Title
Review for Godfather: Part II, The (1974)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring: Al Pacino, Robert DeNiro, Robert Duvall, Diane Keaton, 
          Talia Shire, Lee Strasberg, John Cazale, G. D. Spradlin 
Director: Francis Ford Coppola 
Producer: Francis Ford Coppola 
Screenplay: Francis Ford Coppola and Mario Puzo based on the novel 
            by Mario Puzo 
Cinematography:  Gordon Willis 
Music: Nino Rota 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
In English and Italian with subtitles 
     A companion piece in the truest sense of the term, THE GODFATHER
PART II earned as much adulation as its predecessor, if not more.
Garnering twelve Academy Award nominations, and again winning Best
Picture (and this time Best Director for Coppola as well), the second
installment has been rightfully hailed as the best sequel of all time.
     THE GODFATHER PART II is a more ambitious production than the
original since it attempts not only to tell a pair of completely
disconnected stories, but to do so in parallel.  The less time
consuming of the two presents the early life of Vito Corleone (played
by Robert DeNiro) in Sicily and New York, and shows how he came into
power.  The other tale picks up approximately a decade after the
conclusion of THE GODFATHER, and shows the means by which Michael
Corleone (Al Pacino), now secure in his position, attempts to expand
the family empire into Las Vegas and Cuba.
     Michael lives his life and runs his business by two of his
father's creeds: "A man who doesn't spend time with his family can
never be a real man" and "Keep your friends close, but your enemies
closer."  There are times, however, when those precepts fail as guiding
principles, such as when a betrayal occurs from within the family.
Broken trust arising from so intimate a source can be devastating.
     In THE GODFATHER, family was more important than anything to Don
Vito Corleone.  Michael has inherited his father's values and as PART
II opens, he is surrounded by the Corleone clan as they gather for his
son's first communion.  A symmetry between the first and second films
is established here--both open with a family assemblage, and each
quickly establishes where the power lies as the don "holds court."
     The Corleones no longer live in New York.  They have moved to
Nevada where they are amassing influence with the nebulous goal of some
day becoming "legitimate."  But the affairs of the East Coast are about
to interfere as Frankie Pentangeli (Michael V. Gazzo) arrives to
request the don's acquiescence to a hit.  Michael cannot agree because
such a killing would ruin certain business dealings currently in
progress with the powerful and influential Hyman Roth (Lee Strasberg).
     Plot and counterplot develop, and Michael becomes the focal point
of a web of betrayal and deceit, turned against by those he had sought
to protect.  Assassination attempts and government probes target
Michael, but he fights back using every scintilla of ingenuity he
possesses and sacrificing much of his humanity in the process.
     For a man constantly battling to keep his family together, a
mournful irony of THE GODFATHER PART II is that Michael's efforts
succeed only in fragmenting it.  If the end of the first film was
numbing, this one is shattering.  The flashback preceding the final
scene presents a stark differentiation of how things once were from
what they have become.
     A more comprehensive contrast emerges through the lengthy
sequences detailing Vito Corleone's rise from obscurity.  Showing his
arrival at Ellis Island, his early relationship with Clemenza (Bruno
Kirby), and his confrontation with Don Fanucci (Gastone Moschin), these
segments stand in contradiction to Michael's scenes.  Expansion is
replaced by slow disintegration, energy and success by pain and
failure.  If young Vito's era is the Corleone's dawn, Michael's is the
approaching twilight.
     The danger in interweaving the early twentieth century story with
the one from 1958 is that the momentum of either--or both--could be
curtailed.  While this occasionally happens (most notably in the first
shift back to 1917, shortly after the assassination attempt on
Michael), Coppola handles the transitions adroitly, keeping the pace
consistent enough to limit any sense of jarring or disorientation.
     The traditional elements of the Tragedy introduced in THE
GODFATHER reach their maturity in PART II.  Much of the humanity
remaining to Michael at the outset is leeched from him with each
deception and setback.  Late scenes with a resentful Fredo (John
Cazale) and a bitter Kay (Diane Keaton) emphasize the price for Michael
of continuing his father's dominion.  His flaw is his imperceptiveness
and, as is the case for any hero in a story of this nature, its effects
are crippling.
     Primarily due to the scope of events, PART II is not as
tightly-scripted as PART I.  While most of the first film takes place
in New York (with a few excursions elsewhere), here the settings vary:
Sicily, Ellis Island, New York, Nevada, Cuba, Miami, Washington DC ....
In letting their characters escape the confines of the "old
neighborhood", Coppola and Puzo lessen the intimacy of certain
interpersonal conflicts.
     Visually, many of Michael's scenes have a more gloomy appearance
this time around.  Especially during the latter portions of the film,
the don is shown in severely underexposed settings, appearing as a
silhouette.  His is a voice from the darkness--a photographic mirror
of what's happening beneath the surface.
     As the beginning of PART II echoes the opening of THE GODFATHER,
so too does the end.  Because of the manner in which circumstances are
handled and considering the people involved, the impact here is more
forceful.  The tragic flaw has accomplished its poisonous, inevitable
designs.  Coppola punctuates both movies with a gut-twisting
exclamation point.
     Combined, THE GODFATHER and THE GODFATHER PART II represent the
apex of American movie-making and the ultimate gangster story.  Few
sequels have expanded upon the original with the faithfulness and
detail of this one.  Beneath the surface veneer of an ethnic period
piece, THE GODFATHER is not so much about crime lords as it is about
prices paid in the currency of the soul for decisions made and
avoided.  It is that quality which establishes this saga as timeless.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
The real importance of any movie can't be adequately
appraised solely by the box- office success or critical
response, or even combination of both. Movies, no matter how
popular or critically acclaimed, cease to be important when
the passage of time erases them from collective memory. Only
those films that defy such oblivion are really grand, and
the nice example are first two movies of the Godfather Saga.
Their grandness can be seen not only in their quality and
the influence that had over the generations, but also by the
endless debate that lasts among the critics and film
scholars until this day. The debate was created due to the
fact that the second movie of the Saga, THE GODFATHER: PART
II, represents one of the first examples of now generally
despised practice in modern Hollywood - making sequels out
of the successful, great movies. Such practice earned the
utter disdain of contemporary critics because the sequels
almost always fail to meet the hard standards of its
predecessors, and, more often than not, succeed only in
tarnishing their great memory. However, in 1970s, during the
golden age of so-called "New Hollywood" such rule wasn't
universal, and some films turned out to be even better than
the first in the series. THE GODFATHER: PART II by Francis
Ford Coppola is often referred as one of them.
Reason for the high status of THE GODFATHER: PART II lies in
the fact that the sequel to THE GODFATHER, very personal
movie, was authored by the very same author with very same
personal agenda. While the other sequels usually serve as
nothing more than easy way for unimaginative producers to
cash on previous successes, THE GODFATHER: PART II was a
nice opportunity for Coppola to experiment, correct some
possible flaws or even answer to critics of his previous
work. Luckily, in the atmosphere that encouraged creative
freedom, Coppola also used the immense resources of big
Hollywood studios, whose chiefs gave him an utmost control
of his work. The biggest and most serious objection to THE
GODFATHER was Coppola's allegedly apologetic portrayal the
Mafia - portrayal that would encourage similar more or less
apologetic movie stereotypes in decades to come. Coppola was
accused of showing organised crime more noble and less
violent than it actually was - his Mafiosi are shown as
dedicated family men, opposed to narcotics and any
unnecessary violence, and in some way even better
alternative to legitimate government. In his second part of
the saga, Coppola intended to use the story of the first
part to paint more realistic and, consequently, much darker
picture.
The plot of the movie is rather complex, thanks to the
revolutionary yet ingenious idea by Coppola to mix two
stories. First one begins roughly one decade after the
events of the first GODFATHER, with Michael Corleone (Al
Pacino) now tightly in control of the Corleone crime family,
left to him by his late and charismatic father Vito in the
previous film. The second story deals with young Vito
Corleone (Robert de Niro), first as boy forced to flee to
America from Sicilian Mafiosi who had killed his entire
family, then as young immigrant who must turn to crime in
order to feed his wife and children. Those two stories are
connected by good editing and Coppola's directorial
techniques (the example in the beggining is the scene when
9-year old Vito Corleone that morphs into another scene,
with Vito's 9-year old grandson), although at times the
transition isn't so smooth or symbolic.
The story of young Vito Corleone seems more pleasing for the
viewer, and is definitely more fascinating. Coppola
obviously enjoyed recreating the harsh life of his Italian
American ancestors, and he even indulged himself with the
little humouristic episode that would remain the sole
uplifting piece in this otherwise extremely grim and
pessimistic movie. Robert de Niro was perfectly cast as
young Vito, and his legendary method acting techniques -
like living in Sicily in order to perfect the use of local
dialect and accent - are here in full swing. Vito Corleone
in his early years is as charming as he was charismatic in
his GODFATHER incarnation. Sympathetic portrayal in the
previous movie wasn't accidental - Corleone is shown as
basically honest human being who is simply driven to the
other side of law by harsh circumstances. Ironically,
Corleone was actually the victim of Mafia in his youth -
first, by losing his family, then by losing his job (his
employer being forced to find job for mafioso's relative) -
but he became first the member, than the leader of that very
same organisation nevertheless.
His son Michael in the latter story is shadow, not only of
his father, but of his own self being presented in THE
GODFATHER - generally nice guy who transformed from
idealistic youth into pragmatic maturity. Michael's plan to
carry on with his father's ambitious plan brings disastrous
results - he loses his family, the most important thing and
the very reason he decided to follow the father's criminal
footsteps in the first place. Lacking father's charisma,
Michael leads the family with the iron hand, thus alienating
his closest relatives - his sister Connie (Talia Shire) left
her own children and turned to debauchery; her wife Kay
(Diane Keaton), disgusted with the loss of her freedom and
ideals, plotted the vengeance of Medean proportions; his
weak and neglected brother Fredo (John Cazale) decided to
prove his own identity by betrayal.  Even the most loyal
member of the family - adopted brother and family councillor
Tom Hagen (Robert Duvall) can feel Michael's loss of
affection and desperately tries to regain it by speaking
Italian, without any significant result. This segment is
probably the darkest, least sentimental and most brutal part
of the Godfather saga; Coppola obviously didn't like the
object of his presentation and even the photography by
Gordon Willis illustrates that - while the outside is
sharply lit, the interiors of the Michael's luxurious
buildings are mostly dark, symbolising the corruption and
decay of his criminal empire.
Unfortunately, that segment was probably the weakest -
weaker than the prologue and THE GODFATHER. The main reason
lies in the screenplay by Coppola and Mario Puzo, and the
plot that lacks coherence. This segment introduces two new
major characters - Michael's underboss Frank Pentangelli
(Michael V. Gazzo) and Jewish mobster Hyman Roth (Lee
Strasberg). Those two men has some serious inconsistencies
in their characterisations. Pentangelli is at first simple
street thug, only to be revealed as well-read cultivated man
in the film's finale. Roth is also inconsistent - his
character, based on Meyer Lansky, real life underworld
legend, is someone too clever and experienced to allow
himself to engage in something as doomed as investing in
Cuba at the brink of the revolution. Those flaws are
somewhat compensated with the great actors in those
characters' roles. That can't be said for other plot
problems - lack of clear explanation for the conflict
between Michael and Roth, and many subplots dealing with the
real life events and anecdotes dealing with Mafia (Valacchi
testimony in the Senate and JFK assassination). Finally, the
lack of originality is revealed at the end, when Coppola
almost recreates his multiple massacre scene from the end of
THE GODFATHER.
Despite repetitiveness and lack of originality, THE
GODFATHER: PART II remains truly grand movie. Production
design by Dean Tavoularis is superb (especially in the first
segment); same can be said for the costumes by Theadora van
Runkle (expensive white suit serves as wonderful character
trait by Don Fanucci), but most of all the music by Nino
Rota and Carmine Coppola is almost perfect. The lead actors
are wonderful - Pacino, De Niro, Keaton, Shire, Cazale,
Duvall, Gazzo, Strasberg, as well as those in supporting
roles (Bruno Kirby as young Clemenza, Gastone Moschin as Don
Fanucci, G.D. Spradlin as Senator Geary).
At the end of the day, perhaps even such great,
"Oscar"-worthy film can suffer from dreaded "sequel
syndrome". However, those flaws didn't prevent it from
becoming a true classic, one of the pillars of modern
cinemas, with its quality seldom matched. After almost
quarter of century new viewers should be able to enjoy it -
both those who didn't see THE GODFATHER and those who did.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     The conventional wisdom is that movie sequels are never as good as
the original, and the common belief among most critics is that THE
GODFATHER: PART II (1974) represents the classic exception to that
rule.  As strong and innovative as was THE GODFATHER (1972), most
reviewers prefer its successor.  (Since I recently had the opportunity
to see both on the big screen again, I'll discuss in the end of this
review whether I subscribe to this logic.)
     Unlike the linear structure of the original, PART II has two
parallel stories spanning two different time periods.  In the main
storyline, the Corleone family continues their nefarious activities
from THE GODFATHER, but now it is 1958, and they are concentrating
their misdeeds in the Nevada casinos.
     Al Pacino repeats his role of Michael Corleone, but he has become
the Don since his father, Vito Corleone, died toward the end of THE
GODFATHER.  (The only other cast member not returning is James Caan as
Sonny Corleone since Sonny died in the middle of the original.  In an
uncredited role, Caan does appear briefly in a flashback sequence in
PART II.)
     Al Pacino, who was nominated for Academy Awards for both pictures
but won neither, approaches his more mature role quite differently from
the way he did in the original.  This time he plays it much more soft
spoken and self-assured.  The beauty of the performance can be heard
with the tone of his voice and seen in his lips.  In most of the film
he speaks as a Caesar.  He does not need to justify, he needs only to
ask, and it shall be done.  His clear but low enunciation is that of
someone who has the power to make people hang on his every word.
     Michael's quietness gives way to tremendous fear whenever he does
raise his voice.  Most actors confuse shouting with overacting and have
trouble separating the two, but not Pacino, at least not in this role.
He owns any scene where he shouts.
     In all of his scenes, save one, Michael maintains total confidence
in his ability to control the situation whether testifying before a
pack of voracious Senators or trying to outfox his enemies.  His wife,
Kay (Diane Keaton), tells him a secret, and Pacino's quivery lip
demonstrates the devastation Kay's revelation has had on him.  It is
during this scene that he childishly sounds his false mantra.  "I'll
change; I'll change," he insists to a disbelieving wife.  "I've learned
that I have the strength to change."
     The secondary, but significant, other plot revolves around the
young Vito Corleone and his introduction to a life of crime.  This part
starts in 1901 with Oreste Baldini playing Vito Andolini, later renamed
by mistake at Ellis Island as Vito Corleone which the immigration
official confused his birthplace with his last name.
     This part of the story quickly skips ahead to 1917 where a young
and innocent looking Robert De Niro gives an Academy Award winning
performance in his portrayal of Vito Corleone.  De Niro's subtle acting
is nevertheless powerful in his exploration of the birth of evil in a
person.  He turns the film into a coming of age drama, but not the
normal saccharine one.  This is the genesis of a loving family who was
anything but to their enemies and to the world at large.
     The most effective part of this story has to do with Vito's
overthrow of the local leader of "The Black Hand," Don Fanucci (Gastone
Moschin).  Theadora Van Runkle's costume for Fanucci with his fancy
white suit and large brimmed hat sets up the character so perfectly
that the acting is of almost secondary importance.  During this part,
Vito utters the precursor to the most famous line in THE GODFATHER.
"I make him an offer he don't refuse," he tells his friends of his
plans to get Fanucci to accept $100 instead of the $200 that they owe
him.
     The script by Francis Ford Coppola and Mario Puzo and the editing
by Barry Malkin, Richard Marks, and Peter Zinner takes care not to rush
either of the two stories.  Typically, either a film is told almost
totally in flashback or flashbacks happen briefly and then it is back
to the main storyline.  The subplot of the young Vito in PART II takes
perhaps a quarter of the movie and the sequences go on so long, that
when you see the movie for the first time, it is easy to convince
oneself that most of the movie may be set in Vito's early life.
     The original and the sequel contain perfect symmetry without ever
seeming repetitious.  The beginning of both films has a lavish party at
the Corleone estate in celebration of some church event associated with
one of the younger members of the family.  In the original, it was the
wedding of Vito's daughter, and in the sequel, it is the first
communion of Vito's grandson.  Both parties have people waiting to talk
to the current Don.  (This church linkage, which the first two suggest
but never explore, is developed into the main theme in the fairly
unsuccessful PART III -- remember that sequel rule.)
     Both films end in a hail of violence with the editing interlacing
and carefully sequencing a stream of deaths.  Although the first's
ending was more like a Goetterdammerung, both are powerful and
effective.
     The best new character in PART II is the Jewish gangster Hyman
Roth.  Roth, played with style and cunning by the famous acting coach
Lee Strasberg, tries to out-connive Michael.  Most people get lost
during this part of the story, but I think that is what director
Francis Ford Coppola wanted.  If you are part of the mob, it is rarely
clear who are your friends and who aren't.  This ambiguity is endemic
to crime families.  Roth's duplicity is best seen when he expresses
regret that someone has attempted the assassination of Michael and his
family.  "Stupid thugs," complains Roth to a stone-faced Michael.
"People behaving like that with guns."
     Roth's best line is his boast to Michael on the size of their
crime empire -- "We're bigger than U. S. Steel!"  (This could be
considered the most dated line in the film.  Try to think of some
current corporate powerhouse in place of U. S. Steel, and the line has
more impact.)  Equally good and more accurate is Michael's line when he
rejects Tom Hagen's (Robert Duvall) suggestion that Roth cannot be
touched.  "If anything in this life is certain," he lectures Tom
sternly.  "If history has taught us anything, it is that you can kill
anyone."
     Nino Rota's music, conducted by Carmine Coppola, has great imagery
from romantic and nostalgic to foreboding.  It's the type that has you
humming the tunes when you leave, but moves you while you are watching
the film.  Gordon Willis's cinematography again uses low natural light
to create ominous shadows indoors and bright colors outdoors to cast a
false sense of security about the Corleone family.
     Is it true that most sequels pale in significance to the original?
Absolutely.  The BATMAN series is one of many such examples.  But is
THE GODFATHER: PART II an exception?  Yes and no.  I am a big fan of
both pictures, but prefer the original slightly for its originally and
the intensity of the character's emotions.  The sequel is more cerebral
which is not bad, but it lacks some of the punch of the original.  But,
these are two great movies so which is better is probably unimportant
anyway.
     THE GODFATHER: PART II runs 3:20, but feels no longer than most
run-of-the-mill hour and a half shows.  It is rated R for graphic
violence and profanity.  I give the film my strongest recommendation
and my top rating of ****.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
Member of the 'Internet Movie Critics Association
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Studio/5713/index.html
There are very few movie sequels that are better than the original and
while most are not, there have been some exceptions.  Personally, I
enjoyed the second installment in the 'Alien' series, directed by James
Cameron which, so far, has been the most exciting.  'Lethal Weapon 2' is
better than the original and along with 'The Empire Strikes Back', 'The
Godfather Part II' is debated by more people, particularly film buffs,
as being superior or almost as good as its original.  'The Godfather' is
my favorite film of all time and 'The Godfather Part III' in 1990 serves
as an entertaining film in which director Francis Ford Coppola finds a
new angle worthy of exploring.  It details how the Corleone family tries
to go legitimate and how their destiny prevents them from doing so.
'The Godfather Part II' falls just short of being better than the
original 'Godfather' film for two reasons.  It has a more cerebral pace
than the first film and it's technically flat.  Coppola hardly moves the
camera at all and the editing is standard with no real inventive cuts
possessing greatness.  Don't get me wrong, the film is still brilliant
and ranks as #3 on my all time list.  I am only comparing it to 'The
Godfather' and not other films in general.  The academic qualities in
'The Godfather Part II' are its saving grace.  Character development,
clandestine scenes of criminal activity and thought provoking dialogue
with a dramatic wit are in many ways, as compelling as the first film.
'The Godfather' starts in 1945 and spans approximately ten years.  As
'The Godfather Part II' opens, Michael Corleone is now head of America's
most powerful organized crime family and a servant kisses his hand over
the opening theme music and the two of them leave Michael's office with
Michael's leather backed chair in focus symbolizing the throne of a
king.  Next, the setting is Sicily, circa 1901.  The lettered message
across the screen tells us that Vito Corleone (Marlon Brando's character
from the first film) was born Vito Andolini in the town of Corleone in
Sicily.  His father and brother were murdered by the local Mafia
chieftain who murders Vito's mother and the young boy Vito, nine years
old in 1901, is sent by friends to America where he arrives at Ellis
Island.  The film then shifts forward to 1958, three years after 'The
Godfather' left off and we are witnessed to Anthony Corleone's first
communion ceremony.  Anthony is Michael's son, and the Corleone family
has now moved all of their business interests and living quarters to
Lake Tahoe, Nevada.  There is a big party on the property to celebrate
the boy's important religious occasion; much in the same way a wedding
was used in the first half hour or so in 'The Godfather' to introduce
its characters to the audience.  Michael (Al Pacino) returns with his
brothers Tom (Robert Duvall) and Fredo (John Cazale).  Their mother
(Morgana King) and sister Connie (Talia Shire) are shown along with
Michael's wife Kay (Diane Keaton) and a new character named Frank
Pentangeli (Michael V. Gazzo) would turn out to be a pivotal character
later in the film.
One of the first meetings we see is between Michael, his associates and
a corrupt and mean spirited Nevada senator, played with a sinister
sliminess by G.D. Spradlin.  Michael then meets his sister Connie who is
engaged to marry a man she hardly knows and comes to Michael for money.
The sense of family bonding and loyalty is missing from the first film
by the time the first half hour or so is up in 'The Godfather Part II'
and this is a clever tone that Coppola gives the film, signifying the
downfall of the Corleone empire from its once great place on the map of
American organized crime.  An attempt is made on Michael's life as
bullets come whizzing through his bedroom window as he and his wife are
about to retire for the evening.  Michael is a more ruthless and cold
hearted boss than his father was.  His father (Marlon Brando, not seen
in Part II) always rejected the notion of narcotics and referred to
gambling as "a harmless vice".  We assume that Michael has made a move
towards the narcotics business in Part II since he is questioned about
it in a Senate committee hearing on organized crime later in the film.
One of the big acquisitions the Corleone family has made is in Nevada
casinos.  They next plan to make a move to take over casinos in Cuba and
the character of Hyman Roth (Lee Strasberg) is played in reference to
Meyer Lansky, a real life mob figure.  Roth lives in Miami and Michael
travels to see him.  Michael and Roth are business partners who plan to
take over the Cuban casinos together.  We then learn through a reference
to the attempt on Michael's life earlier in the film that Roth was the
one who set it up.  He says to Michael:  "I heard you had some trouble.
Stupid, people behaving that way with guns."  How would he know what
happened to Michael unless he gave the order, particularly involving
guns.  Not realizing he has given himself away to Michael, Michael plots
to kill him on their trip to Cuba.
At some point around this time and throughout the entire run of 'The
Godfather Part II', we shift back and fourth from the present to the
past to tell two stories, Michael's control of the family towards the
end of the fifth decade of the twentieth century to the days around
World War I in New York City where Vito Corleone (Robert DeNiro, playing
Brando's character from the first film as a young man this time), is
seen in his beginnings as a humble and hard working immigrant to his
rise as THE GODFATHER.  Robert DeNiro is the only member of the cast
that was honoured with an Oscar for his work.  He won the Best
Supporting Actor prize and Brando and DeNiro are the only two actors to
date, to win an Academy award for playing the same character.
Vito Corleone works in a grocery store and spends his time as a loving
husband to his beautiful wife and as a loving father to his newborn son
Santino (James Caan in 'The Godfather) and he sees how the neighbourhood
he lives in is prey to the delight of Don Fanucci (Gastone Moschin).  He
collects money from all the merchants and takes things without paying
for them.  The citizens kiss his hand upon seeing him and he controls
the police and keeps the neighbourhood living in fear.  Determined not
to be a puppet, held by the strings of big shots (the logo for the
'Godfather' films), Vito Corleone along with a young Peter Clemenza
(Bruno Kirby) and Sal Tessio (John Aprea), slowly begin claiming
neighbourhood territory for themselves.  They begin as petty thieves and
work their way up to establishing a front for their illegal business
which is the legitimate Genco olive oil company.  Vito Corleone would
later settle the score with the Mafia chieftain responsible for killing
his entire family.
As 'The Godfather Part II' becomes more and more engrossing with each
passing frame, the film shows family betrayals and some historical fact
as well.  The scenes with Michael and Hyman Roth in Cuba are set at the
end of 1958.  The Cuban presidential palace is host to a party of
international dignitaries on New Year's Eve when the current president
steps down during a bloody revolution and the birth of the Castro regime
was formed, kicking out the Mafia under the communist ruled system and
everything to do with their business, including control of the casinos.
Michael's marriage to Kay falls apart throughout the film, and Michael
begins to see that he constructed his empire the wrong way, a way in
which resistance to his plans was easy.  Michael lacked the political
skill his father had to keep everything in line and Michael's under
handed control of the family is something his father would not approve
of.  There are references to Shakespearean themes in 'The Godfather Part
II" and Part III has a more clearly defined passage of them and a
clearer and less cerebral pace.  'The Godfather Part II' is certainly
the most ambitious movie sequel ever made.  Its determination to be on a
larger scale in terms of its production values and diversification of
characters within organized crime is to be admired.  To many, it was a
film that had an acquired taste.  Coppola is quoted as saying in a
documentary on all three films that there were disastrous previews for
Part II and he was nervous about its release.
Critics were impressed.  Audiences were slower and less fouthcoming but
the Academy gave it six Oscars, three more than the original.  'The
Godfather' won three for Best Picture, Best Actor (Marlon Brando) and
Best Screenplay Adaptation (Francis Ford Coppola and Mario Puzo), based
on Puzo's novel.  'The Godfather Part II' was honoured with Oscars for
Best Picture, Best Director (Francis Ford Coppola), Best Screenplay
Adaptation (Francis Ford Coppola and Mario Puzo), Best Supporting Actor
(Robert DeNiro), Best Art Direction/Set Decoration and Best Original
Music Score for Carmine Coppola, Francis' father.  The film has the
distinction being one in only a handful of films in history to receive
five Oscar nominations for acting.  Al Pacino for Best Actor, Talia
Shire for Best Supporting Actress and Michael V. Gazzo, Lee Strasberg
and Robert DeNiro for Best Supporting Actor.
'The Godfather Part II' is an example of how a carefully crafted sequel
to a great film can work when attention is paid to its artistic
quality.  An element of distinction between integrity and a film's
dollar value can be the difference between a director who lives for the
moment or one that lives forever.  Like the music of Mozart and
Beethoven, the paintings of Michaelangelo and the invention of aviation,
Coppola's 'Godfather' films will live and fly forever.
Visit FILM FOLLOW-UP by Walter Frith
http://home.netinc.ca/~wfrith/movies.htm

Author
Max Scheinin
by Max Scheinin
Read more of Max's reviews at
http://www.garfieldlib.com/yanews/july97/max/max.html
When Mario Puzo first wrote The Godfather it was a piece of pop culture -
treated well because of his reputation as a good writer, but unmistakably
mediocre -  a tale of family life in the mafia from the inside. The
characters were one-dimensional, the story gripping but silly. However it
was a best-seller and several major studios grappled for the rights.
Paramount won out and the film was directed by Francis Ford Coppola, who
turned it into more then what it had been. It became a tale of family and
honor, loyalty and trust, death and fortune, innocent men and ruthless men,
passing rulers and heirs. The film was a huge hit. It was also one of the
greatest films of all time - the only adult blockbuster ever made. It one
three academy awards including best picture, and executives decided that
the story was deserving of a continuation. Coppola was brought back on, and
in an utterly astonishing act, lived up to the high standards. The sequel
was an astonishing act of virtuoso filmmaking that never spared your
feelings. It showed us a man and his gradual descension into evil. The
violence was always needed,
never gratuitous. Complete control was spread throughout in a study of
power, a tale of a family and of Michael Corleone - once a young man who
wanted nothing to do with the family buisness and now a greedy ruler who
ruins both his life and those of the people around him. It is truly epic -
the magnificent clean strokes that paint out a tale of life in the mafia.
By the end Michael has been abandoned by all except those who work for and
fear him. His empire expands and he becomes a powerful man but not a good
one. Every minute is utterly engrossing and completely amazing. Rarely has
a film been so punishing to watch. 
Something happens other then that, something amazing. We are shown the
early life of Don Vito Corleone and it is every bit as good. The sky is
ablaze with a red that springs from some unseen source. The violence here
is shocking and upsetting but completely indespensable. This is the
 rising and near falling of a band of unofficial rulers; but to us,
especially if we have seen the prequel,
 it means so much more. And, when at the end, we see Michael alone in his
garden our heart breaks. He has killed his brother and alienated himself
from all those who - did - love him. He has locked out his wife and he has
no regret. He is a lonely man but not a sad one. Breathtaking. 
Both stories come together perfectly and affect us equally. Coupled with
Nina Rota's mournful score we are told a story of one man's self
destruction. To me the first film is a better one. But they are both
examples of near cinematic perfection, and they are both hard hitting tales
that live in your mind.

Author
Brian Koller
The sequel to the 1972 blockbuster, "Part II" somehow
manages to be an even better film than its predecessor,
despite the absence of Marlon Brando and (except for a
flashback scene) James Caan.  While "Part II" did not
exceed the box office gross of the original, it did
better at the Academy Awards, winning six Oscars versus
the three that "The Godfather" had won.  These Oscars
included some of the most important: Best Picture, Best
Director, Best Supporting Actor (Robert DeNiro) and Best
Adapted Screenplay (Author Mario Puzo and Coppola).
"Part II" is two hundred minutes in length, but the film
seems to pass more quickly.  Set in the 1950s, the story
picks up soon after "The Godfather" left off: Michael Corleone
has moved some operations to Las Vegas, but remains involved
in New York organized crime.  He also seeks to expand operations
to pre-Castro Cuba, in partnership with aging, chronically
ill Hyman Roth (Lee Strasberg).  He also has to defend himself
against congressional hearings into his criminal activities.
As in the first film, Michael ruthlessly punishes those
who oppose or betray the 'family' (i.e. himself).  Although
his success continues, he also becomes ever more cold and
distant: nearly a personification of evil.  The only emotions
that remain are the desires to punish those who have hurt him.
There also flashbacks of Michael's father Vito first as a boy,
then as a young man.  Vito (De Niro) immigrates to America,
alone, to escape a vendetta against his family.  Although he
can be as ruthless as his son would later be, Vito also
rewards with favors those who are on his side.  Since the
people he kills seem to deserve it, Vito comes off better
than Michael does.  De Niro's detached cool provides a
welcome break from Pacino's relentless gloom, and it was
wise of Coppola to shuffle the two films together despite
the film's length and the disturbance of continuity.
Those who believe that Troy Donahue never made a good film
stand corrected.  Donahue has a small role as Talia Shire's
fortune-hunting suitor.  Michael V. Gazzo, who has a
marvelously raspy voice, has a great supporting role as
trouble-besetted mobster Frank Pentangeli.  As in the first
film, John Cazale and Robert Duvall give excellent
performances.
"The Godfather Part II" also won Academy Awards for its
score, co-credited to Nino Rota and Carmine Coppola (Francis'
father), and for its sets.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
