Title
Review for Loser (2000)
Number of Reviews
11

Author
Christopher Null
     If you're a cynic, you might wonder when Amy Heckerling (director
of the utterly vapid Clueless) lost touch with the youth of America. 
I'm inclined to believe it was in 1982, right after the release of Fast
Times at Ridgemont High, her only good movie, which she made when she
was only 28.
     Now in her mid-40's, it's rather depressing to see Heckerling using
the same jokes that worked almost two decades ago.  And for a movie that
uses "Dare to be different" as its tagline, it's almost pathetic that
this story is lifted virtually verbatim from Fast Times, with the Mark
Ratner-Stacy Hamilton romance going awry once again.  Brian Backer, who
starred as Ratner, is even back in a small role.
     With American Pie alums Jason Biggs and Mena Suvari, Loser spins a
story of a vaguely Midwestern, er, loser named Paul, who moves to New
York to attend a vaguely NYU-like school on full scholarship.  Instantly
loathed for not being a philistine, Paul finds himself attracted to a
nice yet vaguely Goth girl named Dora that sits next to him in English
Lit.  The only catch is that she's having an affair with the professor
(Greg Kinnear).
     Ultimately, Loser is your standard love triangle movie, tweaked to
try and appeal to the coveted teen audience.  This is half-successful,
and Biggs and Suvari carry enough innate charm to make you laugh
plenty.  A boatload of comedian cameos from Steven Wright to Taylor
Negron livens things up as well.
     But the story -- and the comedy -- falls flat on the whole.  There
is no doubt from the second the characters are introduced how things are
going to end, right down to the "What happens to..." text that tells you
how miserable all the bad guys end up and how happy our heroes are.  See
also Fast Times at Ridgemont High.  On top of this, the movie is just
plain sloppy.  Direction and editing are lackluster at best, and the
film feels like it was tossed together in a week.  Kinnear deserves
special acclaim for managing to undo years of turning himself into a
respectable actor with movies like As Good As It Gets, diving back into
sitcom stereotypes with his overbearing professor role.
     Amazingly, Loser is one of very few recent movies that draws power
from its soundtrack, chock full of mid-to-late 1990's hits (examples:
"No Myth," "Pretty Fly (For A White Guy)") that Heckerling must have
gotten in an MTV compilation disc.  Good tunes, all of them.  Which
means: if you find yourself bored between jokes on the screen, you can
close your eyes and listen to the music.
Director: Amy Heckerling
Producer: Twink Caplan, Amy Heckerling
Writer: Amy Heckerling
Starring: Jason Biggs, Mena Suvari, Greg Kinnear, Twink Caplan, Zak
Orth, Jimmi Simpson, Egidio Tari, Tom Sadoski
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/loser/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Author
Jon Popick
Writer/director Amy Heckerling^Ňs last film won the Best Screenplay Award
from the National Society of Film Critics.  Clueless was a cleverly
written modern adaptation of Jane Austen^Ňs Emma, and the film
established Heckerling (Fast Times at Ridgemont High) as one of
Hollywood^Ňs quintessential teen romance/comedy screenwriters.
Since wallowing in critical praise for Clueless, Heckerling^Ňs track
record has been, at best, spotty.  She produced three bombs in a row ^Ö
Saturday Night Live^Ňs awful A Night at the Roxbury, the
almost-direct-to-video flop Molly and even a short-lived television
series based on Clueless.  With the release of Loser, the tally hits
four in a row.
Loser re-teams American Pie co-stars Jason Biggs and Mena Suvari as New
York City college students.  It^Ňs your typical three-act film where a
boy meets a girl in the first, tries to win her over in the second, and
just about gives up until the last five minutes of the third.  There^Ňs
nothing here you haven^Ňt seen before, except possibly for the brash new
levels of product placement that Loser achieves.  It^Ňs hard to tell if
you^Ňre watching a long commercial for Sam Adams beer, a paid
advertisement for Everclear^Ňs new album, or an actual film.
Biggs (Boys and Girls) stars as Paul Tannek, a freshman on a full
academic scholarship from a Midwestern town full of people with bad
haircuts covered by hats that are even worse.  He^Ňs the first person in
his family to go to college, and although he^Ňs smart enough to have
earned a full ride (with meal plan included), Paul is worried about his
lack of big-city sophistication and fancy book-learnin^Ň.  We find out
that he^Ňs one clumsy bastard from the funny montage that plays during
Loser^Ňs opening credits.
Suvari (American Beauty) plays fellow freshman Dora Diamond, a native
New Yorker that lives at home with her mom (although we never see her)
and pays her tuition with tips earned at a Manhattan titty bar.  Dora is
also having an affair with her slimy European Literature professor
Edward Alcott (Greg Kinnear, What Planet Are You From?), who treats her
like dog crap and is embarrassed to let people know about their
relationship.
Although Paul and Dora seem like total opposites (she^Ňs street-smart;
he^Ňs a mugger^Ňs dream), the two losers are more alike than they appear.
Professor Alcott walks all over Dora, while Paul^Ňs three hard-partying
roommates (Zak Orth, Thomas Sadoski and Jimmi Simpson) turn his dorm
life into a living hell.  Paul gets kicked out of his quarters, Dora
loses her job, and the two begin to spend more and more time together.
Biggs is an extremely likeable actor that makes the most out of
Heckerling^Ňs limp material.  Besides Hugh Jackson (X-Men) and Owen
Wilson (Shanghai Noon), I can^Ňt think of a relatively new actor that has
impressed me as much as Biggs.  On the other hand, Suvari is just plain
annoying.  She^Ňs whiny and she can^Ňt act, and the more she whines, the
more obvious it becomes that she doesn't have the chops.  Kinnear plays
the smarmy prick professor to perfection, but one has to wonder if he^Ňs
really acting, or just serendipitously cast.
Heckerling^Ňs direction isn^Ňt bad, but her script is almost downright
boring.  You practically sit around waiting for the next unexplainable
cameo from a stand-up comedian (Steven Wright, Bobby Slayton, Andy Dick,
Andrea Martin, David Spade) until the inevitable conclusion is reached
in the film^Ňs final reel.  And just when you think Heckerling^Ňs
screenplay has hit rock-bottom, Loser offers really lame explanations
for what happens to each of the characters right before the closing
credits.
1:30 ^Ö PG-13 for adult language, mild violence and light sexual dialogue

Author
Bill Chambers
LOSER *1/2 (out of four)
-a review by Bill Chambers (bill@filmfreakcentral.net)
starring Jason Biggs, Mena Suvari, Greg Kinnear
written and directed by Amy Heckerling
*THIS REVIEW CONTAINS SPOILERS*
As with most of her films, director Amy Heckerling's latest, Loser, seesaws 
between unpleasant and artificial, and is sometimes both at once. When she 
tackles big issues, such as abortion in Fast Times at Ridgemont High , it's 
impossible to tell whether she's being matter-of-fact or glib about them 
(they carry an almost documentary starkness), but whatever the case, she 
continually refuses to comment politically. Such is the sitcom tendency of 
her work: to jeopardize the innocence of her characters and then hit the 
reset button. This fear of drama soured me on Fast Times..., Look Who's 
Talking, Clueless, and now Loser, in which Ms. Heckerling also 
demonstrates, for the first time, zero affinity for the milieu.
Has anyone, for instance, ever met a girl in the stylistic vein of Mena 
Suvari's Dora? Attired in black thrift, her eye shadow smeared to racoon 
chic and her bangy red hair barely contained by girlish clips, she accepts 
the label of goth, but no self-respecting goth girl ever admitted to 
digging, as Dora does, those geriatric rockers Everclear, nor willingly 
went anywhere with a six-pack-wielding fratboy stranger. The mechanics of 
Loser's tired old introvert-boy-falls-for-extrovert-girl plot drive its 
protagonists into cultural non-specificity, so that they become even less 
than stereotypes. They become walking wardrobes.
Small-town transplant Paul (a strangely static Jason Biggs), our eponymous 
hero, always wears his woolly hunter's cap with flaps covering the ears, 
and beneath it rests a parted moptop that couldn't scream "Shemp" (the lame 
Stooge) wig louder. He has three smug-looking roommates (the 
one-dimensional trio is not supposed to be brothers, but they share similar 
facial features, including and especially mouths), and their fashion sense 
is incomprehensibly glam. Though they're not overtly transvestites, 
Heckerling seems to be equating flamboyance with villainy; how very 
Cruising of her. (The dormies conspire to evict Paul and regularly molest 
women they have drugged. Dora ignorantly downs one of their date rape 
potions. Unfortunately, either Heckerling or the studio is too cowardly to 
admit if she was subsequently violated.)
When Paul rescues Dora from said narcotic scare, he learns that she is 
dating their unctuous European lit professor Edward Alcott (superb Greg 
Kinnear). Although Paul's already in love with Dora by this point, as is 
bound to happen to losers when pretty girls address them by name, he gets 
altruistic and pretends the flowers he bought her are actually from Alcott. 
She's thrilled, but nevertheless spends a few days at Paul's to recuperate; 
the two bond over emergency kitten surgery and a Broadway play ("Cabaret"), 
and just when Paul's got in his head that she's starting to love him back 
in that non-friendly way, she decides to become Alcott's live-in 
girlfriend. Cue precious hommage to The Graduate , shots of Paul drifting 
around Berkeley--er... (Aside: Simon & Garfunkel's "Parsley, Sage, Rosemary 
& Thyme" should never have been allowed in another motion picture.)
Heckerling has a lot in common with Nora "You've Got Mail " Ephron, the 
only other prominent chick directing comedies today, in that neither has 
any use for strong-willed women. Men continue to trod on Dora until the 
bitter end (in the final scene, she gives Paul a big smooch after he blurts 
out his feelings in what amounts to a creepy ultimatum), and Dora 
ultimately shrugs off being drugged against her will--mere hours after Paul 
hints to her that she was poisoned, she's cheerily redecorating his 
apartment. (Heckerling is so laissez-faire about the issue in general that 
she reserves the comeuppance of the would-be rapists for jokey epilogue 
titles.)
Goth veneer aside, there are an awful lot of girls out there who behave as 
erratically as Dora, and enough angry young dude filmmakers to make movies 
about them. Heckerling misses her shot at having Dora transform herself 
into a role model, and while such arcs may not be Heckerling's social 
responsibility, it is a privilege I would have taken advantage of if I were 
in her shoes. (Consider, too, that Dora is the film's sole female 
principal.) Not that Loser is worth contemplating this seriously--God knows 
Heckerling didn't. That is her hallmark. (--- For more first-run, DVD, and 
books-about-movies reviews, plus contests and the proverbial "more!", visit 
'Film Freak Central,' @ http://filmfreakcentral.net ---)

Author
Susan Granger
 Give credit for honesty in advertising: the title becomes a
self-fulfilling prophecy, as writer- director Amy Heckerling lifts
elements from the brilliant Billy Wilder film, "The Apartment" and
transfers them to college students in New York City.  Jason Biggs
("American Pie") plays an earnest, shy scholarship student from a
small upstate town. In his plaid hunter's cap with his kind,
good-natured personality, he doesn't fit in with the big-city
pseudo-sophisticates, particularly his odious, rich roommates (Thomas
Sadoski, Zak Orth, Jimmi Simpson) - but he's not a really a
loser. Escaping from dorm life, he finds refuge in a downtown
veterinary clinic, where he falls for another penniless student, Mena
Suvari (the rose-petal fantasy of "American Beauty"), whom he rescues
from an overdose of a date-rape drug. She works as a waitress in a
strip club and is having an affair with their cynical English lit
professor, Greg Kinnear ("As Good As It Gets"), who's more into
manipulation than marriage. Do the hero and heroine finally fall in
love? You guess. Perhaps the most idiotic moment occurs when Kinnear
says: "I'm sure if she were alive, Betty Friedan would applaud your
epiphany." It's a line that may stun the very-much-alive feminist,
Ms. Friedan. Misspelling "financial aid" as "aide" is another
blooper. The message is supposed to be: trust yourself, take a chance
and turn your back on people who take advantage of you - but the
cinematic sizzle just isn't there. There are cameos from Steven
Wright, David Spade, Andy Dick, Andrea Martin and Everclear, plus a
trendy soundtrack filled with '90s hits. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Loser" is a tepid, lackluster 4. If you want to see good Amy
Heckerling teenage romantic comedies, rent "Clueless" and "Fast Times
at Ridgemont High."

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Amy Heckerling.
Cast: Jason Biggs, Mena Suvari, Greg Kinnear, Tom Sadoski, Zak Orth, Jimmi 
Simpson, Dan Aykroyd, Twink Caplan, Andy Dick, David Spade, Colleen Camp.
2000 - 95 minutes
Rated PG-13 (for profanity, drug abuse, and mild profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, July 22, 2000.
In the last two decades, writer-director Amy Heckerling has defined a 
generation with the respective high school classics, 1982's "Fast Times at 
Ridgemont High," and 1995's "Clueless." Her latest teen opus, "Loser," has 
transported its characters to college, and while it probably won't catch on 
in a big way like the former two pictures did, it remains a charming and 
innocent-eyed romantic comedy, a teen movie that is refreshingly more serious 
than most, and is not littered with raunchy jokes about sex and human 
anatomy. Somewhat a throwback in tone to the '80s John Hughes era of "Sixteen 
Candles," "The Breakfast Club," and "Ferris Bueller's Day Off," Heckerling 
gains mileage by creating and understanding characters who have thoughts, 
ideas, and dreams outside of the requirements of the plot. The same can be 
said for "Fast Times" and "Clueless," and that is, no doubt, the reason why 
Heckerling has prospered each time she has ventured into the world of 
teenagers.
Repairing two of the stars of last year's big hit, "American Pie," Jason 
Biggs and Mena Suvari are delightfully cast as Paul Tannek and Dora Diamond, 
two NYU students who are having trouble making it through their first year of 
college in the Big Apple. Paul, a nice lug of a guy from the Midwest, 
attempts to make friends away from home, but fails to even win over his three 
obnoxious roommates (Zak Orth, Jimmi Simpson, Tom Sadoski), who spend their 
time partying, getting wasted, and taking advantage of girls. Paul wants to 
fit in, but cares too much about his education to risk losing his 
scholarship, and soon finds himself kicked out of his dorm room and 
relocating to a veterinarian clinic.
Meanwhile, Dora is simply struggling to get the money to go to the school by 
working as much as possible on the side as a waitress at a strip bar, and has 
begun an affair with her European Literature professor Edward Alcott (Greg 
Kinnear). Out of fear of the school finding out about their teacher-student 
relationship, he yearns to keep Dora a secret, and seems to only really want 
her around for (1) sex, and (2) doing chores for him around his apartment as 
a sort of slave. 
Paul and Dora, who both share Professor Alcott's class, become good friends 
when Paul's scheming ex-roommates hold a party and give Dora some roofies, 
causing her to nearly OD and have to get her stomach pumped. With Alcott 
listed as her next-of-kin, but him claiming that he doesn't know her, Paul 
lets her stay at the vet clinic with him while she recuperates, and they 
quickly bond. What Dora fails to recognize, though, is how much Paul is 
starting to care for her, and how bad a relationship she is already in with 
Alcott--one that she really needs to get out of.
"Loser" wins no points for originality, but then again, neither did 
"Clueless," which was one of 1995's best films. Boosting a smart, savvy 
screenplay and a bright, young cast, Amy Heckerling succeeds in telling an 
oft-told story by writing characters who may be flawed, but are good-hearted 
inside and often out. 
Also helping matters is a tinge of extra realism that is rare for the teen 
genre. Paul must maintain a 3.5 GPA to keep the scholarship he has earned, 
but without at least a B+ in Professor Alcott's class, he won't be able to. 
Not only is Dora stuck in a relationship with a big jerk, but when she is 
fired at her job, she has no idea how she is going to get the money for next 
semester's classes, nor how she is going to be able to keep commuting back 
and forth from her suburban home to Manhattan. The desperation that both 
characters possess is true-to-life, rather than the whole movie being solely 
about whether the guy gets the girl, or who is going to take who to the prom.
Jason Biggs rose to stardom last year with "American Pie," and while he was 
perfectly endearing there, he is even better here. His Paul is a young man 
who may not be fashionably hip or a big partier, but he is sweet, morally 
honest, and wants to do good in school. Constantly being pulled down by the 
criticisms he receives from his roommates, Paul has no idea where he fits in, 
and is unsure if he ever will, and the way he feels is made palpable by 
Biggs' engaging turn.
With "American Pie," "American Beauty," and now "Loser," Mena Suvari is 
shaping up to become one of Hollywood's most talented young actresses. In 
just a few movies, she has played a full spectrum of diverse characters, and 
has been successful in each one. Suvari's Dora is a bright girl who is 
understanding to other people's feelings, and is the first person who does 
not judge Paul based on how much he parties or how "cool" he is, but on what 
he is like as a person. Whenever Biggs and Suvari are onscreen together, they 
sparkle and are genuinely charismatic, and whenever they are in their own 
individual scenes, their attractive personalities and talent carry them along.
As Paul's airhead roommates, Zak Orth, Jimmi Simpson, and Tom Sadoski, do 
their jobs with flare, but have no positive qualities. The same can be said 
for Greg Kinnear (2000's "What Planet Are You From?"), who has recently been 
making a living playing jerks, but is so good at it that it's almost scary. 
The rest of the cast are in basically cameos, from Dan Aykroyd, as Paul's 
earnest father, to David Spade, as a video store clerk, to Twink Caplan, as 
Dora's coworker at the strip bar.
As with "Clueless," "Loser" has got one of the strongest soundtracks for a 
teen-targeted movie in recent memory, with such popular, non-mainstream fare 
as "Out of My Head," by Fastball, to "Blue (Da Ba Dee)," by Eiffel 65, to an 
appearance by band Everclear. And also, as with "Clueless," when the two 
central characters eventually discover their true feelings and finally have 
that long-awaited first kiss, it actually means something, because they don't 
seem like two actors locking lips, but two real people whom we know--we just 
know--have finally found the one person they deserve.

Author
Bob Bloom
 Loser (2000) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Jason Biggs, Mena Suvari, Greg
Kinnear, Zak Orth, Tom Sadoski and Jimmi Simpson. Music by David Kitay.
Written and directed by Amy Heckerling. Rated PG-13.
 "Loser" is no winner. This youthful comedy, written and directed by Amy
Heckerling, is rather bland actually.
 It's also a bit sweet. But most of all, it is very uninvolving.
 The movie gives you a feeling of deja vu, that you've seen this story
before - somewhere.
 Maybe it is because Heckerling's characters are ill-defined, lacking
any motivation. They are mostly sketched-in types, plot devices.
 - Paul Tannek (Jason Biggs), the small-town scholarship winner
attending college in the Big Apple. He's a nice guy who no one - well,
at least his three roommates - likes. Why?
 Simple, he's at the university to study and learn, plus he wears a
funny hat.
 Paul's a square. He neither parties nor chases women.
 - Dora Diamond (Mena Suvari), the impressionable student having an
affair with self-centered, smarmy professor Edward Alcott (Greg
Kinnear).
 She is blind to Paul's kindness and affection, while explaining away
the condescending manner in which she is treated by Alcott.
  - Adam (Zak Orth), Noah (Tom Sadoski) and Chris (Jimmi Simpson),
Paul's supposedly ultra-hip, sophisticated roommates, are slugs. They
are so dense, so uncool, that it's difficult to swallow the concept that
they are the guys others want to emulate.
 Heckerling, by creating these three stooges as caricatures, has diluted
the very point she is trying to make.
 Compared to those bums, Paul is a winner. And that seems to be the
film's point.
In the eyes of the audience, Paul is no loser. He is a very nice guy,
though a bit naive and too trusting.
 But Heckerling has stacked the deck too much in his favor.
 The three geeks are such morons they have to stoop to using date-rape
type drugs to procure women.
 Paul, meanwhile, allows them to run roughshod over him. Why? It is
never explained. Obviously, he doesn't want to be like them, nor does he
want their companionship.
 Paul is staying true to himself, being a good guy, helpful to others.
He is smarter than he lets on to others.
 So the big question remains: Why at a big New York university, can Paul
only make contact with three losers, plus one flaky young woman?
 Heckerling ignores that aspect all together.
 The cast, however, makes the most with the material at hand.
 Biggs, so memorable in "American Pie, "is rather passive as Paul. He is
more victim than protagonist. He plays Paul as if he were a blank slate.
You only know him as a decent, quiet guy trying to go along to get
along.
 Suvari, who also appeared in "American Pie" and was featured in the
Oscar-winning "American Beauty, "has a problem similar to Biggs in
defining her character.
 Obviously, she is an intelligent young woman. That is why her
attraction to, and her relationship with, her professor seems more like
a plot contrivance than an avenue her character would actually explore.
 She seems too self-assured, too aware of herself, to accept the
belittling constantly heaped upon her by Alcott. It does not make sense.
 "Loser" is a very predictable movie. You know what's going to happen
and who is going to wind up with whom 10 minutes into the feature.
 It's not a very memorable movie. It's like a fast-food snack,
fulfilling at the moment, then quite forgettable.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net
 Bloom's reviews can be found on the Internet Movie Database at: http:
www/imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Bob+Bloom

Author
John Beachem
Like no one in his family before him, Paul Tannek (Jason Biggs) has been 
accepted to college with a full scholarship. His father (Dan Aykroyd) leaves 
him with some parting advice on how to make friends with people in the big 
city: "Look them in the eye when they're talking to you and be interested in 
what they're saying." Obviously this isn't going to work, as Paul soon finds 
in dealing with his three alcoholic roommates, Noah (Jimmi Simpson), Adam 
(Zak Orth), and Chris (Thomas Sadoski). The only high point in Paul's 
college experience is meeting Dora Diamond (Mena Suvari). Dora is a cute, 
slightly naive student who is struggling to make enough money to stay in 
school while dating the sleazy Lit professor, Edward Alcott (Greg Kinnear). 
These two hit it off wonderfully, both being outcasts of sorts. Yet, while 
Paul grows more and more attracted to Dora, he finds himself constantly 
living in the shadow of Edward, who Dora seems to be truly in love with. Add 
to that constant problems arising from dealing with his now former 
roommates, and Paul's college career isn't looking too bright.
Any teen movie like this is bound to possess three qualities: it's going to 
be more than a touch on the predictable side; it's going to feature a lot of 
young actors that older audiences have never heard of; and it's going to 
have a soundtrack full of modern pop songs that will be played at the worst 
times. Knowing the movie was going to be like this, I wondered to what 
extent these three teen movie qualities would be displayed. Thankfully, only 
one was prominent throughout the film. Like all teen movies (and an 
unfortunate number of regular adult movies these days), "Loser" is about as 
predictable as it can be. I don't mean it's as predictable as "The In Crowd" 
(also released this week, and I was guessing what characters were going to 
say before they said it in that movie), but you knew exactly how things had 
to end in this movie, and sure enough it stays true to this form. As for the 
other two traits, the cast may be comprised mainly of young actors, but most 
people now recognize Jason Biggs ("American Pie"), and Mena Suvari 
("American Beauty"); and Greg Kinnear ("Mystery Men") should be well known 
to adult audiences. As for the soundtrack (which I dread in all teen 
movies), comprised entirely of current popular songs, Amy Heckerling 
("Clueless") proves remarkably adept at keeping it toned down and used only 
in the appropriate scenes.
The acting in "Loser" is one of the film's few highpoints. Jason Biggs, who 
turned in quite an amusing performance in the grossly overrated "American 
Pie", is just about perfect for the role of small town boy Paul Tannek. 
There's something about him (probably that goofy grin) that looks so naive 
and, well, small town like, that we have no problem believing he is Paul 
Tannek. Mena Suvari shows she has a remarkable acting range given what a 
different character Dora is from Angela Hayes in "American Beauty". Not only 
does she give a great performance here, but she looks and acts too cute for 
words. Greg Kinnear is developing something of a reputation for playing 
sleaze ball characters. His character of Captain Amazing in "Mystery Men" 
was quite a jerk, his performance in "What Planet Are You From?" knocked him 
up a few notches towards king of jerks, and the way he treats poor little 
Mena in "Loser" nearly gives him the crown. Of the three roommates, only 
newcomer Thomas Sadoski makes any sort of impression. What impression does 
he make? That he can play a complete loser quite well (is that necessarily a 
good thing though?). Watch for cameos from David Spade ("Tommy Boy") and 
Andy Dick (television's "News radio").
I think one of the largest problems with "Loser" (besides the title, but 
I'll go into that later) is that it never quite finds a target audience. 
While I was trying to figure out what age group the movie applied to, the 
following thought ran through my mind: "Teens will probably like - no, well, 
adults will most likely - no, hm, little kids might - oh god no." After 
thinking this, all I could conclude was there really was no audience for the 
movie. The title is the second largest problem with the film for two 
reasons: First, it really doesn't make a whole lot of sense, considering the 
character of Paul Tannek. Paul's a little out of his element, but he's 
smart, kind, quick-witted, and a heck of a fighter. He's apparently a loser 
because he doesn't drink, do drugs, and take advantage of drunken girls? 
That makes sense, and okay, my public service announcement is over. The 
second reason it's a bad idea for a film title is because whenever a movie 
gets a name like that (think "Screwed") it does poorly at the box office. My 
final, and largest, complaint with the movie is a bit more simplistic. If 
I'm not mistaken, "Loser" is being advertised as a comedy. During the entire 
film I don't remember chuckling even once. Coming from me this is quite bad 
because I've been told I giggle at air.
I have two other minor complaints, but they pale in comparison to that last 
one. First, I would like to have seen more of Dan Aykroyd since the last 
thing I remember him from was his horrendous performance in the otherwise 
great "Grosse Pointe Blank", and I don't want to remember the man who 
created "Ghostbusters" that way. My second small complaint was with Amy 
Heckerling's pacing. It wasn't necessarily bad (for bad pacing, see the 
afore mentioned "The In Crowd"), just a bit too languid given the kind of 
movie this was. It can be easily assumed that teenagers would be the primary 
target audience (though I don't believe they'll like this movie). I've 
noticed teens tend to like films that move quickly (granted, they did seem 
to enjoy "The Blair Witch Project" for some reason, and look how slowly that 
moved). At its heart, "Loser" is a cute little movie which could have been a 
lot better if its writer/director had bothered to stick some laughs into the 
script. "Loser" runs a decent 95 minutes, and I'd recommend the movie to 
fans of Jason Biggs and Mena Suvari, since both give great performances, and 
to anyone who enjoys watching Greg Kinnear act like a sleaze. Even if you 
fall into one of these categories, I'd suggest waiting for video or at least 
catching a matinee. I give "Loser" three out of five stars.
Comments? Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
Past reviews can be found at:
http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/JohnBeachem.htm,
http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or 
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem
* * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   If there's one bit of advice that every father should give to
his son--counsel even more important than a talk on the birds
and the bees--it's how to make friends.  In the new movie
"Loser," the titular character's dad (Dan Aykroyd) tells his
college-bound son, Paul (Jason Biggs) that the most
important way to do this is to be interested.  When the
person you're talking to sees that you are attentive to what
he has to say, he will consider you to be interesting.  This is
not original advice and in civilized locales, this would work. 
But "Loser" does not take place in a civilized location.  The
movie is set in New York City and what's more the site is a
large college, probably NYU.  Paul, who comes from an
easy-going, small community and who has won a full
scholarship to this big city institution, finds out from the very
first day that dad's advice may not be counterproductive: it's
just that nobody will talk to him.  Why not?  Probably because
he conveys the impression that he's a nice guy and as
country mouse learns about city mouse a couple of months
into his college education, "This whole city is one big orgy
and if you care about someone, you're a chump."
   "Loser," which is directed by Amy Heckerling (whose
"Clueless" is about a young woman whose sophisticated
character is diametrically opposite Paul's), may be predictable
and overly sweet, but after a steady stream of mostly good
movies that try to outdo one another in vulgarity ("American
Pie," "South Park," "Me, Myself and Irene") the picture is a
welcome change as mid-summer approaches--so long as we
don't get a steady stream of cuddly little tales that could as
soon pass muster on TV shows like "Friends."  The
screenplay, also by Ms. Heckerling, does not feature a whole
lot of bon mots, but in the tradition of the cinema the
villain--in this case a handsome, smart, but charmingly
sarcastic professor--gets the best lines.
   By way of comparison, Jim Carrey's character, Charles,
finds out in "Me, Myself and Irene" that being nice is not all
that it's cracked up to be.  If you're congenial, you'll be taken
advantage of, your sweetness all the more tempting to those
who'd eat you for breakfast.  In this case, Paul's warm and
geeky hat may be suitable for Fargo, North Dakota but is as
out of place in the Big Apple as his nerdy haircut.  When he
meets the adorable Dora Diamond (Mena Suvari) who sits
next to him in European Lit., he's hooked, but Dora has eyes
only for her comely professor, Edward Alcott (Greg Kinnear),
who sometimes treats her almost as badly as Paul is treated
by his rich, snotty, and altogether too hip roommates Adam
(Zak Orth), Chris (Tom Sadoski) and Noah (Jimmi Simpson). 
When Paul eventually takes up residence in a veterinary
hospital, his fair-weather pals talk him into letting them use
the facility for a bash at which they pass out the
infamous date-rape pills to naive and trusting co-eds.  The
greater part of the film deals with Paul's uphill battle to prove
that you can be decent without being a doormat.
   Jason Biggs, well cast here (he's the fella who last year
mistook an apple pie for a sexy woman), turns in a fine
performance as the guy who never loses his congeniality but
does become a bit stonier in his ways under the pressures of
his first year at college while Mena Suvari, who could pass
for a young Liza Minelli, is amiable enough.  Greg Kinnear as
the elitist professor stands out: he's the sort who would have
the populists, especially the young people, in the audience
hissing, but I like the guy.  He stands firm in his
championship of the best and brightest and is appropriately
ticked off when he discovers that virtually nobody in his 160-
member lecture class has read the Kafka assignment or has
understood the text enough to deal with the principal theme. 
When he visits a museum with his co-ed, he appropriate
patronizes her for thinking that there is nothing particularly
more beautiful about a Van Gogh or Greek column than there
is in, say, some Christmas decorations.  
   "Loser" is a date movie suitable for dates who can
appreciate "American Pie" as much as I do but still like to
indulge themselves in a confection which proves that a kid
from the sticks can make it in New York without giving up his
decency.
Rated PG-13.  Running Time: 98 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Chad Polenz
"American Pie" alums Jason Biggs and Mena Suvari star in this summer's 
attempt to capitalize on the youth
market looking for a comedy about young people they can relate to that 
combines generic Hollywood cute
couple-ness and zany comedy. It's about an A+ student (Biggs as "Paul") who 
gets a scholarship to some
college in New York City who sticks out like a sore thumb and falls for Dora 
(Suvari) a ditzy heroin-chic
Goth chick who has no ambition or self-respect whatsoever and allows herself 
to be pushed around just
like "hick-boy" Paul is. 
So we've got a fish-out-water formula mixed with meet-cute romantic comedy 
which ideally should make
for a good movie. Unfortunately the atrocious screenplay and boring direction 
by "Clueless" auteur Amy
Heckerling successfully manages to screw up everything about the film. These 
characters are totally
unrealistic and unbelievable - it's as if everyone under age 30 is a stoned 
raver. There's no background or
details to anyone or anything, it's just a bunch of cartoon characters 
running into each other. Not to
mention the story itself which is virtually non-existant and contains so many 
plotholes it's like swiss cheese.
Even the basic editing is bad. 
If you're looking for a romantic comedy stay far away from this one because 
it is neither romantic nor
funny. I saw this in a PACKED cinema on opening night and the audience barely 
laughed at all. If you've
seen the commericials you've seen all the "funny" parts (which are all from 
the first five minutes). 
Chad'z Movie Page is back! 
New reviews of the latest movies in easy-to-swallow capsule form with the 
trendy, Entertainment Weekly-style of letter grades instead of the old star 
system. Have I sold out? Visit my page and decide for yourself ;-)

Author
Scott Renshaw
     While watching LOSER, it occurred to me that Amy Heckerling's true
genius as a film-maker is casting. In FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH, she
gave us Sean Penn's Jeff Spicoli; in LOOK WHO'S TALKING, she turned Bruce
Willis into a wise-cracking baby and provided John Travolta with is first
career revival; in CLUELESS, she found a star vehicle for the adorableness
that is (or was) Alicia Silverstone. She seems to understand instinctively
how to find performers the audience will like in spite of their flaws. 
Unfortunately, she may also be starting to understand that she 
understands. Giving appealing actors an appealing script creates likeable
movies. Giving appealing actors a script in which their appeal _is_ the
movie makes for unexpectedly awful films like LOSER.
     Naturally, Heckerling makes her protagonist an all-around swell
guy. Paul Tannek (Jason Biggs) is a small-town boy who gets a scholarship
to NYU, then instantly finds himself an island of compassion and diligence
in the cold-hearted big city. Paul is the kind of guy who gives up his
seat on the subway to an elderly woman; his roommates Adam (Zak Orth),
Chris (Tom Sadoski) and Noah (Jimmi Simpson) are the kind of guys who
blast their music and let their waterbeds leak all over Paul. Paul is also
the kind of guy who adores girls from afar, in this case the lovely Dora
Diamond (Mena Suvari). Dora has problems of her own, including a shortage
of funds to pay her tuition and a relationship with a professor, Edward
Alcott (Greg Kinnear), that's more than slightly one-sided. They're two
conscientious kids who love animals and homeless people, so clearly they
belong together, even if Paul is a loser.
     I must confess that, for a while, I was suckered in by Heckerling's
casting. Jason Biggs is an engaging performer whose unconventional looks
make him even easier to embrace; Suvari is a coquette with an undercurrent
of intelligence. They're pleasant enough to watch, and Heckerling gives us
plenty of scenes establishing how nice they are and how nice their
respective antagonists aren't. Then it gradually becomes clear that
there's virtually nothing to LOSER but scenes of that sort. In theory,
LOSER is a romantic comedy, but there is scarcely a laugh to be found in
the entire film (notable exception: a cameo by a scene-stealing comic
actor as a video store clerk). Instead of taking any time to make the
characters' situations funny, Heckerling spends 98 minutes making her
characters' situations pathetic. She shows none of the ear for quirky
dialogue that sparked CLUELESS, nor any of that film's interest in lively
plotting (not surprisingly, since CLUELESS's plot came via Jane Austen's
EMMA). She simply turns the film into a pity party.
     Since LOSER is a film composed almost entirely of establishing
character, you might think that those characters would be interesting, or
at least slightly complicated. Instead, you have people either so perfect
or so unredeemable that there's no reason to watch them. Paul isn't just a
nice guy, he's flawless; consequently, he's a central character who does
absolutely no growing. His roommates aren't just inconsiderate, they're
actively evil-blackmailing Professor Alcott, drugging women with Rohypnol
and generally giving humanity a bad name. And Professor Alcott isn't just
manipulative, he turns Dora into his house slave. Dora's unthinking
devotion to Alcott is the only whiff of basic human frailty to be found in
LOSER, and even that isn't explored in sufficient detail. There's more
ambiguity in the 30-second snippet from Alan Cumming's Broadway 
performance as the Emcee in CABARET then there is in the rest of LOSER 
It's one thing to turn supporting characters into comic exaggerations; 
it's another to flatten your leads into easily digestible mush. And it
would help if those comic exaggerations were somehow ... I don't know
... comic.
     Still, I spent much of the film holding out the ridiculous hope that
Heckerling would somehow salvage LOSER from its tedium and justify my
desire to like Paul and Dora. That hope dissolved the moment Heckerling
underscored a sequence of Paul in the throes of unrequited love to Simon
and Garfunkel's "Scarborough Fair/Canticle." Instead of giving the
sequence a knowing wink-a reference to THE GRADUATE, a hint that Paul is
becoming an overly-sensitive clich-Heckerling plays it deadly straight. 
Even in the scenes that scream for a light comic touch and a bit of a poke
at her protagonist's foibles, she finds it impossible to stray from the
Gospel of Paul as Saint. CLUELESS's Cher had her self-absorption and
manipulative tendencies to balance her cuteness. In LOSER, Amy Heckerling
shows a leaden hand with material that demands friskiness (her one show of
wit involves naming Paul's dorm "Hunt's Hall" after erstwhile Bowery Boy
Huntz Hall). Her gift with casting proved to be her curse. LOSER may be a
crashing bore, but gee, aren't those two kids swell?

Author
Steve Rhodes
Writer/director Amy Heckerling, whose last film was 1995's delightful
CLUELESS, is back this time with LOSER, which is two movies at war with
each other.  One is a lame teen comedy that you've seen a hundred times
before, but the other is a cute romantic comedy about a love triangle.
They get roughly equal screen time, which makes viewing LOSER
alternately frustrating and enjoyable.
New college student Paul (Jason Biggs from AMERICAN PIE) is featured in
both parts of the story.  Paul, who wears a ridiculous hat, is a clumsy
"loser" whom nobody likes.  Actually, of course, he is the nicest person
in the movie.  He studies hard while his roommates drink heavily and
slip date-rape drugs to their girls.  For his nerdiness, his "friends"
treat him like dirt and haze him at every opportunity.  There is little
fresh material in any of these episodes, and the less said about them,
the better.
Thankfully, there is another part to the film.  In it there is a love
triangle involving Paul and the girl he loves, Dora (Mena Suvari from
AMERICAN BEAUTY).  Dora, who is as cute as a button, is trying hard to
make it through college by working as a waitress in a questionable
nightclub.  In order to make ends meet, she eats things like those
little free containers of milk and of honey.  Suvari, who was so
alluring but catty in AMERICAN BEAUTY, is wonderfully likeable this
time, even if her character seems to be going for the wrong guy.
Dora doesn't realize that Paul loves her even though he takes care of
her when she's sick and hangs out with her.  Her heart beats for the
handsome college professor, Edward Alcott, with whom she is having an
affair while taking his English Literature class.  As a sarcastic
bastard, Professor Alcott, Greg Kinnear (Oscar nominee for AS GOOD AS IT
GETS) gives the show its bite.  The professor is an anal-retentive type
who is deeply in love -- with himself.  He couldn't care less about
Dora, although she conveniently provides him sex, as well as tea made to
his precise and demanding requirements.
Dora, who, after being fired as a waitress, thinks her biggest problem
is a lack of employment, finally finds an unusual way to make money
without working.  We can see, however, that her real difficulty is her
entanglement with Professor Alcott and her obliviousness to Paul's love.
There aren't many surprises in this part of the story, but at least it
has characters worth caring about or, in the case of the professor,
sneering at.  Now if we could just have seen an edited version with the
canonical teen comedy parts deleted -- that would be a movie worth
recommending.
LOSER runs 1:35.  It is rated PG-13 for sexuality, language, drug and
alcohol abuse and mature themes and would be acceptable for most
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
 
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com ">http://www.InternetReviews.com> 
