Title
Review for Jade (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(Par)
Directed by    William Friedkin
Written by     Joe Eszterhas
Cast           David Caruso, Linda Fiorentino, Chazz Palminteri, Michael
               Biehn, Richard Crenna
Running Time   Too Long
MPAA Rating    "R" (Presumably for sex, violence, and profanity)
Reviewed at    Mission Valley Cinemas, Raleigh, NC (14OCT95)
     It takes talent to write a movie that's even less impressive than
SHOWGIRLS.  Heaven help us, but original scribe Joe Eszterhas has done
just that.  Hollywood's [choose one: horniest/hairiest/highest-paid]
writer has concocted a "psychological thriller" that's even more absurd
than his last month's appearance on "Larry King Live."  The plot--a
District Attorney caught in a love triangle with a murder suspect--is
so convoluted that even director William Friedkin (THE FRENCH
CONNECTION) is reduced to copying car chases from better movies.  And
you thought killer lesbians were bad?  Try Linda Fiorentino as a
clinical psychologist moonlighting as a high-class hooker!  ["But he
won't take the medicine, Doctor."]
     JADE is a loss and barely worth the breath to balk at.  Like that
other guy, Eszterhas will be acquitted soon enough.  He'll work in this
town again.  (Though maybe no longer without a rewrite!) If there's
*any* fun to be had, it's imagining how the Hirsute One would've
adapted THE SCARLET LETTER.  Let's see ... a blonde Hester Prynne
brutally murders the Reverend Dimmesdale after he discovers her lesbian
love affair with Harriet Hibbins.  For her punishment, she's sold to
the Indians and forced to perform nightly at the New World's newest
nightspot, the Totem Pole.
Who's to say what's a sin in Joe's eyes? 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     JADE is William Friedkin's hot new mystery, thriller, and highly
sexual movie.  Friedkin is a talented director who gave the world THE
FRENCH CONNECTION, THE EXORCIST, and TO LIVE AND DIE IN LA among
others.  This time he is teamed up with controversial writer Joe
Eszterhas.  Eszterhas, whose interviews about the writing of SHOWGIRLS,
make him sound like an idiot, nevertheless has written some movies of
great tension and suspense including JAGGED EDGE and BASIC INSTINCT.
     As the show unfolds, we see a darkly lit room filled with African
masks.  The intense and effective music (James Horner) blasts out at
the audience with a piano playing all those keys down in the low
register.  The editing (Augie Hess) adds to the tension as the cuts
jump from one ominous image to another.  We have seen nothing actually
scary, and yet we are already on the edge of our seats due to the
lavish and haunting sets (Alex Tavoularis).
     Soon people begin to appear on the set.  We have a rich male
corpse who was killed in some sex-related incident.  Assistant DA David
Corelli (David Caruso) is on the case.  His buddies say how lucky he is
since the election is next year and apparently he has been eyeing his
boss's job.
     One of the best parts of the movie is that it was shot on location
in San Francisco.  You get to see a lot of famous and beautiful sights
plus there is no better place in the world than the hills of the San
Francisco to stage long car chases.  The second scene of the movie is
shot in The Palace Hotel at the annual Black and White Ball.  We get
the see the famous large Pied Piper painting by Maxfield Parish, one of
my favorite artists.
     At the ball Corelli runs into his to his ex-girlfriend, Trina
Gavin (Linda Fiorentino), whom he still has the hots for.  She is
accompanied by her extremely wealthy lawyer husband, Matt Gavin (Chazz
Palminteri), who is a sports buddy of Corelli's.  Trina casually
mentions that she was alone at the dead man's house earlier in the day.
Later, in a further complication, we find out that the dead man had
pictures in his safe of the Governor of California (Richard Crenna) in
compromising positions with a hooker.
     Eszterhas's script then leads the viewer on a chase for who killed
the dead man.  As the story develops, it gets much more complex which I
liked a lot.  The dialog on the other hand and the character
development left a lot to be desired.  The lawyer Matt is a poorly
constructed character that gave Palminteri nothing to do.  David and
Trina are quite interesting characters, especially Trina, and yet, I
was disappointed.  Perhaps it was because the trailers for the movie
were so excellent and perhaps it was because Fiorentino is one of the
most interesting actress in the movies today.  She has dominated most
of her movies, don't miss for example, THE LAST SEDUCTION.  She has a
film presence unlike any other actress.  Here, however, Friedkin keeps
throttling her for some reason, but she is best in her usual take no
prisoners approach to acting.  One sad part of the movie is that the
great actor Richard Crenna is given a part so tiny that a few snips of
the editor's scissors, and he would have had no scenes at all.
     The sound editing is way off.  The background noise is fine and
highly dramatic when there are no voices, but when someone speaks it is
frequently hard to hear them due to pumped up music and sound effects.
The cinematographer (Andrzej Bartkowiak), on the other hand, did a
great job of shooting at just the right eerie light level and zooming
in for close-ups at the right time to heighten the tension.
     A high point of the show, even if it does go on a bit too long, is
one great car chase scene.  I can not think of another movie where I
enjoyed a car chase more.  The cars go up higher in the air, than any I
have ever seen.  The chase ends in a great visual through the bright
colors of a Chinatown parade.  The bad car itself is cool with smoked
glass and a look reminiscent of the Batmobile.
     If you like to try to guess the endings of mysteries and are good
at it, you will probably get this one basically right.  I do not enjoy
guessing.  I like to let the show unfold and try not to figure it out.
For me, the complexity of the plot, the tension, the excellent craft in
all parts of the movie (camera, lighting, sets, etc.), and the presence
of Fiorentino made the show work for me.  On the other hand, there is
not a single memorable line in the movie.
     JADE runs 2:00.  It is rated R for long shots of gory dead bodies,
lots of sex, and nudity, and I would think it would be suitable only
for quite mature teenagers.  Although I expected more from JADE, I did
like it and do recommend it.  It gets ** 1/2 in my book.
REVIEWED WRITTEN ON: October 13, 1995
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     A few short weeks ago I posed the question, "What is Joe Eszterhas
going to do next (after SHOWGIRLS)?"  Well, this is it:  JADE, a horrid
little thriller about a whole bunch of obsessive-compulsive crazies,
some of whom may be murderers.
     Actually, I wish it was that simple.  Perennial bad-girl Linda
Fiorentino plays Trina Gavin, a sultry psychologist with a questionable
past.  Chazz Palminteri is her sicko attorney husband Matt, and David
Caruso plays assistant D.A. David Corelli, who is assigned to look into
the murder of a wealthy art collector to whom everyone seems to be
linked ... especially Trina.
     What follows is a convoluted delving into a prostitution ring, one
backstabbing after another, some raunchy sex, and a whole slew of sick
obsessions, each of which seems to outdo the last one.  You realize
pretty quickly that no one is innocent in JADE, and it soon becomes
clear that the identity of the real killer is unimportant--*all* of
these people should be locked up.
     A bunch of annoying characters combined with a bad script conspire
to give us a thriller that isn't particularly thrilling.  Except for
one awesome car chase through the hilly streets of San Francisco and
through a parade in Chinatown, there's very little to redeem this
feature.  Director William Friedkin previously won a slew of awards for
directing THE FRENCH CONNECTION, and seems to have found his calling in
car chases.  Unfortunately, CONNECTION was made in 1971, and while
Friedkin's direction still has style, it ain't what it used to be.
     It's really a shame that a cast of genuinely great actors would
get together and star in such a poor film.  Palminteri looks simply
ragged in JADE, obviously not happy to be there.  Even supermodel Angie
Everhart, in her motion picture debut, is wasted--spending her entire
screen time being chased and beaten up.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Movie Emporium (archives)  /  http://www.notes.tpoint.net/emporium/
-Contributing Editor, FEEDBACK  /  http://www.eden.com/~feedback
-E-mail requests to join the movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1995
U.S. Availability: 10/13/95 (wide)
Running Length: 1:35
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, profanity, gore, sex, nudity)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: David Caruso, Linda Fiorentino, Chazz Palminteri, Michael Biehn,
      Donna Murphy, Angie Everhart, Richard Crenna
Director: William Friedkin
Producers: Robert Evans, Craig Baumgarten, and Gary Adelson
Screenplay: Joe Eszterhas
Cinematography: Andrzej Bartkowiak
Music: James Horner
U.S. Distributor: Paramount Pictures
     JADE is for cinematic anglers.  There are a lot of fish inhabiting
the murky, muddy waters of Joe Eszterhas' latest script, and, except for
the occasional shark or two, most of them are herrings--red herrings,
to be precise.  However, unlike a good mystery, where disparate plot
elements are knitted together into a satisfying (if occasionally
contrived) conclusion, JADE's loose ends unravel.  The finale
shamelessly cheats the audience, echoing that of another Eszterhas
disaster:  SLIVER.
     We've seen this story before--many, many times.  There's the sexy
femme fatale, the hard-nosed husband, and the generally-likable
investigative sort who's looking into the killing of a high-profile rich
guy with important ties.  This time, the actors aren't Sharon Stone and
Michael Douglas; they're David Caruso (assistant DA David Corelli),
Linda Fiorentino (psychiatrist Katrina Gavin), and Chazz Palminteri
(Katrina's top-notch lawyer husband, Matt Gavin).  These three get
tangled together in a web of sex and murder that involves fertility
masks, hidden video cameras, blackmail, a crooked governor (Richard
Crenna), and all sorts of other predictable twists.  (Ho-hum.)
Ultimately, it's not hard to guess the guilty party's identity, and,
even if you get it wrong, the manner in which the truth is revealed is
likely to leave you asking "Who cares?"
     The cast looks impressive, but none of these performers are likely
to underline this film on their resumes.  Caruso is as flat as a sheet
of paper.  This underplayed role definitely doesn't show off his screen
presence.  He has some, to be sure (check out MAD DOG AND GLORY), but it
hasn't emerged since his well-publicized departure from TV's NYPD BLUE.
Chazz Palminteri, who can play just about any kind of role--bad good
guys and good bad guys--isn't much of a standout, either, never
seeming to find more than a caricature in his big-money lawyer
character.  And Linda Fiorentino just re-works her LAST SEDUCTION
persona by adding a dose of humanity.  When you do something as well as
she did, typecasting is inevitable, I suppose.  The relationship between
these three, which is supposed to be a cornerstone of the film, isn't
believable.  Love, hatred, jealousy, and anger are portrayed with a
lukewarm lack of passion.
     Director William Friedkin has created a stylistic picture, but this
is an example of style without substance.  In THE FRENCH CONNECTION,
Friedkin oversaw one of the great chase sequences in screen history.
There's a chase scene in JADE, too, but it's far from the same class.
Repetitious and tedious, this stretches for the better part of ten
minutes and concludes with a highly-anticlimactic splash.  Maybe if
there had been an underwater camera at this point, we would have seen a
few of those red herrings swimming around.
     Eszterhas can take solace from his paycheck and the realization
that this is actually an improvement on his last screenplay (the better-
to-be-forgotten SHOWGIRLS), although not by much.  Like the streets of
San Francisco as portrayed in JADE, the quality of his work lately has
been all downhill.  There's not much right about this film, but at least
it illustrates a valuable point:  even a talented director and a
promising cast can't redeem a moronic storyline.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)
