Title
Review for Ace Ventura: Pet Detective (1994)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
James Berardinelli
     Certain ideas are excellent material for short features on
programs like SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE or IN LIVING COLOR.  Properly padded,
it's possible that a few of those premises could even make passable 1/2
hour television programs.  However, stretching things beyond a certain
point courts disappointment.  Take ACE VENTURA:  PET DETECTIVE, for
example, where the comic momentum sputters long before the running time
has elapsed.
     In the case of movies of this type, the plot is superfluous, and
most of the time it doesn't make much sense anyway, but here are the
basics.  Ace Ventura, pet detective (Jim Carrey), is called onto the
case when the Miami Dolphins' mascot Snowflake is kidnapped two weeks
before the team's Superbowl meeting with the Philadelphia Eagles.
Working alongside Ventura is the woman who hires him and eventually
becomes his love interest, Melissa Robinson (Courtney Cox).  At first,
the case seems to be one of simple dolphin-stealing, but when
quarterback Dan Marino (played, in a role that stretches his acting
ability beyond the breaking point, by Dan Marino) is snatched during
the filming of an Isotoner commercial, it becomes clear that sinister
forces are at work.
     Jim Carrey, also known as "Fire Marshal Bill" from the TV series
IN LIVING COLOR, uses his rubber features and goofy personae to take
control of ACE VENTURA.  From the start, it's obvious that this is a
vehicle for his comedy, and it mostly works--for about ten to fifteen
minutes.  After that, Mr. Carrey's act gradually grows less humorous
and more tiresome, and the laughter in the audience seems forced.
     That's not to say that the film is never funny, because it has its
moments, including some inspired take-offs on the original STAR TREK
(in which Mr. Carrey does a hilarious send-up of William Shatner's
"dramatic pauses"), MISSION IMPOSSIBLE, and, perhaps best of all, THE
CRYING GAME (complete with the Boy George version of the title track).
However, between these moments of mirth, there's a lot of dead screen
time.  After the initial amusement of watching Mr. Carrey's face twist
into numerous odd expressions has worn off, the best way to pass the
time is keeping an eye on Courtney Cox as she tries vainly to hold a
straight face in the midst of her co-star's antics.
     Like the other movies loosely grouped in this category (which
include the two WAYNE'S WORLDs and, to a lesser extent, the NAKED
GUN-type flicks), the humor is very much of the hit-or-miss variety.
Unfortunately for ACE VENTURA, too many of the jokes not only aren't
funny, but aren't funny while thinking that they are.
     There are undoubtedly a lot of fans of Fire Marshal Bill and Jim
Carrey's humor.  For them, ACE VENTURA delivers the expected gags (many
of which are scatological in nature, and almost all of which have the
potential to offend a "sensitive" viewer) and an elongated opportunity
to see Mr.  Carrey in action.  For just about everyone else, this is
likely to be far too much of something best taken in small doses.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jim Carrey, Courteney Cox, Sean Young, Udo Kier, Dan Marino.
Screenplay:  Jack Bernstein, Tom Shadyac & Jim Carrey.
Director:  Tom Shadyac.
     As many individual elements as I might analyze with any given
film, my gut reaction almost always comes down to one crucial issue:
did the film do what it was trying to do?  If it was a thriller, did it
keep me in suspense?  If it was a romance, did I respond emotionally?
And if it was a comedy, did I laugh?  Of all the film types, comedy is
perhaps the most difficult to analyze; either it works, or it doesn't.
Which brings me to this confession: I laughed at ACE VENTURA: PET
DETECTIVE.  God help me, I laughed quite a bit.  Comedian Jim Carrey's
unique persona won me over in spite of a great deal of stupidity and
some sluggish pacing.
     Jim Carrey is Ace Ventura, a private eye who specializes in
finding lost pets.  As the only one there is at what he does, it is Ace
who gets the call for the biggest case of his career:  finding the
Miami Dolphins' kidnapped mascot, Snowflake.  With the help of Dolphins
publicist Melissa Robinson (Courteney Cox), Ace begins investigating
suspects like wealthy marine life collector Ron Camp (Udo Kier),
eventually turning his focus towards someone connected to the Dolphins
organization.  In his way stands the Miami police, headed by combative
Lt. Lois Einhorn (Sean Young), as Ace tries to crack the case before
the Super Bowl.
     Vanity projects are a dime a dozen these days, but they all apply
a very similar logic, namely that if you let the star do what he or
she does best, and if that star's audience is large enough, you'll have
a success.  I'm not sure whether the latter condition is true of
Carrey, but it is true that he's allowed to do what he does best.  It
has been a long time since I've seen a physical comedian who looks as
comfortable on screen as Carrey.  His elastic features recall early
Jerry Lewis, while his spindly frame and geeky self- confidence show
traces of Pee-Wee Herman.  When the comedy is purely physical, the
laughs are really big.  The opening sequence features Ace disguised as
a parcel deliveryman gleefully shattering the contents of his package
to simulate a shipping mishap.  My favorite bit involved Ace sneaking
out of a bathroom window to snoop around Camp's mansion, taking an
elaborate and artificially treacherous route towards a door he could
have walked to in seconds.  ACE VENTURA boasts some of the most amusing
slapstick in recent years this side of the Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker
films.
     It's considerably more erratic in its success when it comes to
verbal gags.  No scatological subject goes unexamined in ACE VENTURA;
Carrey even utilizes his own posterior as a ventriloquist's dummy.  In
fact, ACE VENTURA is almost self-congratulatory in its political
incorrectness, using homophobia and sexism as punch lines.  The film
drags between visual set pieces, rescued only by Carrey's goofy
delivery.  Part of the problem is that screenwriters Carrey, Tom
Shadyac and Jack Bernstein frequently seem unclear as to when enough is
enough.  Ace's trademark mocking cackle, borrowed from Carrey's Fire
Marshall Bill character from "In Living Color," is funny once but not
three times.  A more telling example involves the theme song from THE
CRYING GAME, used perfectly once but then used again so that it just
seems derivative.  Finally, one piece of advice for filmmakers:  if you
must use Dan Marino for a cameo, please don't give him too many lines.
An Isotoner glove commercial is about all I can take.
     There would seem to be little point to commenting on the
supporting players in ACE VENTURA, since for all practical purposes
they serve as scenery with SAG cards.  However, I would be remiss in
not mentioning Sean Young, who appears to have resigned herself to
doing parodies of her reputation as a real-life psycho.  She has a fun,
over-the-top part much like her role in FATAL INSTINCT, but wisely she
avoids trying to steal scenes from Carrey.  It just wouldn't work.  In
ACE VENTURA, Jim Carrey establishes himself as a first-rate screen
clown, one I hope to see again.

Author
Tak
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Ace Ventura (Jim Carrey) is hired to find and return the kidnapped
Miami Dolphin's mascot, the dolphin Snowflake.  Zany antics abound as
Ace questions suspects, assists the police, researches, and romances.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     I didn't really *want* to like the movie, because it *looked*
stupid.  How funny can Jim Carrey be for 85 minutes?  His stuff's good
on five-minute skits, but I didn't think I could even remotely enjoy a
whole showcase movie.  I was wrong.  I ended up laughing a lot.
     Jim Carrey works all his famous bits--the cackling Popeye laugh,
his killer Captain James T. Kirk, and his physical humor.  Much of the
movie is funny because his exaggerated moves are so animated-comic-like
and, well, exaggerated.  He walks funny, he talks funny, and he makes
funny faces.  Doesn't sound funny, but he pulls it off.
     Tone Loc was surprisingly good as Ace's inside police contact.  He
didn't act like a rapper in a cameo, he just acted.  Check him out in
Disney's BLANK CHECK as well.  My opinion of him just keeps going up.
    Dan Marino should stick to making Isotoner commercials.  'Nuf said.
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     Talking about it ACE VENTURA really doesn't do it justice though.
You'll just have to watch it and, when it's all over, see how much you
laughed.  I'm recommending this movie to my friends (as long as they
like Jim Carrey) and I think I'll even go with 'em again.

Author
Dragan Antulov
Jim Carrey is one of the most talented comic actors of our
time, but his reputation often suffered because of the
critics' snobbery. Carrey still suffers because of the huge
popularity of his early movies, especially comedies that
relied solely on his comedic talent and hardly anything
else, causing animosity among critics who demanded higher
standards of American film comedy. ACE VENTURA, 1994 hit
film by Tom Shadyac that turn Carrey into the mega-star is
one of those films that explain why some critics don't like
Carrey and why this actor didn't get his well- deserved
"Oscar".
The protagonist of this film, with screenplay co-written by
Shadyac, Carrey and Jack Bernstein, is Ace Ventura (played
by Carrey), private detective specialised in locating and
retrieving lost pets. His talents are spotted attention of
Miami Dolphins football team, whose owner hires him to find
team's mascot - dolphin named Snowflake. In his quest Carrey
is aided by Dolphins publicist Melissa Robinson (played by
Courtney Cox), while inimical police lieutenant Lois Eichorn
(played by Sean Young) thwarts his investigation. When
Dolphins star Dan Marino (played by himself) also
disappears, Ventura's investigation receives further
complications.
ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE is a film almost without the plot
but that doesn't discourage Carrey. Instead the lack of
meaningful story is seen as an opportunity for him to
display his great comedic talent, including almost
indescribable skills of physical comedy. Humour is often
bellow standards of good taste and definitely not suited for
children, especially in scenes that spoof CRYING GAME. All
supporting actors seem uncomfortable or disinterested for
their roles. However, as long as Carrey appears on screen
the film is truly hilarious, and since Carrey appears with
86 minutes, many of those shortcomings can be forgiven. At
least by those viewers who want nothing more than
light-hearted entertainment and comedic talent in its barest
essence.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Ace Ventura, a guy with an outlandish Hawaiian shirt and long side
burns, has nothing but bad hair days.  Without any of the refinements
he has shown in some of his latter films, Jim Carrey, as Ace Ventura,
keeps the humor in this one insufferably crude.  The first Ace film in
hopefully a short series is called ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE.  Never
has a film been less in need of a sequel than this one, but after
making over a hundred million dollars in 1994, there has, regrettably,
already been one sequel.
     In need of a better script than the one by Jack Bernstein, Carrey,
and the director, Tom Shadyac, Carrey struts his stuff without
restraint.  The director lets Carrey run wild, which in Carrey's case
is a dangerous thing to do.  Carrey is an undeniable comedic genius but
one in need of control.  As proof of how good Carrey can be, consider
his relatively more restrained performances in LIAR, LIAR and THE MASK.
     Typical of the crude bathroom humor in ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE
is a scene of Ace bending over and manipulating his rear in a sick form
of ventriloquism. The rest of the movie is the same, ad nauseam.
     To the extent that the movie has a plot, it involves Ace, loud
mouthed, pet detective extraordinaire, in search of a professional
football team's dolphin mascot, which was stolen two weeks before the
Super Bowl.  The team uses Ace to track down the animal.
     The script is devoid of ideas, and the movie plays as if it were
one long ad lib routine by Carrey.  Sean Young, who, since her one
excellent part in NO WAY OUT, gives her usual forgettably bad
performance, this time as a police detective.  She and all of the other
actors provide little more than a backdrop for Carrey's showing off.
ACE VENTURA has one memorable scene -- the ending credits, which bring
blessed relief.
     ACE VENTURA PET DETECTIVE runs 1:26.  It is rated PG-13 for
profanity, nudity, and crude sexual humor.  The movie would be
acceptable for most kids ten and up.


Author
Michael J. Legeros
     What are we going to do with Jim Carrey?  Viewers of television's
"In Living Color" know this one-man cartoon from such characters as
Fire Marshall Bill.  Viewers also know that "In Living Color" is a
skit-show and that a little of Jim Carrey goes a long way.
     Unfortunately, this fact was forgotten by the makers of the Carrey
comedy ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE.
     Three writers, including Carrey, worked on the slapstick story,
which sends a self-styled "Pet Detective" on the trail of a stolen
dolphin.  The missing mammal belongs to the Miami Dolphins, who need
their mascot for the upcoming Superbowl.
     For plot porpoises, this story works as well as any Three Stooges
short.  Carrey gets to do his "official" schtick as he snoops around
greater Miami.  He leers and sneers, craning his neck to funny effect.
He even does his Captain Kirk impersonation.  Again.
     All of this is pretty harmless stuff up until the point that you
realize that the writers have absolutely no intention of focusing on
anyone *other* than Carrey.
     (Suggested alternate title--JIM CARREY: WILL DO ANYTHING FOR A
LAUGH.)
     Export it to France and you may have a hit.  As it stands, ACE
VENTURA isn't even good kid's stuff.  The profanity count, alone, is
too high.  Which is ironic, since children are, probably, Carrey's best
audience.
     The film doesn't even have the goofball charm of Chris Elliott's
recent no-brainer CABIN BOY.  Sure, Carrey has his moments.  But what
can you say about a film whose high-points include watching Carrey
slink around to the theme from "Mission Impossible?"
     ACE VENTURA has one glaring incongruity.  Amid the butt-jokes and
double-takes, the script takes great pains to set-up an elaborate and
rather funny "Crying Game" gag.  And, for *this* intended audience, that
takes (ahem) cojones.
