Title
Review for Demoni 2 (1986)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Paul-Michael Agapow
Astonishly bad Italian horror flick in which a demonic infection
spreads through the colourless inhabitants of an apartment block,
causing them to underact, accquire poorly dubbed "Epic Theatre"
voices and kill each other.
A definite "so bad it's good" movie, "Demons 2" is
reminiscent of Frankenstein.  The monster, not the movie that is,
because it looks like it was stitched together from the remains
of several dead productions and allowed to shamble about the
soundstage for an hour and a half.  Unfortunately "Demons 2" does
not kill its creator and then get lost in the Artic, but you
can't have everything.  Scarily enough, this effort may actually
have been assembled as a whole.
The prequel "Demons", for those who haven't seen it (and let's
face it, who has?)  concerns a film premiere at which the
audience are transformed one-by-one into demons and kill each
other.  For this sequel, the action takes place instead in a
(quelle surprise) condo.  Common characters?  None.  Plot
connections?  None?  Acting?  None.
You have to give the director (who is the sole common link)
some credit, because he has sucessfully shot a film in which no
character's name can be remembered.  Nada.  You end up referring
to them in elliptical ways.  ("What happened to the black guy who
looked like he was going to get eaten?"  "He got eaten."  "Oh.")
However, he does have a talent for surreal plot twists.  Ten
minutes into the film, a group of partgoers usher their nerdish
friend outside to deflect the crazy "Gerald" (maybe), who is
going to crash their party.
Cue nerd waiting on street corner.  Cue shots of Gerald
driving at high speeds through town, laughing maniacally.
("Gerald, you're going too fast!"  "Hahaha, I can handle it
baby!")  Cue first apartment dwelvers being torn apart by demons
...  Nerd waits on street corner, looks left and right.  Gerald
laughs.  The victims are trapped in the garage, ramming cars into
the closed exit doors.  Gerald shrugs off a request to slow down.
Nerd waits.  People get eaten.  Gerald speeds.  Repeat for next
80 minutes.
Finally, at the film's end, everyone is dead and the nerd is
still waiting.  He turns, gapes.  In a screech of rubber, Gerald
arrives, rolls and crashes his car and dies.  The end.  (Wipes
tear from eye.)  Ah, they don't make them like that anymore.
Hell, they're not allowed to.
Did I say that was the end?  Well, a man and a pregnant woman
do manage to escape into an empty TV studio (perhaps in hope of
starring in something else) and before you can say "Piero
Pasolino", they're re-enacting the birth of Christ.  It _is_ an
Italian film.  Guess the Romans are a little tense about mucking
up the last divine birth, so they want to be sure not to miss the
next one.
Hideous, but deliriously so.  [0/bomb] and rap accordion on
the Sid and Nancy scale.  3 Lamberts on the bad movie scale.
------
paul-michael agapow (agapow@latcs1.oz.au), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse
"There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire."
[archived at http://www.cs.latrobe.edu.au/~agapow/Postviews/]
