Title
Review for Butterfly Kiss (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz
BUTTERFLY KISS (director: Michael Winterbottom; screenwriter: Frank
Cottrell Boyce; cinematographer: Seamus McGarvey; editor: Trevor Waite;
Cast: Amanda Plummer (Eunice), Saskia Reeves (Miriam), Des McAleer
(Eric), Kathy Jamieson (Wendy), Ricky Tomlinson (Robert), Lisa Jane
Riley (Danielle), 1995-UK)
A strange little tale from England about a weirdo homicidal killer,
Eunice (Amanda Plummer), who is first seen barging into a sevice-station
rest stop and asking the girl behind the counter, "Are you Judith?" Then
she hums a tune while asking, "Do you have this record?" All the time
moving nervously about, hopping from foot to foot, in constant motion,
before she kills the girl who is behind the counter for no apparent
reason.
She meets a naive girl in one of the petrol stations who is attracted to
her, Miriam (Saskia Reeves). Saskia emotes in a contrasting understated
performance to the energetic Amanda's. She is the narrator and does it
in a matter-of-fact casual voice from behind prison bars, as seen in a
black-and-white videotape. She tells how Amanda captivated her and how
she chose to run away with her and form a lesbian relationship, getting
involved in a string of murders.
When Amanda runs out of Miriam's petrol station and douses herself with
gas, Miriam runs out to comfort her and Amanda gives her a big kiss.
>From then on, the dimwitted, hard-of-hearing, psychologically impaired,
meek, young girl becomes a follower of the sociopath Amanda, even
bringing her home to meet her infirmed mother, who despotically demands
constant care from her. At one point the sweet talking Miriam declares,
"Mother, Auntie Kathy, a girl at swimming--and Eunice, Those are all the
people who have kissed me." After one night in bed with Amanda, she is
willing to run away with her, thinking that this is her one chance at
finding happiness from her dull existence.
This is a pointless, violent road movie about two very sick girls, who
are not explained or studied, but are just shown to be on a wreckless
course of destruction. Amanda with an urge to kill and be punished for
it, is supposedly looking for her ex-lover named Judy. But Judy might
also be viewed as a figment of her warped mind, or perhaps she
represents someone from the Bible, like the avenger named Judith who
beheaded an enemy of the Israelites. Amanda displays a death wish,
saying, "I'm bad, I won't change. Punishment is all I understand." While
Miriam is a lost soul, having no sense of who she is, armed only with a
very low opinion of herself. She tries to please Amanda, cleaning up
after her murders and travelling with her aimlessly across England's
northern seacoast, getting involved with a number of repelling roadside
crimes. It is not possible to make sense of how these girls relate to
each other and how brutally they act.
The film is mainly interesting because of Amanda Plummer's devilish
performance, where
she needs to be hurt in order to feel that God loves her, wanting
desperately to know that he is aware of her murders of innocent people.
She is a hard-edged psychopath, wracked with an unbelievable amount of
pain, only taking pleasure when she unbuttons her blouse to show off her
lean body, which is covered with bruises and 17 tattoos, each with a
personal meaning. She is also wrapped in chains and has her nipples
pierced and linked  with nipple clamp attachments strung across her
chest. This armament causes her to clank whenever she moves. The
depravity and depth of alienation she evokes from her character, and the
energy that Amanda Plummer puts into her characterization, make this a
fascinating film, if you can ever get past the bleakness of the story.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Steve Rhodes
I saw this troubling and unusual show at the press screening. It
opens to the public Friday June 28th at one of the Camera Cinemas in
the San Jose area.
     BUTTERFLY KISS is an effective and chilling study of the criminal
psychosis of a serial killer.  Secondarily the film is a love story
between two disturbed women - one clearly insane and the other at least
amoral and probably equally mentally unbalanced.  The film is not for
the faint of heart.  It is a shocking show with a surprising
conclusion.
     Before I get into the body of the review, I want to warn potential
viewers.  Although I am giving this film a thumbs up, this is the type
of picture that will have some viewers walking out early in disgust
claiming the film is sick.  If you see the movie and feel that way, I
will completely understand.  On the other hand, films like HENRY:
PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER, MANHUNTER, SEVEN, and THE SILENCE OF THE
LAMBS that realistically delve into the minds of brutal killers must
contain a natural revulsion.  Sometimes the violence in the show is
gratuitous and sometimes not, and it is a fine line the director has to
walk.  Here I felt the acting was excellent and realistic, and the
director (Michael Winterbottom) had everything right on the edge
without going too far.
     The plot of the shot is that Eunice, played by Amanda Plummer from
PULP FICTION, is searching petrol station's convenience stores for her
ex-lover Judith.  When the clerks there turn out not to be Judith, she
kills them.  She also starts to have sex with men and then murders
them.  Plummer delivers an excellent performance reminiscent of James
Woods.  She has so much pent-up energy that you are certain she will
ignite at any moment.  She even pours gasoline over herself at one
point which serves as an apt metaphor for her explosive volatility.
     At one of the petrol stations she meets Miriam, played by Saskia
Reeves who was so wonderful two years ago in TRAPS and is quite good
her as well.  Miriam takes an instant liking to Eunice and discounts
her faults like killing people.  When Eunice says, "I know I'm a bad
person," Miriam reassures her with, "Don't be daft.  There's no such
thing as a bad person."  Eunice has no sense of right and wrong and
explains to Miriam that, "Killing people is nothing.  I've done much
worse than kill people."  Miriam's mother is a disabled hermit who has
a simple solution to keep from getting into trouble.  As she explains,
"If you never go out, you'll never do no evil."  Miriam certainly does
not follow her mother's advice.
     The costumes (Rachael Fleming) are an important part of the show.
Eunice is like a walking ad for a bondage magazine.  She makes a
metallic clinking sound since inside her clothes she has lots of chains
and locks attached to various obscure portions of her anatomy.  She
likes showing her metal off, especially to her intended victims.
Eunice also has 17 tattoos, and Miriam assures us that each has a
special meaning.
     The cinematography (Seamus McGarvey) of the film captures just the
right gray melancholy feel, especially in the exterior scenes.  The
script by Frank Cottrell Boyce pulls no punches - hard hitting and to
the point.
     BUTTERFLY KISS runs just 1:28.  It is not rated, but would
probably get an R rating rather than an NC-17, but it is close.  There
is nudity, sex, and quite gory violence.  This picture is not
appropriate for teenagers.  I recommend the show to people with strong
stomachs because the acting is quite good and the story bizarre but
interesting.  I give it ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
