Title
Review for Strangers in Good Company (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Frank Maloney
     STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY is a film directed by Cynthia Scott and
produced by the National Film Board of Canada.  It stars seven
non-professional actors, Alice Diabo, Mary Meigs, Constance Garneau,
Michelle Sweeney, Beth Webber, and two others whose names have gotten
away from me.  The screenplay was written by Gloria Demers with Cynthia
Scott, David Wilson, and Sally Bochner.
     In some ways, this yank thinks STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY is the
perfect Canadian film.  It is quiet, sensitive, non-violent,
non-spectacular, the very opposite of the Hollywood flick; it is
informed by a love of its characters and the scenery (Mont Tremblant),
by intelligence, by the idea spoken by one the characters that everyone
has an interesting story.
     This story concerns six older women whose tour bus breaks down 20
miles from help.  They and their driver (Sweeney), a young, black woman
who has twisted her ankle, painfully make their way to a deserted
farmhouse above an idyllic lake.  They need shelter, beds, food, and
hope of rescue.  They set about surviving with an unhurried practicality
and openness.  Some of their efforts are silly, some crafty.  They do
what they can and they complain or blame hardly at all.  They spend a
lot of their time talking and revealing their interesting stories.  No
potboilers, no confrontations, no great break throughs, just people
depending on one another.
     The dramatis personae include a nun with an interest in
automechanics, an elegant lesbian who paints watercolors and who has a
fund of facts about nature (Meigs), an ex-Liverpudlian with a face like
an owl and a unique approach to aerobics, a woman with a high-pitched
voice and the cheeriness of an idiot or a saint, a Mohawk matriarch
(Diabo) who knows some tricks about wild food and survival, a beautiful
and young looking 80-year-old (Webber) with a fear of wattles, the
driver with a talent for making music and friends, and a 92-year-old
(Garneau) who thinks she may have found a good place to die.
     These women largely play themselves, it is their stories that they
tell so effectively.  The director from time to time shows old snapshots
from life of character or another; you see the story in their changing
faces.
     My audience had a preponderance of older people in it, exactly the
opposite of most movie audiences.  This may have been a reflection of
the matinee ticket prices (which are lower than seniors prices).
Certainly the mob waiting for the next show were more demographically
normal.  The younger couple behind me thought that every action and
utterance on the screen was so cute as to require a laugh.  It's true,
sometimes the women were unspeakably cute, but at other times they broke
our hearts, they moved us to tears, they filled us with awe at their
bravery, their grace, their acceptance of life.  They had their fears
(death, not seeing a great-grandchild grow up, being ugly, not dying
even); after all, they were human beings--and we are all afraid, but are
we all as wise about our fears and foolishness?
     If I have any complaints about STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY, it is
that the cast is too perfectly balanced.  Could such a group really find
themselves on one small tour bus--the nun, the dyke, the Indian, the
Afro-Canadian, the English immigrant, et aliae?  This is the only
artifice in a movie that emphasizes naturalness, the only fiction in a
movie that is really about real people.
     Please see this movie.  It will change you.  Pay whatever they ask
to get in.  If it doesn't play where you see import movies, as the
manager to schedule it.  And then send a letter of thanks to the
National Film Board of Canada.

Author
Myra VanInwegen
     Today I saw, in a matinee, STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY (directed by
?, sorry, I forgot to write it down; it's a woman, and the film is
sponsored by the National Film Board of Canada).  This time last week I
saw EATING, directed by Henry Jaglom [reviewed in a separate article].
EATING is about a bunch of mostly beautiful, rich, well-dressed,
successful women gathered for a triple birthday party.  STRANGERS IN
GOOD COMPANY is about seven very ordinary women, six of whom are senior
citizens, who have gotten stranded by a broken-down bus.  Neither film
has any male characters in it (except for a very brief glimpse of a male
at the very end of STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY), and neither film is
missing anything by not having them.
     STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY is about a group of women getting to know
each other and learning to take care of themselves.  All the women
(except one, the bus driver) are old, about half of them are fat, only
one uses makeup, and they wear ordinary clothing.  They talk about their
lives, and as the movie progresses we get to know their strengths: what
keeps them going and optimistic in the face of their troubles.  These
are very resourceful women.  They try various techniques of getting
food, attracting attention, and getting themselves out.  Some methods
succeed, some don't, but these women (except for one) never give up
hope.
     These women, unlike their counterparts in EATING, are slow and
natural, like the countryside in which they are trapped.  Yet, despite
their fear and desires to get back to civilization, they never resent
their surroundings nor each other, and they are sorry to go when they
are finally rescued.  And despite their lack of physical beauty, we grow
to love and respect them.  It is very reassuring to see ordinary people
in a movie, where usually all the lead actors look like they've stepped
out of GLAMOUR or GQ.
     I recommend this movie to people who don't define the goodness of a
movie by the number of dead left in the gutters and the number of car
chases.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
97 min., PG, Drama/Comedy, 1991, Canadian
Director: Cynthia Scott
Cast: Alice Diabo, Constance Garneau, Winifred Holden,
      Cissy Meddings, Mary Meigs, Catherine Roche,
      Michelle Sweeny, Beth Webber
     Several women are on a bus when it breaks down in the middle of
nowhere.  One of the women knows of an old falling apart house nearby
where no one lives anymore.  There are no provisions in the house and
they have little with them.  They have to depend on each other's talents
and knowledge until the bus can be fixed.
     STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY is a rather good film.  It does have some
slow spots, but on the whole it is well crafted.  The locations are well
picked.  By the house is a beautiful lake, and the house has nice
mountains in the background.  On a scale of zero to five, I give
STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY a three.  STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY is rated
PG for adult situations.
     The story, itself, is very well done.  It is touching.  You can
feel when the people are scared or depressed.  The actresses did a very
good job, I feel, convincing the audience that they were the character
in the film.  The one main problem with the film is that it sometimes
gets slow.  The fault is not with the actresses, I think, but lies in
the screenplay.  The other main problem with the film is that the oldest
woman tries, I think, to draw a little too much sympathy from the
audience.  If the actress, sorry I don't remember who played her, had
under played the character a bit, the character would have been more
believable.  The screenplay, otherwise, is very well done.  It is a
believable story, which makes the movie much better.  The characters are
ones that I felt myself caring about.  I was hoping that they wouldn't
die stranded out in the middle of nowhere, but would make it to
civilization.
