Title
Review for Christmas Vacation (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jamey Hughton
The third installment in the National Lampoon `Vacation' series is
entitled `Christmas Vacation', even though for this outing the Griswolds
do not actually go anywhere. They stay at home during the Holidays to
welcome a large gathering of family members in a reunion patriarch Clark
(Chevy Chase) has been carefully organizing. Clark knows, when everyone
arrives for Christmas, that idiotic feuding will commence around the
Griswold household. But, he has confidence he can maintain sanity and
still manage to host a memorable Christmas for everyone. Or so he
thinks.
In my opinion, `National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation' is the best and
funniest of the series. I say this, of course, without proper knowledge
of what `European Vacation' is like (although I'm told it sucks, so I
think I'm safe). This film captures the humor and outlandish situations
of the clumsy Clark Griswold with far better success than the
sporadically amusing `Vacation' and the positively dreadful `Vegas
Vacation', offering a consistent slew of belly laughs and Kodak moments
galore. It works as a comedy, with shades of both physical humor and
genial sweetness, but if also functions as a memorable holiday feature.
In some slapstick-driven sort of way, it captures the essence of
Christmas - coming off as both charming and hilarious in simultaneous
fashion.
The troupe of disgruntled family members that arrive at the Griswold
household represent that basis for a lot of funny gags, many of which
are actually inspired. After the hazardous task of picking the proper
tree, Clark and Helen (Beverly D'Angelo) welcome both sets of parents to
their domain. His, played by Diane Ladd and John Randolph, are the
typical set of meek but encouraging well-wishers. Hers, played by Doris
Roberts and the late E.G. Marshall, are more of the pushy type. Director
Jeremiah S. Chechik stages this deranged family get-together with
inspired comic timing, recreating the possible scenario with a great
deal of humorous success The characters are broad but thoroughly
amusing, and some of the comic situations are simply irresistible -
especially the lighting ceremony (in which Clark attempts to show off
the extensive Christmas light display on the house) and the runaway
squirrel sequence.
There is something about `Christmas Vacation' that keeps me coming back;
an unusual spark that never seems to die off. Perhaps the spark is
ignited by Randy Quaid, who joins in the festivities as the grotesque
slob cousin Eddie, a family man who owns a scrappy RV and a dog
appropriately named Snot. Quaid, reprising the role from the original
`Vacation', seems ready and willing to turn Cousin Eddy into the most
utterly reprehensible - not to mention the most downright hilarious -
member of anyone's family in recent memory. When he is explaining why
the metal plate in his head had to be replaced, a sample bit of dialogue
includes `every time the wife would turn on the microwave, I'd piss my
pants and forget who I was for half-an-hour.' I don't know why, but each
time I find Quaid simply uproarious, and marvel at how his timing
derives some great deadpan humor out of Chase - who submits what could
be his funniest screen performance. The comic spark behind Chevy's
approach is certainly lit, and he even offers a believable mental
breakdown toward the end of the film, when (SPOILER AHEAD) Clark opens
his much anticipated Christmas bonus to find he's been enrolled in a
jelly club.
Some of the shtick really don't work - namely, the constant misfortune
of the snotty neighbors (played by Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Nicholas
Guest). As he wrote the screenplay, there is also plenty of trademark
John Hughes humor (Clark gets repeatedly smacked with boards in the
attic, etc.). And yet, despite all of it's imperfections, I still find
`Christmas Vacation' to be a delightful holiday treat -a
chocolate-covered morsel of Yuletide comedy that seems to bring out the
best in the season. Some people view this film as a holiday classic,
ranking alongside `It's a Wonderful Life' and `Miracle on 34th Street'.
But I wouldn't extend my positive critique quite that far. `Christmas
Vacation' is something of a guilty pleasure - a guilty pleasure that I
partake in each and every year.
