Title
Review for Object of My Affection, The (1998)
Number of Reviews
20

Author
Liz Rizzo
Starring Jennifer Aniston, Paul Rudd, Alan Alda, Allison Janney, Timothy
Daly, John Pankow, Steve Zahn, Nigel Hawthorne and Amo Gulinello
Written by Stephen McCauley (novel) and Wendy Wasserstein
Directed by Nicholas Hytner
Produced by 20th Century Fox [US] and distributed by 20th Century Fox
Film Corp. [US]
A chain is only as strong as its weakest link.  And if "The Object of My
Affection" was a chain, it would be a strong one.  Of all the things I
like about this film, and there are a lot, the large and outstanding
supporting cast is by far the most notable.  Our main characters, Nina
Borowski and George Hanson, are played wonderfully and realistically by
Jennifer Aniston in her best role yet and Paul Rudd, who I personally
enjoyed in "Clueless."  Alan Alda is full of funny lines as Nina's book
agent brother-in-law, Sidney Miller, and Allison Janney is hilarious as
his wife and Nina's half-sister, Constance Miller, a woman with firm
ideas about how things should be.  Of all the supporting roles, she was
my absolute favorite.  Timothy Daly is effective as Dr. Robert Joley,
George's initial, self-centered love interest.  And John Pankow turns in
an excellent performance as Nina's boyfriend, Vince McBride, who
develops into much more as the film progresses.  He successfully meets
the challenge of creating a guy who isn't simply the bad guy, but rather
is just not Nina's idea of a perfect match.  Real people break up
because they don't get along with each other, not because one is an
obvious loser.  It is a credit to the script that Vince is a real
person, not just the jerk boyfriend.  Other excellent performances are
given by Amo Gulinello, Kevin Carroll, Marilyn Dobrin, Steve Zahn and
Nigel Hawthorne, who is excellent as an aging gay man and Nina's voice
of reason.  This film is stuffed full of interesting people, and the
script manages them effortlessly.
Another thing I enjoyed is that these characters have jobs, and they
actually work!  OK, they all have incredibly happy, politically-correct
jobs - even Vince is a public defender - but we get to see them working
nonetheless.  Since the average person works over 40 hours a week, it's
nice to feel that what we do with the majority of our lives is worthy of
film.  I like to see characters working just like real people.  Well,
almost like real people.
In fact, when we first meet George he is directing a performance at the
elementary school where he teaches.  The Miller's daughter is a student
there and a performer in the show, which leads to George and Dr. Joley
going to dinner at the Miller's that night.  Nina and George meet and
bond, and when it becomes apparent that George will be needing a new
place to live, Nina jumps at the chance to get a roommate to live in her
spare bedroom, and one who is a respected teacher and friend of the
family, no less.  This leads to a beautiful friendship, the basis of the
whole film.
The conflict arises when Nina becomes pregnant and asks her best friend,
George, to stay with her permanently and act as a father figure. 
Needless to say, this norm-defying decision sends waves through Nina's
circle of friends and relatives.  Most upset is Vince, the father of the
child, who upon being told that Nina would rather be with George than
him, immediately assumes he is being pushed completely out of the
picture and storms off.  And of course, Constance, not one to be into
alternative living arrangements, is completely against the setup.  The
truth she sees though, is that Nina is falling in love with George, and
we all know that can only lead to trouble.
The beauty of `The Object of My Affection,' is that it sets up complex
personal issues, and it doesn't back away for a minute; it lets them
play out.  For example, there is a scene where Nina and George come
close to physical intimacy.  And we think, what are they doing?  Is
George leading Nina on?  Yes, although I'm sure he's not thinking
straight at the moment.  Is Nina fooling herself?  Obviously.  Could
this happen in real life?  Yes, I'm sure it does. I find that films are
often criticized when characters are written realistically and allowed
to do the crazy things we do but don't like to admit.  Julia Roberts and
Cameron Diaz found this out in `My Best Friend's Wedding.'  People
complained about the girl who would quit college to get married and the
strong, single woman who still would drop everything to pursue a man,
yet I could introduce you to plenty of women just like Julianne and
Kimmy.  It can be inspiring when characters are role models, but it's OK
(and at times refreshing) for characters to represent real people, too. 
And while `The Object of My Affection' may not be `As Good as it Gets,'
it does set up surprisingly delightful scenes and then let the audience
sit back and enjoy them, much as that excellent film did.  It also
benefits from excellent editing (I loved how Nina and George's
friendship was developed through dance) and scene segues, not to mention
it's FUNNY.  At one point I missed two lines because the audience was
laughing so loud.  Four words:  Mothers of Latino Lesbians.
Not content to be simply funny and heartwarming, however, `The Object of
My Affection' has a thesis, and it is this: You should find one person
in life to love as a partner and try to make it work with them.  I, and
probably some cultures who practice polygamy, don't blindly accept this
simple assertion as necessarily true, but I'm sure it appeals to the
majority.  Personally, I found myself wondering why George's new
boyfriend, Paul James played by Amo Gulinello, didn't simply move in
with them.  Although they would have needed a bigger place!  And Nina
did need to release and grow past her romantic love for George, who
despite his dalliance with Nina, is gay.  I do like how `The Object of
My Affection' embraces the time-tested notion of monogamy while
incorporating all of the idiosyncrasies of life today:   homosexuality,
divorce, interracial relationships, etc.  Although that last one is
thrown in a bit gratuitously.
If there is a major flaw in this film, it is that the ending is too easy
and too perfect.  In the end, everyone has someone and happiness is
delivered wrapped up nicely with a pretty bow.  That being said, I have
to admit I loved it.  Children singing `Gotta Be.'  Nina's daughter
Molly, played by Sarah Hyland, saying that she had more people come see
her in the school show than anyone because of the extended family Nina
has built around herself.  A perfect picture of how we can create a
village of friends and family through acceptance and open-mindedness. 
This is Nina's world, and it is a pretty perfect place by the end of the
film.  So what.  I wouldn't mind living there myself.  It sometimes
seems that people would rather see films where unrealistic characters
exist in realistic settings.  As though to ask, what would a perfect
person do in my world?  Straight realism aside, I would rather see
realistic people existing in a more perfect world.  As if to say, if we
all tried a little harder, how could it be?  I hope we get there some
day.

Author
Seth Bookey
  Seen on 20 April 1998 for $8.75 with Tony at the Village East Cinema.
   Wendy Wasserstein's screenplay of *The Object of My Affection* has
   borne out good movie. It's based upon Stephen McCauley's novel of the same
   name--one of my all-time favorites. The two works are, however,
   mutually exclusive. George Hansen (Paul Rudd) and Nina Barowski
   (Jennifer Aniston) are introduced awkwardly at a dinner party, when
   George's lover Joley (Tim Daly) breaks up with George via Nina. George
   discovers they have broken up when Nina offers him a place to stay in
   her Brooklyn apartment. Luckily, they soon become fast friends and
   actually get along much better with each other than they do their
   respective mates.
   When Nina becomes pregnant by the overbearing Vince (John Pankow), she
   ultimately decides she would rather have George raise the baby with
   her. What ensues is a struggle for George--wanting some form of
   fatherhood or a life of his own. Some people might object to the theme
   of the woman who goes over the unobtainable man because it's safer
   than facing her own issues (a la My Best Friend's Wedding). But, Nina
   comes to her own conclusions, and finds a way to be happy. There is
   also the overused device of ending the film in the future, and
   equalizing all the characters with fairy-tale happy endings. Expecting
   the movie to be completely awful, based on advance press and
   Wendy Wasserstein's admission that the George character was "a lump"
   and that she decided to play up the Nina story more, I was pleasantly
   surprised. Wasserstein's screenplay is both funny and touching, and
   the performances by Rudd and Aniston save this film from being a
   complete flop. In fact, Aniston's performance here alone was enough to
   win me as a fan. She's quite endearing.
   The supporting cast is also good: Tim Daly excels as the narcissistic
   Joley; Allison Janney as Nina's stepsister Connie and Alan Alda as
   Connie's husband do not overdo their comic roles. In fact, this is one
   of the first times I have not wanted to see Ald a shot to death on
   film (which he finally was in Murder at 1600). Nigel Hawthorne plays
   the older drama critic who points out to Nina, "What happens when all
   these homosexual men at your dinner table leave you for other men?"
   It's a nice change from the "lonely gay man" image.
   The weakest member of the cast is Amo Gulinello as Paul. It's hard to
   see why he and George get together and fall in love. It's pretty clear
   that he is only there to accentuate to Nina that George might not be
   hopeless devoted to her for long, as she grows very jealous.
   One frustration with this adaptation is that George was meant to be a
   lump--not a stud. There is little of MacCauley's sensibilities left in
   this story. Paul Rudd is one of the cutest actors alive, and he can
   also act. It's not difficult to see why both men and women would want
   to rope him in. He is actually cuter than most of the men Nina goes
   out with; why wouldn't she fall for him? It might have been more
   poignant of she fell for a man who was both gay and not absolutely
   stunning; Paul Rudd is the latter.
   Some of the best scenes are the ones in which Nina and George take
   dancing lessons. It showed both their growing fondness for one
   another, as well the passing seasons. Unfortunately, an otherwise
   funny and touching movie experience is marred by two very poor editing
   mistakes. One occurs when George and Paul go swimming, and the other
   is when we finally see Nina's baby born. It is obvious some
   last-minute editing was going on, and there is no excuse for such
   blunder in this day and age.
   Bottom line: If you feel you must choose, read the book. You will
   probably laugh a lot more at the self-deprecating humor of George.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html

Author
Christian Pyle
Playwright Wendy Wasserstein's first screenplay to be produced (based on a
novel by Stephen McCauley) raises intriguing questions about love and the
various forms in which it comes.  At the center of a very amusing array of
characters are roommates George (Paul Rudd) and Nina (Jennifer Aniston). 
George is gay and has just been dumped when he moves in with Nina.  Nina is
dating Vince (John Pankow of "Mad About You"), an overbearing socialist lawyer.
 George and Nina become close friends quickly, leading Nina to hope that they
might become more than friends.  When she becomes pregnant, Nina persuades
George that they should raise the baby together.
        So can a straight woman and a gay man make a go of it?  "The Object of My
Affection" is too smart a film to let Nina off so easy.  She harbors a secret
fantasy, of course, that George will "convert" for her, and she has to suffer
through a series of disappointments before she sees how hopeless that fantasy
is.
        The real charm of the movie is the parade of supporting characters that
Wasserstein uses to broaden and complicate the questions she raises about love.
 These characters include George's conceited ex (Tim Daly of "Wings"), Nina's
stepsister and her bigwig husband (Allison Janney, Alan Alda), George's new
beau Paul (Amo Gulinello), Paul's lovesick mentor Rodney (Nigel Hawthorne),
George's womanizing brother (Steve Zahn), and a nice cop who gives Nina a ride
home (Kevin Carroll).  All these folks are seeking love; a few are in love with
themselves.
        The weak point in this movie is the acting of Jennifer Aniston.  Since Nina's
dreams and disappointments are the focus of "Object," Aniston has to carry more
of the acting load than anyone else, and she is horribly inadequate.  As far as
Aniston is concerned, this might as well be an episode of "Friends" because
there seems to be little difference between Nina and Rachel, Aniston's TV
character.  Aniston's inability to rise to the challenge sinks the movie and
keeps a sharp script from achieving its full potential.
        There's still pleasure to be had, though, by watching the rest of the cast
work.  Rudd does a fine job of portraying the conflicted George, who wants to
be a father to Nina's baby but cannot deny who he is to please her.  Hawthorne
also stands out; he gives a rich and subtle performance as a drama critic
infatuated with Paul, who is young enough to be his grandson.  (Bit of trivia: 
"Object" was directed by Nicholas Hytner, who also directed Hawthorne's
breakthrough film, "The Madness of King George.")   Pankow was surprisingly
good; now that his TV series is retiring, I hope we'll see more of him on the
big screen.

Author
Steve Kong
Jennifer Aniston has always been my favourite "Friend."  I was fairly
disappointed with Picture Perfect, her first film where she held a leading
role.  I knew that Aniston could do much better than that.  So, when I saw
the previews for The Object of My Affection, my heart was aglow with
anticipation. I hoped that The Object of My Affection would be much better
than Picture Perfect.
Nina Borowski (Jennifer Aniston) is a social worker in the Bronx.  She is
dating an obnoxious loud mouth jerk, Vince (John Pankow).  At a dinner
party hosted by Nina's step-sister, Nina meets George (Paul Rudd) who is a
first grade teacher. Nina finds out that George's current lover, Robert
Joley (Tim Daly), is about to leave him. She thinks that it would be nice
to a roommate and what better to have a gay roommate?
After George moves in, he and Nina find that they have a lot in common.
They find themselves at the local community center taking dancing lessons.
They find themselves eating ice cream in bed together watching old movies.
They find themselves at the amusement park together.  They are best
friends.  But, Nina feels something that George doesn't and can't return;
she is in love with George. 
Nina and George's relationship also puts a strain on Nina and Vince's
relationship.  Nina's pregnancy by Vince pushes the strain of their
relationship overboard and they breakup.  Nina decides that she doesn't
want a jerk like Vince raising the child but would like to have George fill
in as the father.  George is ecstatic about being able to be a plug-in dad
for a child.
What Nina discovers is that though she is trying to keep her relationship
with George platonic, she is becoming more and more jealous of George and
his newfound lover, Paul James (Amo Gulinello).
The Object of My Affection rests on having the relationship between Nina
and George seem genuine.  With Aniston and Rudd in these parts the
relationship is very real.  I thought that Nicolas Cage and Meg Ryan had
some good screen chemistry in City of Angels, but this puts Cage and Ryan
to shame.  I'm sure Cage's angel would give up his wings for screen
chemistry like that between Aniston and Rudd; it just seems so cute.
Aniston redeems her Picture Perfect performance with The Object of My
Affection.  She is given a lot more to do in the newer movie and she rises
to the challenge.  Aniston has a luminosity about her that makes her seem
so alive and friendly.  Rudd is wonderful as George.  He gives enough of a
performance to overcome the boring role that he was given.
Most of the minor characters are thin and non-memorable.  However, two
stand out:  Alan Alda's name-dropping, publishing mogul step-brother-in-law
and Nigel Hawthorne's gay theatre critic.  It is Hawthorne's character that
makes the movie's theme clear near the end of the film.
The Object of My Affection starts out as a romantic comedy but about
halfway through changes to become a thoughtful romantic drama.  It is a
film that explores the relationship between a gay man and a straight woman
without putting either of them in a stereotypical role as we saw in My Best
Friend's Wedding or In and Out. With this said, The Object of My Affection
is also a commercial film and some of the scenes feel contrived -
especially the ending.  But, this is a small complaint because we are not
as focused on these things as we are on the relationship between Nina and
George.
Director Nicholas Hytner is able to keep the film moving along, though
parts of the middle section loses focus and seem to drag along.  Hytner is
able to grab our emotions occasionally throughout the film but is not able
to sustain this.
The Object of My Affection is a wonderful film that explores themes like
love, sex, and friendship.  It does a good job with each.  I'm happy that
Jennifer Aniston was able to do this film where she is the star instead of
her cleavage, as was the case in Picture Perfect. Aniston shines in The
Object of My Affection and with the outstanding performance from Paul Rudd,
these two are able to make The Object of My Affection a Don't Miss film.
Don't Miss The Object of My Affection and don't forget to take a loved one
with you.

Author
Edwin Jahiel
THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION (1998) ** 1/2  Directed by Nicholas
Hytner.Written by Wendy Wasserstein, based on the novel by Stephen
McCauley. Photography, Oliver Stapleton. Editing, Tariq Anwar. Production
design, Jane Musky. Music, George Fenton. Cast: Paul Rudd (George Hanson),
Jennifer Aniston (Nina Borowski), Alan Alda (Sidney Miller), Allison Janney
(Constance Miller), Tim Daly (Dr. Robert Joley), John Pankow (Vince
McBride), Nigel Hawthorne (Rodney Fraser),Amo Gulinello (Paul James), Steve
Zahn (Frank Hanson), et al. A 20th Century Fox release. 110 minutes. R
(sex, language)
The title "The Object Of My Affection," is familiar to connoisseurs of old
pop music, from the eponymous song of long ago. The movie's sound-track,
pleasant and mercifully not as busy as most, includes a few nice oldies,
notably the 1929 "You Were Meant  for Me," performed twice, by Sting and by
Gene Kelly. But surprise! "The Object..." is, sadly, nowhere to be heard.
A good semi-surprise is that the film's several gay men are portrayed in
anti-"La Cage aux Folles"ways. The gays are treated in a straight fashion:
no special traits, intonations, mannerisms, flamboyance, queenly demeanor
and the like. Just people. In fact, ordinary beings. But then, ordinary
people can often be uninteresting too, and that's the main rub in this
movie.
George, a New Yorker like most others in the cast, teaches first grade in a
posh, private school. He gets dumped by college professor and would-be
writer Robert Joley, his companion for four years. Helpfully, Nina, who
counsels teen-age girls, places at George's disposal a room in her
apartment. The two become fast friends, "fast" meaning both quickly and
strongly.
Nina's boyfriend Vince, a civil rights lawyer and occasionally her
colleague, seems to be a decent fellow, but eventually the couple comes to
a parting of the ways, somehow catalyzed unwillingly by George's presence
and Nina's ever-growing affection for him, an acute state of mutual loving
friendship. This almost climaxes when Nina starts initiating sexual
relations. Perhaps, at this point, the story could become "A Bisexual is
Born," (or reborn) but the odd couple is saved by the bell, that of a
ringing telephone.
When Nina finds out that she pregnant by Vince, she decides to raise the
child with George. It looks like a good plan, until George, after a long
period of uninvolvement with other men, meets Paul, an actor who lives with
much older Rodney, a Brit in New York .
Rodney gets rather little screen time, but Nigel Hawthorne plays him
beautifully: as a theater critic with a bite, and as an aging man who loses
his lover.  He does it with admirable economy, wit, wisdom, contained
fatalism and pathos. After the movie is forgotten, Hawthorne will not be.
The actor is reunited here with director Nicholas Hytner, the British stage
person whose film debut was "The Madness of King George."
The other supporting roles, all very peripheral, range from tiny to
sub-sketchy, with semi-caricatures reserved for such as senior citizens
taking ballroom dancing lessons,  and especially for a funny Alan Alda
("the most powerful literary agent in the world") and his current wife. She
is also Nina's older stepsister and self-appointed matchmaker. Recurring
bits of a daft older lady on the ground floor of Nina's building are
blatant padding.
The main performances (Nina's and George's appealing duo; Vince's
uncertainly written part)  are pretty good, but missing in strong
personalities. There's a lack of energy all over, in characters and filmic
rhythm, in spite of some lively or colorful scenes. The film is slow. Not
that it drags, bores, or requires suspension of disbelief. Yet its approach
is scattershot as it touches on comedy, romance and downplayed drama,
without getting any strong mileage out of any of those.
A paradoxical curiosity. Those who know about the prudishness of the old
Hollywood Code are aware of how far movie frankness has come. In an early
scene, counselor Nina is discussing boys with her girls. Says one about a
new male acquaintance: "What he wants is to [verb deleted] me." Nina's calm
response: "The point is, do you want to [verb deleted] him?" It is odd how,
within in a film where the openly sexual premises are not a bit scabrous in
1998, this dialogue jars.
On the whole, "The Object of My Affection" is the object of your attention.
It holds it, but not your rapt attention. The viewer remains distanced and
uninvolved. To put it simply, the movie just does not excite. But it does
make for an agreeable, entertaining 110 minutes.
" Le mauvais gout mene au crime" (Stendhal)
Edwin Jahiel's movie reviews are at http://www.prairienet.org/ejahiel

Author
Michael Dequina
Frothy romantic comedies have become so commonplace at the cinema that
filmmakers now generally resort to gimmicks to set their films apart.  Two
romantic comedies currently in release, The Object of My Affection and
Sliding Doors, each employ a twist that gives its film a certain
uniqueness, but in both cases the gimmicks work.
The Object of My Affection roughly fits the romantic comedy mold.  It has
its share of humorous moments and a romantic issue at its heart, which is
where its twist lies.  After being jilted by his lover Dr. Robert Joley
(Tim Daly), gay elementary school teacher George Hanson (Paul Rudd) moves
in and instantly becomes best friends with social worker Nina Borowski
(Jennifer Aniston).  When Nina discovers that she is pregnant by her
less-than-reliable boyfriend lawyer Vince McBride (John Pankow), she asks
George to be the child's acting father.  His acceptance, not surprisingly,
leads to some emotional complications for the both of them.
More of a surprise is that these complications don't necessarily come
dressed in laugh-ready packages.  Director Nicholas Hytner and writer Wendy
Wasserstein, working from the novel by Stephen McCauley, while frequently
throwing in a comic zinger or situation or two, deal rather seriously with
the relationship issues being raised.  While this approach will certainly
disappoint those looking for a lark like Aniston's Picture Perfect, it was
perhaps the best way to go.  To go for cheap laughs would have been to
cheapen the characters, in particular Nina, whose ever-growing but hopeless
love for George achieves true poignancy.  Adding to the poignancy is the
terrific, natural chemistry between Aniston and Rudd; even though one knows
a romance is impossible, they are such a perfect screen match that one
cannot help but develop a rooting interest for their coupledom.  I just
wish that the character of Vince was better written.  One minute he's a
jerk, the next he's surprisingly gentle; he doesn't quite make sense, and
as such, Nina's initial devotion to him doesn't quite either.
On paper, the twist of Sliding Doors appears too high-concept for its own
good.  Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow, sporting the flawless British accent she
adopted in Emma), freshly fired from her job at a PR agency, rushes to
catch the next train home.  The doors on the train car close just as she
reaches them.  But wait--the film rewinds, and suddenly Helen manages to
squeeze her way into the train as the doors close.  From here on out,
Sliding Doors intercuts between the parallel tales of the two Helens: Helen
"A," who misses the train, and Helen "B," who makes the train. 
Helen "B," having made the train, arrives home in time to find her live-in
boyfriend Gerry (John Lynch) in bed with sultry, slightly unhinged former
flame Lydia (Jeanne Tripplehorn).  In a tiff, Helen leaves him, gets a
makeover, and starts a relationship with James (John Hannah), a friendly
Scottish gent she met on the train.  Helen "A" not only misses the train;
she is also mugged, which makes her arrive home long after Gerry and
Lydia's tryst, of which she remains not-so-blissfully unaware.  In
following the two Helens, writer-director Peter Howitt shows how one
simple, chance occurrence can alter the course of a person's life.
Or does he?  What makes Sliding Doors so unique and rather
thought-provoking is how Howitt holds true to the idea of chance while at
the same time subscribing to that of destiny.  The two stories are
distinctly different, but Howitt comes up with clever "intersections"
between the plots, with certain touchstone events occurring in both stories
(albeit in slightly altered ways), believably showing how, no matter what
happens, the hand of fate is inescapable.  Also inescapable is the type of
person one is, and this is best exemplified by Gerry, who is a cheating
lout in both stories--which is the film's one problem.  Although he appears
to have some genuine fondness for Helen, he is on the whole an unappealing
character, making the story of Helen "A" less vibrant and involving than
the "B" tale, which is highlighted by Hannah's delightfully witty James.
Ultimately, however, the effectiveness of The Object of My Affection and
Sliding Doors is not due to the gimmicks themselves but the filmmakers who
use them with care, intelligence, and style.  If it weren't for their
talent and savvy, the two films could have easily fallen into the gimmicky
romantic comedy scrap heap, an undistinguished group that includes the
execrable likes of Made in America and Mrs. Winterbourne.  And for that,
every moviegoer in the world owes a debt of gratitude.
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
Bob Bloom

 The Object of My Affection (1998) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Jennifer
Aniston, Paul Rudd, Tim Daly and Nigel Hawthorne.
 The Object of My Affection is not a simple boy-girl love story.
It's actually a boy-boy, boy-girl, boy-boy, boy-girl love story.
George (Paul Rudd), a teacher, learns at a dinner party thrown by the
parents of one of his young pupils that he is about to be dumped by his
lover, Robert (Tim Daly).
 To atone for her faux paus, Nina (Jennifer Aniston) offers George the
spare bedroom in her Brooklyn apartment.
 Nina, a social worker, is dating Vince (John Pankow, cousin Ira on Mad
About You), a civil liberties lawyer, who tries to run her life.
 When Nina discovers she is pregnant by Vince, she decides she would rather
have George help her raise the child than Vince. Nina and George fall in
love with each other, but their relationship remains platonic.
 They have an "understanding." If Nina - or George - finds another man,
they are free to bring him to the apartment. But, since they are so happy
together, neither is looking.
 That is, until George meets Paul, who is involved with an older man,
Rodney, who ...
 The Object of My Affection, with a Wendy Wasserstein screenplay based on a
novel by Stephen McCauley, works as an odd sort of romantic comedy. And
that's strange, because most of the main characters, especially George and
Nina, are basically self-centered individuals who leave broken hearts
strewn all over New York and Brooklyn as they search for happiness.
 They are not mean. They don't hurt others deliberately. Even if you can't
respect them, you can like and even empathize with them.
 Aniston is a lovely actress with a winning personality. Rudd exudes a
sexual charisma. Their characters have frailties we can recognize in
ourselves, which compensates for the movie's undercurrent of pain and makes
the film a success.
 This may seem an odd project for director Nicholas Hytner, whose previous
credits were the costume dramas The Madness of King George and the screen
adaptation of Arthur Miller's The Crucible.
 Hytner allows the audience to get to know the various characters, which
include Nigel Hawthorne in the small but dignified role of Paul's rejected
older partner.
 Considering all the hurt that people inflict on one another throughout the
movie, The Object of My Affection is civilized. Maybe it needed more of an
edge. Maybe George and Nina's self-absorption should have been emphasized
more strongly. But it's difficult to get an audience to root for
disagreable protagonists in a love story. Difficult, but not impossible.
 The Object of My Affection is a crowd-pleasing movie. Perhaps Wasserstein
and Hytner should not have worried about being so appealing. It may have
made for a better movie.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Jennifer Aniston, Paul Rudd, John Pankow, Timothy Daly, 
      Amo Gulinello, Allison Janney, Alan Alda, Nigel Hawthorne
Director: Nicholas Hytner
Producer: Laurence Mark
Screenplay: Wendy Wasserstein based on the novel by Stephen McCauley
Cinematography: Oliver Stapleton
Music: George Fenton
U.S. Distributor: 20th Century Fox
     THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION, based on the novel of the same name by 
Stephen McCauley, is a pleasant romantic comedy that asks (and tries to 
answer) questions about the nature of love, sex, family, and friendship.  
And, while some of the solutions are a little facile, the film 
nevertheless succeeds, due in large part to a luminous performance by 
Jennifer Aniston and the effectively-developed central relationship 
between Aniston's Nina Borowski, a pregnant twentysomething 
heterosexual, and George Hanson (Paul Rudd), a gay man in the same age 
range.  
     In most movies, friendships are the equivalent of cinematic side 
orders.  Especially in contemporary productions, almost every main 
character has to have a best friend.  This facilitates character 
development and allows secondary interaction.  Rarely, however, is 
friendship the point of a movie.  That's not the case in THE OBJECT OF 
MY AFFECTION, which, although it is a little about sex and love, is much 
more about the undemanding, casual affection that builds between real 
friends.  The chemistry between Aniston and Rudd is perfect in 
establishing this relationship.  They have a real camaraderie which is 
only occasionally spiced up by a hint of sexual tension.
     George and Nina meet at a dinner party that neither of them is 
enjoying.  They soon discover that they have a great deal in common, and 
the fact that she's straight and he's gay makes them ideal candidates 
for roommates.  Once George's current relationship with a egotistical 
doctor (Timothy Daly) comes to an end, George moves into a bedroom in 
Nina's Brooklyn apartment.  The two quickly become best friends, with a 
closeness that is so extreme that, when Nina becomes pregnant by her 
boyfriend, Vince (MAD ABOUT YOU's Ira, John Pankow), she tells George 
first.  Problems arise, however, when Nina begins to fall for George 
while he simultaneously becomes interested in a young actor (Amo 
Gulinello).
     Jennifer Aniston's movie career has proceeded along an interesting 
trajectory.  She broke into the big screen business in LEPRECHAUN, a 
low-budget horror flick that she would probably prefer to forget about.  
Following a meteoric rise accompanying her participation in TV's 
FRIENDS, she gave a plastic performance in Edward Burns' SHE'S THE ONE.  
In her first feature starring role, PICTURE PERFECT, she showed hints of 
the charisma that has earner her a legion of loyal fans, but not until 
THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION has she truly sparkled.  As Nina, Aniston not 
only displays a surprising capacity for both comedy and drama, but she 
shines with the kind of star quality that only a handful of current 
performers exhibit.  THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION is clearly better 
because of her, not in spite of her.
     Nina's platonic/would-be-romantic opposite, George, as portrayed by 
Paul Rudd (CLUELESS), is likable.  This isn't a standout performance, 
but Rudd is good enough to convince us that his character feels genuine 
affection for Nina.  Alan Alda, who has a supporting part as Nina's 
brother-in-law, provides a fair share of humor in an openly-comic role.  
And Nigel Hawthorne once again proves his strength as an actor by 
fashioning a memorable individual out of what is little more than a bit 
part.  Hawthorne's Rodney Fraser is the kind of sad, lonely man who 
effortlessly captures one's pity.
     Many aspects of THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION are not new to movies.  
In fact, the central theme, which struggles with the similarities and 
differences between sexual and platonic love, has been more fully 
explored in recent historical features like CARRINGTON and MRS. BROWN 
(ideas presented in the former bear an especially strong resemblance to 
those developed here).  On the contemporary side, Kevin Smith's CHASING 
AMY travels a similar path (albeit to a different destination) with 
CHASING AMY, about a straight man who falls for a lesbian.  The one 
thing that all of these films have over THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION is an 
edge  each of them tries something a little unconventional and risky, 
while this movie attempts to be a crowd-pleaser.
     This is apparently director Nicholas Hytner's push to make a 
mainstream Hollywood movie.  The respected British director, whose best-
known effort is probably THE MADNESS OF KING GEORGE, has a keen sense of 
character and a good feel for the details of a friendship, and these are 
the reasons why THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION, which has a pleasant (but 
not superlative) script, work.  For, while many of the secondary 
relationships are sketchily-developed and occasionally hard-to-swallow, 
the connection between George and Nina is so strong and believable that 
it draws us into their world and allows us to root for the seemingly-
improbable happy ending.
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
Nathaniel R. Atcheson
By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net)
There are good things to be said about The Object of My Affection, and
I almost chose to focus on those rather than the negatives.  But, it's a
romantic comedy, and behind the girl-falls-in-love-with-gay-guy gimmick,
it's an often shallow film with bursts of greatness.  I knew there was a
problem when the ending became predictable after the first ten minutes;
it didn't help that nearly every scene left me emotionally unmoved.  Add
to this some truly shameless and trite moments, and you have yet another
well-acted romantic comedy that could have been much better with a
sharper script.
Jennifer Anniston leads the cast as Nina Borowski, a New York social
worker.  Early in the film, she meets George Hanson (Paul Rudd) a gay
elementary school teacher.  Because he's gay, he's not a threat, and
therefore it's okay for him to move in with her when he breaks up with
his long-time partner, Joley (Tim Daly).  Nina's boyfriend, Vince (John
Pankow), is an obnoxious "male" character, and apparently has no problem
with George's homosexuality, or the fact that he lives with Nina.
Well, Nina gets pregnant.  I thought this was going to be a minor plot
disrupter, but it wasn't:  nearly two thirds of this film has something
to do with Nina's pregnancy.  This is not good, really, because, like so
many scenes and devices in this film, it takes our attention away from
the characters and needlessly forces us think about what the characters
may or may not do.  Nina, by this point, is falling in love with George,
and she asks him to father the child with her.
We get the feeling that he kind of wants to do it, but he seems
unsure.  It's about this time when George meets Rodney Fraser (Nigel
Hawthorne), a theater critic who is also gay.  Rodney lives with a young
actor named Paul; George and Paul immediately find interest in one
another, and Rodney is left somewhat behind.  There are many subplots in
this film (one of them involving Nina's step-sister Constance, and her
husband, played by Alan Alda), but this is the only one of significant
potency.  Rodney is a fascinating character, and he gives Nina some
insights that are both moving and thought-provoking.  The revelations
that arise from this scene provide the film with its conclusion.
The one element of The Object of My Affection that is uniformly
impressive is the acting:  Jennifer Anniston is luminous and talented,
and proves versatility with this role.  Paul Rudd also has several
shining moments here, and manages to keep up with his character, who
switches personalities so frequently that it's difficult to tell who he
is by the final scene.  Tim Daly is convincing as George's ex-lover, and
Pankow does the obligatory macho-stuff as I'm sure he was instructed.  
Hawthorne, as I said, overpowers all of these performers in his few
scenes, though; this isn't necessarily a compliment, for I would have
liked to see much more of his character.
What displeases me about this film is the way in which writer Wendy
Wasserstein seems to have tried to keep the homosexuality from being a
gimmick; in doing this, there are plenty of "realistic" scenes of men
kissing men (you won't be complaining about In & Out after seeing this
film) and the only time anyone speaks lowly of homosexuals is when we're
supposed to dislike the character.  My least favorite scene in the film
is when Nina tells Vince that she wants George to father the child. 
Now, I have moral problems with this scene:  this is Vince's child
we're talking about.  He has the right to be its father.  Nina's
response to Vince in this scene is cold and heartless.  On a
less-obvious level, I dislike this scene because Vince starts rambling
off anti-homosexual remarks.  Wasserstein clearly does this so the
audience will dislike him even more, but in a film where all the
characters accept homosexuality without even the slightest flinch, this
device is false and intrusive.
So many scenes have this quality:  they're here to serve the story, and
not the characters.  The big plot-hook here is that Nina asks George to
be the father of her child, and that he falls in love with another man
without telling her.  This kind of plotting might have worked, if I had
felt that director Nicholas Hytner was as interested in the characters
as in the plot.  Alas, I do not, because characters here often have to
do things that don't fit their personalities just so other things can
eventually happen.  
This is one of those films hell-bent on getting to the happy,
"unpredictable" conclusion, regardless of how it must contort the
characters in the process.  And, ironically, the final scenes of The
Object of My Affection are of the least satisfying in the film. 
Everything works out so well for all the characters that I wondered why
I was concerned to begin with.  This isn't a bad film, mind you--there
are good scenes here (everything with Hawthorne, for instance), and the
acting makes the picture worth enduring.  But it's a staged and
predictable film, and just isn't what I was hoping to see.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   At a wedding reception toward the end of "The Object of
My Affection," George Hanson introduces his pregnant
roommate Nina Borowski as his friend.  Assuming that Nina
must be George's wife, one woman at a table remarks, "I
cannot imagine my husband calling me his friend."  This light,
sappy, and hardly believable comedy centers on an issue that
probably passes for philosophic discussion in many a college
dorm.  Can a man and a woman live together, enjoying an
intimate and fulfilling relationship, without sex?  The answer to
this enigma becomes clear enough by the story's conclusion,
and though the difficulties faced by most of the principal
characters are resolved, the resolution is a bittersweet one.
   Though "The Object of My Affection" is diverting, it's difficult
to believe that heavy hitters like Wendy Wasserstein, Nicholas
Hytner, and Nigel Hawthorne are major contributors to the
picture.  Hytner did, after all, make his motion picture debut
with a stunning transposition to the screen of the play "The
Madness of George III" with Nigel Hawthorne in the title role
of a loony British monarch.  Wasserstein, a feminist with such
sophisticated scripts as "The Heidi Chronicles" to her
playwriting credit, must have stuck too closely to the novel by
Stephen McCauley.  And Hawthorne is just one of the world's
great actors, who at least brings his considerable thespian
qualities to a bland movie, and in a relatively small role easily
overshadows his fellow performers.
   The story is about several couples whose attachments are
unrequited.  As Hawthorne states in the role of a drama
professor, what happens when the object of your affection
does not return the affection to the degree which you expect? 
Vince McBride (John Pankow) is in love with Nina Borowski
(Jennifer Aniston), who feels that something does not quite
click in their relationship.  Nina, in turn, is in love with George
Hanson (Paul Rudd), who is gay and, try though he may, is
not able to fulfill all of Nina's needs.  George is in love with
Dr. Robert Joley (Tim Daly), a literature instructor who has
found someone else.  Rodney Fraser (Nigel Hawthorne) has a
relationship with a much younger man, a student named Paul
(Amo Gulinello), whose eyes wander toward someone more
his age.  George's brother Frank (Steve Zahn) is about to get
married, but then, he has had seven fiances, and who knows
whether his alliance will work out?  Relationships are tough:
they require a healthy combination of sexual attraction and
intellectual compatability which is so difficult to attain that
stage, screen and the printed page continue to be filled with 
tales of heartache.
   Most of the action takes place in Brooklyn, where Nina
earns her living as a counselor in a center for teens and lives
in a second-floor walkup while her more earthy sister,
Constance (Allison Janney) lives the high life with her
successful book-agent husband, Sidney (Alan Alda).  When
things fall apart between Nina and her boyfriend, she invites
George to share her flat, which he accepts since he has just
been tossed out of his quarters by his own boyfriend.  Much
of the movie centers on whether George and Nina, who have
incompatible sexual temperaments but who are on the same
wave intellectually and socially, can make a go of things. 
Since life is anything but tidy, George and Nina become
caught up in a game of sexual politics that turns their
otherwise accomplished lives inside out.
   Jennifer Aniston, known to TV fans for her role in the
ensemble comedy "Friends" and to movie enthusiasts for her
starring part in "Picture Perfect" turns in her most
accomplished performance here.  She shows a capacity for
growth and for portraying three-dimensional characters
confronted by a host of conflicting emotions, but this time
around she is stuck with a script which is overly sentimental
and unimaginable.  Paired off with John Pankow, who seems
to come from another movie and shares no chemistry with
Ms. Aniston's character, she is unable to materialize
sufficiently as an actress and not just someone who is quite
pleasant to look at.  Nigel Hawthorne is himself enough
reason to see this or any other work he's in.  Here he acts as
the aging homosexual who brings the film's only sobering
advice, when he counsels Nina to discontinue her alliance
with a handsome and thoroughly nice young man who can
never give her what she so desperately needs.  Paul Rudd
looks good but is too nice to bring a needed edge to the
story.  The film suffers from choppy, overly zealous editing,
leading to a seemingly unending variety of scenes.
    "The Object of My Affection" plays on gay-straight
stereotypes that are all too familiar to us, offering little that's
new or particularly surprising. Rated PG-13  Running Time:
111 minutes.  (C) 1998 Harvey Karten

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and trivia, go to http://surf.to/joblo
Another "Jennifer-Aniston-cast-as-the-beautiful-girl-with-no-luck-
in-relationships" movie attempts to add a little variety onto the
proverbial menu, by slapping a gay lead as her man of choice, while
serving the consequences of their relationship as the main course.
PLOT:
Lovely, independent woman does not want her boyfriend to move in with
her, but does request a gay friend of hers to do the same. Her
relationship with the gay man blossoms into a true friendship, as her
actual relationship with her boyfriend begins to crumble. When faced
with a life-altering decision, she must decide who she really loves,
who really loves her back, and how these decisions will affect their
future.
CRITIQUE:
Would-be comedy actually delivers very little in the chuckle
department, runs way too long, musters up a weak ending, and offers
nothing substantially original or thought-provoking to the audience.
This film was actually quite dramatic at points, and within that
context, delivered very little substance to back itself up. The funnier
moments were lacking, the characters seemed pieced together, and the
ending just seemed to politically-agree with anyone who might care
(except for an audience looking to be entertained, that is.) 
CHASING AMY (7.5/10) is the Kevin Smith film that bookmarked the idea
of a heterosexual falling head over heels for a homosexual, but that
film made sure that we understood where each character was coming from,
mixed the whole fling within various real circumstances, and delivered
many funny moments and hip dialogue. Having said that, I also didn't
care for AMY's ending, but that's because I didn't find Banky's
decision realistic. This movie, on the other hand, seemed very cliché,
unoriginal, and quite boring.
Many of Nina's (Aniston) decisions in the film seem self-centered and
unexplained, and left us wondering why she was acting the way that she
was. Also, I never really bought into her "love" for her gay roommate,
and didn't appreciate the zillions of shots of them dancing together,
to make this point (Oh, I get it. If they're dancing together, that
MUST be love!!). All in all, this film is so-so in its narrative, so-so
in the acting department, but boring over its entire close to two-hour
running course. Nigel Hawthorne was the only standout in the cast as
the older, wiser, and more sensitive soul. 
Unless you are in this exact type of situation in your own life, do not
see this film. And even if you are in the same type of scenario, you
will still not be entertained by this film, but may take away some
questions of your own. Either way, do yourself a favor and see Kevin
Smith's CHASING AMY instead. A way superior movie, with better
characters, better dialogue, and a much more entertaining story-line.
You might even want to see MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING (7.5/10) for a more
mainstream solution.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Nigel Hawthorne is presently one of the few openly gay men actors
working in Hollywood.
Jennifer Aniston's real name is Jennifer Anistonopoulos. She was
brought up in Greece and New York City. Her father, John Aniston, has
been playing "Victor Kiriakis" on the soap opera "Days of our Lives"
since 1985. The late Telly Savalas, famous as TV's "Kojak" (Who loves
ya, baby?), is her godfather. Jennifer received $2,000,000 to star in
1997's PICTURE PERFECT. She also played Ferris Bueller's sister in the
ill-fated TV version of the classic pic, and co-starred with director
Quentin Tarantino in "Steven Spielberg's Director's Chair" CD-ROM game.
Timothy Daly is the brother of Tyne Daly, famous for playing Lacey in
TV's "Cagney & Lacey". His film debut was in Barry Levinson's DINER
(7.5/10) opposite fellow movie-virgins Paul Reiser and Ellen Barkin.

Author
Scott Renshaw
THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION
(20th Century Fox)
Starring:  Jennifer Aniston, Paul Rudd, John Pankow, Allison Janney, Alan
Alda, Nigel Hawthorne, Amo Gulinello, Tim Daly, Steve Zahn.
Screenplay:  Wendy Wasserstein, based on the novel by Stephen McCauley.
Producer:  Laurence Mark.
Director:  Nicholas Hytner.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:  110 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     As I sat watching THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION, all I could think was:
here is a romantic comedy for everyone who applauded when MY BEST FRIEND'S
WEDDING ended with Julia Roberts dancing with Ruppert Everett.  I'm not
about to delve into the sociology or psychology of friendships between
women and gay male pals, but apparently it has achieved a status as part
of the urban American zeitgeist.  Still...a mainstream romantic comedy
about two people whose primary similarity is that they're both attracted
to men?
     I have to give THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION credit for tackling the
subject at all.  I just can't give it much credit for tackling the subject
effectively.  The principal characters are a pair of community-minded New
Yorkers, social worker Nina (Jennifer Aniston) and school teacher George
(Paul Rudd).  When George is dumped by his long-time boyfriend (Tim Daly),
he takes a room with Nina, a woman he met just days earlier at a party.
George's presence complicates Nina's relationship with her boyfriend Vince
(John Pankow), but things get even more complicated when Nina discovers
that she is pregnant.  Though she decides she wants to keep the baby, she
wants a better father than Vince for her child.  What she wants, she
decides, is George.
     Why she decides she wants George is another question entirely.  In
fact, why Nina wants anything is up for debate.  There is no character
there, nothing which gives us clue why she does what she does, or what it
is in her life that makes George such an appealing alternative to Vince.
The perky Aniston can do adorable and wistful in her sleep...and in this
case, she might as well have been.  Though Rudd fills in a few blanks with
a pleasant, appropriately confused performance -- working wonders with the
well-handled moment in which he actually responds to Nina's physical
attentions -- George and Nina's friendship never feels genuine.  It's just
a plot device set up so two attractive people can get into wacky and
farcical situations.
     Actually, not all that wacky and farcical at all, as it turns out.
Between Nicholas Hytner's direction and Wendy Wasserstein's script, THE
OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION almost never feels like a comedy.  The story is too
serious by half, full of tearful or angry confrontations and sincere
speeches, with the pregnancy sub-plot a terribly ill-advised decision.
Hytner, meanwhile, can never create a consistent comic rhythm to buoy the
narrative.  Every edit feels jarring, slamming scenes one into the other
rather than letting them build to humorous high points.  Wasserstein metes
out the giggles between the most gratuitous uses of the "f"-word since the
last romantic comedy starring a "Friends" cast member (KISSING A FOOL),
with everyone involved taking the issues too seriously to bother making
them funny.
     All the emphasis on longing and misapplied affection at least
provides a nice role for Nigel Hawthorne, who worked with Hytner on THE
MADNESS OF KING GEORGE.  As a theater critic unrequitedly infatuated with
a young actor (Amo Gulinello), Hawthorne actually makes the film's themes
momentarily poignant as he ponders facing his later years alone.  Yet even
that bright spot further emphasizes THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION as a
romantic comedy which isn't particularly romantic or particulalry comedic.
It's really a half-hearted stab at teasing the same social conventions
CHASING AMY successfully trampled all over.  After all the soul searching
about the lines between friendship, love and sex, it comes to the safe
conclusion that like likes like.  And just to be even safer, it throws a
bone to everyone who came to see the female protagonist dancing at a
wedding with her gay male pal.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Jennifer Aniston, Paul Rudd, John Pankow, Timothy Daly, Amo
Gulinello, Allison Janney, Alan Alda, Nigel Hawthorne
Director: Nicholas Hytner
Producer: Laurence Mark
Screenplay: Wendy Wasserstein based on the novel by Stephen McCauley
There are some things in life that you just can't have, no matter how
much you tear your heart out trying to get it. These include a good seat
on Santa's Reindeer Express, meeting Uncle Walt at Disney land, happily
married men in general, or getting a gay man to change his sexual
orientation in order to marry you. Ladies, spare yourself the
unnecessary heart-breaking, tear-jerking disappointment. Turn your eyes
from the cute guy, flirting with the rugby captain in the change rooms,
and find yourself a dependable, straight guy who will be home in time to
help you set the dinner table. If you persist with the impossible
thought, you will only end up hurting yourself badly against a brick
wall.
Having said this, I have more or less revealed how this movie will end
and sadly, how pointless it becomes. Jennifer Aniston is Nina Borrowski.
Her flat mate, George Hanson (Paul Rudd), a first grade teacher has
recently broken up with his lover, Timothy Daly. Nina and George become
the best of friends (as always), before Nina becomes unexpectedly
pregnant to her casual boyfriend, Vince McBride (John Pankow). When Nina
doesn't want the child to be raised by Vince, but by George, strange
things start happening in Brooklyn. So much so, that George not only
becomes Nina's object of affection, but also her object of fixation.
When George can't return her love, you can't say you didn't try to warn
her!
Part of the reason why many people will not enjoy this movie, is because
of the preconceived notion that this is a romantic comedy. I will be
forward and spare you the heartache, there is no romance and there is
very little comedy. Part of the blame lies with the marketing of this
movie. The billboard poster entails Paul Rudd holding Aniston in a
romantic fashion - implying they fall in love, even though this is not
the case. An innocent bystander, deceived by the billboard into watching
the movie, gets a rude shock when they suddenly realise that this is not
your regular 組uy meets gal' love story.
The plot is jumbled and there is so much bed hoping, that you lose track
of who is whose official partner, and who gets to sleep with whom in
which room. Leaving the viewer extremely confused about everybody's
sexual orientation by the end of the movie. It certainly isn't as
bizarre as CHASING AMY, but when Paul Rudd kisses Amo Gulinello, a lot
of the women gasped with shock. Like they weren't pre-warned that guys
actually kiss guys, in a movie where half the characters are gay - once
again an error on the part of marketing.
If you're feeling sorry for yourself, don't mope alone. Join Jennifer
Aniston and you can't both wallow together, at not being able to obtain
the object of your affections.

Author
Jamie Peck
THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION
Reviewed by Jamie Peck
Aniston plays Nina Borowski, a New York social worker who strikes up an 
immediate friendship with gay schoolteacher George Hanson (Paul Rudd) 
when they meet at a dinner party one night. During the course of the 
evening, George's self-centered college professor lover (Tim Daly) dumps 
him for a student, so Nina offers the spare bedroom in her Brooklyn 
apartment to George. He graciously accepts, and the living situation 
seems ideal; even Nina's lawyer boyfriend Vince ("Mad About You"'s John 
Pankow) takes a liking to George. But before long, Nina unexpectedly 
finds herself amorously attracted to her roommate, and makes a surprise 
decision that puts a kink in her dilapidating relationship with Vince. 
A large part of "Object"'s success is due to the performances of and 
chemistry between Jennifer Aniston and Paul Rudd. Because there's quite 
a bit of emotional weight in the story, Aniston's required to show 
range, and that she does; those who think of her only as her indecisive 
"Friends" alter-ego might be surprised. Rudd ("Clueless") exudes 
bonafide charm -- he plays George as a three-dimensional person, not a 
two-dimensional stereotype. Director Nicholas Hytner, best known for 
"The Madness of King George" and "The Crucible," also deserves some of 
the credit. His genuine knack for depicting character dynamics -- watch 
"The Crucible"'s Daniel Day-Lewis and Joan Allen and take notes -- 
certainly doesn't hinder either actor, letting "The Object of My 
Affection" come off with a central relationship that's downright 
electric. 
Despite these strengths, the story sometimes becomes a little hard to 
swallow in its dealings with vaguely-rendered Vince. Though ably 
performed by Pankow, Vince never quite turns into the superficial jerk 
that he at first seems to be, but, since he is a major participant in 
the film's conflict-heavy plot, matters would have improved if we were 
allowed to get to know him a little better; I questioned a few of his 
actions and reactions because I wasn't quite sure what was going on in 
his head. Some could also dismiss "The Object of My Affection" as too 
pat and sunny, but I think it's less that than the movie never loses 
sight -- even in its heavier moments -- of its upbeat cheerfulness. Pat, 
perhaps, but it's not contrived or manipulative like most romantic 
comedies. 
A happy ending (but not the one you might expect) allows a few 
reassuring answers to those tough questions posed by the movie, thus 
capping off its satisfying meditation on the obstacles -- be they sexual 
orientation, heartfelt emotion or whatever -- that can affect platonic 
companionship for better or worse. And to further illustrate the 
importance of having friends, the filmmakers have gone one step further 
than just hiring one; they've widened their playing field to incorporate 
several priceless supporting roles, the apex of which is a sad theatre 
critic (Nigel Hawthorne, whom Hytner directed in "King George") who acts 
as a world-weary foil for Nina. Due in part to this nifty, 
character-emphasized focus, "Object" is more than worthy of its 
audience's affection.

Author
Matt Williams
What do you expect when the most romantic film relationship in 1997 was
between the straight Julia Roberts and the gay Rupert Everett in My Best
Friend's Wedding? The answer: The Object of My Affection, a romantic
drama that tries to show what happens when a straight woman and a gay
man become more than friends...
Jennifer Aniston stars as Nina Borowski, a social worker in a local
community center.  Her stepsister, Constance (Allison Janney), married
to a rich literary agent, Sidney Miller (Alan Alda), disapproves of
Nina's life and her lawyer boyfriend, Vince (John Pankow).
Enter George Hanson (Paul Rudd), the first grade teacher of Constance
and Sidney's little girl.  He has just broken up with his lover, Dr.
Robert Joley (Timothy Daly), and needs a place to stay.  Nina thinks he
would make a perfect apartment-mate...and sooner than you think, the two
are best of friends, even taking ballroom dancing lessons at the local
community center.
Needless to say, this unique arrangement doesn't sit well with Vince or
Constance.  And things only get worse when Nina starts falling in love
with George...a love he can't return.
The Object of My Affection straddles the gap between romantic comedy and
romantic drama.  Its non-traditional romance ends up being more cute
than funny, and the dramatic weight of the situation is undercut by one
too many romantic clichis.
The gay/straight romantic relationship was handled with much more
success in last year's superior Chasing Amy. This may be a more serious look at such a
relationship, but it lacks any depth, due in large part to its
stereotypical characters.
At the film's center, Jennifer Aniston and Paul Rudd make a cute couple,
but they're not much more than that.  Aniston is much more sympathetic
than she was in Picture Perfect, yet she doesn't quite seem up to the
dramatic challenges present in this role. Paul Rudd weathers the film
better, but is shackled by his bland, unimaginative character.
There are plenty of supporting roles in the film (perhaps a few too
many). Most notable are Steve Zahn, as George's womanizing brother,
Kevin Carroll as a kindly, but befuddled, cop, and Nigel Hawthorne,
delivering a tragically good performance as an elderly gay theater
critic who must cope with an unfaithful young lover.
The film covers quite a bit of territory, and at two hours in length, it
feels every bit like it.  We're rushed through the introductory scenes
just to get to...nowhere.  The middle third of the movie drags on and
on, but, thankfully, the film's delightful coda peps things up a bit.
The Object of My Affection does have its moments, but they are few and
far between.  Most of the time, the film simply drags along, searching
for meaning, but not finding any.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
James Sanford
Brian Wilson said it best in a song he wrote for The Honeys back in 1963:
"The one you can't have is the one that you want the most."
That time-honored truth forms the basis for "The Object of My Affection," a
romance that may leave you teary-eyed if you've ever thrown yourself
wholeheartedly at someone who couldn't even begin to reciprocate your
feelings.
That's the predicament New Yorker Nina (Jennifer Aniston) finds herself in
when she falls for George (Paul Rudd), who's good-natured, good-looking, a
good dancer - and gay. To complicate matters, he's also her roommate and her
best friend. Though Nina's pregnant by her bulldozer of a boyfriend Vince
(John Pankow), she'd prefer to raise her baby with George, who's initially
willing to go along with the plan.
"We can make this up for ourselves, and none of the old rules apply," Nina
promises. "Sex is just no big deal," George assures her.
Famous last words.
In adapting Stephen McCauley's wonderful novel, playwright Wendy Wasserstein
("The Heidi Chronicles") has oversimplified the book's edgy personalities
and watered-down some of the material: George's love interest is now young
drama student rather than a single father, hinting that gay parenting is
still a topic too hot for Hollywood to handle. Wasserstein has also added a
sitcom-style sugarcoating in the form of Nina's wealthy, dopey family, who
throw parties for King Hussein and get phone calls at home from Martha
Stewart.
On the other hand, some of Wasserstein's changes work, particularly a bit
about George's college crush, a running joke about the romantic woes of
George's brother (Steve Zahn), and the new character of an acid-tongued but
lonely critic (Nigel Hawthorne) who offers some sage advice. And Wasserstein
hasn't soft-pedaled what the story is really about: Nina's self-delusion and
George's grief about his perceived obligation. The film effectively drives
home the point that, when forced to choose, most people - even nice ones -
will chase their own dreams instead of fulfilling someone else's.
When it comes to TV stars trying to make it on the big screen, Aniston's no
Helen Hunt, but she adequately expresses Nina's misguided emotions. Rudd,
best known as the hunky stepbrother in "Clueless," is exceptionally good,
eloquently conveying George's charm and pathos.
After a fluffy first half, director Nicholas Hytner ("The Crucible") finds
an appropriately seriocomic tone for the movie's last hour when
Wasserstein's script veers away from easy laughs and concentrates on showing
the genuine hurt that can result from letting your heart override your
brain. Though "The Object of My Affection" is touted as an offbeat romantic
comedy, anyone who's gone through a bout of unrequited love lately may find
it about as much fun as swallowing a corkscrew. Flaws aside, the movie is a
haunting reminder that sometimes there's no aphrodisiac quite as powerful as
rejection.
James Sanford

Author
David Sunga
Written by: Wendy Wasserstein, from a novel by Stephen McCauley
Ingredients: Unsatisfying relationships, pregnant woman, gay man 
Synopsis:
A young woman named Nina (Jennifer Aniston) is the fiancee of Vince
(John Pankow). Meanwhile across town a young homosexual named George
(Paul Rudd) is the lover of Joley (Tim Daly). But these are largely
superficial, sexual relationships. One day at a party, Nina is attracted
to George. When she learns that George needs a room, she invites him to
share a two-bedroom apartment with her. Gay George breaks up with his
boyfriend and moves in with heterosexual Nina.
Soon enough, Nina and George are blowing kisses at each other, and
spending the night draped in each other's arms watching TV. When Nina
gets pregnant, she announces to the father, Vince (paraphrased): "It's
MY baby. I don't care if you're the father; I want you out of our lives
so that George can raise the baby." 
Vince agrees to stay away. Then Nina tries her best to turn George into
a heterosexual, despite his orientation. Will she succeed?
Opinion:
I watched Jennifer Aniston in PICTURE PERFECT. She gets to do more
acting as Nina in THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION, but as a fan, I'd actually
like to see Jen break out of the romance genre, and do an
out-of-character role like Mira Sorvino's in REPLACEMENT KILLERS or Matt
LeBlanc's Don West in LOST IN SPACE.
The intention of THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION is to give the audience the
message that, "Sometimes in life events compel things beyond our
control, and we must make the best of it, and isn't it surprising how
life turns out after all these years?"  
The problem is, Nina and George seem very much in control and not
propelled by events, so the 'forces beyond our control' theme doesn't
really work for THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION.
Nina, who already has a steady beau, meets complete stranger George at a
party, and asks him to live with her, no questions asked. Why would she
ask a stranger to move in without checking him out, if no normal person
would? The next day Nina signs George up to be her permanent dance
partner. What is she thinking?
Similarly, it's hard to see how a decidedly gay man with the honesty of
George could kiss Nina repeatedly on the lips, allow Nina to fondle him,
sleep in the same bed with her, let her unbutton his shirt, unzip his
fly, lick his abdomen, and pretend he's not leading her on. She's just
about to give him oral sex; why isn't he telling her he's gay? What's
his big secret?  
THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION tries to be a light comedy, but the
characters and events are painful and thought-provoking. In THE OBJECT
OF MY AFFECTION, Nina and George are apparently complicated people
deliberately doing things that don't make any sense or might hurt, but
the film tries to brush it off.
I wouldn't mind seeing a re-make of THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION. When
characters are as deep as L.A. CONFIDENTIAL or THE ICE STORM, why not go
for it, and go deep?
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Some actresses are known for their gorgeous looks, others for
their intelligence, some for their homeliness, and still others for
their toughness.  The trait that Jennifer Aniston, last seen in the
delightful but underappreciated PICTURE PERFECT, conjures up on the big
screen is her inherent likeableness.  With her breezy smile and happy
demeanor, she looks like someone who would attract friends like bees to
honey.
     In THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION, Aniston's character, Nina Borowski,
seems to have it all, or close to it.  Her sister, played by Allison
Janney, who was last seen dallying with the governor in PRIMARY COLORS,
is married to a rich New York publisher.  As the publisher, Alan Alda
gives a boisterous, comedic performance as a consummate namedropper
(Mailer, Spielberg, Stone, Hussein, ).
     Although Nina's relatives have just the right up-and-coming man
for her, she's happy being a social worker in one of New York's poorer
boroughs.  Her oppressive fiance, played with a likable unlikeableness
by John Pankow, is a dyed-in-the-wool liberal who sings a union
organizer's song to newborn babies.  That they are all wrong for each
other is as clear as the picture's crystal clean air as filmed by
Oliver Stapleton.
     Into her life comes a prince charming named George Hanson and
played delightfully by Paul Rudd from CLUELESS.  There is, however, one
small problem.  George is a quite happy gay man.  Quite innocently, he
moves into the spare room in Nina's walkup apartment.  Soon they are
taking ballroom dancing lessons to scratchy old records at the local
senior center.  And they go to the movies together, eat out together,
and lie in bed holding each other while watching old movies.
     With Wendy Wasserstein's script holding a virtual neon heart over
their heads, it seems obvious that Nina will want to ditch her fiance
and take up full-time with the guy she not only loves but gets along
with as well.
     The beauty of the story is that it takes so many unexpected
detours and side-trips.  The dialog, however, too often ends up
sounding flat and stagy.  ("We're too old to settle for a twin-bedded
friendship." and "I'm simple, that's why I teach first grade.")  After
the film's midway point, when it makes a switch from romantic comedy to
romantic tragedy, the poignant lines are more sharply drawn.  "Have you
noticed that you're the only practicing heterosexual at your
Thanksgiving dinner?" a famous theater critic, played by Nigel
Hawthorne, points out to Nina.  She laments that she hasn't practiced
in some time.
     Director Nicholas Hytner, whose last film was the poorly received
THE CRUCIBLE, paces the show too languidly and dulls most of the
emotional punches with the result being a film bordering too often on
blandness when its strength is its risk taking.  The ending is crispy
written and staged with great power.  But then they turn around and
give us a feel good Hollywood epilogue that ties up the loose ends all
too neatly and, in some cases, quite unconvincingly.  Don't say I
didn't warn you if you end up suffering a sugar high from those last
few moments.
     THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION runs 1:51.  It is rated R for
profanity, some sexuality and brief drug usage and would be fine for
teenagers.

Author
E. Benjamin Kelsey
THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION stars "Friends"' Jennifer Aniston as Nina Borowski,
a social worker who falls in love with gay school teacher, George Hanson
(CLUELESS' Paul Rudd). After a disheartening breakup with his boyfriend, Dr.
Robert Joley (Timothy Daly), George finds himself moving in with Nina, a woman
he barely knows but quickly bonds with, becoming best of friends. Things run
relatively smooth until Nina discovers she is pregnant and realizes she wants
much more of George than simple friendship. Convinced George could make a much
better parent than arrogant biological father, Vince (John Pankow, best known
as Ira on "Mad About You"), Nina struggles with the realization that George
will probably never love her the way she has come to love him.
If the plot vaguely reminds you of last year's CHASING AMY, that's because it
*is* vaguely like CHASING AMY, but the two are approached differently enough
(and not just thru opposite gender roles) that THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION
never feels like a phony impersonation. The two films are distinct, most
notably the fact that OBJECT is a million times more "commercial",
disregarding the highly risque sexual observations and potentially offensive
dialogue that AMY thrived on. In fact, OBJECT deals with the homosexuality
issue much more discreetly than most "gay" movies. For the most part, the
character of George avoids the stereotypical clichés that could've turned his
character into a running gag as opposed to a genuine, caring persona. Rudd's
subtly sweet performance also gives George the right level of boyish charm
without becoming emotionally manipulative.
Aniston effortlessly proves here that she is the most talented of the
"Friends" sextet with yet another praiseworthy performance, outshining her
PICTURE PERFECT run. Sincerely conveying her character's struggle, Aniston
makes a good lead - both sweet and beautiful to gaze upon. With the rest of
the cast performing at top notch (particularly Alan Alda and Nigel Hawthorne
in smaller roles), it is obvious the flaws held by THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION
lie within the story, not it's transference to the screen. It's a shame that a
film with so many delectable one-liners tucked snugly into its script allows
for so many misfires in way of development. To speak vaguely so as not to
"spoil" the film, why are some things revealed that are nearly contradicted by
the whole premise? Why do they even show up when they will just as soon be
abandoned, leaving the audience highly justified with their notice of such an
obvious frailty?
It is OBJECT's good intentions and easy approachability that make it a likely
winner with most audiences. The film would not have suffered any if George was
a heterosexual who simply didn't return Nina's affection, but the
homosexuality "gimmick" (to put it a bit vulgarly) puts an even greater spin
on things. The ending worked well, allowing for happy resolutions all around -
something the audience is likely to ponder the likelihood of from the get go.
The audience I was in attendance with even broke into a round of applause with
one of the redeeming surprises. And so, while a tune-up could be appreciated,
THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION is a conventionally unconventional film that will
gain the affection of most movie goers.

Author
Seth Bookey
Wendy Wasserstein's screenplay of *The Object of My Affection* has borne
out good movie. It's based upon Stephen MacCauley's novel of the same
name--one of my all-time favorites. The two works are, however, mutually
exclusive.
George Hansen (Paul Rudd) and Nina Barowski (Jennifer Aniston) are
introduced awkwardly at a dinner party, when George's lover Joley (Tim
Daly) breaks up with George via Nina. George discovers they have broken up
when Nina offers him a place to stay in her Brooklyn apartment. Luckily,
they soon become fast friends and actually get along much better with each
other than they do their respective mates. 
When Nina becomes pregnant by the overbearing Vince (John Pankow), she
ultimately decides she would rather have George raise the baby with her.
What ensues is a struggle for George--wanting some form of fatherhood or a
life of his own. 
Some people might object to the theme of the woman who goes over the
unobtainable man because it's safer than facing her own issues (a la My
Best Friend's Wedding). But, Nina comes to her own conclusions, and finds
a way to be happy. There is also the overused device of ending the film
in the future, and equalizing all the characters with fairy-tale happy
endings. 
Expecting the movie to be completely awful, based on advance press and
Wendy Wasserstein's admission that the George character was "a lump" and
that she decided to play up the Nina story more, I was pleasantly
surprised. Wasserstein's screenplay is both funny and touching, and the
performances by Rudd and Aniston save this film from being a complete
flop. In fact, Aniston's performance here alone was enough to win me as a
fan. She's quite endearing.
The supporting cast is also good: Tim Daly excels as the narcissistic
Joley; Allison Janney as Nina's stepsister Connie and Alan Alda as
Connie's husband do not overdo their comic roles. In fact, this is one of
the first times I have not wanted to see Ald a shot to death on film
(which he finally was in *Murder at 1600*). Nigel Hawthorne plays the
older drama critic who points out to Nina, "What happens when all these
homosexual men at your dinner table leave you for other men?" It's a nice
change from the "lonely gay man" image.
The weakest member of the cast is Amo Gulinello as Paul. It's hard to see
why he and George get together and fall in love. It's pretty clear that he
is only there to accentuate to Nina that George might not be hopeless
devoted to her for long, as she grows very jealous. 
One frustration with this adaptation is that George was meant to be a
lump--not a stud. There is little of MacCauley's sensibilities left in
this story. Paul Rudd is one of the cutest actors alive, and he can also
act. It's not difficult to see why both men and women would want to rope
him in. He is actually cuter than most of the men Nina goes out with; why
wouldn't she fall for him? It might have been more poignant of she fell
for a man who was both gay and not absolutely stunning; Paul Rudd is the
latter. 
Some of the best scenes are the ones in which Nina and George take dancing
lessons. It showed both their growing fondness for one another, as well
the passing seasons. Unfortunately, an otherwise funny and touching movie
experience is marred by two very poor editing mistakes. One occurs when
George and Paul go swimming, and the other is when we finally see Nina's
baby born. It is obvious some last-minute editing was going on, and there
is no excuse for such blunder in this day and age.
Bottom line: If you feel you must choose, read the book. You will probably
laugh a lot more at the self-deprecating humor of George.
