Title
Review for Undergĺngens arkitektur (1989)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Frank Maloney
     THE ARCHITECTURE OF DOOM is a documentary film by Peter Cohen.  It
is narrated in German by Bruno Ganz.  Subtitled in English.  (Sweden,
1991.)  It is unrated, but contains scenes of the Holocaust.
     THE ARCHITECTURE OF DOOM is a detailed exposition of a unique
interpretation of Hitler and Nazism, namely that Hitler's ultimate goal
in all that he did was "beauty" (as understood by his limited, bourgeois
standards).  The mass murders of 70,000 mental and physical handicapped,
as well as the extermination of more than 10 million Jews, Gypsies, gay
people, and Slavs, as well as the burning of "degenerate" art and the
promotion of "Aryan" art, all these are expressions of the overriding
concern for beauty, according to Peter Cohen, a Swedish-German
documentarian.
     The film begins with Hitler's own paintings, kitschy postcard views
of old buildings.  Cohen documents the large number of failed or
frustrated artists that surrounded Hitler in the top echelon of the Nazi
leadership.  Cohen pulls together all the insane threads of the Third
Reich to create a coherent picture of the period as an immense, evil art
project.  Racial purity, eugenics, art, sculpture, architecture,
genocide are all aspects of the ultimate goal.
     Cohen depicts Hitler as the ultimate artist manque, designing the
party uniforms and emblems, planning a vast opera and thereby picking up
the work of his musical idol, Richard Wagner, designing national art
galleries, museums, opera houses, the Reich Chancellory, redesigning
Berlin as the capital of his world-empire-to-come, as well as the vast
rallies and art exhibits.
     Seeing the Third Reich, the Holocaust, and World War II as an art
project may seem at first blush to be reductive and trivializing to the
seminal events of our century.  Quite the opposite is the actual effect.
It makes one see the insidious threat behind every effort to limit
concepts of art and beauty to one standard, a la Strom Thurmond and Pat
Buchanan in the U.S.  currently.  To perpetuate these enormities in the
name of beauty makes it even more of a betrayal of our entire
civilization, emphasizing through the inherent irony perversion and
crimes too horrible to encompass.  And it makes ones suspect anyone who
speaks of beauty as if it were a tangible reality, not merely a way
saying "I like it".
     Cohen also makes a cogent argument that the Holocaust, the Final
Solution, the extinction of European Jewry, was so important that trains
for the death camps had priority over transport for his crumbling
armies.  Cohen tells us that Hitler realized after his armies bogged
during the Winter Campaign in the Soviet Union that he would not be
winning the war, but that Hitler felt that if he destroyed the Jews then
the great act for beauty would be Hitler's lasting legacy, that if he
left behind monuments, especially a racially pure Germany, and his own
legend, these would sufficient to inspire future generations to take up
Nazism again.  That Hitler nearly did succeed in wiping out European
Jewry is certainly true; that Nazism is not dead is also all too true.
     The film uses a vast store of stills and archive films to
illustrate the art, architecture, the propaganda, the war, the
Holocaust, and the "eugenics" program that was a dress rehearsal for the
Final Solution.  It ends with a basement full of oil portraits of the
Nazi leadership, a brilliant homage to the end of CITIZEN KANE.
     This is a very disturbing film that provides the viewer with a
closely reasoned and thoroughly argued thesis.  It is a sober and
serious film, long, gruelling, intellectually exciting, morally
disturbing.
     THE ARCHITECTURE OF DOOM was booked into Seattle for long weekend
run and will play spottily elsewhere, I'm sure.  If you can, see this
film.  Ask your art-house manager to book it; it is distributed by First
Run Features.  Look for it later in the video stores; it may become
available.  It will richly reward whatever efforts you must expend to
see it.
