Title
Review for Critters 2: The Main Course (1988)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
Question: what sequel has none of the humor, wit, scares or horror of
the original cult film "Critters"? Answer: "Critters 2." Easy
enough. There have been bad sequels but none as excruciating to sit
through as this one, which only shares one aspect of the original's
flavor - the title with a number in front of it. It not only recaps
the original film with nary a story, but it also lacks any substantial
purpose other than to cash in on the original's brand name.
"Critters 2" has also has the distinction of being the most contrived
of all sequels. It is so contrived that it has almost no reason to
exist as a movie. Consider the plot for a moment. This time, the
lovable Brad Brown (Scott Grimes, with an earring) is back, having
helped to extinguish all those furball creatures from space years
earlier. He returns to Grover's Bend, visiting his grandmother for
Easter. Amazingly, he hardly spends any time with her, and instead
peruses through some old photographs and a useless slingshot. But what
do you know? The Critters' eggs that were left open for a sequel at
the end of the original film are now hatching. I recall they were
hatching already in the original's closing shot but never mind. Some
of the local residents use them as Easter eggs, sold to them by an
antique dealer! The new sheriff in town has to dress up as the Easter
Bunny! And before you can say the words "unintentional comedy," the
sheriff is killed by those mean little furb!  alls with razor sharp
teeth, and the local residents stay indoors at the local church. And
Brad is blamed since his appearance in town coincides with the
hatching of the Critters's eggs!!! Can the filmmakers be serious?
But low and behold, the bounty hunters, who are pursuing those furry
creatures known as the Cripes (or is the Krites as indicated on the
video cover box?), are back at the same damn town to blow them away
with their perhaps unintentionally phallic, futuristic shot guns. This
includes the return of actor Terrence Mann (as the long-haired Ug, the
strongest of the bounty hunters) and Don Opper (the village idiot
Charlie, who has become a bounty hunter himself), appearing as if he
was sleepwalking through all this.
The original instilled some sense of dignity with Brad's family trying
to protect themselves and their home from the Critters. This time, the
human interest level is kaput - in fact, there is not one solid
characterization throughout except for the fabulous character actor
Barry Corbin (replacing M. Emmet Walsh from the original) as the
colorful retired sheriff. Corbin, like Gene Hackman, could never give
a lifeless performance if his life depended on it - if he were the
main character, this cruddy, lazily patched together sequel might have
some substance. The townspeople and the town remain anonymous with no
real visible locale threatened except for the local church. There is a
laughable, forced romance between Brad and a local reporter that makes
after-school specials seem positively sultry by comparison. The
critter action scenes are cut far too frantically, and the best the
film can do is to show rolling furballs along the dusty roads. As it
stands, "Critters 2" is as iner!  t and undignified as they come.
Footnote: The most interesting thing to say about "Critters 2" is the
scene where one of the bounty hunters tries to shape-shift their
appearance into Freddy Krueger from "A Nightmare on Elm Street"
ad. Fitting since "A Nightmare on Elm Street Part 3: Dream Warriors"
showed a clip from the original "Critters" just before a TV addict met
a demise from dear old Freddy.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com
