Title
Review for And the Band Played On (1993) (TV)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Dragan Antulov
Some may argue that movies made for cable television belong
to the limbic world between commercial cinema and commercial
television, which allows their authors to use all their
creative energy without full limitations of those two
industries. On one hand, cable movies are less restrained by
censorship. On the other hand, they are less restrained by
commercial considerations. So, it shouldn't surprise anyone
that some of the best or most impressive pieces of American
cinema in 1990s came from that domain. One of such cases is
AND THE BAND PLAYED ON, 1993 HBO docudrama directed by Roger
Spotiswoode.
The movie is based on the book by Randy Shilts, gay activist
who chronicled first years of AIDS epidemic. The author of
this review had read excerpts from that book many years ago.
Shilts, who died from AIDS himself in 1994, made quite
compelling read, telling the true yet intriguing story about
few unknown heroes - doctors, government officials, gay
activists, scientists - who were trying to cope with new,
frightening disease. Although non-fiction, book was full of
real, vivid characters and dramatic situations, and it
looked like a good screen material .
Among many characters in the movie, chief protagonist is Dr.
Don Francis (played by Matthew Modine), CDC expert for
infectious diseases. At the beginning of the film we see him
still troubled by his traumatic experiences during the Ebola
epidemic in Central Africa 1976. Few years later, his team
is faced with another, less visible, yet equally deadly
medical mystery - young, healthy people, mostly homosexuals
are having their immune system destroyed. While the number
of casualties slowly rises, Francis desperately tries to
find the cause and suspects the unknown virus. In the
meantime, gay activist Bill Kraus (Ian McKellen) tries to
raise awareness about "Gay Related Immune Defficiency", both
in the gay community and among U.S. administration. But the
odds are against him - in 1980 Ronald Reagan becomes
President and new, conservative administration is unlikely
to help gay minority by financing desperately needed
research. Research is even more hampered by the rivalry
between Pasteur Institute in Paris and group of American
scientists led by Dr. Robert Gallo (Alan Alda).
Although faithful to the book, and, as a consequence, almost
two and half hours long, this film never becomes boring.
Spottiswoode keeps the perfect pace, and the editing
provides great drama. But the most important asset of this
film are the actors - many of major Hollywood stars agreed
to appear in cameos. They all work very hard and their roles
are something to be remembered, even when they pop up only
for a second. Even Matthew Modine, who can be rather
irritating in other films, is impressive here as hero.
However, the most impressive role is played by Ian McKellen
as Bill Kraus, the most tragic figure in this sad epic.
Musical score by Carter Burwell helps to set atmosphere and
make this film distinctive from any average television
product with the similar themes.
The movie, although very impressive, could have been better.
The ending, with Elton John's song and long series of shots
featuring most important AIDS victims, seemed somewhat out
of place. The film had already told everything the viewer
had to know, and this remainder at the end looked
over-sentimental and too direct. But, despite that flaw,
this is still very good piece of cinema. The audience
recognised that - in, Croatia, for example, AND THE BAND
PLAYED ON was the only film ever to be released in cinema
theatres after being in video distribution first. So far,
this is the most informative and compelling film ever made
about AIDS, and I hope that one day its reputation would
surpass unjustifiably praised PHILADELPHIA.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     When Stanley Kramer made JUDGMENT AT NUREMBERG, he reportedly had only
a modest budget.  And yet the film had a cast that can best be described as
"star-studded."  Actors who usually got high billing were willing to take
tiny roles and were willing to be paid very modest salaries because the film
had a political message.  It told the story of the trial of the Nazis who
had committed crimes against humanity in the Holocaust and telling that
story was so important that actors put aside self-interest to be part of the
project.  In AND THE BAND PLAYED ON you see a lot of well-known actors in
very tiny roles.  And films made for HBO generally do not have huge budgets.
This film has itself become something of an event and actors want to be part
of the statement it makes regardless of what they can be paid and what
billing they can be given.
     AND THE BAND PLAYED ON would be an enthralling film even if it were
pure fiction, which unfortunately it is not.  It is the story of AIDS from
1976 before the first real breakout and continuing the story for about the
next decade.  It is the story of a disaster; it is the story of politics; it
is a detective story; it is a story about prejudice; it is about courage and
heroism and vanity; it's a horror story.  The cliche is that it would make a
great Hollywood film, but in reality Hollywood is making no more films like
JUDGMENT AT NUREMBERG and it takes someone like HBO with its captive
audience to make a film like this.  (Incidentally, HBO made last year's DEAD
AHEAD, which has some resemblance to this film.  DEAD AHEAD was not nearly
as solid a film as AND THE BAND PLAYED ON and I considered it one of the ten
best films I saw last year.  This would have to be one classic year for
movies for AND THE BAND PLAYED ON not to make this year's top ten list.)
     The film basically follows one doctor, Don Francis (played by Matthew
Modine) from the very puzzling outbreak--people dying from diseases that
usually strike only cats or sheep.  Francis as part of the Centers for
Disease Control (CDC), joins a small team with incredibly insufficient
funding slowly assembling the facts about this new disease.  And facts they
get, but they are facts that a lot of people do not want to hear.  And in
some cases facts are not available and suppositions must do.  So a political
element is added.  And this is a hard-hitting film that uses the names of
famous people, often not in a very positive light.
     Of bad touches, there are very few.  Glenne Headly does a reasonable
job as Dr. Mary Guinan on the CDC team.  She is a talented actress but I
strongly suspect the real Mary Guinan would not have her Hollywood beauty.
They did not feel the need to put in stunningly handsome men in major roles-
--unless it is Alan Alda as the self-aggrandizing Dr. Robert Gallo--but
there is still the perception here that the audience needs to have a pretty
face.  That is the only serious aspect in which the filmmakers have
underrated the audience.  With that exception I commend Roger Spottiswoode
for the direction and Arnold Schulman for an intelligent screenplay based on
the book by Randy Shilts.
     A reviewer always has a dilemma when a bad film is made in a good
cause.  Do you rate the film or the cause?  Thank goodness HBO has made such
a good film in this particular cause.  I give it a +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Brian Koller
Matthew Modine stars as Dr. Don Francis, who has spent his
life working for the U.S. Government fighting worldwide
epidemics.  He is sent to the Center for Disease Control in
Atlanta to fight the beginnings of what would become the
AIDS epidemic.  He selflessly works long hours, with
substandard equipment, and badgers his boss for more
research money and equipment.
Modine and his doctor co-workers are intrigued and
puzzled by what they are learning about this yet-unnamed
epidemic.  They struggle to link it to sexual intercourse,
and find it can also be spread through blood transfusions.
The American Red Cross does not come off well here, refusing
to pay for blood screening of donors, thus helping to cause 
needless additional AIDS victims.
If you are an ardent Republican, you will not enjoy this
movie.  Reagan is a villian here, slashing the funding
of the CDC and indifferent to the plight of gays, and later
hemophiliacs, drug users, and newborn babies, who have
contracted AIDS.  There is an except of a Ronnie speech 
where he boasts to have cut the budget of every government 
department except for Defense.
Gays, devastated by the epidemic, are portrayed as persons 
instead of stereotypes.  There's only one character I find
annoying: Kiko, who is huffy, effiminate, and indecisive.
Numerous stars, such as Steve Martin, Richard Gere and Lily
Tomlin, have cameos, unusual for a humble HBO production.  Look 
for Phil Collins as a cynical bathhouse owner: the man can act.
Dr. Bob Gallo (Alan Alda) is an AIDS researcher who tries to
take all the credit for discovering the AIDS virus, which in
fact was first isolated by a team of doctors in France.
Gallo is portrayed as about the biggest jerk ever.  Alda plays
his character perfectly.
The movie ends with several pages of text softening the 
criticism of Dr. Gallo, and describing new developements in
AIDS.  This is followed by a series of still pictures of
famous people who have died of AIDS, mixed in with photos of
people who haven't, with a maudlin Elton John song in the
background.  Some text could be useful in figuring out who
some of these people are.  Elizabeth Taylor is shown and
someone is sure to think she's died of AIDS.  Or they could
skip the whole ending altogether, as the movie is already over
two hours and it discordant to follow a dramatization with
a memorial.
But here I am nitpicking what is a excellent HBO TV-movie,
intelligently written, revelatory, and socially aware.
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
