Title
Review for Sliver (1993)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
David N. Butterworth
     The first problem with SLIVER is its title.  Sliver.  What, like a
sliver of glass?  Or maybe it's like slaver (as in saliva).  Or maybe
it's just a typo (silver, slither, livers?).  And why is the "L"
italicized in the print ads like that, anyway?
     The title is a reference to New York's upscale Sliver Building
from which, at the film's outset, a striking blonde--who Just So
Happens to bear an uncanny resemblance to Sharon Stone--steps out for
some fresh air.
     It's an opening that screams "flashback," but wait!  That's not
Sharon Stone after all.  It's just someone who looks like her.  Maybe
there's more to this movie than meets the eye.  Too bad.  There isn't.
     Stone plays book editor Carly Norris, who moves into the same
fashionable East Side apartment from which her hapless lookalike took
that fatal plunge.  Faster than you can say "character exposition,"
here's Stone, straight-haired, serious and stylish, coming to grips
with a failed marriage.  Stone's Norris takes liberties with the term
schizophrenic; she's hip (preferring Pearl Jam to Pavarotti), she's
insecure, she's tough.  She's a self-confessed putz, mousy one minute,
vavavoomish the next.  And, as we'll soon find out, she's not the kind
of woman who minds getting her hair mussed.
     Within minutes of moving in, she's hit on in the lobby by icy
computer geek Zeke Hawkins (William Baldwin, he of the piercing
stare).  Zeke offers to carry her packages for her.  Of all the
characters in this film, Baldwin's has the most depth.  He's kinda
likable ... in a dopey, grinning, psychopathic kind of way.
     Tom Berenger plays washed-up writer Jack Landsford, who's
introduced to Norris by her boss (the serviceable Martin Landau).
Landsford wants to know all her secrets.  Norris doesn't appear to be
on the make, but every time a man makes a pass at her in this movie,
she's making dinner reservations.  But she pays the price in a
restaurant strip poker scene with Hawkins that's particularly
embarrassing.
     Stone may try her best, but she doesn't have much to work with.
This is surprising considering novelist Ira Levin's reputation for
clever, complex thrillers.  Screenwriter Joe Eszterhas, who penned
Stone's last film, the notorious BASIC INSTINCT, doesn't add much to
the puzzle with his paper-thin adaptation.  For all its bestseller
status, SLIVER's plot leaves more than a few loose ends hanging
around, and whatever happened to suspense?  This is the kind of movie
in which tension is created by characters never finishing their
sentences.  "You were there when she...?," etc.
     Polly Walker (star of last year's ENCHANTED APRIL) plays Norris'
fast-talking neighbor Vida Warren.  Imagine Tracey Ullman playing
Elvira, Mistress of the Dark, and you'll understand what a change of
pace this is for the versatile British actress.  It's a pity she's
given so little screen time.
     So, do we get to see Sharon in the buff?  You bet.  Her early
bathtub masturbation scene is an obligatory, stylized mishmash that
plays like an outtake from a Madonna video.  Stone and Baldwin go at it
a couple of times it's true, but because there's no real chemistry
between the two stars (Berenger plays it safe and keeps his pants on),
there are few sexual fireworks here.  And this from a film that bills
itself as a kinetically-charged piece of eroticism.
     SLIVER's best scene is an accidental encounter between Carly
Norris and two unwilling and unknowing participants in her recent
initiation into high-tech voyeurism.  Stone's nonverbal display of
discomfort is about the only subtle touch in the film.  The impact of
that scene is heightened by its proximity to Sharon's earlier Big
Montage of Human Emotions. Here she watches--and (over) reacts to--the
private images on the closed circuit television screens: the funny, the
sad, the sexy, the frightening, Real Life for the MTV generation, 52
channels and everything on.
     There's a lot of talent behind this film--aforementioned writer
Eszterhas, cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond (with additional photography
by Lazslo Kovacs), director Phillip (PATRIOT GAMES) Noyce--but
somehow it doesn't show on the screen.  If you *really* like to watch,
try renting PEEPING TOM, Michael Powell's 1960 classic of sex,
violence and voyeurism.  It's everything SLIVER tries to be, and more
so.
     Silly title aside, SLIVER does have, at its best, one of the
most unconventional endings in recent memory.  At its worst, it's just
not very interesting.


Author
James Berardinelli
     On the rebound from a lifeless seven-year marriage and trying to
get her personal life back on track, Carly Norris (Sharon Stone)
decides for a change in venue and opts to move into an upscale
Manhattan high-rise.  There she meets a trio of unusual neighbors.
There's Vida (Polly Walker), the girl across the hall, who likes
cocaine and knows a few too many secrets.  Jack Landsford (Tom
Berenger) is a successful author who uses every ounce of his charm to
snare a date with Carly.  Zeke Hawkins (William Baldwin) seems normal
at first, but it doesn't take Carly long to figure out that he's hiding
something.  Despite the oddities of some of the building's other
tenants, Carly comfortably settles into her new home while someone
watches her on a bank of video screens that show every room in every
apartment of the Sliver building.
     As many studies indicate, voyeurism is one of America's secret
pastimes.  It doesn't have to be peeping through a bedroom window or
watching a couple making love through a telescope.  The seductive power
of voyeurism is the knowledge that you're watching something real--not
acted or scripted--and the players in the drama have no idea they're
under scrutiny.  It's addictive, and those hooked on it can become more
involved in living the lives of others than their own.
     Ira Levin's novel SLIVER explores the dangerous obsession that can
come about as a result of continuous voyeurism.  While the book is not
a psychological or artistic milestone, it makes for compulsive
page-turning.  The story is entertaining and focused (until the end),
and the characters seem real.  In the decisions made to turn the novel
into a movie, all of that was lost.
     In the movie, voyeurism is a plot device in a script that goes
nowhere and whose effete and implausible resolution leaves 50% of the
audience's questions unanswered.  If we really cared about the movie or
its poorly developed characters, this might be a blow, but SLIVER is
so badly put together that its abrupt conclusion is likely to provoke
little response.
     Personally, I don't have a problem with a movie changing the story
of the book from which it has been adapted, as long as the changes are
sensible and effective.  SLIVER, which rips apart the foundation of Ira
Levin's novel (going so far as to change the identity of the killer),
is a butcher's job--a hodgepodge of stuff from the book and Joe
Eszterhas' pen.  The strengths of the original story are muted and the
weaknesses magnified.  The ending is nowhere to be found, and what
appears in the movie is so disjointed and contradictory that it leaves
the viewer feeling cold and cheated.
     Because of writer Eszterhas and actress Stone, comparisons with
BASIC INSTINCT are unavoidable.  Actually, any similarities are
superficial.  There's a lot of nudity (but no icepicks) and a few
deaths but, aside from Eszterhas' often-embarrassing dialogue, the two
films aren't that close.
     As if it isn't bad enough that the script needs a major re-write,
this lackluster production suffers from other problems.  None of the
three major players are in top form.  Sharon Stone, who was effective
as the femme fatale of BASIC INSTINCT, shows a lack of aptitude in
playing the woman-in-distress.  Her emotional range in SLIVER is
limited and she fails to generate much sympathy.  William Baldwin's
portrayal is too bland for a character with the depth of passion and
emotion that Zeke is supposed to have.  Tom Berenger puts a great deal
of energy into what is essentially a thankless role (his character
isn't in the book), but little that we see or learn about Jack
Landsford makes much sense.  The gem in the rough of SLIVER is Polly
Walker (the spoiled heiress of ENCHANTED APRIL, who Phillip Noyce also
directed in PATRIOT GAMES), although she's on-screen for too few
scenes.
     Production-wise, SLIVER has the look and feel of something from
MTV.  The incidental music is intrusive and the quick-cuts are
distracting.  With the movie's focus on video, it's odd that the
visuals are so pedestrian.  There is also a sense of heavy editing.  At
least one scene referred to explicitly has been cut out.
     With thrillers, it's difficult to say who will like what.
Certainly, those who are looking for a good whodunnit won't find it in
SLIVER.  Equally displeased with this film will be the moviegoer
looking for a fast-paced film.  Even those who loved BASIC INSTINCT may
be disappointed--SLIVER has little of the tension and relentless
energy that marked Verhoeven's 1992 movie.  All-in-all, there's little
here to please anyone, and those who loved Levin's book are bound to
leave the theater disgusted.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Justin Felix
Screenplay by Joe Eszterhas.  
Based on a novel by Ira Levin.  
Directed by Philip Noyce.  
Starring Sharon Stone, William Baldwin, Tom Berenger, Martin Landau.  
Unrated version (contains nudity, violence, and profanity)  108 mins.  
Synopsis:  Carly, a divorced, unhappy, 35-year-old book editor who must
work with intensely annoying, sex-starved Judy, moves into a dream
apartment where she meets an elderly, lonely professor and a has-been
novelist who likes to scare jogging women in Central Park.  Carly then
begins an affair with a young technogeek while a bunch of people are
murdered in the apartment building and someone watches it all with video
cameras.
Comments:  Three stars may be giving SLIVER a little more credit than it
deserves.  It's a big-budget turkey slammed by many critics when it was
first released, I won't deny.  Despite its many faults, however, SLIVER
does warrant a second look.
How do I come to that conclusion?  Though it is sometimes compared to REAR
WINDOW (and I do see the resemblance), SLIVER's plot still strikes me as
unique.  In fact, the interesting plot makes one want the movie to be
better than it really is.  I have never read a novel by Ira Levin (who
wrote the book from which this film is based), but Levin's work has
provided the basis for a number of classic science fiction and horror
movies over the years, most notably ROSEMARY'S BABY and THE STEPFORD WIVES
and its inevitable sequels.  SLIVER deals with a dark subject, voyeurism,
and the chilling possibilities open to a voyeur with developing
technologies.  Allow me to suggest, for a moment, something which I rarely
see suggested about SLIVER.  Yes, it is obviously an erotic thriller
(Sharon Stone strips naked frequently and makes out with William Baldwin
while a murderer runs around cancelling out his victims), but it is also a
science fiction film.  Good science fiction often takes a part (a sliver,
if you'll accept a bad pun) of modern day society and exaggerates it.  In
SLIVER, the apartment's owner secretly installs video cameras in every room
of the building for the express purpose of spying on his tenants.  Sitting
in an enclosed room, he watches over these people as if he were God.  Two
walls of television sets, a giant TV in the center, a computer console, and
a remote control make up the majority of his equipment, which apparently
set him back 6 million dollars.  He can zoom in and out on everyone, and
record anything which goes on.  This massive invasion of privacy is
frightening when thought about (imagine every moment in every day of your
life being secretly filmed), and it is here where a major motif of science
fiction resides: the dangers of emerging technologies put to unethical use.
The novelty of the storyline, however, does not excuse Joe Eszterhas's weak
screenplay.  SLIVER is riddled with poor dialogue.  Granted, poor dialogue
can sometimes be unintentionally funny, but in SLIVER's case, Eszterhas
tries to be clever and funny intentionally.  The lines, therefore, only end
up receiving groans from the audience.  Carly and another tenant discuss
moving in an early scene, for example, and the tenant says moving is "worse
than anal intercourse."  They share a chuckle.  The audience doesn't.  Or,
how about this for awful?  Judy, the most annoying coworker to ever stumble
into a movie (get down on your knees and *pray* you never have to work with
someone like Judy), suggests "Pearl Jam [is] some sort of oriental sex
thing."  Ugh!
Another criticism of SLIVER is that it moves too slowly during the first
half.  To be honest, I'm not sure if the screenwriter or the director is at
fault, or if the reason lies in the fact that I'm reviewing the unrated
version over the R-rated theatrical version (from my estimate, though, only
about a minute was added to the unrated version).  Carly's introductions to
the main characters feel contrived, and her "steamy" scenes both with Zeke
Hawkins (Baldwin) and without are drawn out much longer than they need to
be.  
For an erotic thriller, SLIVER possesses a very talented and experienced
cast of actors.  Sharon Stone ... well, she's Sharon Stone, and she
delivers what you'd expect to see after her career-making performance in
BASIC INSTINCT.  William Baldwin looks like a geeky freak, which is good
considering the sleazy character he plays, and he turns in a goofy but
enjoyable performance.  Veteran actors Tom Berenger and Martin Landau seem
to make the best out of their characters (they really aren't offered much
thanks to the script).
I cannot conclude this review without mentioning the music.  I don't
normally have much to say about a film's score or songs, but SLIVER
effectively uses a number of dance standards during several key sequences.
Most notably, Enigma's "Carly's Loneliness" and UB40's "Can't Help Falling
in Love" appear a number of times and serve as fitting themes for Carly and
Zeke respectively.
SLIVER certainly has its faults: a slow first half, bad dialogue, and, at
times, annoying characters (Judy, for instance).  However, a strong
concept, a mostly solid cast, and some well-chosen music almost saves it
from being a turkey and at least makes the film watchable.  The R-rated
version may flow a little quicker than the unrated version reviewed here (I
saw the R-rated version in the theater when it first came out, so it's been
way too long for me to confidently compare the two).  SLIVER also has one
of the more memorable endings to a thriller that I've ever seen, which is a
definate plus because I usually find the conclusions to thrillers cliched
and disappointing.  Some people I know who have seen this turkey hate it,
but I really don't think it's all *that* bad.  I'd give it a passing
recommendation, but keep in mind that it's certainly not family viewing.

Author
Jon Ridge
     Before BASIC INSTINCT, did you even know her name?  For a long
while in Hollywood, a name had been floating around that no one could
actually place a name with.  With such titles as STARDUST MEMORIES,
IRRECONCILABLE DIFFERENCES, and the ALAN QUARTERMAIN movies to her
name, who could be blamed for not taking recognition.  But then, a
funny thing happened:  A director named Paul Verhoeven saw potential in
this sensual blond beauty, and took a chance on her.  BASIC INSTINCT
was a smash success and, although it displayed no "raw" talent in the
acting department for her, the film acted as a huge boost and stepping
stone in her very unsure career in Hollywood.  Of course, I am speaking
of none other than Sharon Stone.  Her interrogation scene in INSTINCT
has become one of the most infamous images in the history of cinema.
It also said that there was, indeed (finally), an actress in the
business who was willing to take risks.
     Stone's second opportunity to prove herself as a serious actress
has also (like BASIC INSTINCT) turned out to be very controversial work
for this budding talent.  But is the movie *good*?  The answer is a
resounding ... well, not really.
     Stone stars as Carly Norris, a recently divorced book editor who
moves into a sliver high-rise in Manhattan.  There she meets three
different men, one of whom dies in the shower soon after the film
begins.  The other two--author, and tenant respectively--are played
by Tom Berenger and William Baldwin.  Both men lust after Carly, Jack
Landsford (Berenger) a bit more than he should.  So, Carly chooses the
younger and more attractive Zeke Hawkins (Baldwin), leading the two of
them to several erotic encounters which had to be trimmed in order to
avoid an NC-17.  Jack's jealous, instantly accusing Zeke of a number of
murders that have occurred in the building over the past couple years.
*no*, Zeke says--It was Jack.  So begins the blame game.  Ahh ... what's
a girl to believe?
     In a way, this film seems like the perfect murder-mystery- sex
thriller (it has just the right feel to it that any sort of thriller
needs).  A good opening track by Enigma sufficiently sets the correct
mood for this techno-thriller, but the film loses steam as it nears the
halfway mark.  Stone is marginally better here than she was in BASIC
INSTINCT, but just about the time the film reaches its midpoint, Stone
begins to look tired, unhappy, confused as to why she got involved with
this project in the first place.  Too many reshoots, too much
controversy over quarreling between the leads off-screen, and Tom
Berenger overacting like never before don't help save this film when it
needs saving the most.
CRITICAL RATING:  ** Rated R, for Violence, Profanity, Nudity, Sex
