Title
Review for Speedway Junky (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg King
This grim tale of street wise hustlers plying their trade on
the neon lit streets and back alleys of Las Vegas ultimately smacks of
a teenage version of Midnight Cowboy.
Teenage runaways are drawn to the glittering dreams and neon
lit promises of Las Vegas, only to find that the reality fails to live
up to the promises.  Many struggle to survive, and turn to hustling
tourists for quick money.  New to this unfamiliar and dangerous world
is Johnny (Jesse Bradford, from Far From Home, etc), an army brat who
has run away from home, hoping to gain work with the pit crew of a
NASCAR car racing team.
He lands in Vegas for a temporary stop, but a series of
misadventures sees him stranded without any money or clothes.  He is
taken in by Eric (Jordan Brower), a gay teenage hustler who works as
part of a street gang.  Eric also introduces him to the world of
casual sex for money.  Johnny just wants to make some quick scores so
he can leave Vegas and follow his dream.  He also meets Veronica
(Daryl Hannah, cast against type), a drug addict and hooker with a
heart of gold, who is something of a surrogate mother to Eric.
Johnny is initially uncomfortable with Eric and his preference
for casual, meaningless gay sex, but slowly a strong friendship
develops between the pair.  However, their involvement with Steven
(Home Improvement's wise cracking Jonathan Taylor Thomas), the street
wise, bisexual hustler who owes money, eventually brings about
tragedy.  The downbeat climax is inspired by Midnight Cowboy.
Speedway Junky is the first film from writer/director Nikolas
Perry, a former post-production assistant who worked on films such as
Bram Stoker's Dracula.  Perry's direction is quite restrained, and
there's no hint of unnecessary exploitation here.  This low budget
tale of gay teen hustlers ventures into territory made familiar by
Star Maps and the little seen Johns.  However, Perry doesn't provide
many insights into this sleazy world, nor does he pass judgement on
the actions or decisions of his characters.
Perry imbues the film with a seedy ambience and squalid
reality, but there is also a vague sense of unreality to the whole
thing.  Speedway Junky is a more sanitised view of life on the mean
streets than the provocative Hustler White.  The involvement of Gus
Van Sant as executive producer also lends the film overtones of My Own
Private Idaho.
Van Sant's involvement has enabled the tyro director to
attract a stronger cast than one would otherwise find in a low budget
feature dealing with such subject matter.
Most surprising of all is the casting of Thomas, whose
swaggering performance is a far cry from his previous roles.  Patsy
Kensit (Lethal Weapon 2, etc) is wasted in what amounts to little more
than a brief cameo.
Despite some solid performances and some great location work
on the streets of Las Vegas, this sordid and uncomfortably seedy drama
ultimately lacks appeal.
