Title
Review for Secret of My Succe$s, The (1987)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Greg Woods
     This is Michael J. Fox's ("Family Ties," BACK TO THE FUTURE) new movie.
It is about a Kansas kid (Fox) who comes to New York to make it to the top.
Old plot.  It is fairly predictable all the way through, and requires a great
deal of suspension of disbelief to enjoy, as Fox's character is repeatedly
doing stupid, outrageous things that have no apparent purpose other than to get
him into funny, sticky situations.  Nevertheless, I found it highly
entertaining and a pretty good parody of the business executive world.  I don't
want to give away too much of the plot, but the basic idea is that Fox gets a
job in the mail room and, not content to make his way up through "normal"
channels, also takes over the office of a recently canned executive, making
decisions and coming up with ideas for how the company should be run (all of
them good ones, of course).  The movie covers office politics (and office
sexuality), and has some pretty stereotypical characters, like the company
head who is married but always fools around on the side, the female executive
who got there by screwing the boss (but of course turns out to be competent in
her own right; after all, this IS the 1980's) and of course, the boss's
sexually frustrated wife who has the hots for Fox.
     Despite the fact that the resolution of almost every scene is predictable,
I enjoyed this movie and found myself laughing all the way through.  I did find
the plot a little forced and contrived, so I give it a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale
in use in this group.  As a comparison, the person who recently posted a very
positive review of RAISING ARIZONA and who referred to MONTY PYTHON AND THE HOLY
GRAIL as "a wasted afternoon" would probably NOT like this movie.  On the other
hand, if you enjoyed OUTRAGEOUS FORTUNE, you'll probably want to catch this
one too.
--Greg
UUCP: {hplabs, seismo, nbires, noao}!hao!woods
CSNET: woods@ncar.csnet  ARPA: woods%ncar@CSNET-RELAY.ARPA
INTERNET: woods@hao.ucar.edu
