Title
Review for Tengoku to jigoku (1963)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Takeshita
Akira Kurosawa's 1963 film HIGH AND LOW has an interesting premise:  A
captain of industry is told his son has been kidnapped and a ransom is
demanded.  Kingo Gondo (Toshiro Mifune) is ready to pay the
kidnapper's exorbitant demand of 30 million yen, when he finds out his
son is safe and sound.  Apparently, Gondo's chauffeur's son was
kidnapped instead in a case of mistaken identity.  Gondo is then faced
with the question, "Would you pay the ransom for a child that is not
your own?"  When the movie is over, it is a question which every
viewer must surely ask himself.
Even if we think Gondo's answer would be an unqualified "yes", he is
in a situation which makes matters complicated.  Gondo is a large
shareholder in National Shoes, one of the leading shoe manufacturers
in Japan, and he has been approached by a few other shareholders with
a scheme to take over control of the company by pooling their holdings
and voting out the current company head.  However, Gondo doesn't want
to partner with these other men, who we find are unscrupulous.
Instead, he has carefully borrowed money to amass an increasing number
of shares and with one last purchase, would be able to take control by
himself.  If he pays the ransom, he would neither be able to make the
last, biggest purchase, nor pay off his loans.  Gondo therefore faces
the dilemma of whether to ignore the kidnapper and achieve his dream
and assure lifetime security for himself and his family, or pay the
ransom and put himself in ruin.  It is this predicament that occupies
the first third of the film.  We know Gondo is a good man who helped
build National Shoes from the ground up.  Whereas the other
shareholders believe they need to make shoes which will wear out
faster so they will be bought more frequently, Gondo insists they
continue to make quality shoes which people will want to wear.  "Shoes
carry the weight of the entire body," he says.  His is a character who
would get our sympathy no matter which decision he made, for we know
his reasons would be sound.
HIGH AND LOW plays itself out in three acts and an epilogue.  The
first act is by far the best and creates the most tension as we watch
Gondo struggle with the decision he must eventually make.  Trapped in
his house atop a hill and under surveillance by the kidnapper, Gondo
is at constant odds with himself, his family, and the police.  Once
Gondo has made his decision, however, the film plays out like just
about any other detective drama.  The second act is mildly interesting
as we watch the police gather information on the kidnapper and prepare
to track him down.  The last act is the manhunt and pursuit of the
kidnapper through the seedy sections of the city.  Unfortunately, this
part is unnecessarily long with too many drawn-out scenes which verge
on boredom.  This third act is also single-handedly responsible for
making the film longer than it should be, at nearly two and a half
hours.  Looking at each scene, it seems as though Kurosawa was too
preoccupied with composition and imagery (at which he has always been
a master), and did not pay enough attention to pacing.
The epilogue is a short interaction between Gondo and the kidnapper,
and is decidedly insufficient.  Although we expect the scene to tie
everything together, the revelations about the kidnapper's motivations
are all too simple and unsatisfactory, given the wonderfully
thought-provoking content in the first third of the film.  HIGH AND
LOW deserves a good rating just for that beginning portion, but the
rest of the film unfortunately just drags it down.
