Title
Review for My Cousin Vinny (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Teenagers Bill Gambini (played by Ralph Macchio) and Stan Rothstein
(played by Mitchell Whitfield) are driving through Alabama on their way to
UCLA.  They drive illegally.  Bill shoplifts a can of tuna.  Then a cop
pulls them over.  The charge is murder.  They need a good lawyer.  The
lawyer they get is just about the world's worst.  Bill's cousin Vinny
(played by Joe Pesci) just passed the bar six weeks before on his sixth try.
He knows nothing about court procedure, and has never even served in a
trial.  But he will work free of charge, so down to Alabama he comes with
his obnoxious bimbo girlfriend (played by Marisa Tomei).  Now Bill and Stan
are surrounded by stereotypes: the whiney girlfriend, the redneck cop, the
silken, ambitious district attorney, the Southern judge who has pre-judged
the case.  About the only person who is not a stereotype is Vinny himself.
Then something funny happens.  The stereotypes start interacting and each
becomes an interesting person.  Even the trial gets interesting.
     Joe Pesci, top-billed for the first time, doesn't quite have enough
charisma to carry the film and Marisa Tomei very nearly steals the film from
him.  Meanwhile Macchio and Whitfield have little to do but stand around and
say, "Oh, gee!"  And of them, it is the lower-billed Whitfield who has the
better role.
     The comedy was written by Dale Launer, who also co-produced.  This film
is on a par with Launer's previous DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS though neither
film is up to his RUTHLESS PEOPLE.  MY COUSIN VINNY is a bright, pleasant
comedy with a slightly distorted view of life in the South.  It was directed
by Jonathan Lynn, who wrote and directed the hit British comedy series "Yes,
Minister" and "Yes, Prime Minister."  Pesci's run-ins with the local culture
are reminiscent of DOC HOLLYWOOD, also directed by a Briton.  It is almost
as if filmmakers are deciding that the rural South has gotten a bad rap in
films and are now trying to give it a better image, or at least play off of
expectations of the worse image.  MY COUSIN VINNY is a likeable comedy that
delivers at least most of the goods.  I rate it a high +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.
