Title
Review for Losing Isaiah (1995)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Jessica Lange, Halle Berry, David Strathairn,
           Marc John Jefferies, Samuel L. Jackson.
Screenplay:  Naomi Foner.
Director:  Stephen Gyllenhaal.
     It is one of film criticism's most ubiquitous put-downs--one
I frequently use myself--to compare a theatrical feature to a
TV-movie.  Such a description is intended to describe both subject
matter (usually topical or sensationalistic) and manner of
presentation (usually didactic or sentimental).  LOSING ISAIAH has
garnered more TV-movie comparisons than I can count, but the
comparison isn't entirely appropriate.  True, the subject of birth
mother/adoptive mother custody conflict is a television staple;
there were probably three such films on the small screen in the last
month.  But TV-movies generally feature one-dimensional characters
and a specific agenda.  LOSING ISAIAH features one-dimensional
characters and a steadfast refusal to adopt a point of view.
     LOSING ISAIAH opens in 1992 in Chicago's housing projects,
where Khaila Richards (Halle Berry), a young black crack addict,
leaves her infant son Isaiah in a box by a garbage dumpster.  He is
found and brought to a hospital, where social worker Margaret Lewin
(Jessica Lange) becomes attached to the child and decides to bring
him home.  Three years later, Margaret and her husband Charles
(David Strathairn) have finalized the adoption, and Khaila is
struggling to make ends meet after a stint in a rehab program.  Then
she discovers that Isaiah is not dead, as she had believed.
Enlisting the aid of an activist attorney (Samuel L. Jackson),
Khaila decides to attempt to regain custody, prompting a court
examination of race, culture and the best environment in which to
raise a black child.
     The subject of inter-racial adoption is a challenging and
complex one, and no one would expect the makers of LOSING ISAIAH to
deliver the final word on the matter.  It isn't the absence of a
patently obvious opinion from writer Naomi Foner and director
Stephen Gyllenhaal which is the problem, but that there is only a
cursory examination of any of the complexities involved.  The
inevitable court battle features the predictable array of speeches
and finger-pointing, but none of these academic arguments are of
much use to the audience.  We need to see more of Isaiah (the
adorable Marc John Jefferies) interacting with the Lewins, perhaps
even being interviewed so his point-of-view could be understood.
There is an attempt to deal with Isaiah's state of mind in some very
effective late scenes which show him responding to a new
environment, but those scenes are too little, too late.
     Similarly, the characters of Margaret Lewin and Khaila Richards
are not characters so much as they are representatives of the two
perspectives.  Jessica Lange is a dynamic actress, and she pours
tremendous emotion into Margaret; there simply isn't much to her
character, particularly a sense of why this particular child, out of
all those she has seen over fifteen years as a social worker, won
her heart.  Some token marital difficulties are meant to fill in the
blanks, but they don't do the job.  The fact is, LOSING ISAIAH is
far less about the Lewins' life with Isaiah than it is about Khaila,
whose redemption is the heart of the story.  Halle Berry is
impressive in the early scenes as Khaila the addict, but in the
film's later stages she becomes the 12-step version of the "hooker
with the heart of gold," too squeaky clean to be real.  It seems to
be the film's idea of balanced presentation not to give both mothers
a character outside of their fierce conviction that the other one is
wrong.
     Stephen Gyllenhaal's direction is usually best when no one is
speaking.  Two scenes are particular standouts:  one in which Khaila
first sees the 3-year-old Isaiah and follows him to a park, and
later when Margaret and Khaila's black attorney (the under-used
Samuel L. Jackson) share an uncomfortable cigarette break.  Those
scenes, and those from Isaiah's perspective, suggest that if LOSING
ISAIAH had been more intimate with its characters all the way
through, the story could have worked.  As it stands, a controversial
subject becomes a minor plot device connecting the stories of two
rather bland characters.  LOSING ISAIAH's contrived ending is
somehow appropriate for this wishy-washy effort.

Author
Eric Grossman
     "Who gets the baby?"  That's the first question everyone has asked
me about the new, socially conscious drama, LOSING ISAIAH.  Well, it
would be wrong for me to tell,  but I will say, the answer to the
question and the process of getting there are both under-whelming.
     Addicted to crack and living in the darkest shadows of the ghetto,
Khaila Richards (Halle Berry) takes her infant son, Isaiah, and leaves
him in a garbage can.  Isaiah is nearly crunched in a trash-truck
before being discovered and taken to a hospital where a social worker,
Margaret Lewin (Jessica Lange), finds herself particularly taken with
the baby boy.  When Isaiah is not claimed, Margaret and her husband
Charles (David Strathairn) decide to adopt him.  Meanwhile, Khaila is
arrested for shoplifting and lands in a drug-rehab program where she
begins to turn her life around.  Three years later, she is out of
prison and working as a nanny when she learns that Isaiah is alive.
Desperate to redeem herself and be the mother she meant to be, she
turns to an activist lawyer, Kadar Lewis (Samuel L. Jackson), to help
her get Isaiah back.  Margaret and Charles, who have developed their
own deep, loving relationship with Isaiah,  hire their own attorney to
fight Khaila.  Sounds really dramatic, right?  Well...
     Filled with topical issues right off of a radio talk-show and
powerful performances, LOSING ISAIAH will certainly spark conversation,
but not too much.  What is absent from this film is a point of view.
Stephen Gyllenhaal (A DANGEROUS WOMAN) and screenwriter Naomi Foner
(RUNNING ON EMPTY) attempt to placate everyone but in the end, they
satisfy nobody.  They should be commended for not succumbing to
melodrama the way an Oliver Stone or a Spike Lee would have, but at the
same time, at least these two filmmakers would have had a viewpoint.
     In its fear of offending, LOSING ISAIAH falls remarkably flat for
a movie with such volatile subject matter.  Lange and Berry keep the
movie afloat with their portrayals of the two mothers who desperately
need the child, however, the pacing is slow and the courtroom scenes
are filled with missed opportunities for dramatic tension.
     Not without its plus side, the film has a well rounded supporting
cast including Cuba Gooding Jr., Daisy Eagan, Regina Taylor and Marc
John Jeffries who makes his debut as Isaiah.  Good production values,
especially the score by Mark Isham, give this film a much needed boost.
     Who gets the baby?  I can't tell you, but instead of seeing the
movie, you should find someone who can.

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: general release 3/17/95 
Running Length: 1:46 
MPAA Classification: R (Mature themes, drug use, language) 
Starring: Jessica Lange, Halle Berry, David Strathairn,
          Samuel L. Jackson, Cuba Gooding Jr., Daisy Eagan,
          Marc John Jefferies 
Director: Stephen Gyllenhaal 
Producers: Howard W. Koch Jr. and Naomi Foner 
Screenplay: Naomi Foner based on the novel by Seth Margolis 
Cinematography: Andrzej Bartkowiak 
Music: Mark Isham 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     LOSING ISAIAH tries very hard to make its viewers cry--and
succeeds.  But the chance to shed a few tears is not all this
thought-provoking and dramatically-solid motion picture offers.  An
emotionally charged issue is handled with balance and care.  Excepting
circumstances, there are no villains here, and the case for each side
is presented in a compelling manner.
     The issue in question is whether a black crack child, abandoned by
a drug-addicted mother shortly after birth, is better off with that
now- reformed woman or with the white adopted family with whom he has
spent the first four years of his life.  Everyone loves little Isaiah
(Marc John Jefferies):  his birth-mother, Khaila (Halle Berry); his
white parents, Margaret and Charlie (Jessica Lange and David
Strathairn); and his adopted sister, Hannah (Daisy Eagan).  But love
often leads to pain, as becomes evident when Khaila goes to an activist
lawyer (Samuel L.  Jackson) to seek custody of her son.
     In LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD, Ken Loach took aim at the British social
work system and fired with both barrels.  LOSING ISAIAH, while dealing
with some of the same themes, approaches things from a vastly different
angle.  Here, both sides are treated equitably--for the drama to work,
this is a necessity.  Director Stephen Gyllenhaal manages to present
the two perspectives without displaying obvious favoritism for either.
Khaila starts out as crack addict, but we are shown her recovery and
reform and, through her interaction with the children she babysits, are
led to believe that she has become a fit parent.  On the other hand,
Margaret and Charlie have given Isaiah a stable, loving home in which
he is happy.  But they are not of his race and are not teaching him
about his culture or background.
     Much of LOSING ISAIAH is wrenching, and all of it is well-acted.
Here, Jessica Lange gives the kind of performance for which an Oscar
nomination is deserving (unlike her over-the-top caricature in BLUE
SKY).  Halle Berry is equally moving in a role that requires more
range.  Lange needs only to play the devastated mother; Berry must do
double-duty as an addict and a woman trying to regain her son.  David
Strathairn and Samuel L. Jackson, two actors who almost always impress,
are solid in less- visible parts.  Newcomer Marc John Jefferies is
amazingly believable and shows none of the awkwardness that often
accompanies the debut of a child actor.
     The end of LOSING ISAIAH is something of a cheat, but the eventual
resolution is neither badly handled nor overly-melodramatic.  However,
it isn't the final five minutes that display this movie's
strength--it's the other one-hundred.  Numerous scenes stand out, but
there is one image -- Jackson and Lange standing side-by-side under an
overhang during a rainstorm--that summarizes everything about this
film.  Brief in duration but undeniable in impact, that moment has
everything:  pain, uncertainty, and the unbridgeable gulf existing
between the issue--"black babies belong with black mothers"--and the
real people involved.  There is virtually no dialogue; it isn't
needed.  It's instances like this, which are scattered throughout, that
give depth and poignancy to a story that daringly probes a volatile
question for which there are no straightforward answers.
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Benjamin Edward Swire
     How much cash does it take to be a mother?  Stephen Gyllenhaal's
new film LOSING ISAIAH delves into the issues of motherhood and race
attempting to separate them.  But if one looks at all closely into what
the film has to say, it is apparent that underlying these surface
concerns is a quickly dismissed issue of class.
     While at times a bit heavy handed, occasionally going for the
easy tear-jerking moments, LOSING ISAIAH is a good film--solidedly
acted, well scripted, and skillfully directed.  It is however, exactly
what you'd expect it to be.  That may be good and that may be bad
depending on your taste, but if you have seen the previews or ads, then
you know exactly what you're in for.  The film knows its audience and
is aimed directly at sentimental viewers with an affection for
heartwarming/wrenching domestic tales.
     The story is about an African-American infant boy (played by cute
'n' cuddly Marc John Jeffries who inspires more "ahhs" than a tornado
in Kansas) abandoned by his crack-addicted mother Khaila (Halle Berry)
and ultimately adopted by the Lewins, an affluent white family.
     Three years pass, and after getting clean, Khaila wants her Isaiah
back.  The Lewin clan however, and especially Isaiah's new mother
Margaret (Jessica Lange), has inconveniently grown fond of the boy and
consider him an important part of the family.  They are after all, the
only family Isaiah has ever known.
     The battle which ensues for custody of the three-year-old traipses
across some volatile and controversial cultural lines--bringing to
the fore valid though contrary viewpoints from both sides of the
argument that "Black babies belong with black mothers."
     Yet while the surface debate concerns itself with the question of
whether motherhood can escape the boundaries of race and biology (as
opposed to being dependent on those very factors), the question which
gets no debate is whether the quality of a mother is determined by her
financial status.  For the film, the answer is unquestionably "yes."
     A major emphasis is placed on presenting Khaila to the court as
a competent mother.  Judging by the steps taken to achieve it,
competence in this film apparently depends upon one's decorating budget
and fashion sense.
     For when she is being prepared for her court appearance there
is a sequence of scenes (reminiscent of the A-Team preparing for the
climactic battle) in which all signs of her poverty are systematically
erased.  Her unkempt hair is redone in a corporate coif; in place of
sweatshirt and jeans, she is outfitted in a well-tailored suit accented
by a string of pearls on loan from her counselor; she is even relocated
from the friend's apartment in which she had been staying and provided
with more "respectable" housing (which she is promptly instructed to
decorate and repair).
     On the one hand, one can suppose that given the need to
convince the court, she needs to appeal to the aesthetics of the court
and its sense of propriety.
     But the affection for the facade is not exclusive to the
courtroom--Khaila is thrilled by the prospect of wearing real pearls
and the camera treats her initial courtroom appearance, the first time
we have seen the ensemble assembled, as if it were the second coming.
There is an utter absence of any sort of working-class consciousness.
The standards are the standards of the wealthy class, validating its
own aesthetic while condemning all else as inferior and
embarrassing--it is humiliating to be poor.
     The film makes no effort to address poverty except to equate it
with criminality and corruption.  "Why should I bother cleaning up,"
Khaila asks, "if someone is just going to look in, see what I've got,
and take it?"
     Beyond this specific impairment in the film's social vision, there
lies a more disturbing matter: the simplicity with which the film
ultimately treats the questions and issues it does recognize.  This
simplicity is both dangerous and damaging.  It is bound up in an idea
of entertainment as catharsis--a purging of emotions.  The idea is that
as one watches the Lewins cry, Khaila cry and Isaiah gurgle, all sorts
of emotions and energy will be stirred up ("I laughed, I cried, it was
better than Cats!" etc.).  By the time one is fed a resolution, all the
energy which was conjured up during the show is spent.
     While during the film one may be horrified by the injustice of
the court system, since it all works out in the end, that horror
evaporates with the credits.  Nothing is left to motivate the viewer
into action--for example to do something about the injustice of the
real court system.  In a sense, the make-believe solution to the Isaiah
dilemma has been substituted for a solution in the real world.  Rather
than a call to action, film becomes a $7 pacifier.
     The film responds to some of the most complex, and problematic
issues of our society by dismissing them with the vacuous simplicity of
"just say no" and "can't we all just get along?"
     Although it is undoubtedly a step forward to even attempt to
tackle this type of subject matter in a mainstream forum, in fact it
does damage to this same subject matter by trying to solve it in a
four-minute, spine-tingling, teary-eyed climax.
     Lurking behind the various cheap emotional tugs of LOSING ISAIAH
are extremely relevant social issues.  The film tries to take a good
hard look at the insane social imbalance which remains virtually
unscathed day after day, and for that LOSING ISAIAH deserves some
credit.
     Unfortunately, these issues are treated as simply another set
of loose plot lines--that type which Hollywood loves to tie up just
before the credits with a big hug and dramatic swelling of the
soundtrack (usually violins).
     Hello?  With apologies to Sherlock Holmes, swelling violins
solve nothing.  If you are going to acknowledge an issue, acknowledge
it and allow it some weight.
