Title
Review for Birdman of Alcatraz (1962)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Walter Frith
A retrospective movie review by Walter Frith
There is no prison film like 1962's 'Birdman of Alcatraz'.  In fact, many
don't view it as a film about prison.  It's more of a one man show with
supporting characters appearing every now and then.  It strikes at the very
heart of one man's life behind bars determined not to waste his years in
becoming just another statistic.  
In this true story, Burt Lancaster plays Robert Stroud, a man sentenced to
life imprisonment who becomes a world famous and respected authority on
birds.  After discovering how he will spend the rest of his life, he is
exercising in the prison yard one day when he finds an injured bird and
nurses it back to health and this leads him to dedicate his life to the
feathered creatures.  
Karl Malden plays Lancaster's adversary as the stern prison warden who
monitors Lancaster's years in prison.  The film's striking black and white
photography is used in one moody scene where Malden tells Lancaster he will
be in solitary confinement for the rest of his life and Malden's face is in a
total silhouette.  Director of photography Burnett Guffey adds greatly to the
film's personality of a darkened life away from society and each frame is a
work of art.  Photography inside cramped corners is often more skillfully
presented in contrast to the outside where scenes often light themselves and
there is plenty of room to move about.  'Birdman of Alcatraz' is one of the
most properly photographed films I've ever seen.
John Frankenheimer who has directed such sharply textured thrillers as 'Black
Sunday',  'French Connection II' and the documentary style feature 'Grand
Prix' has scored well with 'Birdman of Alcatraz' in working with a cast which
features Telly Savalas who would receive an Oscar nomination for Best
Supporting Actor and along with fellow actors Thelma Ritter, Betty Field,
Neville Brand, Edmond O'Brien and Hugh Marlowe, the film showcases one of
Burt Lancaster's most under rated performances.  It proves to be an
alternative biography without over blown emotion or elaborate sets and lets
the actors do their work well.     
