Title
Review for Woo (1998)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Steve Rhodes
     With the mark of true talent, Jada Pinkett Smith, who was Eddie
Murphy's girlfriend in the recent remake of THE NUTTY PROFESSOR,
manages to shine in the otherwise dismal movie WOO.  With her
infectiously happy smile, the beautiful actress has enough spunk and
confidence to rise above the material.  Although not quite enough to
make the movie enjoyable, her performance does give some respite to the
audience, who has to endure every black and male stereotype in the
book.
     As the movie opens, a sexy and mini-skirted Woo (Smith) sashays
down a busy Manhattan sidewalk.  Men left and right trip and fall as
they gawk at her.  She is going to get advice on how to find her Mr.
Right from her transvestite psychic named Celestrial.  As Celestrial, a
performer known as Girlina overacts like the rest of the supporting
cast.
     With only the knowledge of his zodiac sign, Woo sets off to find
her man.  When a blind date named Tim, played by the wholesome-looking
Tommy Davidson from BOOTY CALLS, turns out to have the good fortune to
have been born in the right time frame, she figures she has her man.
After a scene in which Tim practices various come-on lines to arouse
who he thinks will be a reluctant date, she walks into his apartment,
sticks a joint in his mouth and starts taking off his pants.  And this
all happens in the initial two minutes after she first meets him.
     Much of the movie is devoted to Tim's three sexist buddies, played
by Duane Martin, Darrel Heath, and Michael Ralph.  They make catcalls
at every woman they see.  Mixed with their disparaging remarks on the
woman's anatomy, they stick out their tongues to make sexually
provocative gestures.  Think ANIMAL HOUSE on steroids.
     As written by David C. Johnson and directed by Daisy von Scherler
Mayer, the picture, with its heavy slapstick, feels lifted from some
raunchy cable sitcom with a heavy laugh track.  No gesture is too crude
to include and no situation too cliched.  When Tim takes Woo to a fancy
restaurant, you could predict that someone will soon slip and fall
resulting in a big food fight, and you'd be right.  And when Tim tries
to light some incense in his bathroom, you know something will catch on
fire - this time it's the toilet paper roll.
     Although most of the jokes go nowhere, one that does work involves
Tim's prize possession, his car, which is guarded with all kinds of
anti-theft devices. He returns from a nightclub to beep the car open,
only to find that, like the Cheshire cat, all that is left in the
street is a trace - the car's beeper. It still beeps back even the
object it was protecting is gone forever.
     "This is funny; this is funny," Tim tells Woo at one point.  "This
is funny?" she queries.  "What does that mean?"  She doesn't know, and
neither did the makers of this movie.
     WOO runs just 1:25.  It is rated R for profanity and sexual
situations and would be fine for older teenagers.

Author
Michael Dequina
The title of the comedy Woo is a lie.  Taking its name from its party girl
protagonist, this sporadically amusing lark seems less concerned with Woo
than the more oddball characters and situations circling her.
Woo roughly fits the bill of a romantic comedy, and this angle of the film
holds some promise.  Woo (Jada Pinkett Smith), a fiery, independent young
woman who is fixed up on a blind date with square paralegal Tim (Tommy
Davidson) by her cousin Claudette's (Paula Jai Parker) boyfriend Lenny
(Dave Chappelle).  The conflict between Woo's free-spirited, partying ways
and the conservatism of the "stuffy" Tim leads to one long, disaster- and
embarrassment-filled night for the both of them--but mostly for Tim, of
course.  In general, the comic complications moderately amuse, but some,
like a restaurant fire that Woo inadvertently causes, crash and burn (no
pun intended).  However, all of this remains watchable, thanks to the two
appealing leads.  They have a terrific rapport, and Davidson's hilariously
high-strung, put-upon straight man manages to upstage the sexy spunk of
Pinkett Smith, who never looks less than gorgeous throughout the entire film.
If writer David C. Johnson and Daisy v.S. Mayer had stuck with Woo and Tim
exclusively, the film wouldn't have been great, but it would have been
better than the often meandering movie the complete Woo is.  Too often the
film becomes sidetracked by the more eccentric peripheral players, such as
Claudette, Lenny, and Tim's trio of obnoxious buddies, Frankie (Duane
Martin), Romaine (Michael Ralph), and Hop (Darrel Heath).  Claudette and
Lenny are given a raucous, raunchy showcase scene that is worth a few
laughs, but they disappear completely after that, making its necessity
questionable.  Frankie, Romaine, and Hop are funny at first, but their
broadly boorish antics grow old long before they  are shown on a side trip
at a drag club.  Completely out of place is an earnest, barely developed
subplot involving Woo's strained relationship with her brother (Dartanyan
Edmonds).  It's quite telling that the two most memorable supporting
characters only appear in one scene each: Darryl (LL Cool J), Tim's slick
ladies' man neighbor; and Crayola (Nicci Gilbert), a gossipy police
department desk clerk with an attitude problem.
Adding to Woo's problems is its jarringly abrupt ending.  Although I did
not particularly care for the film as a whole, I would not have minded the
additional 20 minutes or so dealing that the ending point suggests; it
would have given Woo and Tim's relationship a more satisfying and
well-rounded closure.  But perhaps that would not have been a problem if
the entire film had focused entirely on the central couple, which would
have made Woo a more satisfying and well-rounded movie.
mj23@michaeljordanfan.com
michael_jordan@geocities.com  |  mrbrown@ucla.edu
>My personal WWW siteshttp://welcome.to/mrbrown
Michael Jordan Beyond the Court: http://fly.to/michaeljordan
A Michael Jordan Fan's Heartbreak: http://fly.to/mj23
Personal Page: http://welcome.to/w3md
>Other WWW sites I work onhttp://www.HollywoodHotline.com
Albany Online: http://www.AlbanyOnline.com
Eyepiece Network: http://www.eyepiece.com
"I didn't know what to expect. It's like something you chase
 for so long, but then you don't know how to react when you
 get it.  I still don't know how to react."
--Michael Jordan, on winning his first NBA championship in 1991
...or, my thoughts after meeting him on November 21, 1997

Author
James Berardinelli
United States, 1998
U.S. Release Date: 5/8/98 (wide)
Running Length: 1:20
MPAA Classification: R (Profanity, mature themes, sexual situations)
Theatrical Aspect Ratio: 1.85:1
Cast: Jada Pinkett Smith, Tommy Davidson, Dave Chappelle, 
      Paula Jai Parker, LL Cool J, Darrel Heath, Michael Ralph, 
      Duane Martin
Director: Daisy V.S. Mayer
Producers: Beth Hubbard, Michael Hubbard
Screenplay: David C. Johnson
Cinematography: Jean Lepine
Music: Michel Colombier
U.S. Distributor: New Line Cinema
     Working in the motion picture industry must be a constant source of 
frustration for a front-line African American actress like Jada Pinkett 
Smith.  Despite being one of the freshest talents available, Pinkett 
Smith has often been relegated to playing thankless supporting parts (A 
LOW DOWN DIRTY SHAME, THE NUTTY PROFESSOR).  The problem is, of course, 
that there aren't many good roles available for black women.  Take away 
the likes of WAITING TO EXHALE, SET IT OFF, SOUL FOOD, and EVE'S BAYOU, 
and all that's left is a chance to be someone's girlfriend, a local 
whore, or a murder victim.  As a result, for Pinkett Smith's first 
opportunity atop the marquee, she is stuck in a stupid, formulaic 
romantic comedy with the unpromising title of WOO.
     Actually, WOO, the latest directorial effort from Daisy V.S. Mayer 
(PARTY GIRL), could have been worse than it is.  The film offers a few 
funny (albeit juvenile) moments and the on-screen relationship between 
Pinkett Smith's Woo and Tommy Davidson's Tim is appealing on those rare 
occasions when the two aren't forced to play it dumb for the sake of an 
endless barrage of cheap gags.  Unfortunately, huge portions of the 
movie are insulting to the intelligence of anyone with a triple-digit 
I.Q.  The situations are painfully contrived, the main characters are 
lifted right out of sit-coms, and the supporting players are so 
incredibly stupid that I wondered whether they all participated in some 
kind of "free lobotomy" lab experiment.  
     Woo is a spontaneous, energetic young woman who has been looking 
for love in all the wrong places.  Her latest relationship, with a 
testosterone-overdosed drug-dealer, came to an abrupt end when she 
refused to wear a beeper.  Now, her transvestite/medium friend 
Celestrial (Girlina) predicts that she's about to meet Mr. Right, and 
that he'll be a Virgo.  Later that day, Woo is given an opportunity to 
go out on a blind date with Tim, a shy man with a penchant for neatness 
and order, who just happens to be a Virgo.  It's not love at first 
sight, however.  Things get off to a rocky start when Tim makes an 
awkward pass, and they get even worse when the pair arrives at a swanky 
restaurant to enjoy a "quiet" dinner. 
     In the one-hundred year history of motion pictures, there have been 
a ton of bad "white" movies about mismatched lovers, so I suppose it's 
only fair that we get a "black" effort of the same low caliber.  As in 
all romantic comedies, we know from the beginning that Woo and Tim are 
going to end up together.  The question is, are their courtship rituals 
entertaining?  In a good entry to the genre, the audience becomes caught 
up in the love story, no matter how familiar it is.  In WOO, the 
constant reliance upon unfunny, moronic humor sinks the project.
     For those who enjoy spotting continuity gaffes, there's a huge one 
in WOO involving a Corvette with a broken window that miraculously 
repairs itself (added to that is the mystery of how the car looses its 
top).  Sadly, that's one of the film's most enjoyable sequences, and the 
entertainment value is entirely unintentional.  Despite exuding charm 
from every pore, there's little that Pinkett Smith and Davidson can do 
to save their characters or David C. Johnson's script.  Since it misses 
the mark by so much, a better name for WOO might have been WHOOPS.  
Now with more than 1400 reviews...
The ReelViews web site: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"My belief is that no movie, nothing in life, leaves people neutral. You
either leave them up or you leave them down."

Author
David Sunga
Ingredients: Nerdy law clerk, wild dream girl, night on the town
Synopsis:
A party-loving hot babe named Woo (Jada Pinkett Smith) finds out from
her astrologer that she is fated to fall in love with a Virgo. Her
friends fix her up on a blind date with an unexciting law clerk named
Tim, but Tim turns out to be a Virgo, so Woo consents.
The rest of the movie portrays what happens during their night on the
town. The two don't get along because Woo feels that Tim is boring and
uptight, and Tim is upset about his car getting stolen, and getting
punched out at a club. Woo also doesn't like the fact that Tim's macho
buddies make fun of him. 
Will they stick with each other despite a trying night?
Opinion:
WOO portrays the main couple as being totally incompatible but for a
dubious astrological connection. However, the chemistry's okay between
Jada Pinkett Smith and Tommy Davidson. 
Will Tim lighten up? Will Woo accept Tim? Will they temporarily break up
and then starting reminiscing about the good things they saw in each
other? You already know the answer. The slapstick is entertaining
(restaurants and cars get busted up, people dressed in yellow chicken
suits) but the film is unremarkable in that it feels like we've seen
these stretches of drama and slapstick before. 
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga
This review and others like it can be found at 
THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com
email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com

Author
Matt Williams
Daisy v.S. Mayer directs this blind date comedy that's more
uncomfortable than a bad date.  Boring, uninteresting and pointless, the
film wastes both its talent and your time.
Woo is the name given to Jada Pinkett Smith's free-spirited character.
Beautiful and smart, she's also a handful...so much so that her cousin
Claudette (Paula Jai Parker), with whom she's staying, schemes to get
her out of the apartment for one night.  She asks her husband Lenny
(Dave Chappelle) to set up a blind date between his friend Tim (Tommy
Davidson) and Woo.
Tim is a legal assistant studying for the bar, and a very nice guy.  Too
nice, or so his friends think.  His last girlfriend used and abused him,
and now, on the rebound, he reluctantly agrees to the blind date.
Of course, the blind date turns into the disastrous date from hell. But
it's not all bad...at least they didn't have to sit though a movie like
Woo. Woo is never groundbreakingly awful.  Well, ok...the chicken sex
fetishist was disturbingly bad, but the movie is more bland than
horrible.  The film is packed with endless unfunny setups that lead
nowhere. You're sure that there's going to be a payoff soon...but it
just never comes.
Jada Pinkett Smith deserves a better film than this one.  Her role here
has some substance, but it is lost in the morass of the film's bungled
attempts at humor.  Tommy Davidson fills the needs of his role:  nice
but boring. There's not much to be said for the supporting cast.  Tim's
trio of buffoonish friends particularly suffer from the film's lack of
humor.
The film is not "Run Away!" bad, but it is bad...and not one which I
would recommend to anyone besides an insomniac.
- Matt Williams (matt@cinematter.com)
Reviewer for Cinematter: http://www.cinematter.com
Home of over 500 reviews, and information on over 600 upcoming releases

Author
Chuck Dowling
What do you get when you rip-off good movies like Woody Allen's
Bananas and Martin Scorsese's After Hours? You'd think you'd get the
best of both films. Instead you get Woo. Falling in somewhere between
Def Jam's How To Be A Player (which was awful) and Booty Call (which
was ok), Woo is yet another in the embarassing genre of showing
African-Americans to be nothing more than sexual buffoons.
The whole film plays out as a black version of After Hours, as wild
woman Woo (Jada Pinkett Smith) goes out on a blind date with
straight-laced Tim (Tommy Davidson). Mayhem follows them. For some
unknown reason (read: contrived screenplay) Davidson puts up with all
of Woo's antics for the entire night, which include her destroying his
bathroom mirror, stealing things from his house, violently questioning
him (accusing and belittling him actually) about previous girlfriends,
causing a riot in an elegant restaurant, and other various infuriating
things that any normal person wouldn't tolerate. But for the sake of
this bad movie? Sure, why not?
There are a few chuckles in the film, the best being the scene swiped
directly from Bananas. In this case, Davidson is running from thugs,
gets into a subway car as the doors are closing, starts to taunt the
thugs, then the doors open back up again. A good joke, but a stolen
one. Another chuckle is provided by Billy Dee Williams' cameo as
himself.
Movies like Woo are seemingly released every three months or so, and
not one of them has ever been a hit. Woo won't be one either. So why
was it made? And more importantly, isn't there anyone else besides me
who thinks these films are offensive?  Everyone involved should really
reconsider their careers at this point.  [R]
The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling
URL: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/
Email: chuckd21@leading.net
Š 1995-1998 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.  No reviews may be
reprinted without permission.
