Title
Review for Sum of Us, The (1994)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
U.S. Availability: limited release Spring 1995
Running Length: 1:40
MPAA Classification:  No Rating (Mature themes, language)
Starring: Jack Thompson, Russell Crowe, John Polson, Deborah Kennedy
Directors: Geoff Burton and Kevin Dowling
Producer: Hal McElroy
Screenplay: David Stevens based on his play
Cinematography: Geoff Burton
Music: David Faulkner
Released by The Samuel Goldwyn Company
     Love is perhaps the most common theme explored by movies.  It is
also the most frequently misrepresented.  Many Hollywood love affairs end
up heavily over-romanticized, and the picture they paint is invariably
far from reality.  So it's refreshing to find a film like THE SUM OF US,
which is about love in all its genuine forms:  sexual (both gay and
straight), platonic, and most important, familial.  Given the honesty of
the script, it should come as no surprise that America's film industry
had nothing to do with the movie--this is yet another gem from
Australia.
     Not only are Harry (Jack Thompson) and Jeff (Russell Crowe) father
and son, but they're best friends as well.  Their relationship is relaxed
and comfortable--they banter and kid around and, though they
occasionally get under each other's skin, there's never any acrimony in
their arguments.  Harry is aware of his son's homosexual preferences and
accepts them unquestioningly.  The only thing he has to say on the
subject is that he's disappointed Jeff will never have an opportunity to
father a child.  With so many dysfunctional family stories around, THE
SUM OF US serves as the perfect antidote.
     Despite his good looks and outgoing personality, Jeff is actually
somewhat shy, as becomes obvious when he's getting to know Greg (John
Polson), a man he meets at a local gay pub.  Greg is no more certain of
himself than Jeff, and it's only after a lot of nervous conversation that
the pair arrive at Jeff's home.  No sooner have the two dimmed the
lights, however, than Harry wanders into the room to greet his son's
prospective lover, unintentionally but effectively dispelling the
romantic atmosphere.
     Meanwhile, Harry, who has been a widower for a number of years, is
looking for female companionship.  To that end, he enrolls in Desiree's
Introduction Agency, and is set up with a middle-aged woman named Joyce
(Deborah Kennedy).  The two hit it off almost immediately, but, while
both are interested in pursuing a serious relationship, it's unclear
exactly how far each is willing to go.
     THE SUM OF US is delightful, by turns droll and serious.  Yet even
during its most dramatic moments, it retains a light-hearted tone that
keeps things from becoming too grim. There's always a joke right around
the corner, and none of the humor seems ill-suited to the situation.
Writer David Stevens has a near-perfect sense of his characters, and
they're the sort of people it's a pleasure to get to know.  Strong,
unaffected performances by leads Jack Thompson (who bears a resemblance
to the American sit-com actor Jerry Van Dyke) and Russell Crowe (PROOF,
THE QUICK AND THE DEAD) emphasize our sense of Harry and Jeff as normal,
everyday people.
     There is no "fourth wall" in THE SUM OF US.  The characters
frequently turn to the camera--sometimes right in the middle of a
conversation with each other--and address a sentence or two to the
audience.  The words are spoken with such easy familiarity that this
particular device is almost always more effective than gimmicky.
     THE SUM OF US isn't exactly cutting-edge, but it takes a few chances
(or what might be perceived as chances by an American viewing audience).
Jeff's homosexuality is a complete non-issue.  There's nothing political
or tragic in his situation.  In fact, he and the other characters
frequently joke about it.  Also, no compromises are made to give the
conclusion an extra lift, proving it's possible to have a happy ending
without undermining the story's intelligence.  It's production elements
like this that make THE SUM OF US such a worthwhile examination of what
love is like for those whose lives don't follow traditional movie
scripts.
-James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com)

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     David Stevens is probably most notable in this country for co-
authoring BREAKER MORANT together with Bruce Beresford and Jonathan
Hardy.  That was a very political film.  His SUM OF US, based on his
own stage play, is a very different sort of story.  At the center of
this story are Harry Mitchell and his son Jeff (Jack Thompson of the
excellent TURTLE BEACH and Russell Crowe of ROMPER STOMPER).  We see
them doing some very normal things like having dinner together.  Jeff,
as we quickly learn, is gay.  Harry accepts his son's sexual
orientation with a sort of stoicism.  Most of the time he presents a
face of complete toleration, but find him in the right mood and he will
admit that he wishes his son would know the joy of "planting his seed
and seeing it grow," as he puts it.  And if you catch Harry drunk and
with his defenses down, you can tell that his natural instincts are
anti-gay.  Still, he is a man of wit and intelligence who greatly loves
his son and who, while in control, will make every effort to be
supportive.  Harry's determination to be not just tolerant but chummy
with Jeff's boyfriend Greg (John Polson) ironically is more of a
hindrance than a help in that relationship.  But if Harry is disrupting
Jeff's relationship, Jeff's being gay may impact Harry's romance with
an attractive divorcee he has met through a dating service.
     Jack Thompson is a familiar face in Australian cinema and has been
in such films as MAD DOG MORGAN, BREAKER MORANT, and THE EARTHLING.
Here he gives a likable and nicely understated performance.  This
really is his film and even in moments of minimalist repartee with his
son, a natural charm and wit shine through.  Crowe is fully credible as
the son but somehow is not able to command the same audience empathy
that Thompson does.
     Stevens creates a real study in the degrees of tolerance among the
families shown in this film.  In Jeff's family the dominant emotion is
love; in Greg's it is anger.  Greg's father seems to have little use
for his son, not even knowing that his son is gay.  The one really
unconventional touch in the style of this film is to have Harry and
Jeff talk directly to the camera frequently.  This technique is often
used in films, but rarely to this degree.  Curiously, this is not at
all bothersome when it is first used, but toward the end of the film
there are cases where it is awkwardly inappropriate.
     This is a film with some comedy and some sadness that warmly
explores an unusual father-son relationship.  There are no thrills and
no special effects, just a simple story.  I wish this country would
make more of this sort of film.  It gets a laid-back +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.
