Title
Review for Kull the Conqueror (1997)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Kevin Sorbo, Tia Carrere, Litefoot, Karina Lombard, 
      Thomas Ian Griffith, Harvey Fierstein, Joe Shaw, Roy Brocksmith
Director: John Nicolella
Producer: Raffaella De Laurentiis
Screenplay: Charles Edward Pogue "based on the worlds and characters of 
      Robert E. Howard"
Cinematography: Rodney Charters
Music: Joel Goldsmith
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures
     Assigning a rating for KULL THE CONQUEROR is, in a way, a difficult 
decision.  On one hand, this is a really bad movie.  The acting is 
horrible, the visual effects are cheesy, the dialogue is moronic, and 
the action choreography is laughable.  On the other hand, there is a 
degree of guilty pleasure to be had from watching something this inane.  
In fact, I believe director John Nicolella was aware of how bad the 
material was, and attempted to generate some campy, Ed Wood-type 
entertainment to keep viewers in their seats.  It works.  I never 
considered walking out on KULL THE CONQUEROR -- not because I cared 
about the character's fate, but because I wanted to see what example of 
ineptness lay just around the corner.  It's been a while since I had 
this much fun at a one-star movie.
     In early 1982, Dino DeLaurentiis and director John Milius took us 
into the mystical, violent world of pulp writer Robert E. Howard's most 
famous creation, CONAN THE BARBARIAN.  It was an entertaining trip, 
primarily because the film makers found the right balance between kitsch 
and seriousness.  The barbarian's quest for vengeance at times had the 
feel of an epic, but never strayed into the realm of pretentiousness.  
And, by borrowing numerous elements from Howard's stories, the film 
effectively recreated the feel of a Conan yarn.  CONAN THE BARBARIAN, 
which set Arnold Schwarzenegger on the road to superstardom, was a 
financial success, so a sequel was inevitable.  Shockingly, however, 
there was little in 1984's CONAN THE DESTROYER that recalled the movie's 
predecessor.  DESTROYER was an exercise in high camp -- a comic book 
come to life that represented a stunning example of big-budget badness.  
One year later, RED SONJA, another tale in the same world (and arguably 
a worse film than CONAN THE DESTROYER), made a brief stop in theaters on 
its way to video.  A third Conan movie was planned, but, due to 
Schwarzenegger's unavailability, it was never made.  Nevertheless, the 
screenplay existed, and, following a re-write, it emerged with a new 
hero (another of Howard's many protagonists) and a new title:  KULL THE 
CONQUEROR.
     This film is a worthy successor to the legacy of RED SONJA and the 
second Conan movie -- it's as deliciously awful and as fun to watch.  
The story, such as it is, tells the tale of the mighty Kull (Kevin 
Sorbo, the hot, hunky hero of TV's HERCULES), a barbarian from Atlantis 
who, through an accident of fate, becomes king of the mighty kingdom of 
Valusia.  But evil is brewing behind-the-scenes.  The wizard Dalgar (Joe 
Shaw) resurrects Akivasha (Tia Carrere), the 3000 year old ruler of an 
ancient kingdom.  She bewitches Kull into marrying her so that, as queen 
of Valusia, she can revive her reign of chaos.  In order to prevent 
this, Kull; his true love, the slave girl, Zareta (Karina Lombard); and 
a renegade priest (Litefoot) must travel to the icy north on a quest for 
the breath of a god -- the only power that can stop Akivasha.
     By their nature, swords and sorcery plots tend to be rather limited 
in scope and originality -- they involve a lot of battles with demons 
and wizards, a few truly nasty villains, some helpful henchmen, and a 
quest or two.  KULL THE CONQUEROR can boast all of these elements, but 
they aren't put together with a great deal of intelligence or panache.  
On top of that, the cast, from top to bottom, is awful.  Kevin Sorbo, 
while probably a better actor than Schwarzenegger, doesn't have the 
range to give Kull more than one mode:  the slightly-sarcastic hero.  
Tia Carrere indicates that she's a lot more attractive than she is 
talented, and Karina Lombard shows the same stiffness she has displayed 
in her previous roles (she was last seen in LAST MAN STANDING).  
Litefoot (THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD) might give Steven Seagal a run for 
his money in the Wooden Man of the Year competition.  The lone bright 
spot is Harvey Fierstein, who gives a hilarious turn as an untrustworthy 
merchant friend of Kull's.  Fierstein plays the part with true gusto, 
delivering his atrocious dialogue in a manner that's likely to cause 
paroxysms of laughter.
     Where else does the film go wrong?  (A better question might be, 
where does it go right?)  In an age of top-flight special effects, 
KULL's are unbelievably cheap-looking.  Joel Goldsmith's score, which 
includes a heavy metal accompaniment to sword fights, belongs in the 
"What were they thinking?" category.  And, worst of all, the sex and 
violence have lost their visceral potency as a result of being sanitized 
to earn the film a PG-13 rating.  There are no graphic maimings or naked 
breasts -- the whole thing comes across as ludicrously tame for a genre 
that is supposed to revel in blood and bare flesh.  
     As for the rating. . .  I have elected to give KULL one star, 
because, on merit, it doesn't deserve anything better.  (In fact, an 
argument could be made that it deserves worse.)  However, this is the 
kind of thing that's worth seeing if you're in the mood to laugh at the 
movie, rather than with it.  KULL THE CONQUEROR will offer a portion of 
its audience a very good time, although perhaps not in quite the way the 
film makers intended.
The website is moving!!
ReelViews web site through 8/31: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
ReelViews web site beginning 9/1: http://movie-reviews.colossus.net/
"The cinema is not an art which films life: the cinema is something between
art and life. Unlike painting and literature, the cinema both gives to life
and takes from it..."

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Kevin Sorbo, Tia Carrere, Litefoot, Karina Lombard, Thomas Ian
Griffith, Harvey Fierstein, Joe Shaw, Roy Brocksmith Director: John
Nicolella Screenplay: Charles Edward Pogue "based on the worlds and
characters of Robert E. Howard"
The worst thing that Kevin Sorbo could have done was to start taking
himself seriously. I believe what makes ‘Hercules' the syndicate series
a success is the fact that it constantly pokes fun at itself and somehow
manages to kick itself in the head with slapstick humour and giddy,
kiddy fun. This sudden swing from action comedy (Hercules) to action
drama (Kull) comes as sudden and silly as a spaghetti meatball trying to
imitate a poached pheasant. Somehow that savoury chunk of meat with
tomato gravy doesn't quite live up to that small dried bird in fancy
dressing.
Sorry Kevin, I don't buy it. ‘Kull' will forever be compared to that
awful masterpiece ‘Conan', and it doesn't compare well. ‘Conan' may have
been one of the worst films made, but it is still a brilliantly bad
film. It had a young Arnold Shwarzenneger with heavy accent, coated with
sweat, humping females and hacking monsters – everything a barbarian
should and does do well. One thing the two films do have in common is
bare flesh and humping. Sorbo performs adequately in both departments,
but this really isn't his forte. I believe Sorbo's strength is the
subtle comic talent evident in ‘Hercules', which should have been
utilised to his advantage in this film but is sadly swept under the rug.
Also greatly missed are the wonderful sidekick characters that make
‘Hercules' a bottle of laughter. Everyone is so serious in ‘Kull' and
nobody significant dies till late in the film.
The main problem with films of this genre is that it gets awful lonesome
when the world of ‘Kull' is sadly under populated. There needs to be
more people around if you want to make it worth saving. I mean it really
defeats the purpose if ‘Kull' was flexing his muscles for a couple of
rocks and withered tree (I'm grossly exaggerating, but it's still a
valid point). It's as if the director hasn't been able to get enough
extras to fill the empty streets and barren landscape in time for the
shoot. My suggestion is to use plenty of mannequins in the background.
I'm sure nobody would notice anyway. After all this is not a film aimed
at academy award nominated performances. So overall the experience of
‘Kull' was sadly a grand mistake of barbaric proportions. This
miscalculated move by Kevin Sorbo should not damaged his popularity, but
next time he starts pumping iron, I would like to see him in that
familiar loin cloth of cheery ‘Hercules'.
--------------DC599E464D49211E1A61FAA5
Content-Type: text/html; charset=iso-8859-1
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit





Cast: Kevin Sorbo, Tia Carrere, Litefoot, Karina Lombard, Thomas Ian
Griffith, Harvey Fierstein, Joe Shaw, Roy Brocksmith Director: John Nicolella
Screenplay: Charles Edward Pogue "based on the worlds and characters of
Robert E. Howard"
 

The worst thing that Kevin Sorbo could have done was to start taking
himself seriously. I believe what makes ‘Hercules' the syndicate series
a success is the fact that it constantly pokes fun at itself and somehow
manages to kick itself in the head with slapstick humour and giddy, kiddy
fun. This sudden swing from action comedy (Hercules) to action drama (Kull)
comes as sudden and silly as a spaghetti meatball trying to imitate a poached
pheasant. Somehow that savoury chunk of meat with tomato gravy doesn't
quite live up to that small dried bird in fancy dressing.

Sorry Kevin, I don't buy it. ‘Kull' will forever be compared to that
awful masterpiece ‘Conan', and it doesn't compare well. ‘Conan' may have
been one of the worst films made, but it is still a brilliantly bad film.
It had a young Arnold Shwarzenneger with heavy accent, coated with sweat,
humping females and hacking monsters – everything a barbarian should and
does do well. One thing the two films do have in common is bare flesh and
humping. Sorbo performs adequately in both departments, but this really
isn't his forte. I believe Sorbo's strength is the subtle comic talent
evident in ‘Hercules', which should have been utilised to his advantage
in this film but is sadly swept under the rug. Also greatly missed are
the wonderful sidekick characters that make ‘Hercules' a bottle of laughter.
Everyone is so serious in ‘Kull' and nobody significant dies till late
in the film.

The main problem with films of this genre is that it gets awful lonesome
when the world of ‘Kull' is sadly under populated. There needs to be more
people around if you want to make it worth saving. I mean it really defeats
the purpose if ‘Kull' was flexing his muscles for a couple of rocks and
withered tree (I'm grossly exaggerating, but it's still a valid point).
It's as if the director hasn't been able to get enough extras to fill the
empty streets and barren landscape in time for the shoot. My suggestion
is to use plenty of mannequins in the background. I'm sure nobody would
notice anyway. After all this is not a film aimed at academy award nominated
performances. So overall the experience of ‘Kull' was sadly a grand mistake
of barbaric proportions. This miscalculated move by Kevin Sorbo should
not damaged his popularity, but next time he starts pumping iron, I would
like to see him in that familiar loin cloth of cheery ‘Hercules'.
 
Timothy Voon
e-mail: stirling@netlink.com.au
 
 

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Last year we had the film THE WHOLE WIDE WORLD tell us about the
personality of Robert E. Howard who from rural Texas spun yarns of
barbarians fighting sorcerers.  His chief character was Conan but some
of his stories were about King Kull and took place in an earlier
never-was.  Kevin Sorbo, who plays TV's Hercules-with-pants stars as
the title barbarian.  The chief problem with this film is that it tells
its story without worry too much what its audience is.  The plot is a
little lightweight for an adult audience and has a little too much
sex-play for a children's film.
     Kull (Kevin Sorbo) is a barbarian fighter come to join an army in
a country with an old and unbalanced king.  The king has several sons
fighting for the throne.  In a fit of anger the old king kills some of
his sons and Kull fights the king to stop him.  Mortally wounded the
old king names the angry barbarian newcomer as his successor.  Suddenly
Kull is a king with new enemies trying to steal his kingdom.  And his
enemies are willing to make bonds with the forces of evil including an
old sorceress, Akivasha (Tia Carrere) who is revived from the dead to
be an ally of the vengeful brothers.
     The film is written by Charles Pogue who gave us DRAGONHEART last
summer.  While it is not a highly ambitious goal to capture Robert E.
Howard's style in a script, he does a reasonable job.  The villains
could have had a little more depth.  Of course one of Kull's better
villains, Thulsa Doom, was borrowed for CONAN THE BARBARIAN.  Conan
lived well after Doom in Howard's pseudo-history.  Here the problem was
the script had times when it was a little hard to follow and there was
perhaps a little too many "Shall I undress now, your highness?" scenes
for a film essentially intended for adolescent audiences.
     Director John Nicoletta makes unfortunately makes little effort to
preserve the period feel and it is here that the film falls down the
most.  The horses are shoed and have bridals that would look too modern
in a Civil War film.  But Nicoletta's biggest mistake is in allowing
Joel Goldsmith's totally misplaced main theme.  It is difficult to
evoke so ancient a period with electric guitars and Joel's attempt is
merely jarring and obnoxious.  The visual effects are not always
convincing, including some bad mattes, but for me that is a small
fault.
     Sorbo is not the most exciting actor in the world.  Charleton
Heston claimed he was cast in a lot of historical films because people
thought he had a historical sort of face.  I am told by one of the
women that Sorbo's great virtue is his pectorals.  But Sorbo does not
really evoke a historical period.  Part of it may be that he never
dresses for the period.  As with the Conan films, there is an odd mix
of cultures and races in the primeval world.  Most of the sets are
Egyptian-looking.  Sorbo's sidekicks include a priest of an unknown
cult played by Litefoot, who played the title role of INDIAN IN THE
CUPBOARD.  Tia Carrere is of Chinese descent, I believe.  Then there is
Harvey Fierstein as a pirate captain.  I cannot honestly say he was
badly cast since had I never seen him before he might have not seemed
all that strange in this role.  For once his gravelly voice might have
made him seem tough.
     Tone down the sex and this might have made a decent matinee film.
As it is there is a lot of sex but no nudity and a lot of violence with
virtually no blood.  I rate this one a high 0 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
KULL THE CONQUEROR
(Universal)
Starring:  Kevin Sorbo, Tia Carrere, Karina Lombard, Thomas Ian Griffith,
Litefoot.
Screenplay:  Charles Edward Pogue, based on characters created by Robert
E. Howard.
Producer:  Raffaella DeLaurentiis.
Director:  John Nicolella.
MPAA Rating:  R (violence, sexual situations, adult themes, profanity)
Running Time:  92 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I was feeling a bit under-prepared as I walked into KULL THE
CONQUEROR.  After all, I had never seen a minute of the syndicated series
"Hercules: The Legendary Journies," and consequently I was completely
unfamiliar with the work of Kevin Sorbo.  What sort of action hero would
this fellow be?  Did he have the stuff to make it on the big screen?  What
sort of appeal could he bring to a creation of Robert E. Howard, who also
created that _other_ barbarian, a surly chap named Conan?
     Well, Sorbo's got the goods, all right, and he shows them off in the
surprisingly high-spirited KULL THE CONQUEROR.  He plays the title
character, a barbarian warrior whose attempt to join the royal guard of
the kingdom of Valusia is rebuffed by the nasty captain Taligaro (Thomas
Ian Griffith).  Instead, Kull ends up with an even better job in Valusia:
as the king lies dying from a wound Kull has inflicted, the monarch names
his murderer as his successor.  This wee departure from the rules of
succession makes Kull rather unpopular with some who would see themselves
on the throne, including Taligaro himself and a demon sorceress named
Akivasha (Tia Carrere) who sees to it that she becomes Kull's queen.  Only
a fortune-telling slave girl (Karina Lombard) and a benevolent holy man
(Litefoot) can help save Kull's life and his crown.
     Standard sword-and-sorcery stuff, to be sure, but for a while KULL
provides enough satisfying spins to the material to keep you grinning.
Director John Nicolella adds some amusing bits of business, like the
triumphant and newly-crowned Kull receiving discreet advice from his
protocol minister to hold his scepter in the other hand.  He also gets a
lot of mileage out of the year's prime contender for Incongruous Casting
Choice of 1997, Harvey Fierstein as an old pirate pal of Kull's.
Fierstein chews up every goofy line he's got, including the most obscure
-- and crudest -- sexual double-entendre in Charles Edward Pogue's script.
     Most of all there is Kevin Sorbo, he of the prominent and prominently
featured pectoral muscles.  Sorbo leaps into the role with enthusiastic
good humor, deciding he's going to find the pleasure in playing the hero.
It would have been easy to play KULL as camp, to keep winking at the
audience to make sure we understood he's really in on the joke.  Rather
than making fun of the genre, Sorbo opts for finding the fun _in_ the
genre.  The result is the kind of energetic action which evokes Richard
Lester's Musketeer films, with Sorbo providing considerably more than mere
pecs appeal.
     KULL THE CONQUEROR appears to have so much going for it early on that
the final half hour comes as a crashing disappointment.  All the energy
leaks out of the film, the pacing abruptly drops to a crawl, and the
appealing riff on creaky fantasy motifs gives way to creaky fantasy
motifs.  Every line of dialogue becomes a piece of exposition, explaining
everything twice so that even the most obtuse viewer might be able to keep 
up.  Chances are they may not want to, though, not with the narrative
reduced to resolving a second-rate "Dungeons and Dragons" scenario.
Sorbo's efforts deserve better; he gives KULL the charismatic spark a good
adventure needs.  Now it's time to catch up on the Sorbo oeuvre.  Anyone
know when the season premiere of "Hercules" might be?
