Title
Review for Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House (1948)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian Koller
Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House (1948)
"The Bachelor and the Bobby-Soxer" was a hit
comedy in 1947.  The film starred Cary Grant
and Myrna Loy, and it made box office sense
to reunite them the following year in another
comedy, "Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House".
Based upon the Eric Hodgins novel, the premise
is familiar.  Blandings (Grant) is a modestly
wealthy advertising executive who lives in a
cramped New York City apartment with wife Muriel
(Loy) and young daughters Joan (Sharyn Moffett)
and Betsy (Connie Marshall).  Blandings decides
to buy a decrepit house in Connecticut, for which
he pays a fortune.  It turns out that the house
must be demolished, and a 'dream house' is built
in its place, with predictable but amusing problems
arising.  Blandings' bad financial decisions are
made despite the advice of 'family friend' Bill
Cole (Melvyn Douglas) who apparently still has
an interest in Muriel, his college sweetheart.
The Blandings' all have one thing in common: a
desire for a high standard of living (and something
unique) that has overcome their common sense.
Blandings also has some delusions about how much
he knows, a characteristic tailor-made for Grant's
considerable comic talents.
Grant was especially good at delivering sarcasm:
he could say "Good Morning" and make it sound
like a resentment against past affronts.  Romantic
jealousy was also a frequent theme in Grant films,
from "His Girl Friday" thru "North by Northwest".
In "Mr. Blandings", Grant suspects Loy and Douglas
(especially given Douglas' complacent and
self-satisfied manner) and his barely controlled
childish jealousy never fails to be funny.
Loy sometimes has a self-satisfied manner
as well.  This comes from her character,
of course, which is a gentle satire of a
materialistic housewife.  Grant and Loy take
little notice or interest in their children as
they obsess over their dream house.  Marshall
does a good job with her character, despite
its stereotype of a precocious intellectual.
briankoller@usa.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
