Title
Review for Equus (1977)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Muhammed Vanker wrote to me saying that he could not find any
reviews on the Internet for the film EQUUS (1977) and asked if I could
point him to one.  Well, the answer was no.  There are probably a lot
of major films from prior to the explosion of the Internet that have no
reviews readily available.  Though I had seen the film once in 1978 and
only once again in the early 1980s, the film left a deep impression on
me.  In part because for years I said that the film, actually a play by
Peter Shaffer makes a very good companion piece to another film by
Peter's brother Anthony Shaffer, THE WICKER MAN.  EQUUS is in part
about the birth of religions, THE WICKER MAN is about the maintenance
of religions.  Possibly the third film should be INHERIT THE WIND,
about the death of religions.  In any case I sent Vanker the quick
outline of what I would say if I were to review EQUUS.  With that in
place, I might as well go ahead and complete the review.  These
comments are based on memories of the film from at least thirteen years
ago.  Please excuse the brevity and perhaps even minor inaccuracies.
     Richard Burton plays a psychiatrist (himself very troubled) who
tries to get inside the mind of a sociopathic stable boy (Peter Firth)
who has blinded the horses who were left in his care.   The boy resists
for a long time any cooperation with the psychiatrist, but finally does
open up to reveal a troubled past.  What Burton discovers is that the
boy has is deeply disturbed but also has a mystical train of mind.  The
stable-boy has created for himself something like a religion (with
strong sexual overtones) worshipping horses.  The religion has its own
ceremonies and  the boy even turns the bits from the horses mouths into
a sort of religious icons which he calls the "Jingle-jangle." The
religion, however, cannot fulfill the boy and after an attempted sexual
encounter that fails his utter frustration was release in the horse
blinding.  This scene, depicted in reenactment, is an intense scene in
which angry boy lashes out against his god.  The full frontal male
nudity in the reenactment scene was rare in 1977 and quite shocking.
     In some ways the play EQUUS is perhaps ill-suited for cinema since
it is so dense in ideas that deserve considering.  It is one film that
would perhaps be better on video than in the theater.  The viewer will
be able to stop and even replay passages to think over their content
and impact.  The pace of ideas is so fast that you cannot think about
one idea before the next one comes along.  Still would have been really
powerful with the immediacy of a stage performance.  Richard Burton and
Peter Firth in two main roles were both nominated for Academy Awards as
was Peter Shaffer.  The film was directed by Sidney Lumet who had
previous directed several classics including TWELVE ANGRY MEN and
FAIL-SAFE.  This is, however, his most intense film and it rates a low
+3 on the -4 to +4 scale.
