Title
Review for Treasure of the Sierra Madre, The (1948)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 TREASURE OF THE SIERRA MADRE, THE (director/writer: John Huston;
 screenwriters: Robert Rossen/from story by Berwick Traven Torsvan;
 cinematographer: Ted D. McCord; editor: Owen Marks; cast: Humphrey
 Bogart (Fred C. Dobbs), Walter Huston (Howard), Tim Holt (Curtin),
 Bruce Bennett (Cody), Barton MacLane (McCormick), Alfonso Bedoya (Gold
 Hat), John Huston (White Suit), Robert Blake (Mexican kid selling
 lottery tickets); Runtime: 126; Warner Brothers; 1948)
A classic adventure tale about greed set in the Mexican wilderness. A
good story is infused with too much symbolic pretentiousness, yet the
overall effect is absorbing. The film won an Academy Award for Best
Screenplay and Director for John Huston, while his father Walter Huston
won for Best Supporting Actor. It was nominated for Best Film, but lost
to Hamlet.
Fred C. Dobbs (Humphrey Bogart) is a disheveled drifter, down and out in
Tampico, Mexico, where he spends his last few pesos on a lottery ticket.
Curtin (Tim Holt) is another drifter who teams up with Dobbs after the
two get cheated out of their wages by their hustler boss (MacLane), who
ditches them after the job and the two get paid only after they find him
in town and work him over. While staying in a flophouse shelter they
hear Howard (Walter Huston), a toothless old buzzard, tempt them with
stories about prospecting for gold. When Dobbs wins the lottery the
three pool their money together for supplies and become partners,
heading for the isolated hills of Mexico to look for gold.
Following Howard's knowledge in prospecting, they find gold but are
warned by Howard that gold can change a man's soul. The three characters
are archetypes: Dobbs is the bad one, suffering from paranoia. Howard is
the wise old man. Curtin is the level-headed innocent.
The men have trouble adjusting to their new wealth, as Dobbs becomes
unnecessarily leery of the others and insists they split their share now
before they reach the town of Durango.
When Curtin goes to town for supplies, he will meet an American in town
he couldn't shake, who follows him back to the campsite. The nervy
stranger, Cody (Bennett), wants to be cut in as a full partner in their
prospecting and refuses to leave. The men decide they have three
choices: 1-Cut him in as a partner. 2- Kick him out and let him go back
to town; or, 3- Kill him. They decide on the last choice, but before
they could plug him, they are approached by bandits who intend to rob
them, led by the notorious train robber Gold Hat (Alfonso Bedoya). In
the shootout, Cody gets killed but the bandits flee.
Heading to Durango to cash in their gold dust, some Indians come to
their campsite and request that one of them help save a young boy's
life. Howard succeeds and is honored by the Indian community, as the two
other partners go ahead to meet him in town. But in leaving the two
alone without Howard's wisdom, Dobbs becomes increasingly more mentally
unstable and his greed takes hold of him, which results in tragedy.
The film plays as a morality story, showing that the deadliest dangers
to man are in his soul and not from the external dangers. This black and
white film is very well acted, especially by Bogie and Walter Huston,
but is not as gripping and intriguing as John Huston's masterpiece --
"The Maltese Falcon."
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
Brian Koller
The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (1948)
"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre" is an outstanding film
that demonstrates how greed can corrupt one's soul.
Humphrey Bogart delivers one of his most memorable
performances playing a scraggly down-and-outer,
whose gold prospecting windfall leads only to paranoia
and violence.
The story begins with Bogart and fellow bum Tim Holt
living a marginal existence in rural Mexico in 1925.
After winning a small lottery and meeting old-timer
prospector Walter Huston, the three seek their fortune
in the Sierra Madre mountains, a dangerous land where
water is scarce and bandits are common.
After the trio discover and mine a gold bonanza, Bogart
becomes mentally unstable.  His mind plays paranoid
tricks on him, and he turns to violence.  Bogart did not
receive an Academy Award nomination for his role, but
certainly he deserved one.  He often played characters
that were either good or evil, but were on the wise and
in control of their circumstances.  Bogart's character
here is not as smart as he thinks he is, and is controlled
by external events.
The supporting cast is very entertaining.  We soon
encounter the director, John Huston, playing a man in
a white suit who disdainfully gives pesos to a begging
Bogart.  Huston won Oscars for both Best Director and
Best Script.  Incredibly, these would be the only Academy
Awards of his career, which included work on such films
as "The Maltese Falcon", "The African Queen" and
"The Alphalt Jungle".
In a cantina, there is a great performance by
a Mexican boy peddling lottery tickets.  The kid turns
out to be Robert Blake, age 14 but looking and sounding
much younger.
Walter Huston, John Huston's father, is dynamic as the clever
old-timer, who always knows what to do in every situation.
He won the Best Supporting Actor Oscar for his role.
Although boring white-bread Bruce Bennett gets fourth billing,
that billing was more deserved by Alfonso Bedoya, who plays
a bandit leader.  His character is treacherous and mercurial,
and he has the film's most memorable line: "I don't have to
show you any stinkin' badges!"
I think that "Treasure of the Sierra Madre" is a little
better than "The Maltese Falcon", and thus is probably the
best film that John Huston directed.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
