Title
Review for Eraser (1996)
Number of Reviews
15

Author
Andrew Hicks
        We remember the toned-down Arnold Schwarzenegger of 
the early 90's, a kinder, gentler man who wouldn't blow people away 
with machine guns anymore. In KINDERGARTEN COP the most 
violent he got was when he beat up on a man who beat his kid ("You 
hit de kid, I hit you"). In TERMINATOR 2 he was forbidden to kill 
anyone so he blew their knee caps off instead. In THE LAST 
ACTION HERO he murdered his lines as usual but no people. The 
crowd-pleasing TRUE LIES was violent but it was a parody of the kind 
of movies Schwarzenegger starred in during the 80's. It took him six 
years to return to a movie with a real old-fashioned, automatic 
weapon body count.
        And that movie is ERASER, where Arnold plays Federal 
Marshal John Kruger, witness protector extraordinaire. His charge 
this time around is a defense contractor employee (Vanessa 
Williams) who has agreed to testify against her company's 
misappropriations of funds and weapons. ("I didn't know treason 
was in the corporate strategy," she announces to her boss.) All 
the evidence she needs is on a CD-ROM disc she carries with her 
through the duration of the movie. At first, she doesn't think she 
needs to go into hiding, but a late-night assault on her home 
convinces her to change her identity.
        Luckily, Arnold is right there, disguised as a buff delivery 
boy, to save her from the bad guys, who have a new weapon that 
shoots electromagnetic pulses at "just under the speed of light." 
Of course, we can still see the pulses flying toward their targets, 
so I'd estimate Vanessa's "just under" comment to mean about 
185,000 miles per second under the speed of light. But authenticity 
isn't important in a movie like this as long as we can see the pulses 
knocking their victims back through the wall.
        Arnold brings Vanessa to a Chinatown apartment, where 
she burns all her forms of identification. "There goes all that I am," 
she laments, to his stone-faced reply, "What you are is in here 
[gesturing to the heart region] and they can't take that from you." I 
was worried at that point that the sense of humor Arnold has always 
had in his movies had completely gone to hell, but those fears were 
shattered a half-hour later when he shot an alligator in the zoo and 
quipped, "You're luggage!" (I didn't say Arnold had a _good_ 
sense of humor, just a sense of humor.)
        "I suppose we won't see each other again," Vanessa says. 
"Not if all goes well," Arnold responds. And of course it doesn't. 
Arnold and Vanessa are reunited at the zoo not twenty minutes later, 
after he shoots the alligator and she shoots a corrupt marshal 
because he doesn't know the "secret handshake." We know by this 
point that most of the marshals are corrupt, including Arnold's boss 
(James Caan), who is in the process of selling millions of dollars in 
weapons to the Russian mafia, to "usher in a new era of world 
terrorism." Caan makes a good psycho villian and we all know 
Arnold makes a good wisecracking action hero.
        After narrowly escaping death by Caan, Arnold jumps out 
of a plane, pulling a GOLDENEYE (and breaking the laws of 
physics) by free-falling faster than his parachute pack and opening 
it just in time, in just one of ERASER's blockbuster action sequences. 
Another one comes shortly thereafter, as Arnold and Vanessa break 
into her company to view the evidence on her magic disc. It's 
reminiscent of another 1996 summer movie, MISSION: 
IMPOSSIBLE, only much more inventive and entertaining.
        The same could be said of the entire movie in comparison 
to MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE. That movie only had three action 
sequences amid a sea of unintelligible plot, whereas ERASER has 
almost wall-to-wall action and a plot Arnold himself could follow. It 
also has some genuinely funny scenes, unlike the straight-faced 
seriousness of Tom Cruise's action foray. After Arnold falls out of 
the sky during the parachute scene and lands atop a junkyard car, 
he gets up, brushes himself off and asks, "Where am I?" A little girl, 
in awe, replies, "Earth. Welcome."
        While we're comparing ERASER with the other action 
films currently in release, I should point out that it's as good as 
or better than THE ROCK. Like that movie it mixes light-hearted 
humor with brutal violence. And Vanessa Williams is certainly a 
better sidekick to look at than the ape-like Nicholas Cage. Williams 
even does a decent job of acting, although all that's required of her 
is nervousness at the beginning, distress in the middle and loving 
admiration of Arnold at the end. It doesn't have an incredible 
amount of originality and its attempts at seriousness are met with 
as many laughs as the comic relief scenes, but ERASER is a 
constantly entertaining no-brainer that provides two hours of 
escape from the oppressive heat and boredom of summer.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html
Serving America For Over 1/50 of a Century!

Author
Scott Mendelson
        Near the end of Eraser, there is a startling twist.  The film actually
falls upon... a plot!!!  Yes, Arnie has more to do than just kill
people.  That's right, he actually has to stop an arms-deal before some
really mean-looking rifles get sold to the Russian-Mafia.  Before this, 
Arnie(playing a Witness Protection Marshal, assigned to protect Vanessa
Williams, who has uncovered that her company is planning to sell weapons
to bad guys), basically runs about, and shoots and stabs bad guys.  Of
course, few go to Schwarzenegger epics for it's multi-layered plots, and
the film works because Schwarzenegger, James Caan(playing a fellow
agent/mentor, who is really a mole), and Chuck Russell(who made The
Mask, an underrated Jim Carrey flick) understand this. 
        When, while being ambushed by evil fiends, who wish to slay the pure
and true Vanessa Williams in her place of slumber, William's
ex-boyfriend walks in the house just in time to get blasted across the
room by some "neato gun"(which shoots green electric bolts of aluminum
at the speed of light, or something like that), we laugh and sigh in
recognition; yes, that is just what happens in these movies.    When
Arnie, while being pursued in one of them "abandoned flame factories",
notices that his shotgun is broken, he tosses it to the stalking bad
guy, who stares at it just long enough to be mistaken for our hero, who
of course, was seen by a sniper to be toting a shotgun.  We sigh, again
in recognition, as the poor villain is blasted away by another one of
those cool "neato guns".    Why did the henchman stand and stare at the
gun?  Because, he is a bad guy in an action film, thus, he is stupid.   
And, of course, no Arnold epic would be complete without scenes of
Arnold getting impaled(a BIG nail, a BIG shard of glass)  and shot
through his arms and legs, and then, moments later having all signs of
the wounds vanishing without a trace(who else besides Arnold, Harrison
Ford, or Sly Stallone, could get shot in the arm, and then use that same
arm to pull a damsel in distress to safety).
        Besides all the "fun-dumb" stuff, there are the usual Arnold staples. 
There is one cool stunt, involving Arnold throwing a parachute out a
plane door, and then flying out the plane to catch it.  There are lots
of would-be one-liners/catch-phrases(my fave: after shooting an
alligator in a zoo: "You're luggage.").  Most importantly, there are the
usual thirty-some bad guys dead in 111 min.
        Overall, Eraser is big, expensive, dumb fun.  The acting is exactly
what we'd expect.  Arnie plays a superman, James Caan plays the villain
that way he plays villains, and Vanessa WIlliams' part is basically run,
scream, look nervous, and look good during all of the above.  The stunts
are impressive, as are the shoot-outs.  Although the action does get a
little too gory at times(did we really need long close-ups of Arnie
pulling nails and glass out of his body?), generally, the tone is light.
While not nearly  as good as True Lies(the best shoot-em up ever made),
Eraser is  much better than Last Action Hero, which is enough for me.        
"B"

Author
Chad Polenz
**1/2 (out of 4 = OK)
1996, R, 115 minutes [1 hour, 55 minutes]
[action]
starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger (John Kruger - "The Eraser"), James Caan
(Robert Deguerin), Vanessa Williams (Lee), Robert Pastorelli (Johnny C.),
produced by Arnold and Anne Kopelson, written by Tony Paryear, Waylon Green,
directed by Charles Russell.
"Eraser" may be the most generic Schwarzenegger flick yet, because it has a
little bit from every film he's ever done: super high-tech/sci-fi stuff;
double crosses; cartoony bad guys; amazing stunts; lots of explosions and
violence; a cute, innocent woman; and a sarcastic buddy to provide for one
liners and lightheartedness. This isn't one of Schwarzenegger's best movies,
but it's far from his worst.
Arnold Schwarzenegger stars as U.S. Marshall John Kruger - "The Eraser," who
protects people in the Witness Protection Program by "killing" them. He makes
clones of their bodies and makes it seem as if these clones are the people
that way the mob thinks they're dead. The way we learn about this is through
a standard gun shooting and fist fight scene somewhere in suburbia, which is
strange, clever, and silly all at the same time.
The story moves rather quickly, we get bits and pieces of some kind of a
plot, but clarity and storytelling is not the point of this movie. We meet
Lee (Williams), a sexy woman who is trying to turn in her company for selling
high-tech weapons to terrorists. Of course she is sort of caught and The
Eraser must protect her. But the plot and the characters are really just
excuses for lots of cool violence (maybe I shouldn't refer to violence as
"cool," but I can't think of any other way to describe it).
James Caan co-stars as the nemesis Robert Deguerin, a traitor who wants our
heroes dead. Caan is not convincing here, mostly because it's difficult to
tell what's going on, so we can't tell what his motives are.
Throughout this picture I kept asking myself where I'd seen it all before,
and it hit me: Bugs Bunny cartoons! There are individual scenes that are suppo
sed to be serious but are just so unbelievable and cliche there's no way this
could have any plausibility. Even the characters are cartoons, like Johnny C.
(Pastorelli), who was "erased" only to find himself teaming up with The
Eraser. Of course, he just happens to have Mafia ties who help them blow away
the even badder bad guys. 
"Eraser" doesn't quite know what it wants to be: a suspenseful, intense
movie about government espionage, or a typical action flick, or maybe even
sci-fi? Still, this film is interesting to watch even though you know it's
fake. If this is the direction the action genre is headed I won't mind...
that much. (8/31/96) (1/18/97) (6/11/97) [see also: "Bulletproof," "The
Rock," "True Lies"]
please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/index.html

Author
Lori Ann Chauvette
What can I say?  Arnold has done it again with his latest film, "Eraser".
He plays Witness Protection Program employee John Kruger, in charge of
"erasing" people's identities in order to protect them.  This time his
charge is Lee Cullen (Williams), a woman who knows too much about the
dirty dealings at a weapons corporation.
There's not really much more you can say about the plot.  And I don't
think anyone who goes to see Schwarzennegar films really cares.  There
was a director who once said to Roger Ebert that in order for a movie
to be great, it has to have at least three good scenes and no bad
scenes.  And in Ebert's review, he said, "This movie has four good
scenes and no bad scenes."  And I would have to agree with him on that
point.
Despite the probably many impossibilities in this film, such as the
cannon-guns used by the bad guys, this movie kept my attention
throughout.  The one-liners (Arnold's trademark) were fast and funny,
the action was the best of any Schwarzennegar film in history, and
Pastorelli was great as the Mafioso- witness who was helped by
Schwarzennegar in the beginning of the film, providing even more comic
relief.  If I wasn't cheering, I was laughing.  And that's what an
action movie should be.
Three and a half stars (out of a possible four)

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, James Caan, Vanessa Williams, Robert
Pastorelli.
Screenplay:  Tony Puryear, Walon Green.
Director:  Charles Russell.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     ERASER is a strange case this summer.  Here is an Arnold
Schwarzenegger action film, carrying an estimated $80 million price tag,
recently in entertainment headlines for last-minute digital work required
to change the name of the company in the film due to a legal
challenge...and hardly anyone seems to be talking about it.  In a movie
season where marketing has attempted to turn every subsequent blockbuster
into a pop culture happening, ERASER seems to be just another supporting
player; it is even sharing its release date with Disney's latest animated
fiscal printing press THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME.  Arnold seems to have
managed the heretofore unthinkable feat of becoming unobtrusive.  The
result might be an absence of overly high expectations, which can only
work in ERASER's favor.  It's generic Schwarzeneggerian action fare which
almost manages to seem quaint in its cartoonish basic-ness.
     Schwarzenegger plays John Kruger, a U. S. Marshal working for the
Federal Witness Protection Program whose specialty is staging the deaths
of his charges to keep them safe -- hence his code name "Eraser."  His
latest case is Lee Cullen (Vanessa Williams), an employee at defense
contractor Cyrez who has agreed to obtain proof that the company is
involved in the sale of experimental weaponry on the black market.  What
Kruger is soon to realize is that even government officials are involved
in the operation, perhaps including his own mentor Robert Deguerin (James
Caan).  But it is Kruger himself who is set up as a traitor, and forced to
keep both himself and Lee alive.  With no one he can trust except his
other re-located witnesses, including mob stool pigeon Johnny Casteleone
(Robert Pastorelli), Kruger must find proof of his own innocence as he
tries to stop the gun-runners.
     ERASER is pretty much everything you've come to expect from a
Schwarzenegger action vehicle:  impossible odds, explosions, predictable
and groan-inducing one-liners (if you can't tell me what precedes the line
"They had to catch a train," please sign up for Remedial Arnie-isms), big
cool guns, and big cool Arnie firing them with abandon.  Director Charles
Russell (THE MASK) leaps right into the action with scarcely a breath, and
for the next 100 minutes seems blissfully concerned with little else.  It
is as though he were saying to the audience, "I've given you a good guy
and some bad guys -- you know how it's going to end, now enjoy the ride."
     And in spurts, it's actually possible to do so.  During one
marvelously sill twenty minute stretch, Schwarzenegger leaps from a plane
to catch up with a parachute he has already thrown out of it, faces down
the same plane while still floating through the air, crash lands in a
junkyard, appropriates a truck, races to a zoo and ends up battling with
villainous Feds _and_ digitally-created alligators.  In those scenes,
ERASER is pure mindless fun in the best sense of the term, but those
scenes are also somewhat isolated.  There is a surprising grimness to much
of ERASER, including two separate incidents where Kruger takes an
excruciatingly long time to remove a piece of shrapnel from his flesh, and
Schwarzenegger himself is overly somber in much of his performance,
brooding over a Dark Past to which we are not made privy.  These token
attempts by Russell and his screenplay-by-committee team to make
Schwarzenegger more vulnerable and human demonstrate a real
misunderstanding of his appeal.  Audiences come to see Schwarzenegger the
super-hero, and to laugh along with his awareness of the absurd situations
in his action films; he is the master of the catch phrase because they are
winking distillations of those absurdities.  There are far too few
opportunities to laugh in ERASER, except those provided by Robert
Pastorelli as the motor-mouthed wiseguy who becomes Kruger's assistant.
     The irony of ERASER is that it turns its greatest asset into a
weakness.  In a season filled with films which seem to be playing hyped-up
games of "Can You Top This?" with their visual effects and decibel levels,
ERASER provides an odd familiarity -- it's just li'l ol' Arnie, playing
hero and making the world safe for democracy.  Unfortunately, ERASER just
rests on its familiarity, providing a bland villain (Caan playing Sonny
Corleone as a turn-coat G-Man), a bland heroine (Vanessa Williams running
and serving up the occasional "I-am-woman-watch-me-kick-a-little-ass" bit
of crowd-pleasing) and a finale which is truly anti-climactic.  ERASER
manages a few solidly entertaining moments, and serves up the kind of
meat-and-potatoes action Schwarzenegger's fans have come to expect.  It
also is a film which spends a lot of time shuffling its feet, and it will
be interesting to see how audiences respond to a blockbuster which seems
to be saying, "Don't mind me."

Author
Larry Mcgillicuddy
Suspension of disbeleif is a necessity when watching an action movie.
For an action movie to be entartaining, it has to feature some things
that are implausible. Arnold Schwarzeneggar has been in Hollywood for
for a decade and a half now, mostly in action movies. Many of them were
implausible. Remember Commando? He took out an entire army by himself.
This works in Arnolds favor, because the majority of the viewing public
has come to accept that Arnold can do things in a movie that others
cannot. So when he gets shot in the shoulder and manages to get back up
and fight like nothing is wrong, it is easier for us to suspend our
disbeleif because its Arnold.
Arnold plays an FBI agent who erases people's identities so they can
testify at trials. His latest assignment is Vanessa Williams, who plays
a computer expert that is asked by the FBI to download some secret
information about arms smuggling that could get some big names in
Washington into serious trouble. She completes her task and Arnold is
assigned to erase her identity. Thats when the fun begins.
There are some intersting twists and turns in Erasers plot.  The plot
is much more entertaining than Mission Impossible's, for an example.
And as you come to expect from an Arnold movie, there are some great
stunts and special effects, such as a scene in a zoo with some nasty
and hungry alligators, and a scene where Arnold goes head to head with
a plane. The plane sequence would've been laughable with any other
actor in the role, but its Arnold, so I began to think Arnold should
pick on someone, or something his own size.
While Arnold is doing his action hero best here, he is also surrounded
by a great supporting cast. James Coburn is dignified in the role of
Arnolds boss. Vanessa Williams gives you everything you'd expect from
an action movie heroine, and does it better than most. James Caan is a
terrific villain. Best of all is Robert Pastorelli, someone Arnold
erased so he could testify against the mafia, and who Arniold enlists
to help him out. Pastorelli is a funny and charming sidekick. Direcot
Charles Russell doesnt bring anything new to this movie, but he
definitely has energy. He gives us what we expected, and what we
wanted. If you're a fan of Arnold, or action movies in particular, here
is a movie you will enjoy.

Author
Zak Forsman
Ugggh!!!
         I just came from Eraser and I'm crying.  This is the most
horrible, horrible film I've had to see all year.  Worse than Twister,
worse than Mission Implausible.  Thank God I didn't have to pay for it.  I
co-write a review column here in Pittsburgh, PA and I cannot find it in my
heart to recommend this movie to anyone--at all.  For starters, I am sick
and tired of lines like: "Clean up this mess." after the head bad guy
kills someone.  Or when a 'good' character turns 'bad' and says it's
because,"I'm a businessman."  What garbage, man.  Total trash.  Why, why,
why are women in films always weak-minded and innocent.  I mean Vanessa
Williams was introduced as a "bonified honest person."  Is this what the
screenwriters think of honest people?  Anyway, what troubles me is that
when characters like her's show an act of strength, we're supposed to
automatically cheer.  What the hell is that?  I'll tell you, it's a lack
of respect and confidence in the movegoer.  They play it safe with what's
familiar to us and, unfortunately, we often do what they expect.  Also,
with regard to her character--must the woman always be the victim of
beatings by antagonists out to prove just how bad they can be?  Or what's
even more common, to be used as a hostage/body sheild?  Okay, minus that
aspect I will concede that the rest of the film. . . . . . . was just as
bad.  How does Arnold survive smashing down the roof of a car?  No broken
anythings?  Oh, he must really be the Terminator, I get it now.  And
another thing--was there truly anyone out there that watched the
introduction of James Caan's character that didn't think he was either
going to be the 'mentor that gets killed' or the 'good guy that has sold
out'?  And those damn aligators were too big and too pissed off don't you
think?  I mean they were growling!!!  Come on!  I guess living in an
aquarium will do that to you.  So then, what the hell were they feeding
those things anyway?  The same thing they fed the hippo from Congo? 
Probably.  Lastly, the guy from the opening scene that helps Arnold out
during the end.  Tell me we haven't seen this character of the funny
buffoon sidekick in countless versions.  Just tell me.  Oh, and thank God
for small-time mafia hoods, too.  As I watched the movie I kept a list of
redeeming qualities.  I have two.  Most of the bit-part characters,
despite they were walking cliches, were funny and about a handful of the
one-liners were just hysterical.  Buuuut, unless you enjoy seeing the same
Hollywood fare you've been spoon-fed since Arnold's Commando in 1986, do
yourself a favor and avoid this one.  It was horrible.
GENERAL SCORE:   16.7% (F)   --   (each catagory is grade in 25%
increments and divided by three to find the average)
(This gives me the opportunity to give a much more free and honest review
than I will submit for publication.  Thanks for reading and any comment,
criticizm, ->insults


Author
Lewis Butler
ERASER is this summer's entry from Arnie, and it delivers just what you
would expect:  good action, good effects, passable story.  There's nothing
remarkable here, and none of the charm of TRUE LIES, but if you like Arnie,
it's a good romp through summer movie madness.  A solid 0 on the -4/+4.
This time around, Arnie plays a US Marshall working in the Witness
Protection program.  His specialty is making it look like federal witnesses
have been killed.
The plot thicks when Venessa Williams, playing a Jr. Executive for a
defense contractor that is selling weapons to the highest bidder, becomes
the target of just about every living person in the Washington DC area.
There are no suprises here, and the identities of the bad guys are obvious,
but not obnoxiously so.  The characters are at least interesting (I mean
the OTHER characters, of course.  Arnie's just playing good-guy
Terminator.)  James Caan plays off Arnie well as his boss and Vanessa
Williams manages not to fall into the helplessly stupid female her
character could have easily been.
There are some nice effects, although there is a strangely poor fire effect
toward the end of the movie where the flames look like they were animated
in.
In short:  If you're an Arnie fan, go ahead and give it a go, otherwise you
might want to pass and wait for INDEPENDENCE DAY.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL :">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme>
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Sometimes a critic falls in love with a show that is getting mixed
reviews.  For me one of these is ERASER.  I went to it expecting an
enjoyable Schwarzenegger action flick, but nothing special.  Once safely
ensconced in my seat I was blown away by the movie.  
     Thanks to an excellent script by Tony Puryear and Walon Green, the
movie is the funniest action picture this year.  Director Chuck Russell
(THE MASK) is able to sustain a high energy pace that keeps the action
moving and the audience's adrenaline pumping.  Too bad he was not the
director of the too often tedious MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE.  Actually there
is a center part of ERASER that repeats part of MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, but
with much more energetic timing.
     First, a suggestion.  Go see this movie while it is still at the
biggest screen with the most powerful subwoofers.  The explosions and
the gun fire, especially the electromagnetic guns, produce a sound that
has the theater rocking.  Second, the setup for the plot is the usual
implausible one of the military, the intelligence community, the Mafia,
big business, et. al. all involved in a vast conspiracy.  This time it
is to buy and sell a new line of ultra powerful weapons.  Ignore this
conspiracy ridiculousness.  Go with the flow.
     John Kruger (Arnold Schwarzenegger) is a Federal Marshall that is
part of a special group in the witness protection program.  He erases
witnesses by making them appear to have died.  He then hides them in a
place that only he knows about.  James Caan plays Robert Deguerin,
Kruger's mentor, and James Coburn plays Beller, who is the head of the
program.
     Things get out of hand when Lee Cullen (Vanessa Williams) reports
to the FBI about the aforementioned plot to sell weapons.  She is hunted
down and almost killed until Kruger saves her.  The picture is about the
cat and mouse game as the bad guys try to kill her and get her computer
disk before she can testify.  The slight mystery is which guys are the
good ones and which the bad.  The ending of ERASER is great.  Moreover,
as soon as you think it is over, it gets better and better.
     The script is intelligent and at the same time so funny in parts
that I was constantly rolling with laugher.  As the lead evil character
puts it when asked about the morality of selling horrible weapons to the
wrong side, "Wars come and go.  The only difference is who gets rich and
who gets dead.  I prefer rich."  When Kruger asks Father Rodriguez
whether it is safe to venture out, Father Rodriguez says, "The streets
are clear.  The police have returned to the safety of their donut
shops."
     The acting is quite good.  Arnold is in fine form and hilarious -
as good as in TRUE LIES, which I loved.  Caan is given a one dimensional
character but manages to make him interesting.  Coburn barely has a part
- not enough to even comment on.  The best acting in the show is by
Vanessa Williams.  In the first scene she is so tense, you feel like you
are going to have a heart attack.  Later in the show, her vulnerability
develops into strength and bravery.  A complex role that she is up to. 
All of this notwithstanding, this is Arnold's picture, and he is great -
strong and funny.
     There are many terrific minor actors in the show, but the best are
the ones from the local mob-cum-union.  We have Robert Pastorelli as
Johnny C. plus someone named Tony Two Toes and another named Mikey. 
They give invaluable help to Kruger and wonderful mirth to the
audience.  When Tony Two Toes first sees Kruger, he asks, "Who's the
tree trunk?"  When Tony thinks some Russians may be involved, he
exclaims, "Those dirty Commies!"  But, Mikey quickly corrects him with,
"They're not commies any more.  They're a federation of independent
liberated states."  When someone gets in his way, Tony Two Toes
threatens them with, "Nobody screws with the union."
     The stunts are spectacular throughout, but my favorites are the
scene when Cullen's house is attacked and the scene on the airplane. 
Each is choreographed with perfect timing and fluid motions.  The script
too is highly imaginative from the guns used to the solutions Kruger
comes up with on the airplane.  Finally, the film conclusively answers
the question, what do you say when you murder an alligator.
     ERASER runs a fast 1:45 thanks to excellent editing by Michael
Tronick.  The film is rated R.  There is no sex or nudity, and the
language is mild.  Since this is an action flick, there is violence with
lots of people being killed and some blood, but overall, it is much less
gory than typical R rated action films - more like a shoot-'em-up
Western.  It is fine for teenagers, but not too much younger.  I saw
some Dads taking their 8-10 year olds into the film which I think is too
immature an age for this much violence.  I give the film a strong
recommendation.  You will like the actions and the stunts and will
probably be rolling over with laughter too.  I give the film *** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Christopher Null
     Is it just me, or is Arnold Schwarzenegger's accent getting worse?  I
think it is, as is his acting ability, as well as his choice of films to
star in.  This time it's ERASER, a big-budget, small-plot, fair-to-middling
feature that continues the testosterone-infused series that Arnie's been
working on since PUMPING IRON.
     It's the cheeseball role to end all cheeseball roles:  John Kruger
(Arnie) works for the Witness Relocation Program as an "identity eraser,"
and he answers to no one (sorta).  His charge is Lee Cullen (Vanessa
Williams), an executive with "Cyrez," who discovers that her company is
selling next generation weapons to Russkie terrorists.  The FBI uses her
just to get the goods on Cyrez, and it's up to Arnie to save her hide from
the bad guys, which includes turncoat fellow eraser Robert Deguerin (James
Caan).
     Meanwhile, Arnie does about every stupid thing possible in order to
(a) inadvertently lead the bad guys to Lee, (b) get in lots of fights, (c)
blow up stuff, and (d) crack jokes.  All of this works with varying
success.  In the film, Arnold comes off as a complete idiot who couldn't
protect his lunch money without blurting out where it is.  It's a good
thing he's so tough, otherwise it'd be a short film indeed.  Even Arnold's
jokes here are of the lowest quality yet, sadly.
     It's sad, really, because everyone *but* the star is pretty good.
Williams proves herself as capable of holding her own against the big guy,
and Robert Pastorelli's Mafioso-in-protection all but steals the show.
We're also treated to some bad-ass special effects (ILM's faker-than-fake
digital crocodiles not withstanding), courtesy of some of the most wicked
weapons on screen.  (Actually, the best effect is the replacement of all
mention/viewing of the word "Cyrex" with "Cyrez" to avoid big lawsuits from
the similarly-named chip manufacturer.)
     Overall, the film delves into complete and utter ridiculousness in the
plot arena, and at the same time is totally predictable -- in fact, large
chunks of it are lifted right out of TRUE LIES.  Throw on a dumb ending...
and the rest you can just erase.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Author
Rebecca Wan
Directed by: Chuck Russell
Written by: Michael S. Chernuchin, Walon Green, Tony Puryear
Cast : Arnold Schwarzenegger (John Kruger, the Eraser), James Caan
(Robert Deguerin),  Robert Pastorelli (Johnny C), James Coburn
(Beller), James Caan (Robert Deguerin, Vanessa Williams (Lee Cullen).
Produced by :  Warner Brothers
Rating : ** out of *****
Well I guess it's that time of the year again. The one time of the year
where movie craftors are exonerated from the need to even *try* writing
a script that has more dialogue than explosions. It's also the best
time for the handful of existing bigtime Hollywood Mr Action Heroes to
dust off their miniscule vocabularies, pull on their black vests and
charge onto our screens tersely expirating what they hope will become
memorable catchphrases. In America they call this time  "summer" and
it happens once every year. And maybe it's the exposure to all that
nasty sun that does it, but in the process normally weak, insipid lines
like "Consider this a divorce," "Hasta la vista, baby," and "You're the
disease. I'm the cure" actually
 do end up being repeated more often then the phrases from my book of
biblical proverbs. This is not entirely a bad thing, of course.
What am I talking about? I'm talking about the summer "blockbusters,"
the "action thrillers," the "this-obviously-cost-a-lot-so-you-know-
everyone's-going-to-go" explosions, gas threats, flying saucers, and
special effects.  In the rash of "my, what big guns you have, but wait!
mine are bigger" movies, there are also the usual
boy-meets-fish-and-saves-environment movies (or whale, whatever), and
*this* year, the odd crop of "save-the-world-from-aliens-or-environment-
threats" offerings. I'm talking about the three BATMANS, the SPEEDS,
the TERMINATORS, etc.  This year I'm talking about TWISTER,
INDEPENDENCE DAY, THE ARRIVAL, THE ROCK, MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE, and of
course, ERASER.
Here in Singapore, as our local movie critics like to whine, we seem to
get the pick of the crop of "my explosion is more real-looking than
yours" movies, but nothing else. MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE opened in our
theatres almost as soon as it did in the US. The same goes for ERASER,
which is unfortunate for Arnold Schwarzenegger because  coming so soon
after what Time magazine recently called "Mission: Unavoidable"
 (on account of its worldwide mega-advertising blitz), ERASER seems
like a cheaper, less thoughtful imitation. That's saying a lot, because
MI the movie was already a cheap, thoughtless imitation of its TV
originator of the '60s/'70s.  
 In ERASER, Arnie is a US federal
marshall who relocates trial witnesses whose testimonies place their
lives in danger. He does this by destroying all evidence of their
present existence and re-situating them with new identities. His new
case is Lee Cullen, played by Vanessa Williams who, unlike all the
other scumbags he's ever relocated, is "an actual, real life honest
person." Because she's so good, and has such nice legs, Arnold spends
the whole movie trying to protect her, and only uses the opening movie
sequence to save Robert Pastorelli from *his* killers. Lee obtains
evidence that the high-technology weapons company she works for is
secretly selling sophisticated, black-market arms to people with
foreign accents and stringy hair. Of course, as the formula goes, her
revealing this information will destroy the system as we know it
because heck, there are people in high places who will go down with
this, because yes, this is the biggest conspiracy in the history of the
world (that is, America) since Watergate.
In protecting Lee, Arnold is framed by the mentor-turned-evil Robert
Deguerin, nicely played by James Caan, and ends up having to prove that
he isn't the one killing the programme's witnesses in addition to
making sure Lee isn't accidentally torpedo-ed to death by the new,
green guns his enemies all have.  It's around this time that people in
the theatre with me starting humming the MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE theme,
because Arnie's mission includes breaking into a high-security building
to run a disk.
I guess I should tell you more about the particular gun everyone in
this movie is so antsy about. It's an electro-magnetic pulse gun thing
which fires aluminium missiles, and which can see through walls. It has
some sort of X-ray vision, so its user can target the victim's heart
even from great distances. Despite this, which I figure is a pretty
cool feature in a gun (though I'm certainly no expert), however,
Arnold, whose own heart is targeted a number of times, *never* goes
flying 10 feet backwards with a two-foot missile through his chest like
all the others who get shot by this gun. Instead he outruns and
outsmarts his trackers each time, giving eery and ironic resonance to
that TERMINATOR line that practically made him famous: "I'll be back."
Like everyone else in the theater, I left the movie feeling that the
trailers had duped me, because they made me want to watch this movie
voluntarily. Although there is a *lot* of violence in this movie, not
to mention mutilation and some bloody tussles with alligators, I
recommend this movie to most over-18s who need some therapeutic
mindless action to get over the weirdness of FARGO or the hangover
effect of LEAVING LAS VEGAS.
REVIEW's rating system:
 * Wait for the video.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with 
Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.


Author
Michael Redman
Another Arnold Schwarzenegger movie and this time with even _Bigger
Guns_.
(I am tempted to end right here. That one sentence just about says it
all.)
This time around Ah-nold is an FBI agent who specializes in creating new
identities for and guarding high-profile participants in the
government's witness protection program. His assignment is Vanessa
Williams who has a computer disk filled with secrets (doesn't everybody
nowadays?) about her former employer.
The company, along with key officials in the FBI and Defense Department,
is set to sell enormous amounts of the newest high-tech monster
electro-magnetic guns to the big bad terrorist. Our hero and damsel in
distress have to stop them virtually single-handedly.
There's nothing remarkably new here. In fact several key plot elements
are repeated from "Mission Impossible". Not to give too much away, but
there's a mole in the organization, Schwarzenegger is suspect and guess
who the real traitor is. There's even the same scene where he escapes a
situation by shooting through a glass wall and creates a giant flood;
here, complete with alligators.
The role is not a stretch for the body builder. It's not much different
from any of his others, but he has that one persona mastered. Williams
is adequate, but not more, in the obligatory babe in danger identity.
The best acting comes from James Caan, but even he has been better.
James Coburn is charismatic, but has only a bit part.
The comic sidekick is Robert Pastorelli (Elliot in "Murphy Brown") as
Johnny C who brings a group of Mafioso in to help out. More like violent
Three Stooges than threatening crime lords, these wiseguys provide some
of the best scenes.
In order to enjoy a Schwarzenegger film, you have to suspend
disbelief...and logic and the laws of physics and any hope for a story
that makes sense. But if you can do that, you'll enjoy scenes like the
one where he dives out of a jet, catches up with a parachute in midair
and then has a shoot-out with the plane.
Nothing amazing, not even a great Arnold movie, but catch it at a
matinee and it's worth the price of admission if no-brain action is what
you're looking for.
[Note: this appeared in "The Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana,
6/27/96, Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com)

Author
B Reitt
"Yes,  I'll have a routine Violence Deluxe, a beefy Ahnold, a small 
order of unchallenging plot twists, and a damsel in distress.  Oh, and make 
sure you hold the originality.  I'm on an intelligence diet."
Is this the movie regimen America really wants to be on?  A film like 
'Eraser' may have been considered enjoyable and possibly even original in the 
pre-'Rambo' early 1980's, but American audiences (hopefully) are more 
discerning in their view toward action films in the mid 1990's, even those 
starring Arnold Schwarzenegger.  Though we hardly expect an Ahnold picture to 
be revered as the next 'Citizen Kane,' our standards have risen in this 
post-'Total Recall', 'Terminator 2,' and 'True Lies' decade.  Those films at 
least had a hint of inventiveness and plot texturing which was complemented by 
Ahnold's well-suited, though admittedly narrow-scoped, acting abilities.  
'Eraser,' on the other hand, is thoroughly predictable and so 
overridden by the conventional bad guys with big guns chasing Ahnold through 
smoky warehouses as he struggles to protect the spunky heroine (played 
adequately by Vanessa Williams), that one feels as if they are watching a 
comically over-budgeted network television movie-of-the-week.  A few fairly 
unimpressive special-effects, coupled with a not-so-bad bad guy (played not so 
adequately by James Caan), and Ahnold uttering the occasional camera-mugging 
witticism, just don't cut it anymore in today's competitive big-budget, 
big-screen world of action movies.  Audiences weaned on 'Starsky And Hutch' 
are becoming jaded by good guys miraculously dodging bullets as they dive 
around corners and somersault their way to their next paycheck.
In 'Eraser,' Ahnold portrays a U.S. Marshall working for the government' 
witness protection program whose job it is to "erase" and create new 
identities for federal witnesses targeted for extinction by the bad guys.  
When a female employee of a high-tech arms corporation (Williams) attempts to 
blow the cover off of a top-secret impending Iran-Contra-style arms deal, 
Ahnold is called in to protect her.  Naturally, evil CIA and FBI flunkies who 
are taking their orders from someone high up in the government echelon attempt 
to thwart Ahnold's mission.  Some silly sequences involving stereotyped 
mafiosos actually manage to offer a welcome respite as we impatiently wade 
through to the formulaic climax.
Today's audiences deserve quality over quantity; we've seen enough 
explosions, dead bodies and fancy guns.  Only a handful of action films have 
delivered the wit, style, and character to make an indelible impression on our 
collective cinematic consciousness.  And, while an Ahnold film may never fall 
into this category, we really should demand a better Ahnold for the buck.  
Otherwise, filmmakers may continue to erase content and leave us only with a 
blinding flash.
"A CANDY-COLORED CLOWN THEY CALL THE SANDMAN"

Author
Michael J. Legeros
(WB)
Directed by     Charles Russell
Written by      Tony Puryear and Walon Green
Cast            Arnold Schwarzenegger, Vanessa Williams, James Caan,
                James Coburn, Robert Pastorelli
MPAA Rating     "R" (presumably for language and violence)
Running Time    112 minutes
Reviewed at     The Wynnsong 10, Durham, NC (21JUN96)
     The new Arnold Schwarzenegger movie is plotted like a series of old
serials that have been combined and compressed, such that every ten
minutes (or so) our hero must beat the clock to avoid another peril.
Sirens!  The cops are coming!  Shots fired!  The bad guys are coming!
Parachute is tangled!  The ground is coming!  This methodical (and
intentional?) approach is actually a *good* thing, given the patchwork
of implausibilities, improbabilities, and other ignored concerns
contained in the script.  Arnie stars a steel-jawed U.S. Marshall who
works for the Witness Protection Program and who has been assigned to
protect-- at any cost-- a young woman (Vanessa Williams) who is blowing
the whistle on her treasonous employer.  The chutes and ladders involve
a political conspiracy, some very high-tech weaponry, and, heaven help
us, another mole inside of a secretive government agency.
     Arnie's character is actually a variation on the Energizer Bunny.
He gets stabbed, spiked, shot, crushed, blown-up, *and* dropped from a
couple of different heights.  None of the many writers (seven, I hear)
thought to worry about his seeming invulnerability, any more than they
thought to worry about describing a weapon as one that fires projectiles
at "just below the speed of light."  Help me.  Granted, such head-
scratchers are a trademark of the action genre, but too much of ERASER 
is carried too far.  Or, rater, the action scenes which are supposed to
*distract* us from such logic problems aren't carried far *enough*.
Director Charles Russell (THE MASK) is new to the big-budget game and
his set pieces are mostly modest in scope.  That is, with two
exceptions.  Both a skydiving sequence and a roomful of escaped
alligators are pure thrills.  Bring a tissue, though, as you may get a
nosebleed from going so far over the top.
     Too erratic to be a "must see," ERASER is still recommendable for
the smaller details.  When Arnie is disguised as a delivery person, for
example, the back of his jumpsuit reads "Let's Party."  Or there's James
Caan, as the boss gone bad, reacting to a throwing-knife wound:  "I
can't believe you nailed me with that cheap, mail-order shit!"  Or, 
even better, the mobster who points to Arnie and asks: "Who's the tree
trunk?" Other notable cast members include Babe's dad James Cromwell in
one scene, James Coburn as the agency head, and Robert Pastorelli as
Arnie's colorful, eleventh-hour sidekick.  No one as dead-on as, say,
either Tom Arnold or Charleton Heston in TRUE LIES, but they're amusing
enough.  (Nor is it every day that we get James Coburn stare down James
Caan!) Finally, where would Schwarzenegger be without a handful of
one-liners?  The Terminator gets off a couple great ones that you're
sure to hear elsewhere.  There's also a classic exchange with two young
kids, after Arnie drops from the sky into a junkyard.  Very funny.
--
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Vanessa Williams, James Caan, 
      Robert Pastorelli, James Coburn, James Cromwell
Director: Charles Russell
Producers: Arnold Kopelson and Anne Kopelson
Screenplay: Tony Puryear and Walon Green
Cinematography: Adam Greenberg
Music: Alan Silvestri
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     The release of ERASER begs the question:  haven't there been enough 
action films already this summer?  With the likes of TWISTER, MISSION 
IMPOSSIBLE, THE PHANTOM, DRAGONHEART, and THE ROCK floating around, do 
we really need ERASER?  Probably not, but Hollywood has decided to give 
us this film, anyway.  Besides, no one does it quite like Arnold 
Schwarzenegger -- or at least that's what Warner Brothers would have us 
believe.  And, until fans stop flocking to see the latest offering from 
this human tree trunk, he'll keep coming back.
     ERASER is the latest in a growing number of "high tech" action 
flicks (THE NET, HACKERS, and MISSION IMPOSSIBLE all fit into that 
category).  It takes the usual chases, explosions, and shoot-outs, and 
places them in plot that involves all sorts of computerized and 
electronic gadgetry.  Often, as is the case here, not much attention is 
paid to whether the "science" is technologically feasible, but if 
something looks and sounds neat, why not use it?
     ERASER will hearten the group of Schwarzenegger fans who have been 
depressed by their favorite star's ventures beyond the action realm 
(such as the bloated parody LAST ACTION HERO and the completely unfunny 
JUNIOR).  This is Arnold at his muscle-bound, gun-toting best, mowing 
down bad guys without taking much of a breather.  And, while 
Schwarzenegger is more of a personality than an actor, he has a solid 
supporting cast this time around, including Vanessa Williams, James Caan 
(thoroughly enjoying himself as the bad guy), Robert Pastorelli in the 
Joe Pesci-type sidekick role, and James Coburn.
     The premise is moderately intriguing.  Schwarzenegger is John 
Kruger, a Federal Marshal working for the Witness Security Department.  
It's his job to "erase" the identities of Federally-protected witnesses 
so that they survive long enough to testify in court.  Occasionally, the 
job requires him to go to excessive lengths to keep someone alive, and 
Kruger frequently leaves a trail of bodies behind him.  Not only that, 
but he's got more stamina than the Energizer Bunny.  He can get stabbed 
through the hand and shot in the shoulder and still use that arm to do 
some amazing things.
     Things heat up for Kruger when his latest client, a former employee 
of Cyrez Technology named Lee Cullen (Williams), is attacked and nearly 
killed by a group of assassins packing a "rail gun" -- a nasty weapon 
that uses electromagnetic pulses to propel projectiles at incredibly 
fast rates of speed.  Cullen has in her possession a disk crammed with 
information that could incriminate a number of highly-placed government 
officials in an illegal gun running operation, including the 
Undersecretary of Defense, several crooked FBI agents, and Kruger's 
boss, Robert Deguerin (Caan).  As soon as Kruger takes the woman into 
his protection, he finds himself framed for murder and on the run from 
just about every law enforcement agent.  His only hope -- unlock the 
disk's secrets and prove his innocence to his boss' boss (Coburn).
     There are some definite similarities between ERASER and MISSION 
IMPOSSIBLE.  Both involve betrayals and government cover-ups, both have 
plots that revolve around information contained on disks, both feature a 
break-in to a supposedly-secure installation, and both contain several 
high-energy action sequences.  Ultimately, however, ERASER is marginally 
more enjoyable.  Not only is Schwarzenegger a better action hero than 
Tom Cruise, but the plotline of this film, while far from a masterpiece 
of originality, isn't filled with the silly, convoluted twists that 
choked MISSION IMPOSSIBLE.  And, perhaps best of all, ERASER has a lot 
of delightfully corny dialogue (including Arnold calmly telling a dead 
alligator, "You're luggage").
     While most of ERASER is pretty standard stuff, there are a few fun 
variations.  One big chase sequence takes place in a zoo, and involves a 
showdown with some hungry alligators.  There's also an exciting 
skydiving scene that has Schwarzenegger playing chicken with a crippled 
727 while unable to get his parachute to function properly.  Finally, 
several of the gun fights, because they feature rail guns, are a little 
more interesting than standard shoot-outs.  The movie also consciously 
avoids several of the worst action-film standbys:  the lead male and 
female do not fall in love, and, thankfully, they aren't always at each 
other's throats.  Cullen accepts that Kruger is trying to help her, and 
decides not to fight him every step of the way.
     It will be interesting to see how this film fares, emerging as it 
does in the wake of so much previous chaos and mayhem, not to mention 
going toe-to-toe with THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME (although I'm sure the 
target audiences are vastly different).  Frankly, I'm getting tired of 
all this action -- ERASER is fun in a limited sort of way, but it would 
have been more enjoyable if it had come out in a less-crowded market.  
Regardless, the film is available now, and if you're on the lookout for 
another loud roller-coaster movie ride, or if you consider yourself a 
Schwarzenegger fan, it's worth a look. 
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
