Title
Review for Making 'The Shining' (1980) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
Stanley Kubrick is one of the great enigmatic directors of the 20th
century. Who was this genius that produced such masterfully realized
works of art such as "2001: A Space Odyssey," "A Clockwork Orange," or
"Barry Lyndon"? This rarely seen documentary, shot by Kubrick's
daughter, Vivian, documents some of the events of shooting the uneven,
controversial horror flick "The Shining." It may not shed much light
on the legendary director, but it does offer a glimpse of what he was
like behind the scenes.
The beginning of the documentary (now on the video and DVD re-released
versions of "The Shining") plays like a home movie with Vivian
following Jack Nicholson into the bathroom while he brushes his
teeth. We see Jack prepping himself for a scene where, as Jack
Torrance, he tears through a door with an axe, pursuing his family,
and taunting them with quotes from "Three Little Pigs." Then there is
Kubrick, wearing a winter jacket, yelling cut during a scene where
Danny (Danny Lloyd) hides inside a compartment from maniacal Jack. To
me, it was a pleasure to hear this man speak with an ever-so-slight
English accent (hardly a trace of his Bronx roots).
There are strong revelations for what must have been an arduous, long
shoot for a horror movie. There is the sense that Kubrick is
tough-as-nails on Shelley Duvall, always taunting her and acting
totally unsympathetic to her mood swings (at one point, she pulls out
strands of hair, showing them to Stanley whose only response is, "I
have no sympathy for Shelley.") There is one tense scene where Shelley
misses her cue when they yell action during a faux snowstorm scene and
Stanley races frantically and argues with her vehemently.
Kubrick is apparently respectful of Jack and only suggests he acts
wilder and meaner (I have heard reports of Jack being used for
lighting tests when in fact a stand-in is ordinarily used). A scene
shows Kubrick's mother seated at a table with Stanley and Jack as they
discuss the constant script revisions from day to day. Naturally,
Shelley is nowhere to be found. She does freely admit that she admired
him for his tenacity and perfectionism, claiming to have learned more
from him than from any other prior film production. Meanwhile, Jack
concludes that working with Stanley is exciting for him as an actor
because the director has his own agenda for making personal films,
even if Jack does not always agree with him.
There are also brief, pointed interviews with Scatman Crothers (who of
course played Halloran, the cook), shown weeping for joy as he
mentions how beautiful the crew was to work with and how he saw Danny
as his own child, and the tyke Danny Lloyd who mentions how he is
smart and likes to make home movies with his less-than-receptive
friends. Kubrick himself is not interviewed but it is fun to see him
at work, especially when he devises a low-angle shot of Jack to
enhance the tension of the scene where Jack tries to con Shelley into
letting him out of a storage room.
"Making 'The Shining'" could have been longer and shed more light on
the master director at work, but it is a fitting, exemplary
documentary of a man whose impeccable sense of craft and direction
exemplified his status as one of America's leading cinematic
artists. Essential viewing for any film buff or aficionado of Kubrick.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with any questions, comments or complaints at jerry@movieluver.com or at Faust667@aol.com
