Title
Review for I Think I Do (1997)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Seth Bookey
Seen on 15 May 1998 by myself for $8 at the Quad Cinema
*I Think I Do* is a full-length feature from the man who brought us the
gay short film *Pool Days*. It is the story of seven friends/roommates
from George Washington University, who convene for the wedding of two
friends in DC one October weekend. The story begins back in their college
days, when the rather plain Bob (Alexis Arquette, brother of all those
Arquettes), who's gay, has a crush on his hunky roommate Brendan
(Christian Maelen). But, Brendan is having a fling with Sarah, and he
reacts rather negatively when he finds out how Bob feels.
Years later, Bob is a soap opera writer and his boyfriend of one year is
the ultrahunky Sterling Scott (Tuc Watkins), a star on his show who winds
up shirtless in many scenes Bob has written. Bob receives a surprise
proposal of his own from Sterling that weekend. Bob is later surprised to
discover that Brendan is not just acting strangely--he is flirting with
Bob. Other lesser dramas ensue around this main story.
There is something admirable and disappointing about this film. There are
some wonderful lines and performances, mostly from Tuc Watkins and
Patricia Mauceri (the control-freak mother of the bride). Not
surprisingly, these two actors have a lot of experience from *One Life to
Live*, which also featured Josh Weinstein, the main character in the
director/writer Brian Sloan's *Pool Days*. Clearly, Mr. Sloan loves soaps
and especially *One Life to Live*, and that's very admirable. Also very
talented and funny is Guillermo Diaz (of *Party Girl* and *Stonewall*
fame), as the stoner who turns out to know a lot more than we think he
does.
The disappointment: What could have been a 1990s version of *Parting
Glances* is instead a bit diluted and uninteresting. While there are many
funny lines and moments, it is hard to understand what is intrinsically
interesting or compelling about most of these characters. We first meet
them as screwy college friends, and we fast forward to six or so years
later, without any bonding scenes up front--and they are still screwy. Bob
is Carol's "maid of honor," but we barely see them together in the
beginning. The supporting cast members have funny lines, but they are
almost a distraction to the main story, which is Bob as the object of
affection of two men--which is hard to understand. Even his lover Sterling
says, "He's dull." He seems to be in perpetual crisis. Believe me, if two
men were after me, I would see the crisis as an opportunity (two words,
according to Lisa Simpson, served by the same word in Chinese). Believe
me, if even one man was (miraculously) after me, I would not be in such
crisis.
In a rare move, New York stands in for DC (usually it's Toronto standing
in for the Big Apple). New York viewers with sharp eyes will note certain
locales as their hometown, and not DC. The director does go to DC, though,
and in one scene, it is apparent their equipment is far inferior to the
NYC equipment. Matt and Sterling are hardly audible at the Jefferson
Memorial until the camera goes into a medium shot. But, this is an indie
production. It's somewhat forgivable.
However, for all its faults, I would still recommend this movie. The
acting is pretty good, there are some wonderful lines, and in the end,
it's David vs. Goliath (Hollywood), and Brian Sloan has beat a lot of the
odds, and is probably someone to watch for in the future, as are some of
the actors (particularly Tuc Watkins, the best actor in the bunch).
NOTE: Some of the funniest "lines" come from the father of the bride, who
does all his acting with his voiceless face. Watch for them.

More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html
