Title
Review for My Science Project (1985)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jerry Saravia
I recall going to my neighborhood theatre in Queens, New York back in good old
1985 to see "Back to the Future." As I was perusing through the hallway theatre,
I noticed they were showing "My Science Project." The scene I took a gander at
featured some kids dressed as the stormtroopers from "Star Wars." I always
wondered what that scene was about. Sixteen years later, I finally watched the
actual film for the first time. I wish I had not bothered finding out. 
A teenage car mechanic (John Stockwell) is failing his science class. His wild
hippie teacher (Dennis Hopper) warns him that he better get his grade up or he
will fail him for the semester. The kid goes on a date with a four-eyed blonde
nerd (Danielle von Zerneck) to a missile base where he discovers a crystal
sphere. He decides that this is his science project since the sphere looks,
well, cool and it emits a phosphorescent glow! With the help of his Fonzie-like
best friend (a very young Fisher Stevens) and his date, they inadvertently
unleash a time-travel force from this sphere where dinosaurs, gladiators, the
Vietcong and other figures from the past run rampant inside the local high
school! 
This is not a bad plot to speak of, just rottenly executed. The characters are
unappealing and uncharismatic - Stockwell as the lead exhibits no personality
whatsoever. The jokes are juvenile and putrid at best (Stevens humming the
"Mission: Impossible" theme is the best the writers can do). The romance between
Stockwell and von Zerneck is a joke in itself (at least von Zerneck fared better
as Richie Valens' girlfriend in "La Bamba" two years later). The special-effects
are bland and forgettable (laser blasts are better handled in "Star Wars"). The
T-Rex has precious little screen time. Only Dennis Hopper saves the day as the
hippie teacher - his last scene is hysterical as he is dressed in the same garb
from "Easy Rider" and ecstatically mentions revisiting Woodstock! And as for my
memory of those stormtroopers? Well, all I can say is that George Lucas should
sue. 
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://moviething.com/members/movies/faust/JATMindex.shtml 
E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at
faustus_08520@yahoo.com or at Faust668@aol.com
