Title
Review for Naked Gun 33 1/3: The Final Insult (1994)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     NAKED GUN 33-1/3: THE FINAL INSULT is hilarious.  Period.  Fans of
the series are advised to wear protective undergarments as these
further exploits of Lt. Frank Drebin *may* inspire fits of uncontrolled
urination.
     But seriously folks, the film is just as funny as the first GUN
sequel in which Babs Bush got hers.  This time it's Oscar-bashing and
not a moment too soon!  Leave it to former Police Squad detective Lt.
Frank Drebin (Nielsen) to come out of retirement to help stop a
terrorist (Ward) bent on bombing the Academy Awards.
     Once again, the gags are non-stop and NAKED GUN 33-1/3 spoofs
everything from "Beavis and Butthead" to "The Brady Bunch."  Blink and
you'll miss a mention to STAR WARS or STALAG 17.  More obvious are the
references to recent films like THELMA AND LOUISE and JURASSIC PARK.
     There's also an obligatory 70s flashback, a great sperm-sample
bit, and an untouchable UNTOUCHABLES send-up that Sergei Einstein
should've lived to see.
     Joke for joke, it's the best stupid laugh-fest since HOT SHOTS!
PART DEUX.
     The downside is that the series is showing signs of strain.
Technical credits are weak, from editing to production design.  The
cast is a loss--neither Presley nor Simpson nor Kennedy is very funny.
As the villain, Fred Ward is hardly a worthy successor to Ricardo
Montalban or Robert Goulet.  And the line between Nielsen's dandy
deadpan and boffo buffoonery is wearing mighty thin these days.
     The irony, of course, is that the NAKED GUN films have *never*
been as funny as the TV series that inspired them. "Police Squad!" ran
for exactly six episodes in 1980 and was promptly cancelled.  The
original adventures of Lt. Frank Drebin were just as funny as the
creator's hit film AIRPLANE!, but viewers couldn't handle the lack of a
laugh track.
     On the Zucker/Abrahams/Zucker hierarchal scale of hilarity, NAKED
GUN 33-1/3 ranks about the same as NAKED GUN 2 1/2 and both HOT SHOTS!
films.  But they all pale in comparison to AIRPLANE!, "Police Squad!,"
and, even, TOP SECRET!

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Leslie Nielsen, Priscilla Presley, George Kennedy, 
           O. J. Simpson, Fred Ward 
Director:  Peter Segal 
Producers:  Robert K. Weiss and David Zucker 
Screenplay:  Pat Proft, David Zucker, and Robert LoCash 
Music:  Ira Newborn 
Released by Paramount Pictures 
     Zucker/Abrahams/Zucker (all three members of the disbanded group
have their names in the credits) must have expended most of their
collective creative and comic talents on the wonderfully funny preview
for THE NAKED GUN 33 1/3, because there's nothing in this film that
comes close to the HOWARDS END/REMAINS OF THE DAY spoof.  While the
sequence has been cannibalized for inclusion in the picture, nowhere
was it more entertaining than in darkened theaters several months ago,
whetting the appetites of millions for this sadly disappointing
feature.
     As the latest installment of the POLICE SQUAD! saga opens,
Lt. Frank Drebin (Leslie Nielsen) has been retired form the force for
six months.  However, despite his earnest attempts to play the happy
house husband, he misses his job, and his marriage to Jane (Priscilla
Presley) is beginning to suffer.  Then, one day while Frank is baking
cup cakes, he gets a visit from his old friends Captain Ed Hocken
(George Kennedy) and Nordberg (O. J. Simpson).  It seems that a
terrorist (Fred Ward) is planning a big bombing and only Drebin can
stop him.  So, getting back in the green car without brakes, Frank
heads downtown to retrieve his gun and badge--and bring the boys some
fudge.
     It's sad to see what started out as such a lively and creative
series descend to this--a feeble attempt to stretch a few pedestrian
jokes into a full feature film.  The first NAKED GUN, like its
television series predecessor, was a hilarious (if not overly original)
motion picture.  (Who can forget the antics on the baseball field at
the end?)  The second installment, while suffering from an
overabundance of recycled puns and unfunny punch lines, still had its
moments.  Unfortunately, the third time around, there's not much to get
excited about or to laugh at.
     There are a few funny moments, such as the '70s spoof in the disco
and some of the Academy Awards slapstick, but too much never clicks.
Unlike its predecessors, this NAKED GUN doesn't seem to be trying very
hard to be funny.  Gone are most of the rapid-fire one-liners and sight
gags.  Sure, some have survived, but the frequency is way down, so when
one joke fails, the wait for the next one is sometimes uncomfortably
long.  There's the obligatory Tonya Harding comment but, like too much
of THE NAKED GUN 33 1/3's humor, it's not worth even a small chuckle.
     Leslie Nielsen is still enjoying himself (in fact, he's on record
as wanting to do another in the series), and his performance is as
crisp as ever.  The rest of THE NAKED GUN crew is back, filling their
usual roles, and guest Fred Ward has fun hamming it up as the mad
terrorist Rocco.
     One thing that can be said about this movie is that it keeps the
audience in their seats until the end of the closing credits--and with
good reason.  One could argue that the credits (opening and closing
combined) are the most amusing part of the movie.  It's what comes in
between that's the letdown.  Even the motion picture parodies (which
are numerous, and include THE UNTOUCHABLES and JURASSIC PARK) are
bland.  Much of what this movie pokes fun at--especially the Academy
Awards--is ripe for the satirical plucking.  THE NAKED GUN 33 1/3
lines everything up in its sights, but never pulls the trigger.  Much
of the POLICE SQUAD!  series' irreverence is absent without leave.
     The original NAKED GUN movie was something of a modern comedy
classic and, while its successor was distinctly inferior, it still had
the capacity to entertain.  The latest offering, however, gives us
another example of a sequel that should never have been made.  We
really can't complain, though, since we have been warned.  After all,
the film is most aptly called THE FINAL INSULT, so the last joke is on
the audience.  Unfortunately, we aren't laughing--at least not
enough--and that's the whole problem.
James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
David Wilcock
Starring Leslie Nielson, Priscilla Presley, George Kennedy, O.J Simpson,
Fred Ward and Kathleen Freeman
Leslie Nielson returns as bumbling Lieutenant Frank Drebin, in the most
slapdash Naked Gun film. Although offering some good laughs, the film
suffers from some lulls. The good thing about The Naked Gun and it's sequel
was that if one gag failed, another one would appear in about 0.5 seconds
that made you laugh out loud. Sadly, this film has a a good laugh every
four bad gags, which is not good, considering the time gap between each bad
laugh is.
The 'plot' goes as thus. Drebin has retired from police squad, settled down
with this now-wife Jane (Presley), and is enjoying married life. However,
Drebin's chief, Captain Ed Hocken (Kennedy) wants to call Drebin onto
another case, involving mad bomber Rocco, played by Ward, who is going to
blow up OSCAR night. Drebin agress, Jane finds out, she leaves him, and
Drebin has to carry on the case without her.
What follows is 1 hour 20 minutes of some great gags (the first five
minutes is a brilliant The Untouchabless spoof) some mediocre laughs, and
some downright awful laughs. This film is much more heavily slapstick
orientated than the first two Naked Gun pictures, and relies less on verbal
humour. The film moves along at an incredible pace though, this is
defintely the most fast paced Naked Gun film.
The performances are reasonable. Nielson pulls the usual mugging and
grinning at the camera, Presley is alright, but Kennedys performance seems
much different from the first two films, much more hyper than before, and
wasn't very good. Simpson is alright as Nordberg, Drebins friend, but
nothing speacial, and the same goes for Ward. The best performance, then,
goes to Kathleen Freeman (the old woman in The Goonies), who, even though
she's playing the same character she's done in every other film she's been
in, is still very funny. There is also some 'acting' from Anna Nicole
Smith, but thankfully she gets about seven lines, and didn't feature in
another major film after this one.
For all it's faults, though, Naked Gun 33 1/3 does deliver the occasional
laugh out loud gag. But it's missing something the other two films had,
which is a lot of laughs. It could be because of the new director, Peter
Segal, who never really matches David Zuckers way of directing a good gag.
Jim Abrahams and Jerry Zucker have disappeared from the writers credits
(they wrote The Naked Gun but not the sequel) which could explain again why
there are less laughs. Or, it could just boil down to that there are no
good laughs left anymore in The Naked Gun series. The Naked Gun 2 1/2
petered out a bit, so maybe the Naked Gun films should of ended there. 
In the end, then, although it has some good gags (The Untouchables spoof, a
great seventies spoof) it proves to be ultimately dissapointing. The Naked
Gun films should now be laid to rest, and Lt. Frank Drebin should retire
for good.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Leslie Nielsen, Priscilla Presley, Fred Ward, George Kennedy,
           O. J. Simpson.
Screenplay:  David Zucker, Pat Proft and Robert LoCash.
Director:  Peter Segal.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I'd like to say a word at this time about the proliferation of
genre parody/spoofs in the last year: stop.  In twelve months we've
seen at least half a dozen such films (LOADED WEAPON 1, FATAL INSTINCT,
ROBIN HOOD: MEN IN TIGHTS, etc.), with roughly that many laughs between
them.  It is saddest of all to see the masters of the form, the former
partners in the Zucker Abrahams Zucker comic triumvirate, among the
perpetrators of slipshod product.  Last year's HOT SHOTS! PART DEUX was
a tolerable but limp effort; still, it shines next to NAKED GUN
33-1/3.  The third installment in the series is only sporadically
amusing, and often crosses the pop culture cannibalism scale from
parody into self-parody.
     Leslie Nielsen returns as Frank Drebin, formerly a lieutenant for
L.A.'s Police Squad but recently retired after his marriage to
sweetheart Jane Spencer (Priscilla Presley).  There are tensions in the
Drebin household, however, as Jane yearns for a child and Frank itches
to return to police work.  Frank gets his chance when Capt. Hocken
(George Kennedy) and Det. Nordberg (O. J. Simpson) ask him to go
undercover in prison.  His mission: to ingratiate himself with
incarcerated bomber Rocco (Fred Ward) and find out the target of a
planned terrorist attack.  While Frank goes to work in the Stateville
Prison, Jane takes off to find herself, and must decide whether or not
to stand by her man.
     The first ten minutes of NAKED GUN 33-1/3 offers some promise.
The opening sequence targets the train station steps sequence from
THE UNTOUCHABLES, and it features some solid belly laughs thanks to
a careful setup.  There are also a couple of winning moments in the
traditional opening credits featuring a roof's-eye view from a
moving police car, particularly a nod to the Death Star trench run
from STAR WARS.  Unfortunately, that's where NAKED GUN 33-1/3 hits the
runout groove.  In a ZAZ film, whether or not it works ultimately comes
down to how many of the gags work, and there are painfully few good
gags here.
     Part of the problem can be attributed to director Peter Segal.
Much of the enjoyment from earlier ZAZ efforts came from watching the
backgrounds, picking up jokes on the fringes of the frame.  In NAKED
GUN 33-1/3, jokes that in those earlier films would have been
background jokes practically have a spotlight set on them, such as the
wall-mounted clothing of notable lawmen in the Police Squad station
(one of the lawmen is J. Edgar Hoover ... you fill in the gag).  Even
though all three ZAZ boys are in the credits in some capacity (David
Zucker as writer, Jerry as producer and Jim Abrahams as executive
producer), their eye is missing in Segal's direction.  While none of
their films were afraid to go for groaners, the difference is that they
didn't underline them.
     Many of the films NAKED GUN 33-1/3 chooses to parody seem ripe for
the picking, but the execution stumbles.  Jane's departure with friend
Louise in a green Oldsmobile convertible seems to offer a great deal of
promise, but the expected THELMA & LOUSIE parody offers surprising
little payoff.  Ditto for the now (seemingly) obligatory CRYING GAME
reference, and an overlong sequence set in the prison.  Time after time
it looks like something worthwhile is coming along, and time after time
the jokes just fall flat.
     There is one other crucial factor worth noting in NAKED GUN
33-1/3, and that is the performance of Leslie Nielsen.  When he made
AIRPLANE!, Nielsen was a career B-movie actor known for dramatic heavy
roles, and he deadpanned his part perfectly.  Now, however, after
AIRPLANE!, the series POLICE SQUAD! and three NAKED GUN films, Nielsen
appears to be aping himself.  Instead of playing Drebin as the
oblivious stiff he had been before, he mugs and double-takes his way
through the film, having learned far too many bad lessons from his
horrendous Dollar Rent-A-Car spots.  Similarly, Fred Ward brings none
of the qualities Ricardo Montalban and Robert Goulet brought to the
first two films.  Rather than playing against the laughs, all the
performers seem to be playing with them, and much of the goofiness is
lost.
     NAKED GUN 33-1/3 is doing well at the box office.  It's too bad.
I was hoping we could avoid NAKED GUN .44: MAGNUM FARCE.
