Title
Review for Obsessed (1992) (TV)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Brian L. Johnson
98 min., not rated, Drama/Suspence, 1992, Made-for-television
Director: Jonathan Sanger
Cast: Shannen Doherty, William Devane, Clare Carey, James Handy,
      Lois Chiles, Lisa Ann Poggi, Albert Stratton
     First there was the nanny from hell (THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE
CRADLE), then the lesbian icepick murderer (BASIC INSTINCT), followed
by the psycho roommate (SINGLE WHITE FEMALE), and now there is a
deranged girlfriend.  Shannen Doherty meets older William Devane when
she is looking at his boat.  Doherty and Devane become lovers, but she
gets too obsessive and he calls the relationship off.  She can't handle
that and wants to pay him back.
     OBSESSED was made for the ABC television network, and is rather
good.  It isn't as good as the other films listed above, but is still
worth trying to see, although some people may be sick of psycho films
and just want to skip this one.  I wouldn't hunt too hard for this film,
it will probably be on repeats in one to three years and you can see it
then if you are still interested.  On a scale of zero to five, I give
OBSESSED a four.
     The actors in OBSESSED do a good job, although sometimes it shows
that they are television actors.  Shannen Doherty sometimes gets a
little carried away with her role and sometimes William Devane doesn't
seem to put enough into his.  But for the most part they carry the film
successfully.  The major problem that I found with the film is that I
couldn't sympathize with any of the characters.  William Devane's
character was a complete jerk and deserved what came to him.  On the
other hand, Shannen Doherty's character was a complete bitch and also
deserved what came to her.
     The film could have been written a little better.  In some parts it
seemed to plod along and other parts looked like they had been put in to
fill up time.  The advertisements for this film made it out to be a lot
more than it was, which is unfortunate because probably many people saw
this film expecting something else and ended up sorely disappointed.
Maybe people should lay off the psycho films until 1993, because there
has been a great amount in the theaters recently, and they are starting
to come to home video (THE HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE is already out and
BASIC INSTINCT is coming soon).  At least this film is a break from the
"standard television films" and this may mark the start of more films
like it.
