Title
Review for Looking for Richard (1996)
Number of Reviews
8

Author
Steve Rhodes
     LOOKING FOR RICHARD is Al Pacino's paean to Shakespeare and to
acting.  The picture is totally his baby.  He conceived it, and it is
the first film he ever directed.  Like many new directors, he is in a
rush to try all possible techniques - some work, some don't.  The film,
for reasons described below, is a frustrating, but ultimately rewarding
cinematic experience.
     Let me deal first with the single and almost fatal problem with
the film and then I can get to the good part.  The editing committee of
Bill Anderson, Ned Bastille, Andre Betz, and Pasquale Buba is a
disaster.  Never I have I seen bad editing detract from a film more
than it does here.
     The movie is about the acting of the play RICHARD III.  It
interposes scenes of the play with rehearsal sessions and with
interviews with scholars and people on the street.  This is a technique
that holds much promise, but the editing almost sinks it.
     In the first half of the picture, people will start to speak, but
the editors will cut them off before they can finish their sentence so
they can switch to someone else whose words will also be truncated.
This makes for an extremely choppy and dizzying experience.  I kept
wanting to yell at them to let the guy speak.  Perhaps this sound bite
technique works on MTV, but not with discussions of Shakespeare.
     After being convinced I was seeing a film that going to find me
with my thumb down, the second part is edited at a pace that allows us
to hear the play, the rehearsals, and listen to the opinions so that in
the end the picture redeems itself and does end up transferring to the
audience an appreciation of the acting profession in general and
Shakespeare in particular.  As proof of its success, I left the theater
wanting to see the play live again soon and to see Ian McKellen's
marvelous movie RICHARD III (1995) once more.
     Let me give you a taste of LOOKING FOR RICHARD.  Pacino talks
about the problems of American actors and The Bard saying, "What's this
thing that gets between us and Shakespeare?"  Vanessa Redgrave tells us
the British view that, "In England you have had centuries when words
are totally divorced from truth."  One actress explains to us about
Shakespearean rules, "There are certain rules like iambic pentameter
that must be learned, and once learned can be rejected."
     Many scenes are set up and just ad-libbed to see what will happen.
Pacino takes his friend and co-screenwriter Fredrick Kimball to visit
Shakespeare's bed.  Kimball expects "an epiphany" and is disappointed.
Pacino chides him, "If you're really an actor, you can come back and
have an epiphany."
     When the producer objects to Pacino's constantly asking scholars
their opinions since Pacino is greater than any of them, Pacino
admonishes him, "A person has an opinion.  It's only an opinion.  It's
never a question of right or wrong."  I think I'll save that quote and
use it on the next hundred people that write me with personal insults
when I have the bad taste not to like their favorite little movie.
     Actually, the producer was correct.  Most of the scholars added
little over the actors' opinions, but I did like one who said that, "an
irony is really only an hypocrisy with style."  One woman at a cocktail
party says that the way she would make Shakespeare more accessible is,
"I'd take Lady Macbeth and put her in a rock 'n' roll context."  Now
there is an idea, hopefully, whose time has not yet come.
     The film is full of Shakespeare and his beautiful and flowery
language.  Lady Anne (Winona Ryder) tells us, "To take is not to give."
And Richard III (Al Pacino) responds, "Was ever woman in this humor
won?  I'll have her, but I'll not keep her long."  At one point he
gives the famous, "Now is the winter of our discontent made glorious
summer."  and "A horse, a horse, my Kingdom for a horse."
     In such a star studded cast, I can't leave without listing the
rest of those who contributed their considerable acting talent.  These
include: Estelle Parsons as Queen Margaret,  Alec Baldwin as Clarence,
Kevin Spacey as Buckingham, Aidan Quinn as Richmond, Penelope Allen as
Queen Elizabeth, Gordon MacDonald as Dorset, Madison Arnold as Rivers,
Vincent Angell as Grey, Harris Yulin as King Edward, Timmy Prairie as
Prince Edward, and Kevin Conway as Hastings.  As appearing as talking
heads are: Kenneth Branagh, John Gielgud, Rosemary Harris, Derek
Jacobi, and Kevin Kline.
     Howard Shore's music is full of dramatic and effective choral
pieces.  Finally, I want to point out that if you like this film, you
will probably like A MIDWINTER'S TALE (a. k. a. IN THE BLEAK MIDWINTER)
and will quite possibly love VANYA ON 42ND STREET.
     LOOKING FOR RICHARD runs about 1:50, but my press kit does not
give the exact time.  It is rated PG-13 for one brief gory scene where
blood spurts and for a few cuss words.  There is no sex or violence.
This film would be fine for any kid old enough to be seriously
interested in the subject.  If you go to see it, hang in there and you
will be rewarded with something special.  A mixed, but in the end
strong recommendation from me, and I award the film ***.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     With a remarkable number of Shakespeare plays being made into
films recently, LOOKING FOR RICHARD, directed, co-produced, and co-
written by Al Pacino, could not have been more timely.  There have been
many films about the activity of making films, but to my knowledge this
is the first film about the making of a Shakespeare film.  It gives
real insight into the richness and complexity of Shakespeare's writing
as well as into the filmmaking process.  Pacino's film seamlessly
bounces between real documentary and scenes of the fictitious
production of an all-star version of RICHARD III.  Meanwhile not just
the actors in the supposed film (Al Pacino, Harris Yulin, Penelope
Allen, Alec Baldwin, Kevin Spacey, Estelle Parsons, Winona Ryder, and
Aiden Quinn), but also guests not in the film--like Kenneth Branagh,
Kevin Kline, James Earl Jones, Rosemary Harris, Peter Brook, Derek
Jacobi, John Gielgud, and Vanessa Redgrave--talk about the content of
Shakespeare and the art of acting Shakespeare.  To have all these
people in one film is remarkable in itself.  To get them all talking
about a subject like Shakespeare is wonderful.  To then waste so much
time watching Pacino clown around as much as he does is agonizing.
Indeed, Pacino as a director just does not know when to say no to
Pacino the actor.  After last year for me now the definitive Richard
will be Ian McKellen.  To see Pacino overpowering the role of Richard
as he overpowers so many of his roles is almost painful.  There are
places that the plotting of the film is inconsistent.  For example,
apparently the actors are making no more than a film version of the
play, but at one point Pacino argues with the adaptation's putative
director as to whether they should have an expert discussing the play
looking into the camera.  Pacino's allusions to his other films amount
almost to product placements--at one point he refers to a scene of the
play as the "meeting of the Dons," he wears a cap that says "Scent of a
Woman," and intentionally or not RICHARD III has rather obvious plot
parallels to SCARFACE.  The positives of LOOKING FOR RICHARD would
dwarf the negatives if it were not for the latter taking too much
precious time.
     Pacino's feature-length discussion of Shakespeare also makes some
telling points about the people who play Shakespeare.  John Gielgud's
viewpoint seems so plain and simple while Vanessa Redgrave goes off
into a rambunctious and pretentious incoherence about the "pentameter
of the soul."  These discussions by some of the great actors of our
time into why the Bard does what he does with language and how his
plays are to be acted will undoubtedly be used in the years to come as
part of college courses, yet it is entertaining enough for paying
audiences even while it instructs.  Even the street interviews are
instructive and show a range of people from the well-dressed who have
never seen a Shakespeare play to one man obviously less fortunate who
waxes on about how if in school if we read more Shakespeare we would
know how to feel and would have less violence in the streets.  The
film's playful approach to the classic starts at the very opening
credits that at first say KING RICHARD, then fill in the additional
letters to say LOOKING FOR RICHARD.  It is Pacino's point of view that
today's actors are the inheritors of a grand tradition of acting and
drama, the centerpiece of which is the contribution of William
Shakespeare.
     If Pacino's goal were just to make this one play accessible, which
in large part it was, I would say he fell short of last year's
production which shows more of the play without ever being
inaccessible.  For the additional insights into the plays of
Shakespeare and the acting required in them I would say LOOKING FOR
RICHARD is more successful.  I rate it a high +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Director:  Al Pacino.
Producer:  Michael Hadge.
Director of Photography:  Robert Leacock.
Music:  Howard Shore:
Starring:  Al Pacino, Kevin Spacey, Winona Ryder, Alec Baldwin, Aidan
Quinn, Harris Yulin, Estelle Parsons, Penelope Allen.
     Part English lecture, part behind-the-scenes documentary and part
theater piece, LOOKING FOR RICHARD is an ambitious experiment created by
Al Pacino as a sort of "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About
Shakespeare but Were Afraid to Ask."  Motivated by a desire to make the
works of William Shakespeare speak to a contemporary audience, Pacino
spent several years (evidenced by his now-you-see-it, now-you-don't facial
hair in the film) putting together a film version of "Richard III" which
would combine performance of key scenes, observation of the actors
wrangling over interpretation of those scenes, and historical background
for the play.  To that end he brought together a group of actors including
Alec Baldwin, Winona Ryder, Kevin Spacey and Aidan Quinn to make their
"Richard III" a Shakespeare for the uninitiated.
     It is a noble goal Pacino has set for himself, but there is something
inherently contradictory about the way he has chosen to go about achieving
it.  As an educational tool, LOOKING FOR RICHARD isn't exactly pitched at
those individuals represented in his person-on-the-street interviews, most
of whom greet the word "Shakespeare" with a shrug or a grimace (the
notable exception being a panhandler who speaks eloquently about how the
Bard "instructed us how to feel").  It is a fairly academic piece of work,
with lectures about iambic pentameter intermingled with talking heads
describing the events in the play.  Pacino employs rat-a-tat editing to
cut back and forth between locations for rehearsals, descriptive narration
and the play itself, resulting in a film which may have been made with the
multiplex audience in mind but which seems destined exclusively for the
art houses.
     Yet LOOKING FOR RICHARD is likely to bore those same art house
viewers, because the film does not offer much in the way of insight.  The
actors and academics who speak throughout LOOKING FOR RICHARD go to such
lengths to make the basic plot of "Richard III" understandable that they
have little time or inclination to dig deeper.  Pacino may have wanted to
foster the "appreciation" of Shakespeare, but he is willing to settle for
people being able to describe what happened and who is doing what to whom,
and that doesn't leave much for those who already know and love
Shakespeare.
     It is also likely that those same art house-attending,
Shakespeare-loving viewers saw Ian McKellen's dynamic RICHARD III last
year, a cinematic rendering which does far more to thrust the play into a
20th century context.  Pacino himself plays the hunch-backed villain with
his typical intensity, and he often shifts into his habit of indicating
the significance of a given line by the volume at which he delivers it.
It is a straightforward performance, but far better ones are turned in by
Kevin Spacey (whose Buckingham seems so fiercely intelligent that he
becomes like an advisor to a modern politician) and even Alec Baldwin (a
surprisingly sympathetic Clarence).  Winona Ryder is a bit less successful
as Lady Anne, and Aidan Quinn is even less successful as Richmond; Quinn
in particular is like a walking manifestation of John Gielgud's comment in
the film that American actors become intimidated by Shakespeare because
"they've been told they can't do it."
     If LOOKING FOR RICHARD does one thing particularly well, it is to
emphasize the interpretive process which makes Shakespeare a living text.
There may be little inherent drama in a group of actors sitting around a
table talking about what they see going on in any given scene, but the
scenes of those conversations help to show the unique qualities of
performed literature.  It is one of the film's best moments when Pacino's
collaborator Frederic Kimball explodes in frustration at Pacino's plan to
ask an "expert" why a character might have acted in a certain way.  "You
know more about this character," Kimball bellows, and it is a perfectly
succinct description of how a role is re-defined by every actor who
performs it.  That makes LOOKING FOR RICHARD an interesting supplement for
a drama class, but it isn't nearly as worthwhile for an English class.
With its snippets of scenes and specific historical asides, LOOKING FOR
RICHARD doesn't exactly teach how to explore the Bard's texts.  It is more
like a filmed version of the Cliff's Notes.

Author
Nick Schaden
        In "Looking For Richard", director Al Pacino successfully captivates
"Richard III" - one of Shakespeare's most famous plays - to the
screen.   Yes, while many of you out there are probably now emitting an
audible yawn from your mouths, listen closely.   This isn't just the
play reenacted on the big screen ("Julius Caesar"), nor a hip 20th
century spin on it ("Romeo & Juliet").  Instead Pacino vouches for a
fresh new viewpoint, via documentary.   The movie essentially shows the
making of the play itself, with actual scenes from the play (in addition
to quick interviews with famous actors such as "Kevin Kline") spruced in
for flavor throughout.
        What makes "Looking For Richard" so great?   Al Pacino realizes that
90% of the American public doesn't understand and couldn't care less
about Shakespeare's plays.   Thus, to play the major roles (Richard
III,Clarence,Buckingham,Lady Anne) he recruits famous top name actors,
such as Alec Baldwin, Kevin Spacey, Winona Ryder, and of course, Al
Pacino himself.   In addition, Pacino narrates the documentary himself,
carefully explaining the play each step of the way, so we understand at
all times what's going on (a common pitfall with other Shakespeare
movies).   Furthermore, the documentary format makes for a fresh, fun
movie, with interesting discussions and interviews to keep
the audiences attention.  All these elements make for a movie that's
entertaining even for Shakespeare haters.
        However, for you Shakespeare buffs a likely question is: "Is the actual
PLAY good?".   Happily, with the high quality of actors in the roles and
the wonderful setting, I can say a resounding "yes".   The documentary
format never hinders what's going on in the play, and rather strengthens
it.
        However, as with nearly all movies, "Looking For Richard" has it's
problems.   Ironically, the largest problem is also it's largest
strength: the documentary format.   While the format is fun, at times it
can be slightly confusing to the audience.   All in all however,
"Looking For Richard" is a great movie, not just for Shakespeare fans,
but for everyone.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Al Pacino, Kevin Spacey, Alec Baldwin, Winona Ryder, Aidan Quinn, 
      Penelope Allen, Harris Yulin
Featuring: Frederick Kimball, Vanessa Redgrave, Kevin Kline, 
      Kenneth Branagh, John Gielgud, Derek Jacobi, James Earl Jones
Director: Al Pacino
Producers: Michael Hadge and Al Pacino
Screenplay: Al Pacino and Frederick Kimball based on the play by 
      William Shakespeare
Cinematography: Robert Leacock
Music: Howard Shore
U.S. Distributor: Fox Searchlight
     Any traditional version of Shakespeare's "Richard III" will open 
with "Now's the winter of our discontent made summer by this son of 
York", the first line of one of the Bard's best-known soliloquies.  It's 
a telling point, therefore, that LOOKING FOR RICHARD starts with a 
stentorian voice declaring: "Our revels now are ended."  This movie, a 
labor of love for Al Pacino, who makes his directorial debut, does not 
intend to present a complete, unabridged version of the text.  Like all 
film makers who take on Shakespeare, Pacino's goal is to give life to 
his own passion for the plays.  His methods are decidedly 
unconventional.  LOOKING FOR RICHARD is a condensed version of "Richard 
III" wrapped in a stream-of-consciousness documentary.
     Since this is the second version of the play (following Ian 
McKellan's RICHARD III) to hit screens within a year, there's a 
legitimate question about overexposure.  I don't think it's a serious 
concern, however.  Even with an actor of Pacino's stature involved, the 
general public is unlikely to turn out in droves to see LOOKING FOR 
RICHARD.  The primary audience will be Shakespeare buffs, and, even if 
they have seen McKellan's adaptation, they won't mind.  Besides, the 
films, despite telling essentially the same story, have vastly different 
approaches.  RICHARD III translates the play to a 20th Century, pseudo-
Nazi England while LOOKING FOR RICHARD keeps the original historical 
context intact but adds a great deal of work-in-progress footage.
     Pacino begins the film as a documentary investigating what modern 
day audiences think of Shakespeare's works.  The answers he gets during 
person-on-the-street interviews are predictable:  "it sucks", "it's 
boring", "huh?"  The director's motivation for making the movie is 
stated up front:  "It has always been a dream of mine to communicate how 
I feel about Shakespeare to others."  To do this, Pacino interviews 
numerous actors and scholars.  Sound bytes from his talks with the likes 
of Kenneth Branagh, Vanessa Redgrave, John Gielgud, Kevin Kline, and 
James Earl Jones are sprinkled throughout LOOKING FOR RICHARD.  He also 
takes his camera to the supposed birthplace of Shakespeare and the site 
of the Globe Theater.
     After this lengthy introduction, Pacino moves on to the play.  We 
glimpse the casting process and are given an impromptu history lesson 
about the War of the Roses (which functions as background material).  
Someone in the crew worries that no one knows "Richard III", but the 
assertion is made that it's the most often-performed of all of the 
Bard's plays.  And, although the documentary portion of LOOKING FOR 
RICHARD is largely over at this point, occasional interludes throughout 
the remainder of the film return to this format.
     The second half of LOOKING FOR RICHARD concentrates on performing 
select scenes from the play.  Although perhaps only a third of the full 
text is used, even someone who has never seen "Richard III" should have 
no problem following what's happening (Pacino's narrative interruptions 
attempt to explain potentially-confusing issues).  The unconventional 
method of filming, which becomes a little wearisome through 
repetitiveness, must have required extensive time in the editing room.  
There are lots of quick shots that switch between a full, costumed 
version of a play and a simple read-through.  At times, LOOKING FOR 
RICHARD recalls VANYA ON 42ND STREET, although this movie makes the 
behind-the-scenes sequences a more important part of the whole.  
     A number of familiar faces fill roles here.  Pacino, of course, is 
Richard, complete with faux hunchback and limp.  Alec Baldwin (HEAVEN'S 
PRISONERS) plays Clarence, and Harris Yulin (MULTIPLICITY) is King 
Edward.  Penelope Allen (DOG DAY AFTERNOON) is Queen Elizabeth, Kevin 
Spacey (THE USUAL SUSPECTS) is Buckingham, Aidan Quinn (LEGENDS OF THE 
FALL) is Richmond, and Winona Ryder (LITTLE WOMEN) is Lady Anne.  It's 
worth noting that, while the play sequences appear to have been produced 
over a relatively short period of time, the entire film has taken years 
to piece together, as is evident from Pacino's constantly changing 
appearance (short hair and a beard in one scene, clean-shaven with long, 
flowing locks in the next).
     Although Pacino is attempting to make "Richard III" accessible to 
the "average" movie-goer, he probably doesn't succeed.  LOOKING FOR 
RICHARD is a fascinating piece of film making, but I don't think it does 
anything so revolutionary that non-believers will be suddenly converted.  
Pacino's passion is obvious, but it's not universally contagious. 
However, those who enjoy Shakespeare, or are at least open-minded, will 
find much to appreciate here.  LOOKING FOR RICHARD is unlike any 
previous adaptation of the Bard's work, and that's reason enough to give 
it a shot.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Al Pacino's labor-of-love documentary about William Shakespeare's
"Richard III" is delightful for, oh, about an hour.  Maybe less.
Pacino, desperate to communicate his love for the Bard, takes his camera
anywhere and everywhere, from the halls of academia right down to the
man on the street.  (In one memorable clip, a homeless man expresses
regret for the loss of feelings behind contemporary language.) Pacino
stages readings and rehearsals and, even, the occasional educational
aside.  (He provides an answer to "what is iambic pentameter?") For a
while, the whole thing is fascinating, funny, and even frank, as when
the many interviewed actors admit the brutal truths about speaking,
hearing, and understanding Bill S.  Unfortunately, when Al gets down to
the business of actually *staging* some scenes, LOOKING FOR RICHARD
begins to look lost.  Almost all of the serious stuff is filmed in that
same loose and leisurely style, which is great for capturing comments,
but not so hot when trying to do drama.  Of the costumed performers,
only two of the actors-- Estelle Parsons and Penelope Allen-- produce
any real fire.  The rest are a bit of a bore, including Al.  
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC, USA, Earth
legeros@pagesz.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
I'm also on the Web!  http://www.pagesz.net/~legeros/

Author
Edwin Jahiel
LOOKING FOR RICHARD *** 1/2 .Directed by Al Pacino. Narration written by
Pacino & Frederic Kimball. Photography, Robert Leacock. Editing, Pasquale
Buba, William A. Anderson & Ned Bastille. Music, Howard Shore. Produced by
Michael Hadge and Al Pacino. Cast: Alec Baldwin (Clarence), Al Pacino
(Richard III), Kevin Conway (Hastings), Kevin Spacey (Buckingham), Estelle
Parsons (Margaret), Winona Ryder (Lady Anne) and Aidan Quinn (Richmond);
interviews with Kenneth Branagh, Kevin Kline, James Earl Jones, Derek
Jacobi, John Gielgud,Vanessa Redgrave and many others.A Fox Searchlight
release.109 minutes.PG-13
Al Pacino's first movie as a director is an original, mesmerizing
exploration. The Richard of the title is Shakespeare's character Richard
III as well as the eponymous play. Pacino has made a documentary about a
stage production-in-progress, one that involves himself as director and as
actor in the title role, plus a host of other people: performers in this
production as well as performers not in it, but who have experience with
Shakespeare and opinions to share; writers; producers;  consultants;
scholars... the list is long. It even includes people casually met on the
street and who are queried about Shakespeare or their lack of knowledge of
the Bard. (Many amusing reactions occur).
You don't have to look closely to realize that this labor of love is a
busman's holiday. It must have occupied free snatches of time over a period
of years. There are clues to this, such as the changing looks of some
participants, the presence of actress Viveca Lindfors who died in 1995, or
the Pacino's hirsuteness that can differ from one scene to the next.
What  Pacino and Company try to do is to unscramble Richard III by
approaching it with as much understanding and as many insights as possible.
The result is a crazy quilt that explains, elucidates, discusses,
simplifies or sometimes complicates matters as they crop up. This may have
been like haphazard patchwork so far as the filming goes, but the excellent
and very hard editing has given hidden logic and relatively coherent
structure to this fascinating chaos.
>From the start, the method in the madness becomes apparent. "Now is the
Winter of our discontent" is analyzed and explained in terms of the War of
the Roses, the Yorks and Lancasters. Later the iambic pentameter is
illustrated (as a response to  Pacino's falsely naive question) via amusing
da-da-dee-dums.
A refrain pops up often, to the effect that "this is a very complicated
play," which it is,  not only for the director and the actors but for
audiences, especially lay, what with the many characters in a dedalus of
ambitions, real or false alliances, overt or covert enmities, and the maze
of history as Shakespeare saw it. So far as I remember, the word "complex"
is used either little or not at all, and rightly so: the play which is
there are either few or no mentions of "complex,"  in the discussions, and
rightly so.
The text is submitted to deconstruction, from which hang the
interpretations ,so that Shakespeare becomes attainable and more
"enjoyable" from artistic,esthetic,poetic,psychological and historical
points of view. The result is that staggering genius of the Bard is better
felt and comprehended yet, in a paradoxical way, even more mysterious. And
even though sometimes scholars are pitted against players, there is a
common ground of admiration for the playwright.
As Pacino says ( I imagine this applied to both actors and audiences), "You
don't have to understand every word. You get the gist of it." This brings
me to "Looking for Richard" as a film for non-native-English speaking
audiences. It was shown at Cannes last spring,where it was complimented,
but I have my doubts as to the comprehension of it via subtitles. The
language of Shakespeare plus the vernacular of the discussions require
linguistic familiarity. They make of "Looking" the opposite of silent
movies and their universality through images and simple intertitles.
On the other hand, thanks to the back-and-forth shifts between stage,
backstage and real life, the mechanisms of stagecraft are so unveiled that
the effect is one pure Brechtian distanciation, reinforced (for some
viewers) by Richard becoming a precursor of the villain in the parable by
Bertolt Brecht "The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui," in which a gangster
gains power in Chicago.
There are several views of what the purpose of "Looking" is. One opinion is
that Pacino, who has distinguished himself on the stage (including many
performances as Richard), was anxious to prove his theatrical skills to the
wide public that knows only the movie side of him. This may be the case,
but would that such polite vanity were more common and result in many more
"intellectual" and literate movies!
Another belief holds that "Looking"  is an introduction to Shakespeare
which, by stressing the humanity of the performers and demystifying
"difficulties" makes the play accessible to neophytes. I cannot share this
perception. It seems to me that a beginner, the street-person as it were,
or a young student, may identify with or at least recognize certain
universals in the Bard, but will not get the full impact. I believe that,
willy-nilly, Pacino is talking to the already converted -- though not
necessarily the specialists -- whose eyes will open more both to
Shakespeare's work and to the actors'.
I also see "Looking" as a direct-approach (and subsequent choices in
editing) work  of the cinema-verite school,  a documentary about a play
that, in its day, was, in its action and plot (though not its language) a
precursor of a  "film noir," with its dark moods, twists, murders and
treasons.
What we see of the "finished" Richard III is only a fraction of the
stage-play. It comes to us in fragments, yet cleverly shows a number of
telling, full episodes, such as the murders of Clarence and of Hastings or
the killing of the Princes in the Tower -- all riveting, all powerfully
suspenseful and touching.
Among the many bonuses of the film is its healthy discussion of the
American feeling of inferiority vis-a-vis the British when it comes to
doing Shakespeare, a feeling that lies a great deal in differences of
accents and intonations. I only wish someone had mentioned that the
performers of Shakespeare's day did not speak BBC or Oxbridgian English!
Here, not one actor falls into the trap of trying to sound ersatz-British,
nor, happily, does anyone have a regional accent, whether from  Brooklyn,
the South, the West or New England. It all comes down to a convincing
demonstration that Americans can deal with Shakespeare without having to
tend apologies.
If anyone had been told that Pacino would employ familiar movie people
(Kevin Spacey,Adan Quinn,Alec Baldwin, Winona Ryder and others), the first
reaction would have been "How incongruous!" if not "How dumb!" Yet, in
spite of this novelty of casting, those performers are surprisingly good
and convincing. If nothing else, "Looking"  revolutionizes our
preconceptions, our expectations and widely-held beliefs that our own movie
actors cannot shift from screen to stage the way the British have been
doing for close to one century, to their advantage and to the benefit of
both media.
The experienced Pacino plays with a great deal of nuances as he searches
for "his" Richard. Sometimes, like the movie Pacino (say, the son of
Godfather Brando), he is hollow-eyed, contained and menacingly quiet. But
often too he reclaims his Italian-American ancestry and the passion that
goes into flamboyant outbursts.
The atmosphere of the film is one of fascinating peeps into the
collaborative nature of plays. This is not devoid of humor. For example,
Kevin Spacey, whether as a civilian or in costume, maintains a delightful
look of skepticism or irony. Pacino shows a big, heavy book, "The Annotated
Shakespeare" and puns on "The Anointed Shakespeare." And when King Edward
finally dies, he lies in state with coins over his eyes, like a Mafioso
Capo.

Author
Tim Voon
Cast: Al Pacino, Kevin Spacey, Alec Baldwin, Winona Ryder, Aidan Quinn,
Penelope Allen, Harris Yulin
Director: Al Pacino
Screenplay: Al Pacino and Frederick Kimball based on the play by William
Shakespeare
Ever wanted to make a movie without any definite idea of how you want to
make it? So when the crunch comes, the simplest solution is to grab the
best footage and throw it together into a coherent mess. This is my
impression of Al Pacino's 혩LOOKING FOR RICHARD' based on 혩William
Shakespeare's Richard III'. A difficult Shakespearean play to
understand, even at the best of times. Despite being mostly documentary
and partly stagey, this film does work. One gets the general feel of
Pacino et al, urgently trying to understand Richard III. Their
earnestness rubs off on the audience, even if their acting doesn't.
Annoying factors include constant close ups of a deranged looking
Richard III/Al Pacino, staring into the camera with bewildered looking
eyes. Kevin Spacey, who just gets to smile on film, but without any
footage of his having recited any Shakespeare at all. Alec Baldwin, who
gets to say a few more lines than Spacey, before being murdered in a
bell tower. Winona Ryder looking pretty, but Shakespeare she ain't. The
lesser well-known actors have a better flare for Shakespeare, but you'll
end up asking yourself who are they? Also included, is informative
footage of interviews with Sir John Gielguld, Vanessa Redgrave and
Kenneth Branagh on Shakespeare.
Despite the patchwork style of this movie, one does conclude with a
better understanding of Richard III. However, we do not actually see the
play performed in its full glory, but presentation is the sacrifice that
Pacino has to pay, in order to get a fuller understanding of lines like
혩This is the winter of our discontent' or 혩A kingdom for a horse.' By
far the most unusual and modern approach to Shakespeare, and also by far
the best high school resource for kids studying Richard III.
