Title
Review for Amores perros (2000)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Steve Rhodes
When a movie "opens" with an admonition that you can safely ignore the 
violence against animals since no animals were actually harmed during 
its production, you know that something is up.  AMORES PERROS (LOVE'S A 
BITCH), an extremely disturbing Mexican film that received one of this 
year's Academy Award nominations for best foreign film, is a perfect 
picture for those who think that the violence in movies today is not 
intense enough.
Using a format similar to Steven Soderbergh's TRAFFIC, the movie relies 
on fast pacing and jump cuts to tell three overlapping and intersecting 
stories.  Whereas TRAFFIC's central theme is drug trafficking, AMORES 
PERROS's common thread is graphic violence against dogs, featuring more 
cut-up, mutilated and gruesomely dead dogs that you've ever seen or will 
ever wish to see again.  The level of violence is so gratuitous and so 
disgusting that I picked up my coat several times and started to walk 
out, something I almost never do.
The only thing that kept me in my seat -- other than hoping, incorrectly 
as it turns out, that the gore would diminish -- was that this is a well 
made film.  Highly derivative of other works, the movie by director 
Alejandro Gonzрlez Iырrritu and writer Guillermo Arriaga started me 
thinking that perhaps their names were pseudonyms and that it was really 
a Steven Soderbergh and Quentin Tarantino collaboration.
Although the film contains cheating with a brother's wife, a horrible 
car accident and many acts of violence against humans, it is the dog 
fighting story at its core that you will never be able to get out of 
your head.  Perhaps the "sport" of training dogs to maul and kill each 
other will be of interest to some, but I found it repulsive.
If you have a pet, if you've ever had a pet or if you're even thinking 
about getting a pet, this isn't the movie for you.  Others may enjoy the 
director's technical proficiency and be able to ignore how derivative 
his work feels.  It's an energetic but sickening thrill ride of a movie.  
It's also a cinematic low point.  What's next?  Hacking up babies as a 
way to provide theatrical thrills to those who have been anesthetized by 
lower levels of violence?
AMORES PERROS runs a long 2:23.  It is not rated but would be NC-17 for 
graphic violence against humans and animals as well as for language, 
nudity and sex.  The film would be acceptable for college students and 
older.
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Want free reviews and weekly movie and video recommendations via Email? 
Just send me a letter with the word "subscribe" in the subject line.

Author
Jon Popick
© Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Mexico hasn't exactly been a hotbed of successful independent film over the
last decade, but if every movie they produce in the next ten years is only
half as good as Amores Perros, Steven Soderbergh had better start brushing
up on his Spanish.  The film, which was nominated for an Oscar and has
already picked up awards from numerous film festivals (including a critics'
award at Cannes), features three stories united by a car crash on a busy
Mexico City street.
Each of the tales would be interesting enough on their own, but cobbled
together as uniquely as they are, the film become a devastating story about
fate and relationships.  Even the Amores tagline - "Don't worry if you don't
see this picture; you're going to live it anyway" - pokes fun at the Fickle
Finger.  All three stories feature a seriously flawed character with designs
on some sort of prize, but Fate always steps in (here, in the form of the
crash) to unexpectedly slap it away.
The first story is about a young unemployed man named Octavio (Gael Garcνa
Bernal) who is in love with his sister-in-law, Susana (Vanessa Bauche).  She
already has one baby, is expecting another and is still a student, but none
of this seems to bother Octavio, who feels his gangster brother Ramiro
(Marco Pιrez) isn't good enough for the beautiful Susana.  He dreams of
getting enough money to convince Susana to run away to Juarez with him and
accidentally finds it in Cofi, Ramiro's dog.  It turns out Cofi is one hell
of a fighter, and Octavio makes mad money pitting him against other dogs in
brutal (and illegal) fights.
Amores's second tale, titled "Daniel and Valeria," focuses on a magazine
editor and fashion model, respectively.  Daniel (Αlvaro Guerrero) is
successful, married and has two kids, but that doesn't stop him from moving
in with Valeria (Goya Toledo).  After being horribly disfigured in an
accident, Valeria's life becomes even worse when her little dog disappears
down a small hole in the floorboards of their new apartment.  The dog is
trapped in the hole, Valeria is trapped in a wheelchair, and Daniel is
trapped in a situation that makes him long for the boring life he just
abandoned.
The final vignette shows an old man named El Chivo (Emilio Echevarrνa)
living a life of squalor after walking out on his family to become a
revolutionary many years ago.  He has served time in prison but now spends
his days and nights tending to a flock of stray dogs...and the occasional
contract killing.  El Chivo (or "The Goat"), who looks a lot like DeNiro in
Angel Heart, is hired by a cop to kill his crooked partner, but he seems
more interested in stalking his estranged daughter, Maru (Lourdes
Echevarrνa).
Other than the crash, the stories don't really intertwine, but, once in a
while, you can see characters from one pop up in the background of another.
With a gritty, ultra-violent story about hitmen, stickups, a fixed fight and
a car crash told in fragmented time, you can't help but compare Amores to
Pulp Fiction or, really, anything Quentin Tarantino has written and
directed.  There have been several attempts to duplicate Tarantino's style
since Fiction was released and, while I don't know if it was the filmmakers'
intention to do so, this film is the best knock-off yet.  It's even better
than Go, which also featured three uniquely structured stories.  Writer
Guillermo Arriaga does a great job constructing the film around stories
involving dogs, as well as showing us that we don't get any wiser as we grow
old (Octavio is in his teens, Daniel is middle-aged and El Chivo is pushing
60).
Amores would have been an amazing enough film, but learning it's Alejandro
Gonzαlez Iραrritu's directorial debut is a little like getting the wind
knocked out of you.  Iραrritu, who also produced and expertly edited the
film, shows the poise and confidence of a feature-film veteran here and,
aided by cinematographer Rodrigo Prieto and scoremeister Gustavo
Santaolalla, has crafted the first great film of the new millennium.  This
is, hands down, the most auspicious debut I've seen in years.  Assuming you
can get over the subtitles and grisly dog fight scenes (the credit assure us
no dogs were harmed during filming, but it's just too intense to believe),
you'll probably feel the same way.
2:33 - R for graphic violence, adult language, nudity and sexual content

Author
Jonathan Richards
Directed by Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu
Screenplay by Guillermo Arriaga (from his novel)
     The movie opens with a high-speed car chase through the crowded 
streets of Mexico City. A wounded dog lies bleeding on the back seat of 
the pursued vehicle.  The chase ends in a two-car collision that's 
horrific even by our jaded moviegoing standards.  And from that deadly 
intersection we move back and forward in time, following three separate 
stories of dogs, love, and violence that occasionally brush up against 
each other.
     Though the end credits assure us that no dogs were hurt in the 
making of this film, it will still test the sensibilities of animal 
lovers.  At the very least, a few dogs must have been drugged, or else 
sent for extensive method training at the Canine Actor's Studio.  The 
first story centers on a teenager who earns a nest egg to run away with 
his brother's young wife  by entering his dog in dogfights, which he 
wins until an opponent spectacularly cheats.  The grimy arenas awash in 
fur and blood are likely to be more upsetting to many audiences than the 
human violence, though there's plenty of the latter as well. 
     The second, and least effective, story concerns a supermodel and 
her married lover, and her fluffy little dog Richie who gets stuck 
beneath the polished floor of their new apartment when he dives through 
a hole in pursuit of a ball.  The metaphors run a bit thick here, but 
what undercuts this section most is the unbelievability of the 
characters' responses.
     The last part of the triptych features El Chivo, a man who was once 
a college professor with a wife and small daughter, then a revolutionary 
guerilla, then a convict.  Now he's a homeless bum who makes a sporadic 
living as an assassin, living in filth and shattered illusions in an 
abandoned building with the pack of stray dogs he's taken in.  He yearns 
for a reunion with the grown daughter who thinks he's dead, and he's a 
walking case study in the maxim that no good deed goes unpunished.
     Director Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu, who grew up in Mexico City, 
sees the love, loyalty, and brutality of dogs mirrored in the lives of 
the people who feed and care for them them.  It's the first theatrical 
feature for Inarritu, but he handles it with a veteran's sureness.  
Comparisons are inevitable with Tarantino's Pulp Fiction, and also with 
Soderberg's Traffic; Inarritu lacks Tarantino's cocky comic swagger, but 
he leaves Soderberg in the dust.  In part he benefits from the use of a 
cast of talented actors unknown here, who create their characters 
without the distraction of recognition.  Best is Emilio Echeverria as El 
Chivo, the hirsute hit man, whose face rivets our attention whenever he 
rambles across the screen.  If  it were Michael Douglas in the role, no 
matter how good he was, a part of our consciousness would be distracted 
by his Michael Douglasness.
     Inarritu set out to explore the social structure of Mexico City in 
this film, and he does it best when he stays in its sprawling 
underbelly, where it's a dog-eat-dog world.  Amores Perros was Mexico's 
entry in the Oscars, and it's a terrific movie - if you can stomach the 
(simulated) dogfights.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Lions Gate Films
 Director: Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu
 Writer: Guillermo Arriaga Jordan 
 Cast: Emilio Echevarria, Gael Garcia Bernal, Goya Toledo,
Alvaro Guerrero, Vanessa Bauche, Jorge Salins
   The great Scottish poet Robert Burns once said "The best
laid plans o'mice and men/Aft gang a-glee."  And don't we all
now that! In Alejandro Gonzalez Inarritu's debut film "Amores
Perros"--which joins "Crouching Tiger," "Divided We Fall,"
"Everybody Famous," and "The Taste of Others" in the Oscar
competition for Best Foreign Language Film--scripter
Guillermo Arriaga Jordan reminds us of an even more all-
embracing quote.  "If you want to make God laugh, tell Him
your plans."  Everybody in "Amores Perros" has A Big Plan. 
Everybody gets shafted.  But ah, there's some justice in the
failure of the humanity's plans in this case: each of the
aspirants violates one or more of the Ten Commandments
and each receives justice of biblical proportions.
   What's so great about Mexico's entry to the Oscar
competition aside from its grandiose ambition to illustrate a
divinely-inspired vengeance on its principals?  Aside from the
skillful acting of a cast largely unknown to a typical American
audience, "Amores Perros" keeps us on the edge of our
seats by its graphic but essential violence, the intensity of its
characters' drives, and not least by a battery of dogs of all
descriptions who are, sad to say, uncredited in the press
notes.  Dogs figure in virtually every sequence of this three-
part, "Traffic"-like story but this is no "Lassie Come Home"
nor are we about to see Toto in Kansas. In fact we are in the
world's most populous and perhaps most polluted metropolis,
Mexico City, which--judging by the way U.S. tourists seem to
be bypassing that capital in favor of Cancun, Acapulco and
Puerto Vallarta--is a dangerous place to be.
   One of Mexico's most notable performers, Emilio
Echevarria, figures in each of the three stories in the role of
El Chivo, but the real center of the action is not a goat but a
ferocious dog named Cofi.  In the first of three sequences,
Cofi is entered into a dog-fight competition, illegal in Mexico
though practiced in shady places by seedy characters for
fairly large stakes.  Octavio (Gael Garcia Bernal), an man of
about eighteen years of age, is in love with his sister-in-law
Susana (Vanessa Bauche), and is in need of some pesos to
carry out his plan to free her from her occasionally abusive
husband and elope with her to Juarez.  Entering his
Rottweiler into the ring, he succeeds in cashing in fifteen
straight times, but remember what the Bible says about
incest: his plans go awry when he perpetrates a godawful car
crash.  
   The second story deals with a middle-aged, middle-class
magazine publisher, Daniel (Alvaro Guerrero), who abandons
his wife to live with a smashing supermodel, Valeria (Goya
Toledo).  The car crash--this time shown through the
perspective of the model rather than of the perpetrator of the
collision--interrupts the plans of this box-office couple. 
Perhaps inspired by Bunuel's film "Tristana," director
Gonzalez Inarritu casts not one but two divine reprisals on
the unfortunate beauty who in one situation desperately tries
to save her little dog who has fallen through the apartment's
floorboards and is threatened by large rats.  (By contrasting
the glossy wooden floor with the unkempt life beneath,
Gonzalez Inarritu is obviously throwing us a metaphor for
surface glitter vs. inner rot.)
   The final episode finds El Chivo, now a homeless man with
a cartload of homeless pooches, wandering through the mean
streets of Mexico City.  Once a revolutionary who had
abandoned his family only to wind up spending twenty years
in jail for murder, he now earns money as a hit man who,
having realized an epiphany after witnessing the car crash,
manipulates both his customer and his customer's intended
victim to act out a story of sublime justice.
   "Amores Perros" faces tough competition particularly
against "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" (which Joel Siegel
pretentiously called "one of the finest films ever made), but
for its more earthy treatment of celestially-inspired repayment
for our sins deserves serious consideration by the Academy.
Not Rated.  Running time: 153 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dennis Schwartz

 LOVE'S A BITCH (AMORES PERROS) (director: Alejandro Gonzрlez Iырrritu;
 screenwriter: Guillermo Arriaga; cinematographer: Rodrigo Prieto;
 editors: Gonzрlez Iырrritu/Luis Carballar/Fernando Pжrez Unda; cast:
 Vanessa Bauche (Susana), Gael Garcьa Bernal (Octavio), Umberto Busto
 (Jorge), Emilio Echevarria (El Chivo), Alvaro Guerrero (Daniel),
 Rodrigo Murray (Gustavo), Marco Perez (Ramiro), Jorge Salinas (Luis
 Miranda Solares), Goya Toledo (Valeria), Lourdes Echevarrьa (Maru),
 Josж Sefami ( Leonardo), Gerardo Campbell (Mauricio); Runtime: 153;
 Lions Gate Films; 2000)
Love's a Bitch is an intricate film noir tale, living up to its tough
sounding title. It's a melodrama about violence and passion in a
contemporary Mexican city. It spans all social classes: the
underprivileged, the wealthy, and the disenfranchised. This compelling,
lengthy (153 minutes) drama is Alejandro Gonzрlez Iырrritu's auspicious
directorial debut. It provides a look at the travails of obsessive love
through three separate stories linked by a tragic car crash and canines
that keep reappearing. The dogs play an important part in the three
interlinking stories.
The first story entitled "Octavio and Susana," starts out with an
exciting car chase through the busy city streets. One vehicle is filled
with crazed gunmen seeking revenge by firing at the car that has a dog
in it that is bleeding to death. The car with the dog in it will crash
into another car and that heavily influences the other two stories.
Flashbacks reveal how the dog Cofi was shot by the owner of another dog,
this is after it nearly killed his dog in a staged dogfight that they
bet on.
The first part of the film is filled with powerful images of dogfights
(they were simulated) in the barrio and the obsessive love one slacker
brother, Octavio (Bernal), has for his older brother's wife, the
teenager Susana (Bauche). She is with one infant and is expecting
another, and suffers from being a battered wife. Somehow, she loves the
older brother Ramiro (Perez) more than she can love the more gentle
younger one. Octavio's obsessive dream is to get her to run away with
him to Juarez and leave her no-good thief of a husband. He starts saving
money and keeps it in a shoebox she keeps in her closet. It's his hope
that this money will enable them to live together. He raises the huge
sums of money when he accidently discovered that his dog is a champion
dogfighter. He goes partners with his buddy Jorge, and the local
dogfight ringmaster (Campbell) who puts up his stake money. He soon
starts making lots of dineros to put in the shoebox, and he still has
enough to buy a car.
The second story is entitled "Daniel and Valeria." Here we meet a
middle-aged, successful magazine editor Daniel (Alvaro Guerrero), who
has left his family to live with a much younger, beautiful supermodel
Valeria (Goya Toledo). He's rented a luxurious new apartment for her;
her smiling image is on the imposing billboard that faces her window.
But her happiness is short-lived, as she is in the aforementioned car
crash and is confined to a wheelchair. There will be complicatications
to her leg injury, as gangrene sets in and she loses the leg. Her love
life is further tested when playing fetch with her minature dog, and he
falls into a hole in the floor and can't be found. But there is
sometimes a whining sound coming from under the floorboards, which
compels the couple to keep looking for him. When looking for him, they
discover thousands of rats there and fear that he won't be able to
survive. The probable loss of the dog (her love for him is an obsession)
and her career being ruined, makes her depression even worst. The lost
dog sequence seemed too forced and heavy-handed to have much impact; it
was piling up the material girl's misery much too high.
In the third story entitled El Chivo and Maru, the attention is focused
on the homeless, disheveled, straggly, long white-haired man
(Echevarria), someone we have seen sketchily in the other two stories
walking the streets with a pack of stray dogs. We learn that his
nickname on the street is El Chivo (Old Goat) and he is being hired by a
rogue cop Leonardo (Sefami) to be a hit man for a nervous businessman,
Gustavo (Rodrigo), who tells him that he wants his partner eliminated
(he turns out to be a half-brother). The cop tells the bio of El Chivo,
how he left his family and college teaching job and became a guerrilla
fighter, and after a long prison term became a wino. He became
disillusioned with his choice to save the world, and is now obsessed
with his grown daughter Maru. He hasn't been with her since she was two
years old, and she's been told by the family that he's dead. El Chivo's
connection with the car crash is that he's the first at the scene and
rifles the money of the dead Jorge and the severely injured Octavio, and
he rescues the badly injured dog Cofi and nurses it back to life.
There's passion and excellent filmmaking and acting in these gritty
stories, but there's also too much of a story going on; and, it is too
long of a film. But it is intoxicating in its edginess and harsh look at
reality, and at one's dreams and obsessions. Iырrritu's characters are
full of life and earthy flaws, and things that are too much for them to
comprehend. But they are always involving. An excellent debut film for
the director, that touches in an original way on themes many other
innovative indie directors (especially Quentin Tarantino's Pulp Fiction)
are currently doing.
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews"
Е ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ

Author
SSG Syndicate
 This entry in Oscar's Best Foreign Film category lost to "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon," but it's an amazing breakthrough for Mexican cinema. Beginning with a catastrophic car crash in the center of Mexico City, it spins into a trilogy of tales about those involved - and their dogs!  In "Octavio and Susana," a young punk (Gael Garcia Bernal) wants to raise money to run off with his abused, pregnant sister-in-law (Vanessa Bauche) by entering his pet mutt in hideously brutal, bloody dog-fights. In "Daniel and Valeria," a businessman (Alvaro Guerro) leaves his wife and family for a beautiful supermodel (Goya Toledo) whom the crash turns into a paraplegic and, while she's convalescing in a fancy loft, her pampered toy poodle vanishes under the floorboards, where he's threatened by rats. And in "El Chivo and Maru," an elderly, itinerant assassin (Emilio Echevarria) adopts a wounded Rottweiler. First-time director Alejandro Gonzales Inarritu and screenwriter Guillermo Arr!
iaga are obsessed with the ferocious cruelty of human nature, illustrated by the various reasons that the cars are at that intersection at exactly that time. And, clearly, they have been influenced by the grim realism of Quentin Tarantino, particularly "Pulp Fiction." Cinematographer Rodrigo Prieto's shaky camerawork conveys a feverish immediacy, while the eclectic soundtrack, masterminded by Gonzales who was in the music business before making movies, mixes Mexican rap with the cries of Celia Cruz. Running three hours in length, it could use judicious editing, and  the title means "Love's a Bitch." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Amores Perros" is a compelling, savage 8. It's obvious why it won the Grand Prize at Cannes Critics Week but it's not recommended  for those who are repelled by violence.

Author
Jeremiah Kipp
Painted in the colors of rust, Alejandro González Ińarritu's Amores
Perros is a hard-edged epic of interconnected lives in the mean streets
of Mexico City.  This has become a popular trend in independent films
such as Wonderland and The Five Senses, not to mention big-budget
blockbusters like Traffic.  By blending different scenarios, there's the
hope of creating a mass collage.  It's not as easy to pull off as you
might think -- consider the rhythm of your standard daytime soap opera.
The concept of three juxtaposed narratives, at least in the "flavor of
the month" sense, can be traced to Quentin Tarantino, as can the
gunslinging desperados and pop music that have become the humdrum
trademark of Pulp Fiction imitators.  Ińarritu is content to simply
rehash those familiar elements.  Perhaps that's why so much of this
Academy Award nominated foreign film comes off like a movie you've seen
more than once, translated a Espanol.
Despite the cinematic and structural predictability and an exhausting
three hour running time, Amores Perros finds surprising flickers of
humanity within the dead-end lives of ex-convicts, losers, young lovers
on the lam, and hired gunmen.  These almost-heroes are driven by an
unfinished business of the heart, most notably the mysterious phantom
hobo, El Chivo (Emilio Echevarría).  He's a contract killer (yes, a
homeless contract killer -- it's not played for laughs) for some elusive
businessmen, but his attention is drawn away by an unexpected obituary
notice that triggers memories of his long shrouded past.  This sort of
thing only happens in the movies, but let's cut Ińarritu some slack
here.
El Chivo lurks throughout the other two stories, but only in his
exclusive section (the final third of the film) does the heart and soul
of Amores Perros emerge.  Retribution is not seen as an easy mark, and
Ińarritu puts to one side the cheap violence and sadistic humor of his
previous tales, replacing it with the empathetic sorrow of a distant
love ballad.  Poetic and slighty cheeseball, but oh so sweet.
It's almost too little too late.  Example: one of the parallel stories
follows a young buck (Gael García Bernal) attempting to raise money to
run away from home with his beloved sister-in-law (Vanessa Bauche).  He
finds a financially lucrative solution in pitting the family pet in a
series of blood soaked dogfights.  For all its combustive energy, it's a
one-note tragedy as he makes enemies of his brother and the local goon
squad.  Things fall apart in a predictable hail of tears and bloodshed.
The other subplot steals images wholesale from Krzysztof Kieslowski,
presenting the arid relationship of a frivolous supermodel, Valeria
(Goya Toledo) and her boyfriend, a successful businessman (Alvaro
Guerrero).  The building block poster of Valeria across the street from
her dream home is a direct lift from Red (in which Irene Jacob played a
petulant model, natch).  When she is hospitalized in a terrible car
accident, the event that brings all of Amores Perros' characters
together, it forces her to reevaluate her empty life.  It'd be sad if
she weren't such an annoying phony.
The title, Amores Perros, directly translates as "Love's a Bitch." 
Meaning, life stinks.  It also means, literally, that love is a female
dog.  That explains the constant presence of mutts throughout.  El Chivo
is surrounded by runaway scamps, the supermodel has a pampered pooch,
and the young buck has his attack dog.  It sounds a little too neat -
and it is, really -- but the canines provide our nasty heroes someone
who they can relate to with unconditional affection.
That unabashed sentiment bridges Amores Perros through the hyperkinetic
overdrive of whiplash images, smash cuts, and the pulsating cacophony of
street noises on the audio track.  It's too much.  In his eager passion
to fill Amores Perros with explosive imagery, Ińarritu nearly drowns his
audience in visual excess.  If he doesn't watch out, he'll turn into
Ridley Scott.
Let's hope not.  This fresh new filmmaker does make the most of his
locations, finding the epitome of downbeat urban squalor (you can almost
taste the mined-in dirt), but he should have listened to Dennis Hopper's
advice in Tarantino's True Romance: "Slooooooow it down, man!"  He's got
an eye for the strong visuals representative of the overcrowded, noisy,
polluted excess of Mexico City.  Now all he needs is a steady gaze.
Director: Alejandro González Ińarritu
Producer: Alejandro González Ińarritu
Writer: Guillermo Arriaga
Starring: Emilio Echevarría, Gael García Bernal, Goya Toledo, Álvaro
Guerrero, Vanessa Bauche, Jorge Salinas
http://multimedia.elfoco.com/elfoco/amoresperros/index.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
