Title
Review for Get Real (1998/I)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   This item appeared in the Associated Press on March
24...PIESON, Fla. (AP) - School officials reversed their
decision and will allow a teen-age boy to attend his high
school prom in drag.  Charles Rice plans to wear a red, floor-
length evening gown, red satin shoes, gloves and matching
rhinestone jewelry to Saturday's prom.  Taylor High School
Principal Peter Oatman changed his mind after conferring
with attorneys.  "I should have the freedom to express
myself," said the 18-year-old senior, who is gay.
   Good for the kid, and good for the principal who avoided an
inevitable, losing court fight!  The young men in American
high schools who would love to wear gowns to their proms
would not have the courage (and perhaps bad sense) to do
what this boy did, so we should not expect most gay young
men in upper-middle-class suburban English schools to dress
in drag either.  The central character of "Get Real," a well-
written, richly photographed film under the spirited direction of
Simon Shore, has no intention of being so audacious.  All he
wants is to be respected for what he is: a quiet, gay person,
with the right simply to be seen in public with a male lover if
he so chooses.  He does not want to be harassed or beaten
to a pulp simply because of his sexual orientation.  "Get
Real" is as British a film as "Jawbreaker" and "Waterboy" are
American high-school stories.  Like other English takes on
school life such as "The Winslow Boy" and "The Browning
Version" and "Quartermaine's Terms," nobody is stuffed into
the trunk of a car, nor is anyone scraped off the ceiling.  "Get
Real" is a compassionate, delicate narrative about a 16-year-
old in a reputable school who feels himself an outsider not
because he is gay, but because he must dishonesty portray
himself as straight to his parents and his schoolmates.  The
subtext--one which, I feel, is not a valid one despite the
writer's own feeling on the matter--is that a homosexual who
comes out of the closet will inevitably feel more comfortable
with himself and his surroundings.
   The story focuses on Steven Carter (Ben Silverstone), a
16-year-old attending a public (that is, a private) academy in
the wealthy English suburb of Basingstoke--itself unusual in
that the film breaks away from the current fashion for
working-class tales from the sceptered like "Twenty-four
Seven" and "Carla's Song."  Steven's parents seem in the
dark about their boy's sexual orientation, and while some of
the toughs in the school bother him and call him a queer, we
suspect they do so only because Steven is a delicate sort of
lad.  Steven is astonished when the school jock, John Dixon
(Brad Gordon), makes a play for him.  Dixon is adamant
about covering up his own orientation.  He dates a leggy
model, is a star athlete, and has every girl in the school
drooling.  Since only Steven's best friend, the plump and
sharp-tongued Linda (Charlotte Brittain), is aware of his
feelings, the lovely Jessica (Stacy A. Hart) wonders why
Steven rebuffs the advances she is making on the young
man.  Ultimately the dilemma is resolved at an awards
assembly program, at which point Steven lets it all hang out,
so to speak.
   While this is the sort of story that could have come from
the pen of early Oscar Wilde, the movie is actually based on
a play by Patrick Wilde, "What's Wrong With Angry?" 
Director Simon Shore has successfully opened the staged
drama to include some strikingly pretty photographs of the
English countryside.  His cinematographer, Alan Almond,
captures the environs of a fairly swanky school, where the
youngsters wear blazers and ties while some of the teachers
dress like urban American instructors.  Among the scenes
that capture the ambience of this privileged institution is one
taking place in an English class in which a 16-year-old girl
beautifully reads a section from "Romeo and Juliet" followed
by an active class discussion.  Significantly, the English
teacher (Richard Hawley) queries his small group about
whether they think Juliet should tell her parents about her
secret marriage to Romeo.
   While the tone of the story is a serious one, "Get Real" is
peppered with double-entendres, as when John offers Steven
a cigarette: "Fag?"  When John follows up with "filthy habit,"
Steven assumes that he means homosexuality, not smoking. 
There is a cute scene that introduces us to how Steven and
John initially form their liaison, one which takes place in a
park bathroom.
   If the conclusion is too pat--Steven's mother (Jacquetta
May) doing the obligatory "I'm-proud-of-my-gay-son" shtick,
the film as a whole is involving, one which succeeds not only
as entertainment but could be used as a primer for kids even
on the junior high school level to teach toleration and, even
better, acceptance of those whose ways of thinking less
popular. "Get Real" was screened at the Edinburgh Film
Festival where it won the Audience Award in 1998 and was
selected for the 1998 Toronto Festival and at Sundance in
1999.

Author
Jon Popick
PLANET SICK-BOY: http://www.sick-boy.com
Hey, you!  Can you quickly name the three clichés that make up the basic
gay film?  The first is obvious – it has to be set in England.  The
second is a bit more subtle – the main character has to have a chubby
female friend that is just as alienated as he is.  The third is optional
 the film must be based on a play written by a guy with the last name
Wilde.
The Wilde in question is not Oscar, but Patrick, and Get Real is based
on his celebrated play What's Wrong With Angry?  The picture begins
promisingly, with a young protagonist Steven Carter (Ben Silverstone)
being forever turned off to both heterosexual activity and ice cream as
a friend incorrectly tells him how babies are made.
As a teenager, Steven appears to be like the rest of his Basingstoke
prep school classmates; his room has a desk and a computer, and its
walls are covered with photos of England's top football players.  The
dodgy student, who doesn't care for the sport, is reduced to ferreting
out potential mates at a varmint-infested bathhouse in the park.  One
day he stumbles upon the popular school jock, John Dixon (Brad Gorton),
who eventually falls for Steven but doesn't want to reveal his
alternative lifestyle to his mates or the rest of the school.
Feeling like it was filmed in (get) real time, the picture slowly winds
its way through sentiments not seen this side of soap operas and bad
after-school specials, finally culminating in the predictable big speech
where Steven outs himself in front of his parents and entire school.
(1:51 - R for language and sexual content)

Author
Pedro Sena
(Seen at the 22nd Portland International Film Festival, in Portland, Oregon)
Despite what might be considered a rather taboo subject for many people,
there is one ting that transcends it all, when it comes to the art of film
making. Some films just are so well made and directed that it is impossible
to even dislike it, in spite of the subject matter that nears the area where
every parent really hates to hear about it, much less deal with it.
Yet, in the capable hands of a director with a magnificent sense of purpose
and design, a film that could very easily have fallen into a melodramatic
and silly film, where the social points of view take precedence over the
quality of the spirit, and the desire to be honest with oneself and his
friends. This film stands up so very well, that it should teach us a lesson
in what is the meaning of love and understanding of self during those
moments. Rarely has a film deal with one subject, let alone two, and done it
so impressively.
GET REAL is the story of a young man, who realizes early that he is gay,
but he is not really sure what to do or go about it. And the other young man
he happens to come to like, is a bit of a jock, and has some serious
problems that he has a hard time dealing with. He may walk away with the
sports award for the year, but he does not get the top award which is his
knowledge and understanding of self, and therefore the ability to feel free
about his spirit and self amidst his classmates.
In between the first and last moments of the film are some rather
satisfying and pleasant lines and situations that help the film along. It is
funny, without being ridiculous and it is serious without being over the
top. Directed with care and attention to detail and balance, this simple
film, becomes a major staple and representative for a generation that is
having a hard time dealing with its films. And if this is not enough, it
takes a gutsy mother to accept things first, and help settle the crap down
once and for all.
if this is not enough, the performances are excellent, and specially strong
and helpful in this film are the three women that help the whole thing go
forward. Linda, a bit over weight, but a close friend to Steven, is a
special treat. and she provides the breaks when we need them, even if they
are at the funniest of moments, during a dance. And later, a girl that
starts to like Steven, but is not aware of his predicament, also help
forward the story rather nicely into its major conclusion and triumphant
end.
While many may be shocked by the content and some people did walk out of
the theater, the fact remains that these things are there and as much a part
of school life as they are a part of society. Were we better able to handle
it when it takes place in our younger days, we might have had a society that
is less guilt ridden and more accepting of those who have different feelings
of affection for members of the wrong sex. This film deals with these things
rather carefully but never gives up, and makes sure that the total honesty
and beauty survive to win.
Few people have that much in guts and honesty about themselves and their
lives. This film is not the answer, but it goes a long way in helping people
understand themselves and their personal feelings, at a time, when
repression and lies seems to be the one thing that most concern themselves
with. Kudos all around. Specially the magnificent casting and use of the
actors. Not for many moments do we get the feeling that we are dealing with
generic characters, and the script helps them all come through. It's hard to
believe that anyone can ask for more in a film.
The film also makes magnificent use of various music, and also has a very
well designed cinematographic stand, which is designed to help lighten up
the moments in such a way as for us to find them human, and not corny. How's
that for excellent design in direction?
4.5 of 5 GIBLOONS
Reviewed by Pedro Sena, Copyright (c) Pedro Sena 1999. All Rights Reserved.

Author
Steve Rhodes
Sion Shore's GET REAL is a look at the agony of being a gay teenager.
Although the picture's glossy finish and relentlessly upbeat music
defuse much of the effect of the bittersweet story, the unquestionably
strong performance by Ben Silverstone rises above the film's
limitations.  Even when asked to deliver some pretty stiff dialog, his
winsome smile and nervous energy speak more than the lines he is given.
Steven Carter (Silverstone) is a teenager who defines his life in terms
of his sexuality.  "I came late to sex," he confesses in his opening
line.  Late to him means almost age 10.  Later, we witness his
stereotypical sex education class, complete with a video of copulating
porcupines and a lecture that includes horrible descriptions of sex that
would scar the minds of youths forever.
We then cut to Steven as a 16-year-old.  As a practicing homosexual, he
hangs around park bathrooms and has sex in the woods with strangers.
Although this behavior carries physical risks, the movie's carefree
music makes it sound completely harmless.  Steven says he is careful,
but the dangers in this environment clearly transcend just AIDS.  At any
rate, Silverstone makes his actions credible, even if perilous.  One
just wished the filmmaker had not felt compelled to put such saccharin
twists on the behavior.
On one trip to the bathroom in which he makes passes through a hole to
the guy in the next stall, he hooks up with school's BMOC, a handsome
jock named John Dixon (Brad Gorton).  Outside the restroom, their dialog
is full of double-entendre.  "Fag?" asks John, offering him a cigarette.
"Sorry?" replies Steven, thinking he is asking about sexual
proclivities.  "Filthy habit," concludes John about the smoking.  "Huh?'
responds Steven, thinking he means being gay.
They become secret lovers with Steven wanting to come out of the closet
and John petrified that someone will find out.  John, you see, is known
to be dating a gorgeous, female underwear model.  Most of the rest of
the story is fairly predictable from this point.  Periodically, the
music will stop, the film's momentum will come crashing to a halt, and
John or Steven will deliver some long monologue, which is scripted
earnestly but not well.
Charlotte Brittain, as Steven's neighbor and classmate, Linda, deserves
special mention.  With too much make-up and big hair, Linda is a fat
girl who knows that she's everyone's last choice.  She makes up for this
by taking driving lessons, 40 of them, with a willing, but married,
driving instructor.  Linda is also the sort of honest and supporting
friend that everyone needs.
In a year in which every teen movie feels honor bound to end at the
prom, this movie doesn't contain a single prom sequence.  When the kids
get together to dance, they do it, not at some artificial big moment at
the movie's conclusion, but just at a normal school dance in the middle
of the picture.  And they even dare to look like they're having fun
dancing.
GET REAL runs 1:50.  It is not rated but would probably be an R for
mature themes, brief nudity and profanity and would be fine for
teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
released by Paramount Classics
starring Ben Silverstone, Brad Gorton, Charlotte Brittain, Stacey Hart, Kate
McEnery, Patrick Nielsen
written by Patrick Wilde(based on his play "What's Wrong With Angry?")
directed by Simon Shore
For quite a while, homosexuality has been trying to find a way into modern
cinema. In films such
as "Gods And Monsters" and "Beautiful Thing", the homosexual themes were
ways to further the
story, rather than shock the mainstream audience. But, I'm afraid the genre
has taken a step in the
wrong direction with Simon Shore's dramatic comedy "Get Real", the first
feature from Paramount
Classics.
Ben Silverstone stars as Steven Carter, a 16-year-old British gay male who
settles for casual sex
in bathrooms. The only one whom he has told about his sexuality is
Linda(Charlotte Brittain), his
overweight next-door-neighbor. The two social misfits are constantly mocked,
but they
complement each other nicely.
One day, while Steven is in a bathroom where the gay men mingle, he gets a
note from someone
in the next stall, asking him to meet him outside. A few minutes later,
Steven realizes that it's John
Dixon(Brad Gorton), the most popular jock in school and "sex on
legs"(proclaims Linda). He tells
Steven that they must forget about the whole thing because he doesn't know
what came over him.
While the year goes on, and different girls(most notably Jessica, played by
Stacey Hart) hit on
Steven and John, the two teens realize their infatuation for one another.
John still denies to himself
that he's gay, but he admits that he is confused. Steven, meanwhile, is
coping with the fact that his
parents are slowly figuring out his secret identity.
The main problem, though, with "Get Real", is that it treats "coming out" as
a plot element that can
fill a movie. But all of "Get Real" is just Steven contemplating whether to
come out or not. "Get
Real" wants to be a normal romantic-comedy, but it makes it's gay themes
seem all too important.
Another problem is cliches. In class, the kids just have to be learning
Shakespeare's "Romeo And
Juliet"(oh no, not another metaphor), while the film's own star-crossed
lovers are taking their
place. And of course, there's got to be the newspaper article, written by
Steven, entitled "Get
Real", from which the film takes its name. It's quite surprising that a film
which claims to be so
refreshingly original and daring can't even surpass the depth of America's
latest teen comedies.
"Get Real" is also very, very melodramatic, so I ended up feeling almost
nothing for it's characters,
making it a dull experience.
But at least newcomer Ben Silverstone gives a charming performance as
Steven, with potential
that shows that he will charge ahead when given a better role. And this is
director Simon Shore's
first film, so at least he has many more years for improvement


Author
Greg King
GET REAL (M).  
(NewVision)
Director: Simon Shore
Stars: Ben Silverstone, Brad Gorton, Charlotte Briitain, Stacy A Hart, 
Kate McEnery, Tim Harris, James D White, Patrick Nielsen, Louise J Taylor
Running time: 110 minutes.
Inevitably, it seems that every new British drama exploring
the traumatic coming out experience of gay teens will be compared with
the marvellous Beautiful Thing.  However, Get Real is good enough to
stand on its own, without the baggage that such a lazy and often
odious comparison brings.
Based on Patrick Wilde's semi-autobiographical play What's
Wrong With Angry?, Get Real treats its emotionally charged and
potentially contentious subject matter with wonderful touches of
humour and insight.  This delightful and entertaining film offers a
warm and engaging portrait of teen angst that will also appeal to more
mainstream audiences.  Get Real is also a refreshing change from the
bland high school comedies offered up by Hollywood in recent years.
The film explores the romantic dilemma of 16 year old Stephen
Carter (played with winning charm and style by Ben Silverstone, last
seen briefly as the young Humbert in the controversial remake of
Lolita), who just happens to be gay.  The only person who knows his
secret and his habit of trolling local beats is Linda (Charlotte
Brittain), his next door neighbour and best friend.
Then a chance encounter leads Stephen to discover that John
(newcomer Brad Gorton), the handsome school jock, is also gay.  A
romance develops between the pair, although the need to keep their
affair secret places great pressure on the pair.  But while Stephen
wants to shout his love for John from the rooftops, John is more
cautious, fearing the knowledge he is gay will damage his reputation
and status at school.  Eventually Stephen finally finds the courage to
make a hard choice, one that will shake up the complacency of his
parents and his school mates.
This deftly written film explores issues of peer pressure,
homophobia, prejudice, and questions of sexual identity with the kind
of honesty and understanding that comes from bitter personal
experience.  Get Real contains a number of quite moving moments, but
it is also a remarkably warm and very funny film.  First time feature
director Simon Shore handles the material with a great deal of
understanding and compassion.
The performances from the young and largely unknown cast are
all solid.  Silverstone beautifully captures Stephen's vulnerability,
angst and confusion with a well rounded performance.  Brittain
delivers a wonderfully rich and sympathetic performance as Linda -
fat, frumpy, lonely but filled with generous spirit - and she provides
the film with much of its engaging humour.
An entertaining and compassionate treatment of the
complexities surrounding gay teens and the problems of coming out, Get
Real is a genial, winning comedy that easily overcomes the mistaken
notion that gay themed films are of limited appeal.
