Title
Review for Bogus (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Were it better written and directed, this unaffecting fantasy might
come across as something other than leftovers from a high-powered
Hollywood lunch.  ("Let's get Whoopi!" "Yeah, and pair her with...  that
Frenchman!") There isn't much subtlety to this story of a little boy
(Haley Joel Osment), his imaginary friend (Gerard Depardieu), and the
grumpy guardian that the boy goes to live with (Whoopi Goldberg) after
his mother is killed in a car accident.  Spoon-feeding is the order of
the day and director Norman Jewison (MOONSTRUCK) overstates nearly every
emotion and related plot point.  (The incessant musical cues are also
tough to take, though I didn't mind hearing Louis Prima's "Banana Split
For My Baby" played during a soda-fountain fantasy sequence.)  Worst of
all is Whoopi's characterization.  Instead of coming across as a lovable
party poop, her self-absorbed actions suggest a level of negligence that
might send a social worker screaming from the theater.  Mercifully, the
darkness is cursed by two luminaries.  The kid, Osment, is a natural and
that Frenchman, with his loopy smile and bulbous nose, is an imaginary
giant for all ages. 
Mike Legeros - Raleigh, NC 
legeros@nando.net (h) - legeros@unx.sas.com (w)
Visit me in MOVIE HELL http://www.n-vision.com/hell/>

Author
Michael Redman
Because of the numerous possibilities of headlines and comments of a
negative nature, if I were making a film called "Bogus", Id go out of
my way to make sure that the film was one of quality. As usual, the
producer and director didnt beat a path to my door asking for advice.
Too bad.
Little boy Albert (Haley Joel Osment)'s Las Vegas chorus girl mother
dies in a traffic accident and he is sent to live with her lifeless
adoptive sister Harriet (Whoopi Goldberg). Albert is frightened and
doesnt want to go, but finds an imaginary friend, Bogus (Gerard
Depardieu) to help him on his way.
The subject of the imaginary friends of children and adults is an
intriguing one, worthy of imaginative exploration. But dont look for it
here amid the dull pap.  Often in films with kids, the problem is with
the overly-cute children. At least you dont have to worry about that
here. Osment has his wide-eyed look down fairly well, but most of the
time hes just there.
Goldberg isnt much better. Her film career has been dramatically uneven
running from the listless comedies to fine performances in "Boys On The
Side", "The Color Purple" and others.  Her appearance here is flat, as
if she had realized what a drab vehicle she was in and attempted to
match it.
The only semi-bright spot is Depardieu. His larger than life man-child
is occasionally delightful and comical. Dressed in an enormous floppy
trench coat that frequently seems to be going in a different direction
than he is, the French actor has a flair for physical humor.
Unfortunately he can't pull the movie out of itself.
Theres a powerful cinematic short-cut that is becoming over-used and
trite. During this film, we see scenes from "Harvey" on the television.
What this segment of Jimmy Stewart talking to his imaginary six foot
rabbit friend is supposed to do is bring us to an "Oh yeah, 'Harvey'!
That was a great film and was about the same subject as this one is so I
should transfer my warm feelings about 'Harvey' to this movie." state of
being. I first remember seeing this used effectively in "Close
Encounters", but here it seems like a sleazy trick.
Even worse than attending a film that you suspect might be mediocre is
seeing one that, based on the cast and story, you expect a magical time
and having it turn out to be a numbing experience. Stay home and rent
"Harvey"; youll have a much better time.
As alluded to in the first paragraph, "Bogus" is, indeed.
[This appeared in the 9/12/96 "Bloomington Voice", Bloomington, Indiana.
Michael Redman can be reached at mredman@bvoice.com]

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Whoopi Goldberg, Gerard Depardieu, Haley Joel Osment, 
      Denis Mercier, Andrea Martin, Nancy Travis, Ute Lemper, 
      Sheryl Lee Ralph
Director: Norman Jewison
Producers: Norman Jewison, Arnon Milchan, and Jeff Rothberg
Screenplay: Alvin Sargent
Cinematography: David Watkin
Music: Marc Shaiman
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     With the advent of the fall, relief from the past season's nonstop 
action is on the way.  Officially, BOGUS is still a summer movie, but it 
has little in common with the recent bulk of mainstream releases.  With 
a director like Norman Jewison (MOONSTRUCK) at the helm, it shouldn't be 
a surprise that BOGUS is well-realized and thoughtful, but, given the 
number of movies that have gone wrong over the last few months, it's 
refreshing to see something that lives up to its promise.
     BOGUS is a lightly-dramatic fantasy much in the tradition of Frank 
Capra's fare.  For the most part, this film is sentimental without being 
mawkish, and only at the very end is there a brief, and largely 
inoffensive, slip into melodrama.  BOGUS handles its subject matter -- 
loss, loneliness, and the need for a friend -- with admirable restraint, 
never employing the kind of relentless manipulation that can easily turn 
off the seasoned movie-goer.  Jewison is in control not only of tone and 
pace, but of his actors, as well.  This results in a string of strong 
performances.
     As the film opens, we're introduced to Lorraine Franklin (Nancy 
Travis), a bubbly single mom with a delightful, seven-year old son, 
Albert (Haley Joel Osment).  Lorraine is part of the Circus 
Phantastique, a traveling band of performers currently based in Las 
Vegas.  Albert has formed an attachment with the group's magician, 
Antoine (Denis Mercier), who acts as a substitute father.  When Lorraine 
is killed in a traffic accident, Albert finds himself alone in the 
world.  Antoine helps him with his grief, but he cannot be a full-time 
caretaker, and the young boy faces becoming a ward of the state.  
     To avoid that eventuality, Lorraine had drafted a will of sorts 
that names her one-time foster-sister, Harriet (Whoopi Goldberg), as 
Albert's guardian.  Reluctantly, Harriet agrees to take the boy in, even 
though, by her own admission, she doesn't have a "motherly bone" in her 
body.  Indeed, Harriet is not a good parent, and, to compensate for her 
inadequacies and fill a void in his life, Albert invents a good-natured, 
invisible friend named Bogus (Gerard Depardieu), who follows him around, 
offering advice and comfort.  Harriet, of course, doesn't believe in 
Bogus' existence, but a series of events makes her question her views of 
reality.
     It's said that many intelligent, creative children invent imaginary 
friends.  Considering that Albert has just lost his mother and surrogate 
family, and has been forced to move to Newark, New Jersey (ugh!), he has 
plenty of reasons to dream up Bogus.  As the movie unfolds, we learn 
that, despite the weighty subject matter, BOGUS isn't a downer.  It's a 
magical excursion into the worlds of imagination and potential.  
Lorraine's death is just the starting point -- the real story is about 
how Albert and Harriet grow close and learn that neither of them is so 
different from the other after all.
     Whoopi Goldberg, who seems determined to act here rather than just 
rely on her goofy personality, turns in a sympathetic and multi-layered 
performance.  It has been a long time since her work has reached this 
level, perhaps going back as far as THE COLOR PURPLE.  Meanwhile, with 
BOGUS, Gerard Depardieu has finally found a solid English-language role 
to place aside his numerous critically-acclaimed French parts.  Forget 
GREEN CARD and MY FATHER THE HERO -- BOGUS shows why the actor is 
internationally respected.  His ability to mix light comedy with pathos 
makes Bogus more than just a cardboard character.  Then there's Haley 
Joel Osment, who has as much charisma and screen presence as any under-
ten performer.  Osment is occasionally a little too cute, but such a 
minor flaw can be forgiven considering the maturity of his acting.
    BOGUS is a well-crafted and moving motion picture.  In striving for 
moderation rather than melodrama, Jewison has crafted a feature that 
touches the heart in a special place.  The film asks, but doesn't 
answer, the question of whether the process of growing up is worth the 
sacrifice of innocence and trust.  The director doesn't attempt too 
much, and his weaving of several themes into one is masterfully handled.  
Children and adults of all ages will be enchanted by this movie, which 
is the exact opposite of its title.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Whoopi Goldberg, Gerard Depardieu, Haley Joel Osment.
Screenplay:  Alvin Sargent.
Director:  Norman Jewison.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     It is a frustrating thing to watch a high concept get in the way of a
perfectly good film.  In BOGUS, there is a scene in which the Jimmy
Stewart classic HARVEY is showing on a television, and the reference makes
you suspect that someone went into a pitch meeting to describe BOGUS as
"HARVEY, but you can see the rabbit...and he's Gerard Depardieu."  BOGUS
could have been -- and should have been -- a simple story of mutual need,
and there are plenty of reasons to believe it could have been a rather
good one.  Instead, poster-driven film-making has turned out yet another
promising but disappointing effort.
    BOGUS begins in Las Vegas, where 7-year-old Albert Franklin (Haley
Joel Osment) is living with his mother Lorraine (Nancy Travis), a circus
performer.  When Lorraine is killed in a car accident, Albert is left in
Lorraine's will to the care of her foster sister Harriet (Whoopi
Goldberg), whom she had not seen in many years.  Harriet, a serious-minded
businesswoman living in Newark, NJ, claims she doesn't "have a maternal
bone in (her) body," but she agrees to take Albert in when the only other
option is state care.  Still, Harriet has difficulty relating to the young
boy, who has chosen to relate instead to an imaginary friend who emerged
from a coloring book, a Frenchman called Bogus (Depardieu).
     There are a lot of things right with BOGUS, beginning with the
performances.  Whoopi Goldberg apparently decided to shake off a string of
one-note trash-talkers and turn in some of her best work in years; Harriet
is not the typical Whoopi wiseacre, although she still gets in a few
decent lines.  Instead, she is a woman dedicated to over-compensating for
a harsh childhood by becoming a more successful adult.  Shaggy-haired
Haley Joel Osment hovers just this side of precocity, doing surprisingly
little posing and emoting as the smart but lonely Albert, and he really
seems to work well with other actors.  The connection between Goldberg and
Osment develops slowly, but eventually it seems quite genuine.  And
Depardieu, who is genetically incapable of sleep-walking through a
performance, has the ideal comical demeanor for his role.
     That role, unfortunately, is the real problem with BOGUS, because
someone should have realized that its central conceit was a big mistake.
It is evident enough in the fact that Depardieu really has nothing to do
but strike an offended pose when someone doesn't believe in him or feed
Albert lines like a French TelePrompter.  Bogus is a prop, not a
character -- he is required strictly to smile benignly and to offer
advice which one would expect from a child psychologist rather than an
imaginary playmate.
     The more substantial issue from a structural standpoint is that
screenwriter Alvin Sargent never commits to whom this story is about, and
Bogus is the crutch which allows him to do it.  When Albert and Bogus are
conversing, BOGUS is about a boy in need of comfort, and that is _not_
what it should be about.  This is Harriet's story, and we should watch her
grow into an understanding of what her life is missing through her
attempts to understand what Albert's life is missing.  By attempting to
place those two stories on an equal footing, Sargent and director Norman
Jewison diminish both of them.  They also end up condescending both to
Harriet and to the audience, because we should no more be able to see
Bogus than we are able to see Harvey.  Harriet's doubts are given no
weight, and there is a strange lack of trust in the audience demonstrated
by the refusal to allow our imaginations -- which the story seems to value
so greatly -- do their work.
     I am certain that some viewers will find the more fanciful elements
in BOGUS enchanting.  These same viewers might also consider my
pooh-poohing of those elements so much humbuggery, but to do so is to
misunderstand my meaning.  BOGUS should be fanciful; it simply didn't need
to be obvious.  Imagine the story with a boy fond of magic, chatting with
an invisible friend instead of grieving, and the severe Harriet (whom we
see in a wonderful scene reacting so violently to a gathering of children
that she actually knocks several of them over) struggling to connect with
Albert by re-connecting with a childhood she feels she never had.  Imagine
more time spent establishing Harriet's workaholic character, and less time
spent on goofy scenes like Albert's defense of Bogus in his classroom.
BOGUS is far from a bad film -- Goldberg is too good, and there are some
solid laughs -- but there is a far more affecting film to be found
somewhere where a tale of redemption and imagination takes precedence over
how easy it will be to construct an advertising campaign.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     BOGUS (1996) is a fantasy about an invisible friend.  People who
exist only in one's imagination are common in childhood and in films.
Perhaps the best known of the latter is the movie HARVEY (1950), which
plays on the television in BOGUS lest we miss the connection of this
show to a greater one from the past.
     As the show opens, effusively happy Albert Franklin has a mother,
Lorraine (Nancy Travis), and plenty of visible friends.  Lorraine works
as a magician's assistant in a traveling act, which is now playing on
the Vegas strip.
     Albert is played by Haley Joel Osment in the strongest performance
in the movie.  Haley, whom you may recognize as Forrest Junior in
FORREST GUMP, is as assertive as he is cute.  His voice projects with
an authority that surpasses many adults.
     Shortly after the beginning of the story, Albert's mother is
killed in a car accident.  Director Norman Jewison cuts away quickly so
as to remove any chance of emotional impact.  Throughout this uneven
movie he will retain this proclivity to shy away from more than surface
depth.  The script by Francis X. McCarthy, Jeff Rothberg and Alvin
Sargent suffers from a similar problem.  The characters, Albert being
the exception, are outlined adequately, but they are only partially
filled in, leaving the viewer with a frustratingly incomplete feeling.
     By the provisions of the his mother's will, Albert is packed off
to Newark, New Jersey to live with his mother's foster sister Harriet
(Whoopi Goldberg), who did not know Albert existed.  (Albert's father
is explained away as a "fly-by-night," with his mother not even knowing
his last name.)  Since Albert is white and Harriet is black, this might
cause some challenges to be dealt with, but this script pays the issue
scant attention.
     Graffiti-encased Newark is cast against type.  Rather than its
usual collection of drug dealers and gangs, we see it as a friendly
working class town.  Nary a bad guy shows his head.  For those of us
who have lived in New Jersey, albeit not in Newark, it is refreshing to
see someone look upon its brighter side.
     As Albert travels on the plane to go to live with Harriet, a large
French stranger named Bogus (Gerard Depardieu) materializes out of a
drawing Albert has made.  Since Bogus can be seen and heard only by
Albert, we have the canonical set of scenes where Albert talks to Bogus
and a confused Harriet asks to whom Albert is speaking.
     Although the child actor gives an excellent performance, the
adults are merely adequate.  Depardieu plays his part whimsically, but
little more.  A more complex interpretation of his character would have
helped.  Similarly, Goldberg has the tough part right as the owner of a
small business, but her role as a reluctant mother is not believable.
She develops little genuine chemistry with anyone else in the picture.
     It is plausible that Harriet starts off tough.  ("This isn't going
to work.  I haven't had a conversation with a child since I was a
child.")  But when the inevitable emotional crack finally comes, it
happens too late and too unconvincingly.
     Notwithstanding these problems, the film does have its magical
moments and none more so than when Harriet and Bogus are transformed in
a daydream to a pair of dancers a la Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers.
This scene was presaged earlier in another movie on the television.
     While always pleasant and sometime downright charming, Jewison's
film remains strangely uninvolving.  The ingredients are there but he
has trouble staging them into a compelling whole.
     BOGUS runs too long at 1:50.  It is rated PG for a little bad
language and its more serious themes.  It would be fine for kids around
6 and up.  My son Jeffrey, age 8, said he thought the film was "okay,
but it can get a little boring at times." His favorite part is when the
boy does magic tricks.  Since I never disliked the film and since there
are several touchingly funny portions, I am giving the film a mild
thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
