Title
Review for Bitter Moon (1992)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Dragan Antulov
In 1992 French writer Pascal Bruckner visited Croatia in
order to promote his novel LUNES DE FIEL. The government
media gave a massive hype to this event, although it had
less to do with Bruckner's work as a writer and more to do
with his vocal advocacy for the cause of Croatian
independence among the ranks of French and European
intelligentsia. Some Croatian critics nevertheless tried to
justify the hype by praising the novel as a perfect example
of new "post-ideological" literature, which should deal less
with fashionable leftist subjects and more with "simple love
stories". The author of this review admits that he haven't
read the novel but the idea of BITTER MOON being a "simple
love story" looks totally alien to him, at least if the 1992
screen version, directed by Roman Polanski, was faithful
adaptation of the novel.
The plot of this film is set on a cruise ship in
Mediterranean. British couple Fiona (played by Kristin
Scott-Thomas) and Nigel Dobson (played by Hugh Grant) are
travelling to India via Istanbul in hope that the exotic
destination would revamp their stiff and boring
relationship. There they meet another couple that seem to
have another set of problems - wheelchair-bound American
writer Oscar (played by Peter Coyote) and his beautiful
French wife Mimi (played by Emanuelle Seigner). Nigel's
natural curiosity about this couple is more than satisfied
when Oscar starts telling him the story of his long and
bizarre relationship with Mimi, not leaving even the most
intimate and embarrassing details. Nigel is shocked by this
series of discoveries and starts to wonder what kind of
perverse game Oscar plays with him, but in the same time he
can't get enough of it, partially because he is getting more
and more attracted to Mimi.
BITTER MOON is anything but "simple" love story, but it is a
nevertheless a love story, and it proves that love stories
can be effective even if the protagonists are dislikeable,
and the events on the screen mostly revolting or depressing.
Credit for this should be given to Bruckner, but also to
director Roman Polanski, director who is able to turn even
the most unpleasant content into something watchable.
Polanski's misanthropy and black humour were perfect for the
story that chronicles the evolution of man-woman
relationship from pure love to pure hatred and takes almost
pornographic approach to the extremes in which participants
of such relationships can show cruelty towards each other.
Such approach required a lot of effort from the actors, and
Polanski was lucky to have a good cast by his side. The best
acting jobe is done by Peter Coyote, American character
actor who rarely had an opportunity to play romantic leads,
mostly due to his rather unglamourous looks. His partner and
Polanski's wife Emanuelle Seigner employs much of her
sexappeal and dancing ability, thus creating few pleasant
moments in this generally depressing film. Grant and
Scott-Thomas are reliable in their roles of stiff-upper-lip
Britons, and their act, so overused in romantic comedies,
seems refreshing in the film of completely different nature.
Unfortunately, BITTER MOON has its share of problems. For
example, the most interesting scenes are those in flashback
(and one of them might interest historians of on-line
communications since it features French Minitel system),
while those on cruise ship are dull, slow and sometimes
completely unnecessary. Uninspiring musical score by
Vangelis also makes a rather disappointing impression. The
finale of the film is non-cathartic and not exactly
convincing. However, despite that, whether you like or
whether you loathe what you have seen in BITTER MOON, this
film will probably leave lasting impression.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com
Movie Reviews by Drax
http://www.purger.com/users/drax/reviews.htm
Movie Reviews on IMDb
http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dragan+Antulov 
