Title
Review for Amazing Panda Adventure, The (1995)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Ryan Slater, Yi Ding, Stephen Lang
Director: Christopher Cain
Producers: Lee Rich, John Wilcox, Gary Foster, and Dylan Sellers
Screenplay: Jeff Rothberg and Laurice Elehwany
Cinematography: Jack N. Green
Music: William Ross
U.S. Distributor: Warner Brothers
     To date, there have been countless variations of the "boy and his dog"
theme, using every animal from man's best friend to a whale.  THE AMAZING
PANDA ADVENTURE transplants the LASSIE story to China and replaces the
collie with a panda cub.  In reality, the only amazing thing about this
motion picture is Jack N. Green's impressive camerawork, which constantly
allows the scenery to upstage both two and four-legged performers.
     As a family film, THE AMAZING PANDA ADVENTURE is more-than-suitable.
It's reasonably entertaining with some not-so-bad acting, energetic action
sequences, and dialogue that doesn't sound like it was scripted for (or by)
morons.  Children will be enraptured by the cute animals and adults won't be
put off by unbearable doses of treacle.  Despite the happy ending, this film
doesn't go overboard when it comes to cute bonding scenes.  They're there,
to be sure, but they don't take up 50% of the screen time.
     The storyline itself is rather thin, and is primarily designed as a
means to get an American boy, a Chinese girl, and a panda out in the
wilderness by themselves.  Ryan (Ryan Slater) is the product of a broken
home.  He lives with his mother in America while his father, Michael
(Stephen Lang), runs a panda reserve in China.  One spring, Ryan receives a
round trip ticket for a visit.  When he arrives, the reserve is in the midst
of a crisis.  Poachers have honed in on a panda mother and cub, and Michael,
along with his assistants, Ling (Yi Ding) and Chu (Wong Fei), is off to the
rescue.  Refusing to be left behind, Ryan joins the expedition.  After a
number of complications, Ling and Ryan rescue the captured panda cub, but
become separated from the others.  Now, out in the middle of the wilderness,
they must fight their way back to the reserve while being pursued by a pair
of poachers who are willing to kill to retrieve the cub.
     Taken as light fare, this movie succeeds.  The best scenes, as might be
expected, are those that highlight the pandas.  Attempts at human character
building vary from marginal to dumb.  Fortunately, these demand minimal
screen time.  Rick Baker's creature shop, which designed the "panda
effects", should be commended.  In contrast to the apes from CONGO, these
animals look legitimate from start to finish, and it's impossible to tell
the real pandas from their fake counterparts.
     Occasionally, THE AMAZING PANDA ADVENTURE stabs at serious issues, such
as protecting endangered species and respecting other cultures, but director
Christopher Cain seems primarily interested in telling this adventure yarn
without cluttering the screen with "extraneous" matters.  As a result, an
opportunity to do something a little more substantial may have been missed.
Then again, substance isn't the strength of THE AMAZING PANDA ADVENTURE,
while sweeping vistas and furry animals are.
     Theatrically, THE AMAZING PANDA ADVENTURE has been packaged with a Bugs
Bunny/Daffy Duck cartoon, "Carrotblanca."  Despite its attempts to parody
the classic film CASABLANCA, this turns out to be one of the most
unimaginative, unamusing Warner Brothers cartoons in decades.  Outside of
Tweety Bird's Peter Lorre impersonation, it's a waste of 8 minutes.
Apparently, if you want to see good Bugs Bunny, you have to stick to TV.

Author
Steve Rhodes
     THE AMAZING PANDA ADVENTURE tells the story of an American boy who
goes to China and helps save a young panda from poachers.  As the story
unfolds, our hero is a boy of about twelve named Ryan Tyler (Ryan
Slater--yes, he is Christian's younger brother) who is giving a report
on what his dad does for a living.  It seems his parents are divorced,
and he never sees his dad, Dr. Michael Tyler (Stephen Lang), because
his dad stays in China trying to save pandas from extinction.  As Ryan
puts it in his report, "There are only 1,000 pandas left in the world.
The problem is that people don't care."
     Ryan gets tickets from his dad to come and visit him on his panda
reserve in China, but he does not want to go.  His mother appears
briefly in the movie to comfort him with "Planes work both ways.  If
you really don't like it over there, you can come home."
     When Ryan gets to China, his father is not there to met him at the
airport as promised, and Ryan soon gets lost in a sea of signs all in
Chinese characters.  This hit home since years ago I got lost on a
remote subway station in Japan, and all of the signs were in Japanese.
It is quite discombobulating.  Eventually, Ryan finds the panda
reserve, but his dad does not care since he is about to leave to save a
young panda.  After at first declaring, "I'm not risking my life for
some stupid old panda bear," Ryan tags along with his dad anyway.
     The rest of the show is a series of adventures that will scare
young children and bore most older ones.  For a dissenting view, catch
Jeffrey's opinion at the end.  We have people being shot with the
resulting bloody wounds, animals caught in vicious traps pulling so
hard you think their legs will tear off, people falling off high
cliffs, people appearing to drown, etc.  The movie is simply one long
chase scene filled with dangers.  At least it does have the predictably
happy ending.
     The acting by Slater is pedestrian and that by Lang down right
awful.  Dr. Tyler's assistants are Ling (Yi Ding) and Chu (Wang Fei).
Fei demonstrates no acting ability, but Ding gives the one compelling
performance of the movie.  She would be worth seeing again.  Finally,
the two bad guys look and act exactly like the idiotic Squat and Baboo
from "The Power Rangers."
     The script (Laurice Elehwany, Jeff Rothberg, and Alex Siskin) is
exceedingly poor and feels like it was put together by a committee.
When Ryan gets in trouble and needs to fix a transmitter, he reassures
Yi with "Relax, I'm an American.  My life revolves around electronics.
I think I can handle it."
     The star of the show and the only reason to see the movie at all
are the pandas.  The scene of the newly born, furless, baby panda is so
precious.  When he gets a little older, he is just as lovable.  Every
time he coos, you want to go hug him.  I was once lucky enough to hold
a koala in Australia, and watching Ryan hold a young panda, Ryan made
me wish I was him.
     The show does have one sweet scene not involving the pandas.  Ryan
and Ling get leeches on them which makes them tear their clothes off.
When they realize what they have done, they both get extremely
embarrassed.  Ryan tries to get over the embarrassment by reassuring
Ling that "I've seen naked ladies before.  I have cable TV."  It is a
tastefully done scene where they are only shot from the neck up.
     The directing was by Christopher Cain whose last movie was THE
NEXT KARADE KID.  Cain has no visible talent.  Given the intrinsic
beauty of China, I thought the cinematography (Jack Green) was
surprisingly straightforward.
     There is one good thing about THE AMAZING PANDA ADVENTURE other
than the pandas - it starts with a fun cartoon geared to the adults in
the audience.  The cartoon is entitled CARTOONBLANCA and is a direct
takeoff on CASABLANCA.  The cartoon stars Bugs Bunny and all of his
friends.  This one, of course, has a happy ending since it is a cartoon
after all.
     THE AMAZING PANDA ADVENTURE runs too long at 1:30.  It is rated PG
for many violent scenes that will frighten kids under 5 or 6.  If you
like pandas, turn on the Discovery Channel instead of seeing this
movie.  My incredibly agreeable son Jeffrey, age 6 1/2, gives the movie
the movie a thumbs up and a thumbs sideways.  He liked the show, but
the thumbs sideways was for the scene of the leaches and the blood when
they pulled them off.  I give the show * for the one sweet scene
involving people and all of the panda shots.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.
