Title
Review for Reise der Hoffnung (1990)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Pedro Sena
One of the saddest, yet, one of the most poetic films I have seen.
It is a political film, which deplores the system to which many people are
attached, and the fact that there isn't much which can really be done about
it all, ... what some of us will do for a chance at a piece of a dream.
For south/central Americans, the dream land is America.  For the many
Kurdish peoples stranded, and stuck in the middle of three hostile
countries, the dream land is either Germany or Switzerland, the richest
countries in Europe.  The price they pay to get to one of those places, is
anything they  can.  The sad part of it all, is that so few of them actually
succeed, and their lives are ruined, forever, with or without their family.
A Kurdish farmer makes a decision to get rid of his farm, and go for the
dream land.  He has received a letter from his cousin in Germany, who will
soon get a job in a factory which has promised to hire him.  He takes his
wife and one of his seven children ( the oldest, a boy ) with him, and the
travels begin.
By the time his travels end, the film stops, leaving us to guess what, and
how it will eventually turn out.  All said and done, there was a cousin, or
a relative of some sort who didn't really exist, and the letter was
fabricated ( the farmer had some money ) with the intent of having the money
taken away by someone,... unclear weather it is Mafia like connections or
simple people who prey on the misguided ones.  Once the 'vision' of success
and future have been aroused, there is little anyone can do for this man.
He is gone.
He travels through Italy, with a fake passport, and goes through various
places until he gets to the high Alps, the pass into Switzerland.  Here, the
people who have brought them this far are having problems agreeing with each
other, and the crowd has to peddle their way on foot, in the snow, in the
night, to get to 'freedom'.
It's the plight of all immigrants, and if you went to school in southern
California like I did, and worked part time in restaurants to pay for the
books and buses like I did, you found out that half of the dishwashers are
Mexican and also very illegal.  The same thing happens in Texas and New
Mexico.  They go through the same process, although,  they have succeeded
where 75% of them have failed.  They know it.  But the others don't.  I even
knew people who every once in a while would bring in one or two for
a thousand dollars each ( I couldn't prove it, though the person drove a
Cadillac and the border guards don't check out rich looking American blondes
driving Cads ) and a few Mexicans who told me how much they paid, which they
are usually told to keep secret or their friends and families will never
come, for the privilege to come to this country.  Believe you me, when all
you have is hell, you will pay the price for a piece, even if a taste, of
real freedom.
It's worth it .  And hopefully something will work out in the future.
Funny what people will do for a dream, isn't it???
This film has incredible music.  If you like European style jazz, listen to
Norwegian TERJE RYPDAL's music ( from EOS ) and swede JAN GARBAREK's music
 from EVENTYR ) all over this film.  It makes the mood of the film so rich
in quality, that it is a bit overbearing.  The cinematography, combined with
this music, is really something to behold, and probably the main reason why
this film won the OSCAR as the best foreign film of last year.  I think  all
actors are Kurdish, and the director is a Kurd, who had a student visa to
get to Europe,... which means he is from a better to do family.

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A low-income Turkish family leaves Turkey for a better life in
Switzerland.  Unfortunately, they are illegal immigrants and are preyed
on by smugglers and other criminals on their trip.  Their "journey of
hope" turns into a desperate struggle for survival when they are
abandoned in the Alps by a smuggler.  A good story, but not told very
well -- a generally mediocre film.
Switzerland (Turkish/German with English subtitles), color, 1990, 105 min.
Director: Xavier Koller
     The story is centered on a poor farmer in Turkey, and his family.
He has received a postcard from a relative who emigrated to Switzerland,
telling him that Switzerland is sort of a "paradise over the mountain"
(paraphrased).  He is determined to go to Switzerland, to find a better
life, at any cost.  To this end, he sells his cattle, sheep, and land to
get the money he needs for false passports and to pay the smugglers.
     However, his wife insists on taking the children (they have seven).
Reluctantly, the husband agrees to take only one child, the youngest.
The rest will remain in Turkey with his parents.  They begin their
journey, and things go smoothly at first.  However, problems arise when
they get to Istanbul -- there are no tickets or passport for the child.
The story continues as the smugglers hide the family in a cargo
container for the journey to Milan, next stop on their journey.
     This film won the Academy Award for best foreign language film,
competing with such films as JU DOU and CYRANO DE BERGERAC.  Although I
feel that the film industry grants so many awards that most are
meaningless, I really hoped that this film would be better than average.
Unfortunately, the film is very ordinary, and did not live up to
expectations.
     The last part of the film is relatively exciting, and many viewers
will react to it emotionally.  However, the problem with the film is the
first part, which you must endure to get to the last part.  In the first
part, you see the farmer behaving in a completely irrational way.  He is
not wealthy, but he is able to support seven children from his small farm.
Unfortunately, he is primarily interested in money; he and his wife
argue on this point when he tells her they must leave the children
behind, for an indefinite period.  Where is his fatherly concern for his
children?  Is going to Switzerland worth the destruction of a family of
nine?
     The problem with the film is that there is insufficient
characterization, particularly for the farmer whose actions drive the
film.  You see his mistakes and (frequent) irrational behavior, but the
motives for his actions have not been sufficiently established.  Because
of this, you might not be fully sympathetic with the characters when
they get into trouble.
     I think that people will react to this film in one of two ways --
the "mind" approach given above, in which case you might view the film
as a case study in irresponsible behavior, or the "heart" approach.  By
"heart", I mean that you will fully identify with the characters, in
which case you might think the film is pretty good.
     Even though it is mediocre/average, the film does illustrate the
refugee and illegal immigration issues that are major political topics
of the day.  Some might consider the film worth seeing simply because it
dramatizes those issues.
     Overall, I think the film is definitely over-rated, and is only
average (first part is below average, second part above average).  Your
reaction to the film may vary according to your interpretation of the
(rationality of the) farmer's actions.
Distribution.  General U.S. release occurs this month (May). The U.S.
distributor is Miramax Films.
Reviewer contact:  teb@stat.Berkeley.EDU
