Title
Review for Rapa Nui (1994)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Eric Mankin
     In the past three decades, archaeologists have decoded the riddle
of the famous statues on Easter Island--Rapa Nui to its inhabitants--as
a clear and terrifying ecological parable for a small planet.
Polynesians reached the remote, once heavily forested island in wooden
boats; built an impressive civilization, and in the process chopped
down the trees--all the trees.
     No more boats, no more fishing, no new wooden tools--just at a
time when more of all of the above were needed for a much-increased
population.  Cut to a futile but increasingly elaborate attempt to fid
a way out through religion (the giant moai figures) and then, abruptly
but predictably, to population crash and no more civilization at all:
just a barbarized, starving semi- cannibal remnant hiding out from each
other in caves, stone age survivalists in an apocalypse of their own
making.
     Here's an attempt to make a feature (Nova has already made a
superb documentary segment) about that apocalypse, on its original
locations.  Director Robin Reynolds and producer Kevin Costner make up
for the noisome pandering of their previous collaboration, 'Robin Hood,
Prince of Thieves': it took real courage to try to make this.
     And it would be an easy film to make fun of.  The story, by
Reynolds and Tim Rose Price attempts to make up for its commercial
improbability by seizing on conventional commercial elements: a
triathlon-like ritual race for sacred priesthood, complete with wise
old trainer; a Romeo and Juliet romance between a scion of the ruling
caste (Jason Scott Lee) and a gorgeous plebeian (Sandrine Holt), with
Esai Morales playing the embittered slave-caste rival.  But hokey as
the elements are, Lee and Morales bring real passion to what they do,
and at least some scenes, like the chopping down of the island's last
tree, have a significance impossible to misunderstand, or to destroy.

Author
Dragan Antulov
At times Hollywood leaves impression of being run by
lunatics, drunks and other people who lost their most basic
mental abilities. This was especially the case in 1990s,
when big studios pumped obscenely large amounts of money
into projects that were doomed to flop from the start. Kevin
Costner's WATERWORLD is usually the best known example of
Hollywood's egos run amok, but the production team of Kevin
Reynolds and Kevin Costner can't be accused of starting that
unfortunate adventure without any sense of caution. One year
before they made WATERWORLD, they tested the uncharted
waters of ecological action spectacle by making somewhat
less ambitious and less expensive project called RAPA NUI.
The plot of this film is based on the legends and historical
speculations about Easter Island in Southeast Pacific, the
most remote part of the world that was ever settled by human
beings. Dutch explorers, upon discovering those islands in
1722, found impressive statues but the the local population,
made of stone-age cannibalistic savages, seemed incapable of
erecting them. The movie tries to give the explanation for
this by setting the story few decades before the arrival of
Europeans. The island is so far away from the other lands
and that the descendants of Polynesian settlers forgot their
roots and believe that they are the only people in the
world. Lack of external conflicts doesn't mean that there
aren't tensions within the community - the society is
divided into two classes based on racial features -
aristocratic "Long Ears" and plebeian "Short Ears". The
class and racial tensions has begun to escalate because of
the population explosion; the island is simply too small to
provide the needs for the people. Old and senile king
Ariki-mau (played by Eru Potaka-Dewes) is less concerned
with those problems, because he thinks only of erecting
bigger and bigger statues in order to placate gods. His
grandson Naro (played by Jason Scott Lee) has other things
on his mind, since he fell in love in "Short Ear" girl
Ramana (played by Sandirine Holt). Love that crosses class
divide happens in worst of all times, since "Short Ears"
like Make (played by Esai Morales) are less and less
enthusiastic about "Long Ears" rule, which slowly but
inevitably paves the way for brutal civil unrest.
RAPA NUI definitely belongs to the same category as
multitude of other films with strong environmental message,
which used to be made during the zenith of Hollywood's
"political correctness" in early to mid 1990s. What
distinguishes this film from those films is the manor in
which the message is delivered to the audience. Namely,
filmmakers wisely chose to set the plot in a time before
arrival of Europeans, thus sparing the viewers from
"politically correct" cliches of evil European civilisation
destroying the nature. RAPA NUI shows that less advanced
native cultures, which are supposed to be more "in tune"
with the nature, can be equally or even more deadly to the
environment than their modern-day equivalents. What is even
more remarkable about this film is the fact that the whole
story can be seen as powerful allegory about the current
state of human civilisation as a whole,. The little spot of
land in the middle of endless sea is more-or-less in the
same situation as our lonely little rock in dark cold
universe, and in the ecologically induced class struggle
between "Long Ears" and "Short Ears" we might see reflection
of the escalating conflict between rich and privileged
states of the First World and numerically increasing yet
constantly impoverished multitudes of the Third World.
Unlike other films that try to shove the Message down our
throats by, RAPA NUI successfully shows how greed, ignorance
and unbalanced approach towards environment can bring down
entire civilisation.
Unfortunately, most of the viewers have to digest this
message in the context of plot, characters and situations
that sometimes look too cliched or simplistic, or simply out
of place. One of the examples is the triathlon scene, which
looks like it was added into the film only to provide some
testosterone- filled action in otherwise depressive movie.
The writer and director Kevin Reynolds nevertheless manages
to keep things under control, helped by ethnically diverse
and very capable cast. Despite many flaws, RAPA NUI is a
film that can leave a strong impression on any viewers, and
after WTC bombings, when the future of our world seems so
uncertain, this impression is definitely going to be even
stronger.
Review written on September 21st 2001
Dragan Antulov a.k.a. Drax
E-mail: dragan.antulov@st.tel.hr
http://www.film.purger.com - 
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian

Author
Raymond Johnston
     The premise for RAPA NUI is a promising one.  Easter Island (known
to the natives as Rapa Nui) is a microcosm society on the verge of
apocalypse.  The last of their forest is in peril of being cut down.
Overpopulation means more work for less food.  The failure of the local
gods to provide has forced a religious crisis.  But the premise put
forth in the tightly edited and lushly scenic trailer is not what
Costner's Tig Productions delivered.  What is on the screen is instead
ROCKY in a hula skirt, or KARATE KID goes coconuts.  It is a big
sporting event competition film.  The sport in this case is,
appropriately enough, an Easter egg hunt.
     The first sign of trouble is the first scene.  The local chief,
called "Birdman" points to a rotting corpse and bemoans the fact that
he has nobody to swim for his clan's team in this year's event.  The
painful and painfully slow machinations around the egg hunt swim fill
up much of the multi-pronged plot.  The rest concerns a group of
neo-Marxist stone cutters called the "Short Ears."  The utterly
simplistic class conflict between the "Long Ears" (the haves) and the
"Short Ears" (the have-nots) takes the place of any development of
threads of religion, culture, ethnography, or tribal ritual.
     Not much is known of true Rapa Nuian practices, but instead of an
informative film based on similar cultures, writer director Reynolds
(with the assistance of co-writer Tim Rose Price) make the worst paint
by numbers coloring book level fable.  Esai Morales, a fine Hispanic
actor (BAD BOYS) is totally miscast as the Marxist-atheist rabble
rouser who spouts on about religion being the distractor of the masses
as if a premature copy of "The Communist Manifesto" had washed up on
the beach.  Other dialogue ranges from incredibly modern, to
stultifying inane.  Birdman extols at one point to his Basil
Rathbone-esque aide "I don't have time for this now, Priest.  I have
entrails to read." Birdman then stands by while the lowly Short Ears
confront him with their list of labor disputes, which is then repeated
endlessly throughout the film in case anybody missed that it was plot
development time.
     Another major disappointment is the quick way in which the carving
of the stone monoliths is glossed over.  People seem busy, but we never
really see how they are carved.  Instead, the scene plays like bad out
takes from the pyramid scene in THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.  All of the epic
crowd scenes all resemble a bunch of disoriented people being told by
somebody off-camera to "now look busy."
     While I am cataloging the failures in this dismal failure of a
film, let me also add that the love story, the one element you can
always count on in a South Sea Island film, is also mishandles
completely, with the third-billed Sandrine Holt hardly being in the
film at all.  Her story, is the most ludicrous.
     I had read complaints about the cross racial casting and was
willing to dismiss them as another case a PCism, but the casting of
American accented leads and Aussie accented minor characters, with
whites in heavy make-up as extras, blew away any remaining sense of
credibility this well intentioned misfire might have had.
     Kevin Costner produced but does not appear in this New Agey tale
of native life.  During the requisite Island Festival scene I thought a
better title for this farango might have been DANCES WITHOUT WOLVES.
     On a serious note, people interested in the topic of Pacific
island life would do better to rent F. W. Murnau's TABU or trying to
seek out John Ford's impressive THE HURRICANE.  Other hard to find gems
include WHITE SHADOWS IN THE SOUTH SEAS and THE PAGAN, both directed by
W. S. van Dyke.  A little further East and into Thailand, CHANG from
the directors of King (Cooper and Shoedsack), still ranks as one of the
finest ethnographic films ever made.
