Title
Review for Jag är nyfiken - en film i gult (1967)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Kendrick
director: Vilgot Sjöman
writer: Vilgot Sjöman
stars: Lena Nyman (Lena), Vilgot Sjöman (Vilgot Sjöman), Börje Ahlstedt
(Börje, Lena's boyfriend), Peter Lindgren (Lena's Father), Chris
Wahlström (Rune's Woman), Marie Göranzon (Marie, Börje's mistress),
Magnus Nilsson (Magnus, Lena's school friend), Ulla Lyttkens (Ulla,
Lena's friend)
MPAA rating: Not rated
"I Am Curious -- Yellow" would mostly likely be a forgotten movie --
left somewhere in the ranks of slightly artistic avant garde films that
mix sex and politics -- if the U.S. Customs Office hadn't seized the
first copy being imported into the United States in 1968.
In its misguided attempt to protect decent American citizens from
Swedish obscenity, the government touched off a firestorm, and "I Am
Curious -- Yellow" became one the final straws that helped pull American
cinema out from under years of prior restraint by the Hays Code and
other forms of censorship. Several court cases later, "I Am Curious --
Yellow" was allowed to play in U.S. theaters, and despite picketing, it
did $20 million worthy of business from moviegoers dying to see on the
silver screen what their counterparts in Europe had been seeing for
years: bare skin and simulated copulation, all in the name of art.
I'm sure that back in the late sixties, when moviegoers flocked to the
few theaters that were brave enough to show such a film, their minds
were running away with dirty notions of what they might see. And some of
them may have been duly shocked at what they saw . . . forty minutes
into the film.
Despite its raunchy reputation as the movie that paved the way "Last
Tango in Paris" and "Showgirls," "I Am Curious -- Yellow" is a
surprisingly dull affair. In fact, it often borders on trite silliness
when it isn't being overbearingly pretentious. It's more political than
sexual, and the majority of the film is given over to endless ranting,
meandering storylines, and journalistic-style interviews about the
political climate in Sweden in the late sixties. It almost gives the
impression that there was no finished script in use while the film was
shot.
The 22-year-old heroine of the story is Lena (Lena Nyman), a
sociologist-wannabe trying to get herself situated in a constantly
changing world. She is insatiably curious about everything, and she
collects information in huge boxes organized alphabetically. The first
forty minutes of the movie deal primarily with her interviewing people
on the streets about their opinions on whether or not Sweden has a class
structure, if women have the same job opportunities as men, and so on
and so forth. It's vaguely interesting for the first ten minutes, but
one can only watch so many man-on-the-street interviews involving the
same questions before its gets tiresome.
However, that repetition makes the film's politics stick with you, even
more than the sexual imagery. A scene showing a man trying to explain
why a doctor should make more money than a dishwasher, a group of
Swedish youth in the streets protesting America's involvement in
Vietnam, footage of Martin Luther King explaining the tenets of
non-violence -- in the end, these are the things we remember from the
film.
The director, Vilgot Sjöman, started off in Swedish theater and moved on
to cinema in the early sixties. He directed "I Am Curious -- Yellow" as
a sort of cinema verite mock documentary, casting himself as the
director of the movie-within-a-movie and having all the actors use their
real names (he actually shot much more footage, which was released a
year later as a second film, "I Am Curious -- Blue," yellow and blue
being the colors of the Swedish flag).
Sjöman used grainy black and white photography with mostly handheld
cameras, and the inept editing and sound is most likely done on purpose.
But that doesn't stop it from being terribly distracting, because there
seems to be little reason why this particular story should be shot as a
documentary. Oftentimes the action will stop in the middle of scene, and
Sjöman will walk on-camera and begin coaching the actors about their
lines.
While "I Am Curious -- Yellow" certainly represents an important moment
in world cinema, it has mellowed with age and is now merely a curiosity
piece, rather than a controversial exploration of politics and sex. I
have no doubt that the MPAA would slap it with an NC-17 rating if it
were ever re-released into U.S. theater (there's far too much male
frontal nudity), but despite its intrinsically biting nature, it still
feels droll and creaky when seen today.

