Title
Review for Feng yue (1996)
Number of Reviews
5

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Leslie Cheung, Gong Li, Kevin Lin, He Saifei, Zhang Shi, 
      Lin Lianqun, Ge Xiangting, Zhou Jie
Director: Chen Kaige
Producers: Hsu Feng, Tong Cunlin 
Screenplay: Shu Kei, based on the story by Chen Kaige and Wang Anyi
Cinematography: Christopher Doyle
Music: Zhao Jiping
U.S. Distributor: Miramax Films
In Chinese with subtitles
     FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE, director Chen Kaige's 1992 epic drama, told 
a tale about sex and friendship against a turbulent political backdrop.  
TEMPTRESS MOON, the film maker's 1996 followup (which premiered with 
much hoopla at that year's Cannes Film Festival) has similar intentions, 
but less successful results.  Rather than existing as a deeply-moving 
exploration of characters and relationships, TEMPTRESS MOON plunges into 
a sudsy, melodramatic formula that it never quite manages to escape 
from.  The film boasts many interesting elements, but, in comparison to 
CONCUBINE, it's a disappointing effort.
     TEMPTRESS MOON opens on the Pang estate in 1911 rural China, 
following a lengthy opening scroll (in English) which describes the 
current political situation.  We are introduced to the three main 
characters -- Zhongliang, Ruyi, and Duanwu -- as children, before the 
film skips forward in time to the 1920s.  In Shanghai, we encounter an 
older Zhongliang (played by Leslie Cheung), who is now in the employ of 
one of the city's many criminal bosses.  Zhongliang's specialty is 
blackmail -- he sleeps with a wealthy woman, then threatens to go to her 
husband if she doesn't pay up.  He's very good at his job, and the boss 
treats him like a son.
     Meanwhile, on the Pang estate, the opium-addicted Ruyi (Gong Li) 
has taken command following an unfortunate "accident" in which her older 
brother smoked arsenic instead of his usual poison.  Ruyi's cousin, 
Duanwu (Kevin Lin), acts as her personal servant, kowtowing to her every 
whim.  When Zhongliang arrives from Shanghai, sent to seduce Ruyi so the 
boss can gain her wealth, he becomes embroiled in a more intense 
relationship than he anticipated.  Ruyi's passionate reaction to his 
advances discomfits the gangster and his cold-hearted composure is 
shaken.
     Chen's story is interesting, but not ground-breaking, and it lacks 
the multi-layered depth of his previous effort.  At its heart, TEMPTRESS 
MOON is about the war between the sexes at a time when women's equality 
was a phrase rarely uttered within China's borders.  The triangle formed 
by the three main characters is constantly being reshaped as the balance 
of power shifts from Zhongliang to Ruyi to Duanwu, with sex being the 
most tangible arena where victory is clarified.  It's fascinating to 
watch the intricate dance that these three go through as they fight to 
emerge unscathed, and to recognize that love not only complicates the 
battle, but raises the stakes.  
     The political climate of the 1920s serves as the film's background 
rather than an integral part of the proceedings -- the story could have 
been moved forward or backward in time without many changes.  However, 
since the period details are among TEMPTRESS MOON's strengths, such an 
adjustment would have deprived audiences of some impressive visual 
elements.  Chen's 1920s atmosphere is strongest at a train station and 
on city streets, but its influence pervades the entire picture.  
Regardless of its other flaws, this, like many Chinese motion pictures, 
is visually sumptuous.
     The acting of the leads is nearly flawless.  Gong Li and Leslie 
Cheung (both of whom appeared in Chen's FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE) generate 
a powerful chemistry.  Many of their scenes sizzle and one in particular 
-- a confrontation in Shanghai when Ruyi demands to know if Zhongliang 
loves her -- is charged with emotional power.  Kevin Lin is equally good 
in a role that demands more subtlety.  Duanwu's participation in the war 
of the sexes is less obvious than that of the other two, but critical to 
the outcome.
     TEMPTRESS MOON requires concentration, especially at the beginning, 
because, as scenes change and the story makes occasionally-jarring 
chronological jumps, it's easy to lose track of who the characters are 
and how they relate to each other.  Miramax has attempted to ease the 
burden by supplying descriptive subtitles, but it's only a minor aid.  
Anyone who becomes lost early during TEMPTRESS MOON will have a 
difficult and frustrating time playing catch-up.
     It's curious that the two latest Chinese films to feature gangsters 
(this and Zhang Yimou's SHANGHAI TRIAD) are among the weakest recent 
cinematic exports from those shores.  Perhaps the film makers are so 
concerned with capturing the mystique of the era that they lose sight of 
the deeper thematic and plot-related elements that have made movies like 
FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE and RAISE THE RED LANTERN modern classics.  But, 
although TEMPTRESS MOON falls short of the lofty perch upon which those 
pictures reside, there's still something compelling about the rhythm of 
this film, and the ending has its own brand of power.  TEMPTRESS MOON is 
a flawed motion picture, but still makes for worthwhile viewing.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Steve Rhodes
     TEMPTRESS MOON (FENG YUE) is a cinematic tone poem from director
Kaige Chen.  Chen, whose last work was the highly regarded FAREWELL MY
CONCUBINE, contents himself this time with dazzling the audience with a
film of stunning beauty.  Populated by characters who are little more
than window dressing, the picture delights the senses, but rarely
involves the viewers.  The characters are mere portraits on Chen's
mantle with the viewers becoming voyeurs into the two dimensional world
he creates.
     The obtuse script by Kaige Chen, Kei Shu, and Anyi Wang represents
a challenge.  Like an opera, you need to read the plot outline ahead of
time to keep the main characters straight, and even then, some of the
minor ones will confuse you.  After meticulously following the story, I
realized in the end that it didn't matter.  The movie's enjoyment comes
from its visuals, so concentrating on the plot is a pointless
diversion.  Nevertheless, I will describe some of story's highlights.
     The movie opens in China in 1911.  The last dynasty is crumbling,
and the forces of modernization are around the corner.  From its first
scenes the movie overwhelms us with its nostalgic and romantic
cinematography.  After beginning the movie with a little girl extolling
the virtues of opium, the film switches to a river scene, where a boat
floats through the hazy, dark night.  The large and lush green leaves
of the plants cut through the darkness as the boat plies its way
forward.
     The people at the palace of the Pang family go wild when they
learn that the emperor has abdicated.  The Pangs are cast as the
Timothy Learys of that era.  Old Master Pang, his daughter Ruyi and his
son Zhengda are more than addicted, they revel in their worship of
opium.  In one telling and erotic image, a girl will caress an opium
pipe with her mouth.  After this opening act, the picture loses its
obsession with opium until the drug returns briefly in the last act.
     The story skips ahead ten years.  Old Master Pang has died and his
son Zhengha has become a zombie as opium has fried his brain.  Elder Qi
(Xiangting Ge) declares that Pang's daughter Ruyi (Gong Li) will rule
the large Pang estate, and he appoints her distant cousin Duanwu (Kevin
Lin Jianhua) as a kind of a guardian for her.  Duanwu is instructed to
call Ruyi "sister," and Elder Qi figures, incorrectly, that he can
control Duanwu and hence Ruyi.
     While a child, Zhengda had a servant named Zhongliang (Leslie
Cheung) whom he treated badly.  Now Zhongliang's boss in Shanghai sends
him back to the Pang estate where the adult Zhongliang and Ruyi become
attracted to each other.
     The story has gotten quite complicated by this point, but don't
worry about it.  Just lean back and enjoy Qiagui Huang's handsome sets,
listen to Jiping Zhao's longing music, admire William Chang and Chen
Changmin's gorgeous costumes and, most of all, soak in the radiance of
Christopher Doyle's incredible cinematography.  Granted, the film does
not have the beauty of SHANGHAI TRIAD, but it comes close.
     Certainly, any film starring as lovely an actress as Gong Li (TO
LIVE and SHANGHAI TRIAD) is worth seeing for that reason alone.  The
camera loves her, and, even if she demonstrates little of her
considerable acting talent in TEMPTRESS MOON, she has a picture perfect
smile.
     Tone poems must be short to be effective.  TEMPTRESS MOON wears
out its welcome and goes on long past its natural ending point.  When
the inevitable tragic end occurred, I found myself unmoved and merely
glad the movie was finally over.  What had started out pleasantly
enough had become repetitive and tiresome.
     TEMPTRESS MOON runs too long at 2:00.  The film is in Chinese with
English subtitles.  It is rated R for sex, drug usage, and a little
profanity.  It would be fine for older teenagers, but I would worry
that younger ones would not be able to see through the pro-drug beliefs
of the Pang family.  I enjoyed watching the movie's visuals, but not
enough to be able to recommend the film.  I give it **.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
Pedro Sena
FILM TITLE:       TEMPTRESS MOON
DIRECTOR:         CHEN KAIGE
COUNTRY:          CHINA 1996
CINEMATOGRAPHY:   CHRISTOPHER DOYLE
MUSIC:            ZHAO JIPING
CAST:             Gong Li, Leslie Cheung, Kevin Lin Jianhua, Caifei He, 
Chang Shih, Liankun Lin, Ziangting Ge, Xian Xie, David Wu, Jie Zhou, WYemang
Zhou, Lei Ren, YIng Wang, Kevin Lin.
SUPER FEATURES:   The design of the film, and story.
 TEMPTRESS MOON, has its good points and bad points.
It is not, on par with previous Chen Kaige films, in that fundamental
directing choices regarding this film. Like his close friend and director,
Zhang Yimou, Kaige has always been a bit too symmetrical of a film maker, in
the sense that the scenes are framed a bit rigidly with the camera, and then
shot. TEMPTRESS MOON, shows that some directors in China are seeing other
films and that they are getting influenced by them. Chen Kaige made a
directorial choice in this film of shooting the whole thing on a steady cam
( by hand ) rather than sitting the camera down every now and then.
It helps, and then it doesn't. When it is challenging to a particular
character's wish or desire, it works. When it is looking at the staid,
boring, and basically dead old monuments of the Pang family, the elders, it
does not work.
It has been said that the success in film, is made because of its ability to
make the camera invisible. And although the idea is ok, in this film it was
not, totally well defined, or designed. The characters know where the camera
is, and are obviously playing to it, which is a bit boring after the first
few times. By comparison, Wong Kar-wai shoots his whole films by hand, and
one never really notices that the camera is obtrusive, although it does have
a breathtaking pace, and a dizzying movement all the time. Kaige's choice,
was to move when he had to, and to stop, when his three main characters were
at a catharsis, which may have been the best time for him to keep it moving
anyway, so one could notice the character scream "in vain" ( so to speak ) ,
thus making each character's plight that much more important... no one is
listening, or paying attention, would be a point, then.
But, if the camera is the main instrument in this film, perhaps, then, we
have to let go of something, and that may just be the story... in almost all
the films where the camera is "free", the story takes second place, and in
fact, is really less important than the point of view that is offered, the
veritable stream of consciousness of the extra person that is participating
in the "film", the fourth wall visitor/audience/us person. In this film,
Kaige never lets go of the story, and tries to enhance it with the close
ups. so we end up with a very emotional, strong, and to this reviewer,
confusing film, where the style seems to be getting in the way of the whole
thing. I might have offered that the youngsters be shot with the moving
camera and that the elders with a totally stationary camera, thus adding a
statement to the "old" style, versus the "new" style, but perhaps this was
already "passe" by the time that Chen Kaige did this film.
Thus, this film comes off as an experiment, but not altogether a bad one.
For one thing, it breaks out the acting, which in these films tend to be a
bit "formal" by western standards..... in other words, this comes off as a
sort of Peter Brook West End performance, probably blazing a trail for the
future of character and theme development. Generally, when this happens, the
"whole" tends to disappear in the past examples, in favor of the "moment".
In this case, the moment makes a statement, but it is not winning the
battles, or the war. It may be a start, however.
With some excellent performances by all parties, Gong Li, may not
necessarily be the strongest performer of all of them, her physical/sexual
moments are weak and terribly self conscious, but nevertheless, she still
manages to bring about a strong personage.
It is the story of the Pang family, whose power and strength has been
dwindling in the past years ( story starts in 1911 ) and eventually falls
apart. It's heirs, are young, and two of them are enjoying the comforts of
being rich, by smoking opium. Their relationship is confused, because of the
demands that are placed on them. And one day, Ruyi, becomes the leader of
the family, and this is a major problem for all the elders, the males, who
are afraid that a woman will ruin the family. And the situation creates an
interesting triangle, for the three children that were friends, that are now
adults, but are, essentially, fighting among themselves for control of the
family and its influence.
What is most obvious, is that the family is trapped inside their quarters,
and are totally out of touch with the world, another cross over chance where
the camera work themes could have been better exploited, since the patterns
of life outside the brick walls are decidedly faster, and changeable than
within the walls.
All in all, visually, this film is very pretty, although the color design of
the film does not get much of a chance to shine, with the camera so intent
on staying on the actors, in an attempt to make their plights stronger. In
doing one thing, I suppose that one sacrifices another. In this case, I
think the film decision was made to do the whole shoot on hand, rather than
study its potential and possibilities.
Not a great film, but a very good one. Different by Chinese standards, and a
bit more "physical/sexual than previous films. Still, it is self conscious
in this department, but that may have more to do with their ability to get
past sensors in China with their state run film industry, than it does with
the director himself. But ultimately, the way to represent this falls on the
director's shoulders.
A good film, not a great one. A changing of ways for Chinese film making,
and a sign that shooting styles will begin to vary out of China, which is
good. Honk Kong influence is very obvious.

Author
Mun Siong Yoong
LES LIASONS DANGEREUSES GOES EAST BY WAY OF CHEN KAIGE.
In his third outing as a scriptwriter, following LIFE ON A STRING
(Bian Zou Bian Chang, 1991) and the highly acclaimed YELLOW EARTH
(Huang Tudi, 1994), Chen returns to his favoured niche of painting the
microcosm of life at the dawn of the new Chinese Rep ublic.
It is the year 1911, and Zhongliang (Leslie Cheung) naively
comes under the roof of the feudal Pang household at the invitation of
his married sister Xiuyi (He Saifei) while the rest of China is
experiencing political turmoil . However, it is not long before he is
subjected to a terrifying period of psychological and near-incestuous
assault under the hands of his opium addicted brother-in-law.
He subsequently flees for the glitzy, cabaret world of Shanghai in the
Roaring 20s where he comes under the tutelage of a secret society
gangster (Xie Tian). Here, Zhongliang plys his trade as a thief of
hearts, offering amour on the cheap to lone ly tai tais before
accomplices step in and extort money at the appropriate moment.
Back at the Pang household where he had left a decade ago, an overdose
of opium has rendered Zhongliang's brother-in-law brain-dead, and the
family moves to encamp the latter's younger sister Ruyi (Gong Li) as
head of the household, with distant cousin Du anwu (Kevin Lin) as her
aide.
The trouble starts when Zhongliang's boss decides to use him to seduce
Ruyi so as to gain the Pang estate (a treasure-filled mansion artfully
placed in a large water lily encrusted lake in Suzhou).
>From whence the plots splits into a confusing dichotomy of emotional
revelations. Zhongliang returns to the house to carry out his
directives and exorcise personal demons but inevitably gets his
emotions mixed up with the job at hand. The besotted victim, Ruyi runs
into a conflict of emotions with having to shoulder the manly task of
running the household under the sexist glances of family elders on one
hand and discovering her sexual awakening after a lifetime of societal
isolation on the other.
Along the way, numerous subplots weave themselves into the main
storyline, with constant flashbacks into Zhongliang's tortured
childhood and his relationship with his scheming sister, now a Pang
dependant waiting for her ride into oblivion.
These nuggets of information, while courageous in their attempt to
flesh out the emotional capacities of the leads, has a tendency to go
into stylised, emotional overdrive and eventually serves only to
diffuse the focus of the film. All fingers point to t he fact Chen
seems rather guilty of participating in sentimental indulgence for the
sake of leaving his thumprint in the movie. Still, both leads Cheung
and Gong Li don't quite hedge up enough sincerity to convince as
emotionally manipulated victims.
While one cannot argue with the sumptousness of the sets and costumes
nor contest the cinematographical techniques of Du Kefung (from Wong
Kar Wai's FALLEN ANGEL), one cannot help but wonder if Chen
scripwriting abilities would be more easily swallowed if there was a
more determined effort on Chen's part to shoot the movie from a
realist's perspective.


Author
Seth Bookey
(Feng Yue, 1996; China/Hong Kong--Chinese with English subtitles)
Chen Kaige's latest banned-in-China film is set in the China's turbulent
1920s, when that nation was forced to figure itself out after thousands of
years of Imperial, patriarchal rule. But, nations under years of autocracy
often appreciate it more than you might imagine, and often accommodate
their everyday autocrats.
The story opens in 1911 when the Emperor abdicates. To avoid the chaos,
Zhongliang Yu (Leslie Cheung) is sent to live and study at the country
estate of the Pang family, where his sister Xiuyi (Saifei He) is married
to Zhengda Pang (Zhou Yemang), an heir--and an opium addict. But the
promise of study is not be kept and soon he is forced to be the preparer
of Zhengda's opium pipe. Life at the estate is a life unto itself, but
unbearable for outsiders, and soon Zhongliang flees into the turbulence,
diverted from study in Beijing to the seediness of Shanghai.
Ten years later, the head of the Pang family dies. The Pang clan meets and
decide to make Ruyi (Gong Li) the head of the family. She is the sister of
the debilitated Zhengda. Her distant cousin Duanwu (Kevin Lin) is
appointed to "help" her. Ruyi is also an addict, which makes it difficult
to marry her off. Life at the estate become more and more insular when
Ruyi dismisses all of the concubines and angers the clan elders.
In Shanghai, where it's the men versus the women, Zhongliang has become a
dapper con man, using his sophistication to corner married women into
extortion, starting by using his tongue to unhook their earrings. The boss
(Xian Xie) of this gang of criminals is fond of Zhongliang and sends him
to seduce Ruyi's fortune from her.
What unfolds is a rather unabsorbing tale of unfulfilled dreams and lost
illusions. Well filmed, but boring. The actors do a good job but the
script is not one to cause empathy. It is difficult to watch characters
for 130 minutes when you don't give a damn about them. Considering they
are all leading lives that have been planned by others in a time of
political chaos, you would think there would be something to work with
there. 
The innocent faces of Ruyi, Zhongliang, and Duanwu open the film. Within
ten years they are a naive addict, a gigolo, and a coward. All three go
through the motions dictated to them, and all three are miserable. You
would think that they would have connected on some sort of level. Only
Zhongliang's sister expresses true feelings of being trapped in all this
luxury, but she is shrill and her brother blames her for making him
heartless. 
Chen Kaige is best known for another snoozer--Farewell, My Concubine,
which was rife with unconnected, unsympathetic characters. Kaige ought to
pay close attention to compatriot Yimou Zhang, who directs films where
people really talk to each other and make the suffering more empathetic. 
Copyright 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021
http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Acropolis/8588/kino.html
