Title
Review for Clockers (1995)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
Christopher Null
     After the first two minutes of CLOCKERS, during which a parade of
bloody crime scene photos are splashed on the screen, you'll be ready
to put down your popcorn.  After the first fifteen minutes, you'll be
bored enough to go buy some more.
     You can't imagine how sick and tired I was of hearing the hype
surrounding CLOCKERS, Spike Lee's latest film about (surprise!)
African-Americans in Brooklyn who get into trouble with drugs, murder,
and betrayal.  Every other critic on the planet will probably say they
love CLOCKERS so as not to appear uncool.  I'll give it to you
straight.
     By and large, Lee has forgone the traditional concepts of
moviemaking (to tell a cohesive, interesting, entertaining story) in
favor of playing a lot of bad music, giving us some incomprehensible
and overlapping dialogue, photographing some meaningless low-light
images, and other sundry nonsense.  A plot does exist: Strike (Mekhi
Phifer) is a clocker (a drug dealer), and his boss (Delroy Lindo, a
shameless Samuel L. Jackson wannabe) sends Strike to kill the local
fast food franchise's night manager.  After all, who wouldn't?  The
cops (Harvey Keitel and John Turturro) close in, and everything comes
crashing down.
     To be honest, it never goes up high enough to crash, per se.  The
film just wallows in its hipper-than-thou attitude and never becomes
engaging in the least.  Characters come and go with no motivation,
spouting their lines as if...Spike Lee had written them for the
actors.  No one is likable at all.  Lee's ultra-stylish use of a
constantly moving camera gets old in about five minutes, annoying in
ten.  And the film just drones on and on ... for 132 very unnecessary
minutes.
     While CLOCKERS has its moments, they are few and far between.  By
the time the film starts to show some promise (about 90 minutes in),
it's much too late to save it.  Overall this is the perfect example of
how *not* to make a movie about the mean streets, coming off more like
a gory Movie of the Week than a feature film.
-Christopher Null  /  null@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu
-Screenwriter & Novelist
-Contributing Editor, Mike's FEEDBACK  /  Film Critic, Texas Business Weekly
-[R]eply to be added to movie review mailing list

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Harvey Keitel, Mekhi Phifer, Delroy Lindo, John Turturro, 
        Pee Wee Love, Isaiah Washington, Keith David 
Director: Spike Lee 
Producers: Martin Scorsese, Spike Lee, and John Kilik 
Screenplay: Richard Price and Spike Lee based on the novel by 
                Richard Price 
Cinematography: Malik Hassan Sayeed 
Music: Terence Blanchard 
U.S. Distributor: Universal Pictures 
     In 1992, Harvey Keitel took the title role in Abel Ferrara's BAD 
LIEUTENANT.  In CLOCKERS, three years later and once again again on the 
streets of New York City (Brooklyn, to be specific), he gets a chance to 
"redeem" himself.  This time, however, he's a good cop--not an icon of 
moral uprightness, but a man who sees the potential buried beneath all 
that is sordid, and who uses his position as an upholder of the law to 
dispense justice. 
     Yet, despite his top billing, this is not primarily Keitel's story.  
Instead, the bulk of CLOCKERS focuses on young Ronald "Strike" Dunham, 
played with impressive intensity by newcomer Mekhi Phifer.  Uneducated-
but-streetwise, Strike is a low-level drug-dealer (a "clocker") and 
possibly a murderer.  His life revolves around a few simple truths:  his 
friendship with his father-figure mentor, Rodney (Delroy Lindo), the 
support he offers to his own young protege (Pee Wee Love), and his 
prized model train collection.  Strike follows Rodney's code:  don't 
snitch on your friends, pay off the cops to keep them happy, and never 
sample the drugs you deal.   
     The walls of Strike's life begin to crumble when Rodney asks him to 
eliminate a "problem."  Hours later, the night manager of Ahab's fast 
food is dead, shot four times, and Strike's brother Victor (Isaiah 
Washington) has confessed to the murder, even though he can't give a 
coherent account of what happened and no one on the streets thinks he 
did it.  It's up to Detective Rocco Klein (Keitel) and his partner (John 
Turturro) to uncover the truth, and the deeper they dig, the more they 
become convinced that Strike, not his brother, is guilty. 
     The script, written by Richard Price and Spike Lee (and based upon 
Price's novel, which was nominated for the National Book Critics Circle 
Award), is less cliched than the average New York-based crime story.  
All of the characters--drug dealers and men in uniform--are given 
enough depth to circumvent stereotypes.  CLOCKERS is about people 
trapped by circumstances, and with all the ambivalent personalities, 
there are no "good guys" or "bad guys" in the traditional sense. 
     That's not to say CLOCKERS isn't without problems.  The first hour 
is oddly paced and frequently confusing.  It takes half the movie for 
the characters to become familiar and for all the elements of the plot 
to fall into place.  Some of this may be the result of condensing the 
book while trying to retain as many characters and subplots as possible.  
Ultimately, CLOCKERS probably attempts too much, and ends up seeming 
overcrowded as a result. 
     The effectiveness of the unusual style of cinematography is open to 
debate.  All sorts of photographic tricks are employed, from the use of 
hand-held cameras to slightly overexposing the film.  There's a fair 
balance between when these methods work and when they become 
distracting.  Certainly, however, CLOCKERS has a unique visual flair.  
In that, this is pure Spike Lee.   
     Although racism is only a subtle part of CLOCKERS, the movie 
nevertheless has a strong anti-racist theme.  This is most eloquently 
expressed when Rocco offers no verbal response to a key question:  Why 
would a white cop care about justice in a case of a black-on-black 
murder?  While some of CLOCKERS' characters may not understand this, the 
viewer does, and that's why Keitel's role, although tangential to the 
primary story, is crucial to the film's success.  Productions like BOYZ 
'N THE HOOD and MENACE II SOCIETY deliver their final blow through 
bloodshed.  While Lee doesn't shy away from violence, his methods are 
less straightforward.  Like 1994's FRESH, CLOCKERS uses unexpected 
narrative turns to accentuate the themes of lost innocence and 
uncultivated potential, and affirms that tragic melodrama is not a 
prerequisite for emotional impact. 
- James Berardinelli (jberardinell@delphi.com) 

Author
Andrew Hicks
        Spike Lee strikes again, with another story of trouble in the 
hood. CLOCKERS shows us the influence older people have on young 
people and why innocent people sometimes take the rap for people 
they love. In this case, responsible brother Victor confesses to a 
murder his brother, Strike (don't ask about the name--my guess is his 
parents were big fans of either bowling or baseball), actually 
committed. It's a long story (about two hours and ten minutes worth), 
but Strike was following orders from his boss Rodney, who got 
absolutely no respect from the victim.
        Strike is a clocker. No, he doesn't manufacture timepieces, he 
does something infinitely more illegal, selling crack. (It's a shame 
people throw their lives away raising money for their crack addiction 
when they can get it free by watching "NYPD Blue." One of life's 
better-kept secrets, I guess.) Strike isn't just protected by his brother, 
he also has an older cop named Andre looking out for him. 
Apparently, the two of them were once good friends, until the 
dangerously lethal world of drug dealing lured Strike into its 
menacing claws, as revealed by this line of dialogue--while Strike is 
riding in Andre's cop car, handcuffed:
        STRIKE: These cuffs is tight.
        ANDRE: You and me used to be tight.
        Yes, it sounds every bit as corny in the movie as it does on 
paper, but I can forgive the occasional lapse in good drama the same 
way I can forgive the speech every character eventually gives, from 
clockers Strike and Rodney to cops Andre and Harvey Keitel, who 
plays the homicide detective convinced Victor is covering up for his 
brother. Keitel and John Turturro, who is mostly kept in the 
background as Keitel's partner, are the token white guys in the movie.
        Making matters worse, Strike takes a liking to a child named 
Tyrone, who looks up to the drug dealer as a hero. Strike casually 
shows Tyrone how to handle a gun and cut cocaine properly, 
remembering of course to tell Tyrone not to do those things himself 
because drugs and violence are bad. Needless to say, the hasty 
disclaimers contradicting the long monologues that precede them are 
ineffective, and soon Tyrone is imitating his older friend, with tragic 
results. The message is that, if little kids see grownups doing 
something that looks cool, they'll emulate it, no matter how many 
times adults half-heartedly tell them it's not good for them. I can 
honestly say that's the reason I started eating tubs of cake frosting at 
such an early age.
        CLOCKERS is a compelling, dramatic story from a talented 
man who seems to reinvent his directorial style with each new movie. 
(The only thing all Spike Lee movies have in common is overuse of 
the F-word... "fiddy.") This time, visually, it looks like a cross between 
MTV and "Cops." Thematically, the message of CLOCKERS is as 
important as any other Lee movie, and he once again paints a picture 
of a world where cops can give young black men body cavity searches 
in daytime at the park. I think I've seen this portrayal somewhere 
before, perhaps in an adult movie I saw at midnight in a hotel room. 
That's a different story...
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE homepage at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
M Isaacs
     Spike Lee's CLOCKERS is another mixed bag from the director and
considering the powerful novel from which he had to work, it must be
considered somewhat of a disappointment.
     It was impossible to read Price's novel without thinking of Martin
Scorsese directing it even long before he became affiliated with the
project.  Scorsese has been brilliant in not only painting the decay of
urban landscapes but in getting under the skin of the people who occupy
them.  It is a literary accomplishment that Price achieved the same
feat with flying colors.
     Like JUNGLE FEVER and other recent Lee films, there are scenes in
this movie that work well but they exist in a vacuum.  The credit
sequence is powerful and unforgettable; the initial on-the-scene
investigation of the dead body is unblinking and preserves the
unsentimental tone of the Price novel; the documentary-style of how the
clocking process works is exceptional; the few scenes centered on the
mini-drug king, Rodney, are staggering; and the young and largely
unknown cast makes a convincing ensemble.
     But the movie never quite pulls together as it should because like
usual of late, Lee keeps getting in the way of his own movie.  In
scenes throughout, the editing tries to artificially jack up the tension
when the material is more than enough to develop that tension;
characters are shot in extreme close-up when there is no justifiable
artistic reason to do so so often; and some art-school devices such as
Rocco reflected in Strike's eye and Rocco running beside a kid on a
bicycle are pointless exercises in flamboyance.  Furthermore, the
entire movie is over-scored.
     Lee's two cameo appearances may strike some as a small quibble but
I think they indicate Lee's narcissism and willingness to dwarf his own
material.  He made the right decision to cast some unknown actors in
the film to give his world more authenticity and remove from it a safe
Hollywood flavor.  But in both scenes where Lee appears--critical
scenes to the movie may I add--he immediately pulls us from the grit
of the movie he has created.  This isn't an Alfred Hitchcock movie
where the tone is devilish and playful.  Hitchcock's appearances only
supported the tone of his movies; Lee's appearances simply crash the
tone he has worked hard to establish.
     I've read a plethora of reviews of high praise for CLOCKERS.  Many
have said it is Lee's best film to date and certainly better than DO
THE RIGHT THING.  I disagree.  In the latter, Lee was able to carve out
three-dimensional characters and include important development that
just isn't in CLOCKERS.  The Danny Aiello character in DO THE RIGHT
THING emerges through the relationship to his sons and the community.
He ultimately is a complex character and what is so special about the
film is the way we see how his racism has formed and how his sons have
reacted to that.  Lee is dealing with a tapestry of characters in that
movie, too, but we still get small and informative insights about them
along the way.  The Ozzie Davis character and Lee's own "Mookie" are
just two characters who emerge more three-dimensional than any of the
people who populate CLOCKERS.
     Think about the scenes where Aiello talks to his son about how
hard he has worked to create his pizza business; or Lee reacting to his
lover and son; or a lonely Davis trying to court "Sister Sister." We
need that kind of insight in CLOCKERS--especially more dimension to
Keitel's character and more insight into Strike as well.
     Lee is certainly a gifted director and creates a world that closes
in on Strike with some passion and urgency.  But he is unwilling to
stay out of the way of his own material.  Too often, we want to see
more Rocco and Strike and less of the wizardry that Spike Lee is way
too eager to serve up these days.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
     Spike Lee adapts Richard Price to mixed effect.  The director's
over-the-top approach reminded me of Oliver Stone's NATURAL BORN
KILLERS, which may or may not suit the genre of urban "gansta" drama.
Over-scored and under-lit, CLOCKERS is a surreal murder-mystery-as-
morality-play that takes about thirty minutes to settle into.  (Hip hop
over street slang doesn't help the acclimation process.)  The saving
grace is the story.  Price's portrait of a small-time crack dealer
(Meki Phifer) is *far* more potent than anything Lee can do with a
camera.
     The fourth wall is almost nonexistent in this silly adaptation of
Paul Rudnick's off-Broadway smash.  A young gay man's celibate reaction
to the AIDS era is played as scattershot sketch comedy, where the walls
are torn down so quickly that the film never has a chance to recover.
This may have worked wonders on stage, but, here, you can't take a
minute of it seriously.  And that's a problem when the melodrama steps
in.  The cast is very appealing, though.  Standout Patrick Stewart
swishes with style as Jeffrey's best friend, Sterling.  Cameos abound,
including Nathan Lane as a horny priest.  No worries, *indeed*.
     The nicest thing you can say about THE TIES THAT BIND--
screenwriter Wesley Strick's unfortunate directoral debut-- is that all
of the scenes appear to be in the correct order.  If you saw *any* film
this summer, then you've seen the trailer, which gives away the entire
movie: a cute little girl is adopted by two yuppies (Moria Kelly and
Vincent Spano), who find themselves in peril with the return of the
girl's psychotic, white-trash parents (Keith Carradine and Daryl
Hannah, slumming).  Zero wit, style, tension, characterization, etc.
*must* be somebody's idea of a cruel joke.
[ Insert drum roll... ]  Makes CONGO look like CITIZEN KANE.

Author
Anthony E. Wright
     Except for two cameo shots, Spike Lee does not appear in this film
about a low-level drug dealer in the New York projects.  Yet his unique
directing style is overwhelmingly present, enough to almost stifle the
story's own merits.  Yet his skills and the solid work of the cast also
makes this movie worth seeing.
     Even more than most Lee projects, CLOCKERS is less concerned with
moving a plot along than with presenting a world, a situation. (You
probably remember the premise and character of previous Lee movies that
the actual story.) He gives us another wonderful version of Brooklyn
verite, complete with high-rise projects juxtaposed with the concrete
pavement below, and the bodegas and Associated grocery stores in the
background.  Like in most other Lee films, this is also a provincial
story, where most of the action takes place on a few select blocks: No
helicopter shots of New York, we see the mundane, redundant landscape
of the characters, and feel the virtual walls that keep them there.
     Unlike the colorful scenes of DO THE RIGHT THING or MO BETTER
BLUES, this picture is a dreary grey.  The cinematography goes a little
overboard but keeps the film visually interesting, with Lee's signature
shots of slow-motion cars and close-ups with moving backgrounds, as
well as fresher and stunning work when dealing with "What If?"
flashbacks.  The momento is set by the horn music that seems lifted
from SCHOOL DAZE or JUNGLE FEVER and a heavy dose of rap.
     The plot is quickly set-up in the beginning: A night manager at a
burger joint has four bullets pummeled through him; the confessed
murderer is a "decent" black father of two that holds two jobs to keep
the family afloat, and never has been in legal trouble before.  While
one of the investigating white cops is willing to leave it at that
(John Turturro), the other (Harvey Keitel) think that the confessor is
covering for his drug dealing brother Strike (Mekhi Phifer), and by
association his boss Rodney (Delroy Lindo).
     But then nothing much happens; the plot stops for an hour.  The
audience is introduced to these characters and several others, playing
various parts in a morality tale in which no one is pure and
blameless.  There is a lot of didactic talk here, from Rodney telling
Strike never to use the crack he sells, to Strike telling a local kid
Tyrone to study in school.  But perhaps we are meant to take this
preaching with a grain of salt:  despite the lectures by Andre, a "good
black cop," or Tyrone's mother, nothing much changes.  In fact, we see
how each generation gets implicated and steeped into the criminal
culture.  In a frightening scene, Rodney learns how to kill from his
supposed "best friend," and his lessons get passed on to Strike, and
then to Tyrone and a whole new group of children.  The culture, the
film suggests, is reinforced by certain types of rap (but thankfully
separates that from the "positive" works of the genre) and even by
video games which show a virtual reality that is more reality than
virtuous.
     This elaborate set-up also includes the inner workings of a drug
deal; the routine of the police that surveil the dealers, and the
hobbies of Strike.  After all this, the last act contains the vestiges
of some intriguing police work, which gets closer to the truth but
nothing is fully resolved.  To underscore that point, the film ends
ultimately not on any of the characters and their respective fates, but
on yet another murder in the projects, which brings resonance to the
opening credits sequence that zoom in on crime scene photos.
     The reason to go see this film is the atmosphere that Lee creates;
it isn't his best film, certainly, but it has its provocative moments,
fraught with a moral complexity that is great to argue about and
impossible to settle.  Lee gets in his own way sometimes, but
ultimately he comes through.

Author
Chad Polenz
Chad'z rating; ***1/2 (out of 4 = very good)
1995, R, 129 minutes [2 hours, 9 minutes]
starring: Mekhi Phiffer (Strike), Harvey Keitel (Detective Rocco Klien),
Delroy Lindo (Rodney), John Turturro (Detective Larry Mazilli), Pee Wee Love
(Tyrone), produced by Spike Lee, Martin Scorsese, Jon Kilik, written by Spike
Lee, Richard Price (based on his novel), directed by Spike Lee.
I know a film is really successful when it makes me think and even scares me
in a way. There have been many films about urban gang life (i.e. "Menace II
Society," "Boyz-N-The Hood"), but "Clockers" is a different because not only
is it a moving and realistic, but it also incorporates a fascinating crime
story.
This story revolves around Strike (Phiffer), a small time drug dealer who
hangs out with his friends in the local park, and are constantly harassed by
the police. Surprisingly enough, Lee does not portray all the cops as racist
and mean. These police are actually concerned about stopping crime rather
than flexing their muscles.
Strike works closely with his supplier and boss of sorts, Rodney (Lindo),
who claims the night manager at one of his competitors' stores harasses his
"kids" and wants Strike to take care of him. Strike visits his older brother
at a bar across the street from the store and tells him the problem. His
brother says he can get someone to do it for him, but we never actually see
who kills the manager. We assume that it is Strike, but was it really? This
storytelling provides for a good sense of mystery, which is even more
interesting considering the genre.
The story also focuses on two homicide detectives Rocco Klien and Larry
Mazilli (Keitel and Turturro), and their investigation of the murder and of
Strike and his associates. It seems as though the film could suddenly switch
to being a straight crime story intead of a ghetto drama, but Lee and Price's
uncanny script and Lee's great direction allows for a great balance of both. 
We learn a lot about the life of Strike and where he comes from, which is
reflective of the entire inner city society. Like most of his friends he had
to do some drug dealing on the side in order to make enough money, because
working a part time job won't help much. Strike also teaches his little
brother Tyrone (Love) about how system "really works."
Klien and Mazilli somehow manage to get evidence on Rodney by plea bargining
with amatuer criminals they cathc. The storytelling does not get too much
into the legal aspects, but instead tries to show the situation as it really
would happen. The cops bend and break the rules in order to get their way,
but are not totally corrupt. Eventually the situation between Strike, Tyrone,
Klien, and Rodney comes to a boil and even more blood is shed. It's difficult
to explain, but it is not confusing to watch. 
"Clockers" is a powerful film that makes you think about the characters, the
settings, and their basis in reality. It is able to take a bleak story about
life in the ghetto and turn it into something a little bit more commercial,
but still good nevertheless. 

