Title
Review for Sugar Town (1999)
Number of Reviews
6

Author
Michael Dequina
        For her follow-up to her underseen 1996 effort _Grace_of_My_Heart_,  
director Allison Anders returns to the musical milieu explored in that
film, albeit in a different time and place.  _Sugar_Town_, written and
directed in tandem by Anders and Kurt Voss, is an exploration of the
contemporary Los Angeles music scene by way of an Altman-esque tableau of
interlocking characters and storylines.  The central thread revolves
around a comeback album being pitched by a once-big '80s rock band.  As
is the case with ensemble films such as this, each individual member has
its own personal drama to deal with on his own.  Clive (John Taylor) must
deal with the sudden appearance of illegitimate son Nerve (Vincent
Berry), much to the chagrin of his wife, Eva (Rosanna Arquette), an
actress.  Deluded, stuck-in-the-glam era Nick's (Michael Des Barres)
policy of only sleeping with 20somethings (or younger) is tested when a
wealthy 40something's (Beverly D'Angelo) potential financial backing
rides on a roll in the hay.  The third member, Jonesy (Martin Kemp),
doesn't have much of a presence in the film, but that slack is picked up
by other loosely connected characters.  Guitarist Carl's (John Doe)
fidelity to his very pregnant wife (Lucinda Jenney) is tested by an
attraction to the fetching singer Rocio (Lumi Cavazos).  Eva's production
designer friend, Daisy (Ally Sheedy), desperately looks for true love as
her new housekeeper, conniving singer Gwen (Jade Gordon), sets her sights
on the band's producer Burt (Larry Klein) in her ongoing scheme to make
it big.
        Ensemble pieces are almost always uneven, with some storylines more
engaging than others.  _Sugar_Town_ is no exception.  The Carl thread,
which also encompasses his ne'er-do-well brother's (Richmond Arquette)
attraction to his wife, isn't quite as much fun as, say, the
Clive/Nerve/Eva storyline.  But the lesser storylines are redeemed by the
uniformly fine performances and the occasional bit of witty
dialogue--making the film a fun, if lightweight, romp.
        The same cannot be said of another film about a rock-'n-roll comeback,
the terrible so-called comedy _The_Suburbans_.  The title is the name of
a (fictional) one hit wonder '80s rock quartet, which is revived under
the guidance of a young record exec named Cate (Jennifer Love Hewitt, in
one of her better performances).  The reluctant revival creates drama in
each individual member's life.  Rory (Tony Guma) and Gil (Will Ferrell)
would rather concentrate on other things; the presence of Cate adds
strain to Danny's (Donal Lardner Ward) relationship with his longtime
girlfriend Grace (Amy Brenneman), who wants a lasting commitment. 
However, the womanizing Mitch (Craig Bierko) relishes the renewed time in
the spotlight.
        Unlike _Sugar_Town_, where the lesser plot threads are evened out by
more interesting ones, the focus in _The_Suburbans_ lies squarely on the
film's least interesting character: Danny--hardly surprising, since Ward
is also the director.  The character with the second-most screen time is
equally dull Rory--again, no surprise, since Guma co-wrote the script
with Ward.  Bierko and Ferrell give more colorful performances, but they
are shoved into the background.  Better than those two, however, is
Brenneman, who is a refreshing breeze of believability amid the inanity;
and the killer duo of Jerry and Ben Stiller, who deliver the film's only
funny moments as Cate's father-son superiors at the record company.  That
the Stillers only have (at most) five minutes of total screen time shows
how tedious and, worst of all, painfully laugh-free the rest of the
film's scant running time is.  (_The_Suburbans_ opens October 29)
Michael Dequina
twotrey@juno.com | michael_jordan@geocities.com |
jordan_host@sportsmail.com | mrbrown@iname.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site:  http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline:  http://www.HollywoodHotline.com
on ICQ: #25289934  |  on AOL Instant Messenger: MrBrown23


Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: Sugar Town
Rated [R], 93 minutes
Starring Rosanna Arquette, Ally Sheedy, Beverly D'Angelo, Jade Gordon,
Michael Des Barres, John Taylor, John Doe and Martin Kemp
Written and Directed by Allison Anders and Kurt Voss
It's been a generation since Cranky worked in the music biz -- I know
it's a generation because one of the principal characters in Allison
Anders' first rate flick Sugar Town refers to Stevie Nicks as "a cool
old guy." Outside of the age gap, nothing much has changed in the world
of rock and roll. Naked ambition, sheer ego, self deception, junkies,
plane crashes and all natural living come together in perfectly matched
multiple stories that fill this flick. It is the highest compliment I
can pay to co-writer/directors Anders and Kurt Voss that they not only
nail the scene and the inhabitants thereof, they at no time let their
innate knowledge of the biz get in the way of telling a good story.
No, I take that back. Stories. Easily a half dozen of 'em, all stocked
with well defined characters and a whole passel of surprises. It's the
kind of work that Robert Altman does well and, considering my mixed
feelings about Anders' Grace of My Heart, a major improvement and a
delightful slice of life tale of folk both rising and falling in the
Hollywood entertainment industries.
We start with Liz (Ally Sheedy) a thirtysomething film production
designer whose biological clock is ticking so loudly that it's making
her neurotic and scaring away potential dates. Her best friend Eva
(Rosanna Arquette) is an actress watching a career go up in flames --
once the sexy ingenue type, now she's being offered a role as Christina
Ricci's mother. Her husband Clive (John Taylor, ex Duran Duran and Power
Station) is a Brit rock star of the 80s who, with other also rans Nick
and Jonesy (Michael Des Barres, ex Power Station and Martin Kemp, ex
Spandau Ballet) is shopping a last chance demo deal with the aid of
producer Burt (Larry Klein, a real life composer and Grammy Award
winning producer) and still waiting to be paid session player Carl (John
Doe of X).
Not to mention Carl's eight months pregnant wife Kate (Lucinda Jenney);
the sexy Latina () whose tour he's playing on, and who wouldn't mind
playing him; Jane, the rich widow (Beverly D'Angelo) who wants to nail
the one rocker who won't sleep with any woman older than 21 and Clive's
heretofore unknown ten year old son Nerve (Vincent Berry) who's dropped
off at dad's doorstep when his groupie mom goes off to join an ashram.
Crossing paths with almost all of these characters is Gwen (Jade Gordon)
the would be rock goddess who will lie, cheat, steal, swindle,
manipulate, plagiarize -- you get the picture -- so that she can flaunt
her inevitable fame in front of the boys who turned her down in High
School and now repair Slurpee machines. Cranky dated a woman just like
Gwen, way back when. She's now working for a superstar and I'm reliving
old nightmares  'cuz Gordon's work is spot on, as is everyone else in
the cast. For those who are playing roles similar to their real lives,
creating a separate character is a very difficult thing because you
can't help being anything but self-conscious of the parallels. If the
Anders/Voss script hadn't provided detailed backgrounds for all of 'em,
this project could have fallen flat as a barely covered and badly told
retelling of real events, which was my feeling about Grace of My Heart.
I have no such reservations about Sugar Town.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Sugar Town, he would have paid...
Anders and Voss wrote the script in two weeks, finished the production
in six months and boasted of the fact at Sundance. As have a lot of
other boasts that have come out of that festival, that almost red
flagged Sugar Town as "sure to suck." It doesn't suck. Mightily.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 1999
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Ross Anthony
A solid "B" film. "Sugar Town" strums a strong steady beat that might get
you swaying, but lacks enough bass action to prompt a boogie.
Following four "aging" rockers as they try for a second round of success in
a fickle and slippery Los Angeles market; "Sugar Town" is the teen soap
opera genre re-written for forty-somethings.
Jade Gordon, playing a selfish mediocre singer, is annoying (but perhaps
that's her job). Ally Sheedy, as the nervously insecure Hollywood type,
performs marvelously. The writers deserve the largest praise for sound
dialogue.
Starring Ally Sheedy, John Taylor, Michael Des Barres, Martin Kemp, Larry
Klein, John Doe, Jade Gordon. Written and Directed by Allison Anders and
Kurt Voss. Produced by Daniel Hassid. Released through October Films. (C)
1999. 93 minutes. Rated R.
Grade ......................................... B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 USA Films/October Films
 Directors: Allison Anders, Kurt Voss
 Writers:   Allison Anders, Kurt Voss
 Cast: Jade Gordon, Michael Des Barres, John Taylor, Martin
Kemp, Larry Klein, John Doe, Lucinda Jenney, Ally Sheedy,
Rosanna Arquette, Beverly D'Angelo
   As Europe wheezes history, so California breathes
contemporary.  The Coast, even more than the rest of the
U.S., is notorious for embracing the new, the trendy, the
modish, while tossing the old, the battered, and even the
moderately seasoned into the dust bin.  In "Sugar Town,"
written and directed by Allison Anders ("Grace of My Heart,"
about the New York pop song world of the fifties and sixties),
and Kurt Voss ("Border Radio," about the L.A. punk scene),
explores the angst-ridden lives of musicians who were big in
the eighties, washed up in middle age, and now seeking to
restore their lost glory.  Save for one pregnant woman, the
film's Earth-mother, there isn't a wholesome character in the
story--part of the charm and distinction of this eminently
enjoyable, delightfully cynical tale.  If the folks portrayed here
are stereotypical--each representing a generic trait of the
coke-and-fast-buck lifestyle of virtuosos and vocalists in the
City of Angels--Anders and Voss's pigeonholing does not
detract in the slightest from the malevolent movie's
merriment.
   While the film-makers conspicuously copy the Robert
Altman style--spinning a diverse tapestry of separate stories
into a loosely-woven cloth--"Sugar Town" is not up to that
director's cogent character studies.  It lacks the classic
poignancy of "Nashville" and at frequently Chris Figler's
editing is so abrupt that you get the impression that some
scenes are isolated from the others as though parts of
different movies.  But the fifteen out of sixteen self-absorbed
neurotics are sporadically even more amusing than some of
"Nashville"'s twenty-four individuals, with Beverly D'Angelo's
characterizations of a rich, sardonic widow easily stealing the
show.
   Essentially "Sugar Town" exhibits a palette of ambitious
souls who think nothing of using one another to climb the
ladder in Los Angeles' rock-and-roll subculture.  Only one of
them, the insufferable but physically attractive Gwen (Jade
Gordon), will freely and totally without compunction steal
other women's influential dates and almost immediately
perform the sexual services that so many followers of the
Hollywood business believe women must render to get
ahead.  Gwen is serving as a personal assistant to Liz (Ally
Sheedy), who is herself a production designer wholly
frustrated in her personal life.  After dating Burt (Larry Klein),
a record producer working with middle-aged, has-been rock
stars Nick (Michael Des Barres) and Clive (John Taylor), Liz
is hit on by a health-food worker who thinks he can charm his
way into using Liz as a reference for his own acting career.  
   Being in her late thirties does not do much for Eva
(Rosanna Arquette), who in her heyday was a fixture in
second-rate horror films, but is now annoyed that her only
potential offer is in the role of a mother to 18-year-old
Christina Ricci.  When Jane (Beverly D'Angelo), a rich widow,
consents to putting up the funding for support a comeback try
for Burt's musicians only if Burt can arrange to get the
attractive glam rocker Nick in the sack with her, Allison and
Voss have prepared their viewers for the most hilarious scene
in the movie.
   Ally Sheedy is instantly recognizable to any young woman
who has been told by her dates that they will "give you a
call."  A sucker for New Age fads, she follows the counsel of
a healer who tells her that she is vaginally blocked and who
offers to loosen her up, while her reading consists of self-help
paperbacks about how to succeed in relationships.  Filling in
some of the minor roles are former musicians like Carl (John
Doe), now a farmer trying to make enough to support his
growing family and must deal with the sexual come-ons of
Mexican-American singer Rosio (Lumi Cavazos); and a
sharply defined scene involving a 12-year-old, mixed-up but
intelligent and cocky kid, Nerve (Vincent Berry) who may or
may not be the love child of Eva's husband, Clive.
   Despite the hang-loose nature of the film, the dialogue is
often sharp and focussed, apparently not improvised, and the
soundtrack is filled unobtrusively and congenially with goodies
like "Gravy Stain Girl," "Puget Sound Sanitation," and "Manic
Kraut Rock."

Author
Akiva Gottlieb
rated R
USA Films
92 minutes
starring Jade Gordon, Michael Des Barres, John Taylor, Martin Kemp,
Larry Klein, John Doe, Lucinda Jenney, Ally Sheedy, Rosanna Arquette,
Jeffrey McDonald, Richmond Arquette, Lumi Cavazos, Vincent Berry,
Beverly D'Angelo
written and directed by Allison Anders and Kurt Voss
Good friends Allison Anders and Kurt Voss are each experienced
filmmakers.  They started out with their $50,000 collaboration on the
L.A. punk rock scene, "Border Radio", and have watched their work
evolve from edgy, alternative indie to mainstream, formulaic
Hollywood.  Anders had made three critically acclaimed films which
told stories from a woman's perspective, and Voss had directed a
handful of films which ended up either faltering on cable or delving
into obscurity. Either way, both decided it was time for a change.
Anders and Voss were looking to recapture that independent spirit
which was so evident in "Border Radio", and decided to conceive and
make a movie without any hassle. For their second collaborative
effort, they decided to once again visit the L.A. music scene, for a
behind the scenes look at the ambition and failure in the rock music
industry. In less than two weeks, they wrote "Sugar Town", and started
production less than a month later. Then, in January, the film
premiered at Sundance Film Festival '99, just six months after Allison
Anders and Kurt Voss put their pens to paper.
As a rabid supporter of the independent film scene, this act of daring
and unconventionality pleased me immensely. But sadly, "Sugar Town"
turns out to be a film that emphasizes the contraints of a low budget
rather than the creative freedom allowed by such an endeavor. "Sugar
Town" is an ensemble comedy in the "Short Cuts" vein that has its
moments, but never gets off its feet.
"Sugar Town" involves a cross section of individuals who are either
climbing the ladder of ambition or who are at 14:59 in their fame
clock. All are involved somehow in a hit or miss business, where a
sure thing today can be a has been tomorrow. There is Gwen (newcomer
Jade Gordon), a ruthlessly ambitious housemaid, Liz (Ally Sheedy), a
movie production designer who is taken advantage of at every turn, Eva
(Rosanna Arquette), an aging actress married to has been 80's rocker
Clive (John Taylor), who is trying to get his new band off the ground.
These people are unified only by their desire to be the next big
thing, despite their age, sex and class differences. But we, the
viewers, never see any developed, human characters.  Instead, we see
dull caricatures that are but pawns in a poorly conceived game. Every
once in a while, there is a clever gesture (the self deprecating rock
stars are played by members of once prominent 80's bands), but "Sugar
Town" ends up feeling more sour than sweet.
As an ensemble film, "Sugar Town" also falters. The few segments which
are most interesting are the ones paid least attention to (which gives
way to some painfully tacky subplots), and the way the characters are
tied together is a bland condescension. "Sugar Town" is short, but
feels long, and the script was not only written in a hurry, but it
feels that way too. The saving grace is the few women characters
(obviously written by Allison Anders), played by Jade Gordon, Rosanna
Arquette, and Ally Sheedy that hold our attention whenever on
screen. Gordon, who had a small role in Anders' "Grace Of My Heart",
shows potential in her role as the vicious Gwen.  Arquette and Sheedy
stay low-key, but are nevertheless effective.
Allison Anders is, in my opinion, a talent with strong views, but a
knack for inconsistency. Her best work is her first sole effort, "Gas
Food Lodging", a semi autobiographical story of a girl growing up in a
small New Mexico town. Her poorest work can be seen in her segment of
"Four Rooms", which was also co-directed by Quentin Tarantino, Robert
Rodriguez and Alexandre Rockwell.
"Sugar Town" has its moments, but it's lacking an edge found in so
many other studies of Hollywood industry. The film ultimately never
really ends, and doesn't provoke much thought. If "Sugar Town" was a
stronger film, it could have been a good argument for more independent
film funding.  However, like its title, "Sugar Town" ends up being
meaningless; a movie that is unprovocative and uncompromising, never
becoming what you want it to be.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic
akiva@excite.com
http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com
this review is also featured at http://jump.to/moviepage 


Author
Steve Rhodes
"Remember, it's just as easy to make rich friends as poor ones," Gwen
(Jade Gordon) writes in her list of life's rules.  "Remember, stardom is
99% perspiration and 1% inspiration," she continues.  "I think Cher said
that."
Gwen thinks she's on her way to the top in the entertainment world, just
as soon as her junkie songwriter (Jeffrey McDonald) comes up with the
songs she has carefully ordered.  She requested, for example, that one
of them should be a love ballad about rape.
SUGAR TOWN by joint writers and directors Allison Anders and Kurt Voss
is a bitingly sardonic tale about fame and the lack thereof.  Like a
mixture of THE PLAYER and SHORT CUTS, the satire successfully includes
over a dozen leads and yet manages to develop all of them into
interesting individuals in their own right.  A thoroughly enjoyable
movie, it is full of laughs, small and large.
The plot surrounds some once successful rock stars who have trouble
getting their songs produced anymore.  The story also concerns their
wives, lovers and friends.  Their collective troubles include rehab,
financial insecurity, promiscuity and love.
Eva (Rosanna Arquette), an ex-horror movie star, has just had the most
frightening experience of her life.  She has been offered a part as
Christina Ricci's mother.  Horror of horrors!  Eva thinks she's too
young for that.  Still, it is work.  Her husband, Clive (John Taylor),
who was "like the rock god of the 80s," can't get a gig even though
groupies still show up at his doorstep to offer their panties in
tribute.
Ally Sheedy, after her highly acclaimed dramatic performance last year
in HIGH ART, shows off the comedic side of her talents.  She plays Liz,
a movie production designer, who has a miserable track record when it
comes to men.  Poking fun at New Age theories and health food stores,
the story has her turning to holistic massage and other techniques to
remove her perceived mental and physical blockages in order to find
love.  When she meets a guy working the wheat-grass machine at a health
food store, she thinks she has finally located Mr. Right.  Needless to
say, he will prove less than organic.
Liz's connection to the rest of the story includes her dating Burt
(Larry Klein), the record producer whom Clive's band is trying to
convince to back their new album.  Their lead song, "gravy-stained
girl," sounds terrible, at least according to Nerve (Vincent Berry), a
devilish 12-year-old recently dumped on Clive's doorstep.  Nerve's mom
claims Clive impregnated her on one of his tours.  Clive has a
wonderful, but unprintable, explanation to prove that he couldn't be
Nerve's father.
The quirky comedy, full of biting sarcasm, is also educational.  What is
the secret to successful songs?  "It's all about the microphone," Bert
explains.  What he does is find just the right mike for the singer.
Simple, huh?
SUGAR TOWN runs a fast 1:32.  It is rated R for strong language, some
drug content and sexuality and would be fine for teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com
