Title
Review for Born Romantic (2000)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   What a delight to come across a small British film for which I
had no particular expectations only to find that "Born Romantic" is
the most delightful movie revolving a dance hall since "Shall We
Dance," Masayuki Suo's beautifully told film of middle-aged
businessman who secretly years to break out of the rigid
conformity of his daily life.   "Born Romantic" is a date movie, yes,
but that cliche has been tossed around so much that movie-goers
expect the usual pabulum when they take their girl friends or best
guys to the cinema.  And I suppose "Born Romantic" could be
called a sitcom as well, or as one critic declares, "another of David
Kane's rom coms (since writer-director Kane is the bloke
responsible for "This Year's Love," which was a big hit in Britain. 
But forget about the usual meanings of these overused terms. 
The actors who play the lonely Londoners are so lovable, the
emotions so worn-on-sleeves, the writing so lightly comic and yet
engagingly poignant that Kane's contribution is a splendid
antidote to some of the big, tasteless epics produced by
Hollywood this year--most recently Peter Hyams' gruesome and
charmless  "Musketeer."
   Featuring just one moderately loathsome character--Ian Hart in
the role of a woman-hating misogynist--the story is one that
should have people in the audience with any sign of humanity
rooting energeticcally for the success of Kane's forlorn Londoners. 
The story opens with some hot dancing to equally hot salsa music
in a London salsa club, which caters to both professional hoofers
dancing for the sheer joy of swinging to the Latin beat and
beginners who take lessons and who for the most part are not
afraid to take to the floor for some respite from their solitary lives. 
Three guys, each different in temperament from the others, seek
out three women, also different from one another but sharing a
common desolation that is the luckless aspect of the urban zoo. 
The men are jerks, each in his own way; the women teetering
between a rejection of the entire male gender and a recognition of
their need for their company.
   The three pairs are all on an off-again, on-again teeter-totter with
each other, getting together only to fall apart at the first goof,
giving them all the more motivation to restore their connections. 
Most captivating--perhaps because the woman is closest to what
I'd consider my type--is the association between Frankie (Craig
Ferguson) and Eleanor (the remarkable Olivia Williams--whom we
Americans saw last in "The Sixth Sense").  Frankie has natural
good looks and is always dressed in a jacket and tie, but he is
evidently without much money and still living under a hostile roof
with his ex-wife when he meets the fearful but seemingly confident
and elegant Eleanor.  Eleanor is uncompromising, brushing
Frankie off from the time he first hits on her by exclaiming that
he's not her type because he does not have "a symmetrical face." 
Lovable in a Damon Runyon sort of way, Eddie (Jimi Mistry)
makes his living by mugging people, using chloroform as his
weapon of choice.  He is forced to choose whether to continue
hitting his vics at ATMs or doing what's needed to impress his
weird woman of choice, Jocelyn (Catherine McCormack)--whose
major relationships are with dead people.  Rounding out the
festivities, Fergus (David Morrissey) realizes that he made a
mistake in ditching Mo (Jane Horrocks--from "Little Voice") days
before taking nuptial vows and works at getting back in her good
graces despite learning that Mo has filled her lonely nights with up
to sixty men, mostly one-night stands.
   Adrian Lester is impressive as an Everyman, a cab driver who
sees all and is not afraid to intervene, saying out right that
knowing about the lives of his passengers is indeed his business. 
Like a silent Greek chorus commenting on the human comedy he
sees around him, Jimmy has himself avoided women, considering
himself married to his wife of five years though she had passed to
the other side a pair of years ago.
   By its very title, David Kane appears to say that we're all born
romantic, i.e. that none of us is an island and that despite our
defenses, there is simply no future in being alone--even when
surrounded by millions of fellow urbanites.  Unlike the pretentious
opener to this year's New York Film Festival, "Va Savoir"--which
makes its viewer wait until the very end of a two and one-half
movie to deliver a smile--"Born Romantic" is a beam and a grin
and a lark from start to finish.
Rated R.  Running time: 96 minutes.  (C) 2001 by
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Jon Popick
Š Copyright 2001 Planet Sick-Boy. All Rights Reserved.
Writer/director David Kane's Born Romantic is the kind of British romantic
comedy you see at a festival and walk out thinking it could be funny,
lighthearted and appealing enough to be the next The Full Monty. Then, after
you think about it for a while, or, God forbid, see it again, you realize
how little meat it has on its bones. That's not to say it's not enjoyable,
entertaining and well-acted - just empty and routine.
Romantic consists of three intertwining stories about men pursing women in
and around a London Salsa club. The stories are held together by Jimmy
(Adrian Lester, Love's Labour's Lost), a cabbie responsible for shuttling
the characters around the city (you might think he's the only hack in
London, if you don't count Arsenal's Patrick Viera). He chats with two
co-workers at Kismet Cabs (John Thomson and Spring Forward's Ian Hart)
during their breaks, providing the film with a fairly interesting Greek
chorus.
Here's a rundown of the men who are unlucky in love (but, if you've got half
a brain, you know they'll end up happier than John Ashcroft at a Bob Jones
University-sponsored Ku Klux Klan rally):
ˇ Frankie (Craig Ferguson, Saving Grace) is a businessman who is divorced
but still living with his shrewish ex-wife (Hermoine Norris) until their
house, which is slowly sinking into the ground, is sold. He meets and falls
in love with the beautiful Eleanor (Olivia Williams, The Sixth Sense), who,
of course, wants nothing to do with him.
ˇ Fergus (David Morrissey, Hilary and Jackie) is a struggling musician who
has returned to London after a six-year absence to find his long-lost love,
the sex-craved museum lover, Mo (Jane Horrocks, Little Voice).
ˇ Eddie (Jimi Mistry) is a clumsy criminal who hides out in the Salsa club
after a botched ATM robbery attempt. He picks the pocket of a mousy girl
named Jocelyn (Catherine McCormack, Shadow of the Vampire), but ends up
falling for her.
And that's pretty much it. None of the characters are wacky enough to be
unbelievable, except possibly Jocelyn, who wears a neck-brace and runs a
funeral plot maintenance business called Loved Ones Limited. There's a lot
of dancing, a lot of chasing, and one strange gag about putting hot sauce on
a certain part of the male anatomy.
Kane made a bit of a name for himself with 1999's This Year's Love (which
also starred Hart and McCormack - and was unreleased in the U.S.), nabbing a
British Independent Film Award for his screenplay. Romantic is nicely
structured, but is ultimately predictable - a frustrating fact that you've
probably come to accept from mainstream Hollywood romantic comedies, but may
still be disappointed to see in indie films like this. Robert Alazraki (The
Closer You Get - another disappointing British rom-com with Mr. Hart)
provides nice photography, adding enough red hues to the Salsa club scenes
to make you seem like you're at a Tijuana donkey show.
