Title
Review for Sorcerer (1977)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Nick AMado
Starring: Roy Scheider, Bruno Cremer, Francisco Rabal, Amidou
It is said that Hollywood remakes seldom acheive the quality of the
original (especially when the original was NOT a Hollywood picture.)
Sorcerer stands out as one of the sparkling exceptions. It is based on
Georges Arnaud's "The Wages Of Fear" which was filmed by Hitchcockian
French director H.G. Clouzot in 1952. With some minor differences, the
stories are the same. Four cons, desperate to leave the poverty
stricken town to which they have exiled themselves, are chosen for a
life or death job. They must transport highly volatile nitroglycerine
from one part of the mountainous and swampy Southern American terrain
to the other. If they make it, they get the money they need to escape,
if they don't they are dead. The nitro is packed in sand in the backs
of trucks to help reduce shock, the slightest jostle can end it all.
Friedkin does a fantastic job of making the two trucks into a combined
fifth character. We see them being reconstructed from complete junk
early on in the film. As the picture progresses, tension is created by
close up's of the wheels as they roll gently over unstable ground. We
get a feeling of exactly how much each truck can take. The sound of
the trucks are constant, and it is a well crafted soundtrack mix that
lends to the character each.
Schieder shows why he is one of the more underrated performers in the
industry. Though the film is not loaded with dialogue, he does a
marvelous job of showing how his character runs the gamut of emotions
(similar to his character in Jaws.) But Schieder's is not the only
good performance in this film, all of the actors do a great job.
The 1952 version, The Wages Of Fear, is certainly worth a look, but it
is longer, not as tense, and spends more time on the relationship of
the men, rather than the suspense of the situations in which they find
themselves. Another nifty element of Sorcerer is its score by
Tangerine Dream. The funky synthicized tunes are haunting and very
appropriate. It is a great example of how important to a film good
music is. This is a severely underrated film from the most explosive
decade in film history. It was released in 1978 and is a great film
for everyone to see, but it is a can't miss for Friedkin fans.

Author
Brian Koller
What is the worst movie title in film history?
"Beavis and Butt-head Do America" and
"Scudda-Hoo! Scudda-Hay!" are candidates, but
"Sorcerer" is also a contender.  Not because the
title itself is awful, but because it has virtually
nothing do with the film.
"Sorcerer" is a remake of the 1953 French film
"Wages of Fear".  I have not seen the original,
so I can't compare the two versions.  But it
would have to be an excellent film to top the
remake.  "Sorcerer" is an extremely tense and
dramatic film that should keep you on the
edge of your seat.
The film begins with several loose ends: we meet
a Palestinian terrorist (Anidou), a failed French
banker (Bruno Cremer), a hit man (Francisco Rabal)
and an American bank robber (Roy Scheider).  It
turns out that these four strangers have much
in common: they are criminals with their lives
in danger, and must flee somewhere where they
cannot be found.  They each end up in a rural
slum in Nicaragua.
An act of sabotage at an oil refinery causes a
massive fire, which can only be extinguished with
dynamite.  The only available dynamite is 200 miles.
Volunteers are needed for the near-suicidal, but
high-paying job of transferring the dynamite by
truck to the fire.  The four criminals, desperate
for cash, volunteer for the job.
Since "Sorcerer" is an American film, Scheider has
the biggest role.  He hardly gets to smile the entire
film, and spends most of it struggling to get
the dynamite-laden truck across rickety bridges
and nearly-impassable roads.  Character development
is marginal, and we don't see these men beyond
desperate outlaws.  Cremer is the exception, as
we get glimpses of his married and business life
before having to flee France, and in Nicaragua there
are traces of a romance with a silent middle-aged
laborer.
"Sorcerer" is directed by William Friedkin, whose two
previous films, "The French Connection" and "The Exorcist",
achieved much greater commercial success.  But all three
films favor action, cinematography and story over
character development and dialogue, and since all three
are good films, Friedkin may have been onto something.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Serdar Yegulalp
CAPSULE: A haunting remake of the French classic THE WAGES OF FEAR, which
takes on a vicious life of its own.
In principle I'm against remakes. Rare is the remake that is not a pallid
carbon copy of its predecessor, as was the case with the wretched DIABOLIQUE
(which, ironically enough, was created by the same man who also created
WAGES, Henri-Georges Clouzot). SORCERER is by William Friedkin and manages
to escape that trap through a show of surreal visual power. The movie
lingers in the mind long after others have evaporated, if for no other
reason than because it presents us with some really astonishing things to
look at.
Unlike the previous movie, which confined itself more or less to one locale,
SORCERER spends its first forty-five minutes globe-hopping and setting up
its four main characters. Nilo (Francisco Rabal) is a cold and dispassionate
killer of international repute. Kassem (Anidou) is a Palestinian terrorist.
Victor Manzon (Bruno Cremer), a French financial whiz, has a wife he loves
dearly, but he is forced to abandon her when a business deal goes south and
a partner kills himself. Finally, Scanlon (Roy Scheider) is a smalltime
Jersey hood who has to flee the country when he offends a mob boss by
knocking over the poor box in his church.
Three of them flee to an unidentified Central American country -- with all
the globehopping, it's the only locale that's not announced with a title
card -- and hide out as menial laborers for an oil company. The country is
overseen by a military junta; life is meager and hateful. There's no way out
-- until a well accident forces the company to scrounge for suicide drivers.
They need someone who can drive four cases of *sweating* dynamite (which
could explode for no reason at all) across 218 miles of jungle. The fourth,
the assassin, shows up later (he's been sent after Scanlon) and is roped
into the mission after a disaster forces them to get another man.
The movie quickly sets itself up as a case study in desperation. All of them
want out: the money promised by the company for the job will set them free,
but there's a good chance they'll blow themselves up in the attempt. They
have to build two trucks to haul the stuff more or less from scratch. The
odds they face are sickening: outdated maps, bad weather, and a rope bridge
they have to drive BOTH trucks across. (This last scene is most astonishing
for a number of reasons, not the least of which being that it appears to
have been totally unfaked.) At one point they are stopped cold by a fallen
tree; at another, they are held at gunpoint by soldiers. There's no easy way
out of anything -- not even death, which comes all too easy for the wrong
reasons. All of this is set to a mesmerizing and eerie Tangerine Dream score
that is well worth seeking out.
SORCERER is agonizing and draining, and in the end, highly existential. It's
not a movie you feel like celebrating life with, but it stays with you long
after it vanishes from your eyes. Comparing it with its original isn't
really the best thing to do -- better to see it as a brother. A very twisted
and ugly brother, but a brother nonetheless.
