Title
Review for All Forgotten (2000)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Julia Levin
The hero of the unlikely British drama Lover's Prayer, based on Ivan
Turgenev's story First Love, is a frail, pale-faced, Russian boy named
Vladimir (Nick Stahl) who stumbles through the movie as if his legs were
stilts, barely finishing five complete sentences.  The son of
middle-class landowners, Vladimir is spending away summer near Moscow,
waiting to go to college in the fall.  He desperately wants to fall in
love but, being very shy and deeply absorbed in his own naďve imaginary
world, he's unsure of himself.  To explain his longings, the director
relieves the actor from acting almost entirely, and, instead, simply
asks him carry his dour face throughout the movie and adds a voice over
of an older Vladimir, his tone so dispassionate one wonders if the actor
took sedatives before taking on the project.
Soon enough, Vladimir becomes acquainted with his parents' neighbors, an
alcoholic and broke princess with a hair like a haystack, who, while
reaching for a bottle, utters banalities in a loud piercing voice. 
Immediately, Vladimir falls for the princess's daughter Zinaida (Kirsten
Dunst) and spends endless summer days in the company of this pug-nosed,
plain looking capricious young woman.  Zinaida adds Vladimir to her
circle of admirers--a group of men of every stripe, age, and rank.  They
all dance around Zinaida, playing charades, eager to fulfill her every
wish.  As it turns out, she seems to have many such admirers--and
Vladimir learns that she is having an affair with his own father.
In Turgenev's "First Love," the story begins on a light romantic note
about a boy falling in love for the first time.  But when he discovers
the identity of Zinaida's lover, the mood turns to one of torment and
despair.  Turgenev, with remarkable sensitivity and honesty, describes
the boy's growth of knowledge as he awakens to the complex nature of the
adult world and discovers the depth of his own tragic passion.
Nothing of this sort happens in the movie: Lover's Prayer is one of
those strange international hybrids in which foreign filmmakers -- in
this case British ones -- entertain themselves with the idea of filming
Russian classical literature without having a scintilla of understanding
about its meaning, its idiosyncrasies, its elusiveness, and its
historical basis.  Unable to convey the depths of any of the characters,
the tone of the film becomes murky, and every time there is a hint at
some sort of hidden layer of mystery, the film stutters as if it
immediately forgets what it was.
Lover's Prayer is mostly hot air -- a strange concoction of haphazard
elements in which nothing really works, a love story that doesn't have a
single character to care about. The actors mispronounce Russian names
horribly, and each in a different way.  As expected, the adaptation of
Turgenev's powerful idiomatic language is substituted for a commonplace
one -- a language without a flavor and weight.
Director: Reverge Anselmo
Producer: Jo-Anne Smith
Writer: Reverge Anselmo
Starring: Kirsten Dunst, James Fox, Geraldine James, Nathaniel Parker,
Nick Stahl, Julie Walters
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
