Title
Review for Thunderball (1965)
Number of Reviews
4

Author
Dragan Antulov
 "Which Bond film is the best?" is a question commonly asked
among filmophiles. There are different answers, but most of
the Bond fans usually name one of the first five films of
the franchise - Bond classics that made character of James
Bond inseparable from the image of Sean Connery. Among those
five films the most popular choice is GOLDFINGER, but
judging by strictly commercial standards, the best Bond film
was made a year later. THUNDERBALL, directed by Terence
Young in 1965, was most profitable film in the history of
the franchise. Eighteen years later, the same film was
subjected to remake in the form of NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN,
but the reason had less to do with the general quality of
the script and more with unsettled copyright issues. The
original novel was co-authored by series' creator Ian
Fleming and Kevin McClory, who later claimed copyright on
the character. In 1965 producers and McClory were trying to
co-operate, and McClory took part in the screenplay.
The plot begins with British secret agent James Bond (played
by Sean Connery) recuperating in English health spa after
another dangerous but successful mission. By accident, the
spa is located near RAF base that hosts pilots from
different NATO nations. One of them, Lieutenant Derval
(played by Paul Stasino) gets involved in a hijack of Vulcan
bomber that carries two nuclear bombs. This is the work of
SPECTRE, global criminal organisation that blackmails
British and US government, demanding huge amounts of money
in exchange for safe return of the bombs; if SPECTRE doesn't
get paid, the bombs would be detonated on UK and US
mainland. Faced with unprecedented case of nuclear terrorism
British secret service gathers all their top agents,
including Bond, in order to locate the missing plane and
possibly thwart SPECTRE plans. The only clue leads Bond to
Bahamas where he meets pilot's young and beautiful sister
Dominique (played by Claudine Auger), who is currently
cruising Bahamas on the yacht owned by her "uncle" Emilio
Largo (played by Adolfo Celi). Largo doesn't like this,
because he happens to be top SPECTRE operative who had
executed the operation. When Bond and his CIA colleague
Felix Leiter (played by Rik Van Nutter) begin investigating,
they would be faced with many of Largo's henchmen, including
seductive but deadly female assassin Fiona Volpe (played by
Gabriella Paluzzi).
THUNDERBALL was supposed to be the first Bond film, but
aforementioned copyright problems caused producers to choose
DR. NO instead. It turned out to be a good thing for
THUNDERBALL - in 1965 success of previous three films
guaranteed both the huge budgets and huge hype which led to
record performance at the box- office. This success was
justified, because THUNDERBALL fits all the high standards
we might expect from a Bond classic - intelligent script,
realistic characters, breath- taking stunts, spectacular
action, exotic locations and even more exotic women - all
that under superb direction and highest production values of
its time. What was unfortunate for this film is the fact
that it was made a year after GOLDFINGER. In most cases the
unavoidable comparisons between the two usually favour
former over latter. THUNDERBALL is already showing some
weaknesses that would plague Bond series in decades to come.
The script by Richard Maibaum and John Hopkins is not one of
those weaknesses. The motive of nuclear blackmail still
retains down-to-earth realism of the first Bond movies and
it is even more realistic in today's world, when more
nations possess such weapons. The plot, despite a minor hole
or two, works well. Characters, on the other hand,
don't.Character of Bond was, naturally, unchanged; evolution
of the role ceased and that meant that Connery can play him
without contributing anything original. This was supposed to
be compensated with other intriguing characters, but
THUNDERBALL, at least partially, disappoints. Chief villain
Emilio Largo is portrayed as intelligent, efficient yet
menacing, which makes him superior to the laughable villains
of later Bond films. Unfortunately, his character remains
one- dimensional and talents of great Italian actor Adolfo
Celi seem wasted (for the author of this review additional
problem is in the fact that he remembers Celi as much
superior villain in SANDOKAN and mini-series BORGIAS).
Bond girls, another important element of the formula, are
here represented with three ladies that would satisfy all
the different tastes, at least when the hair colour is an
issue. Bond's partner Domino, which represents brunettes, is
played by former Miss France Claudine Auger. Although
stunningly beautiful, Domino lack depth in character and
Auger's romantic scenes with Connery lack the right amount
of chemistry. Molly Peters, girl representing blondes, has
smaller but more effective role of Bond's nurse. Both of
them fall in the shadow of Luciana Paluzzi, Italian actress
that represents redheads. Physically attractive, yet
immoral, ready to use her body for nefarious purposes as
well as kill in cold blood, Fiona Volpe could be viewed not
just like femme fatale but also as some kind of Bond's
opposite. To make her character even more rounded, Fiona
Volpe is given some lines that could be interpreted as
screenwriters' answer to feminist accusations over sexist
stereotypes used while creating character of Pussy Galore in
GOLDFINGER.
The lack of dimension within film's character is hard to
notice, because the main attraction of the film lies in
action. Terence Young, who had directed first two Bond
films, does his job more than capably and we hardly notice
that the film lasts more than two hours. The action scenes
are perfect, especially the Vulcan hijacking - one of the
best moments in the history of Bond series. Another
interesting thing about THUNDERBALL is extensive use of
underwater photography; this film is the first to feature
underwater battle scene that would later become one of
trademarks of Bond franchise. The same scene is often
criticised for being too long, but it also provided
something quite new and spectacular for 1960s audiences.
Today's viewers are perhaps less patient, and less able to
overlook obvious gratituitousness of certain scenes (like
Bond using jetpack and thus ruining quite effective opening
scene), but they remain attractive and they don't hinder the
plot (which is not going to be the case in future
instalments). THUNDERBALL is also helped with the creative
talents of composer John Barry who provides new, original
material. The film also feature very goo title song by Tom
Jones, combined with first true Bond-style opening titles.
THUNDERBALL is not the perfect Bond film, but it still
represents the series in its zenith and provides excellent
entertainment even after more than three decades. There is
one flaw, though. True fan of classic Bond could hardly
watch this film without some sadness, knowing that the each
consecutive instalment is going to be worse than before.
Filmske recenzije na hrvatskom/Movie Reviews in Croatian
http://film.purger.com

Author
Andrew Hicks
        This James Bond movie will forever be known as the 
underwater one, as it takes whatever interest or fascination anyone 
ever had with scuba diving and crashes it off a cliff, with overkill as 
the driver. This was Sean Connery's fourth appearance as 007, a sad 
follow-up to GOLDFINGER, but not quite as sad as the fifth Bond 
movie, YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE.
        The plot this time has SPECTRE stealing two atomic bombs 
from a crashed NATO plane. So that's overlong underwater sequence 
#1, when the evil scuba divers retrieve the bombs from the ocean floor. 
When SPECTRE demands a huge ransom from the U.S. and England, 
Bond is sent to investigate. He stumbles upon a Frenchman with an 
oceanside house, complete with shark pool and giant yacht. So here 
comes overlong underwater sequence #2, as Bond investigates the 
underside of the yacht and surrounding areas, shortly before a group of 
henchmen/frogmen attack him. There are only so many times you can 
watch someone get his scuba mask ripped off before it becomes 
tiresome.
        The main problem with THUNDERBALL is that such a 
significant chunk of it takes place underwater. Besides the two 
previously-mentioned overlong underwater sequences, #3 occurs when 
Bond finds and investigates the crashed plane, with #4 being the 
climactic underwater fight scene, where dozens of casualties occur on 
both sides. And as usual, Bond gets laid by three different women, 
though to my knowledge, this is the only time he's ever made love on 
the ocean floor (no jellyfish jokes, please). So he's now a member of 
the Mile Below Club. "I hope we didn't disturb the fish," he remarks to 
the lady afterwards. Okay, _now_ you can make your jellyfish jokes.
Visit the Movie Critic at LARGE website at 
http://www.missouri.edu/~c667778/movies.html

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Sometimes the most dated parts of an old film can be the most
enjoyable; so it is with Bond's fifth movie, THUNDERBALL.  In the
opening, Bond surreptitiously witnesses the funeral of one of his foes.
As the dead man's heavily veiled widow leaves the church, he deduces
that it's really the bad guy in drag.  The giveaway?  She opens the car
door herself!
     For my almost 9-year-old son it was an entirely different scene
that won his heart.  He literally went wild when Bond broke out that
classic Flash Gordon device, the personal jetpack, as a means of
escape.  (I can understand his feelings.  When I was his age, I dreamed
of my own rocket strapped to my back, but the closest I ever came to it
was the fast car -- Chevy 409 -- that I drove in high school.)
     The setup for 1965's THUNDERBALL is that SPECTRE has taken control
of a jet containing 2 atomic bombs, which they bury in the ocean under
military-style camouflaging.  They demand 100,000,000 pounds sterling,
or they will destroy a major British or US city.  The tension is on.
Will Bond, played beautifully again by Sean Connery, find the bomb
first or will a city be wiped forever off the map?
     THUNDERBALL goes back to the Caribbean where the first Bond film
was set, but this time it is the Bahamas rather than Jamaica.  Poor
Bond has to drive an Aston Martin just like the last movie -- later
Bond films were less interested in such recyclables.
     Bond has to go up against SPECTRE's number 2 operative known as
Emilio Largo.  The casting of Adolfo Celi as Largo and his playboyish
costumes makes Largo less like a villain than a rich member of the
International Yacht Club.
     Continuing the tradition begun with Jack Lord in DR. NO, CIA agent
Felix Leiter (Rik von Nutter) wears conspicuous dark sunglasses.  Might
as well have worn a CIA T-shirt.
     THUNDERBALL, which relies a bit too much on a larger than normal
bevy of beauties to carry the story along, needed the writers to have
spent more time in plot development.
     The movie could have used crisper editing.  Some of the underwater
sequences in particular run on way too long, especially a full scale
underwater battle between a couple of hundred men.  The staging becomes
confusing and it is frequently not clear who is ahead or what is
happening.
     Bond is always one fortuitous guy.  When he is about to be shot he
wheels around his evil dancing partner.  The bullet goes into but not
through her.  She dies instantly, but he gets off completely unscathed.
Life's like that when you're the world's most handsome spy.
     THUNDERBALL runs 2:13.  It is rated PG for violence and sexual
innuendo and would be fine for kids around nine and up.
     My son Jeffrey, almost 9, liked the movie a lot, especially the
jetpacks and the full-scale underwater battle.  THUNDERBALL is his
favorite of the first four Bond movies.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Sean Connery, Claudine Auger, Adolfo Celi, Luciana Paluzzi, 
      Rik Van Nutter, Bernard Lee, Martine Beswick, Desmond Llewelyn,
      Lois Maxwell
Director: Terence Young
Producers: Kevin McClory
Screenplay: Richard Maibaum and John Hopkins based on the original story 
      by Kevin McClory, Jack Wittingham, and Ian Fleming
Cinematography: Ted Moore and Lamar Boren (underwater)
Music: John Barry
U.S. Distributor: United Artists
     By the time THUNDERBALL, the fourth in the "official" James Bond 
film canon, was released, the "Bond Formula" had already been perfected.  
It goes something like this:  take the suave 007 (always impeccably 
dressed and ready with a witty one-liner) and add several beautiful, 
scantily-clad women, at least one exotic locale, a few neat gadgets, 
multiple polished action sequences, a megalomaniac villain, and a 
musical score by the inimitable John Barry. These elements, taken 
together, made Bond a huge success in the 1960s and have kept him riding 
a crest of financial profitability for more than three decades.
     THUNDERBALL is from the team that brought all the early Bond 
adventures to the screen:  lead actor Connery (as 007), director Terence 
Young (who also helmed DR. NO and FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE), longtime Bond 
screenwriter Richard Maibaum, cinematographer Ted Moore, title sequence 
designer Maurice Binder, and composer John Barry.  THUNDERBALL proved to 
be the most popular Bond of all, topping UK and US box offices in late 
1965 and early 1966.  The film was so well-received, in fact, that it 
was remade some 18 years later as NEVER SAY NEVER AGAIN.
     As THUNDERBALL opens, SPECTRE is again on the move.  This time, the 
mission -- to blackmail the United States and Great Britain -- is headed 
by Number Two, Emilio Largo (Adolfo Celi).  The plot he has masterminded 
involves stealing two nuclear weapons, then threatening to blow up a 
major city if the two countries don't pay the ransom.  After the threat 
has been issued, M (Bernard Lee) calls in the "00" agents and assigns 
them to tasks around the world with the goal of finding and stopping 
Largo.  007 draws Nassau, where he encounters old friend Felix Leiter 
(played this time by Rik Van Nutter), Largo's lovely mistress, Domino 
(Claudine Auger), and a host of deadly adversaries.
     At two and one-quarter hours, THUNDERBALL runs too long.  Certain 
sequences could have been trimmed, especially the climactic underwater 
battle, which seems to take forever.  The villain of the piece is a 
little weak, coming in the wake of such memorable adversaries as Dr. No 
and Goldfinger.  While Adolfo Celi is suitably menacing, he plays Largo 
like a high-placed thug.  There is some compensation for the 
deficiencies of the lead villain, however.  It comes in the person of 
femme fatale Fiona (Luciana Paluzzi), whose sophisticated, black widow-
like personality makes her more dangerous than any male SPECTRE agent. 
     Of all his Bond performances, Sean Connery seems the most 
comfortable here (not that he was ever uncomfortable).  With three 
movies behind him and two more yet to come, Connery was in the midst of 
a career-making, successful run.  His screen version of the superspy may 
not be what Ian Fleming envisioned when he first put pen to paper, but, 
by the release of THUNDERBALL, the actor had left his indelible imprint 
on the role -- a characterization that none of the performers following 
him has been able to equal.  The 007 of the books is different from the 
007 of the movies, and Sean Connery is James Bond for the film-going 
audience (with apologies to George Lazenby, Roger Moore, Timothy Dalton, 
and Pierce Brosnan).
     The underwater sequences, which are choreographed and directed with 
great skill, are THUNDERBALL's standout feature.  Connery is more often 
in a bathing suit than a tuxedo here.  A fair amount of time is spent 
beneath the ocean's surface, and, down in Neptune's realm, the 
photography (by Lamar Boren) is clear and the action sequences are 
invigorating (when they don't seem to last forever, that is). 
THUNDERBALL is classic 007 -- not the best picture in the long-running 
series, to be sure, but a more-than-worthwhile diversion for the action-
loving escapist in us all.
