Title
Review for Party, The (1968)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Shane Burridge
Peter Sellers and director Blake Edwards decided to take the Inspector 
Clouseau concept from their Pink Panther collaborations and run with it in 
this simple but funny cult comedy.  There is no real story, just a series of 
gags and routines that unfold within the confines of a swanky but dry 
Hollywood party.  Sellers removes the bumptious aspects of Clouseau and 
keeps the walking one-man-disaster premise for his creation Hrundi V. 
Bakshi, an Indian actor who finds himself accidentally invited to a 
producer's party after wreaking havoc on the set of his GUNGA DIN remake (he 
literally only gets three steps from the front door before things start 
going wrong).  Why Sellers elected to make his character Indian is a bit of 
a mystery as there is no reason for it in the story other than to make him a 
complete foreigner amongst the Hollywood set (you can spot the lines that 
were inserted to give his nationality some 'relevance').  I'd say that 
Sellers wanted to utilize his gift for mimicry and accents in a way he 
hadn't tried before, at least not for the length of a feature - for those of 
us raised on THE GOON SHOW his choice of role comes as no surprise.  It may 
be an odd choice but it works beautifully and we do not question it: if 
anything, it helps cement the notion in our mind that he and fellow outsider 
Claudine Longet (playing an aspiring French actress) belong together by the 
film's end.
Film has many funny gags but slides in a couple of places.  Sellers is best 
when he is on the move and liable to get himself into trouble - when he is 
seated at a dinner table halfway through the movie the action instead must 
transfer to a tipsy waiter.  Similarly, the slapstick gets more hysterical 
and less effective when Sellers disappears for much of the movie's final 
quarter - having characters repeatedly take pratfalls into a swimming pool 
is just plain lazy.  That's not to say the film still can't be enjoyed - 
it's just that you have to switch gears from watching a Peter Sellers film 
to watching a 60s time capsule (the finale has go-go dancing, a 
brightly-painted baby elephant, and a sea of soap bubbles).  Film isn't just 
for Sellers fans - kids will enjoy the gadget-laden house and relate to his 
child-like reactions to the problems he causes (he tries to hide the 
evidence or disappear from the scene).  The party hosts' house may remind 
you of the tacky, modernised home in Jacques Tati's MON ONCLE, just as 
Sellers may remind you of Tati's creation Monsieur Hulot.  Regular Edwards 
composer Henry Mancini provided the music, and yes, pop singer Longet - 
remember her kitsch-but-cute 'Love is Blue'? - does get to sing in her 
distinctive, sugary style.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com

Author
David Landers
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Peter Sellers (Hrundi V. Bakshi), J. Edward McKinley (Fred
Clutterbuck), Herbert Ellis (Director), Claudine Longet (Michele Monet)
DIRECTOR: Blake Edwards
CERTIFICATION: PG
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1968
THE PARTY is one of those classic slapstick comedies that will leave you,
at times, cracking up.  The film takes place, for the most part, in
real-time during an exclusive evening party that is attended only by the
biggest names in Hollywood. 
Hrundi V. Bakshi, played very well by Peter Sellers, is a struggling actor
who just came to America from his homeland, India.  Hrundi tries out his
acting talents, but it seems that he just isn't cut out for the job.  On
the set of his current film that he stars in, Hrundi seems to make
everything go for the worse.  During the filming of this movie set in the
1800's, Hrundi manages to annoy the director (Herbert Ellis) in any way he
can.  This includes a pitiful acting job in many scenes, wearing an
underwater watch in one scene, and accidentally detonating a massive set.
Many of the Hollywood producers and big names want Hrundi out of the
business forever.  And when the director makes a personal phone call to
Mr. Clutterbuck (J. Edward McKinley) pleading for Hrundi's ejection from
Hollywood, everything is pretty much over for Hrundi.  Clutterbuck writes
his name down on a piece of paper to insure that Hrundi will never again
work in Hollywood.  But when this piece of paper turns out to be the guest
list for Clutterbuck's exclusive party, Hrundi is invited, and certain
chaos is bound to occur.
Of course, as predicted, Hrundi causes lots of trouble.  Each scene in
which Hrundi encounters a situation, usually one that he can't handle, is
almost always very humorous.  And each scene with Hrundi and the drunken
waiter, who is alone hilarious, adds to the comedy in a great way.
THE PARTY can be compared to many other films of it's type, specifically
the trio of NAKED GUN movies and the AIRPLANE movies, but THE PARTY is a
delightful movie that incorporates very well played out comedy into
believable situations.  It also includes a number of memorable scenes (can
anyone say "birdy num-num"?).  If you're in the mood for fun and enjoyable
slapstick comedy, check out THE PARTY.  It's not going to be one of your
all-time favorites, but if you enjoy this type of humor, you'll enjoy THE
PARTY.

