Title
Review for Ministry of Fear (1944)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Brian Koller
"Ministry of Fear" is a greatly underrated
'film noir' mystery thriller from the 1940s.
Strange and confusing, the plot is pieced
together slowly and only by film's end does
it make complete sense.  The film's lead,
Ray Milland, is as much in the dark as is
the audience.  His confusion throughout the
film is only matched by his determination to
unravel the whole mystery, a Nazi spy ring
that is fronted by a charitable organization.
Stephen Neale (Milland) has spent the past
two years in an English asylum after mercy
killing his wife.  Released during the World
War II era of German bombing raids, Milland's
attempts at establishing a normal life are
thwarted when he is mistaken for a Nazi agent.
As a good patriotic citizen, Neale wants to
get to the bottom of it.  It seems that the
only people willing to help him are
good-natured Willi Hilfe (Carl Esmond) and
his sister Carla (Marjorie Reynolds).
Eventually, Neale is accused of murder, and
must clear his name in addition to uncovering
the spy ring.
What makes "Ministry of Fear" special isn't
just director Fritz Lang's ability to string
along the viewer, or the screenplay adapted
from the Graham Greene novel.  It isn't even
the 'film noir' feel of dark lighting and
shady, mysterious characters.  The best part
is that the film is completely unpredictable:
the viewer knows that something is about to
happen, but has no idea what it is.  In other
words, the suspense.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html

Author
Dennis Schwartz
MINISTRY OF FEAR (director: Fritz Lang; screenwriters: Seton I. Miller/from the
novel by Graham Greene; cinematographer: Henry Sharp; editor: Archie Marshek;
cast: Ray Milland (Stephen Neale), Marjorie Reynolds (Carla Hilfe), Dan Duryea
(Cost/Travers), Carl Esmond (Willi Hilfe), Hillary Brooke (The Second Mrs.
Bellaire), Percy Waram (Inspector Prentice), Alan Napier (Dr. Forrester),
Erskine Sanford (Mr. Rennit), Thomas Louden (Mr. Newland), Eustace Wyatt (Blind
Man); Runtime: 86; Paramount; 1945) 
Fritz Lang adapts Graham Greene's spy novel that is set during WW11 in a London
that is experiencing blackouts. It has an exciting plot and is properly
atmospheric despite its cheap studio sets. The only flaw was in the unnecessary
ending, where the love-smitten hero becomes foolishly heroic instead of letting
the police do their job. 
Stephen Neale is released from a prison insane asylum after spending two years
there for a mercy killing of his very sick wife, which she actually did herself.
Happy to be free and going back to London by rail, he stops off at a charity
event run by an organization called 'Mothers of the Free Nations.' After seeing
a clairvoyant, he's told by her the exact weight of a cake being given to the
one who comes closest to guessing its weight and is told that it's important for
him get the cake. The cake was meant for a Nazi spy, as it contains microfilm of
a map showing where the British plan to invade Europe. When he wins it, he
refuses to give it up as another couple comes to claim it. 
This leads to the Nazi spy ring chasing him, as his cake is stolen on the train
by someone acting the part of a blind man. He fails to kill Stephen as he jumps
from the train and fires at him, but an airplane bomb kills him when he tries to
cross a field while escaping. 
In Stephen's hotel room his luggage is ransacked, which causes him to hire a
private detective, Mr. Rennit (Sanford), to follow him and find out why the cake
is so valuable. But the detective is discovered and murdered by the Nazis. 
Stephen retraces his steps by going to the charity group to get the address of
the fortune teller. The group is headed by a brother and sister team of Austrian
refugees, Willi and Carla Hilfe (Carl Esmond & Marjorie Reynolds). He is taken
by Willi to meet the fortune teller, but she's not the same one he went to, even
though she has the same name. She tells him there was a sub for her while she
took a break and invites him to attend a seance, and during that event he's
spooked that the fortune teller knows about his past crime. During the darkness
a shot is fired killing Mr. Cost (Duryea), and he's accused of killing the same
man who tried to claim the cake was his. Rather than try to explain this to the
police because of his past, he talks Willi into letting him escape. He then
meets the attractive Carla, someone he has fallen in love with, and she hides
him in the house of a bookseller, Mr. Newland (Louden). 
Soon Stephen starts recalling those at the seance and he becomes suspicious of a
Dr. Forrester (Napier), a psychiatrist who writes propaganda articles and works
for the Ministry of Home Security, and whose book he spots in his hideout. 
When Stephen is asked by Newland to deliver a package of books to Dr. Forrester'
hotel room, a bomb is in the package that goes off almost killing him and Carla.
When he wakes up, he's alone and being questioned by Scotland Yard Inspector
Prentice (Waram). Thinking he's being held for the murder of Cost, he's told no
such murder was reported. He has a hard time convincing the inspector he isn't a
nut, but gets him to go to the site of the bomb crater where the blind man was
killed. There they find the cake with the microfilm. 
The finale is an action-packed scene of the chasing down of the Nazi spy ring.
But, it seemed anti-climactic when compared to the tight story that preceeded
it. 
The film had the mood of film noir, as Milland is the innocent one who has no
luck convincing society that he is indeed innocent. He is released from one
nightmare and quickly falls into another. There is a sinister tone to the film
that plays well. Duryea who reappears from the dead as a fancy Saville Row
tailor, menacingly waves a large tailor's scissors at Milland but instead uses
it to dial the number of his Nazi boss to warn of the police being onto them.
It's a scene that perfectly captures the chilling mood this thriller evoked. 
Dennis Schwartz: "Ozus' World Movie Reviews" 
Š ALL RIGHTS RESERVED   DENNIS SCHWARTZ
