Title
Review for Europa (1991)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Thomas E. Billings
Synopsis:
A few months after the end of World War II, an idealistic young American
returns to his native Germany.  There he takes a job as a sleeping car
conductor on the reconstructed Zentropa railway line.  He gets involved
with a beautiful woman, pro-Nazi terrorists, and U.S. occupation
forces.  A stylish fantasy that is interesting, but of only average
quality.
     The story centers on Leopold Kessler, an idealistic young American
of German origin, who returns to Germany right after the end of World
War II (late 1945); his return is something of a goodwill gesture.
Thanks to the influence of his uncle, he gets a job as a sleeping car
conductor on the recently reconstructed railway line, owned by the
Zentropa Corporation.  In the course of his job, he eventually gets
involved with a beautiful woman, the head of the Zentropa Corporation,
pro-Nazi terrorists (referred to as "werewolves" in the film), and U.S.
occupation force authorities.
     The above plot description is deliberately vague, to avoid
spoilers, and because the plot develops rather slowly in the first half
of the film.  The film is very stylish -- in fact, the stylishness gets
in the way at times.  Most of the film is in black-and-white, with a few
scenes in color and some scenes that are a mixture of color and
black-and-white.  Part of the dialog is in English, part is in German
(with subtitles in the German portions).
     The film is presented as a sort of dream, with a narrator voicing
over scenes to describe the character's emotions or thoughts at times.
Back-projection is used (not very well, I might add) to superimpose
scenes, particularly when the narrator calls for a scene change.
Although the narrator does provide important information at times, I
felt that the film might have been better if there was no narration.
The film develops slowly in the first half, however the pace gets
frantic in the last half.  There is some humor in the film, but not very
much.
     To summarize, I would describe the film as a stylish fantasy, that
is of only mediocre quality.  A newspaper review (San Francisco
Chronicle, 4/24/92) described the film as "think of BLADE RUNNER crossed
with BRAZIL".  The preceding quote is so marketable that I wouldn't be
surprised if the U.S. distributor (Miramax Films) uses it in their
advertising when the film is released later this year.  After seeing the
film, I would counter the quote by saying that it is technically correct
in some ways.  However, if you go to this film expecting a film of the
quality of BRAZIL or BLADE RUNNER, I suspect that you will be very
disappointed!
     The comparison to BLADE RUNNER comes from the post-apocalyptic
state of Germany after World War II, which is comparable to the vision
of Los Angeles presented in BLADE RUNNER.  Comparisons to BRAZIL can be
made because of the authoritarian bureaucracy present everywhere, and
perhaps to the atmosphere of the film (the latter point being
subjective).  Instead of these comparisons, I would offer a different
comparison.  Because the film is mostly in black-and-white, and presents
post-war Germany as a world of its own, comparisons to the work of
Canada's Guy Maddin are reasonable.  Maddin's films are in
black-and-white, and present worlds that are quite different from our
own; his films include TALES FROM THE GIMLI HOSPITAL and ARCHANGEL.  So
I would say that ZENTROPA is what you might get if Guy Maddin did a
conventional film.
     There is one other piece of information that I want to pass on.
This film is/was released in Europe under the name EUROPA.  Do not
confuse ZENTROPA with a recent German film released in the U.S. under
the name EUROPA, EUROPA -- they are two different films!
U.S. Distribution: currently on the film festival circuit. The U.S.
distributor is Miramax Films, and general theatrical release is
planned for sometime later this year.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
          Capsule review:  A weird and hypnotic film, but
     ultimately a disappointment.  The viewer is apparently
     hypnotized and regressed to be a German-American in Germany
     shortly after WWII.  He becomes a train conductor pulled into
     the conflict of the Americans against the anti-American
     resistance.  Rating: high 0 (-4 to +4).
     You are being hypnotized and regressed to an earlier existence.  The
hypnotist puts you to sleep and makes you live the life of an American of
German descent who went to Germany a few months after World War II ended to
become a sleeping car conductor.  You are under the supervision of a stern
uncle whom you have just met, and he pushes you through a Kafkaesque world
that places impossible demands on you, all to meet the incredibly high
standards of being a sleeping car conductor on the Zentropa train line.  But
this is only the beginning.  You are about to be drawn into an intrigue that
pits the Americans occupying Germany against werewolves--the secret German
resistance against the occupation.
     ZENTROPA is a complex and confusing film, very heavy on style.
Sometimes it is dense with ideas, sometimes totally incomprehensible.  It is
filmed mostly in black and white with selective use of color.  Some scenes
are all black and white, some are all color, some have only the foreground
in color.  Sometimes just one object will be in color like in a Nuprin ad.
The black-and-white photography is usually crisp and sharp, with some
amazing images.  One of the best is a train speeding through a tunnel seen
from a few feet ahead with the smoke forming a streaming "hair-do" over the
top of the train.
     ZENTROPA (original title: EUROPA) is Danish director Lars Van Triers's
strange look at Germany after war.  Parts of the world seem as if they could
never have been.  The Zentropa Railroad is a world out of BRAZIL crossed
with Kafka in which the individual is beaten into submission by the system.
In the film's one obvious joke, our main character has just had to pay for
his uniform--which nevertheless belongs to the company--and several other
expenses he must pay in order to start work on the railroad.  "I now
understand German unemployment," he says.  "Nobody can afford to work."
     Ultimately ZENTROPA is a muddled thriller that only partly makes sense.
The viewer is never certain if the historical detail has any validity or is
being made up from the whole cloth.  There are certainly moments of tension,
but more of confusion.  It won the Jury Prize at the Cannes Film festival of
1991, but lost out to BARTON FINK for the Golden Palm, at which Van Trier
reportedly was extremely indignant.  Stylistically it is an achievement, but
the viewer will have to decide if it is really is an entertainment
experience.  For me it had all the elements to work but a few logical
questions left unanswered.  For that I rate it a high 0 on the -4 to +4
scale.
