Title
Review for Kirlian Witness, The (1978)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Shane Burridge
A woman is found dead - apparently murdered - on a rooftop.  Her sister 
(Nancy Snyder), unsatisfied with the official police findings, pursues 
inquiries of her own.  Here's what makes the rest of this genre piece 
different: her key witness is a potted plant.  It sounds like a joke, but 
the story handles its premise seriously.  Aware of the importance of 
suspending the audience's disbelief, first-time writer/director Jonathon 
Sarno provides a skeptical husband (Joel Kolodner) to voice our own doubts 
about Snyder's investigation as it progresses.  Does it make the story more 
believable if the central character is a woman?  I'd say that it was 
definitely a conscious choice of the film-makers, although it suggests the 
underlying message that women are more receptive to a broader view of 
science and nature than men.  Personally I don't see THE KIRLIAN WITNESS 
reaching any conclusions about polygraphs, telepathy, or Kirlian photography 
as a forensic methodology: ultimately, the circumstances of Snyder's 
investigation can be boiled down to hypothesis and autosuggestion.  It's an 
underplayed distraction to what really matters - that Kolodner and fellow 
murder suspect Ted Laplat become drawn into a paranoia that finds themselves 
believing in the occult and contributing to their downfall (the film's 
alternate title was THE PLANTS ARE WATCHING).  THE KIRLIAN WITNESS may be 
more a new-agey Poe update than a film about Gaia or cosmic communion.
Sarno is smart enough to keep the tone of his film quiet; the unspoken joke 
is that characters communicate better with plants than between themselves.  
It's hard trying to pin down how they relate to each other - their roles as 
sister, husband, friend, or employee are non-specific.  They don't even seem 
overly upset at the deaths that occur in the story (note that the violence 
towards plants is handled with just as much attention as that of the human 
characters).  With the exception of Laplat, who has some good exchanges with 
Kolodner, the novice cast doesn't give a performance that promises film 
careers - at least Sarno got Hollywood veteran Lawrence Tierney on board in 
a supporting role.  Film was marketed as a horror picture, although it is 
really an alternative take on crime thrillers.  The economical storyline 
provides only two suspects, but delivers a satisfying conclusion.  
Coincidentally 1978 also saw the release of the documentary THE SECRET LIFE 
OF PLANTS, better known by its Stevie Wonder soundtrack, which made the top 
ten.  The book of the same name can be glimpsed in Sarno's film.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free E-mail from MSN Hotmail at http://www.hotmail.com
