Title
Review for House of Games (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: David Mamet
Writer: David Mamet (story by Mamet and Jonathan Katz)
Starring: Lindsay Crouse, Joe Mantegna, Mike Nussbaum, Lilia Skala, Ricky
Jay, J. T. Walsh, Steven Goldstein, Jack Wallace, Meshach Taylor, William
H. Macy
"House of Games" recognizes a distinct human weakness that we all suffer
from: the need to feel like you're smarter than everyone else.  I remember
not too long ago being in a chinese restaurant with a friend, and she told
me she was going to steal the ash tray at our table when the cooks weren't
looking.  I asked her why she wanted to that; she didn't even smoke.  She
just gave me a bad look and shoved the thing in her bag, and then cooly
left the building.  Hmm...
This film deals with people who do this kind of stuff for a living, and on
a much more dramatic scale.  The main characters in this film are the
infamous people known as confidence men, who are all flawless actors who
fool people out of something, whether it be money or just their wits.  The
writer and director of this film, David Mamet, one of the world's great
playwrights, is himself a magician, another form of the confidence man, who
just loves to play with people, and here has made a downright fascinating
magic trick that cons the audience perfectly with such an incredible
illusion that it soon opens the film up to even more incredible depths that
few suspense films have ever tread upon.
"House of Games" deals with a psychiatrist, Margaret Ford (Mamet's
then-wife, Lindsay Crouse), who deals primarily with compulsions, and has
just had a book published when she discovers that one of her patients, a
compulsive gambler, has just gotten himself in a big trap: he owes 25 grand
to a man who says that if he doesn't pay by the next day, he will murder
him.  Margaret journeys across town to the place where the man hangs out,
called "The House of Games," where she meets this man, Mike (a brilliant
Joe Mantegna), and sees if she can get him to help her friend out.
Mike, who has never heard something like this, decides to cut her a deal:
she helps him find the "tell" on a man he is playing poker with in the next
room, and if he wins, her friend's marker is torn up.  From here on out, it
would be totally unfair to reveal anymore of what happens plot-wise, but
let's just say she gets sucked into the world of conning and deceiving,
where the whole idea is that you con someone out of their money in the most
elaborate way possible so that they have little or no doubt that they were
duped.  After all, what use is stealing money from someone if they know
they were tricked?
Basically, this film is one big con from start to finish because nothing
that it shows us is real and it knows it.  It leads us through what seems
to be high drama, then pulls the rug out from under us and shows us that we
were totally duped, which shouldn't be a real shock to anyone who's seen
his latest film, "The Spanish Prisoner," and has yet to see this film
(which was me up to a couple of hours ago).  Both films feature elaborate
con games that fool the protagonist with twist upon twist upon twist, and
in turn, probably also fool the audience as well.
Yet this film is still remarkably intelligent and fresh and a whole lot
better than most films that try to do what this film does.  Why is it so
intelligent and fresh?  Well, it's intelligent because it never takes us
for morons, and instead sets up such a lavish ploy that anyone of any kind
of intelligence can be easily duped by it.  Everything we see seems totally
real and there's really no proof of fraud until you see everything for what
it really is.  That's why it's such a smart movie.
And it's fresh because it's not just always thinking about what it will do
next and stays two steps ahead of the audience, but also because it's
remarkably deep for any film.  Basically, "House of Games" is about
watching movies, making this a subtlely self-reflexive film.  There's a
scene towards the end that has to be one of the most kafkaesque scenes I
have witnessed (later sorta copied for a later scene in "The Game," another
ingenius con game), and is basically saying that this is all an act we are
watching, and none of this is real, which sets it up for the finale which
could be seen as cheap if it weren't so intelligent and deep.  It's pretty
much one of the reactions someone could have to this film, basically
because it can be seen as manipulative.
"House of Games" is brilliant, though, because it can easily and almost
effortlessly con the viewers into thinking like the psychiatrist
protagonist, and because it's practically a tragedy of two types of people
in the world.  The chief con man of the film, Mike, is one of the saddest
characters to ever populate a movie because he's all an illusion and he has
no delusions about what he is (or isn't).  And the second tragic figure is
Margaret, the woman who tries to delude herself about a simple human folly,
and tries to make herself out to be something better than everyone else is,
even in the final frame of the film.  "House of Games" is electrifying
because it's so refreshingly smart, and so enigmatically deep about
humanity.  And what a con.
Homepage at: http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Hills/8335/

Author
pax@uxa.cso.uiuc.edu
     This film reminds me of SLEUTH, THE CONVERSATION, and BLOW UP.  That makes
two pluses and a minus, but not in that order.  It has an undercurrent of
violence and, as the movie progresses, insanity, a current that eddies in your
subconscious and only surfaces later.
     In one sentence, it is the story of a woman who, sick of her life, takes a
walk on the wild side.  In two, it is an elaborate con gone awry.  It is clever
but flawed.  She is not quite believable, the plot is not quite believable, it
is one of those plots where everything too neatly fits.  And it relies too much
on misdirection for its effect--I could see what was coming next not always but
too often.  So I keep thinking that it is too witty, too slick, to be that
good.  In fact there is a time in the movie after which they were in such a
hurry to wrap it all up that it is plainly forced.
     Perhaps it is the suspicion that it is merely an understated piece of
feminist propaganda delving into real persona purely by accident that leaves me
feeling so ambiguous about this film.  Certainly both women in the film are
strong successful professionals, and all the men are conniving and criminally
deceitful; albeit, there is a certain necessity for this--there are no loose
strings, no gratuitous anything.  Certainly the men prey on the women (well, on
the woman).  And certainly she gets even.  So it could be femiganda, but the
rhetoric is missing, and she is subtly demented always, and she is unusually
dense.  We figure out what is going on long, long, long before she does.  So if
it is femiganda, it's an ambivalent strain and I like it anyway.
This one gets 4 out of 5 on my 1 to 5 point order of magnitude scale.

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     David Mamet is becoming a name to conjure with.  I first noticed him
about a decade ago when he had a play on Broadway called THE WATER ENGINE.
That play, set in 1939, wove together chain letters, the World's Fair, and
the great American paranoia myth that the auto companies have an engine that
runs on water, but they've hushed it up.  Much more recently Mamet wrote THE
UNTOUCHABLES, an enjoyable screenplay unencumbered by concern for historical
accuracy.  HOUSE OF GAMES has a Mamet screenplay and Mamet also debuts as
director.
     Lindsay Crouse plays Margaret Ford, a successful psychiatrist.  Dr.
Ford has doubts that she really can help any of her patients.  Against the
cautious rules of psychiatry she gets involved in the personal life of one
of her patients and, in doing so, meets Mike (played by Joe Mantegna).  That
is not saying much about the plot and my personal recommendation is to stay
away from any reviewer who is going to tell you any more about the plot than
that.  If you really want to know more about the plot to know if you will
like the film, take my word for it, you will probably like HOUSE OF GAMES.
It has humor, it has suspense, and it had the audience spellbound.
     My biggest complaint with HOUSE OF GAMES is that even when the final
credits roll, the audience is still waiting for the other shoe to fall.  No
matter how many shoes fall in a film like this, you still expect that there
will be another one and another one.  And what further creates that feeling
is that HOUSE OF GAMES is so entertaining, it seems like a much shorter film
than it really is.  Perhaps a plot twist or two predictable.  Lindsay
Crouse's acting is a little wooden.  But Joe Mantegna is mesmerizing on the
screen.  His is apiece of nearly perfect casting.  Siskel and Ebert both
admitted to talking to the screen when they saw this film.  I'm glad I
didn't see it with them, but I do remember grinning at the screen a few
times.  I rate HOUSE OF GAMES a +2 on the -4 to +4 scale.
