Title
Review for Vital Signs (1990)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Randy Parker
        VITAL SIGNS is a fascinating look at five students during one of
the most grueling and exciting periods of their lives: the legendary third
year of medical school.  It's time to sink or swim: the students must leave
behind the security of the classroom and plunge into the life and death
reality of practicing medicine in a bona fide hospital.
        A true ensemble film, VITAL SIGNS skillfully juggles half a dozen
plot strands.  It follows each of the five students as they proceed through
the year--working 30 hours a day and fiercely competing with one another to
earn honors, an achievement which can make or break their careers.  For the
first time in their education, the students are getting hands-on
experience--iscovering the joy of saving lives and the heartbreak of losing
them.
        Most of the cast members are unknowns, but their performances are
surprisingly vibrant and self-assured.  Adrian Pasdar is outstanding as
Michael, the son of a famous surgeon who is trying to live up to his
father's sterling reputation.  Michael is an exceptionally good student,
but he doesn't become a good doctor until he learns from a cancer patient
(Norma Aleandro) that people are as important as facts.
        Diane Lane plays Michael's love-interest, a fellow student whom he
finds attractive both for her extraordinary beauty and for her sensitivity.
Lane began her film career in 1979 as a young girl (in A LITTLE ROMANCE);
she has blossomed into a lovely young woman and a fine actress.  Lane is
integral to the movie's most heart-breaking sequence; unfortunately, she's
also integral to the film's most serious blunder: an altogether gratuitous
love scene which goes on and on and on...
        Jack Gwaltney is effective as Kenny, an ambitious student who is
more committed to his career than to his marriage to Laura San Giacomo
(whose character is amazingly subdued and restrained compared to the
over-the-top characters she plays in PRETTY WOMAN and SEX, LIES, AND
VIDEOTAPE).  Kenny is Michael's main competition for the coveted surgery
internship; in fact, their ferocious rivalry is really the blood and guts
of the film, the conflict which drives the story forward.
        Another sub-plot, which is less fully-developed (but no less
compelling), involves Jane Adams and Tim Ransom as a WHEN HARRY MET
SALLY-like couple: best friends who jeopardize their friendship by sleeping
together.  Adams and Ranson have precious little screen time, but they make
it count by creating lovably goofy characters.  Finally, Jimmy Smits (from
"L.A. Law") is on board as the hospital's head surgeon, an educator who
mixes stern authority and light-hearted humor to command respect and
admiration from his students.
        VITAL SIGNS stands out because it absorbs us so deeply into its
characters and because it conveys so vividly the intensity of medical
school.  The movie offers an intimate glimpse into the lives and loves of
five genuinely compelling characters; as they change and mature, we
celebrate their victories and grieve over their defeats.
        The film convinces us that we are witnessing the real thing.  In
fact, the surgery scenes are uncomfortably realistic and incredibly
riveting.  Director Marisa Silver wisely silences the soundtrack and allows
the operations to generate their own drama and suspense.  Only the ending
seems a little Hollywood, a bit too neat and tidy; everything else in VITAL
SIGNS seems brutally authentic and vital.
