Title
Review for What Planet Are You From? (2000)
Number of Reviews
22

Author
Mac VerStandig
---A copy of this review can be found at 
http://www.moviereviews.org/what_planet_are_you_from.htm ---
The ordinarily conservative Ben Kingsley, while playing an intergalactic 
leader, says "penis." Gary Shandling's character makes a humming noise 
when sexually aroused, courtesy of an artificial sex organ. A sleazy 
banker has intercourse with his supervisor in the vault. Find this 
funny? So do I.
Some planet, "way the hell out there," is attempting a universal 
domination bid by knocking off one celestial body at a time and earth's 
number has come up. (Now there's a new one!) Agent 1449-6 (Gary 
Shandling) is selected to lead the takeover mission by going to earth, 
assuming the name Harold Anderson and successfully inseminating a human 
female. (Another new one!) Blending in won't be difficult, however, as 
our out-of-town guest already has a human appearance - minus a penis 
that is. Yes, one of the keys to the all-male planet's domination is 
that none of its species can think with any head other than that lying 
firmly between their shoulders.
Anderson ultimately settles on Susan Hart, (Annette Bening hot off of 
her Academy Award nominated portrayal of Carolyn Burnham in American 
Beauty) a reformed alcoholic whom he picks up at an A. A. meeting. There 
is little shock when Susan finally becomes pregnant and breaks the news 
to Harold with a lame yet surprisingly memorable show stopping "High 
Hopes."
Because Anderson has neither pride to lose nor humiliation to fear, he 
makes passes at woman after woman from the minute he lands until he 
settles on Hart. This allows the film to use numerous hilarious pickup 
lines that put this summer's memorable "Suck me, Beautiful!" (care of 
American Pie) to shame. But the oftentimes offensive and always lurid 
cracks are overshadowed by the aforementioned reoccurring vibrating 
penis joke that stops being funny very quickly but continues throughout 
the entire piece. 
Like most alien-come-to-earth movies, the villain here is represented by 
a disgruntled government employee with a rocky marriage. (EDITOR'S NOTE: 
you can delete the "alien-come-to-earth.") Here the bad guy is Roland 
Jones (John Goodman), but he never achieves full evil status since you 
simply can't help but feel badly for the overworked government servant.  
When dealing with a movie of this nature, some reality must be 
suspended. Fine, aliens who travel quickly through space and blend in on 
earth can be bought. But some concepts aren't as easy to swallow. Isn't 
it odd that Hart is willing to repeatedly engage in sexual congress with 
Anderson even though his reproductive organ hums? What about the fact 
that very few people think twice about her ability to deliver a baby 
after only the first trimester? And if Anderson took some poor guy's 
job, where is the poor guy?
So, to recap, Gandhi says a naughty word, Larry Sanders can't control 
himself and Carolyn Burnham sings. Don't let your hopes be as high as 
hers.

Author
Steve Rhodes
"I like your shoes, and you smell nice too," H1449-6 a.k.a.  Harold
Anderson (Garry Shandling) uses as his favorite come-on line to the
women he meets.  Harold is on a wham-bamm-thank-you-ma'am assignment
from his planet.  He has been fitted with a penis (an organ not extant
on his home planet) so that he can impregnate a female earthling.
Mike Nichols' WHAT PLANET ARE YOU FROM? is a good-spirited little comedy
that takes its audience from smiles to snickers to big laughs as it
pokes fun at human philosophy, emotion and sexuality.  If this unique
show has any roots it is as a social satire version of 1984 but set in
the future.  The script by Garry Shandling and Michael Leeson is full of
smartly-written, bone-dry humor.  ("You appear intelligent, but when you
open your mouth, the effect is spoiled," is one of the film's typically
acute observations.)
Initially, Harold has a terrible time getting a woman to have sex with
him.  His first strike-out is with a blonde bimbo stewardess, who might
appear to be a sure thing.  "My boyfriend once told me it was like
trying to start a dead car," she tells him, while naked, but frozen, in
bed next to him.
Harold goes to work at a bank at which Perry Gordon (Greg Kinnear)
works.  Perry, in shades of FIGHT CLUB, takes the ever-horny Harold to
an AA meeting as a way for them to pick up women.  (Perry's wife is
played by Linda Fiorentino, who wears some killer outfits.  Perhaps the
hardest thing to believe in the movie is why anyone would cheat on her.)
As alcoholics get up to testify, Harold sets his eye on a charming
ex-drunk named Susan (Annette Bening in another turn as a real-estate
agent).  Susan is a walking mission statement full of new age
philosophies.  Her current goal in life is to get to know herself better
so that she can focus less on herself and more on others.  Her dresser
has icons from all of the world's major religions.  She is mentally
noshing on them until she finds one that she likes.
The once promiscuous Susan has given up sex until after marriage, so
Harold agrees to tie the knot with her as a necessary prerequisite to
procreation.  "You're marrying a woman you haven't had sex with?" Perry
asks Greg in absolute astonishment.  "Aren't you scared? Didn't you see
THE CRYING GAME?"
The film's on-going joke is that Harold's penis hums loudly when he is
sexually aroused, which is often.  Sounding like a cross between an
electric pencil sharpener and a small hand-held fan, his organ hums
loudly, which is taken as merely an eccentric oddity by his would-be
conquests.
The rest of the wonderful cast includes John Goodman, as a bumbling but
persistent FAA investigator, and Ben Kingsley, as the no-nonsense leader
of H1449-6's planet.
With squeaky clean sets and a wry sense of humor, the film has jokes
that get funnier the more you think about them.  Although it's not a
message movie, the story has more than its share of commentary on how
ridiculous we human beings can be.
In a movie with many good scenes, my favorite is when Harold picks up
his naked baby boy and threatens to use the baby as a weapon.  "This
thing's gonna blow!" he warns attacking soldiers from his planet.  And
as anyone who has ever held a baby knows, he isn't kidding.
WHAT PLANET ARE YOU FROM? runs 1:40.  It is rated R for sexuality and
language and would be acceptable for older teenagers.
Email: Steve.Rhodes@InternetReviews.com
Web: http://www.InternetReviews.com

Author
Chuck Schwartz
CrankyCriticŽ movie reviews: What Planet  Are You From?
Rated  [R], 105 minutes
Starring Garry Shandling, Annette Bening
Story by Garry Shandling & Michael Leeson
Screenplay by Shandling & Leeson and Ed Solomon and Peter Tolan
Directed by Mike Nichols
website: www.sony.com/whatplanet/
IN SHORT: "It's Garry Shandling's Movie..."
....which is how the advertising folks should have billed this very funny
flick, 'cuz none of 'em obviously watched the damned thing. Thus the ad
campaign which implies that an alien being from a planet of men and only
men, comes to earth to father a child and save his planet. Nope. The
advanced society of said planet wants to conquer earth. It's said so
right at the top of the flick, as Star Wars-like background titles roll
up the screen. Why making one baby with an earthling would enable these
aliens to conquer earth is beyond me, but logic needs no reason in this
story, a perfect setup to Garry Shandling's type of reaction humor,
which is firing on all cylinders in this flick.
And just forty or fifty years ago, all alien planets were stocked with
busty, barely clad women, all desperately in need of a good shtup. Now,
in the first Year Zero in a century, we are confronted with the
intellectual and technological inhabitants of a Planet we'll call X, all
male and all dressed in black and gray Armani suits, looking like the
clones that they are. Without women, this society has gone beyond the
need for emotions or relationships or the private parts that play such
an important part in each.
Thus, H1449-6 (hereafter Harold Anderson) is dispatched to Arizona, USA,
to find and knock up one of our own. This being accomplished, their
dastardly plan to do away with our various lifestyles would be underway
.. . . except that they've sent Garry Shandling. Harold's assignment has
him posing as a loan officer at a bank, where an incredibly sleazy
co-worker (Greg Kinnear) shows him the ropes of picking up chicks. One
chick happens to be Susan Hart (Annette Bening) who has enough problems
of her own and has dealt with them by deciding, among other things, not
to have sex until she is married. Harold, whose mind is on nothing but
procreation, pops the question after one date. From there on in, What
Planet... quickly becomes a learning experience for the ET as to what
relationships truly mean. Just as director Mike Nichols' The Birdcage
wasn't as much about gay life as it was about families, so is What
Planet... more about the male/female thing than alien conquest.
OK, we'll forgive the marketing people for this one...
What Planet Are You From? is a Garry Shandling comedy and it delivers
all the chuckles you associate with GS, once again taking a concept fit
for a trashy TV sitcom (and, yes, I do sorta kinda like 3rd Rock From
The Sun, though it took awhile) and elevates it to a level of comedy fit
for adults. Any fan knows that Shandling has made an art of creating
inept, and intellectually funny, characters. Any fan will not be
disappointed. With a very small dose of low-brow humor added to the mix,
the folks just looking for a good time will not be disappointed, either.
John Goodman plays the FAA investigator hot on Harold's tail. Teevee
faces Nora Dunn, Camryn Manheim play Susan's friends. Ben Kingsley plays
Graydon, leader of Planet X (and while July 14 is still months -- and a
different movie studio -- away, any X-Men fanboy is going to catch at
least two very in jokes at the end of this flick). All are positive
reinforcement to the gags.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to What Planet Are Your From?, he would
have paid...
If you're not a Shandling fan, What Planet... is still a better than
average time in the dark. For those of us that wonder why we should
shell out for something that's been done in broad comic strokes on
teevee . . . 'cuz it's funny. That's why.
The Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000
by, Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com

Author
Rose 'Bams' Cooper
What Planet Are You From? (2000) 
Rated R; running time 100 minutes
Genre: Comedy
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0181151 
Official site: http://www.sony.com/whatplanet/  
Written by: Michael Leeson (based on a story by Garry Shandling)
Directed by: Michael Leeson
Starring: Garry Shandling, Annette Benning, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear, 
Ben Kingsley, Linda Fiorentino, Anne Cusack, Camryn Manheim, Nora Dunn, 
Caroline Aaron, Richard Jenkins, Samantha Smith, Janeane Garofalo
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsplanet.html
When I realized last week that my travelling to New Orleans for Mardi 
Gras would mean that I'd miss the opening weekend for What Planet Are 
You From (hereby known as WPAYF), I breathed a sign of relief.  Unlike 
the hoards who thought Garry Shandling's HBO and FOX TV shows were 
funny, I avoided them like nobody's business; I couldn't get past his 
looking too much like a giant weasel.  And the premise behind WPAYF just 
screamed to me, "Girl, don't go see this goofy sh...tuff".  Still, I had 
a few extra hours on my hands Sunday; and besides, I reasoned with 
myself, if you ignore Shandling, it's got a very talented supporting 
cast in Annette Benning, John Goodman, Ben Kingsley, and Linda 
Fiorentino.  What could go wrong?
Then I remembered "Random Mess" and "Stupornova" - and crossed my 
fingers...
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**):
WPAYF takes the "Men Are From Mars" concept to another level: Harold 
Anderson (Gary Shandling) is a brother from another planet - a planet of 
men with no penis [shudder].  It should come as no surprise, then, that 
these dickless men wish to conquer another planet - and which planet 
would that be?  Three guesses; and the first two are wrong.
After putting his planet's men through semi-intensive training on the 
ways of Earth women, hoping that they'd be Easy, fearless leader Graydon 
(Ben Kingsley) picks Harold as their man.  His mission: grab his 
attachable penis, get an Earth Girl knocked up, and something or another 
mumble mumble about the new superbaby...oh yeah, it will become Supreme! 
Ruler! Of! Earth!
A few things get in the way first, though; mainly, his lame lines fail 
to impress many women - including a Flight Attendant (Samantha Smith) he 
met on the way to Earth - that is, until he meets Susan Hart (Annette 
Benning), who he figures just might be The One.  Finding a job at a bank 
while he's waiting for the child thingy to resolve itself, he also has 
to deal with his slimy sycophant co-work Perry Gordon (Greg Kinnear), 
their boss Don Fisk (Richard Jenkins), and FAA inspector Roland Jones 
(John Goodman), who is committed to proving to his bosses that Harold is 
from somewhere way the hell out there.
The Upshot:
As did "The Whole Nine Yards", WPAYF started out slow(ly) and picked up 
steam as it went along, with some very funny scenes along the way.  What 
really worked about it for me is the sense of fun the characters and 
actors seemed to have with each other, from Susan kickin' it with her 
girlfriends Liz (Anne Cusack), Alison (Camryn Manheim), and Madeline 
(Nora Dunn) to the comic interplay between Shanning and the surprisingly 
funny Benning - and especially Goodman, one of the funniest Big Men in 
Hollywood - the laughs were easily drawn out of me, even I as sat there 
determined not to laugh at this movie.  That lasted for about 15 minutes 
- right up to the point where Mr. Happy starting humming.  After that, I 
was done for.
The feel of this comedy is very "Raising Arizona"-ish; stretching the 
see-through lines men often troll on women - and the 
hook-line-and-sinker way women often respond to them - to a comic 
extreme, you quickly see, through Harold's eyes, just how silly the 
Battle Between The Sexes really is.  But even after the Obligatory 
Alien-Develops-Human-Feelings bit, the "yes, dear" relationship, in all 
its familiarity, seems somehow comforting; at least it did for this old 
married chick.
I do, however, take slight issue with what I see as two casting flaws, 
one of character choices, the other, miscast actors.  The character most 
out-of-place here was Helen Gordon, played to her smoky best by Linda 
Fiorentino; though Ms. F. did no real wrong in her role, her character 
seemed to be an unnecessary distraction, an appendage to "prove" how Bad 
Perry was (not that he needed the help).  Still, she delivered one of 
the best lines of the movie (and since it was featured in its 
commercials, I'm not giving away anything here): when Harold tells her 
that the humming sound she heard was coming from his penis, she says, "I 
guess it doesn't know the words".  Rollin', I tell ya; absolutely 
rollin'.
The second, more problematic, casting flaw involves Janeane Garofalo; as 
was done in Dogma, she was included here in a glorified cameo as a 
nervous airline passenger used as a target for more of Harold's Intro To 
Earth bit.  WPAYF's Powers That Be would've done far better to cast her 
as Roland's wife Nadine, and her part minor played instead by Caroline 
Aaron (the actor who actually played Nadine Jones).  Nothing against 
Aaron, but I had no idea why she was trippin' so tight over Roland just 
doin' his thang; but you can bet your bippy that if Garafolo had gotten 
her hooks into Nadine, comedic sparks would've flown between her and 
Goodman.
There's nothing - nothing, I say! - at all Deep about WPAYF; it 
certainly won't be up for anyone's "Best Of" lists at the end of the 
year, to say the least.  But in a year (so far) where damn near every 
movie seems to be striving for inclusion on "Worst Of", you could do 
much worse than to spend 100 minutes of your time with a few good 
bellylaughs and a chuckle or three.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
Yeah, I know: I'm as shocked as you probably are to see me give WPAYF a 
greenlight (especially since I only gave its soulmate, last year's 
Galaxy Quest, a conditional yellow).  Hey, every Chick can be wrong 
once, eh?
"What Planet Are You From?" (rating: greenlight): 
Even if Garry Shandling does look like a giant weasel.

Author
John Beachem
Directed by: Mike Nichols
Written by: Garry Shandling (story), Michael Leeson
How do you think an alien would react if forced to experience the trials of
human dating  rituals? This is the main idea behind "What Planet are you
From?", the new comedy from director Mike Nichols ("Primary Colors", "The
Birdcage"). Garry Shandling ("The Larry Sanders Show"), who also developed
the film's story, plays the lead role. The truth is, I went into this movie
not expecting a whole lot out of Shandling. I've never cared for his
previous roles, and the previews looked somewhat bland. Much to my surprise,
"What Planet are you From?" turned out to be quite an enjoyable movie with
fairly consistent laughs throughout. This is mainly because not only does
Shandling do an admirable job, but he is surrounded by a great supporting
cast.
On a planet way the hell out there, a race of men is preparing to take over
the universe by sending minions to have sex with women from every other race
in the galaxy. Harold Anderson (Garry Shandling) has been chosen to
procreate with a female from Earth. His planet's leader (Ben Kingsley)
prepares him with the necessary training (in a very amusing opening scene)
and gives him two days to conceive a child. However, upon his arrival,
Anderson finds that his training has not prepared him for the illogical
behavior of humans. He immediately seeks help from a co-worker (Greg
Kinnear) and is soon introduced to a suitable mate named Susan (Annette
Bening). Anderson is faced with two problems now: First, Susan will only
mate with him after they are married, and second, his arrival on the planet
has aroused the suspicions of an airport employee (John Goodman) who soon
discovers who Anderson really is.
I think the funniest thing about Shandling's performance throughout "What
Planet are you From?" is that he reacts to everything thrown at him in such
a logical manner. For example, in one scene Susan is upset with Harold for
watching television rather than paying attention to her. She hurls the
remote against the wall, smashing it. Harold immediately decides to purchase
a new remote, which further infuriates Susan. She then shouts "Fine, just
go!" Harold promptly nods his head and leaves. Annette Bening is perfectly
cast as Susan, managing somehow to look hassled, angry, and deeply confused
all at once. She also manages to save Shandling at times when his lack of
experience in a leading role begins to show.
The supporting cast is, in fact, one of the best things about this film.
Greg Kinnear ("Mystery Men", "As Good as it Gets") is perfect as the king of
sleaze balls everywhere. Ben Kingsley ("Species", "Schindler's List") is a
great choice as the straight as an arrow ruler of Anderson's planet, though
he is a bit underused. John Goodman ("The Big Lebowski"), who I believe is
one of the best comic actors in Hollywood, is hilarious in his role as the
one man who thinks he knows the truth. One of the biggest problems I had
with the film was that Goodman was so underused that his character seemed
rather pointless. Linda Fiorentino ("Dogma") makes a brief appearance as
Kinnear's wife, and Janeane Garofolo shows up in a cameo as an airline
passenger.
The film may not make a whole lot of sense, since we are never told just how
Anderson's impregnating a woman will bring about the downfall of the
species, but plot isn't exactly the point here. While "What Planet are you
From?" manages to keep the humor going through the majority of its length,
things do get a bit too sappy and sentimental towards the end. If it had
been trimmend down some from its 112 minute running time I probably would
have given it four stars. One last thing I must note is that Annette Bening
plays a real-estate agent in the film ("American Beauty", anyone?). For a
very funny script, a surprisingly good turn by Garry Shandling, and a great
supporting cast, I give "What Planet are you From?" three and a half out of
five stars.
Comments? Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net
For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:
http://www.dependentfilms.net
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it only if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever made. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Author
Christian Pyle

What Planet Are You From?
Reviewed by Christian Pyle
Directed by Mike Nichols  
Written by Garry Shandling, Michael Leeson, Ed Solomon, and Peter Tolan
Starring Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear, and Ben
Kingsley
Official Site: http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/whatplanet/
Grade:  C+
Somewhere way out there is a planet with a society that has advanced beyond the
need for reproduction.  However, they haven't gotten past the desire for
conquest yet, so the planet's leader (Ben Kingsley) dispatches H1449-6 (Garry
Shandling) to Earth to impregnate a human female.  (If this works, they'll send
lots more guys to knock up our women, and the offspring will eventually take
over the planet).  The alien operative comes to Earth with the human name
Harold Anderson and a job at a Phoenix bank.  His slimy co-worker Perry (Greg
Kinnear) takes Harold to an AA meeting to pick up chicks.  There they meet
Susan Hart (Annette Bening), who's just given up a life of debauchery in favor
of sobriety.
The aliens have an unusual mode of travel between planets:  they beam
themselves into the restrooms of airplanes in flight.  So, while Harold seeks a
receptive womb, FAA investigator Roland Jones (John Goodman) is looking into
the bright lights and turbulence that accompanied Harold's arrival on Earth. 
Although skeptical after twenty years on the job, Roland soon deduces the truth
about Harold.
On their first date, Susan tells Harold that she's not going to have sex again
until she's married.  The next time he sees her, Harold proposes.  After some
deliberation, Susan accepts, and they're off to Vegas.  Even as he moves closer
to completing his mission, Harold begins to have feelings for Susan that
weren't covered in his training.  Will he be able to leave her when the baby is
born?
>From "The Graduate" to "The Birdcage," Mike Nichols has directed fresher,
funnier movies than this one.  The laughs in "What Planet Are You From?" come
in clumps separated by slow and predictable sequences.  The script by Shandling
and company could have used another rewrite or two.  It benefits from the fact
that sex is always funny, but it doesn't find any new approaches to familiar
gags.  Several of the funniest bits are beaten to death with repetition.  For
example, Harold's artificial penis hums when he gets an erection.  The first
time around, the joke is really funny; by the fifteenth time, it's just
annoying.
In the varied ensemble cast, Annette Bening stands out.  She plays her part of
the recovering alcoholic seeking meaning and stability with the earnestness of
drama.  As a result, Susan is a well-developed, three-dimensional character. 
Although the men get higher billing, the supporting actresses provide many of
the funniest moments.  Caroline Aaron is hilarious as Roland's suspicious wife
Nadine who believes that his sudden interest in work must mean he's having an
affair.  Linda Fiorentino plays Perry's wife who tries to seduce Harold to get
even with her husband (who actually is having an affair).  Nobody can play a
seduction scene as well as she can.
Despite having starred in two ground-breaking television series, Garry
Shandling remains a comedian, not an actor.  He can deliver funny lines with
skillful timing, but he can't bring a character to life.  This flaw doesn't
bode well for his career as a movie star, and I predict he'll find his way back
to the small screen or be content with supporting roles.  Speaking of
supporting actors . . . Greg Kinnear and Ben Kingsley CAN act but this movie
doesn't give them much to work with.  They both try hard but their characters
are standard stock figures we've seen a dozen times before.  I especially hope
to see Kinnear in a meatier role soon.  He proved his talent with his
Oscar-nominated performance in "As Good as It Gets" but hasn't challenged
himself since.
Bottom Line:  A handful of hilarious scenes separated by genial but stale plot
development
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review: 
http://www.madreview.com/main.html

Author
Bill Chambers
starring Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, John Goodman, Ben Kingsley
screenplay by Garry Shandling, Michael Leeson, Ed Solomon, Peter Tolan
directed by Mike Nichols
To paint a picture of how immature Mike Nichols' What Planet Are You
From? can get, its McGuffin is a vibrating penis. The film stoops,
often, to a level of humour rarely used outside the schoolyard-or an
episode of `Married With Children'. Yet there's an infectious sunshine
in its comedy; Garry Shandling's first big screen starring vehicle
revels in impropriety without lapsing into bad taste. My problems with
What Planet Are You From? generally lie outside its sense of humour.
A Star Wars-style credit crawl recounts the development of a faraway
planet populated entirely by brilliant, emotionless men. Their leader
(Ben Kingsley) has chosen galactic domination as their next course of
action, starting with Earth. One lucky citizen will be outfitted with an
electric schlong and transported via some bizarre molecular charge to
America, natch, where he will be expected to impregnate an earthling
woman. `Harold Anderson' (Shandling) proves himself up to the challenge
in a series of ignorantly designed tests on the art of courtship.
Harold's spaceship' crashes into a plane bound for Phoenix; he begins
work immediately upon exiting the tiny lavatory, flirting unsuccessfully
with a harried flight attendant (Judy Greer) and a passenger
(Shandling's receptionist from `The Larry Sanders Show', Janeane
Garofalo) who has been frightened by the faux turbulence. (`I like your
shoes,' he tells her as she cries out for comfort.) On ground, Harold
immediately lands an upper-level job at a non-descript financial
institution, where he seeks out dating advice from philandering
co-worker Perry (Greg Kinnear).
Following a few aborted flings, Harold meets recovering alcoholic Susan
(a game Annette Bening), with whom he shares a desire to have a baby.
They marry in Vegas and have a 21-hour honeymoon of non-stop sex. Like
many a horn dog before him, Harold misunderstands his duties as a
provider of emotional support thereafter, and would rather watch TV than
discuss feelings with his wife.
The film's witty hook is that Susan can't tell the difference between a
man and an alien-moreover, that a member of a notoriously unsympathetic
alien race is anthropologically indistinguishable from sleazy Perry or
Roland Jones (John Goodman), a neglectful airline insurance
investigator. (Jones allows his marriage to disintegrate in his quest to
expose Harold's secret identity.) As a result, Harold and Susan's
interstellar divide is, amusingly, a non-issue. Still, it's not news
that the sexes are eternally, and maybe extraterrestrially, engaged in
silent battle, and whenever What Planet Are You From? gets its mind out
of the gutter long enough to be about long term relationships, it is no
more revelatory than a night at `Yuk Yuk's. (A little vibrating penis
goes a long, long way.)
As the man responsible for The Graduate, Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf,
and Carnal Knowledge, director Nichols specializes in stories that
explore the male-female dynamic, which probably made him seem the ideal
choice to mount a quasi-adaptation of John Gray's soupy reference book
Men Are From Mars, Women Are From Venus. Yet What Planet Are You From?'s
guiding hand could be mistaken for that of John Landis or Amy
Heckerling, especially given the preponderance of skin and the shabbier
edges of the material (neither filmmaker is famed for his/her scrutiny):
the corners of the blasé plot don't always meet and Bo Welch's
outerspace sets are derivative of Men in Black's gleaming headquarters,
which he also designed.
Lacking any unique political perspective, What Planet Are You From? is a
high-profile T&A comedy, albeit an enjoyable one. The tone of  the film
is pleasantly relaxed and awfully sweet-we're barely alerted to the
climax before it happens and get to spend a lot of quality time with
Bening as she charms in spades. Shandling is droll, as always (as a
devoted fan of `...Larry Sanders...', I admit a certain bias to the
scrunch-faced actor), and, as Harold begins tearing down his emotional
girders and taking responsibility for his actions, he displays an
oft-muted warmth in full-force. (Shandling also makes off with the best
line in the movie, say I, though to reveal it is to spoil many
surprises.)
Others in the ensemble are not so successful, notably Kinnear, who
fritters away the clout earned from an Oscar nomination in a role that
has Sam McMurray (who played the wife-swapping boss of Nicolas Cage's
character in Raising Arizona) written all over it. And what the heck are
Linda Fiorentino and Ben Kingsley doing there? If Nichols didn't have
the reputation of a Woody Allen or a Robert Altman, and if the project
didn't necessitate hiring big names to elevate its cachet beyond that of
another coming-of-human tale, casting choices may have been a little
less all-star perfunctory, and subsequently improved the picture.

Author
Susan Granger
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "WHAT PLANET ARE YOU FROM?" (Columbia Pictures)
 After The Graduate, Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?, Carnal
Knowledge, Heartburn, even Primary Colors, there's no question that
director Mike Nichols relishes exploring the relationship between the
sexes. Which explains why he was drawn to comedian Garry Shandling's
concept of an extraterrestrial who was sent to Earth to impregnate a
woman as a part of some sort of universal domination plan. Having this
alien come from an advanced civilization of neutered, cloned males
with little knowledge of the behavior of the female of the species is
a clever concept, ripe for scathing social satire, but its execution
misses the mark. In addition to his writing and producing efforts,
Shandling stars, utilizing his wry, dead-pan understatement to be an
awkward, almost totally passive hero. The primary gimmick revolves
around his surgically implanted penis which emits a motorized humming
sound when he becomes aroused. The gag is amusing the first time, the
second, even the third. After that, it loses its vibe. Posing as a
banker in Phoenix, his copulating mission is simple. "I have to have
sex right away," he gasps. "I'm really very horny!"  A sleazy
co-worker, played by Greg Kinnear, takes him to troll at an Alcoholics
Anonymous meeting where he meets Annette Bening, a neurotic, lovable
Earth-chick who is, indeed, easy.  "Don't laugh," she says, "but I'm
working as a real-estate agent" - a line that immediately elicits
chuckles as a reminder of her role in American Beauty.  Bening's
terrific, while John Goodman, Linda Fiorentino, Camryn Manheim,
Janeane Garofalo and Ben Kingsley add to the mix. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, What Planet Are You From? is a droll but silly,
superficial 6. I suspect Garry Shandling will have a limited
big-screen career as a leading man.

Author
Eugene Novikov
Starring Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear,
Ben Kingsley, Linda Fiorentino. Directed by Mike Nichols. Rated R.
One of the most important rules of making a comedy is that you can't
have it both ways. You can either have a goofball, irreverent,
slapstick jamboree, in which case it has to be funny, but isn't
required to make a whole lot of sense. Or you can aim higher and make a
more ambitious movie, raunchy at director's discretion but also
insightful and intelligent. The latter, however, has one catch: it has
to have a thought-out plot. Mike Nichols's new movie What Planet Are
You From? is missing that last all-important component.
"Men are from Mars, Woman are from Venus" and Harold Anderson (Garry
Shandling) is from somewhere way the hell out there. Literally. He's an
alien from another planet and he has come to earth to procreate in
order to assist his homeworld's plans for universe domination. There
are a couple of problems. His planet consists of an all-male population
and he has no experience with human females. The catch phrases he
learned, such as "You smell good" and "I like your shoes" obviously
don't cut it. Also, he is missing the crucial equipment so it has to be
installed -- and whenever he is aroused, it hums. Yes, that's right --
it hums.
Harold takes a liking to Susan, a real estate agent/recovering
alcoholic (Annette Bening, playing a real estate agent for the second
time in a row). She is vulnerable at the time and she marries him on
the spot. Their relationship doesn't exactly take off because all the
groom cares about is that baby while the blushing bride worries that
she may be sterile. Meanwhile, a Federal Aviation Administration agent
(John Goodman) notices some strange things and gets on Harold's trail.
There are actually a lot of good things to say about What Planet Are
You From?. First and foremost is Annette Bening's performance which is
the best of the movie. In her last film, American Beauty, her gem of a
performance went somewhat underappreciated (even though, oddly enough,
it got an Oscar nomination) because it was upstaged by the acting
behemoth that is Kevin Spacey and the film's generally bizarre nature.
Here, she gets a chance to shine; there is a scene where she does an
uproarious song-and-dance rendition of "High Hopes" that won't soon
leave my memory.
Garry Shandling doesn't have the best comic timing around, but he is a
whiz of facial expressions and because of the nature of his
performance, he is often dead-on. The running gag, of course, is the
humming genitalia, which somehow manages not to turn this into a one
joke movie. It gets somewhat predictable, but never old.
The movie really is quite funny, and at times affecting, but as a whole
it doesn't hold up. It feels incomplete because while the film seems to
actually care about the characters and their emotionss, it doesn't have
an iota of concern for its plot. Nothing makes sense. The film doesn't
bother to explain anything about the aliens' background or what exactly
it is they are here for. The whole scenario remains irritatingly
ambiguous, preventing us from ever actually caring about what happens
on screen. The film's set-up fits a Saturday Night Live sketch better
than a full-length movie.
I have seen far worse comedies about aliens from outer space. What
Planet Are You From? at least manages to keep us from squirming in our
seats even if it never realizes its ambitions of involving our
emotions. Garry Shandling, in his first movie since completing his
Larry Sanders Show stint on HBO, looks promising for a lively big-
screen career. And Mike Nichols, who is revered for making comedies
with a compelling human side has made a movie that barely skims the
surface when it needed so desperately to dig a little deeper.

Author
Jon Popick
This is a perfect example of why you shouldn't judge a book by its
cover.  What Planet Are You From? might be the dumbest name for a
feature film since Stop or My Mom Will Shoot.  And on the surface, the
story of an alien being sent to Earth to impregnate a woman seemed
awful.  Knowing the title of the film, and that it starred Garry
Shandling, I envisioned the actor covered in a Lycra spacesuit with
antennae, wrinkling up his nose and asking everyone if his ass looked
big.
Don't let the name and the plotline scare you off.  Sure, Shandling
isn't much of a leading man, but he did create two of the best
television shows in the last dozen years (Fox's It's Garry Shandling's
Show and HBO's The Larry Sanders Show).  Planets story was conceived by
Shandling, who also shares a screenwriting credit with three other
writers (including Sanders and Analyze This scribe Peter Tolan).  It's
basically just the combination of two old, over-used plot formulas  the
`guy trying to get laid' story and the `fish out of water' story.  Think
of it as a cross between American Pie andwell, anything starring
Brendan Fraser.  Except Planet is very entertaining.
Shandling plays H1449-6, a resident of a planet four solar systems
removed from our own.  Their sphere is thousands of years ahead of Earth
technologically, its inhabitants cloned as opposed to bred.  Thanks to
the cloning, they are also genetically free of emotion and their
shriveled private parts are totally useless.  Of course, their lack of
both sex and emotion makes them want to take over the entire universe.
H1449-6 is hand-picked by Graydon (Ben Kingsley, Alice in Wonderland),
the planet's leader, to travel to Earth and father a child in what will
be the beginning of their slow transformation of Earth into a planet
full of similarly dressed, sexless clones.  Which makes it sound like
the crowd at a NASCAR race.
H1449-6 assimilates into Phoenix, Arizona as Harold Anderson, a banker
specializing in commercial and residential lending.  Armed only with
corny pick-up lines, Harold starts trying to get laid before he even
hits terra firma.  Having been taught that complimenting women will lead
to fornication, Harold is surprised when his `You smell nice' and `I
like your shoes' greetings are rebuffed by every female he comes in
contact with.  To make matters worse, Harold was also fitted with a
mechanical penis that whirs to life at the slightest hint of a sexual
encounter, growing louder and louder as the chance of sex approaches.
Harold comes in contact with a zany bunch of Earthlings, including his
pussyhound co-worker (Greg Kinnear, Mystery Men), an FAA agent (John
Goodman, Bringing out the Dead) and a struggling real estate agent
(Annette Bening, American Beauty) that eventually becomes the target for
his super sperm.  Sure, there are problems with the script (why isn't
his mission to knock up as many women as possible?) and anyone should be
able to figure out that Harold will start to act like an Earth male and
develop emotions, but Planet is a still a laugh-riot.
Planet was directed by Mike Nichols (Primary Colors), who successfully
captures Shandling's unique brand of humor and is nearly able to pull
off the idea of the awkward comedian as a leading man.  The acting is
fine all around, especially Bening, who, once again, plays a real estate
agent (a la her Oscar-nominated turn in American Beautyand when did
Bening replace Jane Wyman as Columbia's torchbearer?).  Planet co-starts
Linda Fiorentino, Camryn Manheim, Nora Dunn and Ann Cusack, while
Janeane Garofalo appears in just one scene.
1:42 - R for nudity, sexual content and adult language

Author
Jamey Hughton
Starring-Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, Greg Kinnear,
John Goodman, Ben Kingsley and Linda Fiorentino
Director-Mike Nichols
Canadian Rating-14A
Released by Columbia Pictures - 03/00
After a wearisome floating space disclaimer akin to the `Star Wars'
movies, the alien sex comedy `What Planet Are You From?' changes its
setting to an environment that many audience members will likely find
disturbing. In a futuristic auditorium on a distant planet, there is
row-upon-row of men. These men seem to be the sole inhabitants of a
planet which has focused their highly advanced technology on a universal
takeover. Their latest target is Earth. One chosen member of the alien
colony is to travel to Earth, whereupon he will impregnate a single
female with his extraterrestrial seed so that the hostile takeover may
commence. The lucky guy is H1449-6 (Garry Shandling), who will adopt the
name Harry Anderson and be given a special reproductive attachment to
fulfill his mission. An unexpected side effect: when excited, Harry's
genitalia hums.
And so marks the basis of this loosely amusing but scattershot and
disorderly comedy from veteran director Mike Nichols, who previously
pulled a comedic ace out of his sleeve with `The Birdcage' in 1996.
`What Planet Are You From?' is a pet project that Shandling has been
nursing for four years, and with such an array of versatile talent
involved, the film itself is more than a trifle underwhelming. Although
it boasts some hearty belly laughs and a generally sweet and warmhearted
nature, `What Planet Are You From?' leaves the chalky residue of a movie
that fails to meet its original promise. The film is mundane and watery,
but once you're in the presence of its harmless approach of genial
nonchalance, you'll find it agreeable just the same.
The cast certainly tweaks the curiosity. Once on Earth, Harry's sleazy
co-worker Perry Gordon (Greg Kinnear) takes him to an AA meeting to
scope the chicks. Susan Hart (Annette Bening), a free-spirited soul
attempting to start again from square one in the relationship circle, is
the woman he meets there. Now, back on his distant home planet, Harry
was lectured in the proper methods to pick up an Earth woman (so that he
may impregnate her later, of course). These methods include `telling the
Earth female she smells nice' and `complimenting her on her stylish
shoes.' Once he finds himself in the heat of the battle, Harry discovers
that smooth-talking a lady isn't as elementary as perhaps anticipated.
Watching side-splitting sequences such as Harry and Susan's first date
are like rainbow sprinkles dispersed over this otherwise bland vanilla
concoction, because Shandling's perfected sense of comic timing is given
time to shine. It's unfortunate that there isn't more screen time
dedicated to these bare essentials; instead, Nichols' and company sculpt
the film into a feel-good drama. And multiple subplots weave through the
central plot, including the infatuation of Federal Aviation Agent Roland
Jones (John Goodman), who is very much onto Harry.
Even when it does shift gears into a light romantic comedy, featuring
Harry developing human emotions, `What Planet Are You From?' is sweet
and innocuous. But at the same time, it feels oddly detached and
careless, like it was assembled by chimpanzees equipped with scotch
tape. Numerous loose ends are never tied up, and the screenplay
frequently declines the opportunity to chart further into the realm of
comedic possibilities. Luckily, the enjoyable supporting cast is full of
bright and enjoyable faces. Kinnear reverses personalities and is fun as
the arrogant jerk, while Goodman and Ben Kingsley (as the leader of the
alien race) offer reliable support. The only certified shame is the
thorough waste of Linda Fiorentino (`Dogma'), who plays Perry's alluring
wife in a mere window dressing role.
Believe it or not, Shandling and Bening actually make a cute couple. The
lack of progress achieved with his character is neutralized by Bening's
lively, lovable performance, and the
pair together spark a sensation of innocent charm. They amplify the
otherwise rickety second half of `What Planet Are You From?' to
enjoyable romantic fluff. In certain spots, it's also laugh-out-loud
funny... so collectively, why does `Planet' unhinge? It would be the
overdose of humming penis jokes if that particular sight gag wasn't
fresh and inspired. No, it's the fact that the film seems to be
puttering along without a piece of its own anatomy... this one being
closer to the heart. The only otherworldly aspect of `What Planet Are
You From?' is that, with such a terrific cast and experienced director,
the finished product isn't funnier.
Your Comments Appreciated!  movieviews@hotmail.com

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Am I the only one who still has dozens of "Larry Sanders" shows stashed in
all my video drawers? I hope not, cause that was one of the funniest and
best-written shows to ever hit the airwaves. It starred Garry Shandling as
Larry, and featured much of his signature dry, sarcastic and biting humor.
Easily one of the best asshole characters ever put to the small screen. With
that in mind, I was looking mighty forward to Garry's first big screen
credit as a writer and leading role.
PLOT:
A male life form from another planet populated entirely of highly evolved
males is sent down to Earth in order to impregnate a woman and consequently
save his own planet.
CRITIQUE:
Despite its one-track mentality and overall tame nature, this fun-premised
film features a decent helping of chuckles, a couple of big laughs,
interesting characters interpreted by good actors and enough penis jokes to
satisfy...well, all penis joke lovers! Being a proud lifetime member of the
penis joke lovers club, I was  amused by most of what I saw in this film but
still managed to leave the theater with an uneasy sense of fulfillment. Sure
I smiled, laughed and giggled...uhm, well okay I don't giggle, but chuckled
my way through one humming penis joke after the next, and you bet I enjoyed
John Goodman's nutjob FAA dude performance, as well as Kinnear's king of
sleaze character, but ultimately it just felt like the film was missing a
certain je ne sais quoi...bite, perhaps! I guess I was expecting a darker,
grittier and much funnier interpretation of this creative premise, but in
the end, it felt more like a safe trolley ride through the sanitized lanes
of Hollywood studio-land. Shandling...with restraints on tight.
Don't get me wrong, the film isn't bad by any stretch of the imagination, in
fact, I sort of appreciated some of its smaller, more emotional moments
between Shandling and Bening, and its cute ending. But if you're like me,
expecting to see an edgy, darker point of view in this film, you will be
hard-pressed to find it among its grab-bag of penis humming jokes. In fact,
the penis humming gag is the film's main running feature (i.e. alien gets
horny, penis starts humming loudly...alien gets turned off, the humming
subsides), which I personally enjoyed (see previous lifetime membership
acknowledgment earlier on in this review), but which I certainly can see
getting "old" to others out there. Overall, I would say that the film does
provide for some light, enjoyable, quick and easy entertainment with an
original story, but I would recommend that you go into it with minimal
expectations and a certified predilection towards penis and male
chauvinistic humor. Guilty on both counts :)
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Garry Shandling is not an easy person to break up with, as proven by the end
of his 7-year relationship with actress Linda Doucett (who played the
blonde, bimbo secretary on "The Larry Sanders" show), which resulted in her
filing charges against him for sex discrimination and sexual harassment, as
well as his breakup with long-time agent and friend, Brad Grey, which
resulted in Shandling suing Grey for millions of dollars.
Annette Bening currently has three children with actor Warren Beatty, also
known as the "Man with the golden dick", with another one baking in the
oven.
John Goodman calls New Orleans, Louisiana home for him, his wife of eleven
years and their one daughter.
Interesting to note that actress Annette Bening once again portrays a
real-estate agent in this film, as she did in her Oscar-nominated role from
AMERICAN BEAUTY (7.5/10), as well as getting pinned in bed by her lover.
Director Mike Nichols was born in Berlin, Germany to a Russian father and a
German mother. His real name is Michael Igor Peschkowsky. His family
immigrated to the United States when he was only seven years old, and he was
brought up in New York City. He also co-founded the Chicago comedy group The
Compass, later renamed Second City. He has been calling TV anchor Diane
Sawyer his wife since 1988.

Author
Chuck Dowling
See this review the way it was meant to be seen at:
http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/
Cast: Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, Greg Kinnear, Ben Kingsley, Linda
Fiorentino, John Goodman, Judy Greer, Nora Dunn, Camryn Manheim, Ann
Cusack 
Written by: Garry Shandling, Michael Leeson, Ed Solomon and Peter Tolan 
Directed by: Mike Nichols 
Running Time: 104 minutes 
Garry Shandling makes his long overdue starring film debut as an alien
from a planet populated only by genetically created men, who are looking
to take over the Earth by propagating their own species there. 
Shandling is chosen for the mission, is given the name Harold Anderson,
and is set up as a banker in Seattle.  After a few disastrous "mating"
attempts, he figures his best bet will be Susan (Annette Bening), a
former alcoholic who eventually tells Harold that she won't have sex
again until she gets married.  The leader of Harold's planet (Ben
Kingsley) tells him to marry her, and Harold is soon exposed to all the
"joys" of married life. 
Despite its title and premise which seem to imply that this is some
Jerry Lewis vehicle from the late 1960s, What Planet Are You From? is a
very funny movie.  The plot (which the film wisely doesn't linger on the
specifics of for too long) is of course nothing more than framework for
the jokes, most of which work very well.  The material may be considered
crude and tasteless by many, and I might have thought so as well had
Shandling not been the lead.  But he brings a sort of pathetic charm to
the role, and it's his performance that makes the film truly funny
instead of just offensive. 
Plus if you think about it, What Planet Are You From? could have VERY
easily gone the gross-out route (considering that Shandling's character
is given a detachable penis that vibrates and hums when he gets
excited).  We never SEE anything though, it's all implied, which gives
the film a touch of class amidst its crudeness.  I'm glad to see that
someone in Hollywood still understands the concept of "less is more". 
The talented supporting cast certainly adds to one's enjoyment of this
film.  Annette Bening (oddly playing a merged version of her real estate
salesman character from American Beauty and her ditzy spiritualist
character from Mars Attacks!) does a fine job keeping up with Shandling
and makes a good catalyst for his brand of humor.  She even manages to
pull off a potentially disastrous scene where she has to perform a
rather goofy rendition of "High Hopes" for a lengthy period of time. 
Ben Kingsley, John Goodman and Greg Kinnear all fare well in their
performances as well, and Linda Fiorentino... good lord, there should be
some sort of law stating that no woman can be THAT sexy.  Everything
about her character in this film oozes raw sexuality. 
What Planet Are You From? is available on DVD from Columbia TriStar Home
Video.  The disc gives you the choice of either watching the film full
frame or in its original theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1 (and enhanced
for 16x9 televisions.  Also included on the disc as extras: a decent
making-of featurette, an isolated score track, talent files for the cast
and crew, and the film's original theatrical trailer (as well as
trailers for Wolf, Men In Black, Bugsy and As Good As It Gets). 
When I first saw that the disc featured an isolated score track, I
actually laughed.  How great could the music for a silly little comedy
be for it to get it's own isolated track?  Well as it turns out, it's a
mighty fine score from Carter Burwell (Fargo, The Hudsucker Proxy) that
I enjoyed listening to again while I typed up this review.  Kudos to
Columbia TriStar for adding that feature to the disc. 
What Planet Are Your From? was unjustly ignored in theaters, and I hope
it finds its deserved audience on home video.  This fine DVD is
certainly a great way to see it. [R]
Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com
AOL Instant Messenger: FilmJax
The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/

Author
Ross Anthony
Admittedly, I love Garry Shandling. For those of you who don't appreciate
his wry sense of humor and constipation-faced guise; well, probably you're
better off missing this one.
But for those to whom the name Garry Shandling means nothing, go see it.
It's funny. It's light-hearted, and best of all you'll leave the theater
feeling good.
Oh, one more warning: There's quite a bit of comedic play on
not-necessarily-flattering male/female stereotypes. But remember this is a
comedy. And of course, there's the sexual humor. But again, this is a film
about an alien (Shandling) who comes to Earth with one mission and one
mission only ... impregnate an earthling woman.
That said, one might expect a silly script of "Mel Brooks" quality starring
unknowns or at best B-comics. The great thing about "What Planet are you
from?" is that it stars high-powered actors like Bening and Kinnear. And
Shandling's just as strong. Not only that, but the script is sharper,
cleaner and oddly has a lot of heart: Bustin' your gut while still managing
to tighten up your throat.
What Planet are you from? Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, Greg Kinnear, Ben Kingsley, Linda
Fiorentino And John Goodman.
Directed by Mike Nichols.
Screenplay by Garry Shandling & Michael Leeson and Ed Solomon and Peter
Tolan Story By Garry Shandling & Michael Leeson.
Produced By Mike Nichols, Garry Shandling and Neil Machlis At Columbia.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Author
Homer Yen
"Planet" is so bad, it's actually kind of funny.  I'm
not recommending this film, but in the right frame of
mind (the frame of mind that develops after a couple
of beers), this might actually be an acceptable 90
minute diversion.  There is a gentle sweetness that
resides deep beneath the film's core.  But be warned -
even Forrest Gump would find this movie dumb. 
"Planet's" premise is about an advanced world that is
populated by only men.  Led by the stonefaced Ben
Kingsley, this race has bred out emotions and has even
evolved beyond the need for genitalia.  Their agenda
involves conquering other worlds not through
interstellar battle, but through a more subversive
method of breeding.  One man (Garry Shandling) will be
sent to Earth to begin colonization.  He'll be
'equipped' with the right tool to carry out his task. 
And to prepare for his encounter with Earth women, he
is trained to say all the right things.  But just what
are the right things to say?  And even more pressing,
how will the organ-deprived alien accomplish his
mission of impregnating some unsuspecting Earth woman?
 The answers set the pace of this wry comedy, which
for better or worse, will undoubtedly make you roll
your eyes and groan with chagrin.  
To prep Shandling, one lesson teaches him to nod in
approval and say 'uh-huh' when a female is talking. 
Another lesson teaches him to start conversations with
pick-up lines.  He says things like "Can I have your
autograph.  You ARE Miss America, aren't you?" (this
is where we roll our eyes and groan).  Of course,
Earth girls aren't easy, and this baffles our alien to
no end.  Shandling's perpetual look of childlike
indecisiveness suits him well here.  He represents the
common man who is ill-prepared to meet women.  The
other comedic element focuses on his organ-deprived
body.  Genitalia is attached to his body (there is no
male frontal nudity), but when he gets in the mood,
there is this disconcerting humming noise that begins.
 This joke is revisited countless times, and now we're
rolling our eyes and groaning again.  
Certainly, his task is not an easy one.  He's armed
with lame pick-up lines, has a humming problem,
becomes friends with a selfish scoundrel (Greg
Kinnear) and eventually attracts the attention of a
government official (John Goodman) who believes that
he's not quite of this planet.  The audience's task of
staying the course is no less daunting.  The movie
finally picks up a bit with the introduction of
Annette Benning as a recovering alcoholic who has been
completely unlucky in love.  But by this time, the
original premise has run out of ideas, and the movie
switches gears and becomes an awkward lesson about the
fears of commitment and responsibility.
"Planet" could have been a much funnier movie.  It
needed to focus more on the man-versus-woman foibles
rather than shifting the focus to the less funny issue
of commitment.  Still, the movie itself is not
terrible, and admittedly, it made me chuckle a few
times when I wasn't rolling my eyes.  If nothing else,
it certainly provided the best one-liner.  Stately Ben
Kingsley stares at the prosaic-looking John Goodman
with a deadpan eye and says, "You look intelligent,
but when you open your mouth, the effect is spoiled!" 
If you get any satisfaction from watching this movie,
it'll be because you like Annette Benning (who gives a
fine performance), or because you generally believe
that all men are from Mars and that this movie will
confirm all of your suspicions.

Author
bob bloom
  What Planet Are You From? (2000) 1/2 star out of 4. Starring Gary
Shandling, Annette Bening, Ben Kingsley, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear and
Linda Fiorentino. Directed by Mike Nichols.
 "What Planet Are You From?" follows a long line of science fiction
films in which male aliens come to Earth for the sole purpose of mating
with human females.
But the question is, why? What makes Earth women so special that male
ETs would travel thousands of light years merely to get em in the sack?
I mean with all the millions of planets out there, you're telling me
that Earth has the most desirable women in the universe? There's not
some hot, green-skinned number on a planet revolving Alpha Centuri who
makes the "Sports Illustrated" swimsuit models look like Janet Reno?
 No offense, ladies, but I don't buy it. As a species, women are for the
most part too complicated - and have too many issues - for human males,
so how can alien males who know nothing of our culture hope to succeed
where the majority of us fall on our butts - and most times more than
once.
 And that's the beauty of movies such as "What Planet Are You From?"
 Unfortunately, the latest member of this small genre is a stinker.
 My first clue that something was amiss with "What Planet Are You From?"
was found in the writing credits.
 While the story is credited to star Garry Shandling and Michael Leeson,
the screenplay credit contains four names, including those of Shandling
and Leeson.
Comedy, like brain surgery, is a delicate procedure and the cliché about
too many cooks rightly applies.
 "What Planet Are You From?" is listless, lame and limpid. It cannot
decide if it wants to be a low-comedy sex farce or a satiric look at
male-female relationships and marriage.
 Either way, the movie fails. It is neither meat nor fowl. It's an
overcooked goulash not fit for cinematic consumption.
 The story is simple. A technologically advanced planet consisting of an
all-male population, decides to expand by conquering the Earth. How?
Easy. They send one of their own to the planet to impregnate a female,
which would be the first step.
 How that leads to world domination is never explained, and neither is a
lot of other aspects of this woeful exercise.
 Suffice it to say that when a prop male organ that hums has more
charisma than the star to which it is attached, the movie has big
problems.
 As you watch "What Planet Are You From?", you feel embarrassment for
many of the cast members. 
 Annette Bening, for instance, tries so darn hard to be cute, bubbly and
perky that you can almost see the sweat break out on her forehead. And
God only knows what Ben Kingsley was thinking as he continually exits
airplanes by being flushed down the commode.
 Actually, he could have done all of us a favor if had taken all copies
of the script with him.
 Shandling's laid back, ironic and wry comedy stylings are unsuitable to
carry a film. His type of humor is more observational. On the screen, he
makes a better second banana, commenting on the foibles of others, than
a leading man. What he needed was a Garry Shandling of his own.
 "What Planet Are You From?" was directed by Mike Nichols, who is no
comedy slouch. And it is understandable what attracted him to the
project. The topical humor is a bit reminiscent of the riffs he and
Elaine May did 30 or 40 years ago. Well, she had her "Ishtar" and now he
has his.
 It would be more fun to kick back and watch a guilty pleasure such as
"I Married a Monster from Outer Space" or even "Mars Needs Women" than
to suffer through "What Planet Are You From?"
 One final thought: Why aren't there movies in which beautiful,
big-breasted female aliens come to Earth to mate with human males in
order to save their planet?
Id. volunteer. Oh well, I can dream. And those ramblings will be more
enjoyable than sitting through "What Planet Are You From?"
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
IN. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
bobbloom@iquest.net

Author
Max Messier
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Max Messier.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/fcfc38c81c72f6bc88256894000c3d09?OpenDocument
It's always a shame to see great comedic minds fall so far from the
mark.  Garry Shandling is a funny man.  Just check out any episode of
"The Larry Sanders Show."  He has a wonderfully dry wit and is downright
hilarious without drawing overt attention to himself.  I just want to
know what the hell happened to What Planet are You From?
Simple story line:  Alien must come to Earth and impregnate female human
being to establish future dominance of his planet's race.  Comedic
premise:  Alien must learn how to communicate to female human beings.
Comedy rolls on:  Alien encounters and makes ass of himself to female
human beings.  Comedy continues:  Alien tracked by rogue FAA agent.
Comedy continues even more:  Alien meets female human and falls in
love.  Cue drama.  That's about it.
Let's examine the facts.  You have Mike Nichols, the Oscar-winning
director of The Graduate, Catch-22, and the underrated Primary Colors,
steering this oil tanker of a film. A great supporting cast of Annette
Bening, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear, and Ben Kingsley all try to make
something out of nothing of a script.  Garry Shandling has co-written
himself into a very dark corner of unfunny comedy.  All of which means,
I'm a bit lost.
Some funny moments can be found, buried in the film, but the jokes end
up falling flat after the first fifteen minutes.  The romantic
situations that could have been executed become contrived and
ridiculous.  This would have made a great Adam Sandler/Rob Schneider
vehicle.  (Though even I must admit, Garry Shandling's vibrating penis
deserves a least one bonus star.)  And kudos to the likes of Bening,
Goodman, Kinnear, and Kingsley for pouring some great acting into the
most pointless of scripts.
Director: Mike Nichols
Writer: Garry Shandling, Michael Leeson, Ed Solomon, Peter Tolan
Starring: Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, Greg Kinnear, John Goodman
Producers: Brad Grey and Bernie Brillstein
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Author
Sean P. Molloy
When I watch a movie like Mike Nichols' What Planet Are You From? I can't
help
but feel like everyone is looking at me. It's as if all the audience is
gazing
at the back of my head in the darkness, eyes shooting daggers, quietly
blaming
me for the fact that they paid hard-earned money to spend their time
watching
this... this... thing. I shift uncomfortably in my seat. I'm reminded of how
I
feel when I see a pair of second- or third-rate celebrities engaging in a
teleprompted "funny" conversation to introduce the next Blockbuster award.
It's
not my fault, I know it's not my fault, but dammit, someone's gotta be
embarrassed, because it doesn't look like anyone on the screen is ready to
take
the blame.
I'm about to give you a list of names of people who are gonna make a movie
together: Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear, Mike
Nichols. Do any of these names make you instantly shudder? The answer I
would
have come up with before today is no, this is quite a list of talented
individuals we've got here. Granted, John Goodman was in The Flintstones,
and
Greg Kinnear has turned in some less-than-lackluster leading man
performances in
certified failures like A Smile Like Yours, but even so, they've got proven
power as excellent supporting players. Garry Shandling has two television
classics under his belt, his ingenious little It's Garry Shandling's Show
and
The Larry Sanders Show. And for God's sake, Mike Nichols directed The
Graduate,
and Annette Bening is just walking away from American Beauty.
What Planet Are You From? purports to be a comedy exploring the relationship
between men and women satirizing the whole pop-psychology Mars/Venus
phenomenon.
But what this movie winds up being is a collection of unfunny
cringe-inducing
moments coupled with uninsightful cringe-inducing moments; the end result
is,
unsurprisingly, an unfunny, uninsightful, cringe-inducing, thoroughly icky
embarrassment.
Garry Shandling plays an alien from a planet populated by technologically
advanced but emotionally vacant males (they reproduce through cloning, of
course). His leaders put a select group of males through a series of tests
designed to determine which one is most fit to fly off to Earth, find a
female
of the species, and impregnate her. They're taught how to pretend that
they're
listening by nodding and saying "uh-huh," and how to compliment shoes.
Imagine
my delighted surprise when, oh heavens, all their carefully practiced
tactics
turn out to fail miserably, producing comedic results! The lucky winner is
fitted with a penis (since theirs, after generations of disuse have long
since
shrunk out of existence... I will restrain myself from mentioning the
implausibility of such a scenario since the population has stopped evolving
due
to the fact that they're all just clones... whoops, too late.) The penis,
when
aroused, tends to make a humming noise. The writers, when frequently
strapped
for ideas, tend to turn to this as a source of "comedy." It isn't funny the
first time. It isn't funny the eighth time. It isn't funny the eighteenth
time.
If anything, it made me feel vaguely self-conscious.
Garry meets up with a coworker at a bank played by Greg Kinnear, who turns
out
to be a generic, unlikable scumbag. He's meant to fill the part of
unfortunate
role model for Shandling's alien character, but he's so flatly drawn that
even
the writers quickly give up and toss him aside. Kinnear's scumbagginess is
demonstrated by the fact that he claims other peoples' work as his own to
worm
his way into a Vice Presidents' position and goes to AA meetings to pick up
chicks. Wow. What a magnificent bastard.
Nearly every man in the movie, in fact, is played as the same sort of
sex-driven
slimeball. When Kinnear's wife walks into the office, there isn't a single
guy
who doesn't trip, bump into a wall, or otherwise pratfall as if they'd never
seen a woman before. The few guys that aren't particularly slimeballs, such
as
John Goodman's detective character, are simply uncommunicative workaholics.
Shandling meets up with Annette Bening, who will inevitably prove to be the
love
he never knew existed, at one of Kinnear's AA meetings. Shandling's mission
is
to have a baby, and when he reveals his desires to her, Bening instantly
falls
for him, and the next day... they get married. Yup. The next day. Cuz ya
see, it
turns out she wants a baby too!
Bening's character perhaps was the most difficult to watch, especially after
seeing her come apart at the seams so effectively in American Beauty... if
her
character here is supposed to be representing the female of the species as a
whole, then woe, I say, to the species. She's unfathomably insecure, and
succumbs so easily to all of Shandling's lines and lies that it borders on
tragic. There's a point where, after thinking she may not be able to bear
children, she learns that she is indeed pregnant. When Garry comes home
after
nearly cheating on her, she strolls into the kitchen and sings "High Hopes"
(you
know, the uplifting ant and the rubber tree plant song) to deliver the news,
and
then says to him, "now you can't leave me." We're supposed to empathize with
Shandling's discovery of the feeling of "guilt," but instead I wanted to
weep
for Bening that she was placing her entire life and soul firmly in the lap
of a
great big nothing. And eventually, Shandling falls in love with her... for
real,
I suppose, though I'm not sure exactly what prompted it.
What's the message I derive from all this? Men are liars, inherently empty
creatures, but if you hang around long enough... well, maybe something will
click. Ha ha... ha? I'm thankful such broad cynicism isn't frequently
allowed to
run so rampant.
There's also a subplot involving John Goodman as an airline incident
investigator that wades in the bog of stupidity. Goodman, through a series
of
astoundingly implausible realizations, puts together the fact that Shandling
is
a being from another world with a magic, vibrating penis. It has all the
makings
for a subplot of having Shandling be discovered, that, thankfully, never
comes
to the inevitable hackneyed fruition. Instead, it just dangles limply on the
branch for a while, withers, and falls away. Further proof that Goodman
should
just stick to doing Coen Brothers movies.
But let's not dwell on this any longer, I've already wasted plenty of your
time
and my own. Let's move on, forget about what we've seen here, and get on
with
our lives. And to help us out, let's end things on a happy note...
Congratuations go out to Annette Bening, winner of this week's "Title!"
award,
for delivering the awkward line of dialog containing the movie's name.

Author
Harvey S. Karten
 Reviewed by Harvey Karten
 Columbia Pictures
 Director: Mike Nichols
 Writer: Garry Shandling & Michael Leeson and Ed Solomon
and Peter Tolan. Story by Garry Shandling & Michael Leeson
 Cast: Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, John Goodman,
Greg Kinnear, Ben Kingsley, Linda Fiorentino, Camryn
Mannheim, Nora Dunn
   As I was leaving the theater, I spotted two people on the
street, the sorts of young people sometimes referred to as a
box office couple.  She: tall blond and statuesque not unlike
supermodel Claudia Schiffer.  He: a near replica of Brad Pitt. 
"They must be thoroughly absorbed in each other," I figured,
but no.  While they were waiting for the light to change, he
punched out some keys on his cell phone, got a wrong
number, and punched again.  "She must be annoyed with this
behavior," I assessed, but no: no sooner did he get off the
phone than she picked it up and began clicking away herself. 
What does this all mean?  It could mean a simple case of
parents calling their baby sitter, but then again it could
suggest that both of these beautiful people were more
interested in talking to others via technology than through
direct, available human contact.  All this is an apt metaphor
for TV watching, the typical scenario being the nuclear
family's sitting around the living for four hours nightly
watching their favorite programs and hardly acknowledging
one another.  
   The way technology interferes with human relationships is
a fitting subject for documentaries, essays, and most
interestingly, science fiction movies.  That's the very theme of
"What Planet Are You From?", partly produced, partly written,
and partly featuring TV host Garry Shandling as the title
character.  Like the best science fiction, "What Planet,"
though situated in the future, satirizes our contemporary
culture.  In exposing the threat of technology it doesn't match
up to "1984," which warns against Big Brotherism,
"Fahrenheit 451," which cautions against giving up reading in
favor of watching the big screen, and one of the greatest of
them all, "Logan's Run," a riff on a society that vaporizes its
citizens once they reach the useless age of thirty.  "What
Planet Are You From?" has its moments of rollicking fun, but
the whole project appears underwritten, depending on the
incessant repetition of a penis joke.  A penis has been
attached to alien Harold Anderson (Garry Shandling) with a
flaw: it hums every time he's excited.
   This is the story of a people from a distant solar system
who are intent on dominating the universe.  To conquer our
world, they must (for some unexplained reason) assign one of
their citizens to Earth with the task of copulating with a
female, producing a child.  The baby would be whisked off to
the planet and cloned, perhaps thousands of times over,
thereby making the conquest of Earth more attainable.  The
people of the planet are led by Graydon (Ben Kingsley), who
selects Harold Anderson for the job, preparing him by
furnishing lines to feed the women: "You smell great," or
"Your shoes are stylish."  The comedy is evoked from the
subtleties of which Anderson and his instructors are not
aware, in other words, you have to say a lot more to women
to make them responsive and you have to show emotion.  
Unfortunately the people of the distant planet are so
technologically advanced--one thousand times more so than
those of Earth--that they have lost their capacity to feel. Get
it? Therein lies the warning for us back home in the year
2000.
   Aside from calling our attention to the dangers of
technology, the story takes off from self-help guru
John Gray's best-seller, "Men Are from Mars, Women Are
from Venus: A Practical Guide for improving Communication
and Getting What You Want in Your Relationships." 
Anderson is to learn that women are not at all like men. 
They crave intimacy, not one-night stands; they need a
shoulder to learn on; they need to be listened to intently as
they express the very feelings that men are embarrassed to
verbalize.  Anderson could not have picked a more complex
woman to seduce than Susan (Annette Bening), whom he
met at an Alcoholics Anonymous conference to which he was
dragged by a randy colleague with whom he works in a bank,
Perry Gordon (Greg Kinnear).  "A great place to pick up
women," cites Perry, as Harold hones in on someone who
has just renounced alcohol and who, unfortunately for him,
refuses to have any more sex before she is married. 
Obviously the solution is to propose to her virtually on their
first date--wherein much of the comedy lies.
   The cast is rounded out by the machinations of an agent of
the Federal Aviation Administration, Roland Jones (John
Goodman), who is obsessed with finding out why an Arizona
West aircraft experienced turbulence three times--each time
involving the presence of passenger Harold Anderson.  
   "What Planet Are You From?" should have been funnier. 
After all sex comedies are made to arouse frequent, not
vaguely periodic laughter ever since Aristophanes penned
"Lysistrata" about 2500 years ago--about how women locked
their husbands out of their bedrooms until the men ceased
making war.  Shandling is fine for the role. Not for him the
broad buffoonery of a pratfalling Chevy Chase or the inane
facial expressions of a Matthew Perry.  This would appear
the perfect role for him as a confused guy meeting the
women of the Earth for the first time and having only a
Relationships 101 background to guide him.  And Annette
Bening combines some of the most alluring looks in
Hollywood with a face brimming with character.  Greg Kinnear
as the guy who gets promoted to vice president of his bank
by stealing Anderson's report and who regularly has sex in
the bank vault with at least one of the voluptuous women who
work in the depository virtually steals the show--looking better
than ever in a closely-trimmed goatee.  The movie has
nothing like the pizazz of "Galaxy Quest" as it plods along, its
attractive characters often appearing lost in outer space with
generally inane and repetitious dialogue.
   Incidentally, I wonder about the people who write the
production notes.  The press kit uses the word "penis"
several times in describing the plot, but instead of spelling the
term out, it refers to a p****.  Are the real words describing
body parts now taboo--in an age in which the most blatant
vulgarities are so often spelled out?
Rated R.  Running Time: 100 minutes.  (C) 2000
Harvey Karten, film_critic@compuserve.com

Author
Dustin Putman
Directed by Mike Nichols.
Cast: Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear, Ben 
Kingsley, Linda Fiorentino, Judy Greer, Caroline Aaron, Nora Dunn, Camryn 
Manheim, Ann Cusack, Janeane Garofalo.
2000 - 107 minutes
Rated R (for profanity, sex, nudity, and much sex-related humor).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 4, 2000.
The premise of "What Planet Are You From?" is one of great convolution and 
foolishness, the type that, more often than not, would simply be written off 
as a dimwitted movie without any value or merit. Who could possibly take a 
film seriously in which an alien (Garry Shandling) from a planet "way the 
hell out there" is sent to Earth for one mission, and one mission only: to 
mate with a woman and have a child? Sounds like the usual low-rent junk that 
is released in theaters in the spring,  or sent direct-to-video, eh? 
Certainly not, if it aims directly for laughs, and is in the hands of 
acclaimed director Mike Nichols (1983's "Silkwood," 1988's "Working Girl," 
1998's "Primary Colors"), and stars, among others, Garry Shandling (TV's "The 
Larry Sanders Show"), Annette Bening (1999's "American Beauty"), and John 
Goodman (TV's "Roseanne"). 
Following a prologue on the distant planet, where the human-looking aliens 
(who otherwise exhibit no ability to have feelings or emotions) are 
misdirected in their teachings on how to treat the opposite sex, one such 
alien, who is given the name Harold, is chosen to make his way down to Earth. 
Locating himself in Seattle, Washington, he gets himself a job at a bank and 
makes friends with his womanizing, married coworker, Perry (Greg Kinnear), 
who begins to help him in his quest to meet a woman. Harold, who firmly 
believes he can have sex with a woman if only he compliments her on her shoes 
or hair, has another problem, which is the brunt of a great many jokes, 
almost all of which are a devilish hoot: when aroused, his penis vibrates and 
makes a buzzing sound.
One evening, Perry takes Harold to an AA meeting (a prime place, Perry 
believes, to pick up conflicted and vulnerable females), where Harold is 
instantly smitten with Susan Hart (Annette Bening), a recovering 
alcoholic/real estate agent whose biological clock is ticking very loudly, 
but who has sworn to herself she will only sleep with someone again when she 
has married. After just one date, in which Harold and Susan hit it off, 
Harold proposes marriage to Susan, and in a moment of haste, she accepts. 
Their relationship soon grows problematic, however, when Harold becomes very 
distant and unloving towards Susan after she has gotten pregnant. What she 
doesn't know is that he isn't purposefully being emotionally cold to her: he 
just doesn't know how to love.
Meanwhile, following a mysterious blast on an airplane that allegedly was 
Harold's entrance to Earth, a Federal Aviation Administration agent (John 
Goodman) begins to investigate the strange occurrence, and gradually catches 
on to the true identity of Harold, causing stress on his own marriage to a 
fed-up housewife (Caroline Aaron) who believes he is having an affair.
"What Planet Are You From?" may very well be the trickiest motion picture of 
the year, thus far, because its admittedly ludicrous nature only adds to the 
delicate balancing act that must constantly be obtained by director Nichols 
and screenwriters Garry Shandling, Michael Leeson, Ed Solomon, and Peter 
Tolan. One prominent misstep, and the whole film would be in danger of 
crumbling to the ground, making the movie be a complete embarrassment for all 
involved.
It's a stroke of luck (and an obvious boatload of comedic talent), then, that 
the film is, overall, the most laugh-out-loud funny comedy in ages. For the 
first hour, it is genuinely perfect, a masterwork in which literally almost 
every attempt at a laugh works, so much so that I often was still laughing at 
one part, when the next would arise and make me laugh even more. Suffice to 
say, I wasn't able to inhale much oxygen during that sixty-minute time span. 
Everything, even right down to the use of a particular musical chord that 
echoes the raising of a character's eyebrows, is an example of comic 
brilliance, the way all comedies should work. Refreshing, too, that a movie 
with countless sex and penis jokes manages to avoid being overly juvenile, 
and is aimed squarely at teenagers and adults. It may be silly, and it may 
sometimes be even graphic in its sexual innuendo, but it is also an 
undeniable riot.
The second hour of "What Planet Are You From?" shifts tones, and while still 
effective, much of its comedy is put on the back burner for a more somber, 
poignant look at love relationships that may involve an alien in this case, 
but stands for a great deal of marriages, in general. Changing from something 
that is so highly entertaining and relatively breezy to something that delves 
a little deeper into the characters and story comes as a marginal 
disappointment on the outset, but in another way, the latter half is vital to 
what the whole picture has been setting itself up for. By getting more 
serious, but never totally abandoning its comedy, director Nichols wants us 
to invest our feelings into the fate of Harold and Susan's relationship, and 
we are surprised to realize that, while the opening had been wavering along 
the lines of even being considered a spoof, a 'la "The Naked Gun," we have, 
indeed, grown to care about them.
Only the climax, which briefly takes us back to Harold's planet for a rather 
saccharine speech on the importance of compassion and human emotions, does 
the film stumble for more than a fleeting moment, but, fortunately, it 
recoups itself by the finale.
Garry Shandling, in his first starring film role, is outstanding as Harold, 
the very important and flawless comedic center of the film. While being 
unable to feel things inside, Shandling, nonetheless, is able to gain our 
sympathies, and the eccentric romance that blossoms between he and Susan is 
sweet-natured and involving. Susan, as played with energy and appropriate 
pinnache by Annette Bening, is Harold's total match because, although she 
gradually becomes dissatisfied with his uncaring ways, makes it clear that 
she had meaningless sex with so many men in her life that she has forgotten 
herself how to love, or what it even is. Only after meeting the one-of-a-kind 
Harold does she start to rebuild her life and understand what it means to 
feel love, even when it isn't outwardly being returned to her.
As the slimy Perry, this is Greg Kinnear's most memorable role to date. 
Usually an extremely bland actor, Kinnear jumps off the screen here and makes 
his, albeit unlikable, character come alive. Judy Greer (1999's 
"Jawbreaker"), as a flight attendant turned off by Harold's advances until 
she meets him at the AA meeting, is entertaining and gets a great big laugh 
in the last second of her final scene due to the aforementioned musical chord 
that strikes at just the right time. And although just an unbilled cameo, 
Janeane Garofalo brings her usual sparkling presence to the role of a nervous 
flier whom Harold hits on, even in her horrified state. Meanwhile, Linda 
Fiorentino (1997's "Men in Black") is severely wasted as Perry's wife, who 
Harold considers having an affair with after he is married.
Whatever you do, do not be turned off by the premise, or the title itself, of 
"What Planet Are You From?" Rated R, and rightfully so, this film will 
delight adult viewers who are in the mood for a feel-good comedy that turns 
out to not only be about the punchline of jokes, but also, within the 
context, takes its characters and their situations seriously. In fact, 
perhaps the most gratifying thing of all is that director Mike Nichols and 
his cast of high-profile actors took a big risk on making this offbeat movie, 
and do not embarrass themselves. Not one little bit.

Author
Lars Lindahl
Directed by Mike Nichols
Written by Michael Leeson, Garry Shandling, Ed Solomon, and Peter Tolan 
Starring Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, Greg Kinnear, Ben Kingsley, Linda
Fiorentino, and John Goodman.  
What Planet Are You From? can be divided into three distinct segments. First we
follow alien Harold Anderson (Garry Shandling) on his mission to impregnate a
woman on earth. Far and away the funniest segment of the film (despite the fact
that it is one long extended joke), it remains consistently amusing. We don't
know exactly why he is trying to woo an earth woman but it is still funny. The
dialogue is fresh, the characters are well introduced, and the premise is
original. The most hilarious and ironic joke of this segment is that this
clueless alien, just trying to complete a revolutionary mission for his planet
is indistinguishable from some obnoxious earth jerk just trying to score. 
For this reason, Harold finds himself interacting and bonding with sexist
perverts such as Perry (Greg Kinnear) at his fake job. His relationship with
these characters makes up the second segment of the film. At this point, What
Planet? begins to lose some of its fresh humor and originality as it shifts
from Harold's desperate search to succeed for his planet to a disappointing
who's-sleeping-with-who-and-why ensemble piece. The segment contains way too
many pointless side stories that would have made the movie better if they did
not exist at all. Who cares if Perry and Harold are competing for a vice
president position at their job? Or if the man trying to find out exactly who
Harold is (John Goodman) is having marital problems at home? The answers to
these questions only distract the viewer from the central point.
The third segment has Harold taking the next step by marrying a former
alcoholic,  Susan, (Annette Bening) in hopes of improving his chances to have a
child. There are some very memorable scenes between Susan and Harold, but these
pleasant moments surprisingly lead up to one of the most idiotic endings I've
seen in a long time. The characters become excessively cartoonish and, out of
nowhere, the script gives them extremely foolish lines. It gets mushy and
overly dramatic in some areas and way too slapstick in other areas. It almost
seems like a different screenwriter or director contributed at this point with
completely opposite ideas of how the characters should act and talk. 
When examining the film as a whole, it is a disappointment, because only one
segment is totally satisfying. Despite some lively performances from the
talented cast, the script does not have enough energy to keep up. It seems like
there was only one real joke within What Planet? and that joke was quickly
overused just as the first segment was ending. If only the movie was a 40
minute short in which Harold gets the girl, has sex, gets the girl pregnant,
and leaves. It might have worked, and if not, the short would have been a lot
better than the real thing, a 120 minute movie that didn't work. For true
entertainment in which aliens pretend to be humans with hilarious consequences,
watch Third Rock from the Sun. It's amazing how that show has been funny for
years now using the same joke that What Planet Are You From? couldn't make
funny for two hours. 

Author
Scott Renshaw
WHAT PLANET ARE YOU FROM?
(Columbia)
Starring:  Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear,
Ben Kingsley, Linda Fiorentino, Judy Greer, Richard Jenkins.
Screenplay:  Michael Leeson & Garry Shandling and Peter Tolan.
Producers:  Mike Nichols, Garry Shandling and Neil Machlis.
Director:  Mike Nichols.
MPAA Rating:  R (profanity, sexual situations, adult themes, nudity)
Running Time:  103 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I started to get a sense for how good WHAT PLANET ARE YOU FROM? could
be at around the fifth or sixth iteration of The Gag. It's the running gag
that comes from the unique identity of its main character, an alien known
on his home planet as H1449-6 (Garry Shandling) but tagged Harold Anderson
for his mission on earth. Part of an emotionless all-male race that
reproduces via cloning and has conquest of other worlds always on its
mind, Harold is sent to our world to impregnate an earth woman, thus 
preparing the way for an invasion through alien progeny. Unfortunately,
the men of this world have evolved without genitalia for lack of need, so
Harold is equipped with an artificial organ -- one that hums when he is
aroused.
     As a gimmick, it's positively inspired, providing an auditory cue
for every time Harold starts feeling a bit randy. It's also a gimmick that
could have grown really old really fast, turning WHAT PLANET ARE YOU 
FROM? into a one-joke movie without much to laugh at. I'm guessing that
there are probably three dozen humming penis gags in WHAT PLANET ARE
YOU FROM? And I'll be damned if I didn't laugh at every one of them.
     The reason the joke works for so long and with so many variations is
that Shandling (who also co-wrote) and company realize that you can still
write a smart comic script that happens to include some lowbrow subjects
(he proved that point for several years on "The Larry Sanders Show." Part
high-concept comedy, part broad farce and part exploration of male-female
dynamics, it's actually a clever spin on relationship tomes like "Men Are
from Mars, Women Are from Venus" and "You Just Don't Understand." Plenty
of sharp self-help comedy comes from Shandling's relationship with
recovering alcoholic Susan (Annette Bening), and novice lover Harold's
difficulties understanding his new compaion. Meanwhile, the supporting
cast offers plenty of support:  Greg Kinnear as Harold's sexually and
professionally predatory co-worker; Ben Kingsley as the dead-serious
leader of Harold's planet; and the ever-reliable John Goodman as an FAA
investigator who may be on to Harold's identity.
     I suppose you could say WHAT PLANET ARE YOU FROM? is sort of an
unruly film. Actually, it's a _very_ unruly film, often leaping through
sub-plots and minor characters too quickly to do them justice. Goodman's
troubles with his wife, which might have made a marvelous counterpoint to
the alien's relationship troubles, instead serve as the source for a
couple of throwaway gags. Linda Fiorentino is woefully underused as
Kinnear's femme fatale-ish wife, and there's a rushed feeling to all the
scenes on Harold's home world (as though the budget wasn't quite there for
a more thorough peek at their culture). For a film from Mike Nichols -- a
director whose films almost always click with comic precision -- WHAT
PLANET is a bit ragged and scattershot.
     And it's also very, very funny. Films with laugh-out-loud moments are
embarassingly rare, which makes it all the more wonderful that WHAT PLANET
hits on so many levels of humor. The dialogue is full of the kind of  
razor-sharp punch lines that recall vintage Woody Allen. Subtle bits of
physical acting add kick to the simplest scenes (watch for Shandling's
priceless change of expression during his first date with Susan). 
Predictable sight gags are given unpredictable twists. A weird shift to a
hard-boiled exchange between Shandling and Goodman adds an effectivley
bizarre late change of pace. Even the warmer moments of gentle character
humor work. But most of all, there's The Gag -- not necessarily because it
inspires the biggest laughs, but because it inspires the most. WHAT
PLANET ARE YOU FROM? may be messy, but it sure is plenty entertaining. 
Shandling and his cohorts prove that exquisite execution can take even the
silliest concepts and make them ... well, hum. 
