Title
Review for Annie Hall (1977)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Ted Prigge
Director: Woody Allen
Writers: Woody Allen and Marshall Brickman
Starring: Woody Allen, Diane Keaton, Tony Roberts, Carol Kane, Paul 
Simon, Shelly Duvall, Janet Margolin, Colleen Dewhurst, Christopher 
Walken, Marshall MacLuhan, Dick Cavet, John Glover, Jeff Goldblum, 
Beverly D'Angelo, Sigourney Weaver
When trying to pick the film in a director's oeuvre that should be 
referred to as his or her masterpiece, one should not go for the one 
that was the best over all, but the one that best represents them as a 
human being.  Directors, contrary to popular opinion, are human beings 
and are trying to inject themselves into their art in one way or 
another.  Whether it's Martin Scorsese telling stories of his home town 
in "Mean Streets" or Tony Scott telling homoerotic stories in "Top Gun" 
(you know it's true, that movie is so homoerotic, it's campy), the 
director has expressed himself with his piece of art, even if it is "Top 
Gun."  Well, I pick "Annie Hall" as Woody Allen's masterpiece.  I think 
it IS his best film, although that is up for argument but has nothing to 
do with whether it's his masterpiece.  He has several masterpieces 
("Manhattan," "Hannah and her Sisters," "Crimes and Misdemeanors," 
"Sleeper"), but none better represent Woody as a person.
One thing you must realize is Woody has been bad with relationships.  He 
was married twice before meeting Diane (I think) and, well, you know all 
about he and Mia (I actually read her autobiography - interesting...).  
Well, Woody explains why he continues to go on with them after failing 
at them several times in this film.  On the surface, it's a romantic 
comedy (and a damn good one at that).  If you watch closely (not that 
closely, really), you see that it is Woody giving a theory he has and 
showing an example of it.  His theory?  Glad you asked: Love is annoying 
and pointless and everything, but we're in it 'cause we need it, 'cause 
we need to feel liked and to like someone else and perhaps change them a 
bit, infusing ourselves into their psyche, even if it is just for a bit. 
 We are, in fact, all unique because we've met other people and are all 
walking around with bits and pieces of eachother on ourselves.  Well, 
that's what I got from this film.  
The film is also incredibly autobiographical, although Woody has 
reportedly denied it is (uh huh).  Granted, some of the parts of the 
protagonist's life are very over-exaggerated, I'm sure something similar 
happened to him in his childhood.  Woody plays Alvy Singer, a stand-up 
comedian and comic writer (big stretch).  The film begins with a 
brilliant stand-up routine delivered to the camera as he stands in front 
of a blank wall.  He tells some old vaudevillian jokes (example: "There 
are two women at a resort, and they're eating, and one of them says: 
'The food here is really terrible.'  And the other woman says, 'Yes, and 
in such small portions!'")  He then goes on to explain how each applies 
to his life, giving an odd, universal twist on all of them.  He explains 
that he's pretty tired of himself and how much he was in love with a 
girl named Annie Hall (Diane Keaton, of course, in her Oscar-Winning 
role), and how they are now broken up.  He says he has been thinking 
about their relationship a lot and sifting it through his mind.  And 
that's what we get for the next 90 minutes: sifting of his relationship, 
trying to figure out what went wrong and why he still wants to get into 
other relationships.
The film, done in a great non-linear form, expresses his views on love 
and friendship as we see Woody drifting from scene to scene in the most 
original ways possible.  The funniest scene takes place when he first 
meets her and he goes to her apartment to drink and talk a bit.  As they 
talk about her photography, sub-titles appear below them, stating what 
they are thinking at that exact moment (example - Alvy: "I wonder what 
she looks like naked," Annie: "He's too smart for me; hang in there.")  
It's possibly the most brilliant scene in the film.  Another scene 
involves cartoons when they break up for the first time with Annie 
portrayed as the witch from "Snow White."  Another brilliant scene takes 
place when Alvy eats at Annie's parents house and he comments on how 
different his Brooklyn family is to her New England family.  Then the 
screen splits and we see half of Annie's family talking peacefully and 
the other half is Alvy's family, bickering about passover.
The film has no real plot or anything, but we see Alvy trying to form 
Annie into what he wants her to be, kind of like "Pygmalion" (only 
funnier).  First off, she takes pictures beautifully, but he wants her 
to learn about "asthetics" and take classes on it.  Second off, she 
sings in a club and has never taken a lesson.  Woody urges her to 
continue singing and take lessons and all, but her voice is beautiful 
without them (interesting side-note: Diane is on the original 1969 cast 
album of "Hair" in a minor role).  She's also a tad on the vapid side 
and sometimes has no idea what he's saying (much of her dialogue 
consists of "yeah, oh yeah?" but Diane does it so convincingly that it 
sounds totally realistic), so he convinces her to go to school and take 
some adult college courses.  This backfires as she not only has a crush 
on one of her professors, but she becomes smarter and the two outgrow 
eachother, forgetting why they were attracted to eachother in the first 
place.  This happens all the time with couples: they fall in love with 
eachother but are always trying to change them for the "better."  This 
is probably the reason why so many divorces occur.
One of Woody's biggest pet peeves is California vs. New York.  All his 
films (save a couple) take place in New York, mostly in Manhattan ("Play 
it Again, Sam" was actually filmed in California, but it was a different 
director).  His best friend, Rob (the great Tony Roberts), is a TV actor 
who lives out there and Alvy uses him to not only be his designated best 
friend, but also part of the satire of California.  He's always 
convincing him to come out, but Alvy doesn't want to change himself.  
He's lived in New York his whole life, in garbage.  When he and Annie go 
out to California so he can do a TV special, Woody remarks about how bad 
it is, how superficial everyone is and how it's clean because "they 
dont' throw away they're garbage; they make it into TV shows."  
By the end, Alvy and Annie are done for, but we already knew that.  All 
he's left with is what he got from her, how she has rubbed off on him 
and he is a slightly different person.  He carries around black soap she 
used for her complexion, and she takes later boyfriends to see "The 
Sorrow and the Pity," a 4-hour holocaust film Alvy dragged her to see 
numerous times.  And at the end, Alvy has figured out why we put up with 
relationship: 'cause we need them.
"Annie Hall" is also one of his funniest films.  He creates hilarious 
scenes involving some of his phobias and nebbishes.  One scene towards 
the beginning has him being harrassed by scary guys in front of a 
theatre before a date with Annie where they ask him if he's been on the 
"Johnny Carson show."  Another painfully funny scene (that's a good 
thing, believe me) involves Alvy sniffing a bit of coke and then 
sneezing into a pouch of it that had cost one of his friends about 5 
grand.  But his humor is more realistic and more poignant than his 
earlier comedies.  While most of it is still for satire, much of it is 
more focused on the point he is trying to make.  And the dialogue is so 
perfect that the film seems to shoot right back at the audience, 
reminding them of themselves.
The scenes are short and to the point, as not to waste time.  It's like 
he makes his point and ends them, and then somehow tails them onto the 
next scene.  One scene has Alvy and Annie in bed, but Annie's not in the 
mood so her spirit leaves her body and sits down to draw.  Alvy is mad 
'cause he wants all of her, but her body just turns to him and says, 
"You have my body."  He wants all of it 'cause he says he's a comedian. 
 She asks him if he's always been funny, and he says, "What is this, an 
interview?  We're supposed to be making love!"  And the scene goes to an 
interview he has to write for some sap.
The acting is terrific from a huge ensemble cast, many of who get small 
one or two scene parts.  Christopher Walken gets to say his funniest 
speech other than his on in "Pulp Fiction."  And Paul Simon gets the 
harsh task of playing a music producer.  Shelly Duvall plays someone he 
sleeps with on the rebound (Why?!) and Carol Kane plays as if she's on 
ridlin (compared to her other performances) as Alvy's second wife.  Tony 
Roberts, the underrated man of the 70s, plays his typical best friend, 
as usual.  
But the acting goes to the two leads.  Woody and Diane are a flawless 
comic duo, much better than Mia and Woody (chemistry, please?).  She 
plays right off his jokes, and he plays off her brilliantly realistic 
acting.  Woody is the usual Woody character, but seems more realistic 
this time since the film is more realistic.  Diane creates her most 
memorable character (to date) and does the best acting of her entire 
career.  
"Annie Hall" is one of two Woody films to be acknowledged highly by the 
Academy of Arts and Sciences (the other being "Hannah and her Sisters"). 
 It won four out of the five oscars, including Best Original Screenplay 
for Woody and Marshall Brickman, Actress for Diane, Direction for Woody, 
and the Best Picture Oscar.  The only one who didn't win was Woody, who 
lost to Richard Dreyfus for the "Goodbye Girl."  As much as I LOVE 
Richard's performance in "Goodbye Girl," Woody should have won for the 
same reason John Wayne won in 1969 for "True Grit."  Woody's a fantastic 
actor and he makes his character in this one his most likable and most 
realistic.  
As I've already said, "Annie Hall" is Woody's masterpiece because it 
best expresses its creator.  But also, because it best expresses us as 
the viewers as we sit watching it, meanwhile living a life where we have 
several failed romances and we just can't figure out why we keep going 
out to do it over again.

Author
Brian Koller
"Annie Hall" is a very good comedy about relationships,
from a realistic rather than romantic viewpoint.  The
film has many quirky and original comic techniques,
all of which work.  While not Allen's best film
("Manhattan" is even better), its strict focus on
relationships, its accessiblity, and its originality
make it his most popular.
Allen plays his usual character.  He is a New Yorker,
Jewish, liberal, intellectual, talkative, slightly
neurotic, and involved in relationships.  Carol Kane
and Shelly Duvall appear briefly as love interests,
but his primary target is Annie Hall (Diane Keaton).
Keaton is endearing as a goofy hedonist and whispering
supperclub singer.
Their romance is doomed by disparate interests.
Allen wants Keaton mostly for himself, while she has a
need for new experiences and new friendships.  Tony
Roberts plays Allen's sarcastic friend, while Paul
Simon has a small role as a music producer.  Christopher
Walken appears briefly as Keaton's spooky brother.
The film's enduring popularity is due to the clever
and witty script.  "Annie Hall" is funny, regardless
of the audience's demographic.  Keaton is also very
likable, much more so than Mia Farrow would be in
later Allen-directed films.
"Annie Hall" is not an outstanding film, however.
Early scenes take potshots at the working class,
mocking the future careers of his grade school
classmates, then making buffoons of blue collar
types who recognize Allen as a celebrity.  Later
and more successful scenes belittle pseudo-intellectuals
and Hollywood dealmakers.  Still, the film's point
seems to be that in the end, we are all selfish
and shallow.  Allen may be correct in this, but
Keaton's free-style Annie belies his own conclusion.
"Annie Hall" focuses on Allen and not the title
character.  While this is natural, it seems to be
asking the audience to take his side.  It does help
that Allen is very funny, and Allen-the-actor is
given great lines by Allen-the-writer.
Allen gets away with risky, inventive techniques.
In a flashback as a kid, Allen appears by the teacher's
side, and takes a poll of his classmates' future
occupations.  He becomes an animated character
to explore his relationship with the Wicked Queen
in "Snow White".  He asks a handsome, happy couple
how they manage to stay together, and their remarkable
reply is that they are shallow.  During an early
conversation between Allen and Keaton, subtitles show
what the characters are thinking about while one
desperately tries to present a appealing image
to the other.  Allen frequently talks to the camera.
Keaton has an out-of-body experience while making love
with Allen.  Keaton and Roberts play Ghost of Christmas
Past, appearing with Allen in one of his childhood
flashbacks.  What is surprising is that these various
gags work, adding originality to what could otherwise
have been an entertaining but conventional film about
a romance.
1977 was the year of the science fiction blockbusters
"Star Wars" and "Close Encounters of the Third Kind".
Despite this, "Annie Hall" won Best Picture and Best
Director (Allen), while Keaton won Best Actress.
Allen (along with Marshall Brickman) also took the Oscar
for Best Original Screenplay, while Allen was nominated
for Best Actor.
kollers@mpsi.net
http://members.tripod.com/~Brian_Koller/movies.html
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Author
Walter Frith
Woody Allen's unique style as a motion picture director, writer, actor and
overall consumate professional make him one of the great American treasures
in the history of cinema.  His films are disliked by many; primarily by those
who don't understand his neurotic flamboyance with dialogue to the point
where it seems almost too real for average movie goers to understand that in
many cases they're really looking at themselves up there on the big screen.
It's hard to believe that Allen will be 62 years old this coming December
and his films are timeless classics focusing predominantly on relationships.
Only two of Allen's films have been nominated for the Best Picture Academy
Award and they are 'Annie Hall' (1977) and 'Hannah and Her Sisters' (1986).
Other masterpiece showcases such as 'Interiors' (1978), 'Manhattan' (1979),
'Broadway Danny Rose' (1984), 'The Purple Rose of Cairo' (1985) and 'Bullets
Over Broadway' (1994) had to settle for little or no recognition from Allen's
peers although 'Hannah and Her Sisters' did win three Oscars in major
categories---Michael Caine (Best Supporting Actor), Dianne Wiest (Best
Supporting Actress) and Allen for the film's original screenplay hailed by
many critics as the best original film literature of the 1980's.
Alvy Singer (Woody Allen) and Annie Hall (Diane Keaton) are the subjects of
examination along with other New Yorkers (some eventually become
Californians) in Allen's defining masterpiece which is his Academy Award
winning film 'Annie Hall'.  This picture was crowned with four Oscars (Best
Picture, Director for Allen, Actress for Keaton and Original Screenplay by
Allen and Marshall Brickman).  On its twentieth anniversary it remains as
fresh and original with high class wit and low brow production values perfect
for viewing a Woody Allen movie.  Allen often uses only one camera during the
prduction of his films and allegedly made a statement saying he is never
completely satisfied with any of his films.  Understandable since so many
artists don't like to look or listen to themselves in their selected fields,
among them Mick Jagger, Jack Palance and Harrison Ford.  A personal project
can cry out for perfection and Allen is about as close as you'll find on an
academic level but critics and film buffs respect and admire all that Allen's
genius has contributed.
'Annie Hall' opens with a brilliant in your face stand up routine in which
Allen is telling an old joke and comparing it to the way he feels about life
and his dissection of social empathy is nothing short of hilarious.  The
deadpan humour throughout 'Annie Hall' is neatly presented and timed to
perfection as each scene is well paced and knows when to exit once its made
its point.  Allen discusses the relationship with the many women in his life
and his relationship with his friend played by the under rated Tony Roberts
is pure gold. In one scene between the two actors there is a long tracking
shot of a sidewalk and street and we don't see them come into the camera's
range for quite sometime but all the while we hear their discussion about
life in New York and it's discussed in a way which defines Allen as a true
New Yorker.  Roberts has nicknamed Allen 'Max' in the film and this leads to
a discussion of what that nickname means.  Is it short for maximum?  It could
be since Allen uses so many hand gestures and levels so much speaking time in
the film to a "maximum" capacity that Roberts could be poking fun at his
every turn.
Diane Keaton made a name for herself as the strong-willed and no nonsense
girlfriend to Allen in the film as her character remotely subjects Allen to
take a good look at himself and to see that his unwillingness to leave New
York is not a selfish one but one that frustrates her as she makes California
her home later in the picture.  When the two of them first meet during an
afternoon of tennis and they retreat in seclusion for a drink there is a
conversation between them in which Allen interjects subtitles to show that
what they're saying is really being covered up by cautious dialogue pursuant
to what they're really thinking.  It's one of the most original things ever
seen in any movie and may be the film's best scene.  Another classic moment
comes when Allen is taking a drive with Roberts in California and an
observation is made about how clean California is compared to New York and
Allen suggests that all of California's garbage is recycled into t.v. shows.
Hysterical !
With a cast that includes Shelley Duvall, Paul Simon, Carol Kane, Collen
Dewhurst, and Christopher Walken, 'Annie Hall' is Allen's best film and
winning four Oscars out of five nominations isn't bad either.  That's a ratio
of 80%.  Oh, did I mention that the one it lost for was Allen as Best Actor.
That's hard to believe in a film where Allen doesn't just play himself, he
lives the part and that's an achievement all its own.    
