Title
Review for Woman's Tale, A (1991)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Pedro Sena
Every once in a while, we get to see a film which just simply knocks your
socks off.
This is the story of an old woman, who is spending the last years of her
life attended by a nurse, who has a special liking to the feisty old lady.
The old lady is independent, a true lover of nature, despite
her really sad story in the middle of the war.  And as usual, the old lady
has her squabbles with the landlord, and the son, until he realizes that the
old lady is right.
In the meantime, the old lady is up to her enjoyable adventures during the
day, which as it really turns out, are her escapes from the horrible events
which she has endured.  But it doesn't matter, she has a liking for helping
people, and even has a boyfriend, and wants the nurse to make sure they make
love in her bed after she dies.  And of all the oddities, she smokes, not
because she is nervous, but because she loves it, and a restaurant owner
gets the brunt of her opinion on the matter and that is that.
One day she falls, is taken to the hospital, and found out to have cancer,
with a very probable chance of survival three months at best.  She promises
a young nurse to be out of the hospital, and does get out, because she can
do all the exercises in the ward, and has earned the nickname of rabbit.
She wants to go back to her  apartment, but the landlord is playing jerk.
But he has to give in because the old lady has something over him, a certain
ability to put him in the right place.  And there she does die, with one
last shot of morphine..... you must keep the love alive.....
What the film does not say afterwards, is that this old lady, Sheila
Florance, won the Australian Oscar last year, and a week later died of
cancer.  The film was her crowning achievement in a lifelong dedication to
an artform that she believed to the very end.  Even in the process of
playing a character, this old woman still sits naked on a bathtub, where she
has her memories of the horrible past.
And if you don't come out of this film with a tear in your eye, shame on you
is what Sheila is going to say.  There are some truly funny moments...
talking about aging, and how the bird is seven years
old ( quite old for a bird ) and the sucker doesn't have a single grey
feather..... and many other moments which really shake one's heart.  In the
meantime she tries to save someone else from suicide
over the radio, and even manage to help many of her aged friends, who really
have lost the desire to live, which she definitely has not.
It is not only difficult to do something like this, it is also a magnanimous
gesture, and the director should be commended for this very beautiful film.
It's hard to tell where the film ends and the real Sheila starts, but it
doesn't matter.  It all fits in together so tightly woven, so pretty, that
there aren't enough tapestries in life that look this good and cry the creed
of love so clearly, as this film does....................

Author
Frank Maloney
     A WOMAN'S TALE is an Australian film directed by Paul Cox and
written by Paul Cox and Barry Dickins.  It stars Sheila Florance, Gosia
Dobrowolskia, Chris Haywood, and Norman Kaye.  Unrated.
     A WOMAN'S TALE, a film that moved from the Seattle International
Film Festival to a local theatrical run, blurs the line between fiction
and documentary to the point where we the audience cannot say that
anything we see on the screen happened to Sheila Florance, the
80-year-old Australian actress, or to the character she plays in this
her final performance.  Both were dying of cancer as the film was made.
Both apparently are feisty, sweet, in love with life with all its
sadness, thoughtful, and mean to the petty and to those who have lost
sight of life.  However neither she or her character is the frightful
old lady of TATIE DANIELLE or the cute eccentric of HAROLD AND MAUDE.
She is one of a kind, the fictive she as well as the real she.
     We have a traditional, rather straight-forward plot about an aging,
dying woman, whose landlord wants to move someone more lucrative into
her memory-filled apartment, whose fretful son wants to move her into a
nursing home "for her own good," whose visiting nurse has become her
surrogate daughter, whose friends include a 90-year-old woman who is as
fluffy as her white hair and a senile ex-military man.  His death sparks
a crisis in her own life.  This appears to be fiction.
     But the core of interest for us in the character and person of
Sheila Florance.  She appears to be playing herself, her memories appear
to be her character's -- as when she remembers the Blitz and dogfights
and body parts raining out of the sky and the death of her infant
daughter.  Her anger at war, her inconsolable, lifelong grief, her joy
in life, her wit, her theatrical, rather Tallulah-Bankheadish
mannerisms.  On this level, A WOMAN'S TALE is a one-woman theater piece.
One thing is certain in all the peekaboo is that Florance was a
performer of extraordinary courage and honesty.  Her scene of taking a
bath -- how many of us have even seen a naked woman of her age?  -- in
which she not only reveals her outer self, the sunken flesh, the fallen
breasts, that amazing wide mouth stripped of its lipstick, the eyes so
bright and lively elsewhere closed and unseeing in the dim bathroom, but
even more devastatingly she reveals the inner terror and sadness of
being old and alone with her memories, her losses, her tears.  She
grants us a unique gift in her dying to preserve and reveal who and what
she was.  You rejoice that you get to know this much of her now even you
regret you never knew her when she was alive.
     Florance is so compelling a personality that it is easy to lose
sight of the writer-director Paul Cox, a Dutch-born Australian whose
career ranges from a documentary about Van Gogh (VINCENT) to a gentle
love story (LONELYHEARTS) to a comedy about voyeurism (MAN OF FLOWERS)
to a divorce drama (MY FIRST WIFE).  He first saw Florance on stage in
the 60s, when they became friends.  He has the good sense to pretty much
hand his film over to Florance.  But Cox also respects the lesser
characters in his story, even the fluffy old lady who prattles endlessly
about cliched messages in nature.  Despite the source, there is an
underlying wisdom even in the cliches and Cox returns to the source
again and again in recurring (and final) images of moving water.  Even
the bitchy queens who live below Martha (Florance's character) and who
covet her apartment are redeemed at the right moment; exactly why they
had to be a gay couple to be bitches and unpleasant neighbors seems to
me the only gratuitously mean note in the film.
     Sheila Florance died last fall, a few days after receiving an
Australian Film Institute award for this work.  Because of the film, she
lives on.  I high recommend that you do what needs to be done to make
her acquaintance.  She will repay you many times over.

Author
Brian L. Johnson
100 min., PG-13, Drama/Comedy, 1991
Director: Paul Cox
Cast: Sheila Florance, Gosia Dobrowolskia, Chris Haywood, Norman Kaye,
      Ernest Gray, Myrtle Woods
     This film is a segment in the life of an old woman, Sheila
Florance.  She embraces life with great hopes, and in ways that would
shock other people her age.
     I was surprised at how good A WOMAN'S TALE was.  It didn't look
very interesting to me, but it was part of a double feature and I wanted
to see the other film (THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE).  I enjoyed A
WOMAN'S TALE and suggest that you go to see it, whether you are a young
adult, a senior citizen, or in between.  On a scale of zero to five, I
give A WOMAN'S TALE a four.  A WOMAN'S TALE is rated PG-13 for adult
situations and female nudity.
     The cast in this film is great, especially Sheila Florance.  
Sheila Florance, I think, holds this film together.  Her character is
unlike what most people perceive old people to be like and Sheila
Florance seems to jump into the role.  With a different actress in the
role that Sheila Florance had, I think that this film would not have
been as good as it turned out to be.  Unfortunately, I have heard,
Sheila died shortly after the film's original release.  Gosia
Dobrowolskia is the woman who watches over Sheila Florance.  She did a
very good job, but doesn't hold the film together the way Sheila
Florance does.  The man who plays Sheila Florance's next door neighbor
(I don't remember who played him) also did a great job.  He also helps
hold the film together.  I think that the actor who was chosen to
portray him was perfectly picked.
     The film successfully combines comedy with a bleak, at least to
some people, subject.  The end result is an interesting film that makes
the viewer think while watching the film.  The film is very well
written, and provides interesting characters.  The scenes in the film
flow together smoothly and the film doesn't get too dark about the
subject of death, which otherwise could have bogged this film down.
