Title
Review for Chacun cherche son chat (1996)
Number of Reviews
9

Author
Edwin Jahiel
WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY (CHACUN CHERCHE SON CHAT) (France, 1996) *** 1/2
Written and directed by Cedric Klapisch. Photography, Benoit
Delhomme.Editing,Francine Sandberg. Production design, Francois Emmanuelli.
Producers, Aissa Djabri, Farid Lahouassa ,Manuel Munz.Cast: Garance Clavel
(Chloe),  Zinedine Soualem (Jamel), Renee Le Calm (Madame Renee), Olivier
Py (Michel), Rambo (Rambo),  Arapimou (Gris-Gris, the cat), et al .  A Sony
Pictures Classics release. In French with subtitles. 95 minutes. R (sex).
Although it has some suspense, especially for cat devotees, and moments of
sadness, "When the Cat's Away" is first and foremost a Gallic Delight. In
1983-85, writer-director Eric Klapisch, a Parisian, was in New York
University's film school, also worked on short films in the Big Apple. Back
in Paris he was involved in industrial films, documentaries, shorts, made
his own TV documentary on the Masai of Kenya. Four features followed of
which "When the Cat..." is Number Three. It has won several prizes
including the International Critics' Award at the Berlin Film Festival.
"Cat" was planned as a short, the genuine story of a friend who before
leaving on vacation left her cat with an old lady, Madame Renee. When the
young woman returned to Paris, the cat had disappeared. Madame Renee
enlisted many senior citizen friends to help the girl find her feline.
During preliminary work on the short, Klapisch, having "discovered all
these wonderful people" decided to expand the movie into a feature. The
result is a wonderful picture, much of it improvised yet  showing no signs
of the original project having been stretched by force. It is like a short
story that is turned into a really good novel.
Protagonist Chloe is played by Garance Clavel. She had been in just one TV
movie before this. I think that whoever chose her uncommon given name was
propitiating the Gods of Cinema. The magnificent actress known simply as
Arletty had played the unforgettable role of Garance in that classic of
classics, "Children of Paradise" (1945).
Chloe, in her early twenties, is a make-up artist for fashion models being
photographed. The work  is demanding, the bosses are hard task master. She
badly needs a vacation, her first in three years. She lives in the Bastille
neighborhood, a popular area (in the sense of many working class dwellers)
that has been undergoing major upgrades in the last decades. She saves on
rent by sharing a small apartment in a big old building with Michel, a gay
friend.
Any family she may have is not mentioned. Her only relative is her furry
cat Gris-Gris (literally Gray-Gray in French). When someone asks why that
name for a black cat, Chloe does not explain that  Gris-Gris means an
African amulet or fetish. (The film has several connections to Africa, but
like all else, nothing is underlined).
There are no men either in Chloe's private life. The movie does not go into
explanations, such as timidity or lack of opportunities. It's a common fact
that many a person is caught inside singleness which brings solitude and
sadness. Among the many nice aspects of the movie is that Chloe is just an
ordinary person, not especially beautiful though appealing, quiet and very
much alone.
Before she leaves for the sea, she must find someone to take care of the
cat. Her roommate flatly refuses (He's also irritated because he just split
with his current boyfriend). Chloe asks around. In a very French way
everyone has a suggestion. She ends up by leaving Gris-Gris with a neighbor
she did not know existed, a hoarse-voiced little old lady with her own
mini-zoo of cats.
Cut to a single picture of Chloe, alone by the sea, in a flash that
compresses all of the vacation. It is a humorous bit with a melancholy
subtext. It is also a vivid example of skillful, no-nonsense, economical
film editing. All of "Cat"'s techniques are intelligently simple and
ungimmicky. In a later sequence the movie cuts from someone dangling from a
roof to is being safe on the ground. The intervening rescue by firemen is
skipped. This saves production money and eliminates unwanted suspense and
dramatics.
When  Chloe goes to pick up Gris-Gris, a desolate Madame Renee tells her
"Your cat has vanished. Believe me, it's never happened to me before. I
looked all over." The search begins. Some acquaintances and some
strangers-until-now help Chloe with Lost  Kitty posters. She meets Jamel
(Dzhah-MEL), a nice, slow-witted handyman of Arabic parentage. He becomes
her assistant.
Diminutive Madame Renee mobilizes a fascinating, real-life network of older
women. They flood Chloe with advice and suggestions, often make hilarious
phone calls or subject her to solemn, "important" questionnaires.
To say that the search involves picaresque adventures would be hyperbolic.
Mr.Klapisch is working in realistic, not Hollywood-fictional style. To
begin with, the movie's Madame Renee is real. She is the very same person
who had lost the real cat of the real Chloe. Most other characters  are
real people too, not professional actors. The neighborhood is real, the
streets, cafes, shops are real as is the battalion of lady-searchers, all
friends of Madame Renee. So is the commotion about Gris-Gris, Paris being
Cat City. You can't push realism much farther. (Yes, kitty is finally
located).
The movie's catchy English title is misleading, as one might expect it to
develop into a "The Mice Will Play" situation.The French title literally
means "Everyone Is Looking for her/his Cat" but at a deeper level implies
that all people are after something. It could anything: money, love, sex,
the pursuit of happiness and its bluebird. Jamel, for example, though not
ill-treated, can be the butt of some jokes. He needs a friend and finds one
in Chloe.
In her wanderings, Chloe herself meets and discovers new people and places.
It's not always positive, but the possibility of friendships or
relationships is in the air. In the process, along with the young woman we
see and feel the ever-changing face of Paris and society. A giant crane is
demolishing a church. Old buildings are about to be torn down for more
upscale edifices. Tenants are being evicted. Old people are being replaced
by modern, often swinging youth. Familiar pop-and-mom shops are giving way
to impersonal modern facilities. Nostalgic Madame Renee and her cronies
treat us with sweet, often humorous running commentary on the unsettling
changes.
Director Klapisch has assimilated beautifully the populist French cinema of
the 1930s (minus its romantic, fate-driven darkness), the
film-rules-breaking New Wave, the naturalism of today's Young European or
American Cinema. He communicates feelings with sympathy but without
militancy, theatrics, drama, overt sentimentality, or the touristy
picturesqueness of romantic views of Paris. The.local color is unforced.
Klapisch subtly and unraucously evokes the past and the changing times. He
also shows us today's racial mixture in a working class that may not always
live in total harmony but does practice peaceful -- sometimes friendly
--coexistence.
(Note a pun that may reflect the mentality of the filmmakers. The real name
of the cat who plays Gris-Gris is Arapimou. The widely-traveled French
easily pick up foreign words. In Greek, Agapi means Love so that the
expression Agapimou means My Love. Arapi means a black African, which makes
Arapimou mean My Black).
Per a French saying, misfortune has its good side. In this well balanced
movie, a misfortune (the temporary absence of Gris-Gris) leads to a search
that expands Chloe's horizons and will lead to positive changes. On the
street she even eyes repeatedly an unknown young man. By chance, she later
has a quick, happy fling with him. It turns immediately into a downer but
still, the bottom line for Chloe is in her been meeting other people too.
Among them is a previously anonymous neighbor now being evicted. At the
end, Chloe, getting involved in local life, is among those who help the man
move his belongings. Earlier, he had been a sad widower. Now there's a
sudden, discreet yet promising spark between him and Chloe. The last scene
is one of hope as she runs along the streets with a beaming smile on her
face.
"Cat" has excellent English subtitles. Although I find no credits for the
music's organizer, the soundtrack is one of the best, a rich mixture of
genres popular among the French:  U.S. and French rap, salsa, African
songs, rock, a street band, oldies and more. Plus Chopin.

Author
Scott Renshaw
WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY
(Sony Classics)
Starring:  Garance Clavel, Zinedine Soualem, Renee LeCalm, Olivier Py.
Screenplay:  Cedric Klapisch.
Producers:  Aissa Djabri, Farid Lahouassa, Manuel Munz.
Director:  Cedric Klapisch.
MPAA Rating:  R (adult themes, sexual situations, profanity)
Running Time:  92 minutes.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     The Paris of Cedric Klapisch's disarming comedy WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY
is no City of Lights.  Quaint neighborhoods are vanishing as elderly
residents are evicted to make way for upscale cafes and trendy boutiques.
Wrecking crews clear away old buildings to make way for the new.  Lovers
in love have given way to a parade of lonely hearts trying to connect in
bars and alleyways.  Paris has rarely looked more modern -- or less
romantic -- on film.
     This is the Paris discovered by a young single woman named Chloe
(Garance Clavel) when she is forced by the disappearance of her beloved
cat Gris-Gris to get out of her apartment.  Gris-Gris, along with Chloe's
gay roommate Michel (Olivier Py), is one of the few dependable male
figures in her life, giving her plenty of incentive to track him down.
Instead of her cat, however, Chloe finds plenty of reminders that she is
not alone in her loneliness.  Her neighbor Madame Renee (the charming
Renee LeCalm) surrounds herself with pets, another neighborhood woman
(Gisele Laquit) holds conversations with her dead husband's ashes, and a
shy fellow named Djamel (Zinedine Soualem) develops a crush on Chloe while
helping her search for Gris-Gris.
     Though this all may sound quite depressing, it's actually nothing of
the kind.  Klapisch finds none of his subjects pathetic; he looks upon
them with a subtle bemusement, admiring their ability to persevere and to
adapt to the world around them.  He has a particularly good time with
Chloe, played with an arresting sweetness by Garance Clavel.  Some of the
film's cleverest scenes, including a seaside vacation rendered in one
five-second shot of Chloe swimming alone in the ocean, capture Clavel
playing a woman trying to pretend she is resigned to her fate.  The film's
final optimistic note makes her struggles all the more appealing.
     The episodic nature of WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY does grow wearying after a
while, with several encounters dissolving before they even register with
the viewer.  There isn't much narrative momentum to Chloe's adventures --
WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY functions mostly as a walking tour of contemporary
Parisian heartache, emphasis on the "walking" -- but there is a
genuineness to each one.  The many characters in WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY are
looking for love in a lot of the wrong places, but at least most of them
are still looking.  Chloe's quest is really a search for the romantic
Paris of song and story, one which may no longer exist, though it
may please the heart to believe that it does. 

Author
Seth Bookey
(France, 1996); released in the US under the title When the Cat's Away
Seen on 22 June 1997 with Tony for $8 at the Quad Cinema.
Based on a true incident, director Cedric Klapish discovers
that the search for a lost cat in the Bastille section of Paris turns up
a lot more than you might think. Chloe (Garance Clavel) lives with Michel
(Olivier Py), who really doesn't want to look after Gris-Gris (Arapimou),
her black cat. She eventually finds Madame Renee (played by chatty non-actor
Renee Le Calm), who has at least a half-dozen cats and several dogs in her
charge. Imagine Chloe's horror when she returns to discover that Gris-Gris
has flown the coop. Madame Renee springs into action, though, with her network
of other septuagenarian friends in their Bastille neighborhood. She goes
on daily treks with the local simpleton Djamel (Zinedine Soualem), and little
old ladies spot her a mile away with their advice and sympathies.
As Chloe--a make-up assistant--searches for Gris-Gris,
she undergoes a change. She becomes immersed in her neighborhood and becomes
part of it. It is impossible to overlook the forces destroying the personality
fabric of the neighborhood--evictions, demolitions, and gentrification.
As we are treated to a view of the rooftops of Paris, large cranes loom
over the neighborhood. At one point the camera lingers as a giraffe-like
bulldozer eats away at the top portion of a church it is destroying. Chloe's
transformation is complete as she runs into a work acquaintance--who has
just opened a trendy shop--while searching for her cat with Madame Renee
and another crony. The new shop owner looks at Chloe's friends askance while
then loudly criticize the store and its wares ("Who would pay 800 francs
for a metal bra?").
Most urban dwellers can empathize with this Parisian neighborhood's
woes; the march of realty development and how it makes irrevocable changes
is a universal phenomenon, and urbaphiles everywhere will sadly recognize
"the beginning of the end" as it is shown here. The camera works
mainly as an onlooker. Chloe's loneliness is evident as she watches others
have love lives--her roommate Michel features a new boyfriend every week,
people at bars have each other, while men and women she doesn't want hit
on her. But, as Chloe becomes a real part of the neighborhood, she begins
to discover that happiness can be found right there in your own arrondissement.
NOTE:  Watch carefully for the hilarious depiction of Claire's vacation.
If you turn away or blink, you'll miss it for sure!

Author
David N. Butterworth
Leave it to the French to take an idea as simple as a young woman searching
for her lost cat and turn it into an evocation of life, love, and the big
city.
More specifically, credit first-time writer/director Cedric Klapisch, his
leading actress Garance Clavel, and a fine assortment of non-actors who
give "When the Cat's Away," above all, a true heart.  Oh, and let's not
forget Arapimou who plays Gris-Gris, the missing feline at the center of
this largely improvisational piece, who's credited above most of the real
life performers!
Clavel plays Chloe, a "small, slightly pale brunette who wears tight
jeans."  Twentysomething and sick to the nines of her workaday job as a
makeup artist, Chloe longs for a vacation, but there's a snag--her beloved
cat, Gris-Gris.  No one is willing, or able, to catsit him for the week.
Including her gay roomate, Michel (Olivier Py), who jokingly suggests she
"chuck him out of a car."  Including a friend for whom Chloe watered the
plants at Easter.  In fact, no one.  (If you've ever had pets, you'll
understand the difficulties in offloading them during the holidays.)
Finally Chloe finds relief in the form of a batty old lady, Madame Renee
(Renee LeCalm), who runs a cathouse of a less lascivious kind.  When Chloe
returns from her trip, however, Gris-Gris is "perdu," and the hunt for the
inappropriately named animal (Gris-Gris is unquestionably black) is on.
What began as a short subject has been expanded by director Klapisch, who
uses the storyline as a springboard for showing us the changing face of
Paris.  Gentrification is hitting the city and hitting it hard.  Cafes that
sell cups of coffee for four francs are being knocked down to make room for
coffeehouses that sell them for ten.  Music stores are being replaced with
high-priced boutiques.  Small, family-run businesses are giving way to
large, impersonal supermarkets.  Tenants are being evicted every which way
in order to accomodate unchecked urban growth.
The metropolitan landscape might be succumbing to the wrecker's ball but
the inhabitants are harder to displace.  Klapisch weaves a colorful
tapestry in his depiction of Chloe's neighbors, colleagues, and cat-lovers,
from the dotty old women who form a cross-city network of concerned persons
(including the head of "Cats Are People, Too"), to Michel's revolving
lovers, to a mysterious drummer who catches Chloe's eye.  In addition,
there are the rough-edged inhabitants of the local watering hole, including
the dim-witted Djamel (Zinedine Soualem, who resembles an emaciated Tom
Jones), who accompanies Chloe on most of her circuitous adventures.  He
even offers to take her to the seaside...but that's how she got into this
mess to begin with.
Newcomer Clavel is tremendous as Chloe, convincingly portraying a woman
battling a sense of loss and loneliness.  Her attempts to find true love on
the streets and in the nightclubs of a pulsating Paris are marked both by
sadness and humor.  "When the Cat's Away" is most successful at blending
these elements in a way that resists easy interpretation: with whom should
Chloe ultimately wind up, and is her cat really partner enough?  That said,
the film's final image of a joyous Chloe running down the street is
remarkable.  It's likely to stay with the viewer for a long, long time.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
A movie review by Michael J. Legeros
Copyright 1997 by Michael J. Legeros
     WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY is about a young Parisian woman (Garance Cla-
vel) who loses her cat.  She leaves it with an old lady (Renee Le Calm)
before going on vacation and returns to learn that puss has popped out
the window and so she organizes a search party and they scour the
neighborhood and her gay roommate (Oliver Py) helps and the old lady
helps and the young woman makes new friends and visits new places and
still hasn't found her cat and so she lays awake at night while her
roomie bangs away in the next room and all of this was so damn exciting
that I decided to forgo what promised to be a *very* relaxing nap and,
instead, agreed with my companion that walking out was, indeed, the best
way to appreciate this so-called "charming French film." Needless to
say, returning to the real world and our really ordinary lives was one
Hell of an exciting proposition, by that point.  In French, with English
subtitles. 

Author
Ben Hoffman
Paris. The present. Chloe, (Garance Clavel), a young woman, is fed up
with her life which seems to be at a standstill.   She lives with a
jet-black cat she calls Gris-Gris, even if it does mean "grey-grey",
and with Michel (Olivier Py) who is gay.  To get away from it all, she
takes off on a vacation by the sea but not before insuring someone
reliable will take care of her cat.   She finds her in the person of
Mme. Renee (Renee Le Calm) who is a bit batty and who has many of her
own cats.
While ostensibly about a lost cat, that thread is only to tell the
story of an ever- changing Paris, here personified in Chloe and the
many people with whom she comes in contact when on her return from her
vacation she learns that Gris-Gris has disappeared . . . wandered
off.   Mme. Renee has called on everyone she knows to help in the
search.    One of the volunteers in the search is a young Arab, Djamel
(Zinedine Soualem) who has a somewhat diminished I.Q. but makes up for
it in his crush on Chloe and devotion to the search.
Everyone joins in the hunt:   Mme. Renee's elderly friends; a
long-haired drummer, (Romain Duris) who seems to oddly show up wherever
Chloe just happens to be;  and Carlos, (Simon Abkarian) the
neighborhood know-it-all.
Just as Paris is changing, adapting to the new ethnic groups now found
in every country,  trying to deal with the new youth and their
lifestyles as well as the elderly who still reside where they always
have. . . .  so, too, is Chloe adapting and finding out about her life
and which way she ought to go and how to deal with her loneliness.
The film moves quickly with no wasted effort, much of it in an
improvisational manner by the writer/director.  Although actress
Garance Clavel  has had little film experience she was chosen for the
role because she exuded both fragility and the toughness necessary to
survive.    Renee Le Calm plays herself as do those in  some of the
smaller roles for which the director chose non-actors.   All in all an
enjoyable film.
Written and Directed by Cedric Klapisch

Author
Steve Rhodes
     Some movies are not what they seem to be.  WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY
(CHACUN CHERCHE SON CHAT) is one such film.  Although on the surface it
is a mystery about the search for a lost feline, in reality, it has
only marginal sympathy for the missing animal.  The story, written and
directed by Cedric Klapisch, uses the disappearance as a ruse to take
the viewers on a neighborhood tour of Paris.
     Klapisch's storytelling style borrows heavily from the great Eric
Rohmer, whose last picture released in the United States was the
beautiful, episodic RENDEZVOUS IN PARIS.  Klapisch has mastered the
form of a Rohmer film, but lacks Rohmer's gift for the narrative.
Klapisch's plot has the same wide variety of characters, but Rohmer's
are more compelling.
     As the story starts, a young Parisian named Chloe has a
predicament.  She is going on vacation and needs someone to look after
her cat, Gris-Gris, while she is away.  Garance Clavel plays Chloe with
such big, soulful eyes that it is hard to see how anyone would turn her
down.
     Chloe lives in the apartment of a gay man named Michel, played
rather insufferably by Olivier Py.  Although Michel claims to be her
friend, he says she should just put the cat in a bag and abandon it
somewhere.  (In a film nominally about cats there are several such
cruel references to them.)  Michel will do nothing to help the animal
that has been living under his roof.
     Chloe finds an old woman who keeps cats and who would be happy to
look after hers as well.  In fact, the old woman prefers cats to men.
"Men have let me down, but animals, never.  Never!" says Madame Renee,
played by local resident and non-actress Renee Le Calm as a feisty old
woman in her eighties.
     After a vacation concisely summarized by a five second shot of her
in the ocean, Chloe returns to find that Madame Renee no longer has her
cat.  A window was accidentally left open, and Gris-Gris has
disappeared.
     This early plot device of a truant cat launches the body of the
story.  Chloe enlists a host of local residents in her search.  The men
scour the small streets of Paris with her, and a network of older women
form a telephone chain to communicate the results of their search.
Easily the best visual in the show has the camera flitting back and
forth from one rooftop to the next as the old women plan their watch
with military precision.  The scene is reminiscent of the one in which
the cat is trailed in THAT DARN CAT.
     Soon, however, the cat becomes less and less important.  The story
gets wrapped up in all of the relationships that Chloe establishes with
her neighbors.
     A subplot deals with the destruction of the old Paris to make way
for the new.  A building is shown being demolished, and half of the
people seem to be in the process of being evicted from their
apartments.
     If, like I, you are able to guess the resolution of the missing
cat mystery, it will not detract from the story.  The movie's interest
lies strictly in the people Chloe meets.  Rohmer could have found her
some more interesting ones, but the ones she does run into possess a
certain charm.
     WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY runs 1:36.  It is rated R for profanity and an
explicit sexual scene.  (The Parisians in the film seem to smoke, drink
and breathe in about equal proportions.)  The picture would be fine for
mature teenagers.  I give this delicate film thumbs up and ** 1/2.
Opinions expressed are mine and not meant to reflect my employer's.

Author
James Berardinelli
Cast: Garance Clavel, Zinedine Soualem, Olivier Py, Renee Le Calm,=20
      Romain Duris, Joel Brisse
Director: Cedric Klapisch
Producer: Aissa Djabri
Screenplay: Cedric Klapisch
Cinematography: Benoit Delhomme
U.S. Distributor: Sony Pictures Classics
In French with subtitles
     Part documentary, part narrative fiction, WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY=20
represents one of the year's most offbeat approaches to a character=20
study.  Set in Paris' Bastille quarter, Cedric Klapisch's film offers an=20
involving, occasionally poignant portrait of an insecure twentysomething=20
woman named Chloe (Garance Clavel).  At the same time, the movie=20
examines the changing face of the city, as trendy shops replace older,=20
family-run businesses, supermarkets supplant Mom and Pop stores, and=20
apartment buildings are renovated to cater to a younger crowd.  Indeed,=20
although Klapisch doesn't dwell upon Paris' gentrification, it=20
represents one of his film's important subtexts (watch for the highly=20
symbolic scenes depicting the destruction of an old building).
     It's no accident that much of WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY has a "real" feel=20
=96 many of the supporting performers, who are playing themselves, are=20
amateurs with no previous acting experience.  In fact, Klapisch was so=20
intrigued by the colorful secondary characters that he greatly expanded=20
the movie's length (it was originally devised as a 20-minute short) to=20
take advantage of their presence. =20
     WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY begins with the search for a lost animal, but=20
develops into something more sublime and revealing.  At the film's=20
opening, we meet Chloe as she is making final preparations for her first=20
vacation in three years.  Up to this point, however, she has been unable=20
to find anyone to care for her beloved cat, Gris-Gris.  Her gay=20
roommate, Michel (Oliver Py), is unwilling to put himself out, so she is=20
forced to ask around the neighborhood.  Her inquiries lead her to Madame=20
Renee (Renee Le Calm), a known cat-sitter.  Chloe leaves Gris-Gris with=20
the elderly woman, then leaves for two weeks at the seaside.  She=20
returns to learn that Gris-Gris has run away, leaving Madame Renee in a=20
state of near-panic.
     The film progresses with Chloe searching the neighborhood for Gris-
Gris.  In the process, she meets many of the people who live nearby, but=20
with whom she has never come into contact.  There's a shy, insecure=20
young Arab named Djamel (HATE's Zinedine Soualem) who is more than=20
willing to help Chloe as she scours the streets, a grungy musician=20
(Romain Duris) who catches her eye, and, most memorably, a group of=20
Madame Renee's friends, all of whom seize upon this minor emergency as a=20
means of adding spice to routine existences.
     As she interacts with neighbors for the first time and later sits=20
alone at home, listening to her roommate entertaining a lover, Chloe=20
becomes aware of her own isolation and loneliness.  Suddenly, WHEN THE=20
CAT'S AWAY is no longer about finding Gris-Gris, it's about Chloe=20
discovering meaning in her life.  The cat becomes a metaphor for=20
companionship, and Chloe opens herself to emotional risks she would not=20
normally consider in an effort to find someone with whom she can=20
connect.  Her plaintive question of "Why am I all alone?" is one that=20
many individuals across the world can relate to. =20
     Klapisch's decision to rely upon many unproven actors has mixed=20
results.  Some of them are clearly raw, occasionally delivering lines=20
awkwardly.  Others, on the other hand, such as the eccentric Madame=20
Renee, are natural performers, and they provide the film with some of=20
its best comic sequences.  WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY's real revelation,=20
however, is newcomer Garance Clavel, who is hypnotizing as Chloe.  Not=20
only is Clavel an excellent actress with expressive features, but she=20
has an undeniable screen presence.  The camera loves her, and it's=20
obvious that one reason we become so attached to Chloe is because of the=20
way in which Clavel brings her to life.
     WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY claims a premise so simple that it's easy to=20
wonder how a full length feature could be developed from it, but the=20
results are profound and moving.  There's a little bit of Chloe in all=20
of us, I think, and that's why it's so easy to relate to this searching=20
young woman.  Klapisch injects enough comedy to keep WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY=20
light, but not so much that he turns it into a farce or dilutes the=20
film's dramatic content.  This picture is yet another unconventional=20
French export worthy of notice, and is a welcome addition to the=20
season's movie schedule.
Copyright 1997 James Berardinelli=20
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@mail.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 

Author
Alex Fung
WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY (CHACUN CHERCHE SON CHAT) (Sony Pictures
 Classics - 1996)
Starring Garance Clabel, Zinedine Soualem, Renee Le Calm, Oliver Py,
  Arapimou
Screenplay by Cedric Klapisch
Produced by Aissa Djabri, Farid Lahoussa, Manuel Munz
Directed by Cedric Klapisch
Running time: 95 minutes
Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
      Be forewarned.
    -------------------------------------------------------------
I was not familiar with director Cedric Klapisch before I caught
CHACUN CHERCHE SON CHAT (WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY), having not seen any
of his prior feature films (RIENS DU TOUT, LE PERIL JEUNE) or
subsequent features (UN AIR DE FAMILLE), but it was not too far into
the film when I became convinced that Mr. Klapisch was a filmmaker of
talent and significance.  There are a handful of scenes and shots in
WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY which virtually had me bolt out of my seat with
the realization that this was a *director* at work here; in an era
where capable if inoffensively bland and uninspired craftsmen (say,
Ron Howard) and flashy cut-cut-cut-cut specialists (perhaps Michael
Bay?) can lay claim to such a title, Mr. Klapisch's talents are
definitely noteworthy and certainly worthy of embracement.
The scene in WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY which cinched my positive assessment
of Mr. Klapisch is Chloe's vacation scene, of which I should say
little other than it's truly an inspired piece of work, utilising
both wit and narrative economy.  This is a sequence which could have
been handled in a million-and-one different ways; Mr. Klapisch pares
down the situation and discards one million of them, selecting the
single most perfect manner to handle the scene, which a lesser
director might simply consider as a throwaway one of little
consequence.
The aforementioned Chloe (wonderful Garance Clavel) is the protagonist
of WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY, a young modelling agency makeup artist who
shares her apartment in Paris' Bastille district with her homosexual
roommate Michel (Oliver Py) and her beloved cat, Gris-Gris (Ms.
Clavel's own cat, Arapimou).  As the film opens, Chloe is in the
midst of preparations for a long-awaited seaside vacation;
unfortunately, Gris-Gris cannot accompany her on the trip, and Michel
is unwilling to look after the cat, so she's in a bit of a bind.
(This, come to think of it, results in another terrific scene where
Chloe sits on her couch checking off her 'To Do' list - "Find someone
to care for Gris-Gris" is the sole unmarked entry - while mournful
music swells in the background, and the cat cutely perches on her
lap.)  After asking around throughout her neighbourhood, she's pointed
in the direction of Madame Renee (Renee Le Calm, a non-actor who
essentially portrays herself), an fiercely-opinionated elderly woman
who works at home as a catsitter.  Madane Renee cheerfully (well,
relatively speaking) takes in Gris-Gris, but when Chloe returns from
her holiday she finds the catsitter thoroughly distraught, for the cat
has gone missing.  The two women then set out in search of Gris-Gris.
On the surface, this does not sound like the most enthralling of film
subjects - a woman in search of her pet cat - but WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY
is not really about Chloe and her cat: it instead uses this as a
starting point from which to leap.  Chloe's search for Gris-Gris
brings her into contact with a diverse group of interesting people in
her immediate community that she would have never otherwise met, and
sets about a chain of delightfully humourous misadventures.  The loss
of Gris-Gris compounded by the encounters with her many neighbours
also triggers Chloe's acute awareness of her own loneliness and
self-imposed isolation, which she attempts to address through by
exposing herself to social environments never before partaken.
Meanwhile, throughout the film Mr. Klapisch weaves in an affecting
thread of lament, mourning the gentrification of Paris as familiar
stores are replaced by new trendy ones, and the old buildings are
displaced by new ones catering to the young.
WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY could have gone wrong at any number of points, but
it never missteps, weaving a compelling, enchanting, often poignant
tale.  The critical element is the performance of stunningly beautiful
Garance Clavel, who is a delight as the adorable Chloe.  A relative
newcomer to film, Ms. Clavel's dazzling performance is completely
convincing and she makes sweet-faced Chloe a terrific, utterly
sympathetic protagonist for the film who is a joy to watch as we
follow her onscreen adventures.  A true revelation, Ms. Clavel is an
actor to watch out for in future projects.
The film profiles a set of completely affable characters who come to
Chloe's aid as she searches for her Gris-Gris.  Madame Renee enlists a
squad of fellow catsitters who set up checkpoints and passionately
scour the neighbourhood in search of the cat, phoning in to Chloe at
regular intervals with cat-watch updates.  In a very touching and
humourous subplot, good-hearted but hapless and slow-witted Djamel
(Zinedine Soualem) falls hopelessly into unrequited love with Chloe
while helping to try to find Gris-Gris, and consequently goes to great
lengths to try to find her pet and thereby win her heart.
Representative of the warm-hearted tone of WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY, the
frequency at which Djamel unexpectedly pops up in the film in search
of the cat is amusing while simultaneously sweet.  Mr. Clavel lovingly
depicts a cheerful, affectionate community with genuine camraderie in
his film, which both makes enjoyable viewing and also adds accentuates
the bittersweet element of this old neighbourhood's slow
disintegration in order to give way to the new.
WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY skillfully depicts Chloe's increasing realisation
of the emptiness in her life, with perhaps the two most effective
scenes being ones where Ms. Clavel has no dialogue - one where Chloe
is sent scurrying about on a fashion shoot at her unrewarding job, and
the other as she silently sits in her apartment listening to her
roommate in the throes of passion with a lover.  Her Chloe is such an
affectionate creation that the audience can't help but root for her
happiness, and that results in her clumsy, naive quest for
companionship becoming all the more compelling.  (The scene where
Michel advises her on which clothes to wear to a nightclub is a
particular standout.)
It is astonishing to consider how such a simple, unlikely concept can
act as the leaping board for such a compelling, airy film, but Mr.
Klapisch pulls it off splendidly with WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY; the film
is simultaneously fun, sweet, amusing, and touching. It's completely
engaging and satisfying - and I don't even *like* cats.
--
Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/
"At one point when berated and bloodied by her male military superior,
 Moore screams out a guttural invitation to him to enjoy partaking in the
 absorption of a certain anatomical member." - Dan Cox, VARIETY, on G.I. JANE
