Title
Review for Boiling Point (1993)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Berge Garabedian
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A federal agent apparently reaches his "boiling point" after his partner
gets killed during an undercover job, and vows to find the man who fulfilled
the dirty deed. As it turns out, the man who killed him is just a dimwitted
flunky of a lifetime criminal who just got out of jail and owes the mob
$50,000. The bumbling duo only have one week to get their hands on the
money, while the cop has the same amount of time to nail them. Pretty
exciting, eh?
CRITIQUE:
This film includes some pretty bad acting, little to no action, a "Miami
Vice" leftover script, and Dennis Hopper acting with his red hair. Having
said that, it also features a slick Wesley Snipes acting like a bad-ass
while chomping on a cigar every chance he gets, one of Viggo Mortensen's
earlier and less subdued roles, and an overall decent noirish time if you
happen to catch it on video. It won't make or break your evening, but it
certainly is an easy appetizer to complement any main dish which you might
be contemplating for the rest of the night. Is it all pretty predictable?
Yes. Is it all together boring? Not at all. In fact, despite some sub-par
acting by some of the side-players, you can't help but enjoy Snipes acting
like a tough guy, Seymour Cassel as a money-laundering flake, Hooper letting
his goofy walk do the acting for him, and Viggo the man, giving us a little
of what his hair would do for him in the future. Toss in a throwaway role
for Lolita Davidovich as the happy hooker with the golden heart, so-so
tension and a true-life fate report at the end of the film which lets us
know exactly what happened to all of these semi-interesting characters, and
you've got yourself a mediocre night at the movies. See it if you don't mind
rehashed cop movies featuring some interesting actors, and one of the worst
taglines to a movie...ever! --> "He's a cop who reached the Boiling Point!".
Yech!
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Based on a true story by the novel called "Money Man" written by a man named
Gerald Petievich.

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Wesley Snipes, Dennis Hopper, Lolita Davidovich, 
           Viggo Mortensen, Dan Hedaya
Director:  James B. Harris
Producers:  Marc Frydman and Leonardo De La Fuente
Screenplay:  James B. Harris based on the novel MONEY MEN by 
             Gerald Petievich
Music:  Cory Lerios and John D'Andrea
Released by Warner Brothers
     Jimmy (Wesley Snipes) is a Federal Agent who doesn't always play
things by the book.  When a bust goes bad and one of his colleagues is
killed as a result, the department decides to ship him off to Newark,
New Jersey.  He has seven days to avenge the dead officer and find the
men responsible for his death.  The killer, a man named Ronnie (Viggo
Mortensen) is actually the flunkey of Red (Dennis Hopper).  Red has
Ronnie believing that he's a big-time crook while, in reality, he's no
more than a two-bit con artist.  Together, the two start on a
rarely-successful crime spree with Jimmy in hot pursuit.
     BOILING POINT is basically an average police thriller (although,
surprisingly, there are no high-speed car chases) with little that's
new or original to offer to its audience.  It tries to be more
intelligent than most movies of the genre, but what passes for a
"higher quality" script is just a story that's a little less exciting.
One of BOILING POINT's main problems is that there isn't a great deal
of action and the ending is never in doubt.  The few clever plot twists
(none of which are substantial) don't make up for general lack of
energy evident throughout most of the movie.  I doubt action fans will
enjoy this film much, and those looking for a dramatic picture will be
put off by the stock characters and predictable situations.
     There are a few characters that seem completely irrelevant to the
overall plot.  Many of these are in supporting roles, but one main
character, Lolita Davidovich's Vikki, serves no purpose other than to
provide a few moments of subtle irony and an opportunity to see other
facets of the personalities of Jimmy and Red.  Unfortunately, these
"character-building" moments don't work well.  In fact, in a movie with
so many scenes designed to show the human sides of both heros and
villains, it's surprising that no one attains any great depth.
     Unlike many films that focus on con artists and their scams,
BOILING POINT only presents a few run-of-the mill capers.  We keep
expecting Red to come up with something brilliant, but the "card up his
sleeve" is one that we learn about early--that he's leading Ronnie on
while training him to be his assassin.  For his part, Red detests
killing.  He doesn't even like carrying a gun.
     BOILING POINT is based on the novel MONEY MEN, which in turn is
based on a true story.  While this naturally limits the scope of the
plot, the manner in which the story has been converted to the screen
lacks style.  It appears that an attempt was made to correct matters in
the editing room (even a casual look reveals that the movie has been
heavily edited), but there's only so much that can be done in
post-production.
     Simply put, BOILING POINT is an unspectacular movie that will
vanish as quickly from theaters as it will from the memories of those
who see it.  It's as mediocre a movie as there ever has been, with very
little to like or despise.  It certainly isn't the best work done by
either Wesley Snipes or Dennis Hopper, but neither of them need hang
their heads in shame because of it.  At least they got a paycheck.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)
