Title
Review for Halloween 4: The Return of Michael Myers (1988)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Joe Chamberlain
Starring Donald Pleasence; Ellie Cornell; Danielle Harris; George P. Wilbur
& Michael Pataki
Halloween 4: The Return Of Michael Myers picks up where Halloween II left
off. (Halloween III had absolutely nothing to do with the Michael Myers
character -- proving once again that movie producers are not all rocket
scientists.) Anyway, it's years after the events of that infamous Halloween
night (Halloween & Halloween II) when Michael Myers went on a murderous
rampage and killed pretty much everyone in sight in the small town of
Haddonfield Illinois. We all thought good old Mike was stopped for good at
the end of Halloween II. But it's the movies, and more specifically a movie
about a bloodthirsty mass murderer, so we all know it pretty much takes a
howitzer to the head to stop them. For those who missed Halloween II, here's
the scoop. Myers' longtime psychiatrist, Sam Loomis (Donald Pleasence)
seemingly blew himself and Myers up to end Myers' killing spree. It ended up
only scarring Loomis and putting the evil Mikey in a coma for a decade.
Well, Halloween is rolling around once again, and it's time for Mikey to get
up and go trick or treating again. This time he's off to a family reunion.
Seems he has a niece living in Haddonfield and, as is his custom, he pretty
much is forced to try to do anything he can to kill her. Like his last
murderous rampage, the body count rises fast and furious as Mike knocks off
anybody who happens to get within two feet of him.
Unlike the original Halloween movies, Halloween 4 has a higher budget. At
least in terms of production values anyway. The budget was obviously not
used to go after the best Hollywood had to offer in terms of acting talent.
With the exception of Pleasence, most of the actors seem to have been cast
for their good looks as opposed to their acting skills. If you've ever seen
a slasher flick, that shouldn't come as much of a surprise to you. Michael
Myers again dons his Captain Kirk mask painted white and his overalls. (At
least they didn't have to splurge on the wardrobe budget.) Although much to
my dismay, unlike the earlier films, there were no gratuitous nude scenes.
If it weren't for the enormous body count, this would be a PG movie. But
there is that body count, and most of the deaths are pretty violent.
I actually enjoyed Halloween 4. I really can't figure out why though. There
is nothing about it that really sets it apart from any of the other cookie
cutter slasher films. Perhaps I was just happy to see Michael Myers, one of
my favorite horror film characters, return after all those years. It's good
for a couple of hours of mindless entertainment, if nothing else.

Author
Scott Hamilton & Chris Holland
 Halloween 4: The Return of Michael Myers
Reviewed by Chris Holland & Scott Hamilton
By the time most movie franchises have made it to part four, the life has
been sucked out of the concept and all that's left is to rehash the same
old scenes. Most screenwriters and directors making these sequels feel
little motivation to further the overall storyline or to break new ground
for old characters. For this reason, fans of the original film tend to look
down on all sequels and reject them as "not as good as the first one" once
the end credits roll. Halloween 4 has seen its share of criticism at the
hands of horror fans, but we feel that it deserves some credit for both
maintaining the feel of the original film and for covering new territory
with both new and old characters.
Because Halloween 3 did not take place within the Michael Myers storyline,
the producers of Halloween 4 gave it a subtitle that leaves no room for
misinterpretation: the inhuman killer with William Shatner's rubbery visage
will indeed return to Haddonfield, The Small Town That Just Doesn't Learn.
His favorite victim, however, is long gone.
Michael's sister Laurie Strode, played by Jamie Lee Curtis in the first two
films, is nowhere to be found in part four. Instead, her daughter, Jamie
Lloyd (so named in an obvious homage to Curtis), is still residing in
Haddonfield after the death of her parents. (Awww man, you mean Laurie
lived through all of that crap with Michael Myers only to die in a car
accident or something?) Why anyone related to a psycho killer with a
penchant for killing his own family would remain in the same town is beyond
us, but there it is. Adopted by the Carruthers family, Jamie lives an
insecure life, taunted by her classmates ("Your uncle's the boogeyman!")
and unsure of her relationship with her foster sister, Rachel. Rachel, for
her part, loves Jamie, but is a teenager and is subject to the normal
behavior problems incurred by being a teenager in a horror film.
-- "We're talking about evil on two legs." --
Meanwhile, back on the funny farm, Myers has escapedonce again, this time
by drilling his thumb into theskull of an ambulance attendant and slipping
away in the resulting crash. Doctor Loomis, to the dismay of the asylum's
director, departs in pursuit of the killer, because that's what he does.
Loomis (the tireless Donald Pleasence) is looking pretty haggard ten years
later, and his last run-in with Michael didn't help any. (Loomis sacrificed
himself in order to kill Michael by blowing up a hospital operating room.)
Myers, of course, is headed back to Haddonfield, to look up his niece and
cut her throat. (Avon calling!)
Up to this point, the pacing and character development are fairly good.
Loomis has a roadside run-in with Myers at a truck stop before making it to
Haddonfield, the inevitable sex scene is set up, and the police are alerted
just as Michael begins his killing spree. To their credit, the sherriff
takes Loomis at his word and sends out an alert immediately. "There aren't
many people in Haddonfield who can forget your name, Doctor," says Sherriff
Meeker. "Especially the police."
-- "This is startin' to spook me, Doc." --
Unfortunately, the movie fizzles soon thereafter. After a brief chase by
Michael, Rachel and Jamie hole up in the sherriff's house, which is a
sensible thing to do, but not very exciting. There's a pointless romance
subplot in which Rachel argues with the sherriff's daughter over a
pointless male character (who, as we all can predict, is destined to die
before the film ends anyway), and the sherriff leaves the house to reign in
a posse that has started taking pot shots at the local populace in the name
of hunting down Myers. Just when you're thinking to yourself, "Where the
hell is Michael Myers?", he arrives at the house and the killing begins
again.
To be fair, Halloween 4 has some genuine scares. One nice touch set up
early in the film is Jamie's choice of Halloween costume -- it's a clown
costume similar to the one Michael wears at the beginning of the first
film. Also, there's a bewildering and frightening scene in which multiple
Michaels appear, surrounding Loomis and the sherriff. The cinematography is
clean and the production values are high. Nice little details like these
make Halloween 4 more than the average underbudgeted slasher flick.
The best acting, of course, comes from Pleasence and, surprisingly,
Danielle Harris as Jamie. This little girl can scream pretty well. The
expected goofy teenager peformances are given by Ellie Cornell as Rachel
and the other adolescent members of the cast, although Cornell is clearly
the best of the bunch.
 -- "You can't kill damnation, mister. It don't die like a man does." --
Undoubtedly, the most important thing about Halloween 4 is its ending,
which is probably the most creative and suprising ending ever filmed for
the fourth film in a series. It's a development at which you could probably
guess, but it's still darn creepy to see it on screen, especially with the
reactions of Doctor Loomis.
While not the equal of the first Halloween, The Return of Michael Myers
justifies its existence as a continuation of the Myers story. It's not at
all innovative in terms of action, but it does further the plot and
provides some satisfaction to those of us who are continually asking: "What
happens next?"
For the html version of this review, including screen captures, please
visit Stomp Tokyo Video Reviews (URL below).
