Title
Review for I Know Where I'm Going! (1945)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Jeff Meyer
[Seen at the Seattle International Film Festival]
I KNOW WHERE I'M GOING (Great Britain, 1945)
Director/Producer/Screenwriters: Michael Powell and Eric Pressburger
                                 (The Archers)
Cast: Wendy Hiller, Roger Livesey, Pamela Brown, Finlay Currie,
     Capt. C. W. R. Knight, Petula Clark, Valentine Dyall, Nancy Price,
     John Laurie, Jean Cadell
[Part of the TRIBUTE TO MICHAEL POWELL series]
     One of the first films that Powell & Pressburger produced under their
Archers emblem, this is a romantic comedy that works very well, due mainly to
casting (of both major and minor roles) and a decent script.  It also attempts
to capture a magical Scottish atmosphere in the bargain; it's a respectable
attempt, but it only seems to ferment at the very end of the picture.  However,
there is enough good work going on elsewhere in the picture to leave a
satisfying taste in one's mouth throughout its running time.
     Wendy Hiller plays Joan Webster, a strong, materialistic woman who has
finally manipulated her millionaire boss into marriage; before leaving for
Scotland to meet her fiance, Joan describes to her father how everything in her
life is going exactly as she had planned it to, and that this is the
culmination of her dreams.  Her father warns her that the best things in life
are often the ones which aren't planned, and of course he turns out to be right
by the end of the film.  (Fathers always are in films like this.)  While
waiting to get across the loch to the island castle owned by her fiance, Joan
meets a brace of eccentric characters who live in the area, including Roger
Livesey as Torquil, the local laird who has just returned from the war.  The two
begin to fall in love, with Joan's dreams of financial independence hindering
and the awful weather over the loch helping the budding relationship.  The
varied personalities and activities of the locals, along with the ruins of a
castle and its ancient curse on Torquil, keep I KNOW WHERE I'M GOING from
having any bare spots; and the performances of Hiller and Livesey make for a
very fine romance, indeed.
     According to Maltin, this isn't out on video yet; however, with the
continued interest in Powell & Pressburger's work, it may not be long before it
is available.  A solid romantic comedy with a bit more emphasis on the romance
than the comedy, and a feel distinctly different than, say, Capra or Lubitsch.
     [Bias Disclaimer:  I think Wendy Hiller was born to play Dorothy L. Sayers'
Harriet Vane, and I really haven't seen anyone else who's come close.]

Author
Joseph C Fineman
I KNOW WHERE I'M GOING.  British, late '40s.  Seen because Orwell
mentions it a couple of times, and because I am fond of the song it is
named after:
     Like the song, the movie is about a woman who knows what she
wants, or anyway thinks she does.  She is the daughter of a banker, and
has made what she considers a good catch--a rich industrialist.  Her
father disapproves (I suppose because it means marrying into trade?),
but she stays her course.  Her fiance has rented an island off the west
coast of Scotland for the duration of World War II, and that is where the
wedding is to be, but several days of bad weather keep her from making
the last leg of the trip there, which has to be made in a small boat,
past a dangerous whirlpool.  So she is stuck on another island, where
there is a handsome young man (a soldier? it was three weeks ago and I can't
remember) whose intentions are honorable.  She feels herself falling in
love with him, and becomes desperate to get away from him and to her
fiance.  The owner of the boat will not try the passage until he judges
it to be safe.  However, he has a son, perhaps sixteen, who is engaged to a
young lady on the island but expects it to be several years before he
has saved up the money he needs to marry her.  The banker's daughter
offers him the whole sum at once if he will take her to the other
island.  He agrees.  His fiancee hears about it and scolds her
eloquently: I was willing to wait four years for my lover, while you are
willing to risk his life so you can jump into bed with yours tonight.
The honorable young man hears he is the cause of it all and insists on
going too.  They go out, but are beaten back by a squall and nearly
drowned in the whirlpool; they make it home, and the boatman gives his
son a sickening dressing-down.
     Thereupon the banker's daughter walks off into the sunset with the
handsome young man, because God damn! this is a *comedy*.  None of the
misery she has caused counts.  We are not supposed to care about the
invisible industrialist's disappointment, because (I guess) he is rich
(and a draft dodger?) and therefore wicked.  We are not supposed to
care about the boy's humiliation, because (I guess) he is poor and
therefore inconsequential.  We are supposed to pay attention to the
middle-class lady's hormones, and be amused at how they and all those
other props conspire to prove that a woman cannot, after all, know what
she wants.
     The song is actually sung now and then during the movie, as
background music, without much art or conviction.  It tells a different
story:
     In this, as in many other Scottish songs (c.f. "Eppie Morrie,"
"The False Lover Won Back"), the heroine is shown to know what she
wants and how to get it.
     Orwell mentioned the movie in a couple of letters because he was
nearly done in by the same whirlpool.  He does not say what he thought
of it, but I imagine he was entertained by the class angle.
