Title
Review for Angel Heart (1987)
Number of Reviews
3

Author
Mark R. Leeper
     Harry Angel (played by Mickey Rourke) is a hard-boiled private eye in
the Philip Marlowe tradition.  He is a little crude, a little rude, and
occasionally a little bit dense.  His client is Louis Cyphre (played by
Robert DeNiro), a recluse with a silver cane, pointed fingernails, and, like
a cipher, is something of a mystery to be solved.  Cyphre hires Angel to
track down Johnny Favorite, a singer who disappeared twelve years earlier in
1943.  Angel follows a trail that has been cold for twelve years through
Harlem, Poughkeepsie, Coney Island, and soon to New Orleans.  The trail will
lead from drug addicts to evangelists to voodoo worshipers.  Harry will
trigger a series of murders of friends of Favorite and will become the prime
suspect in some of these murders before he discovers the secret of the
disappearance of Favorite.
     ANGEL HEART is an interesting variation on the detective stories of the
'40s.  It is as moody a piece as Raymond Chandler would have written,
probably nearly as suspenseful, but it also is a comment on religion.  We
see gospel evangelists squeezing money from their believers, we see baptisms
for a religion whose primary symbol is, as one character describes, a man to
a wooden cross, and we see voodoo rituals with slaughtered chickens.  Each
somehow looks equally ridiculous.  I doubt that Raymond Chandler would have
ever thought to put comparative religion into one of his stories.
     To be perfectly frank, my first reaction was to say that this was just
a fair detective story and a little bit more and hence would have given the
film a +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  However, thinking back, the full solution
of the mystery makes a lot of the film, even some of its settings, seem a
lot more interesting.  The film has a complexity and makes statements not
immediately apparent on first viewing.  On consideration, the film does
deserve a +2.
     Oh, and as for the film having to have ten seconds of Mickey Rourke
shaking his buttocks edited out in order to go from an X to an R rating--who
cares?  That ten seconds has become a major topic of interest about the
film.  It has little to do with the main thrust of the film.  There might
not have even been an explicit sex scene if the rating system had not been
around.  Arguing what an R-rated film should be and what can only be in a
X-rated film is like arguing how many angels can dance on the head of a pin.
And I guess that brings us back to Angels.

Author
Jason Wallis
Angel Heart (1987)
Rating (out of five): ****1/2
Starring Mickey Rourke, Robert DeNiro, Lisa Bonet, Charlotte Rampling,
Michael Higgins, Stocker Fontelieu,
Brownie McGhee and Dann Florek
Directed by Alan Parker
Written by Parker (based on a novel by William Hjortsberg)
Rated R for graphic violence, profanity and sex
Theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1
Released in 1987
Running 112 minutes
Not many movies capture a mood the way Angel Heart does. Right from its
opening moments, the film begins to show off its incredible use of lighting
and visual structure, giving us a shot of a common New York alleyway. It's
quite an effective scene; watching it, you can't help but feel slightly
claustrophobic as the camera pans over the narrow alley, only to reveal that
it harbors a deadly secret. Technically, the scene is flawless.
But not only is that opening shot a marvel of cinematography and lighting,
but it also sets up the mood for what is to follow. Throughout the movie, we
think we're right there in the middle of things, maybe even a step or two
ahead of its hero. Then every so often, the story surprises us and reveals
that it has something up its sleeve, and at times that something can be far
more complicated than we at first perceive it to be.
That said hero is a private investigator named Harry Angel (Mickey Rourke),
a classic dick in the vein of the greats like Philip Marlowe and Jake
Gittes. He smokes, he womanizes, and above all, he doesn't seem to give a
damn about anybody. As the narrative opens circa 1950s, he is called upon by
a mysterious foreigner by the name of Louis Cyphre (Robert DeNiro, in an
extended cameo) to track down a missing band singer called Johnny Favorite.
It appears that Favorite once enlisted the aid of Cyphre, but has since
disappeared and left his debt unpaid. Angel's job then sounds simple enough;
merely find out if Favorite is alive or dead, and report his findings to the
elusive Cyphre. But through the course of the film, it becomes clear that
not everything is exactly what it seems, as Angel is pulled into the dark
world of New Orleans and all that inhabits.
Angel Heart follows in the tradition of some of my favorite movies from the
past, films like Chinatown and Sleuth, puzzle-box movies that at first seem
to be about one thing but then reveal themselves to be about something else
altogether. And indeed, Angel Heart borrows heavily from its predecessors,
not just visually but also thematically. Strangely, though, it never comes
across as a rip-off in any way, nor does it seem to be a gimmicky homage.
Bruce Willis' latest summer vehicle The Sixth Sense has recently took
America by storm, shocking unsuspecting audiences with its "jolting"
conclusion. Much like that film, some of the central themes in Angel Heart
are only made clear after the credits have begun rolling. And, yes, this
movie also features a finale that is designed to surprise the audience. The
only difference is, this time the trick worked. While The Sixth Sense and
its ending are more likely to leave you scratching your head, the ending of
Angel Heart makes perfect sense even under intense scrutiny. And also like
the Bruce Willis film, I knew the twist here before seeing the movie. Now,
I've gotten some pretty nasty e-mails attacking my review of The Sixth
Sense, most of them informing me that the sole reason I disliked the film so
much was because I had prior knowledge of the last twist. I guess, if
nothing else, Angel Heart at least proves that a movie can be extremely
effective and enjoyable even if the viewer is robbed of the surprise ending.
As good as the final trick is, the real star of the show here is Mickey
Rourke. In the '80s, he kind of existed as that decade's equivalent of
Marlon Brando. Constantly on the cutting edge, he went for the more risque
roles that other actors wouldn't dream of touching in fear of being forever
thought of as soft-core porn stars. But, sadly, the allusion to Brando
turned out to be all too accurate; much like the Godfather of film, he has
now drifted into obscurity. Every once in a while, he does land a film job,
but ends up being fired because he can't remember his lines (to be fair, in
the last movie he was working on, he was kicked off the set after demanding
that his small dog be featured in one of the shoot-out scenes).
But Angel Heart features Rourke in the prime of his acting days, and indeed
is one of his more steamy efforts. In fact, upon release, the movie was
slapped with the "X" rating due to one of its more controversial moments, a
truly unsettling and disturbing sex scene between Rourke and Lisa Bonet
(formally of "The Cosby Show"). Explaining exactly how the sequence is so
upsetting would be hard without giving away key plot points, but if you are
easily shaken you might want to fast-forward through it, even if it is one
of the most potent points. Eventually, 10 seconds were cut from the
interlude, but they are restored for most home video versions.
If you've the stomach to take it, Angel Heart serves as a very nice (albeit
unpleasant) alternative to trekking off to the local cineplex and wasting
your money on seeing The Sixth Sense for the third time.
*Find all of Jason's reviews at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475

Author
Clark Quinn
Starring: Mickey Rourke, Robert DeNiro, Lisa Bonet, Charlotte Rampling
Directed by: Alan Parker
Produced by: Alan Marshall and Elliott Kastner
Executive Producers: Mario Kassar and Andrew Vajna
Screenplay by: Alan Parker
From the novel: "Falling Angel" by William Hjortsberg
Director of Photography: Michael Seresin
     I saw this movie at a special pre-release screening here at UCSD.  Before
the movie started, there was a trailer stating something to the effect that the
version we were seeing was not a finished product, and that color, editing,
etc.  (I can't remember the rest) may be adjusted.  We saw the film Saturday
night, the film is being released on Friday.  Sidenote: can they really make
major changes in that short a time?  
     The story is set in 1955, and involves a PI, Harry Angel (Mickey Rourke)
hired by a mysterious stranger named Louis Cyphre (Robert DeNiro) to find
Johnny Favorite, who welshed on a debt he owes Mr. Cyphre.  The only
information Angel has is that this man is supposed to be in a hospital in
upstate New York, unrecovered from a traumatic wartime accident.  The plot
complicates as Angel tracks his man to New Orleans and encounters voodoo
magic, murder, and a surprise ending.  Unfortunately, only part-way into the
movie I gradually recognized the story as one I had read in a magazine
(undoubtedly either culled from the book or expanded into a book at a later
date).  While I remember feeling that the story was one of the more interesting
and eerie that I had read, being privy to the solution of the mystery may have
diluted the effect of some of the revelations in the movie.  I did try and get
an unbiased view of the effect of the pacing by talking to my viewing
companion afterward, who was not aware of the story.
     For this movie to work, it is important that the questions lead in a
tighter and tighter spiral, the tension must mount, the pace quicken.  While
there can be occasional minor buildups and releases, overall there has to be a
heightening sense of mystery and peril.  On two of these scores the movie 
succeeds, and on one I believe it fails.  First, the screenplay felt tight; 
the clues led ominously to the next one, and each one seemed to provide more
questions than it answered, right up to the slow realization of the solution.
There were a couple of plot holes, but only one truly felt jarring, and, set
near the end, it did not detract from the pace.  In addition, the 
cinematography set a tone that properly framed the action.  Early on, a mood 
of foreboding pervades the movie, and the camera succeeds in capturing a 
seediness in the environs with drab colors and small details.  Unfortunately, 
the pace is uneven.  Certain scenes are dragged out for no obvious reason, and
several mystery cliches are needlessly added.  The worst offense is the
seemingly obligatory horror scene that turns out to be a dream.  One other 
time there is a dream sequence that seems unnecessary, but this scene is not 
so much of a red herring.  I hope that if they change the film at all, it is
the use of judicious editing to tighten the film and remove or trim the slow
spots.  In this movie, if you have too much time to think, the film loses.  I
think this weakness is particularly a shame, since director Alan Parker is 
taking away from nice work by screenwriter Alan Parker.  I do not know what 
Alan Parker has previously done.
     Mickey Rourke does a fine job of making Harry Angel an everyman's PI.
Occasionally he seems to fall too far into the nervous school of acting, but
his gradual realization of the real story is nicely evoked.  Lisa Bonet is
striking as the sexy, worldly young voodoo priestess.  Robert DeNiro captures
the mystery of Louis Cyphre well, but Charlotte Rampling is not given enough
leeway to play her part of the fortune-teller debutante girlfriend of the
missing man.
     There is considerable violence and gore in the movie, perhaps more than 
necessary.  There is also some flesh and sex, but not gratuitously.  I 
especially think the ending twist is highly imaginative.  Looking back, I think
that a good job was done in translating the feel of the story to the screen.
Overall, I would give the movie a high 1 on the Leeper scale of -4 to +4.  A
better job of editing would give it a solid 2.  
--
 Clark N. Quinn
 Institute for Cognitive Science C-015
 University of California, San Diego
 La Jolla, California 92093
 (619) 534-5996 (UCSD): (619) 457-1274 (Home)
 {ucbvax,decvax,akgua,dcdwest}!sdcsvax!sdics!clark.uucp  OR  clark@nprdc.arpa
