Title
Review for Hi-Line, The (1999)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
James Brundage
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member James Brundage.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/b4c2639b9da39a0c882568d7005f5d8d?OpenDocument
Everyone wants to be a director.  Actors, producers, writers, actresses,
sometimes even critics.  But sound mixers?  Shoot me if I see a film
written and directed by The Dust Brothers.
Yet I have just finished watching The Hi-Line, an incredible simple
narrative ditty by two-time Academy Award winning sound guy Ronald
Judkins (Jurassic Park, Schindler's List, and Saving Private Ryan), and,
much to my surprise, the film wasn't all that bad.
Marketed completely wrong, one would see the tagline of The Hi-Line
(`Vera Johnson is about to make a big discovery herself') and assume
that Rachel Leigh Cook completely cashed out last year with She's All
That and began to make nothing more than Hollywood dribble.  Yet The
Hi-Line never goes down that terrible road to bad acting and incredible
melodrama.  Instead, it does what the last film from its executive
producers (Instinct) did not: provides a decent character drama.
In The Hi-Line, Vera Johnson (Rachel Leigh Cook) is just like a lot of
rural girls: she wants out of her Montana town.  Her particular
escape-of-choice is as clichéd as her character originally appears to
be: Vera wants to model.  Sam Polvino (Ryan Alosio) comes into town
claiming to be a scout from a department store in Chicago, but we know
from the get go that his motives are a little different.  In truth, Sam
knew Vera's real father, and Vera was one of those children who was left
by her mother.
Rather than go the ultra-sentimental route and place in tons of
symphonic crescendos, thus turning The Hi-Line into a melodramatic POS
resembling a beat-up-Ford, The Hi-Line takes the high road into a
journey of self-discovery.
For a sound man, Judkins manages his cast to perform just as well
talking as silent.  Newcomer Alosio turns out a very impressive
performance as a man struggling not to become a drifter, while Rachel
Leigh Cook acts up a very quiet storm as a woman facing internal
struggles that her small town life has not prepared her for.
In the end, the characters bend inward, examine themselves, and come to
the sort of resolution that you only get in movies.
Therein, of course, lies my gripe as a critic.
For such a thoughtful and nontraditional film, The Hi-Line manages to
end so Hollywood that you begin to wonder what ever happened to that gem
of originality.  Although I enjoy happy ending as much as the next guy,
I wonder if a more ambiguous ending would suit The Hi-Line better.  To
get an idea of a movie very similar to The Hi-Line that does this, watch
Ed Radtke's The Dream Catcher, a film that is making the festival and
European circuits but has not gotten the acclaim it deserves here.  Yet
when dealing with The Hi-Line, an art house film sure to draw quite a
few teens on the appeal of Rachel Leigh Cook, a more resolved ending
will probably prove to be just what the audience ordered.  My other
gripe is with director of photography Wally Pfister, who underlights the
majority of the movie, resulting in a very unprofessional look.
Yet The Hi-Line takes the high road over these flaws as well.  It ends
up being mystic, intelligent, and a welcome break from what is beginning
to look like a very ugly cinematic summer.
Director: Ronald Judkins
Producer: Collin Phillips, Molly Mayuex
Writer: Ronald Judkins
Starring: Rachael Leigh Cook, Ryan Alosio, Margot Kidder, Stuart
Margolin, Tantoo Cardinal
http://www.thehi-line.com/
---
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
