Title
Review for Into My Heart (1998)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Chuck Schwartz
IN SHORT: Too damn precious, even for the intended arthouse circuit
What do you do if you fall in love with your best friend's girl? If
stories like these haven't been done to death in movies, they've sure
been done to death in rock 'n' roll songs. You'd save a lot of time
sticking to worn out CD's by Clapton and The Cars (yeah, I'm dating
myself) because Into My Heart will not satisfy on any level. What ticks
me off about this flick is its insistence on forcing an open ending to
stir discussion after the fact. Like all other arthouse failures it
pushes the button that immediately makes its characters behave in
unbelievable ways. That's my read. The alternative critique would be
that the performances are so understated that a mook like me is left
staring at his watch. I think better of actors than that. But I'm still
a mook.
Within a minute or so of the film's start, one character has fallen off
the side of a old stone tower up in Massachusettes. It may have been an
accident. It may have been a suicide attempt. In flashback, we meet and
greet our principal players and spend all our time watching the process
of character development.
Adam (Jake Weber) and Ben (Rob Morrow) have been friends since nursery
school. They went to college together. They were together when Adam saw
Nina (Claire Forlani) and was struck down hard. Ben goes west for grad
school. Adam and Nina stay east and marry. Ben returns with new flame
Kat (Jayne Brooke) on his arm. Two happy, loving couples. So far, so
good, if you've got 20/20 hearing 'cuz both men mumble almost every line
of dialog. If you make it through that barrier, pay attention. This
script is all comfortable friends stuff, and not all that interesting
dramatically. Emotionally, except for a line of expository dialog here
and there, not much occurs, either. Along the line, Ben makes an advance
on Nina and they eventually spend a night in bed together while their
partners are out of town doing that workaholic yuppie thing.
Later on down the line, Adam and Ben are reminiscing about childhood
memories. Nina interrupts the mumbling and calls Ben a s***thead. This
translates in Adam's head as "my wife is sleeping with my best friend"
and a man who didn't cry when a fireworks accident blew out his eyeball
sheds a single solitary tear at the recognition of betrayal. That's
artsy-fartsy pretentious, friends, and this flick is swimming in it.
Into My Heart best demonstrates the peril all writer/directors go
through on their first film -- they are so familiar with their
characters and the inner motives and worlds of the same, that little of
these necessary bacground pieces are laid out in front of the audience.
The utter lack of chemistry between Morrow and Forlani strip out any
emotional accessibility you might want. It all comes to a head when the
film snaps back to "real" time when Morrow offers his sympathy in a
manner that should have got his face slapped. The writer/director team
choose to go in a different direction, thus enabling your post viewing
conversation. Either way, the emotional reactions are so muted, they may
as well not be there.
On average, a first run movie ticket will run you Eight Bucks. Were
Cranky able to set his own price to Into My Heart, he would have paid...
For Jayne Brook who, as the "outsider" to this intimate trio, delivers
the only believable performance in the movie. Even if you live in an
arthouse, viewing such a pretentious and precious work is more than you
should endure.
Cranky CriticŽ is a Registered Trademark of, and Copyright Š 2000 by,
Chuck Schwartz. All Rights Reserved. Cranky on the web at
www.crankycritic.com
