Title
Review for Portraits chinois (1996)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Harvey S. Karten
   When I saw my first Woody Allen movie I was young and
naive and wondered whether only Americans were that
neurotic.  My impression was that somehow the U.S. was the
most stressed-out society and that Americans were the only
ones who needed--and went to--psychotherapists.  Since
then, an exposure to foreign films convinced me that people
in Burkina Faso and Vanuatu might be just as disturbed as
those in the richer, more complex societies.  Still, traditional
psychotherapy as we know it works best in cultures that love
to talk talk talk and whose people sometimes appear on
screen to be more alive from the neck up than they are in
less dispassionate parts of their bodies.
   And since no one talks to the 35mm camera the way the
French do, you'd expect our loquacious Gallic neighbors
across the sea to discuss their relationships to death.  That's
exactly what they do in a film that resembles a Woody Allen
comedy of insecure people and apprehensive relationships
but seems to be made strictly for a French audience. 
Despite the usual stellar acting from the wonderful English
actress Helena Bonham Carter (who does double-duty here
by speaking French so fluently that I dare any Frenchman to
make fun of it), I really couldn't give a fig or care a croissant
how things turned out for them.  Though the subtitles are
clear, sharply etched, raised on the screen and brief enough
to be read at a glance, what humor and irony probably abide
in the endless conversations seem lost.  This is, after all, not
an Eric Rohmer film.  "Portraits chinois" lacks the
transcendent wit of Rohmer's "Autumn Tale," an amusing
story of a middle-aged woman who finds love when she least
expects it in a narrative that easily finds a home across the
ocean.
   Martine Dugowson, who directs and has co-written Peter
Chase's screenplay, mines the Robert Altman field but her
cast of characters play out their roundelay of relationships in
an even more disjointed manner.  Though by the conclusion
we have a substantial idea of each person's makeup--
insecurities, hopes, triumphs and disappointments--Vincenzo
Marano's camera does not focus long enough on any of
these garrulous people (particularly not on Ms. Carter with
whom he spends all too little time), to tell us that person's
private tale of woes and felicities.  Dugowson is best when
she allows some characters to announce their thoughts to us
in the style of Eugene O'Neill's interior monologues in
"Strange Interlude."  The thoughts are, of course, at variance
with what the persons say, and had she used this device
more frequently, "Portraits chinois" could have been a movie
to be enthusiastic about.  After all, Dugowson does want to
point out the disparities between what people say and what
they feel: the few scenes in which she employs the O'Neill
technique work remarkably.
   Filmed in Paris with a concluding, ironic scene shot
apparently on a secluded isle in Italy, "Portraits chinois"
focuses on a group of Parisians who test whether 'tis better
to have lost and lost than never to have loved at all.  Helena
Bonham Carter performs in the role of Ada, an English
fashion designer working in Paris for a noted fashion guru. 
She has just moved into an apartment with her live-in
boyfriend, movie screenwriter Paul (Jean Philippe Ecoffey). 
Living together by habit rather than passion, they refrain from
communicating their dissatisfaction with each other, though in
one delightful moment Ada's thoughts do inform the movie
audience of her anxieties.  Guido (Sergio Castellito), who
assists Paul in writing scripts, is insecure in another way: he
is like the fifth wheel whom everyone else has to fix up with
dates and he spends considerable time and money on his
outfits as though his leather apparel could proclaim his
manhood.  An upcoming fashion designer, Lise (Romane
Bohringer)--who repeatedly thinks "I love you, I love you"--
intervenes by throwing herself at Paul, who at first rebuffs
her, while Alphonse (Miki Manojlovic), an aging but still
handsome film director, has his hands busy with more than
the scripts he assigns his assistant to read.
   "Portrait chinois" is not only an altogether French-style
comedy but one with the look of a woman's hand at the helm. 
Martine Dugowson, who used some of her actors five years
ago in "Mina Tannenbaum," fails this time to elicit the same
audience engagement of that story treating a friendship between
two Jewish Parisian girls, and their disintegration when they
fall in love with the same man.  This time around, when Ada's
bond with Paul falls apart only to become potentially revived,
I couldn't help wondering whether Eugene O'Neill would have
been interested in my thoughts: in two words, "Who cares?"
   There is one priceless line delivered by Paul, the
screenwriter, when one of his fans compliments him on the
ideas in his movies yet receives in return a hostile reply: "You
put two years into a film and everyone thinks he can put his
two cents in...Do you do that with your doctor?  No.  You
pay."  That seems like as good a pretext as any to end this
review now.
