Title
Review for Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937)
Number of Reviews
1

Author
Jon A Webb
     This is a re-release of the classic film, which I believe was the
first full-length cartoon film ever made.  The image has been restored
via computer processing, so this is the first chance modern audiences
have had to see the film as it was first released.
     First, on the imagery: it is impressive, but I wouldn't go to see
it just for that reason.  This is a restoration.  The colors are
brighter than I remember, the edges sharper, but that is all. (In fact,
it's nice that Disney showed respect for the original and didn't try to
"enhance" it a la Ted Turner colorizing.)
     Second, on the movie itself.  It this era when attitudes toward
women have changed so much and are still in a state of flux, it is a
little offensive to see women portrayed as they are here (as Ellen
Goodman pointed out in a recent column).  There are two women in the
film: one is evil and vain, the other is childish, good, hard-working
(she cooks and cleans), and unable to fend for herself without a man's
support (or at least seven dwarves).  She is Nora of "A Doll's House":
she moves from the castle to the dwarves' home to her prince with
nothing in between, except for her prolonged sleep of death.
     I can't get over how childish Snow White is.  Her face is drawn
with the shape of a girl of about eight to ten.  Her voice is also
about that old.  Her attitudes towards the world correspond.  But
still, she is given to her prince in the end.
     At least Disney has moved to older girls over the years.  Ariel is
a prepubescent teenager, and she shows a little independence.
     I took my daughter to see this because I want her to know about
classic films.  I'm not sorry I did it, because she is exposed to all
sorts of role models.  But I do agree with Ellen Goodman; this film
would have a negative impact if it was taken seriously.  Better make
sure you also show your daughter women working and fiction like THE
WIZARD OF OZ, PIPPI LONGSTOCKINGS, and ELOISE.
