Title
Review for War of the Worlds, The (1953)
Number of Reviews
2

Author
Chad Polenz
The War Of The Worlds
Chad'z rating: *** (out of 4 = good)
1953, not rated, 85 minutes [1 hour, 25 minutes]
[science fiction]
starring: Gene Barry (Dr. Clayton Forrester), Ann Robinson (Sylvia Van
Buren), Les Tremayne (General Mann), Lewis Martin (Pastor Matthew Collins),
written by Barre Lyndon, produced by George Pal, directed by Bryon Haskin,
based on the novel by H.G. Wells.
        "The War Of The Worlds" is a good film that wonders just how smart and
powerful humans really are. Here in the United States we'd like to think
we're the most powerful nation ever. We can win wars, but are we prepared to
take on invaders from another planet?
        Gene Barry stars as Dr. Clayton Forrester, the token genius scientist who is
called into a Californian town when a huge meteor crashes in the nearby
mountains. The opening scenes are not very intense, so everything seems
normal. The dialogue and storytelling style is interesting, as it adds a bit
of suspense when we realize the meteor is not all it seems. There is also a
good sense of humanism here as we meet Sylvia Van Buren (Robinson), a regular
woman who is fascinated by Dr. Forrester's work, and her uncle, Pastor
Matthew Collins (Martin), who is one of the most realistic clergy characters
I have ever seen in the movies.
        Three men are left to watch the meteor as it has been causing some fires in
the area in which it landed. One of the men notices a long, metallic probe
sticking out of the meteor. The design to this probe is simple, yet it is
frightening because of the mood. We know nothing about it, only that it must
be  extra-terrestrial in nature. A catastrophe ensues but what makes the film
so intense is that it doesn't move too quickly. It's obvious what's going to
happen in the long run, but it takes the time to establish the necessary
details which are quite exciting. 
        When Dr. Forrester and the local sheriff look for the men, we then see,
through their perspective, an alien spaceship in its entirety which proceeds
to attack and shows just how powerful and ruthless it is. Obviously these
aliens are not friendly, and we get an old fashioned military defense set up
for resistance. 
        Haskin does a good job in establishing the presence of the aliens. We see a
reporter talk about similar events happening all around the world saying,
"Once the alien crafts move on, no news continues to come out of that area." 
        Since the story already has a good sense of humanism to it, it uses that
element to transition to moods of fear and suspense. When one of the main
characters approaches the crafts they are incinerated, after which the
military opens fire to no avail. This entire scene might not be completely
original, but it is interesting to watch because it shows just how primitive
the humans are compared to the aliens.
        Dr. Forrester and Sylvia try to escape via an unreliable airplane. They
crash land and hide in an abandoned farmhouse, which is later surrounded by
three alien ships. This is one of the best scenes in the film and it is
really scary because the suspense has been built up. The fear of the unknown
comes to a boil when the two find themselves face to face with one of the
aliens.
        The two escape and manage to make it to the authorities, all the while we
have really learned a lot about the invaders through the scientific logic and
the characters' rationale. The military resorts to atomic warfare, but even
this effort is futile.
        The last act starts to crumble a little as Forrester and Sylvia are
separated. All we really see are scenes of devastation by the aliens and
people fleeing for their lives. The ending can only been seen as either very
weak or very strong  as it is a case of classic, literary irony, but does
give a sense of poetic justice.
        "The War Of The Worlds" proves everything in nature has a purpose, but it's
far from a work of thematic genius. It's your basic science fiction film and
it works. 
Please visit Chad'z Movie Page @ http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz - over 140
new and old films reviewed in depth, not just blind ratings and capsules.
Also, check out The FIRST Shay Astar Web Page @
http://members.aol.com/ChadPolenz/ShayAstar.html

Author
Dragan Antulov
Whenever a superior civilisation, state or life form
encounter its inferior counterpart, the latter is almost
always subdued or eradicated by brutal force. At least, that
was the case with the state of international politics in
late 19th Century when H.G. Wells tried to speculate about
such practices on inter-planetary level. The result was THE
WAR OF THE WORLDS, one of the first classical sci-fi novels
that, like THE TIME MACHINE by the same authors, established
the sub-genre of First Contact stories. Images created by
that novel later proved almost prophetic, in the
unimaginable and utter destruction of two world wars. The
technology of the destruction was man- made, but for the
victims, faced with certain destruction by unstoppable and
technically superior machines, it didn't make any
difference. The proof for that came in the form of famous
radio-adaptation by Orson Welles, when the ensuing panic
pre-ceded later horrors of London Blitz, Dresden and
Hiroshima. The same feeling of fear and helplessness in
front of the superior technology also resonated well with
the anxieties of people in the atomic era, who used to live
in the shadow of Cold War. Such atmosphere brought third
incarnation of THE WAR OF THE WORLDS, this time in the form
of a 1953 science fiction movie, directed by Byron Haskin
and produced by George Pal, one of the legends of that
particular genre.
The film begins with the narration by Cedric Hardwicke that
describes Mars as the planet of superior, yet dying
civilisation, desperate for rich resources of Earth.
Martians are studying Earth and preparing for the invasion.
First Martian probe lands in small Californian town of Linda
Rosa. Group of scientists from a nearby observatory, led by
Clayton Forrester (played by Gene Barry), comes to
investigate, but the object is too hot and, before it cools
off, Forrester takes much more interest in Sylvia Van Buren
(played by Ann Robinson), daughter of the local priest. In
the mean time, the crew of Martian probe awakens and the
three local policemen guarding the site are the first to be
pulverised with deadly Martian beams. Seeing Martians as
hostile, authorities bring the military, but the best
equipment of this world is powerless against the invaders
from another world. Soon, the world is full of similar
Martian crafts that start their unstoppable reign of
destruction. While the governments of the world are working
desperately to stop the invasion and apparent annihilation
of the humanity, Forrester and Sylvia are trying to escape
Martians that are now roaming the ground, outside their
vessels. After they reach relative safety of Los Angeles,
Forrester and his colleagues are trying to devise a weapon
that would prove to be effective against Martians. But when
even the atom bomb proves useless against Martians, all hope
seems to be gone.
THE WAR OF THE WORLDS was one of the most successful science
fiction films of its time. Its popularity came partly
because the script seemed very much in line with the anxiety
of the times, as well as with the traumatic memories of WW2.
But the main reason was probably in the special effects,
that were state-of-the-art for its times, and that could
even be impressive today. The popularity of this film later
transformed into cult status among the genre aficionados,
and many successful and important science fiction films of
the later age were heavily influenced with it. The example
most often referenced is Spielberg's CLOSE ENCOUNTERS OF THE
THIRD KIND, although mostly in a visual sense, because those
two films are extremely different in their depictions of
First Contact and human reaction to the unknown.
When THE WAR OF THE WORLDS gets compared with another film
that was heavily influenced by it, Devlin and Emmerich's
INDEPENDENCE DAY, it becomes clearly obvious why the former
is regarded as important classic and latter as nothing more
than forgettable "thrillride of the summer". Its director
Haskin was hardly a top Hollywood director, but the group of
talented artists provided a whole series of memorable,
spectacular and even today very effective scenes, especially
those involving destruction of the cities and panic in the
streets. The script itself, written by Barre Lyndon, wasn't
so successful. Many times story meanders along unecessary
subplots, especially those involving obligatory romance
between the macho scientist and damsel in distress. The
ending, although based on the original novel, seems somewhat
too melodramatic and deus ex machina. And I don't think that
H.G. Wells, known for his atheistic beliefs, would be too
enthusiastic about its heavy religious overtones. But,
despite those flaws, and despite the fact that it was firmly
in the B movies category, THE WAR OF THE WORLDS is a classic
that should be seen by anyone who really likes genre of
science fiction in the cinema.
Review written on September 27th 1999
