Title
Review for Terminal Velocity (1994)
Number of Reviews
7

Author
James Berardinelli
Starring:  Charlie Sheen, Nastassja Kinski, James Gandolfini, 
           Christopher McDonald, Melvin Van Peebles 
Director:  Deran Sarafian 
Producers:  Scott Kroopf and Tom Engelman 
Screenplay:  David Twohy 
Cinematography:  Oliver Wood 
Music:  Joel McNeely 
Released by Hollywood Pictures 
     Eureka!  Why didn't I think of it earlier?  It's amazing how
sometimes these things get past a person.  To what am I referring?
Why, TERMINAL VELOCITY, of course.  For a moment, I almost thought this
was a serious movie.  But, upon careful consideration, I've come to a
different conclusion.  I mean, a movie this funny has to be a satire,
right...?  The only problem is, I don't think the filmmakers share my
view.
     It is possible to enjoy TERMINAL VELOCITY once you realize how
truly awful a film it is.  In fact, it's only then when it becomes
fun.  In terms of laughs, there are moments of high mirth.  The
question is: how much of the humor is intentional?  Sadly, given the
way the film was put together, the answer is likely to be
disappointing.  Intent, however, does little to limit effect.  Why else
do people find PLAN NINE FROM OUTER SPACE so engaging? (No, TERMINAL
VELOCITY is nowhere near that quality level.)
     I have never admired Charlie Sheen as an action hero.  He does the
wise-cracking okay, and he's not bad in a fight, but there's one major
asset he lacks:  an accent.  How can you take anyone serious in this
sort of movie when they sound like they were born in this country?
Even Steven Seagal has an accent of sorts ... it's called a monotone.
     Ah, but then there's Nastassja Kinski, and she has the accent.
Given the way she takes command, it becomes apparent who the real
muscle in this movie is.  Sheen is just along for the ride (so to
speak)--a "male love interest."  That doesn't really fit, though,
because he gets top billing.  Then along comes the scene with the
freefalling car, and it all clicks into place.  Sheen isn't the action
hero or the token beefcake.  He's the comic relief.
     The plot takes preposterousness to new levels.  I doubt even
Forrest Gump would be able to suspend his disbelief enough to swallow
what this movie has to offer, worm and all.  It's about a former KGB
agent named Chris Morrow (Kinski) who decides to go skydiving one
afternoon.  Her teacher, a guy with the unlikely appellation of Ditch
Brodie (Sheen), is so intent on getting her into bed that he doesn't
notice when she takes an unsupervised jump out of the plane.  A few
minutes later, she goes splat, and he's left nursing his guilt and
facing a possible manslaughter charge.  However, when he visits the
dead girl's apartment, he learns that things may not be quite as they
look.
     The dialogue is as hard-boiled as it comes.  These are the kinds
of lines that once made dime-store novels so popular.  And it's not
just occasional.  "Pack the bags--we're going on a guilt trip" happens
to be my favorite, but there are lots more to choose from.
     TERMINAL VELOCITY has an unfair advantage over many other bad
movies: it's too raucous to put anyone to sleep.  There are enough
explosions, gun fights, and loud music to arouse the attention of even
the most disinterested viewer.  Laughably preposterous--yes;
boring--no.  It's an experience, all right--albeit one that most people
can do without.
- James Berardinelli (blake7@cc.bellcore.com)

Author
Dragan Antulov
The outcome of the latest bloodbath in Balkans would
probably look like the ultimate humiliation for many
Russians. But, actually, the worst humilitation for that
former superpower lies not in the field of international
politics, but in the field of popular entertainment. Once
mighty empire is reduced to the source of stereotyped
villains and cheesy plotlines for uninspired and unoriginal
Hollywood filmmakers. One of such examples is TERMINAL
VELOCITY, 1994 action thriller by Deran Sarafian.
The movie protagonist is Ditch Brodie (played by Charlie
Sheen), maverick skydiving instructor who takes a flight one
day in order to give parachuting lessons to beautiful
stranger named Chris Morrow (Nastassja Kinski). During the
flight, he flirts with her, but simple glancing away is
enough for her to disappear from plane. The body is found on
the ground, but Ditch is convinced that he had put her
safety on. Faced with the manslaughter charges, he begins
investigation of his own that would lead him to Chris, who
seems to be alive and well. But it doesn't seem that it
would be for long, because both of them are involved in
conspiracy involving smuggling gold, and former KGB
operatives who want to overthrow Russian government and
restore Communism.
To be frank, I didn't expect much from this film yet I was
disappointed. It wasn't the preposterous formulaic plot
(certain mutant crossbreed between NORTH-NORTHWEST and Jan
de Bont's SPEED), nor the cardboard characters the viewers
don't care for. It wasn't even the not so original directing
(one particular action scene is actually literally borrowed
by Renny Harlin's DIE HARD 2). It wasn't Charlie Sheen,
whose charisma and couple of wisecracking lines actually
saved this film, turning it into unintentional comedy. The
biggest disappointment was Nastassja Kinski, who obviously
chose wrong film for her great comeback into the movie
industry. Although she looks charming, she is anything but
believable as tough intelligence operative, Russian to make
things even more interesting. Villains are more convincing,
as usual, although the main ones - played by James
Gandolfini and Christopher MacDonald - doesn't look like
Russian at all. However, although definitely and justifiably
forgettable, TERMINAL VELOCITY is a film that can provide
some entertainment for not very demanding audience.

Author
Raymond Johnston
     TERMINAL VELOCITY is basically a Summer picture.  As the title
implies it has a lot of high speed action.  Buena Vista, the film's
distributor, might have felt that it was too slight to compete with
TRUE LIES or SPEED, and they have now dumped it in the middle of Oscar
season hoping to get something out of it as counter programming.
     TERMINAL VELOCITY succeeds as a slight diversion.  Charlie Sheen
plays a cynical loser, an athlete screwed over by cold war politics.
Enough of his lines are funny, more funny than Arnold or Sly have been
recently, to qualify this as an action comedy.  Sheen manages to be
just dumb enough without going over the edge into parody.  The audience
can feel relatively smart by being a step or two ahead of Sheen without
feeling that Sheen is just too stupid to see the road in front of his
face.
     What really helps TERMINAL VELOCITY is the presence of Nastassja
Kinski.  After making just a few sporadic art film appearances over the
past several years, she comes off a fresh face.  As lovely and
enigmatic as ever, she is perfect as VERTIGO-esque the mystery woman.
Fans of Nastassja Kinski can only hope that this film marks a true
return after a long hiatus.
     The story itself is a lukewarm rehash of Hitchcock thriller
elements, VERTIGO, NORTH BY NORTHWEST, and THE 39 STEPS in particular,
with bits of CALL NORTHSIDE 777 and other films thrown in.  The score
(by Joel McNeely) is quite reminiscent of Bernard Herrmann's Hitchcock
scores.  The action moves fast enough to be enjoyable..  Much of the
film involves sky-diving and plane stunts, which are difficult to make
boring.  In fact, some of the stunts ar quite hair-raising even if they
are obvious blue screen shots.  Add in a few nasty villains including
the creepy QUIZ SHOW announcer (Christopher McDonald), and a halfway
decent action film is almost guaranteed.  It is only after the film is
over that the inconsistencies of the plot become bothersome.
      I would like to give the filmmakers credit for at least coming
up with a post-Cold War thriller plot that uses planes in the
Southwest, but does not involve cheesy South American drug lords.

Author
Scott Renshaw
Starring:  Charlie Sheen, Nastassja Kinski, James Gandolfini,
Christopher McDonald.
Screenplay:  David Twohy.
Director:  Deran Sarafian.
     Most of the time, I see a new movie on its opening weekend, and
it's not just so that my reviews can be fairly fresh.  It is also an
attempt to avoid, to the extent that it is possible, pre-conceptions
based on other reviews.  Such was not the case with TERMINAL VELOCITY,
which had the chance to accumulate a mountain of negative response in
the two weeks between its opening and my screening.  It's difficult to
preduct how those pre-conceptions will affect my own reaction.  In this
case, they allowed me to be pleasantly surprised.  TERMINAL VELOCITY is
frenetic and uneven, but it has a certain bone-headed charm thanks to
Charlie Sheen's improbably dense hero.
     Sheen plays Richard "Ditch" Brody, a skydiving instructor with
something of a reckless streak.  It is that reckless streak which is
blamed when a young woman named Chris (Nastassja Kinski) plunges to her
death while Ditch is giving her a lesson.  The threat of a manslaughter
charge inspires Ditch to do a little investigating of his own, during
which he discovers that for a corpse, Chris appears remarkably lively.
He also discovers that she is a former KGB agent, trying to prevent
other former KGB agents from financing a coup in Russia.  Somewhat
against his will, Ditch becomes Chris' partner in a battle to prevent a
new Cold War.
     The plot of TERMINAL VELOCITY is not exactly what you would call
inspired; it's basically classic Hitchcock crossed with classic James
Bond.  The plot's few twists and turns are spelled out in huge letters
from the outset, and a bit clumsy in the execution.  Equally
distracting is a tone which careens from brutal to near slapstick in
moments, making for a schizophrenic experience which isn't as purely
enjoyable as it might be.  Director Deran Sarafian drives the action
forward relentlessly, which is usually an ideal choice for a film of
this genre, but often seems merely hyperactive here.  TERMINAL VELOCITY
sometimes feels like a cockroach race -- moving fast, but in no
particular direction.
     Its saving graces are the characterizations and interaction of
Charlie Sheen and Nastassja Kinski.  Sheen's Ditch Brody is just a
handful of brain celss removed from his goofball HOT SHOTS! persona,
but it's a character that comes off as extremely refreshing in an
action thriller.  Rather than being either inordinately brilliant or
dumber than virtually everyone in the audience, Ditch is just simple.
He is quite entertaining in scenes where he is infuriated by Kinski's
references to his dim-wittedness, but he maintains a kind of affable
puppy-dog eagerness to please.  In one scene, he opens a cylinder which
is supposed to contain valuable information.  When what he finds (a CD
rom disk) isn't what he expects to find, he taps the cylinder on the
desk to make sure there's nothing else inside.  It's a simple gesture,
but funny because it's clear this is no rocket scientist we're dealing
with.  Kinski is also quite good as the tough, edgy agent.  She is
clearly smarter than Ditch, and it's a credit to screenwriter David
Twohy (THE FUGITIVE) that he lets her maintain the upper hand; even
when Ditch has to rescue her late in the film, it never seems as though
she's merely the "woman in distress."
     That rescue, a wildly inventive stunt, is certainly TERMINAL
VELOCITY's highlight.  Plunging through the air in a convertible
Cadillac, Ditch has to fight off villain Christopher McDonald, free
Kinski from the car's trunk and release his parachute before hitting
the ground.  It's a gag worthy of the best Bond films, and it sends
TERMINAL VELOCITY off on a note of high energy.  But it's not an
isolated moment.  TERMINAL VELOCITY is full of well-staged action
sequences, and Twohy's dialogue is rich with fine one-liners.  Though
it sometimes seems a bit too busy and scattershot for its own good,
it's still a perfectly enjoyable no-brainer worth a few solid laughs.

Author
Ben Hoffman
     David Twohy, who co-wrote THE FUGITIVE, had a "new" idea for a
screenplay.  "What if a woman arranged a sky-diving incident in order
to fake her own death?"  Sounds interesting.   All it needed was a
little better story and better execution, neither of which the film
got.
     Chris Morrow (Nastassja Kinski) comes into the office of
sky-diving instructor, Richard "Ditch" Brodie (Charlie Sheen), saying
she wants to learn how to sky-dive.  And she is in a hurry.  Wants her
first lesson immediately as well as her first jump.  She tells him she
is not athletic but she is determined.  "If I don't do it right now I
may change my mind and never do it."  Ditch says "Okay."
     They get into a plane and take off.  While up in the air, Morrow
diverts Ditch's attention for a moment by saying she sees another plane
nearby.  He goes up front to ask the pilot if he has seen anything; he
has not.  Ditch returns to the back of the plane and finds it empty.
Looking out the open doorway he sees her hurtling to her death below
with the parachute not having opened.  The FAA blames him for
carelessness, for perhaps not having secured the parachute properly,
etc.
     As this is the star, who is supposed to have been killed early in
the film, it should be obvious that whoever hit the ground, it is not
Morrow.  That leaves only one person whom it may have been and the
audience should easily guess who.  Ditch smells a rat and tries to find
out what really happened.
     The movie has several important goofs and suspensions of disbelief
so that it becomes nothing more than hundreds of so-called
"thrillers."  Exciting parachute jumps happen frequently in the film
and there is even a high aerial act (unbelievable) where Ditch
transfers from the wings of a bi-plane onto another plane and crawls in
through the open back.  Sure.  An attempt to mix banter and thriller
does not help the movie.
     Deran Serafian (DEATH WARRANT and BACK IN THE USSR) is the
director.  In addition to Sheen and Kinski, the cast includes James
Goldofini (whom you may recall was Geena Davis' jilted boyfriend in
ANGIE) and Christopher McDonald who was in QUIZ SHOW and GRUMPY OLD
MEN.

Author
Michael J. Legeros
Directed by  Deran Sarafain (GUNMEN, DEATH WARRANT)
Written by David Twohy (THE FUGITIVE, CRITTERS 2)
Cast            Charlie Sheen, Nastassja Kinski, and Christopher McDonald
MPAA Rating     "PG-13"
Running Time    Approx. 100 minutes.
     QUIZ SHOW's Christopher McDonald in a blond wig as a bad-guy!?
That's just one of the guilty pleasures of TERMINAL VELOCITY, a
harmless thriller starring Charlie Sheen as a thinks-with-his-ahem
skydiving instructor who gets wind of a conspiracy after his student
(Kinski) plays Wiley Coyote and lives.  Though slower than SPEED, the
last action sleeper, TERMINAL VELOCITY enough falling bodies and
semi-spectacular stunts to make this trip (almost) worth taking.
     The story is the weakest link, a silly mix of international
intrigue and airborne action.  David Twohy's script has more
liabilities than U.S. Air, but that doesn't deter director Deran
Sarafain.  He thinks he's Renny Harlin and pulls out all the stops,
from a gonzo mother-of-all-jumps jump to a gag stolen from DIE HARD 2.
     The scowling Sheen is always easy to watch, but his female co-star
could use some practice in self-parody.  The Arizona locales are good,
too.  Complementing the mise en scene are a windmill farm and a nifty
jet junkyard.  Too bad the plot poops so soon.  And what's with that
awful music direction?  Imitation Herrman and heavy-metal don't mix.

Author
Rob Furr
     TERMINAL VELOCITY, the new Charlie Sheen vehicle, is a hard movie
to review.  Not because of any inherent problem with the movie itself,
but because delivering my honest opinion is going to make me look like
an idiot.
     Believe it or not, I consider TERMINAL VELOCITY to be well worth
the five-seventy-five and two hours I spent on it.
     Now, I'm *sure* that that statement is going to be met with
disagreement, but that's not what's going to get me in trouble.  What's
going to get me in trouble is the rest of this review.  To wit:
     The first adjective that comes to mind when describing TERMINAL
VELOCITY is "Hitchcockian."  If Alfred Hitchcock was a modern B-movie
director, this is the sort of movie he'd make.  Forget FRANTIC and the
other stale reworkings of the Master's art; Hitchcock at his best was
able to conjure a fearful, paranoia-laden energy that his modern
followers can only imitate.  TERMINAL VELOCITY, on the other hand,
manages to weave something approximating the Hitchcock aura out of its
B-movie roots.  It's nowhere near as good as the Master's best, but, to
be quite honest, I'd rather sit through TERMINAL VELOCITY again than
TOPAZ.
     In fact, TERMINAL VELOCITY is Hitchcockian enough that I'm not
going to describe the plot beyond the basics: There's this
sort-of-rebel parachute instructor who takes a student up, see, and ....
     The plot is even a rough approximation of the Hitchcock plot.  The
general description is Hitchcockian enough; slightly-tarnished Everyman
gets into a situation over his head in which nothing and no-one is what
it seems.  Even some of the specifics are Hitchcockian; the rocket sled
ride (which was visually impressive, but otherwise mostly pointless)
brought the Redcap scene from NORTH BY NORTHWEST to mind (and,
furthermore, there's even a scene that's almost identical to the
classic biplane sequence from that movie.)  There's a MacGuffin, which,
in true Hitchcock style, is never satisfactorally explained (what was
it doing on a German plane?), there's a underlying Cold War air to it,
and so on.
     Now, before you, the reader, fire up your mail program to tell me
that I'm trying to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear, let me qualify
this general statement:
     No, TERMINAL VELOCITY is not a great movie.  There are some
howlingly bad scenes, some rather tasteless scenes, and a conclusion
that is a deus literally ex machina, and if you have a low tolerance
for cheap characterization, then you might want to avoid this movie.
     On the other hand, if you're willing to put up with some stupidity
on the part of the filmmakers, you might stand an excellent chance of
actually enjoying this movie.  On the Furr Scale, TERMINAL VELOCITY is
either a three-star two star movie, or a two-star three star movie.
(The Furr Scale rates movies on ambition as well as quality; you
shouldn't expect a movie that's trying to be AMADEUS to be better or
worse in the same way as a movie that's trying to be EVIL DEAD 2.
HEAVEN'S GATE is a one-star four-star movie ... that is, it's an
utterly rotten movie that was trying to be great, and ROBOCOP is a
three-star three star movie; a darn good movie that was trying to be
darn good.) It's hard to tell with TERMINAL VELOCITY whether it was
trying to be a B movie, in which case it was pretty darn good, or an A
movie, in which case it was merely average.  Considering all in all,
I'm leaning towards three-star two star (an above average B movie.)
     Whatever it is, it's worth a look.  If you're unsure, give it a
matinee performance; it's definitely worth *that*.
