GO (Columbia - 1999) Cast: Desmond Askew, Taye Diggs, William Fichtner, J.E.
Freeman,       Katie Holmes, Jane Karkowski, Breckin Meyer, Jay Mohr,       Timothy Olyphant, Sarah Polley, Scott Wolf Screenplay by John August Produced by Paul Rosenberg, Mickey Liddell, Matt Freeman Directed by Doug Liman Running time: 100 minutes . Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    Doug Liman's GO is almost the certainly the first film in Columbia    Pictures' history where its trademark fanfare and torch-bearing    emblem flickers out to give way to a full-out rave in progress.
It's    the sort of brazenly confident touch which Liman employs throughout    the picture, revealing a fearless flashiness previously unseen in his    breakout debut, SWINGERS.
So frenetic is GO, so aggressively    energized, it'd be utterly exhausting were it not so exhilirating.
Wearing its sardonic sense of humour like a badge of honour, the    snappy screenplay by John August segments the film into three    interrelated sections running along the same 24-hour timeline and    careens through them at a breakneck pace.
We meet Ronna (Sarah    Polley), in desperate need of rent money, who haphazardly engineers a    drug deal which predictably goes awry.
There's her co-worker Simon    (Desmond Askew), who embarks on a disasterous misadventure during a    fling to Las Vegas with friends.
And there's Adam (Scott Wolf) and    Zack (Jay Mohr), the soap opera actors who instigated the deal with    Ronna and find themselves stumbling into a strange series of    quandries.
The entire film, in fact, is essentially a string of escalating    situations which comically spin out of control in quirky and    unexpected ways as its collection of disaffected young characters    recklessly plow through the night.
While each of the vignettes has a    slightly different tone -- Adam and Zack's is the most wickedly    mischievous, while the madcap anarchy in Simon's manic half-hour    contrasts with the sly deliberation in Ronna's chapter -- they easily    meld in this lively black comedy where both Liman and his characters    throw caution to the wind and charge into a pulsating world of    dangerous chic.
Despite possessing elements of action and tension, at heart, GO is a    gleeful comic romp and consequently Liman never takes the mishaps    which befall the characters seriously -- there are shootings, ODs and    other assorted misfortunes, and yet the film doesn't let up for a    moment; it's as if the director feared the picture would stall the    moment he took his foot off the pedal.
While there's nothing    especially remarkable about August's topical, consciously hip    dialogue, the situations in which the characters find themselves are    often very witty and some of the cute little touches are inspired; the    unlikely macerena and feline sage are standout moments.
As good as Liman is in effectively injecting offbeat comedy into    otherwise grim situations of youthful folly, his confident, kinetic    visual work is his chief contribution to the picture.
The film's    urgent pacing is assisted by Liman's bold, appealingly edgy    cinematography; the handheld camerawork pops with energy that    complements the rhythmic soundtrack, and Stephen Mirrione's crisp    editing helps keep GO humming.
While it's Liman's picture, the young ensemble cast is uniformly    solid.
I don't think that her performance as resilient would-be drug    dealer Ronna is vintage Sarah Polley, but it says a lot that she's    nonetheless wholly arresting.
In his North American debut, Askew is    great naughty fun, while Taye Diggs as level-headed friend Marcus is    an unexpectedly strong screen presence.
Katie Holmes, playing Ronna's    timid friend Claire, makes for an appealing collatoral, while William    Fichtner makes a strong bid for leftover Christopher Walken roles with    his memorable turn as the creepy Burke.
For all of its propulsiveness, GO begins to run out of steam before    reaching the finish line, but its primary deficiency is its sheer    narrative unpredictablility; all of the twists and turns in the plot    basically play out in random fashion.
While this certainly helps to    keep the audience on its toes and involved to a certain degree, such    arbitrariness also makes the proceedings feel a bit fleeting and    shallow.
Although PULP FICTION, to which this picture owes its    structural resemblence and shared general aesthetic, completely deals    with redemptive themes, GO really doesn't have any running    undercurrent -- it's cheerfully, blissfully amoral, and consequently    lacks any real resonance.
Ultimately, GO is nothing more than a    thrill ride, but it's a stylish, enjoyable one.
-- Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/ "THE DREAMLIFE OF ANGELS happens to be one of the best French movies since  Jules met Jim.
"                          - Anthony Lane, THE NEW YORKER. . 
