  Seen on 25 April 1998 with Andrea at the SONY Lincoln Square for $10   (including teleticket fee).
*Sliding Doors* takes a look at what would happen if you missed your    train by a few seconds.
Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow) goes to work one    morning, only to find out she's been sacked and then goes to take the    District Line tube home.
(By now you must've figured the film is set    in London).
After missing her train, the camera backs up to the moment    a young girl got in the way and takes her out of the way, so Helen can    get on the train.
Henceforth, the movie skillfully alternates between    the tale of Helen coming home to find her boyfriend Gerry (John Lynch)    in bed with his old girlfriend Lydia (Jeanne Tripplehorn), and the    tale of her just having missed that scene.
So, the stories ensue in similar paths.
The outraged Helen    moves out, dyes her hair blonde (this helps distinguish the two    storylines), and gets involved with James (John Hannah of *Four    Weddings and a Funeral*) as she starts her own PR company, and deals    with Gerry wanting her back.
In the other storyline, the cuckolded Helen struggles along waiting    tables and working two jobs while Gerry "writes his novel" and    continues to cheat on Helen with Lydia, who is pressing for him to    make a break with Helen.
A lot of women I know just hate Gwyneth Palthrow (she's "too    beautiful" or something), but Sliding Doors might change their minds.
She gives an engaging, fresh performance to both "realities" shown in    the film.
John Hannah (who has a delightful Scottish accent) is    equally wonderful as James.
The supporting roles of Anna (played by    another Scot, Zara Turner) and Russell (Douglas McFerran) as Helen and    Gerry's best friends (respectively) also do a wonderful job.
McFerran    is particularly good in his role as Gerry's amused but unsympathetic    confessor.
Lynch and Tripplehorn, especially the latter, are a bit over the top    as the panicky cheat and the bitchy American lover.
But they are not    so over the top that it destroys the romantic comedy mood created by    first-time director and writer Peter Howitt.
It was very surprising to    discover that he had never directed before.
Some of the night scenes    on the Thames with the lights of a suspension bridge on the Thames are    among the best ever seen in a romantic comedy.
*Sliding Doors* features many funny moments as well as touching,    romantic ones.
One of my favorite lines came from Tripplehorn, who    tells Gerry, "We know what we want, but we don't tell you what we    want, but we reserve the right to get angry when you don't know.
That's what makes us so fascinating, and so scary!
" In another, as    Russell laughs at Gerry's plight, he tells him, "If it weren't for you    I don't know how I'd make it a whole week before the next Seinfeld.
".    As ever, I recommend you see it on the big screen, especially for the    full effect of the night scenes on the Thames.
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html. . 
