Starring John Travolta, Madeline Stowe and James Cromwell Directed By Simon West Running Time: 1 hour 56 minutes. Every once in a while comes the standard 'run off the mill' movie.
It's purpose is to tell a simple story, put in some action and comedy, a little romance and drama, and give the star something to do.
The Generals Daughter is 1999's run off the mill movie.
Travolta, looking fat and sweaty, plays Paul Brenner, who is called in to investigate a gruesome rape and murder case.
The victim (Leslie Stefanson) happens to be the daughter of a general (Cromwell) who is planning to run for presidency.
Brenner, and rape investigator Sara Sunhill (Stowe) try to find out who raped and murdered her, starting with shifty suspect Robert Moore (James Woods.
). Simon West, who brought us the standard action movie in the form of Con Air, moves onto standard thriller with this.
All the elements are there: a shifty suspect played a well known character actor, suspenseful music, and naturally a 'thrilling' twist.
Unfortunately, The Generals Daughter performs these elements a little lazier than most other films.
Although there's action, it's not particularly exciting.
The music is way to loud during scenes that should be played quiet.
The twist is largely obvious, and James Woods doesn't get nearly enough screen time to make much of a villain.
The cliched predictability of it all makes a rather boring time for the audience, which isn't what a thriller should be doing.
The cast go through the motions, looking forward for the pay cheque at the end.
Travolta is obviously doing this for the money, and it must be embarrassing to have this film on his C.V along with Get Shorty and Pulp Fiction (and, er, Michael.
) He also puts on one of the most atrocious southern accents heard in western cinema.
Madeline Stowe, who hasn't had some good work for ages, was obviously getting late for the rent payments, and again just seems to be in this film for the money.
James Cromwell delive rs a performance so average, it's impossible to believe this is the same guy from the excellent L.A Confidential.
And James Woods is suitably over the top as the suspect, but just disappears from the story.
The actors all have that pained, distant look that plagues every 'run off the mill' movie.
The script, written by Christopher Bertolini and, bizarrely, William Goldman, is abysmal, and leads largely to the films downfall.
Some of the lines uttered are absolutely hideous, especially during the scene where the two leads are searching through the victims house.
The plot chunders on in it's predictable way, pulling off virtually no surprises.
The film sometimes gets surprisingly brutal for no apparent reason.
And the denouement is so disappointing, it almost made me cry due to it's poorness (and I didn't shed a tear throughout E.T.
). The Generals Daughter is no classic, but it's no Burn Hollywood Burn either.
It's slightly boring, deeply flawed, but it's slickly produced.
Although not really worth paying for, The Generals Daughter is perfect television entertainment: it fills two hours and won't trouble the brain.
But Travolta really should have aimed higher.. . 
