Bowfinger can only be compared (since I do love comparing two films with some of the same plot sequences) with the recent The Muse, which also took a fun look at the thing that we call Hollywood.
But this comedy seems a little duller than The Muse was, it's more of a spoof on all of those B-movies you see in that dusty corner of the neighborhood video store.
Bobby Bowfinger (Martin) is a movie producer, he works out of a dump that he calls Bowfinger International Pictures in the cheap section of Hollywood.
When a member of his troupe of actors comes up with a wonderful action script, (it's called Chubby Rain, and it's about aliens that come down to Earth to fry us all to a crisp in the rain, thus making it chubby) but no movie executive will produce it unless big time action star Kit Ramsey (Murphy) is attached.
So the entire crew just goes up to Kit and says their lines about aliens and such.
This works out perfectly because Kit is paranoid that aliens are coming to take over the Earth, when they finally drive him over the edge (and into a mental hospital) they must find someone that looks like him to play the part of Kit.
Finally, a summer comedy has something that all of the other ones lacked, a good script.
Martin has come up with some of the funniest plot sequences and one-liners that I've seen in a long time.
Topping it off is Heather Graham, she knows exactly how to get around in Hollywood, and her character makes a surprise twist in the end.
Performances are all great, especially Murphy, Kit Ramsey talks a mile a minute (much in the same way of Chris Tucker) and it's really fun to watch what he does with the role.
Also making a wonderful turn in Christine Baranski as a theater veteran that thinks she's a top notch actress.
So if you want to laugh, go see Bowfinger, which gets *** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains some language and passionate make out scenes.
Good Age 12 & Up. A Review by Frankie Paiva The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic. . 
