FREQUENCY (2000) by JOHN SYLVA, associate of OFCS (www.ofcs.org). It's a wonder of a concept, isn't it?
The thought of reaching back in time, changing a certain something that in turn alters the course of your life forever- Is it really possible?
Screenwriter of the new film "Frequency," Toby Emmerich, would try to pass the idea off, but perhaps the concept would be a good one for him, which would allow the first time scribe to reach back in time and fix all of the plot holes and mistakes his script bares.
"Frequency" has its ups and downs, but when it's all over, there's nothing that the film holds effective or memorable enough to have any lasting effect on the viewer.
John Sullivan is a modern man with a modern life, living in the year 1999.
He is a dedicated police officer, with a great deal amount of affection for his single mother, as his father Frank died in 1969.
Everything about John's life is modern.
Frank Sullivan is a man in the past, living in the year 1969.
He is a dedicated firefighter, with a great deal amount of affection for his son, John, and his wife.
Everything in Frank's life is just an element of the past.
How could it be, that parallel universes on Earth are in existence simultaneously?
"Frequency" tells the complicated story of the son, John Sullivan (James Caviezel), who will communicate with his father, Frank Sullivan (Dennis Quaid), over his dad's old ham radio- Who's been dead for thirty years.
The two unite (reunite for John) over the radio like friends would at school after their summer vacation, very un-father/son like, and then play catch up, as Frank has no knowledge that his future has death in store, and John is still shocked that there's a ‘lil John living thirty years before him.
After the two are pretty much on the same page, "Frequency" becomes more of a thriller, as Frank has now overcome what would have been his death, resulting in everything in the future being different- Including the fact that John's mom lost her life long ago to a serial killer.
Quaid and Caviezel are major letdowns in their starring roles, as neither one ever convinces the viewer that they're witnessing an occurrence of the supernatural.
They rehearse the already dull dialogue without caring, and handle scenes of intense drama with mellow mediocrity.
The screenplay isn't written convincingly or focused enough for the idea of the parallel worlds existing to be believable, which is a major chip on this film's shoulder, as in order for us to believe "Frequency," we must suspend our beliefs about the laws of physics, the element of space and time, and the ability and capacity of the human memory.
Emmerich's script is full of too many holes to pass anything off in the film as realistic.
Time is certainly on the character's sides in the film, and it would have been to Emmerich as well if he had polished his work before having it produced into this mess of a feature film.
Gregory Hoblit's follow up to the eerily intense "Fallen" is mostly a letdown, as "Frequency" doesn't seem to build strong enough roots before delving into the numerous subplots that it has.
The film seems to be trying to make a film as magical as quite possibly the best fantasy film ever made, "Field of Dreams," but never even thinks about making a film that plants its own roots.
"Frequency" is a perfect example of when too much is too little, as constant twist after turn is taken, which is usually something I look for in a film, but the catch is: The screenplay isn't written well enough for us to really care.
Although "Frequency" is a film of numerous problems, it certainly has its undeniably touching and exciting moments, but the sloppy screenplay and acting make for a film that is nothing extraordinary.
For a good portion of the film, you're feeling positive about the general environment and story, but as the film progresses, the intriguing setup transforms into an aimless, shallow film possessing a "Sixth Sense"-ish ending that may encourage one to stand up and cheer for a moment, but then after the credits roll, you're left with the burning question, "That's it?
"  Don't get me wrong, I'm a sucker for sentimental, crowd pleaser endings- Just not when a film is as unsatisfying, incomplete, and average as "Frequency" is.
The Bottom Line: "Frequency" is a film of mystery, suspicion, murder, love, reunion, and family...Somewhere, among it all, the effect vanishes into thin air.. . 
