rated PG-13 starring Heath Ledger, Julia Stiles, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Larisa Oleynik, David Krumholtz, Andrew Keegan, Larry Miller written by Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith based on the play "The Taming of the Shrew" by William Shakespeare directed by Gil Junger. In the wake of SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE's recent Oscar winnings, there seems to be no better time to release a modern Shakespeare adaptation.
First-time director Gil Junger's 10 THINGS I HATE ABOU YOU is loosely based on the Bard's "The Taming of the Shrew".
As we find out early in the film, the shrew, Kat Stratford(the Shakespeare references don't end there), is most often referred to as "heinous bitch".
Kat(Julia Stiles) is a very pretty girl, but a very tempestuous one.
To her, being nice is too normal, and she wants to do whatever is unexpected.
her sister Bianca(Larisa Oleynik), on the other hand, is the most popular and gorgeous girl in school.
But the sisters are untouchable because their father(Larry Miller), who fears pregnancy, will not let them date till college.
But then, he decides on a better idea.
Bianca can't date until Kat dates.
It is then that Joey(Andrew Keegan), a superficial asshole as well as a model, decides to pay juvenile delinquent Patrick Verona(dont' mind the pun), played by newcomer Heath Ledger, to take Kat out on a date so that he can have Bianca to himself.
But there is also the new kid Cameron(Joseph Gordon-Levitt), who feels genuine infatuation for Bianca, and will do anything to be near her.
The relationship between Kat and Patrick is basically the staple of the movie, and for the most part, it works out rather nicely.
But that doesn't mean that 10 THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU isn't contrived.
There are moments in the film in which you'll say out loud "Why would anyone ever do that?
" This film is basically nothing more than an insignificant entry into the way-too-crowded teen movie genre, but it's actually pretty fun for the most part, and should make most teens happy.
Julia Stiles(T.V's "The 60's") shows a lot of potential while playing the part of Kat, and it's no surprise that she has a crowded schedule to round out '99, including a couple more Shakespeare adaptations.
10 THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU is dumb for the most part(especially when it blatantly rips off CAN'T HARDLY WAIT), and it is no excuse to not read Shakespeare, but it does deserve some credit for being entertaining.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic akiva@excite.com. http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST. . . 
