Directed by Brenda Chapman and Steve Hickner. Voices of: Val Kilmer, Michelle Pfieffer, Danny Glover, Steve Martin, Jeff Goldblum, Martin Short, Sandra Bullock and Ralph Fiennes. Perhaps the best thing about The Prince of Egypt is that it was directed as if the characters were tangible, and the camera was actually moving through the film's dazzling landscape.
Modern technology has afforded animated films the luxury of looking just like live action films in the way the camera is free to move and focus.
Not only is The Prince Of Egypt pretty to look at, well acted (by the voices, of course) and well animated, but it is really well directed.
This story comes from the Book of Exodus.
It takes us through the discovery of Moses as a baby as he is taken in by the Pharoah.
He is raised as Egyptian royalty (along with future Pharoah Ramses) even though he is born Hebrew.
As an adult he discovers his true heritage and exiles himself from Egypt.
As a Hebrew shepard, God speaks to him through the burning bush.
The second half of the film is Moses' journey back into Egypt to confront Ramses and free the Hebrew slaves.
With some artistic liberties (as the begining of the film claims) the story is faithful.
The blood in the water, the plagues, Passover, the parting of the Red Sea all make their appearance.
Perhaps the only flaw in this film (aside from the abrupt musical numbers, which are a flaw in ALL musicals) is the set of Ramses' goons.
They are voiced by Martin Short and Steve Martin (the latter of which is so recognizable that it is extremely distracting).
Their characters simply do not fit, neither thier physical appearance nor their personalities.
Thankfully, they play a rather small part.
Perhaps what makes them flawed is that they seem more fit for a Disney movie, and Dreamworks clearly wanted to separate themselves from the notion that they are like thier animation counterparts.
The new digital age really makes its impact in animated films.
Digital effects just don't look real in live action pictures, but they make animation astounding.
There are numerous scenes in The Prince Of Egypt which were unachievable five years ago.
The parting of the Red Sea is perhaps not the most amazing (as wonderful as it is.
) The early chariot race, the plagues and the burning bush are all equally powerful.
It is unique to see an animated film tell such a story.
There are no fairy tale elements to this story.
What you see can be found in the bible.
And yet as Moses reaches the top of the mount to present to his people the ten commandments of their god, it is as powerful as Simba's birth and eventual return to Pride Rock in The Lion King (to me, the most wonderful animated film of all time.
) With Disney's latest turn for the worst in terms of animation style and weak story and weaker characters, The Prince Of Egypt stands out as a destined classic.
It has a beautifully unique cinematic style, physically interesting characters and music that, though unnecessary, does not detract from the picture.
The Prince Of Egypt is one of the year's best motion pictures.. . 
