USA.
1998.
Directors - Tony Bancroft & Barry Cook, Screenplay - Eugenia  Bostwick-Singer, Rita Hsiao, Phil LaZebnik, Chris Sanders & Raymond  Singer, Story - Robert D. San Souci, Based on the Poem, Producer - Pam  Coats, Music - Jerry Goldsmith, Songs - Matthew Wilder & David Zippel,  Production Design - Hans Bacher.
Production Company - Disney.
Voices: Ming-Na Wen (Fa Mulan), Eddie Murphy (Mushu), B.D.
Wong (Captain  Li Shang), James Hong (Chi Fu), Harvey Fierstein (Yao), Jerry Tondo  (Chien-Pao), Gedde Watanabe (Ling), Miguel Ferrer (Shan-Yu), Soon-Tek Oh  (Fa Zhou), Pat Morita (The Emperor), Miriam Margolyes (The Matchmaker),  George Takei (First Ancestor). Plot: When the Huns invade China, the emperor puts out a general  conscription calling for one man from each family to join the army to  repel the invasion.
The aging and crippled Fa Zhou is called up.
To  spare him, his daughter Mulan cuts her hair, dresses as a man and goes  off to join the army in his place.
This defiance of tradition upsets her  ancestors who decide she must be stopped.
A demoted temple dragon goes  to offer assistance, deciding the only way it can regain his position is  to help her triumph against The Huns.
I may have been one of the few to have been relatively disappointed with  the 1990s renaissance of Disney animation.
Both `Beauty and the Beast'  (1991) and `The Lion King' (1994) were impressive.
But while many have  too hastily rushed to make comparisons to the great Disney classics,  many other recent Disney's pale in contrast.
`Aladdin' (1992) was a  bland effort only really founded on Robin Williams being a funny man;  `Pocahontas' (1995) seemed more constructed to toe a PC line than  actually be a film; `The Hunchback of Notre Dame' (1996) failed to be  the epic it artistically strove to be due to a flat, mawkish story; and  `Hercules' (1997) took its in-jokey self-referentiality to the point of  annoyance.
I didn't approach `Mulan' with any great expectations and as  a result ended up being pleasantly surprised.
`Mulan' is an adaption of a Chinese legend (although the character's  name has been Anglicized to one word from the original's Mu Lan.
While  also in the creative embellishment stakes the invading army with some  historical dubiousness turn out to be Huns).
In some regards `Mulan' is  like a `Pocahontas' - strong heroine stands against odds to  single-handedly end a war - but with a stronger story and less of a  feeling that it is tip-toeing on eggshells in order not to offend any  minority group.
Certainly the PC values are still there - despite being  an animated film in English, it is scrupulous enough to cast most of the  Chinese character parts with Asian-American actors - but not to the  point it gets preachy and in the way of the story.
And in all other regards it is a satisfyingly well-rounded film - a warm  balance of humour, a likeable obligatory supporting cast of small  talking animal sidekicks, a strong female lead (something that is also  requisite for the new PC Disney these days).
The artwork is modelled on  traditional Chinese lithographs and all drawn in pastel colours.
While  economically drawn, there is at least one artistically (and  dramatically) dazzling sequence where Mulan brings an avalanche down on  an advancing army and is forced to ride the crest of the wave on her  horse.
Amongst the characters Eddie Murphy does a standout piece as a  fast-talking dragon.
Murphy has an absolute ball and makes it the most  memorable of the talking animal mentor/sidekick parts that Disney has  done in recent years - far better indeed than Robin Williams's  overrated, anachronism-spouting turn in `Aladdin'.. . . 
