8MM (Columbia - 1999) Cast: Nicolas Cage, Joaquin Phoenix, James Gandolfini, Peter Stormare Screenplay by Andrew Kevin Walker Produced by Gavin Polone, Judy Hofflund and Joel Schumacher Directed by Joel Schumacher Running time: 119 minutes . Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    A film revolving around subject matter as morally repugnant as the    mythic snuff movie is not one which will exactly inspire a lot of    affection; not only will many find the material so thoroughly    distasteful that a typical knee-jerk reaction is to reject the entire    project outright, but even the more tolerant will find themselves    immersed in a harrowing world of debauchery.
Equally contentious is    that the vague undercurrent of hypocrisy involved in condemning    sadistic voyeurs while neglecting to indict the audience's own    complicity in partaking this inherently voyeuristic tale.
In short,    this is the sort of edgy, unpalatable material which one would expect    to find tackled in a more daring independent film, not addressed in a    big-budget studio production starring Nicolas Cage.
However, despite    giddy overtures to the contrary, it eventually becomes clear that    8MM, a picture which finds detective Tom Welles (Cage) and newfound    sidekick Max California (Joaquin Phoenix) in search of a teenage girl    seemingly murdered in an old 8mm reel, is unwilling to explore the    iniquitous subject head-on and instead uses it as a basis for rote    thriller sequences.
8MM is the newest entry in an oeuvre of mostly unfortunate vigilante    pictures by the Internet's most-maligned director, Joel Schumacher,    whose effectively provocative FALLING DOWN was more than offset by A    TIME TO KILL and his notorious BATMAN films.
(There's some irony in    that 8MM, with Cage's grim, obsessive leather-clad hero and Phoenix's    brash, wisecracking sidekick, captures the ethos of the Dark Knight    legend far better than either of his two pictures in the Warner Bros.
franchise.
)  While it's difficult to defend his recent track record,    it should be accounted for that Schumacher was working from    screenplays by longtime collaborator Akiva Goldsman -- not the most    promising of starting points.
(I'm not sure that even the greatest    director alive could've made anything worthwhile out of the insipid    BATMAN AND ROBIN screenplay.
).    In this picture, Schumacher instead works from a script from SE7EN    scribe Andrew Kevin Walker, and while many comparisons can be drawn    between the David Fincher picture and this one (in particular,    Walker's morbid fascination with the grotesque), from a narrative    standpoint 8MM is largely indebted to Paul Schrader's HARDCORE, which    followed George C. Scott in a father's dogged search of his daughter    into the depths of the underground sex world; similarly, in the    Schumacher film Welles finds himself delving into the seedy    underground pornography scene in order to track down the elusive girl    in the dated film footage.
There's less of a personal tie here --    Welles is essentially a mercenary figure -- but the story is given a    paternal angle through an affecting performance by Amy Morton as the    missing girl's mother, and imbued with emotional shadings through    Welles' transformation into an avenging angel.
The film's early sequences depicting Welles as an adoring family man    with wife Amy (Catherine Keener) and a baby daughter carry immediate    significance -- 8MM is less interested in establishing a background    of normalcy than it is setting up his downfall, hence the cuddling,    kissing and I-love-yous give way to uncomfortable silences and    increasingly infrequent phone calls from the road as the film    progresses.
With Amy as his metaphoric lifeline, Welles' deepening    disaffection and hardening is revealed by his cold and distant manner    as he spirals into the nightmarish abyss.
It's not very profound nor    particularly subtle -- there are even overly explicit lines of    dialogue like "There are things that you're gonna see that you can't    unsee: they get in your head and stay there" and "If you dance with    the devil, the devil don't change, the devil changes you" -- but it's    nonetheless effective to contrast the stony-faced Welles blankly    staring at lurid acts of sexual torture with the one whose loathing    of violence is so pronounced that his screening of the girl's filmed    slaughter prompts exaggerated cringing and horrified shudders.
Curiously, Welles' screening of the snuff film, clearly one of 8MM's    most crucial sequences, is far less effective than it ought to be,    largely due to the failure to build an ominous mood of dread leading    into the scene.
It's also not helped by Mychael Danna's percussive    predilection -- if ever there was a picture which cried out for a    moody Howard Shore score, it would be this.
While the procedural vignettes which follow are competent if    unconvincing -- Welles doesn't come off as nearly resourceful enough    to trace the girl's path so handily, though clues and breaks in the    case clearly pop up in order to expedite the storyline -- the    picture hits its stride when it shifts locales to Hollywood and links    Welles up with Max, a punky adult store clerk who guides him through    the Los Angeles underground sex scene.
The film's strength is in its    seedy, revulsive depiction of this shadowy world, in no small part    due to the sets and lighting; in stark contrast to the almost    wholesome, cheerful version of the mainstream pornographic world    drawn out in bright colors in BOOGIE NIGHTS, 8MM uncovers the flip    aspect of its hidden, seamier side, taking the film into damp, dark    basements bathed in cold, clinical neon light.
There's a palatable    sense of danger in these gritty scenes, and the frequent glimpses of    miscellaneous S&M footage (surprisingly graphic for a studio picture,    though no moreso than in, say, David Cronenberg's VIDEODROME) in    conjunction with the bombardment of disturbing perversions help to    create a thoroughly unsettling ambiance fraught with tension.
While    Schumacher does not capture the same atmosphere of helplessness and    despair as Fincher in SE7EN, this film is even more consistently    gloomy -- it may not be perpetually overcast, but it's not nearly as    jokey and only sporadically dabbles in humour.
During its    exploration of this depraved underworld, the relentlessly bleak    imagery of 8MM is effectively disquieting.
Unfortunately, the picture slips gears shortly thereafter as it seems    to lose its nerve and transforms into a fairly routine thriller,    employing standard chase and fight scenes in a disappointing move    which feels like a commercial concession.
Aside from an overbroad    performance by Peter Stormare as "the Jim Jarmusch of porn" and the    Scooby Doo-like revelation of a surprise villain, it's mostly solidly    staged -- there's a sequence which momentarily rivals Clarice    Starling's breach into Buffalo Bill's lair in THE SILENCE OF THE    LAMBS for tension, and another which momentously hinges upon a    decision, similar to the climax of SE7EN -- but it squanders the    sordid tone in favour of familiar cathartic slam-bam heroics and    vengeance.
The inclusion of self-psychoanalysis by the villains was    also an unwelcome choice; while occasionally gripping (the villain's    rant in the Fincher picture worked on sheer acting prowess), it's    usually just goofy, and in 8MM's case, unintentionally laughable --    when one unmasked villain meaningfully readjusted his appearance and    launched into a speech about the banality of evil, I almost groaned    aloud.
When Welles screamed "Why?
" at his tormentors, I wasn't    counting on such an elaborate and detailed explanation.
Though 8MM's conventional latter half is substantially less    enthralling than the scenes leading into it, the strong visual work    of the picture is still reasonably successful in evoking a creepy and    foreboding atmosphere.
Ultimately, the most disturbing thing about    the film is how close it comes to becoming something truly memorable    before veering back into safer territory.
-- Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/ "X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them  in on the whole conspiracy.
Half the time I have no idea what they're  talking about.
" - Martin Landau. . 
