Starring: the voices of Tony Goldwyn, Minnie Driver, Rosie O'Donnel, Glenn Close, Lance Henriksen, and Wayne Knight. Synopsis:  Orphaned as an infant when his parents died in the African jungle, Tarzan (voice of Tony Goldwyn) is adopted by the she-ape Kala (voice of Glenn Close) and raised among apes as her surrogate son.
Tarzan becomes adept at jungle skills, but because of his obvious differences he is not quite accepted as an ape by his adopted father Kerchak (voice of Lance Henrikson) and others.
When Tarzan stumbles across friendly zoologists Jane Porter (voice of Minnie Driver) and her father as well as evil poachers he must decide between his ape responsibilities and the lure of becoming human.
Rosie O'Donnel offers comic relief as Tarzan's buddy Terk, a gorilla with a New York accent.
Opinion: This animated gem puts an interesting spin the tale of Edgar Rice Burroughs' Tarzan of the Apes, this time painting a story about earning acceptance.
Adults will enjoy watch this version of Tarzan because he's not a wimpy, passive, politically correct hero.
With knife in hand, young Tarzan goes one on one with a killer leopard and roars the Tarzan victory cry.
And when he gets trapped in the hold of a ship, he gets a crazed look in his eye and begins to exhibit the wildness and claustrophobia of a cornered animal.
On the other hand, children will LOVE this flick because it tells the tale from a kid's point of view.
Here's this young kid Tarzan growing up slightly hyperactive, trying to come to grips with himself while surrounded by big adult figures approving and disapproving, encouraging and discouraging.
He surfs down winding branches and careens through the trees like a monkey to the tune of rhythmic pop music.
He faces down danger or runs away from it.
He has exciting adventures and sticks to his values.
He finds his way.
Take the whole family.
This one's worth it.
Copyright Š 1999 by David Sunga This review and others like it can be found at  THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com. . 
