As Message in a Bottle opens, we see an expanse of deep, ocean water and the name, Kevin Costner, is emblazoned across it.
Your first thoughts are, Is this a sequel to Water World?
But rest assured, it is not.
It is a marvelous, weepy type of love story that's set in today's world.
Robin Wright Penn, who is always sensational, is perfectly cast as Theresa Osborne, the divorcee who lives and works in Chicago with her nine-year old son.
She has brought him to the East Coast to spend some time with his father, who has remarried and has a new baby.
In an attempt to relax, she spends a couple of days vacationing on the seacoast where she finds a bottle with a message inside.
The message is written to Catherine, and it is filled with love, the kind of love that Theresa wants and needs.
She takes the bottle and message back to Chicago, to the newspaper where she works, and her boss [Robbie Coltrane] writes a column about it.
The column prompts many letters including two that tell of finding similar messages.
With the help of her computer and friends like Lina Paul [Illeana Douglas], Theresa tracks down the sender of the messages.
He is a ship-builder living in the Outer Banks of North Carolina.
She convinces her boss to let her visit the area for a follow-up story.
Once there, she meets and falls in love with Garret Blake [Kevin Costner].
The real treasure of the film is the portrayal of Garret's father, Dodge Blake by Paul Newman.
This man has certainly aged well.
He's still nice looking, but it is his believability as the loving, caring parent who is coping with his own demons that impresses you most.
It is a long time until next year's Oscar race, but I hope that the Academy remembers him for a Best Supporting Actor nomination.
He deserves it.
Although most people will say that this is a `chick' flick, it truly appeals to anyone, male or female, who has feelings.
There were many men in the audience who couldn't hold back the tears.
If you didn't even care about the love story, you'll be impressed with the cinematography.
There are some of the prettiest shots that I have ever seen, not only of the ocean, and the other beautiful locations, but all the shots are special, especially the lighting and the shadows of the love scene.
It shows how a love scene should be filmed.
There is nothing salacious about it.
The lighting is love itself.
Hollywood should take note that a good movie can be made without explosions, nudity, or swearing.
It's early in the year to give a high rating, but this has to be at least a B+.
I do want to see it again, and I'll keep recommending it. . . 
