There are not very many veterans of World War II alive today and those are at least seventy years of age.
To most viewers of The Thin Red Line the battles of Guadalcanal seem to have merely lasted a few days instead of the long, bloody, dragged- out siege that it was.
Director Malick has tried to convey the futility of war through the eyes and reactions of the soldiers, particularly those of Private Fife who has come to love and appreciate the native life of the pre-battle islanders.
Using flashbacks Malick jumps from savage shooting to children swimming underwater, and back again.
There are too many of these cutaway shots.
A little symbolism goes a long way.
Many of the `stars' who appear are nothing more than cameos.
John Travolta, portraying the General in charge, looks surprisingly reminiscent of John Hodiak, a handsome star of the WWII era.
George Clooney has but one scene as well.
It is said that his role was longer, but was cut.
Bill Pullman is there, too, but don't blink or you'll miss him.
He says nothing.
One of the best vignettes is by Woody Harrelson as a well-trained and dedicated career soldier.
His act of heroism is so well enacted that it's almost overlooked for what it is.
Others have lauded Nick Nolte, as the psychotic colonel who is determined to secure the `hill' despite the costs, as an Oscar caliber role.
It is almost one-dimensional, however, and Sean Penn'' portrayal of the sergeant serving under his command, is much better.
Some of the best acting is from the unknown actors.
Adrien Brody, Jim Caviezel and Ben Chaplin are standouts.
Their characters seem a bit confusing at times as they resemble each other and all those uniforms are alike.
Even the officers forego wearing insignia.
It is especially difficult to identify some of the voice-over narration.
Several of the scenes are unusually disturbing such as the American GI who carries pliers with him to extricate gold teeth from the deadand dying.
And there are the dogs feasting on the corpses.
It is very long, needlessly long and so I only give it a B-.
I don't want to see it again, and neither does my husband, a WWII veteran.. . 
