Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre) Released in the UK by Buena Vista International on April 7, 2000; certificate  15; 145 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1. Directed by Norman Jewison; produced by Armyan Bernstein, Norman Jewison,  John Ketcham.
Written by Armyan Bernstein, Dan Gordon; based on the books "The 16th Round"  by Rubin 'Hurricane' Carter and "Lazarus and the Hurricane" by Sam Chaiton,  Terry Swinton.
Photographed by Roger Deakins; edited by Stephen Rivkin.
We all have talents that mystify other people -- some folks can work complex  equations in their heads, others can run for miles without getting short of  breath, and we all know some show-off who can cartwheel like there's no  tomorrow.
I can't do any of that stuff, but I do know Bob Dylan's  eight-minute ballad "Hurricane" off by heart.
Impressive, eh?
The song is the first track on Dylan's 1975 album "Desire", and tells the  story of Rubin 'Hurricane' Carter, a black middleweight boxer from New Jersey  who angered intolerant locals with his cocky handling of success.
In 1966,  when the authorities saw a chance to frame him for murder, they jumped at it.
"How can the life of such a man be in the palm of some fool's hand?
" Dylan  asked, and for quite some time Ellen Burstyn, Muhammad Ali and a whole host  of other celebrities and activists were equally concerned.
Despite his status as a cause célčbre, though, it took twenty years for  Carter and his co-defendant to be released from prison.
When they were,  according to Norman Jewison's film "The Hurricane", it was largely due to the  efforts of a commune of Canadians and a young boy they were schooling.
The  kid, Lesra Martin (Viscellous Reon Shannon), had bought Carter's  autobiography for twenty-five cents at a used book sale.
This event changed  the course of both his life and that of the fighter.
Carter (Denzel Washington), as Lesra discovers from his reading and we learn  in the film, had an upbringing heavily influenced by racial persecution, and  vowed to make weapons out of his body and mind.
In prison, his shell grows  harder, and he becomes a vessel of mistrust and hate.
"There's no more Rubin  Carter," he says in his book.
To his wife: "I'm dead.
Move on.
Bury me.
". Somehow Lesra is able to strike up a correspondence with him; he DOES feel  alive when he's writing, because he doesn't have to look at the dehumanising  prison walls.
The communication develops into friendship and love, and  results in the boy and his surrogate family dedicating their lives to  Carter's appeal.
One of the most involving things about "The Hurricane" is  how it demonstrates the power of the written word -- showing that it can free  souls, stimulate emotions and overcome violence and evil.
Another is its  portrayal of how Rubin, who had so thoroughly trained himself to use hatred  as a means of survival, earned liberation by having the courage to feel love  and trust.
This is fantastic material -- the kind of thing we're talking about when we  refer to "triumphs of the human spirit".
It's regrettable that Jewison has  not presented it with more panache.
Gone is the powerful staccato rhythm of  Dylan, and instead we get such ludicrous dialogue as "You're going down,  punk!
" and "Jeez... you're having a smoke for breakfast?
" There are tears,  speeches behind bars and far too much sentimental scoring.
Dan Hedaya gives a  ludicrous performance as a corrupt cop who lurks in corners grimacing and  growling.
The movie is made with such lack of edge that at times it runs the risk of  alienating us, like a made-for-TV weepie.
But the story somehow survives, and  remains potent, and that is a testament to how great a tale it is.
Just as  'Hurricane' himself championed over oppressive forces, so too does his legend  transcend a sloppy telling, and remain one worth knowing.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
