     Just in time for Father's Day, "The General's Daughter" swaggered onto the big screen last weekend with a heartwarming story about a dysfunctional father-daughter relationship in the military.
If you can't say anything nice, my mother taught me, don't say anything at all, so I'll keep this short.
There's a cast of good actors doing their best with lines like "She could change a tire, and bake a hell of a key lime pie.
"  That line falls to James Cromwell, in his heavy mode here (see "L.A.
Confidential") as the General in a sober scene as he recalls his beloved murdered daughter.
The daughter is well played by Leslie Stephanson while she lasts -- we even get to see the tire-changing scene.
John Travolta is the Army cop investigating her murder, and he does a better job than the writers have any right to expect with their dialogue.
Madeleine Stowe as his co-investigator and once-and-possibly-future love interest is beautiful as always, but shows few signs of acting.
Most of the rest of the characters are colonels -- Clarence Williams III (of the original "Mod Squad"), John Beasley, Timothy Hutton, and James Woods (whose cagey scenes with Travolta are the best in this whole sorry affair.
)  One of these colonels is in the movie for no discernible purpose other than to be a surprise bad guy, and you won't have much trouble guessing which.
Early on there's one of those .007 plot-irrelevant action scenes which explodes and disappears without a trace.
Then it's on to the sex-and-titillation stuff, which involves your usual stars-looking-at-porn-with-distaste, and then a particularly vicious and gratuitous rape scene where the girl is stripped and spread-eagled to tent pegs, calculated to shock and horrify but still grab the attention with a nicely backlit breast.
It's the worst kind of sleazy cinematic pandering.
The whole thing is shot and paced like a bad John Grisham TV movie.
There's heavy-handed exposition, tortuous plot twists and connections, and material just plain too ridiculous to turn on the projector for.
The general's daughter, a captain in Psy-Ops, explains her work to Travolta: "Mostly we just fuck with people's minds.
"  In this movie, our minds never get that lucky.. . 
