Cast: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, Blythe Danner, William B. Davis, Armin Mueller-Stahl, John Neville, Terry O'Quinn, Glenne Headly, Tom Braidwood, Dean Haglund, Bruce Harwood. I have mixed reactions when it comes to The X Files.
I'm a big fan of the show, so naturally I'd be a fan of the film.
And I did like the film.
It has all of the elements which makes the television series enjoyable: aliens, government conspiracies, etc etc.
But overall, it's TOO much like the show.
In other words it would have made a great episode, but there's nothing really there to merit me having to pay for something that I get to see for free every week.
I would think that when you make a feature film out of a television series that is still in production, there would be some reason to do so other than money.
Apparently not.
The story being told in the film should be one that just simply can't be told within the confines of the small screen.
But aside from the score being a little bit grander, the screen a little bigger, and a couple of visual effects, there's no reason for this to be a feature film.
It's hardly even a sweeps week episode.
And as far as the specifics of the story go, what plot elements haven't we seen before in the series?
When the film begins, the X Files division has been shut down (seen that).
The powers that be then try to split FBI agents Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) apart (seen that).
Scully plans on quitting the FBI (seen that).
Mulder then asks Scully "How can you say that?
After everything we've seen?
"  (seen that).
Shadowy characters seek out Agent Mulder to tell him secrets (seen that).
Those shadowy characters are soon killed (seen that).
The other shadowy characters decide that instead of killing Agent Mulder (which would of course, solve all their problems) that they will take Agent Scully away from him and do harm to her (seen that).
Mulder will attempt to discover aliens, but doesn't even bother to bring along a pocket camera to document his inevitable discovery (seen that).
In the end, Mulder and Scully have experienced something which makes them want to go on and pursue their work, even though they have no hard evidence of anything at all.
Yep, I've seen that too.
Then there are new elements of the story which perplex me.
For example, usually when the evil powers that be decide to cover something up, people die.
Here, they buy some kids shiny new bikes in exchange for their silence.
Ok.  Then, it's revealed that the aliens that the government had been conspiring with (and which aliens were we having the conversations with, the black ooze aliens or the snarling monster aliens?
) have double-crossed them.
For some reason, they blow this off and just continue to go along with the plan as scheduled.
Seems to me that would change some motivations.
Obviously not.
Please don't get me wrong with all of this though, the film did entertain me.
It also managed to entertain the friend that went with me who hasn't even seen an episode of the show.
So I guess it did what it intended to do, which is to get both fans and non-fans of the show to buy a movie ticket.
I just wish The X Files had been more feature-film worthy.
[PG-13]. The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling URL: http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/ Email: chuckd21@leading.net. Š 1995-1998 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.
No reviews may be reprinted without permission.. . 
