Directed by David Fincher (Seven, The Game, Alien 3).
Starring Edward Norton and Brad Pitt.
Just by looking at these three names, I knew that this was going to be a absolute great movie.
And it was.
The movie is all about Joe, or the Narrator, or whatever his name is.
Joe (Edward Norton) is a typical character from a Douglas Coupland novel.
Thirty years old, living on his own in his IKEA furnished luxurious apartement, and is having a well-payed white-collar job at a car manufacturer.
Picture perfect for any Generation X.
But he has insomnia and hasn't slept in 6 months.
Just like a Coupland character!
So this Joe is out to seek a cure for his insomnia.
He found it by visiting group-sessions who are talking about their illness and phobia and other stuff.
Here Joe finds all the compasion he needs, so he can sleep.
But after a while, a Marla (Helena Bonham Carter) came to these sessions, and Joe found out that she's just like Joe, not having a certain illness or phobia.
This drives Joe crazy, so he goes back again to the insomnia-days.
While in his insomnia days, he meets Tyler Durden (Brad Pitt) on an airplane.
The two talked, and after Joe's apartment blew sky-high, he stayed at Tyler's place.
Both in search for a meaning of life, and soon they were starting this club, The Fight Club.
Even though the first two rules of The Fight Club are "You never talk about The Fight Club", The Fight Club spreads across the nation so fast.
And then everything goes so fast, suddenly you'll see that The Fight Club has turned into a revolution movement, because Tyler Durden said "The things you own end up owning you.
". The ending is amazing.
You can choose whatever you like, because Fincher has put it in a certain way so you can figure out the film as you like.
All and all, I think that this is the best movie since Pulp Fiction.
It's kinda like an answer for people asking what and who this Generation X are, and what is really on their mind.
And a lot of fighting with minimalized gun shots (only 2 or 3 shots).
Indra Moeljadi is looking for a Fight Club nearby his IKEA furnished apartment.. . 
