 Galaxy Quest Reviewed by Christian Pyle Directed by Dean Parisot   Written by Robert Gordon and David Howard Starring Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Daryl Mitchell, and Enrico Colantoni Official Site: galaxyquest.com Better Sites:  http://greatsci-fimovies.hypermart.net/galaxy_quest/. http://www.moviefanonline.com/previews/1999/galaxy_quest/galaxy_quest.htm Grade:  B+. Somewhere out in space, the peaceful Thermians are being slaughtered by a belligerent race of lizard people.
Their last hope:  Commander Peter Quincy Taggart and the valiant crew of the Starship Protector, heroes the Thermians know from Earth's broadcasts.
The Thermians travel to Earth to find Taggart.
One little problem:  the Thermians don't know that the "historical documents" they've received from Earth are actually episodes of "Galaxy Quest," a TV series that was cancelled in 1982.
Eighteen years after the show ended, the cast of "Galaxy Quest" is still in costume, making personal appearances at conventions, spouting catch phrases, and lamenting the lack of other opportunities.
William Sha - uh, I mean - Jason Nesmith (Tim Allen), who played Commander Taggart, is an egotistical boob who doesn't realize how much his former co-stars hate him.
Alexander Dane (Alan Rickman) played alien scientist Dr. Lazarus and now whines constantly that he was once a Shakespearean actor.
Gwen DeMarco (Sigourney Weaver) wore a tight, low-cut as Lt. Tawny Madison, whose only job aboard the Protector was to repeat what the computer said.
Laidback Fred Kwan (Tony Shalhoub) was the ship's engineer, and Tommy Webber (Daryl Mitchell of TV's "Veronica's Closet") was the child star at the steering wheel.
A contingent of Thermians led by Mathesar (Enrico Colantoni of TV's "Just Shoot Me") scoop up a hung-over Jason and whisk him up to a working replica of the Protector to negotiate with General Sarris, leader of the lizard people.
Accustomed to personal appearances with fans who earnestly believe the show is real, Jason only realizes that he's actually been on a spaceship after the Thermians beam him back to Earth.
By that afternoon, the Thermians are back for more help, and this time Jason brings the rest of the cast, including Guy Fleegman (Sam Rockwell), who played the ill-fated "Crewman # 6" in one episode of "Quest.
"  To survive, the cast will have to learn how to play their parts for real.
"Galaxy Quest" does for science fiction television what "Austin Powers" did for 60's spy movies.
The script is smart and on target.
It's filled with funny moments that satirize ridiculous plots, motifs, and characters common to the genre as well as attacking the obsessive fan culture that still surrounds shows decades after they're cancelled.
My favorite sequence has Jason and Gwen racing through the bowels of the ship to stop it from blowing up when they're confronted by a passageway lined with huge metal choppers sliding menacingly up and down.
Gwen:  "It doesn't serve any purpose!
Why would they even build anything like that!
"  Jason:  "It was on the show!
"  Gwen:  "The show was badly written!
" . The cast is filled with comic talent, so much so that I was a little bummed that Tony Shalhoub and Daryl Mitchell didn't get more screen time.
Sigourney Weaver stood out (in more ways than one - considering the way her costume was cut to accentuate her breasts), reminding me of the comic flair she showed years ago in "Ghostbusters" and "Working Girl.
". On the down side, the losers-rise-to-the-occasion-and-become-heroes plot is predictable and thin.
More bothersome to me, however, were the serious moments as Thermians are tortured by the evil lizard guys.
These scenes weighed down the comedy that followed.
The theme of genocide (the small band of Thermians aboard the ship are the last of their race) seems inappropriately heavy for this movie.
Bottom Line:  There's more laughter than lulls, and I had a great time.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review:  http://www.madreview.com/main.html. . 
