STEPMOM Cast: Julia Roberts, Susan Sarandon, Ed Harris, Jena Malone, Liam Aiken, Jason Maves Director: Chris Columbus Screenplay: Gigi Levangie, Jessie Nelson, Steven Rogers, Karen Leigh Hopkins and Ronald Bass, based on a story by Gigi Levangie Running time: 125 minutes Australian theatrical release: January 21, 1999 Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 2 stars. It appears as though everybody and their dog wanted to contribute something to Stepmom.
What other reason could explain the seven scriptwriters (one not credited) and eleven producers involved in the production?
It is ironical, then, that the greatest fault in this film lies in its screenplay.
Despite solid efforts from an ensemble cast, there is only so much that actors can do.
Julia Roberts and Susan Sarandon tried desperately to make Stepmom work, only to find themselves with too much screen time, and too little to say.
Blunder blockbuster Armageddon suffered from a similar problem, with nine writers and no hint of a coherent storyboard.
At least this time, director Chris Colombus occasionally builds some worthwhile dramatic moments.
With Stepmom Colombus departures from his trend of lightheaded movies; the best known being Home Alone, Mrs. Doubtfire and Nine Months (that's why this "serious" film didn't have "by the director of Home Alone" on its posters).
When Stepmom drifts into drama and confrontations, you get the sense that Colombus is unsure as to how to handle his material.
Many moments go way too long and are emphasized over sufficiently, and much of the dialogue could have been said in far fewer words.
Consequently, Stepmom loses interest in scenes that could have been edited into something tighter and more structured.
With so much speech, a good half-hour could have been slashed from its 124 minute running time.
Isabel (Julia Roberts), a professional photographer, is the girlfriend of workaholic lawyer Luke (Ed Harris), a divorced father of two children.
She regularly takes care of Anna (Jena Malone), who has just started dating, and Ben (Liam Aiken), a little kid with an aspiration to be a magician.
Luke's ex-wife Jackie (Susan Sarandon) dislikes Isobelle and sees her as a threat to the family, so naturally she is quick to find fault in every mistake Isabel makes.
But Jackie is soon forced to reevaluate her views on life and love upon the news that she has cancer, and not long to live.
The two women form an unlikely friendship and respect for each other whilst Luke fades into the background, presumably working on an important case.
Allow me to stress that Luke - the most important male character (with the possible exception of Ben) - performs an annoying disappearing act.
Lead female roles in film are not easy to find nowadays (though we've had some good ones lately with My Best Friend's Wedding and There's Something About Mary), but the novelty of having Julia Roberts and Susan Sarandon dominate the screen is quickly worn off.
The always-reliable Ed Harris is given enough ground to make a solid performance, but not enough screen time to make a memorable one.
As Harris performs his disappearing act, something even greater than a gifted actor vanishes - the film's father figure is also missed.
Whilst it's great to see a couple of talented women star in movie that is primarily theirs, it is foolish to ignore a male actor when one is desperately needed (especially one of the caliber of Ed Harris).
For everything that it is not, Stepmom at least provides realism and maturity.
The seven scriptwriters take a good shot at looking into sensitive family themes, which consist primarily of divorce and re-marriage.
The film is most painful when it looks through the eyes of the children, although some of their pain is a little exaggerated - yelling and crying is one thing, subtly examining their desire for love and acceptance is another.
I guess this is something that one writer could do better than seven, twenty or a hundred.
Chalk that down as a message to the makers of Stepmom: hire fewer people and do a better job.
Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of course, you already have) or for any inquiries or feedback. Read more of my reviews at Alphalink Movies: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au. . 
