Since his New Nightmare, director Wes Craven has released several terrible films, like Mangler and Vampire in Brooklyn.
However, the end of 1996 brought Craven's Scream to the big screen to frighten more people.
The film stars Neve Campbell (The Craft) as Sydney Prestcott, a character much like Heather Langencamp's in Craven's first big horror hit, A Nightmare on Elm Street.
She plays the innocent virgin who the maniacal killer preys upon.
The plot is a simple as any horror movie.
A psychopath with a machete or a knife or some sharp weapon preys on the youth of a small, quiet, rural town.
In this movie, someone takes their love of movies one step too far.
The film bled talent, no pun intended.
It featured some hot young stars and a few old ones.
Courtney Cox (TV's Friends), co-stars as a tabloid reporter.
Drew Barrymore (Boys on the Side) plays Casey Becker, the first victim in the crime spree.
Liev Schrieber (one of the kidnappers in Ransom) appeared Cotton Weary.
But the appearance of Henry Winkler (THE FONZ!!!
) as Principal Himbry took the taco.
If you've seen the movie, you already know that he's another victim, but how do you kill Fonzie?
Anyhow, the story revolves around Sydney's obsession with her mother's murder.
And on the one year anniversary, the killer strikes again, murdering innocent teenagers left and right.
Some references were made to the original horror films of the late 70's and early 80's.
For example, the school's janitor was dressed exactly like Freddy Kreuger, minus the sharp glove.
And Sydney's boyfriend's last name, Billy Loomis (Skeet Ulrich, Albino Alligator), is the name John Carpenter gave to his main star, Dr. Loomis, in the Halloween series.
The climactic end of the movie throws a wicked curve ball, as the killers are revealed.
Throughout the movie, clues are given here and there, but too many for anyone to pinpoint the actual killers other than by guessing.
Truthfully, I don't think anyone would've guessed the killers identity until he took off the creepy mask.
If you liked Wes Craven's New Nightmare, then you'll definitely like this witty, bloody horror movie.
If you like to Scream the go see it.
Grade: A-, **** out of *****. . 
