Reviewer: M.P.
(bootsector@hotmail.com). In a world where being conceived the natural way is looked down upon, and being genetically altered is the only way to get a real job.
A story is born, a story that shows us a brief glimpse of what could be and of what is mere fantasy.
Gattaca is about the struggle to survive against the impossible odds.
Vincent(Ethan Hawke), is an invalid who has a dream of flying into the stars because he doesn't feel like he belongs.
He is bared from decent jobs because he is an invalid, a child who's conception was left to chance, he wasn't genetically altered.
Vincent goes against all the odds that a genetic heart condition will kill him in his early 30's finds a way to get past the system.
Everything goes great until there is a murder at his place of work, 'Gattaca'.
The ensuing investigation brings him closer to Irene(Uma Thurman) a co-worker assigned to help the police investigation of the murder.
The murder threatens his survival more than seemingly possible since he had nothing to do with the crime in question.
This story is build up very well and the pacing of it builds up very well.
The story is set in a very sterile environment... something similar to our earth today, albeit a bit further in the future.
And the director lets the audience know what the circumstances are and how the protagonist finds himself in his situation.
Although this portion of the movie is a bit slower than the rest of the movie, it is required and well balanced to the rest of the movie.
Unlike many other Sci-Fi movies of late, this one gives you the background to its complex setting and brings the audience further into the story.
The setting is marvelously created, and everything seems fairly accurate with at the very least current technology.
Although some things can be questioned, the movie does not leave gaping holes about the setting, or situation, what holes are there can be overlooked.
This movie shows details that many other movies have intentionally avoided, so if the sight of urine in a jar or bag bothers you, you may be advised not to watch this movie.
BUT don't get me wrong, these are merely props and aren't the focus of the movie although they are seen from time to time.
That had to be mentioned unfortunately because not all people react the same way to seeing bodily fluids.
A few small things didn't make much sense, and in my opinion seemed a bit predictable.
But these things although predictable to some extent are well placed and for the most part not blatantly obvious.
Aside from Vincent's real brother just happening to be assigned to the murder case(must use willing suspension of disbelief).
Then again no story can be perfect and without flaws, but that one point is a tad bit big... things like that don't happen very often.
The acting in this movie is spectacular!
The casting for this movie in my opinion is perfect.
Although Ethan Hawke does look a bit on the clumsy side in some places, and there is at the very least one mistake in the script(wrong word used in dialogue).
Ethan, plays the role of Vincent almost perfectly.
His mild clumsiness, shows that the real Vincent is flawed and human, and at the same time shows a certain grace that gives credit to the role.
Although the acting by Ethan is very good in my opinion, it wont be getting him an Oscar nomination.
Uma Thurman, who plays the role of Irene, is just stunning.
The role couldn't have been cast better.
She plays the role very well, although the role is a bit stiff at times.
Uma, seems to glow in this movie(I could be wrong here simply because I am male and find her very attractive).
Jude Law (Jerome, the person whose identity Vincent borrows), also puts in a spectacular performance and plays the part of Vincent's accomplice in duping the system really well.
He seems like he belongs in the role.
And the conditions of the role demanded a fair amount of patience, and the demands were more than met.
All the acting in this movie is of exceptional caliber, Ethan and Uma shine through marvelously and are in themselves good reason to see this movie.
Despite its flaws, and in some cases style oddities, this movie is well worth the money you pay to watch it.
Although I am partial to Science Fiction movies in general, this one is in my humble opinion one of the better ones that have been made in a rather long time.
And to top it all off, there are some subtle messages and ideas in this movie.. it will leave you thinking, and if it doesn't you should at least find the story entertaining.
I rate this movie 3.5/4. . . 
