To think that the two people behind the Ace Ventura movies would combine to make a movie like this.
It is true, Tom Shadyac (director of Ace Ventura) is behind the camera, and Steve Oederkerk (director of Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls) has written the screenplay in one of the year's most touching films.
Robin Williams brings all his hilarious baggage and his dramatic side with him playing the title character, Patch Adams, a med student who believes that laughter is the best medicine to help his patients.
Discovering his talent to help people while admitted to a mental institution, Patch sets his goal of becoming a doctor.
Toting a fake white overcoat to disguise himself (actually, it's a meat packing jacket), Patch weaves in and out of hospital rooms making people laugh.
If at least a smile doesn't form across your face while watching Williams make hospitalized children laugh, then you must be closely related to the Grinch.
I'm not at all surprised to say this is an excellent movie.
At the same time, it is a long distance from being a perfect movie.
But you have to applaud a film when it has the ability to make you laugh and cry so much in a limited 2-hour period.
Despite the obviously serious premise of Williams helping those in need, there is still plenty to laugh about here.
One scene, in particular, will have to go on the record shelves for one of the funniest moments in movie history.
And yet, the filmmakers never stray too far and fail to make the point that they're attempting.
Robin Williams is again wonderful - heck give the man another Academy Award.
He's the heart and soul of Patch Adams, balancing the movie on his shoulders like a scale about to tip at any moment.
Amazingly, he never lets it drop, or even budge, for that matter.
He gets and excellent supporting turn from Philip Seymour Hoffman, playing another doctor who at times questions Patch's methods of viewing death, as something humorous.
Monica Potter is also memorable as his self-conscious love interest, who's studying medicine herself.
There's lots of emotions to feel in this movie.
Whether they are good or bad, the entire project is so heartwarming you may have the urge to hug the people sitting next to you.
Patch Adams is a movie each and every human being should see.
Jamey Hughton was a 1999 Writing Finalist in the YTV Achievement Awards and writes a Published Column in The StarPhoenix (Saskatoon Sk.
Canada).. . 
