Antz is the first animated effort form Dreamworks Pictures.
It comes with promise, and delivers extraordinarily.
Featuring the voices of Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Jennifer Lopez, Sly Stallone, and Danny Glover, Antz becomes one of the most visually beautiful, compelling films of the year.
Being completely computer animated, Antz's animation seems unbelievably real, as the movement of characters is particularly smooth.
Ants that walk and talk may seem like a stretch, but after viewing this film, you'll think it's a reality.
Watching Antz, you are put into the mind of a creature much smaller than yourself, and you see how scary being an ant might really be.
Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz, and Paul Weitz have put together a screenplay so clever, you wonder why garbage like A Night At The Roxbury ever makes it to theaters.
Antz tells the moving story of Z, voiced by Woody Allen, a nice, rather shy working ant and his journey to find freedom.
Z is your typical ant, rather scrawny, and a hard worker, who hangs out with Weaver (voiced by Sylvester Stallone), a mighty, well known and respected ant.
Z thinks his ordinary ant life is going nowhere, until he meets Bala (voiced by Sharon Stone), the charming princess of the ant colony.
The first real groundbreaking sequence in Antz is between Z and Bala, as they tango away late at night at an ant bar.
After a few obstacles, the two end up on a journey to find the land of Insectopia, which is believed to be, metaphorically speaking, ant Heaven.
Along their journey, they encounter wicked insects, menacing children, and much more, which all provide for vast, beautiful scenery, animated to perfection.
Like the 1995 adventure from Disney, Toy Story, Antz is a meaningful film that will open your eyes to the other beings alive in this world.
Unlike Toy Story though, Antz features some adult humor that may be out of the league for many children, who are the primary targets here.
Antz is an epic that children and adults alike can enjoy together.
The Bottom Line: Funny, beautiful, and well-written.
The best animated film of 1998.. . 
