Korben Dallas (Bruce Willis) is an ex-fighter pilot in the 23rd century who  now flies a cab.
His life takes a sudden turn when a beautiful young woman  named Leeloo (Milla Jovovich) falls into his cab.
Leeloo is a perfect  entity, sent to Earth to fight the ultimate evil, which comes every five  thousand years.
Four groups are searching for Leeloo: Priest Vito Cornelius  (the excellent Ian Holm), whose line has assisted in the fight against evil  for centuries; Jean-Baptiste Emmanuel Zorg (the wonderful Gary Oldman) and  his flunkies, who work for the ultimate evil; an evil warrior race known as  the Mangalores, who were betrayed by Zorg; and the Earth government, led by  the ever uncertain President Lindberg (Tom "Tiny" Lister Jr.) and his chief  General, Munro (Brion James).
Now Korben and Leeloo have to meet up with  Cornelius, find four sacred stones needed to fight the evil, and get back to  Earth in just a few days or all life in the universe will be destroyed.
Along the way Korben will meet such peculiar characters as a cross-dressing  radio host named Ruby Rhod (Chris Tucker), a galactic Diva named Plavalaguna  (Maiwenn Le Besco), and a mugger (Mathieu Kassovitz) with a very interesting  hat (don't ask, it has to be seen).
"The Fifth Element" is not a movie designed for all tastes.
Viewers will  most likely be divided into two groups: those who don't like their movies  far-fetched and ridiculous, and those who love their movies to be comically  bizarre (I fall into this category).
The first group is going to loathe this  movie because it represents all they detest in cinema.
The plot (despite my  rather confusing description) is child like in its simplicity.
The  characters are really nothing more than cartoon characters given human form;  and all the movie's events are so ridiculous these people will no doubt be  hitting the stop button after about thirty minutes.
The other group is going  to have an absolute blast.
These people won't care about how ridiculous the  movie is, so long as it entertains with fantastic visuals and off-the-wall  humor.
Is "The Fifth Element" entertaining?
It is, quite possibly, the most  flat-out entertaining movie I've seen this decade.
It has no qualities one  would associate with a great film, but if that's what you're looking for  when you watch this movie you've obviously heard nothing about it.
Rather  than giving a deep, meaningful, Oscar worthy (you know, boring) picture, Luc  Besson ("The Professional") instead chooses to give us a movie which  promises to be just one thing - fun.
"The Fifth Element" delivers on this  promise in spades.
Dramatic acting is obviously not going to be of supreme importance in a  movie like this, but comic acting is all important.
Bruce Willis does quite  a good job as the jaded Korben Dallas, dead-panning nearly everything but  occasionally letting just a trace of amusement at his surroundings leak out  (watch for his scene with the mugger; it's too funny for words).
Milla  Jovovich delivers a very amusing performance since she spends over half the  movie speaking in gibberish.
Word has it she actually made up her chattering  language as she went along.
Chris Tucker's ("Friday") performance is  something of an acquired taste.
When he first showed up on screen, I'll  admit, I was rather shocked; but as the film went on, his character grew on  me (maybe like fungus, but whatever works).
The two actors who truly deliver  outstanding comic performances are Gary Oldman ("Lost In Space") and Ian  Holm ("Brazil").
Oldman hams it up like you've never seen as the  multi-zillionaire Zorg.
Zorg has a limp, a southern twang, a bizarre  wardrobe, and an even stranger haircut.
In the hands of anyone else, this  character would have been a pathetic failure.
Oldman actually manages to  make Zorg likeable enough that a small part of you wants to see him get  away, if not win.
Ian Holm displays some of the best comic timing I've seen  from an actor, well, anywhere.
The way he delivers some of his lines is  nothing short of perfection (one of my personal favorites was Ian Holm  saying, "We're going to save the world my son.
" Korben responds with,  "You're um, heh, gonna save the world?
" Holm says, in an exasperated tone,  "Yes!").
"The Fifth Element" is one of those marvelous movies which contains scenes  that will stick with you for days, weeks, possibly even months afterwards.
My favorite scenes were Leeloo's reconstruction in a futuristic (though very  peculiar looking) laboratory; Korben's cab being chased by the police  through the futuristic city; and the Diva's scene where she sings a  beautiful (though very alien) opera while Leeloo fights a horde of  Mangalores.
Those first two I mentioned show Besson's visual imagination in  two very different ways.
The scene where Leeloo is being assembled is  something quite extraordinary.
It shows her skeleton being assembled  quickly, piece by piece, then muscle and tissue being created over it, and  finally skin being created.
It's a remarkable scene in a remarkable movie.
Korben's car chase gives us a chance to see most of Besson's futuristic  city, and it's a sight to behold.
The city is comprised of massive  skyscrapers, surrounded by row after row of flying cars, going up as far as  the eye can see.
The scene with the Diva singing her opera while Leeloo  beats up the Mangalores is exquisitely filmed (I must have re-watched that  one scene five or six times).
It combines Leeloo's martial arts style  fighting with the singing flawlessly.
Again, none of these scenes are going  to win any major awards, but they're ever so much fun to watch.
Those who have seen Besson's work on "Nikita" and "The Messenger" know he is  one of the more erratic directors in Hollywood.
"Nikita" was a suspenseful  tale which bordered on masterpiece, while "The Messenger" was quite the  opposite.
His work on "The Fifth Element" is far closer to that in "Nikita".
One of Besson's trademarks is his frantic pacing throughout the film; this  didn't work in "The Messenger", but it works perfectly in "The Fifth  Element".
The movie runs 126 minutes, which should have felt like an  eternity, but with the combination of Besson's quick pacing and constant  laughs, it feels more like 45 minutes (I'm not kidding).
The soundtrack to  "The Fifth Element", by composer Eric Serra ("Goldeneye"), is one of the  film's strongest points.
It's such a bizarre mix of different types of music  (everything from something which sounded Jamaican during the car chase to  beautiful instrumental music at the film's conclusion) that it could have  sounded awful, but each song is somehow perfectly suited to its scene.
I'd  recommend the movie to anyone who likes their movies more than a little on  the strange side and give it four and a half out of five stars.
Comments?
Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net. Past reviews can be found at: http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or  http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem. * * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.. . 
