Directed by Jonathan Lynn.
Screenplay by Mitchell Kapner.
Starring Bruce Willis, Matthew Perry, Natasha Henstridge.
Running time: 100 minutes.
Rated AA.
Reviewed on March 16th, 2000.
Sometimes, comedy is easy.
Romance, sports, teen angst -- these topics  and others have often been mined for the purpose of making us laugh.
(Every now and then, it's even done successfully.
) Other subjects have  proved more difficult to capture successfully in a comedy format,  however.
Of these, few have been more elusive than the gangster genre.
"The Whole Nine Yards" is the latest attempt to marry mirth and the mob,  telling the screwball tale of Nicholas "Oz" Oseransky (Matthew Perry).
Oseransky's life is less than idyllic: he is trapped in a loveless  marriage, he's forced to pay off his late father-in-law's enormous debts,  and he's a dentist.
Just when things seem as though they can't get any  worse, Oz recognizes his new next-door neighbor as Jimmy "The Tulip"  Tudeski (Bruce Willis), a feared hitman who turned state's evidence  against Chicago's Gogolack gang and has recently been released from prison.
Oz does his best to ignore the situation, eventually becoming friends  with Tudeski.
But Oz's scheming wife Sophie (Rosanna Arquette) has other  ideas.
She forces him to fly to Chicago to inform mob boss Yanni Gogolack  (Kevin Pollak, with a hilariously ridiculous accent) as to The Tulip's  whereabouts and collect a finder's fee, while at the same time telling  Jimmy what Oz is doing, in the hope that Tudeski will bump off her husband.
To make matters worse, in Chicago Oz meets Jimmy's wife Cynthia (Natasha  Henstridge) and instantly falls in love with her.
It turns out that she,  Jimmy and Gogolack have entered into an agreement whereby if two of them  die, the third gets ten million dollars.
It is this deal which drives the  final two-thirds of the movie, as the different players try to bump each  other off, and Oz tries to save Cynthia while not losing his own head.
Like most mob comedies, "The Whole Nine Yards" faces the difficult task  of juxtaposing laughs with the sheer brutality of the gangster  profession.
Some movies deal with this by indulging in the truly bizarre,  like Tarantino's "Reservoir Dogs".
Others simply tone down the violence,  so that the jokes seem less incongruous.
"The Whole Nine Yards" does  neither, and the result is a somewhat uncomfortable viewing experience.
I  found it difficult at times to laugh at the sitcom-level humor of the  film, immediately after seeing four men blown away in a hail of gunfire.
Neither of the principals really seems to embrace the material, perhaps  themselves uncertain how to reconcile the movie's plot with its comedic  intentions.
Willis looks like he's cruising in neutral as Tudeski.
While  The Tulip is given a number of interesting personality traits, they never  really come together to form a convincing, complete individual.
Perry's  Oz is basically just his Chandler Bing character from the TV series  "Friends" transplanted to a different milieu; even some of the vocal  mannerisms are identical.
He's likeable enough as a sympathetic Ordinary  Joe caught up in events beyond his control, but just doesn't have the  on-screen presence to really absorb the viewer into his plight.
Better are the supporting characters, particularly Amanda Peet as Jill St  Claire, Oz's receptionist who harbors secrets of her own.
Peet clearly  relishes her role, and her electrifying performance helps her steal  scenes from the more tepid Willis and Perry.
Star of the TV sitcom "Jack  and Jill", Peet appears to be a comedy star on the rise.
Michael Clarke  Duncan also has fun as Frankie Figs, one of Tudeski's hitman confreres.
"The Whole Nine Yards" is set for the most part in Montréal, and is  attractively photographed.
Surprisingly, though, it takes little  advantage of the Francophone milieu.
The movie is liberally sprinkled  with the French language (and Arquette sports a grotesquely exaggerated  Québecois accent), but virtually none of the humor arises from the unique  culture, beyond a running gag about hamburgers and mayonnaise.
This is  unfortunate; were the comedy to arise more naturally from the film's  situations and surroundings, instead of resorting to routine one-liners  and pratfalls, I think I would have found the violent aspects of the plot  less jarring and easier to swallow.
Like last year's "Analyze This", "The Whole Nine Yards" is an only  partially-successful mob comedy.
It has its moments, especially when Peet  is involved, but the time between laughs is often lengthy, and many of  the jokes just don't pack much of a punch, especially when paired with  the violence of the gangster lifestyle.
This is a film which desperately  needs to eschew the conventions of the sitcom format and more wholly  embrace its subject material.
In essence, instead of falling back on a  tired comedy format, "The Whole Nine Yards" needs to go the whole nine yards.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TheWholeNineYards.html. . 
