Starring: Harrison Ford, Harrison Ford, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline Obradors. Ingredients: Boyish old island rascal, young female magazine exec, true love. Synopsis:  In this romantic comedy, a spunky, career-oriented gal named Robin (Anne Heche) and her nerdy boyfriend Frank (David Schwimmer), decide to take a vacation to a remote tropical island in French Polynesia.
Harrison Ford plays Quinn, a divorced exec who has gotten rid of his business and now lives a simple life as an island bush pilot.
When a business emergency requires that Robin fly off the island, she hires Quinn, but the two get stranded alone on a deserted island when their plane is damaged in flight.
To make matters worse, they are attacked by pirates.
On the bright side, they are falling in love.
Can a 56-year-old islander and a 28-year-old yuppie get along, much less fall in love?
Opinion: Usually in the summer, we expect to see a Harrison Ford adventure movie.
But SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS is not an adventure movie; it's a fluffy, lighthearted, romantic comedy reminiscent of camping.
Imagine the kind of situations you'd put in a comedy involving two people on a funny camping trip: running around lost with maps in hand; equipment that doesn't work; bad luck weather; a situation involving a snake; grass skirts from GILLIGAN'S ISLAND; falling from great heights and plopping down safely in water.
It's all there in SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS.
The movie even throws in a lost World War II plane.
While not meant to be realistic or even remotely original, it's all an excuse to show how a man and a woman might quibble and argue their way into falling in love.
So the only important question is, do Harrison Ford and Anne Heche have the chemistry for it?
He's country; she's city.
He's island; she's mainland.
He's laid back; she's a go getter.
He's 56; she's 28.
Do opposites attract?
In the movies they do.
Ford and Heche deliver.
Copyright Š 1998 by David Sunga This review and others like it can be found at  THE CRITIC ZOO: http://www.criticzoo.com email: zookeeper@criticzoo.com. . 
