Betty Sizemore (Renee Zellweger) is a waitress at a little diner in Kansas City.
She's married to an abusive bully named Del (Aaron Eckhart) who sells used cars and is involved in some pretty shady dealings.
It's no wonder that the highlight of Betty's day is to watch the videotape of her favorite soap opera, "A Reason to Love" each evening.
While watching her show one night, she witnesses the murder of her husband by two strangers over a drug deal.
The killers don't see her and Betty goes into a kind of amnesiac state, forgetting her real life and suddenly believes she is the ex-fiance of the fictional Dr. David Ravell (Greg Kinnear) from her television story.
She leaves Kansas for LA in search of her beloved (in her mind) doctor, not knowing she has two very upset hit men on her trail in director Neil LaBute's "Nurse Betty.
". Neil LaBute is not known for his bouts of lighthearted whimsy - if you witnessed his previous films, "In the Company of Men" and "Your Friends and Neighbors," you'll know what I mean.
"Nurse Betty" hardly seems the kind of story the more darkly natured director would take on for his third work.
But, it is a good decision and marks LaBute as a multitalented up and comer in the industry.
The rather conventional concept of the heroine going on the lam to escape the vengeful bad guys is skewed 180 degrees, in the script by newcomer James Flanberg, with the intro of Betty's unusual amnesia, triggered by Del's untimely, violent (though not entirely undeserved) death.
The sudden shock to the system propels her to fall under the delusion that "A Reason to Love" is real life and that she jilted Dr. David a year and a half before.
Realizing the error of her ways, in her confused mind, she packs her stuff up and heads to LA to make things right with her handsome ex-fiance.
Meanwhile, the two hit men, Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris Rock), are frantic when they realize that both Betty and a Buick loaded with their drugs are gone.
They, too, head across country looking for clues as to where Betty will show up.
Charlie, at first, thinks that Betty is a "cunning, ruthless woman" who coldly took off with the drugs that were the cause of Del's death.
As he and his cynical partner Wes try to find her trail, Charlie begins to fall for the pretty Betty as he gazes at her photo and builds an image of her in his mind as they cross the country.
By the time the pair hit LA, Charlie is thoroughly smitten by the idea that he has fallen for Betty.
Just when I was wondering how the heck the upcoming collision between Betty and the boys would be handled, the charming, darkly funny screenplay by Flanberg takes a twisty turn when Betty performs a heroic act while searching for her beloved Dr. David.
(This is where the "nurse" in "Nurse Betty" comes into play.
) The real fun of the film is watching this part of the story unfold, so I'm not going to discuss it.
Let it be said that LaBute and his team of filmmakers - on both sides of the camera - make the twists work in a way that is funny, sad, entertaining and, in the end, extremely satisfying.
Renee Zellweger is an interesting actress who made a successful splash with "Jerry Maguire," but hasn't had a chance, since, to show her acting talent in a larger venue.
With "Nurse Betty," this changes.
Zellweger shows the comedic talent to hold the lead of the film and acquits herself in both the funny and dramatic bits.
Morgan Freeman, one of America's finest actors, hasn't had the chance to really show his acting chops for quite a while.
(Of course, the great actor always gives his best to his films, even if the films themselves don't.
) Here, he gets the chance to create an interesting, sympathetic character - who happens to kill people for a living.
As Freeman goes from the tough, deadly businessman to the romantic, smitten "suitor" of Betty, you can see why he is one of the best in the business.
The rest of the cast is first rate, too.
Chris Rock, as the acerbic, cynical Wesley has an inherent mean streak that gives his no-nonsense killer an edginess that lingers right to the end.
The comedic background of the actor helps to lend a dark funniness to the edge.
Crispin Glover ("Wild at Heart"), as Kansas reporter Roy, and Pruitt Taylor Vince ("Heavy") as Sheriff Eldon Ballard have small, but significant roles - displaying good humor, too - especially in the film's shoot 'em up finale.
Greg Kinnear gives the right note to his dual perf as soap star George McCord and his TV doctor persona.
Allison Janney, as George's producer, helps flesh out the background with a tight, funny performance.
Tia Texada ("Paulie") is both bright and sassy as the Hispanic women who befriends Betty (remember the heroic act I mentioned?
) after "Nurse" Betty saves her boy friend.
The production team behind the camera complements the telling of this offbeat tale with a nice harmony.
Veteran cinematographer Jean-Yves Escoffier ("Cradle Will Rock") gives a unique and interesting look to each locale the characters visit in their separate journeys.
Costume, by Lynette Meyer ("Your Friends & Neighbors"), is sometimes kitschy, especially with Betty dressed in her waitress outfit looking like Dorothy from "The Wizard of Oz.
" (To reinforce the Kansas image, Betty is called "Dorothy" at one point.
) Helmer LaBute moves the story and its characters right along with nary a moment wasted.
If you're looking for a dark, funny, sometimes caustic, comedy that is a challenge to the mind - something the summer film fling doesn't often allow - make tracks to the theater and ask to see "Nurse Betty.
" It will be the right prescription.
I give it an A-.. . 
