        In "The Net," Sandra Bullock raced against a band of computer  hackers who sought to erase her identity.
In predictable fashion, she  was able to outsmart the fiends, saving herself from extinction, in the  final scene of the movie.
Writers John Braccato and Michael Ferris have  teamed up again, this time creating a less formulaic and more  unpredictable thriller in "The Game," with winning results.
Michael Douglas is San Francisco investment banker Nicholas Van  Orton.
A composite of his previous cutthroat and tempermental  businessmen from "Falling Down" and "Wall Street.
"  Throw in the bad luck  he experienced in "Fatal Attraction" and "Disclosure," and we have his  latest character.
Nicholas is a miserly, modern-day Miss Havisham, who  chooses to rot away in his wealth with nothing but reheated food and  monotonous financial reports.
How could this six hundred million dollar man become such a cold  fish?
While not seeking to find the drive behind his personality, "The  Game" constructs a past through home video-style flashbacks.
In them, we  see a young, happy boy with all the luxuries of the rich life his father  brought to the family.
Unfortunately, the happiness subsides after he  witnesses his father leaping to his death from the roof of their mansion  at age forty-eight.
Today happens to be Nicholas' forty-eighth birthday,  but in his life its just like any other day.
Dark rooms, cold floors, and bland gray suits abound as Nicholas  tends to his daily business of being filthy rich and alone.
Director  David Fincher (Seven) skillfully crafts the image that Nicholas is a  small cog in the grand scheme, passively living while his fortune builds  effortlessly.
Wide screen views of him within his mansion or office  focus on the amenities of a lavish life rather than on Nicholas as a  charater.
We care about the ineffectuality of these scenes and not about  the sad, unfortunate man within them.
The spark plug in the Van Orton family comes in ne'er-do-well  Conrad, played by a hyperactive Sean Penn.
Conrad has part of the Van Orton  estate, but does not allow it to rule his life.
Seeing Nicholas' misery,  he decides he needs to have some fun.
For his birthday, Conrad gives  Nicholas the opportunity to play a reality based role playing game,  sponsored by the ominous Consumer Recreation Services.
In order to play,  Nicholas endures extensive physical and mental tests, while also  completing endless personality questionnaires.
As the representative  tells him, this game will provide him with what his life lacks.
In Nicholas' case, he is bound to have some excitement thrown  into his life.
It begins while he watches the financial news and the  newscaster interrupts to tell him the rules of the game.
Essentially,  whatever happens, happens.
It will not ruin the plot to say that while  doing business, he cannot open his briefcase, a waitress spills wine all  over him, he almost drowns in a car accident, and he endures rifle fire.
While all this is inexplicable to him, the waitress (Deborah Unger)  reveals that she was bribed to dump drinks on him as part of a prank.
"The Game" descends into the twisted and macabre as Nicholas  begins to realize that he cannot bail out of his gift.
The game overlaps  and overtakes his life when his house is vandalized and his company's  funds are tapped and drained.
Even his friends seem connected to his  downfall, and the waitress, who turns up again, has more than just drinks  to spill on him.
Technically, Fincher has captured the essence of the thriller  through a great use of his camera.
The initial expansive views of  Nicholas in his home, seemingly possessing control of his life, begin to  close in on him.
As the pressure on Nicholas rises, we find him trapped  in elevators, running down alleys and dank hallways, and locked in cars.
Sweat and strain replace the calm and command that Nicholas once  possessed.
The paranoia runs deep and even Conrad does not appear  trustworthy.
After all this, we have quite a way to the end, and I choose not  to spoil it.
I find it hard to imagine that the ending will be guessed,  since "The Game" twists where "The Net" plodded straight ahead.
Given  the way Nicholas treated people in the beginning, its fun to see this  representative of Douglas' despicable characters be paid back.
With the  tables turned, the great world that Nicholas has inhabited and ruled does  not feel quite so comfortable anymore.
The acting on the parts of Douglas and Penn, using their  stodgy and wild-boy images respectably, is amazing and makes this plot  seem more credible.
The supporting cast are faceless enemies within a  destructive machinery reminiscent of Stephen Spielberg's "The Duel.
"   While the supporters could have held greater speaking parts, but the  writers and Fincher smartly choose to focus on Nicholas fighting an  uncontrollable monster.
"The Game" is an exciting, nerve-wracking thriller, and I highly  recommend it.
It runs over two hours, but feels as fast as a runaway  car hurtling toward the San Francisco Bay.. . 
