Starring-Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume Canet and Robert Carlyle Director-Danny Boyle Canadian Rating-14A Released by 20th Century Fox - 02/00. When I envision a beach, I think of an undisturbed sandy white plain, with waves of glaciated water lightly caressing the shoreline in peaceful transition.
Leonardo DiCaprio's latest offering, vaguely titled `The Beach', is nothing of the sort.
It's more like a rocky terrain of jagged frustration and unneeded obstacles, with the oncoming waves pounding the shore with such force that the effect should be deafening.
Instead, it's nothing more than a repressed whisper.
But enough with the metaphors.
Unlike a large fragment of the population - namely younger females - I do not consider myself to be a diehard Leo fanatic.
I do concede that the kid has acting abilities, which were showcased in a certain boat movie involving an iceberg.... Oh, yes - `Titanic'.
Given the incoherent catastrophe surrounding him, DiCaprio's resolute performance is actually one of the positive aspects of `The Beach'.
Playing Richard, an American boy wishing to seek refuge from the boring squabble of everyday living, DiCaprio is believable and compelling.
I wasn't concerned about being properly persuaded by the actor, and he delivers sufficiently.
Sadly, Danny Boyle (whose work includes the maniacally macabre `Shallow Grave' and `Trainspotting') offers no sign of destination in the director's chair.
After a set-up bubbling with intriguing promise, Boyle reveals his movie serves no purpose.
Perhaps after the first half of shooting was completed, the director sat back to contemplate the question `Sooo... where are we going from here?
'. The script is weak and meandering, but at least `The Beach' looks pretty.
The story follows Richard, who hooks up with a French couple (Guillame Canet and Virginie Ledoyen) in a cockroach-infested Thailand hotel and goes on a mission to reach a secret beach.
A map to this supposed paradise was given to Richard by an eccentric Brit named Daffy (Robert Carlyle), who commits gory suicide immediately following.
Once the determined trio reach the destination, they find 1) an enormous marijuana plantation; 2) a band of willful civilians led by the authoritative Sal (Tilda Swinton); and 3) an enclosed island paradise unlike anything they've ever seen.
This is where the seductive visual radiance of `The Beach' really proves to be a valuable asset.
Aside from that, DiCaprio and a terrific soundtrack, the film is nothing more than a pulpy mirage of lost meaning.
Even through a series of weird and supposedly profound events leading up to the denouement, I was unable to determine the real purpose of `The Beach'.
Perhaps I'm just daft, but I was confused.
Some of Boyle's irregular humor helps matters....like a surreal sequence that pits Richard, bordering on insanity, into a live-action video game in the jungle.
But unfortunately, all other vital aspects are drowned in favor of the meaningless plot.
The romance between Leo and co-star Ledoyen is flat and uninviting.
For such a fuss to be made over their romantic connection, more sparks should have definitely been generated.
Tilda Swinton is quite good as ring leader Sal, but she also gets dealt a character too conventional to be really striking.
It all boils down to the prettiness of `The Beach'.
Those nice aerial shots of the lightly tinted ocean, the glimmer of the sand once they arrive.... all this photographic style and glamour seems to be in a movie different from the murky final product.
Also be forewarned of the violence level, which is extreme, particularly due to some of the grisly after-effects of a shark attack.
At any rate, the plentiful swarm of young ladies dedicated to Leo are going to find squat to like about `The Beach' (save for Leo himself).
It's also not a film for those who enjoy inner meaning and moralizing with their cinema.
Although it goes to great lengths to achieve a purpose, `The Beach' simply cannot find a satisfying comfort zone.
Those looking for a rewarding experience are going to be frustrated, so take my advice: avoid `The Beach'.
You'll find the waters too rough.
Your Comments Appreciated!
movieviews@hotmail.com. . 
