Cast: The Spice Girls, Alan Cummings, George Wendt, Richard E. Grant,        Claire Rushbrook, Roger Moore.
Directed by Bob Spiers.         I am a Spice Girls fan, and am one of the few over eighteen who  will admit that they indeed do have talent.
Part of the Spice Girl  backlash is that many feel they are simply pretty faces and became  extremely popular extremely fast.
I have no problem with that, yet they  can sing, and their songs are enjoyable.
They are entertainers, not a  band, so in my mind, they do not have to play instruments to be  legitimate.
Can they act though and do they deserve a movie?
This could only  be proven by watching "Spice World," which I did, and enjoyed  considerably.
Of course its silly and is not a filmmaking clinic, but it  does what some of what are considered great films have failed to do:  entertain.
To answer my first question, some Spice Girls are better actors  than others, and the winner of most-talented Spice Girl goes to Melanie  Chisholm (Sporty Spice).
Her distinctive voice is highlighted in the  song "Too Much," and is peppered throughout the rest.
Yet, she can  really act, as well, to the point where it felt as if she was being more  than just a Spice Girl.
Among the others, Melanie Brown (Scary Spice)  and Geri Halliwell (Ginger Spice) act well, and Emma Bunton (Baby Spice)  and Victoria Addams (Posh Spice) were given lesser roles in the scheme of  things.
You can really feel their bond and comfort with each other.
The plot basically takes us through the follies of the girls as  they go from rehearsals to press conferences to one final big live show.
Members of the press try to ruin them, and their managers are put to the  test trying to keep things together.
The tabloid run by Kevin McMaxford  (Barry Humphries) is the weak link in this, as they try to show his evil  through visual effects of thundering galestorms and streams of spittle as  he talks.
The managers, played adeptly by Richard E. Grant (Portrait of a  Lady) to ridiculous extremes and Claire Rushbrook (Secrets and Lies) create some on-screen chemistry that Grant thwarts each time he talks to her.
Roger  Moore plays an omnipotent producer known as The Chief who carries on sight  gags and  mixes his cliches a la "Naked Gun.
".         Other appearances are made by George Wendt (Cheers) as a film  producer and Alan Cummings (Circle of Friends, Emma) as a documentarian  who both attempt to make films of the Spice Girls and their travails.
What is churned out is a film about the making of a film about a film in  which the Spice Girls are the main attraction.
The Spice Girls sing  their tunes to the delight of fans, stringing in what are essentially  four or five music videos.
The Spice Girls show they are not all work when they help out a  pregnant friend (Naoko Mori) who missed the Spice boat, but who supported  them when they just got started.
Cameos by Elton John, Elvis Costello,  and Bob Geldolf are thrown in, but the movie is at its strongest when the  girls themselves are on screen.
I was expecting it to be dumb, but there was even some adult  humor in there that kept me going, and it never disappointed me.
If  you're a fan, you'll enjoy the movie.
If you're not, then don't go,  because we don't need to hear yet another person mocking them because  that is the popular thing to do.. . 
