Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre) Released in the UK by UIP on April 14, 2000; certificate PG; 113 minutes;  country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1. Directed by Brian De Palma; produced by Tom Jacobson.
Written by Lowell Cannon, Jim Thomas, John Thomas, Graham Yost.
Photographed by Stephen H. Burum; edited by Paul Hirsch.
"Mission to Mars" is too long-winded and stone-faced to be intended as  comedy, and yet I wonder how anyone could expect us to take it seriously.
This is one of the most ridiculous sci-fi movies ever made, which is no mean  feat, considering all the trashy B-pictures of the 1950s and zombie flicks of  the 80s.
The tone is set early on, by clunky passages of dialogue designed to get the  audience up to speed on the plot.
An example: "Hey, man, you must be feeling  really upset now, because this used to be your mission.
Jeez, if only your  wife hadn't died, and you hadn't gotten so depressed and had to pull out.
"  Give me a break.
The speaker is Luke Graham (Don Cheadle), an astronaut preparing to go on a  four-man mission to Mars.
His team's goal is to research the feasibility of  human colonisation.
When drilling for water on the red planet, his partners  come under the spell of a giant face-shaped sculpture, which sucks them into  a sandstorm reminiscent of last year's "The Mummy" and disembowels them.
News of the deaths reaches NASA headquarters.
Soon afterward radio contact is  lost.
A new quartet, played by Gary Sinise, Jerry O'Connell, Tim Robbins and  Connie Nielsen, are sent to the rescue.
The three of them who survive the  trip find Graham with Christ-like hair and beard, ranting and raving about  the mystical life forces that guide us, or something.
Everybody gathers round  to look at the big sculpture, and through guesswork so miraculous that it  must be based on telepathy from the gods, they suss out how to enter it  safely.
This illogical business leads to an amazing moment in which the film's heroes  discover an alien learning zone; it's a visually arresting scene, but too  little too late to save this silly movie.
Want to know why only three of the  four rescue pilots make it to Mars?
Because halfway through their journey  they abandon ship and decide to float through outer space to another one.
Robbins is unable to manoeuvre himself successfully -- what a surprise, I  thought the task would be something anyone could pull off with ease!
They've taken the drastic measure because of an emergency onboard their  rocket, which emerges completely nonsensically, when O'Connell is typing an  instruction into the ship's computer.
For no particular reason, the keyboard  breaks, and in an unfathomable development, this causes the cabin to start  losing pressure.
At first we don't even realise there's any danger, partly  because of the situation's implausibility, but mainly due to the scene's lack  of urgency.
The characters drift around without any panic, talking things  over in technical jargon, as a slow, toneless organ tune plays on the sound  track.
Odd for most movies, typical of this one.
"Mission to Mars" was directed by Brian De Palma, who once made pictures like  "Carrie", "Blow Out" and "Scarface".
Watching it, I was reminded of a  television interview with Quentin Tarantino, in which he mentioned that a lot  of good filmmakers lose their creativity, and end up doing bad studio  vehicles just for the pay packet.
I hope De Palma isn't going down that road.
But surely even Tarantino, who is one of the director's greatest fans, will  recognise that "Mission to Mars" is not a good sign.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani. Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
