        When I watch Nick at Night, I laugh at the simplicity of the old TV shows.
Shows like `Leave It to Beaver' [1957-1963], and `The Andy Griffin Show' [1960-1968] really made life look downright pleasant, or is it?
David (Tobey Maguire), a high school student, is a huge fan of a fifties television show called Pleasantville.
One day in preparation for a Pleasantville marathon, he and his sister, Jennifer (Reese Witherspoon) get in a fight over what to watch on television.
During the brief fight, they break the television remote.
Magically and without warning, a television repairman (Don Knotts) appears and gives them a new remote control.
With the press of a button David and Jennifer are actually transported into Pleasantville.
The two teens are instantly given a new family and a new life in the entirely black and white town.
Their new parents are delightful fifties stereotypes.
The father (William H. Macy) works all day to provide for the family, and bowls with his friends in the evening.
The mother (Joan Allen) cooks and cleans all day and always has dinner ready for her husband when he comes home from work.
Pleasantville, at first glance, appears to be paradise.
Upon further study, they find a world infected with censorship and oppression.
Things begin to change in Pleasantville, and the citizens that break free of the usual monotony are changed from black and white into color.
These `coloreds' are looked upon as weaker people, and are banned from stores and are outcast in the black and white community.
The film continues on as David and Jennifer discover that maybe the `good old days,' are not as good as they seemed to be.
The movie, itself, is visually stunning and quite beautiful.
The way that black and white is mixed with color is simply brilliant.
I wouldn't be surprised if Pleasantville was nominated for art and cinematography Oscars.
The acting is also great.
Tobey Maguire and Reese Witherspoon do a great job in their leading roles.
Although it is really the terrific supporting performances by William H. Macy, Joan Allen, the late J.T.
Walsh, Jeff Daniels, and the perfectly cast Don Knotts, that propel this film.
The leads have the most screen time, but they are nowhere near as interesting as the characters each of these actors play.
Pleasantville is an incredibly symbolic movie.
In fact, it is far too symbolic.
Instead of concentrating on one or even two topics, it spreads itself far to thin.
After only one screening I noticed references to Nazism, Racism, Individualism, Christianity, Judaism, Communism, Socialism and more.
With so much taking place it becomes almost muddled and unclear.
Pleasantville runs a little over two hours long and it feels like more.
While some of the scenes are incredible, some seem to add absolutely nothing to the story.
Better editing would have made this movie much more enjoyable.
Pleasantville still manages to be entertaining, and at least interesting to watch.
While it is about 20 minutes to long it is still rather humorous, thought provoking, and contains a number of great performances.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==---------- http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    . . 
