     Tarsem is a successful director of music videos who has added the  gravitas of a last name, Singh, for his first foray into feature films.
You'd think "Singh" would work for the musical stuff, and could be  dropped when he went tuneless (unless you count Howard Shore's  cacophonous score.
)  But I digress....      His attitude toward movies seems to be that it doesn't matter what  you say or do as long as it looks good.
And at times it looks very  good.
The opening, with Jennifer Lopez swathed in brilliant white  pacing the knife-edged tops of dramatically shadowed desert dunes, is  the pure distilled essence of an expensive commercial.
She is at the  time prowling the subconscious of a small boy (more on this later), and  we can only assume that this is a small boy who will grow up to be a  fashion photographer - these are not images that dominate the  subconscious of your typical prepubescent male.
All right, here's the deal - she's a psychologist working in an  experimental scientific program that allows her, suspended in midair in  a form-fitting corrugated body suit alongside her patient, to enter the  kid's subconscious and find out what's gone wrong in there.
The science  is reminiscent of '50s sci-fi potboilers.
Things aren't so bad in the  little boy's brain, but they take a turn for the worse when FBI agent  Novak (Vince Vaughn) finds out about this program and recruits her to  take a side trip into the brain of a comatose serial killer (Vincent  D'Onofrio), who has a victim stashed somewhere and there's no time to  lose!
Singh cares little enough about dialogue that he allows  screenwriter Mark Protosevich lines like "If we can't stop him, he ain't  gonna stop himself," and to be on the safe side he imports plot and  style elements from movies as diverse as "Silence of the Lambs",  "Altered States", and the animated "Fantastic Planet".
He has stocked  his cast with middle-echelon stars, and seems not to have wasted much  time directing them, with the result that Lopez spends most of her time  trying to look sympathetic and concerned, Vaughn looks worried and a  little lost, and D'Onofrio just looks crazy.
Ultimately, Singh is  banking everything on his slick visuals, and while sometimes he nails  it, as often as not it gets away from him.
A recurring image of  Jennifer Lopez as the Virgin Mary is one that could be charitably  forgotten.
If you like shots of kidnapped young women being systematically  drowned in a plexiglass cell, screaming "Daddy!
Mommy!
Help!
" as the  water level rises, you'll be treated to them randomly throughout the  movie.
If you're fond of disemboweling and vivisection, look no  further.
If you're a fan of crisp story, character, and credibility,  hang in there.
Something's bound to turn up soon.. . 
