South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut by DeWyNGaLe    Rating: A-. http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html. *Note- This review contains some mildly vulgar language which could be offensive to some, but the film calls for me to bring up these issues.
VOICES Trey Parker- Eric Cartman, Stan Marsh, Mr. Harrison, Mr. Hat Matt Stone- Kyle Brofloski, Kenny McCormick, Jimbo Marsh Mary Kay Bergman- Sheila Brofloski, Mrs. Cartman, Mrs. McCormick, Wendy Testaburger Issac Hayes- Chef. Based on the hit television show, South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut is an unbelievably vulgar animated comedy starring none other than America's favorite lovable little 3rd grade South Park festively plump resident, Eric Cartman.
Cartman, Kyle Brofloski, Kenny McCormick, and Stan Marsh are all here in this film which seems to be a regular South Park episode, only three times the length.
Being a devoted fan of South Park, the stretched out episode is good news to me, and even those unfamiliar with South Park should find themselves laughing during this potty mouthed film.
In South Park, Colorado, the new film, "Asses of Fire" is playing, which stars two Canadian comedians who chowed down to much sour kraut dinner, Terrence and Phillip.
After hundreds of children are exposed to the "R" rated language in the film, new words can be heard flowing from the mouths of kids everywhere.
In protest, Kyle Broslofski's Mom forms an organization against Terrence and Phillip, resulting in the death sentence of the two, and the United States declaring war on Canada.
Meanwhile in Hell, Satan and new boyfriend Saddam Hussein are outraged about the death sentence of Terrence and Phillip, and plan to launch the apocalypse.
The result of one of the strangest plots in a film for years is an outrageous, mind-blowing film.
Bigger, Longer, Uncut, which is directed by Trey Parker, and written by Parker and Matt Stone, doesn't hold back on language, but uses unrepeatable phrases, making me question how this film got an "R" rating from the MPAA.
The film received an NC-17 rating from the MPAA three times, but this final version doesn't seem to be edited at all, but rather "uncut.
"  Bigger, Longer, and Uncut has language to offend everyone, whether it be African Americans or smart students, this film has it all.
Some may take the humor (which I believe is innocent) harshly, but as an African American in the theater laughed as the blacks in the army are used as "Operation Human Shield" against Canada, some may take it lightly and laugh at the classic use of humor.
If Bigger, Longer, and Uncut is going to offend one group in particular, it is those who are very religious.
Themes of Satan being friendly and gay are shown constantly, there is a child who hates God, and says unbelievably crude things about him, among other lines and sequences which will have religious folks scattering the theater before the relatively short film is finished.
Adding to the humor are the songs in which characters break out into frequently, which have more appeal to me than the songs in Disney's recent release, Tarzan.
Although every song is particularly vulgar, the tunes are catchy and upbeat, and surprisingly well done.
South Park: Bigger, Longer, and Uncut couldn't come at a better time, as the MPAA is cracking down on teens seeing "R" rated films, this film proudly waves the middle finger at the association.
I agree with a character in the film that says something along the lines of, "You can have loads of violence in a film, but bad language isn't okay.
"  Bigger, Longer, and Uncut is a "theme movie" of sorts for those who dislike the MPAA as much as the film's writers do, Matt Stone and Trey Parker.
Some may say "Anyone could make a film about four foul mouthed kids with terrible animation," but I disagree with that.
For someone to take this simple concept, create a national phenomenon, and make me laugh to the point where I was choking on my popcorn, is sheer brilliance.
What is the brilliant force behind South Park?
You may say I'm crazy, but Trey Parker and Matt Stone are brilliant.
The Bottom Line- A film that delivers the fans of South Park what they need-- an "Uncut" version of the hilarious T.V.
show.. . 
