        Since debuting on Comedy Central in 1997, "South Park" has continually pushed the envelope of good taste and challenged the conventional idea of what is and is not appropriate for television.
The battle has not been an easy one: since the very first episode was aired, the network has been besieged by letters from angry parents, religious organizations, and nearly every political group in the country, all demanding the immediate cancellation of the series.
But the proof is in the Snacky Cakes: Trey Parker and Matt Stone, the show's creators, have demonstrated that poo-poos and profanity can not only entertain the masses, they can also mean big merchandising dollars.
Now they're gambling that they can take the premise (and its profits) to the next level.
In the small "redneck mountain town" (according to the opening song) of South Park, Colorado, life is quiet and peaceful-- idyllic, even.
But the town's solitude is challenged when a new film opens at the local theater: "Asses of Fire," starring Canada's Terrence and Phillip (a comedy duo whose schtick revolves entirely around their ability to fart on cue).
Four of the local children (Eric Cartman, Stan Marsh, Kyle Broflovski and Kenny McCormick) sneak in to see the R-rated movie, and are quite taken with the new vocabulary words contained therein.
As is the way with children, they promptly begin showing off their new arsenal of colorful phrases at every possible opportunity.
The community is outraged that four pure, innocent children have been corrupted by the film (apparently they don't watch the "South Park" TV show), and soon the president declares all-out war on Canada, the bastion of evil responsible for the offending movie.
Terrence and Philip are sentenced to die, and the boys hatch a plan to save their idols.
Even more is at stake, however: Kenny discovers that if Terrence and Phillip are killed, Satan and his lover, Saddam Hussein, will gain dominance over the world.
Yes, that's right, the film is an all-out musical affair, with lots of singing and dancing.
Fear not, however: unlike those in recent Disney features, these tunes are actually memorable, managing to stay imbedded in your head for days afterwards.
There's "Mountain Town," the bouncy opening number which extols the virtues of small-town life; the inspirational "What Would Brian Boytano do?
"; the villainous "Blame Canada" (which recalls the positively evil "Be Prepared," from "The Lion King"); and a frantic rendition of the toe- tappin' "Kyle's Mom's a Bitch" (an "It's a Small World"-type sing- along), which is guaranteed to offend absolutely everyone.
E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm. If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com. Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/ Share what you know.
Learn what you don't.. . 
