A Film Review by Mark O'Hara Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. In time for Christmas we have the ninth 'Star Trek' feature,  Insurrection, a picture that succeeds largely because of the risks it  takes.
In the opening shots we see the idyllic lifestyle of the Bak'u, a people  who are dead ringers for Homo Sapiens, and who choose to exclude their  advanced technology from their everyday existence.
(Have you noticed,  by the way, that intermittent apostrophes in names give them a foreign  smack?
)  Thus there are blacksmiths and bakers and other artisans who  wear costumes and live in a village reminiscent of the late Middle Ages.
The set decoration resembles a resort, in fact, a place one might reach  by a small craft across a man-made bay from Epcot Center.
It is the  quaintest part of the movie.
Another aspect of the set that accents the  film's action is the beauty of the planet;  similar to the forests in  Return of the Jedi, these landscapes provide a natural backdrop in which  the story unfolds.
The few deep space shots look wonderfully luminous,  like the multi-colored photographs of gaseous formations sent back by  the Hubble telescope.
A sudden intrusion on the simple routines of the Bak'u tells us trouble  is afoot.
Data (Brent Spiner) has gone haywire, and anyone who knows  'Trek' lore knows Data is an android with the strength of a backhoe.
Quickly he thwarts the Federation lackeys who pursue him, and then  uncloaks the spy-post occupied by none other than Starfleet Admiral  Dougherty (Anthony Zerbe) and some loose-skinned species with whom  Dougherty is in cahoots.
Soon we witness the re-assembly of the crew of  the enterprise, whose mission is at first to capture Data.
When matters  become more complicated, a restored Data, Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick  Stewart) and a comely Bak'u woman named Anij (Donna Murphy) discover a  holographic double of the Bak'u village.
It seems that this Admiral  Dougherty has wheedled the leaders of the Federation into approving the  evacuation of the Bak'u to another planet, in order to exploit a most  unusual natural resource.
If carried out, these orders would of course  violate the Prime Directive.
Will the principled Jean-Luc Picard permit  these peaceable people to be displaced?
In the tradition of the best episodes of the series, Insurrection floats  some worthwhile political ideas - a plotting strategy right out of Gene  Roddenberry's notebooks.
The agenda of this installment attacks the  relocation of native populations;  at no point does Picard mention  Stalinist Russia or Nazi Germany, though the comparison comes across.
So the central conflict of the film springs from a trusty, if  unoriginal, premise, and director Jonathan Frakes - Cmdr.
William T.  Riker, the loyal 'Number One,' - moves the story engagingly while  staging variations on familiar themes.
Michael Piller's screenplay is  well edited, with punchy scene-closings and a few hearty chuckles, nods  to comic relief generated by Worf's revisted puberty and Data's  misinterpretation of references to boobs.
Pretty standard stuff, this,  but it works again.
The villain's seat is occupied by F. Murray Abraham as Ru'afo, an angry  alien who looks like a mummy with a steel plate in his head.
Abraham's  makeup is actually a throwback to his Academy Award-winning role of  Salieri in Amadeus, skin sagging in even greater folds and pouches.
Ru'afo is moderately effective as a baddie;  it's just that he's mostly  bark, the script not giving him the menacing bite given Christopher  Plummer as a Klingon general in an earlier flick.
Not until we discover  Ru'afo's history with the Bak'u does his character take on more mythical  proportions of evil.
Once again Patrick Stewart plays a brave and noble captain.
His acting  is probably the most transparent among the cast.
He makes us believe a  60-ish action hero whose ethics and actions are beyond question.
Picard  even gets a love interest in this episode - Anij, whose beauty belies  her 300-plus age.
Unfortunately, the Captain gets no farther than  hand-holding, though he promises to spend an upcoming 318-day leave with  her.
Hints of a rekindled romance turn up repeatedly between Riker and  the buxom Counselor Deanna Troi, though we do not see much consummation  in this relationship, either.
(The dearth of affection is probably one  cause for the PG rating, for which I am thankful;  my 10 year-old was  able to attend with us when usually she misses 'Star Trek'  installments.
). Music in Insurrection nicely compliments scenes that require it, giving  the audience cues for climactic moments.
As I believe the makers of the  'first' episode of 'Star Wars' are doing with John Williams' theme, the  'Star Trek' people reuse the famous 'Next Generation' main theme, big on  horns, at the end.
All the baloney about numerology aside, this odd-numbered 'Star Trek' is  a solid entry in the series.
It is not as riveting as the last, First  Contact, which featured the Borg, the worst cross you could imagine  between zombies and vampires, and which was very heavy on technology and  space exteriors.
By leaving this trend at least momentarily behind,  Insurrection takes a chance on a slower pace and more character  development.
Two decisions that, for my three and a half dollars, make  for good entertainment.. . . 
