Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com. DIRECTED BY:      Rupert Wainwright STARRING:         Patricia Arquette, Gabriel Byrne, Jonathan Pryce, Nia Long WRITTEN BY:       Tom Lazarus, Rick Ramage RATED:            R for intense violent sequences, language, some sexuality SCRIPTURE REFERENCES:       Isaiah 52:14, Revelation 22:18-19, Proverbs 30:5-6. "A gift of God?
Can I give it back?
"  It's a legitimate question that is asked by Frankie Paige, a 23 year old hair stylist from Pittsburgh who inexplicably develops an affliction allegedly only experienced by the deeply religious.
The fact that she's an atheist is stumping the religious investigators who have come to study her.
They've come because her body is being assaulted by an invisible attacker, leaving on her the marks of the stigmata.
"Why her?
" is the question they want answered.
What does it mean?
STIGMATA, a new release from MGM, bears a passing resemblance to THE EXORCIST, and is being released on the heels of THE SIXTH SENSE and STIR OF ECHOES, two other supernatural thrillers.
Unlike its two recent predecessors, STIGMATA focuses upon the depiction of religious phenomenon and the response of the Roman Catholic Church in the face of such unexplained events.
As such, it has the rare distinction of being accurately inaccurate.
After receiving a rosary which belonged to a dead priest, Frankie (Patricia Arquette, THE HI-LO COUNTRY) begins experiencing attacks from an unseen force which causes deep wounds through her wrists and feet as well as lacerations on her back and forehead... the same wounds experienced by the crucified Jesus.
Such wounds are known in religious circles as "stigmata.
"  Hearing of these attacks, the Vatican sends its emissary, Father Andrew Kiernan (Gabriel Bryne, THE MAN IN THE IRON MASK) to investigate and prove or disprove the phenomenon.
As Father Kiernan becomes convinced of the spiritual nature of Frankie's experiences, other factors begin to come to light which implicate the Roman Catholic Church and its obsessive need for secrecy and self-preservation at any cost.
Cardinal Houseman (Jonathan Pryce, TOMORROW NEVER DIES), a high-ranking Vatican official takes a deep interest in the ongoing investigation and when Frankie begins to speak and write in Aramaic, the language of Christ, he comes to America and ominously takes personal command of the situation.
The acting is first rate.
Patricia Arquette is amazing as a young night clubbing party girl who has no way to understand or comprehend what is happening to her.
She maintains her believability even in the midst of unbelievable occurrences.
Gabriel Byrne is appropriately cast as a scientist turned priest whose faith is tested and even potentially strengthened by this experience.
Jonathan Pryce is downright Machiavellian as the evil hearted Cardinal Houseman.
While the movie is both visually stunning and intense in nature, the story it tells fails to adequately explain the various questions that it brings to mind.
The concluding scenes, which unsatisfactorily resolves the storyline, are disappointing on two levels:  From a narrative perspective, the ending is implausible and only serves to raise a slew of other questions.
From a spiritual perspective, it is misleading and in many ways completely inaccurate.
It is impossible to go into more details without revealing the ending but the scripture references I list at the beginning of the review will allude to some of the untruths I find objectionable.
The "gift of God" comment (which comes midway through the film) was a lame attempt to explain why the stigmata is only experienced by the deeply religious.
To believe that God would inflict such pain and suffering upon anyone is beyond blasphemous.
It would contradict everything that God reveals about Himself through His Word.
Jesus Christ endured the pain of the cross and the physical torture which led to it (which was far worse than anything seen in the film...
The scriptures state that his body was ravaged so badly he was unrecognizable.
)  He did so for a specific purpose, the redemption and salvation of all mankind.
To think that there is a godly reason for anyone else to be subjected to that level of human suffering is to demean and bring to naught his accomplishments.
Because of his accomplishments, we are able to claim physical wholeness, manifest power from on high, understand spiritual matters, and lead a life that is more than abundant.
That is the true gift of God in all its beauty and divine glory.
Anything else, especially anything so obviously devilish, is counterfeit.. . 
