Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com. DIRECTED BY: Bruce Beresford STARRING: Ashley Judd, Tommy Lee Jones, Bruce Greenwood, Annabeth Gish WRITTEN BY: David Weisberg, Douglas S. Cook RATED: R for language, a scene of sexuality (nudity), and violence.
SCRIPTURE REFERENCES: Luke 21:12-15, James 1:5, Exodus 4:10-12. "No person (shall) be subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb..." --  Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
A very liberal interpretation of that amendment serves as the basis for the new Paramount feature, DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
Ashley Judd (SIMON BIRCH) stars as Libby Parsons, a devoted mother whose life gets turned upside down when her affluent husband is declared dead and she is charged, then convicted, of his murder.
Her life takes another spin when, from behind bars, she discovers that her young son and the woman to whom she entrusted his care have disappeared.
When she finally tracks them down, she gets the biggest surprise of all.
Her husband is apparently not dead, which means that not only is she serving time for a crime she did not commit, she is serving time for a crime that never took place.
The good news (if you want to call it that) is that since she has been convicted and punished for killing her husband, thanks to the Fifth Amendment she is now free to really kill him without fear of legal consequence (or so we are led to believe.
). Director Bruce Beresford (DRIVING MISS DAISY) breezes through these premise setting introductory scenes as if he were power walking with the wind at his back.
With the exposition so speedily dispatched, we can settle in for the real meat of the movie which takes place six years later as Libby attempts to find her son.
A task made more difficult due to the relentless pursuit of her parole officer, Travis Lehman (Tommy Lee Jones, VOLCANO).
But Mr. Beresford has a problem.
Because more time wasn't spent in the beginning to involve us in the lives of these people, we aren't all that involved in the story of which they are part.
The end result is a series of mildly entertaining chase scenes featuring characters we hardly know played by actors who deserve better.
Ashley Judd has some good moments as a mother singly obsessed with finding her child.
She makes some odd choices at the beginning of the film, underplaying her wrongful arrest and conviction, but once she wins her parole, her characterization gets some legs and she is off and running (literally).
One of those chasing her is the reliable Tommy Lee Jones in a role that is becoming all too familiar for him.
We've seen him before as the pursuer in both THE FUGITIVE and US MARSHALS.
Here, as an ex-law professor turned parole officer, he is more embittered and less sure of himself, but the similarities to his other films cannot be mistaken.
Bruce Greenwood (THE SWEET HEREAFTER) is cast as the "now you bereave him, now you don't" husband.
Appropriately insincere and full of oily charm, Mr. Greenwood leaves no doubt as to who the bad guy is in this film.
The script by David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook (THE ROCK) is superficial at best.
The actions scenes are taut and exciting, but there is little else for which to commend it.
While in prison, Libby gets some advice (some of it laughable) on what to say to the parole board that will be what they want to hear.
While that may have worked to her advantage in this implausible script, as believers we are commanded to handle things differently:. "But make up your mind not to worry beforehand how you will defend yourselves.
For I will give you words and wisdom that none of your adversaries will be able to resist or contradict.
"  Luke 21:14-15 [NIV]. Standing resolutely upon the truth, building the Word of God in your mind, and staying peaceful and calm in your heart allows God to communicate with the spirit within you thereby teaching you what to say or do in times of need.
No finer defense could be given.
No better counsel could be received.. . 
