The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review. "I'm dead sexy!
" yells an enormously large Scottish man, hellbent on catching Dr.
Evil's notoriously evil (and midget-like) twin Mini-Me for a quick snack.
"Get in my belly!!
" he bellows, and Mini-Me quickly scampers back to Dr.
Evil, who's hesitant on letting the guy (Fat Bastard is his name) use his crapper.
It's moments like this absolutely ridiculous one that make Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me just as much a fun romp as the original.
Mike Myers shows he hasn't lost any creativity, and, through lots of comic timing, comes up a winner with a hilarious, if slightly overwrought, sequel.
Basically, the story begins roughly where the first one left off.
The honeymoon ends quickly for Austin and his new bride Vanessa (Elizabeth Hurley in a funny cameo), and soon Austin is thwarted by the efforts of his nemesis Dr.
Evil, who's making it personal- this time, he's after Austin's "life force", his mojo.
That leads Austin to travel back to 1969 to try and retrieve his mojo, before Dr.
Evil gets any bright ideas and uses it himself.
(Of course, a scene where he gets a taste of the mojo is funny as hell.
)  There, Austin teams up with Felicity Shagwell (a very sexy Heather Graham), who's just as horny as he is...er, was.
Along the way, we're introduced to many characters, including the aforementioned Fat Bastard and Mini-Me, as well as a younger Number Two (Rob Lowe), the ill-fated Mustafa (Will Ferrell), and Dr.
Evil's sarcastic son Scott (Seth Green).
Sure, the movie has some slight dull spots, and I think the gags involving product placement were a slight bit overrun (Fat Bastard's take on the Chili's song was pretty funny, though), but a lot of the movie has inspiration, something a sequel usually lacks.
There's some great new gags here, a gaggle of cool cameos (from Tim Robbins to Woody Harrelson to...you guessed it...Jerry Springer), and, of course, more "evil" than you can shake a stick at.
It's all in fun, and the overall product is very shagadelic.
The Happy Bastard (no relation to Fat). . 
