THE BIG LEBOWSKI (1998) Reviewed by Chuck Dowling Copyright 1998 - The Jacksonville Film Journal URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/. Cast: Jeff Bridges, John Goodman, Julianne Moore, Steve Buscemi, David Huddleston, John Turturro, Sam Elliott, Peter Stormare, Flea, Ben Gazarra, Phillip Seymore Hoffman, Tara Reid Written by: Joel and Ethan Coen Directed by: Joel Coen Running Time: 119 minutes My Rating: ***** out of *****. After critic Gene Siskel saw the Coen brothers' 1996 film "Fargo" he remarked that he would not see a better picture that year.
I thought that was a pretty bold statement considering how early in the year the film was released.
Well, here it is the first week of March, the Coen brothers have released their latest film "The Big Lebowski," and I have to say, in the words of Gene Siskel: I will not see a better film this year.
To describe the plot of "The Big Lebowski" would be pointless, as it's just not something able to be described.
Jeff Bridges plays Jeff Lebowski aka "The Dude," a hippie who gets mixed up in a case of mistaken identity with a millionaire (David Huddleston), also named Jeff Lebowski.
What follows includes kidnapping, ransom, auto theft, bowling, musical dance numbers, former german rock stars, bad pornography, and more comedy than ten movies usually have.
The Coen brothers, responsible for such wondeful motion pictures as "Fargo," "The Hudsucker Proxy," "Raising Arizona," "Barton Fink," and "Blood Simple" always succeed in creating their own little universe on the movie screen, and with "The Big Lebowski" they certainly succeed again.
How they have managed to maintain their creative filmmaking and storytelling abilities, and now manage to TOP all their previous works is beyond me.
But I am so glad that they have.
I usually try to avoid grand, sweeping statements when I write reviews, but in the case of "The Big Lebowski" I just can't help it.
Without a doubt, "The Big Lebowski" is the funniest film I have ever seen.
For the entire running time of the film, I was constantly laughing.
Yes, that's right.
I laughed for 119 minutes.
Never once during the 1am screening I attended did I glance at my watch, and not once did I yawn or take my eyes off the screen.
While the film ran I never wanted it to end, and when it was over I wanted them to run it again.
If I was to give out the Oscars, acting awards would go to all involved (particularly Bridges, Goodman, and Buscemi, who's dialogue and chemistry with one another is fantastic), along with awards for writing, directing, production design, music... everything.
And a note to the Coen brothers: I want a sequel.
I want more of these characters, and I want it as soon as possible.
Now I realize that comedy is a tricky thing, and that everyone has a slightly different sense of humor.
And the comedy in "The Big Lebowski" isn't necessarily jokes, set-ups, and punch lines.
It's dialogue and attitudes, much like the comedic elements of "Pulp Fiction".
Certainly some of you will see the film and afterwards think that I am completely insane.
So here's a little test to help you see if you'll go along with the comedy of the film.
In the early seconds of the film, The Dude writes a check for a ridiculously low amount of money, something like $.68.
I found that to be absolutely hilarious.
If you would too, then "The Big Lebowski" is right up your alley.
It's the best film of the year so far, and I seriously doubt there will be anything better.
[R]. . 
