---A copy of this review will be posted to  http://www.moviereviews.org/wonder_boys.htm on the evening of February  24, 2000.---. Watching Wonder Boys is somewhat akin to viewing the last two-minutes of  a football game where your home team simply cannot muster the needed  points to emerge victorious.
The players, Michael Douglas, Tobey  Maguire, Frances McDormand, Robert Downey Jr. and Katie Holmes, all  maintain hometown-hero status with solid efforts.
Unfortunately though,  the game has run so long that your attention fades in and out and those  last few passes reek of disparity as the quarterback tries to force  something that simply doesn't work.
Grady Tripp (Academy Award Winner Michael Douglas) is a college  English professor who finds his life in shambles as his wife leaves him,  he struggles with a 2611-page unfinished novel and carries on an affair  with the chancellor (Academy Award Winner Francis McDormand).
His  solution: dope.
James Leer (Tobey Maguire) is one of Tripp's students.
His writing is  ridiculed by the class, his personal life is dark and mysterious but his  potential proves to be unlimited with a new book he has written.
His  solution: carrying a gun.
Terry Crabtree (former inmate Robert Downey Jr.) is a down-and-out  homosexual editor seeking success and a new sexual partner.
His  solution: Tripp's book and Leer's body.
So, to recap, we have a lot of dope, a murder weapon, an unfinished  novel, a finished novel, an affair and a group of characters with  problems.
Throw in a hood-jumper (Richard Knox), a wise student (Katie  Holmes), Marilyn Monroe's wedding coat, a dead dog, a Howard Johnson  parking lot and a forgotten backpack and there's plenty happening in  the confusion-dominated football game.
Despite being given the opportunity to express a panoply of emotions in  his self-discovering character, Michael Douglas always makes the  conservative call and consequently fails to rouse up the crowd even if  he is getting the job done adequately.
Francis McDormand and Tobey  Maguire both seem to go the extra yard, however.
McDormand has an  ordinary quality that is rare among actresses today- probably the reason  for her Fargo Oscar- and she reaffirms acting competence here.
Maguire  confirms that he is to the depressive seeking enlightenment what Jack  Palance is to the old western cowboy.
With Pleasantville and The Cider  House Rules as previous evidence of this trait, the 25 year-old actor is  Hollywood's newest typecast thanks to this role that is practically  made for him.
Wonder Boys first hits trouble with the Tripp/chancellor relationship.
In a film with an otherwise interesting set of plot circumstances, the  old boy-likes-girl-who-questions-affection-for-boy-untill-boy- accidentally-does-something-indirectly-affecting-her-and-is-afraid-to- tell-but-ultimately-she-confrontes-him-with-forgiveness is a tad too textbook for the film.
Ditto the other major development in their relationship, or, to speak more properly, in her womb.
The movie's plot loses steam well before the fourth quarter even  begins and things aren't helped by a desperately forced ending that is  even more textbook than the aforementioned relationship.
This year, hundreds of millions of people looked on as the Super Bowl  came down to 36 inches.
Hopefully not even a fraction of those people  will subject themselves to this production that sets itself up for a  hopeless fourth and long and doesn't have 30-second Budweiser spots to  tide the audience over.. . 
