rated R starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Joe Pantoliano, Hugo Weaving written and directed by Andy and Larry Wachowski. What is the matrix?
If it helps answer the tagline question, THE MATRIX is the most satisying and stylish action pic since FACE/OFF.
The second film by the Wachowski brothers, THE MATRIX will remind many viewers of 1998's little-seen Alex Proyas masterpiece DARK CITY.
It has a similar look to it, and a similar message.
But after seeing THE MATRIX, the movie that came to mind was Terrence Malick's misunderstood war epic THE THIN RED LINE.
Like THE THIN RED LINE, THE MATRIX is a heavily disguised, poetic and metaphoric meditation on finding God, and the difference between pure good and evil.
The complicated plot of THE MATRIX is too good to spoil, so I will not go in depth.
Keanu Reeves plays Thomas "Neo" Anderson, a computer programmer who wakes up one morning(a la DARK CITY) and finds that people are out to get him.
He is then contacted by Morpheus(Laurence Fishburne), a man who says he's out to help him.
He then joins Morpheus' squad and travels into the matrix, a world that is supposed to shield you from reality.
Morpheus believes that Neo is "the one" who can somehow save the human race.
Neo trusts Morpheus and believes his prophecy.
And Neo decides to stay in the matrix, unable to ever leave.
The Wachowski brothers, who made the brilliant mob caper BOUND, have backed THE MATRIX's blistering, electric style with substance to create what is not only a perfect futuristic noir thriller, but a perfect pre-Y2K film.
THE MATRIX took a long 5 year journey to the screen, but the time all seems worth it.
THE MATRIX should also be credited as the film which revives Keanu Reeves' career.
After trash like JOHNNY MNEMONIC and FEELING MINNESOTA, Reeves is finally back in style, playing the hero with as much natural tenacity as his hero in SPEED.
Mainstream audiences are likely to leave THE MATRIX feeling clueless and cheated, but like THE THIN RED LINE, they should give the film a second viewing to appreciate a subtlety that is largely lost in modern cinema.
THE MATRIX may not be an Oscar winner, but the film is almost a shoo-in to be a cult classic.
Of all the many questions I was left with after viewing THE MATRIX, the most important one I could think of was "When is the sequel?
". a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic akiva@excite.com. http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST. . . 
