Cast:  Kevin Spacey, Anette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, Mena Suvari, Chris Cooper (I). 'American Beauty' is one of those films that leave a huge emotional impact that remains for days after you have seen it.
Seldom have I seen such marvelous characters, each somehow representing an important puzzle piece of our modern society.
And it is not often you get to experience a film where virtually every actor is giving an award worthy performance.
The story itself is a constantly surprising, complex and ingeniously spinned web of events, ideas, characters, thoughts and feelings.
The hero in the story is Lester (Kevin Spacey).
He is working in a respectable firm, lives in a great neighborhood, has a beautiful wife and a sweet daughter.
He is living the American dream -- or so it seems.
The truth is that Lester is hated by his daughter, ignored by his wife and is "expendable" at work.
His wife, Carolyn (Anette Bening) is so perfect that her garden shears are coordinated with her footwear.
She is a successful real state agent, happy and content -- or so it seems.
Actually Carolyn is a neurotic woman, unsuccessful in work and family.
She has simply forgotten what it is to feel alive.
His daughter, Jane (Thora Birch) is a lonely and unhappy girl that lives in a certain apathy, longing to leave home.
Her friend, Angela (Mena Suvari) is the blond beauty that is the school's main attraction.
A girl that is dreaming o becoming a model.
Her motto is "There is nothing worse than being ordinary".
The truth is that she has never dated a single boy and her love affairs have been fiction and lies that she used to seem attractive and unordinary.
Those are the main characters, but there are others that add color and meaning to the story.
There is an ex-Marine officer (Chris Cooper) that collects nazi stuff and has some radical thoughts about gays.
He is a tuff, angry, almost sadistic man that tests tests his son, Ricky (Wes Bentley ) for drugs, taking a urine sample every six months and beating the shit out of him for no obvious reasons.
In the end it becomes clear that he is gay himself.
Ricky is the good and polite son at home, but spends his time to change jobs and selling drugs and basically any whatever his "clients" wish for.
What starts as parallel stories soon float into each other, creating a web of misunderstandings that are nothing less than bizarre.
Lester is unwillingly dragged along by his wife to see his daughter perform as a cheerleader.
And it is here he sees his angel, his key to instant bliss and happiness, the only thing that makes him feel alive.
The only trouble is that she is Angela.
There are so many events that it is impossible and unnecessary to sum them up, they have to be experienced.
The film ends with a finale that is so intense and powerful that it is simply unforgettable.
"American Beauty" is not only a Lolita-kind of story.
It is a tale about a man waking up after 30 years of apathy and numbness, thinking about what happened to your life.
It is a man that wants to bring some of his dreams, hopes and fantasies to life - a simple wish to live again, to feel alive.
Off course there is more to it.
It is basically a story about or society -- under the facade of obvious happiness and success, hides a different reality.
It is about the fact that image and success mean everything, and are worth sacrificing your own identity and happiness.
What we are trying to hide is our humanity -- our true feelings, our actual thoughts and dreams -- the very things that make us human.
This theme is rather familiar and parallels to films as "Fight Club" and "Eyes Wide Shut" can be drawn.
Like "Fight Club", "American Beauty" gracefully balances between tragic drama and amusing comedy, never becoming boring or sentimental -- a kind of feeling like laughing through tears.
Both films are brilliantly written and spectacularly acted and both present our society in a rather bad light.
So it almost seems that they are equal, but not quite.
David Fincher's description of society is sharper, darker, deeper and far more controversial, because of its unique style and daring story.
Sam Mendes doesn't go that far and he doesn't break any barriers or open new doors.
"Fight lub" didn't only capture the three dimentionality  and essence of the problem, but provided also the consequences of our actions and showing us the path towards which we are heading.
Mendes doesn't do that.
He is simply scratching the surface and never goes as deep as Fincher.
That is why "American Beauty" will be popular at the Academy Awards, and "Fight Club" will not.
Acting (as I've mentioned at least a hundred times) is wonderful.
This may be Kevin Spacy's finest, most colorful and mature performance.
A natural and intelligent approach that simply strengthens the film.
Likewise is Anette Bening.
A rather unexpected depth and understanding that she portrays in such an easy manner, that it is simply a joy to watch.
The other cast members are weaker, but still amazing.
Especially Wes Bentley as the romantic, dreamy young man that sees outstanding beauty in everything.
I am confident that a bright future in Hollywood awaits this promising, young actor.
The technical side of the film is likewise perfect.
A brilliant cinematography, magnificent editing and a stimulating musical score wrap the whole thing up into an unforgettable and fascinating film that deserves both attention and appreciation.. . . 
