Apt Pupil: Brad Renfro, Ian McKellen, David Schwimmer, Elias Koteas.    The opening scene of "Apt Pupil" is set in a high school at the end of    a week of studying the Holocaust in history class.
The teacher reminds    the students that if they want to know more, they can always turn to    the library.
Instead, Brad Renfro turns to experiential learning, leading to some    frightening conclusions.
Renfro is Todd Bowden, a bright, bored high-school student.
Using    leaps of logic that would impress even the Scooby Doo crew, he deduces    that neighborhood recluse Arthur Denker (Ian McKellan) is in fact Kurt    Dussander, who ran one of the Nazi concentration camps during the war    and is still wanted by the Israeli government.
For some reason, instead of turning Dussander over to the police, Todd    blackmails him - firsthand information about the death camps in    exchange for his silence.
"Tell me what the schools are afraid to," he    pleads.
As Dussander's tales grow ever more glorious and graphic, Todd grows    more and more unraveled - having gas chamber hallucinations in the    shower, doodling swastikas in his notebook, falling behind in school.
Then he grows truly disturbed, killing birds and the occasional    homeless man.
Based on a novella by Stephen King and directed by Bryan Singer (who    helmed the Oscar-winning "The Usual Suspects"), "Apt Pupil" clearly    had a lot of potential.
King's story, and thus the screenplay, is    sufficiently spooky if you can wade through the mounds of mediocrity -    it doesn't get truly suspenseful until the second hour.
McKellan, winner of multiple film awards, turns in an acceptable    performance as the despicable Dussander, right down to the faux German    accent.
And the supporting cast, from David Schwimmer to Elias Koteas,    is right on target as well.
Renfro, however, is a disappointment.
His character seems disturbed    even at the start of the film, so his descent into depravity has    little effect on the viewer.
This lapse is inexcusable in the key    character in the film.
We should be mourning for his shrinking    humanity, not for the movie.
Few would argue that the Second World War and the Holocaust were among    the greatest atrocities in history.
Last weekend though, a new    atrocity was unleashed upon the world - the mediocre, eminently    forgettable "Apt Pupil.
". . 
