The escape film is a standard genre which has been employed throughout motion picture history.
Its inherent tension and suspense provide a natural framework on which to build a gripping story, and this has been done so often that it is difficult to create anything original within that genre.
However, being such a stalwart formula also makes it a ripe target for parody, and this film does that by replacing all the standard human characters with primarily chickens.
The film is an animated feature made by a process of stop motion animation with clay figures - "claymation", a specialization of Aardman Production, which produced this film.
It is written and directed by Nick Park (who is known for his claymation shorts Wallace and Grommit) and Peter Lord.
This technique has been in existence since the early days of film, but has become rare since the development of less labor intensive special effects, notably computer generated imagery.
The story takes place at the Tweedy chicken farm, where the resident chickens (all hens save for one aged rooster) are held captive.
They are constantly searching for a way to escape the unpleasant conditions at the farm, where they must keep up their egg production quotas or literally get the axe.
They make many attempts to escape, led by natural leader Ginger (Julia Sawalha), but never meet with any success.
One day they see Rocky the Rooster (Mel Gibson) fly overhead and accidentally crash into their fenced compound.
In Rocky, they see someone who could teach them to fly, and thus give them a means to escape the farm and reach a sanctuary to live a life of freedom.
Although a grim storyline is the basis of the plot, this is actually a funny and entertaining film.
Their enclosure is portrayed as the common prisoner of war camp of film, and all the components of that genre are expressed - clandestine meetings, contrived escape plans, close camaraderie from shared hardship, and a barter economy with black market traders (in this case, Cockney rats).
Although it may appear derivative, the story goes to such great detail to anthropomorphize the chickens, that it feels that the genre itself is the aspect being manipulated to fit the plot.
When a formulaic storyline is used as a shortcut for original, writing, it is dreary.
When it is used as a basis for a genre spoof, it can be the outlet for intelligent humor.
Discerning viewers will notice the multiple layers employed by the film, and will be impressed by the challenges that the film sets and meets.
The film is constructed to have appeal for all viewers.
It does not euphemize death and killing for its younger audience, but it also does not present intentionally disturbing images.
For younger viewers, the film provides colorful characters, typical cartoon action sequences, and limited musical sequences.
For adult viewers, it provides clever one-liners, caricatures of stereotypical characters, and subtle references to classic films.
Highly recommended.
This film uses a standard storyline to great effect.
It is a simple, common structure that can be followed by children, and it is also a target for parody that will entertain adult viewers.
It is consistently humorous, entertaining, and clever, and thus has appeal for a wide audience.. . 
