ANALYZE THIS Cast: Robert De Niro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Joe Viterelli, Richard C. Castellano, Chazz Palminteri Director: Harold Ramis Screenplay: Peter Tolan and Harold Ramis and Ken Lonergan Australian theatrical release: March 11, 1999 Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 3 stars. Fans of Robert De Niro are not often given the chance to watch him act silly, so I guess all the hip-hoola surrounding the release of Analyze This is justified.
What doesn't seem so justified is the common appraisal of the film's script.
The only really clever idea that the three screenwriter's have developed is a funny concept: a Mafia bigwig looses his nerve, and seeks help from an untainted shrink.
You can probably guess the type of jokes that will fill the following 90 minutes, as De Niro and co-player Billy Crystal share opportunities to mouth off.
The comedy between these two - and, I guess, the film's overall success - relies heavily on dialogue.
It then comes as good news that the dialogue is punchy and fun; the kind of which would take writers hours to get the timing just right.
It must be said, then, that Analyze This finds a constant comedic beat, the kind that the recent Waking Ned Devine severely lacked.
But in this case, solidarity is both good and bad.
If you appreciate a couple of the film's early jokes, you'll probably appreciate most of its later ones.
Unfortunately, Analyze This takes precious few risks, so nothing in it feels particularly involving.
However much like Rush Hour, the chemistry between its two protagonists generates enough laughs and memorable moments to make a pleasing film experience.
Paul Vitti (De Niro) is a powerful New York gangster, and is under constant threat of assassination and prosecution.
His tough guy image is jeopardized when Vitti loses his edge.
He becomes the victim of anxiety attacks (in one amusing scene, he attempts to persuade a doctor that he has had a heart attack), and even finds television ads as enough of a reason to break down and cry.
Vitti realizes that he must cure himself before his reputation shatters, so he seeks the help of psychiatrist Ben Sobol (Crystal).
Sobol has a young son and a fiancée (Lisa Kudrow) that he is about to marry, so naturally helping Vetti is not one of his primary concerns.
Robert De Niro is fun to watch as the extravagant Vetti, although his performance is not to be mistaken as an excellent one.
De Niro's part is simplistic and two-dimensional (sort of like a cameo that lasts for an entire film) but constantly entertaining.
Billy Crystal is the real highlight here.
Crystal never lets his talent or experience overshadow his charm, and in Analyze This he has all the energy of an actor trying to make it big, and all the passion of man who's worked twenty rewarding years.
The biting chemistry between De Niro and Crystal is, at its best, shrewd and entertaining.
Like other "concept" films (such as Groundhog Day and The Birdcage), the concept behind Analyze This is exaggerated and developed into a full length film.
For those who have had enough of sight comedies and satires, Analyze This might just bridge the gap between intelligent and funny films, whilst making a new gap of its own: a smart movie that doesn't take enough risks.. . . 
