Seen at the UA Criterion for $4.50 on 28 July 1997. *My Best Friend's Wedding* is the film that finally proves that a woman's best friend is not diamonds--he's a gay man.
I had resisted this movie, because frankly, who can forget *Mary Reilly*?
Did anyone even see *Mary Reilly*?
Case closed.... *My Best Friend's Wedding* is the best Julia Roberts movie since *I Love Trouble.
* Let's face it, Dermot Mulroney (as Michael) and RRRRRRupert Everett (as George; a gay actor playing a gay character) are a lot more appealing than Nick Nolte--whom I love, even though he refuses to return my many, many phone calls.
Julianne (Julia Roberts) has a best friend in Michael (Dermot Mulroney)  with whom she once had a brief romance, nine years ago.
But when she discovers that he is marrying superwealthy Kimmy (Cameron Diaz--who's inexplicably hated by many women I know), she suddenly realizes that she's in love with him, and she has four days to stop the nuptials.
What ensues is improbable but comic.
Julie flies into Chicago and is immediately swept into the wedding plans.
Kimmy, the bride, fawns all over Julie and after a while, it seems that Kimmy really is perfect.
She thwarts Julie's attempts to discredit or embarrass her--whether she's being forced to sing off-key karaoke or admitting wrongdoing to Michael.
This frustrates Julianne.
So she has to call in the big guns--her gay friend George.
He actually has more of a life than she does.
George shows up in Chicago and poses as her fiance.
Her machinations fail and it is hard to root for her.
What make the movie enjoyable is that it is a traditional romantic comedy, except this time the Rock Hudson type is openly gay.
Even the opening credits give a nod to tradition.
Julia Robertsactually has good comic timing.
She falls down with the best of them--John Ritter, Dudley Moore.
Personally, watching people fall down is a cheap laugh unless it's done well (which is why I do not really like too many Blake Edwards movies).
As for the romantice, the soundtrack amplifies the throwback ambiance with ballads like "The Way You Look Tonight" or the entire cast exuberantly singing "I Say a Little Prayer" at a crab house (the best scene in the movie--the reason I would sit through the movie again).
No Depeche Mode or Smith dirges here.
Dermot Mulroney turns in a good performance as the "straight man" and we will probably be seeing him in bigger-budget movies from now on; but the real scene-stealer is Everett, who is more than just the typical gay character dying to be a woman's best friend.
He is a good friend, and he counters her mad schemes with comeuppance rather than compliance.
The supporting cast is also very good.
Rather memorable are Rachel Griffiths and Carrie Preston as the loudly dressed sisters and friends of the bride, Samantha and Amanda; Susan Sullivan shows up as the upper crust mother of the bride and plays the part well.
JD Department: I could have very easily snuck into Speed 2 at the Criterion, but decided against it; if the building collapsed, it would be worse than being found dead with dirty underwear.
Copyright (c) 1997 Seth J. Bookey, New York, NY 10021, sethbook@panix.com.
Other film reviews by Seth Bookey are available at http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/mission.html. . 
