Before entering "The Haunting", it's important for the viewer to consider what kind of movie they're looking for.
If it's a terrifying horror movie, look elsewhere.
If it's a special effects extravaganza with fine acting and some of the best sets ever seen, this is the movie to see.
It should also be noted that as a remake of the chilling original, the film is not quite up to par.
If taken on its own merits however, this is a rather fun, brainless summer movie.
Dr. David Marrow is a professor whose speciality is fear.
Taking a group of subjects consisting of the timid Eleanor; the perky, gorgeous Theo, and the goofy Owen, he travels to Hill House.
Hill House is a tremendous mansion in the middle of nowhere which has a rather checkered past (I don't want to say more, as further explanation would be a spoiler).
Dr.
Marrow does not, however, tell the group that they are there to examine the effects of fear.
They are supposedly there to cure the insomnia experienced by the group.
Upon reaching the house, it slowly dawns on the three, and eventually on Dr.
Marrow, that the house is indeed haunted, and out for their blood.
The house seems to take a special interest in Eleanor.
As the nights go by, the house becomes more and more dangerous.
I was rather disappointed at the bad reviews this recieved (except from the always reliable Roger Ebert).
So many critics seemed to grade this based entirely on how it compared to the original.
If viewed on its own merits, I found this to be quite an enjoyable film.
The acting is quite good, although the characters really are underwritten.
The standout in my opinion is Liam Neeson, but I've always been a fan of his.
The one person I was not so impressed by was Lili Taylor, though she seems to be receiving all the praise from other critics.
Owen Wilson does get a little annoying at times, but for the most part he adds some neccesary comic relief.
The greatest part of this film is amazingly not the visuals, though they are impressive.
It is the house itself, that steals the show.
Filled with long, dark corridors which seem to lead to nowhere, and are filled with chilling (and sometimes moving!
) statues, the house is truly awe inspiring.
The fireplace, and its possible denizens, is one of the few truly frightening parts of the film.
This brings us to the flaws, and there are quite a few of them.
As I mentioned before, the characters are very underwritten.
We know nothing about Dr.
Marrow, Theo, or Owen, and very little about Eleanor.
The dialagoue is, at times, positively abysmal.
For example, Liam Neeson climbs a very rickety flight of stairs to help an apparently suicidal Eleanor.
The stairs collapse, all over the place, and Owen points at them, open mouthed saying "Look, the stairs are falling.
" My only other really major complaint is the film's end, which was really quite terrible.
Eleanor confronts the evil spirit in a huge (but strangely disappointing)special effects event, while spouting out some sort of strange speech about family values!
As I stated earlier, do not see this film if you want a terrifying horror movie.
It simply doesn't inspire much fear.
However, I do reccomend it simply to see the amazing, bone chilling sets.
For this, some fine visual effects, and some good acting, "The Haunting" earns three and a half stars.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick.
Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad.
See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever.
See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com. . 
