Release Date: February 5, 1999 Starring: Mel Gibson, Maria Bello, Gregg Henry, David Paymer, Deborah Kara Unger, Kris Kristofferson, Lucy Alexis Liu, William Devane, James Coburn Directed by: Brian Helgeland Distributed by: Paramount Pictures MPAA Rating: R (strong violence, language, drug and sexual content)  URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/payback.htm. In PAYBACK, Mel Gibson has the role of a surly, hulking badass named Porter.
Porter has a unique disposition: he's the bad guy we know and hate caught in the main role.
Already the red flags are going up in the marketing department -- audiences'll never go for it; they need someone more noble to cheer for.
And what's this?
By the end of the movie, Porter's *still* a badass!
Unacceptable.
A successful antihero pic, GROSSE POINTE BLANK had our hero character come full circle and pick up some respectable virtues by movie's end.
But not Porter.
Nope.
However, maybe it *is* Porter's stubborn badassedness that helps save this movie.
PAYBACK needs something to save it, because it doesn't always work.
Porter, essayed in fine form by Gibson, is a master bank robber who specializes in payroll jobs -- taking large sums of money all at once.
Unfortunately, his partner (Gregg Henry) has double-crossed him, and run off with Porter's half of their latest score: $70,000.
Not only that, but Porter's girlfriend (Deborah Kara Unger) was in on the double-cross.
So now Porter's got to follow a cold trail back to his money, through a lethal syndicate of mob heads and crooked cops.
It's when Porter gets on the trail back to his money that the movie runs cold as well.
Here it loses the upbeat tempo which is crucial to the movie's sucess, and instead of providing snappy, guns-blazing action, it lulls into unnecessary segments of development.
This isn't good filmmaking, especially when audiences expect to get a thrill ride.
Fortunately, the slower middle portion is bookended by a great opening sequence and a nice finishing touch.
The finishing touch is loaded with irony, and it's just a sampling of the script's finer moments.
Written by Brian Helgeland, who co-wrote the award-winning script of L.A.
CONFIDENTIAL, it includes a number of comic moments that get the audience in the proper mood to forgive the movie's slower moments.
Helgeland, who makes his directorial debut here, chooses to try and spice up these slow parts with excessive blood and gore, but it largely desensitizes the viewer to Porter's mission.
It does not accomplish its task.
The movie comes in at slightly above average for Mel Gibson's fine performance in the lead role.
He gives a sadistic credibility to Porter, one that might elude actors of a lesser talent.
The supports are all serviceable, and they're not really asked to do a whole lot in a movie like this.
Largely, the pieces fit together; it's just an odd puzzle to fit them into, and for this, PAYBACK is a questionable choice.
Not to be seen by the lighthearted movie-goer, it will run its course in the box office and then reappear as an occasional bachelor party video rental. . . 
