    During "Primary Colors", I honestly wondered what this film's impact  would have been if we had never heard of Monica.
That we did makes  "Primary Colors" all the more powerful.
Despite major flaws, and holes  at the end of this modern-day fable, the questions it raises about our  moral state in politics today are without a doubt powerful and  important.
The basic question Mike Nichols and Elaine May raise is  this: what part does morals and character play in choosing our  President?
John Travolta turns in a solid, albeit unspectacular, performance as  Jack Stanton, a Democratic progressive candidate who has mastered the  art of the game.
He is an impeccable candidate, with populist positions  and an ability to inspire.
However, like every other character, he is  extremely flawed, with serious womanizing problems and troubles in his  past.
During one of his many campaign stops, he meets Henry Burton  (Adrian Lester).
Henry is beginning to question the present state of  affairs, and he wants to be inspired.
Henry and Jack are joined by Susan Stanton, the ambitious wife  played perfectly by Emma Thompson.
They are the three who define this  story, it is through their eyes that we see this story unfold.
Billy  Bob Thornton is hysterical as Richard Jemmons, a campaign consultant,  and Kathy Bates turns in a marvelous performance as Libby Holder, a  private investigator hired to protect the Stantons from any dirt that  might come at them.
The story follows the primary races, as Stanton battles for the  Democratic nomination.
His main rival is Lawrence Harris, a New England  senator who is running on an economic platform that is gaining support.
Stanton has to face all obstacles.
He is running against Harris, the  press, his vices, and the past.
Early on, we see how Stanton uses lies  and deceit to conjure up an emotional anecdote that connects with a  group of voters.
We ask, is this so wrong?
Shouldn't a man appeal to  his constituents, because he must be able to inspire them, to make them  believe?
Stanton's beliefs are never in question.
His flaws are  extreme, especially his womanizing, that which we are introduced to  early and often.
The story follows Stanton and Harris, and is often a raucous comedy  filled with humor to the extreme.
However, midway through the campaign  Harris suffers a heart attack.
The man who takes his mantle is Fred  Picker, a former governor of Florida who runs an idealistic campaign on  the issues AND on the moral high ground.
He abhors campaign finance  abuses, therefore, he runs no ads.
He abhors words, so he leads by  action.
Picker's campaign sets off a deep contrast between he and  Stanton, whose vices add up tremendously.
Slowly, Henry is forced to  make difficult decisions regarding his life, the people he loves, and  the ideals he adheres to.
"Primary Colors" isn't a brilliant film.
The beginning is flat-out  hysterical, but the comedy dies down when the movie becomes more of a  character drama/study.
It is unevenly paced, too long, and simply  boring at some parts.
Yet, it is also deeply emotional, it triggers  responses which generate questions on the system of affairs today.
"Primary Colors" just might be the most important film of the year  because of what it shows about ourselves.
It is a mirror to our  society, displaying our faults as people, and displaying the state of  affairs in our nation.
It is not about the Presidency.
In the end, it  is about ourselves.
FINAL: *** out of **** Flawed, but important and entertaining nonetheless. . 
