Seen on New Years Day 1999 by myself at the Cinema 1 for $8.75. Young Will Shakespeare is having writer's block.
His pre-Viagra therapist suggests that he find his muse so he can get his quill up and running to complete his latest play, "Romeo and Ethel the Pirate's Daughter.
" And he must write in a hurry.
The producer at The Rose theatre is pressuring him, as he owes money to some local thugs.
He also has dealings with the competition across the Thames--the Curtain.
So sets the stage for the comedy *Shakespeare in Love*, with the personable and sexy Joseph Fiennes (as the young playwright) leading a cast of Oscar winners and nominees.
Anthony Hopkins he ain't, but he is entertaining.
Meanwhile, noblewoman Viola de Lessups (Gwennyth Paltrow) wants a life "full of poetry, and adventure," and to take to the stage in an age that forbids women actors.
So she auditions at the Rose disguised as "Thomas Kent" for a role in "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter.
" If there is any element that makes no sense in the movie is that anyone would not notice she is a woman in male drag, but that is my sole complaint.
Like many a Shakespeare play, there are twists and turns, cross-dressing, and mistaken identities.
Director John Madden and writers Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard bring to life a lively bunch, a Who's Who of British Film Actors: Geoffrey Rush as one of the rival producers; Colin Firth as the venemous Lord Wessex, Viola's fiance; Simon Callow as a petty bureaucrat; Judi Dench as the older, sharp-as-a-tack Queen Elizabeth I; Rupert Everett as the Bard's rival, Christopher Marlowe; and Tom Wilkinson as Hugh Fennyman.
The movie's comedy also succeeds as it shows the "origins" of elements of Romeo and Juliet.
For example, climbing up to Viola's terrace; the kind confidence of the helpful nurse (played hilariously by Imelda Staunton); suggested plot devices come from his rival.
Anyone with even a minimal amount of exposure to Shakespeare will find enough to appreciate the in-jokes.
The best sequence is the one in which the lovers run their lines; while the soundtrack maintains a continuous dialogue, the scenes intercut the lovers both on stage and half-clad in bed.
This is what editing is all about.
What makes *Shakespeare in Love* a winning film is an enthusiastic cast, quickwitted dialogues, comic timing, and an obvious love of The Bard's work.
Also adding to the movie's charm are some anachronistic elements: Shakespeare goes to a therapist; oarsmen on the Thames are more like New York cabbies ("Follow that boat!
"); and statements like, "I hear there's a future in tobacco.
" England has never looked sunnier; indeed, there doesn't seem to be any significant rainfall in this romp.
Also worthy of acclaim is Deborah Lynn Scott's costume design.
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html. . 
