U-571 is a submarine war movie in almost all senses, but I couldn't help  thinking of it as a warped science fiction movie.
Space movie elements most  have seen before are abundant here.
The crew who sometimes doesn't get along,  the ship/submarine that's not suited for flying/moving through water and  needs repairs, the captain shouting off random commands to crew members that  the audience doesn't understand, etc.
During one point near the middle,  Matthew McConaughey even says, "Make it so" a famous line often uttered by  Captain Picard (Patrick Stewart) in recent Star Trek movies and the Star  Trek: The Next Generation television series.
My mind drifted away with  thoughts like these for the entire movie, yet it was easy to keep up with the  events happening onscreen.
U-571 takes some simple plot concepts and milks  them for all they are worth.
At times this makes for an entertaining action  film that’s easy to follow.
At other times it's downright cheesy.
An American group of submariners led by Lt. Andrew Tyler (Matthew  McConaughey) sneak onto a German submarine hoping to capture the Enigma  cipher machine that would enable the American army to understand coded German  radio communications.
The group kills most of the crew inside and beats the  ship up pretty bad, but soon their own ship gets blown up.
This forces the  American crew of nine to stay on the enemy submarine and pose as Germans when  a German re-supply sub comes to help them.
The crew, which includes Chief  Klough (Harvey Keitel) and Tank (Dave Power), must work together to evade  German ships in hostile waters.
There is a lot to like about this movie.
Some action sequences are  spectacular.
One particular scene where water explodes out of the ocean in a  perfectly timed pattern is nothing short of amazing.
The sound is also  astounding.
Remarkable care to the sound effects for this movie make it an  easy contender for Best Sound and Best Sound Effects Editing at the Oscars.
The sound really tests the theater’s speaker system.
Walking out of the  movie, I became very surprised.
I could still hear!
Another nice thing about  this movie is that the German characters actually speak in German.
Instead of  conversing in English with German accents, there are subtitles as they talk  on the screen.
These people are actually speaking in their native language.
This is quite a surprise in a mainstream Hollywood action production.
The problem with U-571 is that it lacks appeal.
The lead characters  (McConaughey, Keitel, Paxton, and more) are always grimy, their faces soaked  with sweat.
I don't need to see Harvey Keitel or Bill Paxton with combed over  hair ever again.
It's hard to look at Matthew McConaughey and not see him  naked playing bongo drums.
The crew (which also features the Chris Rock of  the 1940s) isn't very likable, and there was no chance to pick a favorite or  choose someone to root for.
U-571 is also under the crosshairs regarding its  accuracy.
In reality, the British actually captured the Enigma machine and  many small details (mostly regarding the operation of a submarine) get  overlooked.
Some WWII veterans have said it's the, "Funniest movie they've  ever seen.
" The ending of the movie made me groan with displeasure.
It was  just too unbelievable.
U-571 can't decide whether it wants to be Saving Private Ryan or Titanic, and  it fails at both.
Too many elements were implausible, and some good action  doesn't make up for the actors and plotline.
This submarine sinks without a  doubt.. . 
