Last year, writer/director Night Shyamalan rocketed from obscurity to the  A-list with "The Sixth Sense," which won both critical and popular acclaim.
This year, he hopes that lightning will strike twice by serving up another  supernatural drama, "Unbreakable.
"  Bruce Willis is back, and there's a  little boy and a twist ending, too.
However, the current pic just doesn't  work.
You wouldn't know it from the trailers, but "Unbreakable" is a superhero  movie.
It begins with a set of stats about comic-book collecting.
(It turns  out that the average collector will devote an entire year of his life to  reading comics; I wonder what he wasted the other sixty-nine years on.
)   Comics come up in the movie in the person of Elijah Price (Samuel L.  Jackson), who suffers from osteogenesis imperfecta, a disease that causes him  to have brittle bones.
Because he's spent most of his life recuperating from  injuries, Elijah had a lot of time to read comics.
He owns an art gallery  devoted to original art by comic-book artists and has an unusual theory:   superheroes live and work among us.
Elijah figures that if he can have a  disease that makes his body easily broken, then there must be others who are  unbreakable.
Security guard David Dunn (Bruce Willis) is unbreakable.
At the beginning of  the movie, David is the sole survivor of a terrible train wreck.
Over a  hundred people are killed, but David walks away without a scratch.
Based on  this, Elijah believes that David is the fulfillment of his theory.
David has  problems of his own; he's breaking up with his wife Megan (Robin Wright Penn)  and trying to maintain a relationship with his son Jeremy (Spencer Treat  Clark).
So, David resists the idea that he's Superman, until he discovers  unusual abilities he never knew he had.
Everyone tries very hard to make this movie fly.
Shyamalan pervades every  scene with the same subtle creepiness that enriched "The Sixth Sense.
"  His  direction shows the same meticulous attention to color, and his script endows  the fragile premise with as much realism as he can muster.
Willis gives his  best performance in awhile.
While I found him unconvincing as a shrink in  "Sixth Sense," Willis shines as dull-witted characters who are out of their  depth (as in "12 Monkeys" and "Pulp Fiction").
David is such a character.
(When Elijah inquires if David has ever been sick, David has to ask his boss  and his wife to find out that he hasn't.
)   Jackson is slick and charismatic  with an undercurrent of menace.
Penn is down-to-earth and genuine.
Clark is  sweet and likeable.
However, despite the admirable efforts of the director and his cast,  "Unbreakable" just can't make its plot work.
A major part of the problem is  the somber attitude with which Shyamalan approaches his subject.
Superheroes  can be a lot of fun, but a sober tone robs the concept of its joy and wonder.
The movie's website includes a lot of information on real-life unbreakable  people, so I assume that Shyamalan shares the theory he puts in Elijah's  mouth.
Willis recently said that "Unbreakable" was the first chapter in a  trilogy.
Hope the next two have a sense of humor.
Bottom line:  Unbreakable performances, brittle premise.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review:  http://www.madreview.com/main.html. . 
