Starring Ryan Phillippe; Salma Hayek; Sela Ward; Breckin Meyer & Sherry Stringfield. 54 focuses around the character of Shane O'Shea, played by Ryan Phillippe, and how his life takes a dramatic turn after he becomes an employee of New York's infamous nightclub, Studio 54, during the 1970's.
The fictitious story of the Phillippe character that is quite weak, but the interesting look at the fact-based events at the club more than made up for the weaknesses of the main character.
I actually didn't expect a whole lot going in, so I was very surprised at how good 54 really was.
Mike Myers is brilliant as Studio 54's owner, Steve Rubell -- I had to actually remind myself a couple of times that I was watching Myers and not the real Steve Rubell.
Salma Hayek and Neve Campbell fans will be disappointed.
While both actresses are featured prominently in the ads for the movie, their parts are really nothing more than fairly minor supporting roles.
The film's unlikely star, Phillippe (I Know What You Did Last Summer), is not a bad actor, although I'm not sure if he would have been able to carry the movie if it weren't for the 70's atmosphere.
It kept my attention most of the time, thereby minimizing the possibility of catching any deficiencies in his performance.
Also helping Phillippe was the fact that the entire supporting cast was strong.
While Myers and Campbell have limited roles in this film, they do add significantly to it.
Hayek isn't bad for the most part, but there are a couple of scenes where she is a bit painful to watch.
I have to admit it -- I actually enjoyed listening to all of the 70's disco music.
I feel I should be attending some sort of group therapy session after owning up to that.
Although I am happy to say that I still think that everybody in the seventies had to be on some serious drugs for them to actually go out in public dressed like they did.
I must say that after watching 54, I really wished that the club were still open.
It looked like it was a hell of a party.
I think 54 captured the reason the club became the hot spot that it was during the late 70's and early 80's.
Sure, the fictitious story of Phillippe's character was not great, but just the atmosphere and look of the movie really did make me feel as though I was actually there experiencing the party times at 54 during a more carefree and swinging era.
I'm sure another Mike Myers' character, Austin Powers, would have approved.
Worth checking out if only for the interesting look into the world of the beautiful people in the 70's.. . 
