Paramount / 1:37 / 1997 / R (mucho gore, violence, language, nudity) Cast: Laurence Fishburne; Sam Neill; Kathleen Quinlan; Joely Richardson;  Richard T. Jones; Jack Noseworthy; Jason Isaacs; Sean Pertwee; Holley  Chant  Director: Paul Anderson  Screenplay: Philip Eisner . A traditional ghost story dressed up in spiffy sci-fi trappings, "Event  Horizon" plays like a patchwork assembly of the "Alien" films with a  spooky demonic presence in place of the nasty outer-space monster.
In  fact, it's so derivative in pretty much every imaginable way, that it  makes "Mimic" -- another new release that heavily incorporates bits and  pieces from the afore-mentioned trilogy -- look like a complete  original.
"Horizon" isn't ever the movie event it aspires to be, but,  boy, it does have its weird moments.
If being something of a copycat is a hefty drawback, then at least  "Event Horizon" is successful in setting up its terrifying atmosphere.
Director Paul Anderson (who made the awful "Mortal Kombat") and  production designer Joseph Bennett kick off the creepy proceedings  incredibly well; that even the slightest detail -- in one scene, a lone  drop of water -- seems menacing is a testament to that.
But after a  stable first hour or so, it becomes all too clear where Philip Eisner's  screenplay is getting ready to go.
The film takes its title from a prototype spaceship that mysteriously  turns up somewhere off the crust of Neptune in 2047 following a  seven-year disappearance.
Event Horizon inventor Dr. William Weir (Sam  Neill) and emergency team leader Captain Miller (Laurence Fishburne)  head a crew aboard a search-and-rescue craft to intercept the Horizon  and find out what happened to those on board.
A radio transmission gives  Weir and company little hope -- distinguishable among the mass screaming  is "Liberate me!
", a Latin plea for help.
Their perspectives don't improve after climbing aboard and finding what  appears to be blood and entrails caked on the walls.
Miller's corps --  who include Kathleen Quinlan, Richard T. Jones ("The Trigger Effect")  and Joely Richardson ("101 Dalmatians") -- make several other disturbing  discoveries, one of them being a surprise confession from Weir and a  video tape of ship goings-on that becomes suspiciously snowy at one key  moment.
Before long, there appears to be an evil visitor lurking in the  Event Horizon's core, something that is capable of turning the team's  worst fears against them.
It first preys upon Miller's engineer Justin  (Jack Noseworthy).
Every twist "Event Horizon" takes, the less involving it becomes,  finally degenerating into an exceedingly silly, endlessly gory climax  where Fishburne gets to wallop a nude, scabby Neill and the blood flows  like cherry Kool-Aid -- literally.
A rule stating the less that's shown,  the more horrifying it can be is certainly true in this case.
For  instance, one of the movie's "huge scares" (when we're shown what  exactly is on the security tape) made me laugh so hard I nearly fell out  of my seat -- it looks like a kinkier, more explicit Marilyn Manson  music video (although it might be worth focusing on if you've ever  wondered what it looks like when someone's intestines are pulled out  through their mouth).
I never found "Event Horizon" unwatchable, but it is disappointing that  what starts out so strong finishes up like "Alien" by way of Clive  Barker and David Lynch.
The movie tells us too much too fast, and as a  result, exactly where the ship has been is pretty easy to figure out.
Also, "Horizon" treats the obvious villain somewhat ambiguously, so it's  no shock when he wields a Ginsu and carves up victims in an icky manner  that would impress Hannibal Lecter.
Other characters are shakily developed, too.
Fishburne is excellent, but Miller is low enough  on personality so that you never quite root for him, and Brooks just  hangs around to provide unnecessary comic relief.
Quinlan and Noseworthy  -- both of whom starred in last May's "Breakdown" -- are the real  standouts here.
So while at least half of "Event Horizon"'s substance is problematic, it  does a fantastic job with visuals and ambience.
The seemingly dynamic  hand of effects supervisor Richard Yuricich molds some really exciting,  dazzling sights, and it's also interesting to see science-fiction that  focuses on religious nuances rather than slime-dripping creatures, even  if "Contact" did beat it to the punch (and do a far better job).
The  movie covers fascinating, absorbing territory for a while, but when the  Event Horizon goes to hell, so, in many areas, does the film.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck  E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/. . 
