In "Scream", director Wes Craven and writer Kevin Williamson created a film  which was a brilliant blend of horror and self mocking comedy.
In "Scream 2",  the same writer, director team made a film which, while not quite as  enjoyable as the first, blended the two genres as it joyfully poked fun at  sequels.
With "Scream 3", Wes Craven was given the chance to have fun with  trilogies.
The problem is, Williamson wasn't on board this time and was  replaced by Ehren Kruger ("Arlington Road").
Williamson is sorely missed.
While all the old characters are back, Sidney (Neve Campbell), Dopey Dewey  (David Arquette), and Gale Weathers (Courtney Cox) don't seem to be having  too much fun anymore.
The truth of the matter is, I can't blame them.
The  Scream films have turned into the exact thing they were trying to satirize.
The ghost masked killer is back, and he/she is desperately seeking Sidney  (sorry, couldn't help myself).
However, Sidney has gone into hiding out in  the woods, fearful of yet another killer coming after her.
Meanwhile, Stab 3,  the movie in a movie of the Woodsburough murders, is being filmed.
The film's  cast is becoming worried that the killer may start after them rather than of  their real life counterparts.
Dewey and Gale team up with homicide detective,  Kincaid (Patrick Dempsey), and attempt to find the killer before he strikes  again (and again, and again).
Tossed into the mix are Stab 3's director,  Roman Bridger (Scott Foley), the film's producer, John Milton (Lance  Henriksen), Stab's entire cast, and, somehow, Sidney's dead mother, Maureen  (I believe played by Priscilla Pointer).
One of the trademarks of the Scream films has been to kill two characters off  at the very beginning of the film.
I personally believe this is a bad idea.
This makes for an incredibly predictable first ten minutes or so.
In "Scream  2" we may have received this predictable intro, but at least the remainder of  the film was somewhat surprising.
In "Scream 3", an easily forseen film  follows this intro.
One of the other major failings in "Scream 3", as opposed  to the previous two films, is the lack of any real humor.
We all might  chuckle at Dewey's stupidity at times, but it's not the same.
The reason is  obvious, and for those of you that haven't seen "Scream 2", I advise you not  to read this next sentence.
With the departure of Randy (Jamie Kennedy), all  the humor has been sapped out of the film.
We are no longer granted hilarious  little monologues about the faults of horror movies or, at times, of movies  in general.
Despite all this, "Scream 3" does have its moments.
Randy does make a brief  appearance of sorts, which is quite amusing, but promises things the movie  fails to deliver.
Also, watch for a cameo by two characters from another film  series which comes completely out of left field.
It's also nice to see Dewey  and Gale again, as the two will occasionally indulge in some very funny  dialogue.
However, Sidney has rather worn out her welcome.
She's no longer  the strong character that she was in the previous two films.
She now hides  away from her troubles half the time, and simply appears tired of the entire  situation the other half (who can blame her?).
I suppose I could go on listing faults all day, but what exactly is the  point?
Nearly every teenager on the planet is going to see this film, despite  what I say.
Perhaps they'll see something in it that I didn't.
One more thing  I simply must note: indie film favorite, Parker Posey ("Coneheads", "The  House of Yes") is absolutely wasted in the role of the actress playing Gale  Weathers in Stab 3.
Parker is a delightful actress, but she is allowed to do  nothing here other than follow Gale about, making idiotic and annoying  comments about how she would have done things differently.
"Scream 3" runs  far too long at 116 minutes.
I don't think you'll be able to sleep because  someone is constantly screaming (imagine that) throughout the film.
I'd  recommend it to fans of really cheesy "b" horror films, but to no one else.
I  give it a generous two and a half out of five stars.
Comments?
Feel free to e-mail them to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net For past reviews, movie news, and other fun stuff, visit:  www.dependentfilms.net. * * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick.
Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad.
See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever.
See it only if you enjoy pain.. . 
