REVIEW:  Great Expectations by Luke Buckmaster (bucky@alphalink.com.au). If you're after a comparison between the classic Charles Dickens novel Great Expectations and the new, modern day film version of the same name then I'm afraid I can't give you one (simply because I haven't read the book).
But I suspect that many of today's teenagers, who the film is primarily targeted for, are in the same position as I was - no great expectations, no novel to set the standards.
Generation X actors Ethan Hawke and Gwyneth Paltrow have gelled together on screen for a simple task: look hunky dory, sound like bimbo's with intelligence.
They have succeeded very well on both tasks.
Living in the small town of Florida, young lad Finn Bell (Ethan Hawke) is asked to accompany the incredibly wealthy Ms. Nora Dinsmoor (Ann Bancroft), a long time resident who lost her mind after a man left her standing at the altar thirty years before.
Aged 8, Finn is immediately attracted to Dinsmoor's 11 year old (and already stunning) daughter Estella (Raquel Beaudene).
Seizing the opportunity to share some of her troubled wisdom, Dinsmoor warns: "She'll only break your heart; it's a fact.
And even though I warn you, even though I guarantee you that the girl will only hurt you terribly, you'll still pursue her.
Ain't love grand?
". Through emotional and sexual seduction, Estella's power over Finn grows until their off and on relationship hits the boundaries of time and location.
Now into adult hood, Estella (Gwyneth Paltrow) moves to New York after a rousing night with Finn (Ethan Hawke).
Years later, a mystery benefactor suddenly requests Finn to showcase his talent for drawing (of which was nothing more than a hobby) and make himself known in the art world.
Off he goes to New York, and can you guess who he bumps into?
The reunion of these two characters brings forth some rather surprising results, and as the film begins to wrap up we are able to appreciate the love story that has kept us interested all this time.
With a surprisingly dramatic climax, Great Expectations decides to change its path of romance and love to a much more engaging finish (even though this is only for a short time).
Sure - it's far from perfect, but perfection isn't the name of the game - the film has a sugary sweetness buried deep inside, which is eventually discovered and appreciated.
The icy cold performance by Gwyneth Paltrow, and the puppy love role that Ethan Hawke plays are quite obviously nothing special, but they both look great together as a modern couple with a passion for seduction.
Although Great Expectations may not be the most satisfying cinema experience, it has more than enough bones in it's body to make it an enjoyable feast of Generation X gibberish.. . . 
