PAYBACK Cast: Mel Gibson, Maria Bello, Gregg Henry, James Coburn, Kris Kristofferson, William Devane, David Paymer, Deborah Kara Unger Director: Brian Helgeland Screenplay: Terry Hayes and Brian Helgeland based on The Hunter by Richard Stark Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 3 stars. "Get ready to root for the bad guy," trumpet Payback's advertising taglines.
With a mean spirit and a bad temper, Mel Gibson returns to form in a film that is so nasty it's almost refreshing.
The film's dark and cynical edge is driven by Terry Hayes and Brian Helgeland's screenplay (based on The Hunter by Richard Stark), and Helgeland also directs with a similarly edgy style.
The scripting bears similarities to Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels in its cleverness and wit; both films consistently keep themselves two steps ahead of their audiences.
But also like Lock, Stock, Payback's screenplay is responsible for its only major downfall.
Character and meaning are afterthoughts, whilst violence and brutality take center stage.
Surprisingly, the film gels quite nicely.
The combination of Helgeland's hostile direction and Gibson's eccentric title performance is a winning one.
Gibson especially seems to relish the opportunity of playing a bad guy.
A really bad guy.
In fact, in the first ten minutes or so of Payback we've already witnessed Porter (Gibson) take money off a street beggar, steal cigarettes from a waitress, and take advantage of some poor guys credit card.
You see, after a money heist, Porter's partner Val (Gregg Henry) and wife Lynn (Deborah Kara Unger) double cross him - they shoot him in the back and leave him for dead.
Much to their disgust, Porter soon makes it known to them that he is indeed live and well, and thirsty for revenge.
The tough Porter is now even tougher, and he will do absolutely anything to win back his share of the loot.
I could complain about Payback's lack of heart and emotion, but I guess that would be missing the point.
No doubt both Brian Helgeland and Mel Gibson intended to create something different, something that could separate itself from the many other blood-soaked crime capers.
In that way, Payback is a success, though that's not to say it is totally original.
The film borrows bits and pieces from other films and gives a fresh spin on them.
Although the old cigarette dropped on petrol trick has been done numerous times before, it seems irresistible when performed by Gibson.
There is something about watching a cuddly Hollywood star trapped inside a vividly portrayed world of crime that immediately captivates.
Although flawed with a script that is too clever for its own good, Payback provides great light entertainment.
In fact, I was often so amused by this film that I became frustrated knowing that the inevitable would come - an ending that really doesn't satisfy.
By the time that Payback reels through its final few scenes, it is obvious that the film is too weak on plot and characters to make it a memorable flick.
It is also obvious, though, that almost all of Payback is immensely enjoyable.
"I saw weird stuff in that place last night.
Weird, strange, sick, twisted, eerie, godless, evil stuff.
And I want in.
"  -Homer Simpson. . 
