Rounders (1998) - Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, Martin Landau, John Malkovich.    Everyone has their little problems.
Matt Damon's character in    "Rounders" has a big problem - a gambling problem that threatens to    ruin his life more than once.
"Rounders" flirts with being a great    story about Mike McDermott (Damon) and his difficult path to a Pyrrhic    victory, coming close, but never really making it.
Despite having never joined a 12-step program, it's clear that Mike    doesn't have all the cards in his deck.
In the opening scenes of the    movie, he loses his life savings, including the money he was using to    pay his law school tuition.
With some difficulty, he takes up    low-paying night jobs and settles down with his girlfriend Jo    (Gretchen Mol).
Nine months later, an old card buddy with the appropriate nickname of    Worm (Edward Norton) gets out of prison and promptly gets beat up for    skipping out on his old gambling debts.
Mike reluctantly returns to    the shady world of illegal high-stakes poker to help Worm pay his    debts, remembering why the game is so irresistible and watching the    rest of his life collapse.
Damon and Norton are both excellent actors, and it shows.
The audience    is given remarkable insight into Damon's character, from narrative    voice-overs to the slightest facial expressions.
Norton's "Worm" is,    well, a bit of a worm - stacking decks with the best of them, Norton    projects just the right blend of good intentions and bad habits.
For the most part, the supporting cast - with character names like    Petra, Kinish and Grandma - is also excellent.
Martin Landau has a    small but significant part as a law professor and McDermott's    enigmatic mentor.
John Malkovich, as the card shark, "KGB," is    suitably devious and insane; his Oreo-munching performance alone is    cause to see this movie.
But "Rounders" fails to sell the story convincingly on two fronts.
One    is the premise - not everyone is familiar with poker, so a lot of the    jargon may go right over some viewers' heads.
The other is Mol.
A key part of McDermott's fall from grace is the    collapse of his romance with Jo, but it simply isn't plausible.
Mol's    emotional gauge is stuck on over-perky ex-cheerleader.
There simply    isn't any chemistry between her and Damon, and it's hard to care about    their alleged relationship.
"Rounders" - the term refers to a poker player who makes the rounds of    local games - has so much potential.
It could have been the next    "The Color of Money," but merely deals us a pair instead of a straight    flush.. . 
