In English class they teach you that there are three conflicts used in writing: Man vs. Man, Man vs.
Nature, and Man vs.
Himself.
Well to really say what G.I.
JANE is, we have to add a new category .
.
.
Woman vs. Man.
Jordan O'Neil (Demi Moore) has always wanted more experience in the military.
Unfortunately this was something hard for her to gain in a male-dominated, very often female-degrading, organization.
It seems the Navy Lieutenant still caries a grudge after being denied a combat position during the Gulf War.
But when Senator Lillian DeHaven (Anne Bancroft) is preparing for her next election and needs something that will give her a sure-fire win, the two meet and our premise is setup.
Pushing for woman's rights, DeHaven will get O'Neil to be the first female "guinea pig" to go thru the Navy SEALS training program, something that even 60% of men can't seem to accomplish.
The ultimate goal?
If O'Neil can make it, full integration may be the next step in the military.
Naturally, O'Neil goes for it.
It's a chance to prove herself.
It seems a win-win situation.
O'Neil will get experience and DeHaven will get some positive publicity.
Sounds perfect right?
Well, aside from O'Neil herself, nobody expects much of a result .
.
.
including the Senator.
The building block of G.I.
JANE is really just a backdrop to the real conflicts: Will the men come to accept her?
Will her boyfriend support her?
Quite simply, can O'Neil make it?
This movie is very well done even if you do know what you're in for: vulgar sexual references by chauvinistic males that make the lone-female even more determined to stick it out.
It's not a complaint that this film is pretty cut and dry .
.
.
it's your typical "against the odds" hero, er, heroine story .
.
.
but if you're looking for something absolutely spectacular, you might be slightly disappointed.
Demi Moore, one of the highest paid female stars and also one of the most criticized, does a decent job here.
Her body is still her main asset and she's still showing it off, although now in a more muscular fashion.
Anne Bancroft and Viggo Mortensen (as Master Chief John Urgayle) both do good jobs at making you hate them.
In fact, the only likeable character is O'Neil herself.
She's an outsider and we're stuck rooting for her whether we like it or not.
One thing that stops this film from being a stand up and cheer movie is that's it's so brutal!
By the time G.I.
JANE wraps up, you're not in high spirits, you're downright exhausted!
It's not an action flick, but G.I.
JANE has plenty of fighting, screaming, blood, and gunfire to satisfy those with an insatiable appetite for such things.
It can be hard to follow, and there are a few things that  come up that are just as quickly forgotten about, but if you move past that, it's not a bad film.
At times confusing, at times implausible, at times hokey (some dialogue wants to be deemed classic, but comes off quite silly), it isn't the kind of film that will be remembered long, but it is recommendable.
Here's a movie that gives new meaning to the term "chick flick".. . 
