Directed by Norman Jewison.
Screenplay by Armyan Bernstein and Dan  Gordon, based on the books "The Sixteenth Round" by Rubin Carter and  "Lazarus and the Hurricane" by Sam Chaiton and Terry Swinton.
Starring  Denzel Washington, Vicellous Reon Shannon, Dan Hedaya.
Running time: 146  minutes.
Rated AA for controversial subject matter and offensive language.
Reviewed on February 23rd, 2000.
"The Hurricane" is the story of boxer Rubin Carter (Denzel Washington), a  middleweight boxing champion who in 1966 was convicted of three murders,  on the basis of a case steeped in racial prejudice.
During Carter's stay  in prison, his plight drew the attention of "the famous and the  infamous", including celebrities such as Bob Dylan and Muhammed Ali.
Despite  this, Carter remained imprisoned until 1985, when a teenager named Lesra  Martin (Vicellous Reon Shannon) -- inspired by Carter's autobiography  "The Sixteenth Round" -- took up his cause.
"The Hurricane" has many things going for it.
In particular, there is  Washington's performance as Hurricane Carter, which has won him a Golden  Globe award and an Emmy nomination.
Washington practically disappears into  the character, suffusing Carter with nobility, passion and determination.
This is not an easy role to play: Washington's challenge is to portray  Carter as intense without turning him into a fanatic.
He succeeds, with a  performance broad enough to permit Carter not just great strength but  also moments of weakness, especially as Lesra's efforts start to bear  fruit.
"I'm fifty years old," Carter laments to his lawyers at one point.
He has been in prison more than half his life, and we feel the  weight of every one of those years.
The defining moment of Washington's performance comes when, at the start of  his life sentence, Carter refuses to wear a prison uniform because he  will not wear the clothes of a guilty man.
He is sent into solitary  confinement for ninety days to reconsider his protest.
In many ways, he  never emerges: to cope with his imprisonment, Carter isolates himself  from the rest of the world.
He focuses on honing his mind and body, and  congregates more with his own inner demons than with his fellow inmates.
The scenes of Carter in jail are "The Hurricane's" most powerful, but in  a sense are really just a backdrop for one of the movie's main themes,  about redemption through the written word.
This is made clear from the  start: an early scene sees an uncharacteristically desperate Carter  pleading with a friendly prison guard (Clancy Brown) that his cell not be  searched, for fear of having his partly-completed autobiography taken.
It  is by writing his story, and by reading voraciously, that Carter survives  the prison experience.
"The Sixteenth Round" becomes the first book the  barely-literate Lesra ever buys, and through it he discovers Hurricane  Carter's plight.
Carter and Lesra spend much of the movie communicating  not by phone but by letters.
And by the end, this odyssey of paper and  ink has benefited both their lives.
Performances from the rest of the cast are respectable but not as  well-rounded.
This is not entirely surprising; "The Hurricane" is  Carter's story, after all, and he deserves the spotlight.
But the lack  of development of the supporting cast is disappointing, particularly in  the case of Lesra, a young man from a broken home whose encounters with  Carter help him realize his own potential.
Shannon's acting is capable,  but the growth of his character is conveyed more by what we are told than  what we are shown, transgressing a fundamental rule of storytelling.
Given rather less to do are Lesra's guardians (Deborah Unger, Liev  Schreiber, John Hannah).
They act virtually as a gestalt, often referred  to simply (and irritatingly) as "the Canadians".
We never really get a  firm idea of why they do what they do -- why they are together, why they  are taking care of Lesra, why they do so much to help Carter (even moving  to New Jersey from Ontario!
) -- and it seems little effort was expended  in making them anything more than plot facilitators.
I was nine years old when Rubin Carter was released from prison and have  no recollection of the events surrounding his eventual freedom, so I can  offer little comment as to the historical accuracy of "The Hurricane".
Indeed, I don't think a film need be bound by the letter of the truth, if  a certain amount of license will make it better artistically.
But I have  to wonder if the wholesale invention of Detective Della Pesca (Dan  Hedaya) does "The Hurricane" service from either a factual or an  aesthetic point of view.
In the movie, Della Pesca is the man mainly responsible for setting up  Hurricane Carter, a deed which is the culmination of a lifelong grudge  against the boxer.
In reality, he never existed.
He is intended, I suppose, to be a synthesis of all those who helped put Carter away, but Della  Pesca himself is so crucial to "The Hurricane" that it is difficult to  imagine how things 'really' happened.
Moreover, he is almost  embarrassingly one-dimensional, given no more characterization beyond  his vaguely-motivated hatred for Carter.
It almost feels as though Della  Pesca should have worn a black hat and a Snidely Whiplash-style moustache.
Indeed, the movie's biggest problem is that the story itself ends up  feeling excessively Hollywood-ized.
Nowhere is this more true than in the  climactic courtroom scenes, which -- true to reality or not -- feel like  a disappointing cop-out after two hours of Washington's enthralling  characterization.
There were many issues "The Hurricane" could have dealt  with more fully: the maturation of Lesra, the way an entire justice  system can be blinded by prejudice, even the question of whether Carter  really might have committed the crimes (the movie doesn't even raise the  possibility).
Instead of challenging us, the film settles for a routine  trial scene surprisingly lacking in dramatic value, as if director Norman  Jewison knew the ending was uninspired.
We already know how the movie is going to end, so emphasizing the court proceedings is unnecessary.
It is a shame that so gripping a performance  as Washington's winds up being subordinate to a cliche.
"The Hurricane"  would have been better served by keeping its focus on the characters and  their personal journeys, instead of the events through which they traveled.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/TheHurricane.html. . 
