Steven Spielberg has a way with film.
Does the man ever fail?
In an era of Hollywood where CGI is more commonly used then plot, Spielberg manages to tell his stories in a way to captivate fans of all genres and get his point across.
His latest, Saving Private Ryan, examines World War II, and has the basic plot of trying to save one man by risking the lives of eight.
But, he is able to tell many other stories and does it with such flair that I am still impressed.
The film starts off with D-Day, the invasion of Omaha Beach.
It is a twenty-five minute sequence that is the one of the most shocking lengths of film in motion picture history.
There is no introduction, you do not know the characters, you just see men running for their lives trying to secure Omaha Beach.
For once, war is not glorified.
Throughout the film, Spielberg displays the image of men fighting for their country, but does not glorify the horror that the men experience in battle.
He shows his audience the gruesome aspects of war, from dismembered body parts to shots in the head.
This first sequence of Saving Private Ryan is not for the weak at heart.
The film progresses to a special mission handed down to Captain Miller (Tom Hanks) from his superiors.
The mission: Miller and his platoon must scour the lands to find Private James Ryan (Matt Damon), whose three brothers died in action.
Therefore, Hanks takes up his men to start the search.
The casting of Hanks' platoon was terrific.
Ed Burns plays the tough-talking Private Reiben.
Tom Sizemore plays the by the rules Sergeant Horvath.
Another outstanding performance is turned in by Adam Goldberg who plays the somewhat cynical, but humorous, Private Mellish.
Through Goldberg's character, Spielberg expresses the views of the Jewish, who were being persecuted by Hitler during the war.
But, in my opinion, the man who turns in the most unexpected performance and steals the show is Jeremy Davies who plays Corporal Upham.
He is brought along to translate for the platoon and fight, and thinks of war as glorious battles and a lovely brotherhood among soldiers.
But, Spielberg displays the change he sees as he experiences true war.
Tom Hanks, as always, gives a terrific, Oscar worthy performance.
His character is a quiet, yet powerful, leader who is torn between risking his life and his men's life and his ticket out of the war.
But, Spielberg displays through Hanks the true glory of war.
Captain Miller is a man who fights for his country and follows all orders.
Despite his objections, he risks his life and the life of his men to save Private Ryan and get his ticket back to his home and his wife.
The film progresses with each story developing in a subtle way, yet each getting their point across.
Throughout their journey they fight the impossible fight, almost break apart and go through such surprising moments, I was genuinely shocked.
We learn of Captain Miller's occupation (I won't spoil it for you), a wall crashes and it is all of a sudden two opposing platoons with weapons and no one willing to pull the trigger.
Also, they find James Ryan, or so they thought.
And yet through all of this, the whole platoon is able to come together through bonding and fights, against the enemy and against themselves.
All in all, they find Ryan when they find a way to coexist in harmony through Hanks' leadership.
It is a truly inspiring film, and Spielberg is able to make the two and one half-hours seem like half that.
Saving Private Ryan is a truly cinematic masterpiece.
Throughout the film, Spielberg expands on one story to tell dozens.
He yet again utilizes his entire cast to portray war as a horrific experience, despite all of the glorifying aspects of defending your country.
Spielberg truly does have a way with film and yet again shows that he can reach any audience and have them leave with a truly new thought on life.
The Movie Page- http://jump.to/moviepage Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!. . 
