Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre) Released in the UK by Fox on February 11, 2000; certificate 15; 118 minutes;  country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1. Directed by Danny Boyle; produced by Andrew Macdonald.
Written by John Hodge; based on the novel by Alex Garland.
Photographed by Darius Khondji; edited by Masahiro Hirakubo.
Danny Boyle is one of the most hyperactive boors in modern cinema, the film  director equivalent of someone who'd take your arthritic father to a rave,  forcibly make him dance to the horrible music and claim to be promoting  social integration between the generations.
He takes gritty works of  literature, which are filled with reality and truth, and shakes them up into  shallow feature-length pop videos.
Obviously he paid attention in film  school, where they teach you conventional Hollywood structures and cheap  tricks that please mass audiences; if only he'd realise you're supposed to  move on after you graduate.
Boyle first trampled on a great book with "Trainspotting" (1996), a  grotesquely lively romp based on Irvine Welsh's epic study of drug addiction  in inner-city Scotland.
Now the filmmaker, and his team of writer John Hodge  and producer Andrew Macdonald, have brought us an adaptation of Alex  Garland's "The Beach", in which Leonardo DiCaprio plays Richard, an American  backpacker disillusioned by the tacky Westernisation of foreign culture.
He  walks through the cities of Thailand shaking his head at the hustle and  bustle of yapping market traders, café bars full of people watching  television, and vulgar drunken tourists.
In his fleapit hotel, the kid is kept awake by the sounds of a crazed  Scottish pot-head who goes by the pseudonym of Daffy Duck (Robert Carlyle)  and raves about a perfect beach which has so far been kept secret from these  ruinous tourist crowds.
He takes a liking to Richard, though, and gives him a  map to this paradise before killing himself.
Richard and his French travelling companions, Étienne (Guillaume Canet) and  Françoise (Virginie Ledoyen), do eventually get to the place Daffy promised  them, and settle into the beautiful locale, which is populated by young folks  just as sick as they are at the state of traditional holiday destinations.
Their community is rather sophisticated -- everyone has work assignments,  there are group meetings, huts have been well-built -- and yet more than  anywhere else these people have been, their island offers them the  opportunity to absorb parts of the world that haven't been trodden on.
One of  them describes it as a "beach resort for people who can't stand beach  resorts".
The dream doesn't last, because inevitably people do find out about the  place, and try to come.
This invokes the violent anger of the dope farmers on  the other side of the island -- an added devastation to the lives of our  beach-dwelling friends, who have already begun to destroy their own peace by  developing hostile paranoia about their privacy.
In his book, Garland found all the right notes to tell this story; he knew  that the experience of paradise found and lost had to really HAPPEN to the  reader, so it had some emotional charge and didn't just become a pretentious  cogitation on man's tendency to ruin the gifts God gave him.
His hero was a  perceptive, down-to-earth Brit we could identify with.
The beach society was  made up of people looking for clean fun, not a bunch of freaks with some  twisted revolutionary ideology.
And their downward spiral emerged gradually,  tragically, out of reasonable concerns that got out of hand.
Boyle and company, however, plunge enthusiastically into every pitfall  possible.
The middle passages of their film should settle into beach life,  capture a feeling of tranquillity and make us hope that it can last; instead,  the happy part of the plot is covered in a short montage where we see  snippets of activity and hear DiCaprio's narration tell us how everything was  going fine.
Consequently the madness and carnage of the latter passages come  from nowhere and mean nothing.
The condensed structure, the introduction of  irrelevant romantic subplots and the brief dialogue make "The Beach" a film  of plot, which is a mistake, since it should be one of journey.
The production design and photography are impeccable, and DiCaprio's intense  screen presence is always fascinating.
Strange, then, how bland and  superficial the film feels; I think it's because Boyle jumps around instead  of absorbing atmosphere, and is working from a screenplay without any  well-defined characters or key moments.
The experience of reading "The Beach"  and then seeing the film resembles the plight of the characters -- they found  something wonderful, rejoiced in it, and then saw a bunch of careless  bastards trample it into bloody pulp.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani. Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
