Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre) Released in the UK by UIP on May 12, 2000; certificate 15; 150 minutes;  country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1. Directed by Ridley Scott; produced by David Franzoni, Branko Lustig, Douglas  Wick.
Written by David Franzoni, John Logan, William Nicholson; from a story by  David Franzoni.
Photographed by John Mathieson; edited by Pietro Scalia.
Ridley Scott's "Gladiator" is an interesting and attractive action movie, but  not a very forceful one.
It needs to spend more time with the gladiator  himself.
This is a "hero out for revenge" picture that keeps cutting away to  its cardboard villain, just as we're starting to cheer on the protagonist.
It's like channel-hopping between "Spartacus" and "Caligula".
Russell Crowe stars as Maximus, a Roman army general under emperor Marcus  Aurelius (Richard Harris).
Marcus is so impressed by Maximus's leadership  that he appoints him as his successor.
His son Commodus (Joaquin Phoenix) is  not best pleased by this news, as he himself had expected to be next in line  for the throne.
Commodus kills his father, seizes power, and orders the death  penalty for Maximus and his family.
Of course, Maximus escapes this fate, but his wife and child do not.
Then  Maximus is kidnapped and sold into slavery.
His master, Proximo (Oliver  Reed), forces him to become a gladiator, and when his military training leads  to great slaughtering talent, Proximo takes him to Rome, to perform at the  Coliseum.
There the crowd falls in love with him, which forces Commodus into  an awkward position; yes, he's found Maximus, but he can't deal with him,  because if he kills him then he'll lose the support of his people.
The movie is basically taken up by Maximus and Commodus doing a lot of  plotting against each other, punctuated by lofty speeches and gruesome  fights.
That is as it should be.
The problem is that we don't spend enough  time with Maximus -- the film is divided pretty much equally between him and  the enemy, when it needs to be much more single-minded.
Look at "Ben-Hur" or  "Braveheart" -- these films are driven completely by their heroes'  determination, and that's why we get emotionally involved.
Crowe gives a  great performance as Maximus -- he has a penetrating stare, commanding voice,  muscular body and towering demeanour.
He's a powerful, passionate Hollywood  lead, and we want to invest our care in him.
We just don't get the chance.
Because "Gladiator" never gets us wrapped up in Maximus's struggle, the  action sequences are not as tense or affecting as they should be.
We can't  simply enjoy the excitement of the violence, either, because it's not  stimulating, it's sick.
Roman bloodlust is one of the most shameful things in  history, and Scott, the director, presents it realistically, throwing us into  the middle of gladiator fights by way of giddy close-ups and shutter speeds,  while the chants of the despicable onlookers thunder at our ears in stereo  surround sound.
What we have here, ultimately, is one amazing piece of acting and several  flourishes of wonderful technique, spoiled by unwanted distractions.
The  overall bold, colourful nature of the filmmaking might have been enough to  recommend the picture if its better parts hadn't led us to expect something  superior.
Strange: "Gladiator" would have been a more enjoyable movie if it  had been made with less skill.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
