My wife said it best as we left the theater, It was uneven.
What's charming about the film are its engaging takes on life -- city,  human, celestial.
When we first look upon the angels Seth (Nicolas  Cage) and Cassiel (Andre Braugher) sitting atop superhighway signs, we  know the narrative will be pleasantly slanted and watchable.
Their  wings and halos replaced by black overcoats, these messengers from God  patrol streets, construction sites, and especially libraries.
It is in  the library that Seth and mortal Dr. Maggie Rice (Meg Ryan) meet in two  emotional scenes, one beginning their relationship and the other  determining if it will end.
I found the angels' ability to read humans' thoughts not so much  original as fascinating.
As the camera moves among the cars in a  traffic jam or among carrels in the library,  we are permitted to  mind-surf, catching glimpses of what life is like in this very human,  "naked city.
"  It is gritty yet beautiful, from the scenes in the  hospital in which Meg tries to prolong life, to the scenes in which the  angels – seen only by us and by those they choose – give humans small  embraces of protection.
John Seale's cinematography paints Los Angeles  in colors Maxfield Parrish would use:  glowing and clean;  even shots of  seaminess are uncluttered and objectified.
The major roles are indeed well-acted.
Cage, his hair meticulously in  place, even his eyebrows handsomely trimmed, casts his big,  compassionate eyes upon human suffering.
Unlike most of his fellow  celestials (who at times look alarmingly remote and agent-like), Seth  pursues a human.
(Isn't it a breach of the ethics of invisibility to  watch a woman as she bathes, or kisses her boyfriend?
)  On her part, Meg  Ryan is appropriately tentative in dealing with Seth.
Where another  might think him an odd preacher or even a stalker, Maggie eventually  realizes his gentleness, and soon harbors amorous thoughts that Seth  intercepts.
Her performance is most riveting when she discovers Seth's  corporeal form is bloodless;  her mix of fear, bafflement and anger  alerts us to the crux of her emotional predicament.
The minor roles in this picture function like confidants in a good play,  enabling the leading roles to succeed.
Dennis Franz does a most  convincing job as Nathaniel Messinger, a gluttonous, life-loving patient  of Maggie's.
It's not far-fetched that Franz will get a nod as Best  Supporting Actor nominee.
One of the hard-to-believe sequences has  Nathaniel leaving the hospital to chow down at a diner (while Seth, who  has manifested himself to another mortal, eats nothing).
But  Nathaniel's gusto, along with Maggie's mutual feelings, causes Seth to  take a fall into the grimy pleasures of humanity.
In his role as  Cassiel, Andre Braugher (say it ain't so, Andre, that you're leaving  Homicide!
) is underused.
Further, some of his banter with Seth is not  transparent enough.
Just as Braugher does a masterful job with average lines, Cage admirably  juggles a handful of clichés.
Are we to believe that Seth, formerly an  immortal who for ages has observed humans, is not cagey enough to avoid  hitch-hiking, in the rain, outside a nude-dancing palace, and then  benevolently greeting a carload of scumbags who mug him?
Would he  really act so child-like at the strong scent from a bottle of perfume?
And possibly the most unforgivable piece of writing has Seth making no  direct communication with his Maker.
It is stated in the film that "No  one believes in us (angels) anymore";  a big problem is that the movie  contradicts this claim by further popularizing all things angel.
What  we wind up with is another New-Agey, secular treatment of religious  themes.
Let me end by commending the sequence in which Seth falls to earthiness.
Director Silberling's black-and-white montage is dramatically brilliant,  evoking the precious and intimate side of humanity remembered by the  deceased characters in Our Town.
I also liked that the ending of City  of Angels would not please followers of Disney.
I only wish the ending  sustained the emotional power of what comes just before it.
And I'm an  easier critic than my wife.. . . 
