People are gushing over this movie and it all seems so undeserved.
Without giving too much away, the movie's theme and subsequent plot equals its tagline "Can you really trust anyone?
" Apparently not.
You cannot even trust David Mamet.
My biggest problems with The Spanish Prisoner were two: The film is very stagy and unexciting in its presentation.
It's unswervingly flat.
While it's nice not to be manipulated by music and editing now and then, this Spartan approach is a bit uninvolving as it continues past 30 minutes through the conclusion of the film.
There is unforgivably complete lack of filmwork, like editing and camera movement.
While it adds to the cinema verite unemotional presentation of a con game, it prompts less and less audience investment as it moves towards its inevitable conclusion.
The other problem is that this film is a lot like another Mamet film: *House of Games*.
Its a bit much to see a director steal from his own repertoire.
You expect that from Brian DiPalma (I am one of eight people who saw *Raising Cain*, so I should know).
The idea that you never really know someone and it's difficult to trust others is hit home here, as in the older movie, and we are hit over the head with this repeatedly.
That people are taken in easily is nothing new; that it can be this perfectly orchestrated stretches common sense, though.
In its favor, there are some wonderfully quirky moments and some genuine laughs.
Most of these come from the office ingenue, Susan Ricci (the ironically named Rebecca Pidgeon).
The movie begins with the arrival of Joe Ross (the lead role played by Campbell Scott) to a ritzy Carribean isle--St. Estaphe.
It's a business retreat also attended by the paranoid boss Klein (Ben Gazzara) and George Lang (Ricky Jay), Joe's co-worker and friend, who is constantly spouting off aphorisms, some humorous and some ridiculous.
While on the island, Joe falls into a odd, close friendship with the mysterious Jimmy Dell.
The action moves to New York, where after some odd run-ins with Dell, Joe starts to realize that something is afoot, and the secret patent-pending formula is is working on is in danger.
There is a very odd feeling of homoerotica (I don't think it's just my pink glasses getting in the way here) between Joe and Jimmy; that Jimmy is conning him and Joe is falling for it and that there is some attraction for Jimmy from Joe are not coincidental.
The only other chemistry Joe has is with THE IDEA that Jimmy wants his sister to date Joe, a man Jimmy approves for her.
I cannot say much more without ruining the movie.
I will say this, though; it's not worth full price.
See it with coupons or sneak in (like someone I know did), or wait for TV or video.
I would normally never recommend this, but it's so utterly uncinematic and flat that rushing to the cinema to see it seems unnecessary.
With a good director and a good cast, you would think this movie would be a lot better.
I expect so much more from David Mamet, who usually produces excellent work, like he did in last year's The Edge.
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html. 
