As I watched the sweeping landscapes, gory battles and generally noteworthy  performances that comprise "The Patriot," a very inappropriate thought simply  refused to exit my mind: Mel Gibson as a chicken.
Gibson takes on two very different roles in "The Patriot" and "Chicken Run,"  two appropriately diverse films opening in the month of June.
In the premier,  he plays a British-born man who will help lead the American Revolution.
In  the latter, he plays an American-born (?
) Rooster who will lead a revolution  of British chickens.
Both very entertaining films - albeit for different  reasons - the less serious "Chicken Run" is ultimately the superior.
Nick Park, the possibly-genius director who won an Oscar for his claymation  "Creature Comforts" and has received wide acclaim for his "Wallace and  Gromit" films - also claymations - teams up with Peter Lord for "Chicken Run"  and the product is the first must-see film of the summer and a comedy so  uproariously funny and unique that it is bound to survive the test of time,  even if the entire production is nothing more than clay figures being  meticulously moved very slightly in every frame (24 times every second!
) to  create a live-action appearance.
"The Patriot," on the other hand, clearly aims for much more than laughs and  a much more adult audience than the kids who will be most attracted to  "Chicken Run" (although, the comedy does work on multiple levels and makes a  great date flick).
Unfortunately, "The Patriot" seems to aim too high and  consequently is only an above-average film, not the great epic that its  makers clearly set out to create.
The revolution in "Chicken Run" comes about when a group of already  disgruntled chickens learn that not only has one of their own been beheaded  for her inability to lay eggs, but that they are all destined to be baked and  boxed so that families on the run can zap them in a matter of minutes and  still have a nutritious meal.
Soon after the doomed flock learn this, Rocky -  the self proclaimed "Lone Free Ranger" - shows up and appears to be their  ticket to freedom.
If the group can learn to fly, they will make it over the  fence that separates them from freedom and vegetarian pies will have to  suffice.
But the process will be a grueling one in which several cock fights  will erupt and civility will oftentimes take a back seat to the chaos caused  by not very fair fowls who are actually rather chicken of what might happen  to them should their plan fail.
"The Patriot" is decidedly more firmly planted in reality with its entire  premise being based on the very-real Revolutionary War and a fictional family  destroyed by it.
Screenwriter Robert Rodat takes sole credit for this piece  and having penned "Saving Private Ryan," - the greatest film ever made in  this critic's opinion - the similar yet inferior premise is all but marked  with his own blood.
But don't think this production foreign to star Mel  Gibson either, as the title could well be "Braveheart 2" and few would wince.
Unfortunately, the plot is overburdened by Rodat's apparent need to kill as  many people as he can in an attempt to jerk the maximum number of tears  possible and to try to add excess depth with a slavery based side plot which  serves no purpose other than to overload the film with morals.
"The Patriot" does, however, comes across strong with some excellent  supporting performances, - especially one by Chris Cooper - oftentimes  breathtaking cinematography and a plot that, like it or not, does tap many  emotions.
"Chicken Run," on the other hand, taps many memories.
Perhaps Lord and Park's  brightest move is making the film very much adult-friendly with references to  older films and a classic television show.
When an escape attempt fails, you  see a character bouncing a ball against the wall and "The Great Escape" comes  to mind.
And when the farm's dim owner continuously spies on his  fine-feathered animals and then insists to his wife "they are organizing"  only for them to scatter into chaotic formations when she takes a gander,  memories of "Bewitched" run free.
Other references include, but surely aren't  limited to, "The Bridge on the River Kwai," "The Shawshank Redemption,"  "Stalag 17" Charly Chaplin's "Modern Times" and none other than Mr. Gibson's  "Braveheart.
". In the time it takes to watch "The Patriot," you can see "Chicken Run" twice.
This may not be such a bad idea.
Although, if you insist on seeing the longer  war epic, do so while the movie is still on the big screen as the broad  cinematography and battle scenes require such size.
And if you decide to do  like I did and see "Chicken Run" first and then "The Patriot," please give  enough time in between so that you aren't stuck with mental images of a  chicken in the Revolutionary War.
These birds of a feather clearly don't  flock together. . . 
