SPECIES II Reviewed by Jamie Peck. The story, such as it is, casts Henstridge as a good guy, a docile clone  of her "Species" character that helps out fellow original cast members  Marg Helgenberger, as a brainy biologist, and Michael Madsen, a stoic  hitman.
They're pitted against a heroic astronaut (Justin Lazard) that  returns from America's first Mars mission with a little something extra  in the bloodstream.
When the mood strikes him -- and the mood strikes  him often, considering his alien urge to procreate -- he turns into a  sex-crazed, slimy monster whose demon semen produce instant toddlers  that cause his bedmates' bellies to graphically swell and pop right open  post-coitus.
So much for the afterglow, I guess.
There's little imagination or creativity at work here, but those things  aren't what "Species II"'s core audience will be looking for anyway;  presumably, nobody's going to see this movie expecting anything more  than gore, sex and special effects, so the character and story holes and  lack of coherent plotting aren't really going to be enjoyment  roadblocks.
"Species II" is at least competently assembled, with slick  production design, a few interesting moments and a couple of  particularly puzzling celeb cameos (Richard Belzer as the president?).
Take away the antagonist gender-reversal and this is essentially the  very same movie as "Species.
" It even ends, not unlike its prequel, with  the promise of another installment.
Any takers?
Recurring attempts to lend the film some emotional weight, as the  antagonist is fully aware and occasionally horrified of the bloodshed  he's causing, distract from the rest of the mostly campy proceedings,  and even render certain scenes somewhat distasteful.
Patches of "Species  II" are genuinely, pleasantly goofy (particularly a scene where Lazard's  brood demonstrates an inventive use for snot), but the film as a whole  is highly inconsistent, and bouts of hilarity -- be they intentional or  not -- don't justify a slight, needless sequel.
The makers of "Species  II" should have left the alien resurrections (and alien franchise  resurrections) to Sigourney Weaver.. . 
