Believe it or not, the real Jackal lives to this day and is currently safely  tucked away in a high security prison.
The 1973 film The Day of the Jackal was  a critically acclaimed account of the true story of a professional assassin  (code-named The Jackal), on a mission to kill the French president during the  early 1960's.
Bruce Willis and Richard Gere star in the modern re-make The Jackal, which  unfortunately is not historically accurate and only very distantly related to  the original story.
The Jackal (Bruce Willis) has been hired to kill an important figure in the US  government.
Declan Mulqueen (Richard Gere) is our hero in this story; who is an  underground operative released from jail to help the FBI track down this deadly  killer.
This is easier said than done, as The Jackal is a master of disguise  and is constantly changing appearances and disappearing without a trace.
Along  with the FBI's Deputy Director (Sidney Poitier) and a dedicated small team,  Mulqueen must track down The Jackal before his job is complete - although his  target, location and identity are unknown. For thrills and spills, The Jackal supplies plenty of impressive action scenes; but any film that is related to a true story should make sure not to let what  is popular control what is historically accurate.
This alone is the films  biggest downfall, as it shows no respect or consideration for the 1973 hit -  and thankfully through legal procedures the "Day of" was forcefully removed  from the films title.
Even Edward Fox, who played the leading role in The Day  of the Jackal, refused to have a cameo role for old time's sake.
Director Michael Caton-Jones (Rob Roy, Memphis Belle) would have been far  better off to have made The Jackal a stand alone film rather than delve into  the harsh world of re makes, where anything that is made is automatically  compared to its predecessor.
What he has created, however, is highly entertaining action film that not only  lets us witness an explosive screen duo but also shows Bruce Willis kissing  (eep) another man. . . . 
