As I saw in the trailers that Julia Roberts, Susan Sarandon, and Ed Harris were starring in this drama I thought...how could it not be good?
Well, my question stayed true, considering Stepmom is the best movie of the year.
It is shown as more of a comedy, but it is mostly a tear jerking drama.
Everyone was in tears in the theater I was in.
When I sat back in my seat and waited for the movie to start, little did I know I was about to see the most amazing film since Titanic.
Susan Sarandon plays Jackie, mother of Ben and Anna.
She was married to Luke (Ed Harris), but they were divorced three years back when Luke walked out.
Luke is now seeing Isabel, a young, funny, nice young girl played by Julia Roberts.
Jackie and the kids despise Isabel though.
Mostly because she is tearing the family apart by seeing Luke.
Isabel is extremely nice to the kids, but they don't care.
For instance when Isabel buys them a puppy Anna says "Well I'm allergic to dogs and I'm allergic to you, too.
"  . Jackie and Luke have something tremendous to tell one another.
One is more serious then the other, but Luke goes first.
He lets Jackie know that he and Isabel are getting married.
At this point, Jackie doesn't say what she wanted to say and simply states it wasn't important.
But, this thing is extremely important.
Something that is tremendous.
(I won't tell you what it is though.
)  Jackie continues to lie about her secret to the family.
At this point, Jackie is sick of all the fuss and wants the family to be happy.
She gives the kids tips to getting along with Isabel, and they work, a little too well.
Now the kids think of Isabel as their mother, and Jackie thinks she is out of the picture.
She becomes very jealous at this point.
Stepmom depicts the average 90s family, with tenseness, sadness, happiness, and angryness.
This movie is a story about life and the roads that it can take you on.
It lets you know that you should enjoy what you have because you never know when it will all come to an end.
Susan Sarandon gives the best performance of the year and she definitely deserves and Oscar Nomination.
Roberts and Harris also give outstanding performances.
I don't know about you, but Stepmom was so special to me, I can't explain it.
Hands down to one of the greatest movies of the year.. . 
