Starring Sean Connery; Catherine Zeta-Jones; Ving Rhames; Will Patton & Maury Chaykin First, let me get something off my chest.
Over the last few days I have been reading the reviews of Entrapment.
All anybody seems to be able to talk about is the romantic pairing between Sean Connery and Catherine Zeta-Jones.
I'm really beginning to wonder if I saw the same film that these critics did.
I didn't think that the age difference was such a big deal.
Especially not considering the story behind it.
This may sound a bit sexist, but here goes.
As far as I know, the main audience for an action movie is young males.
So it seems perfectly reasonable to me to cast a young, very attractive actress in the leading role.
Many of the critics have wondered why an actress closer to Connery's age wasn't cast in the Zeta-Jones role.
Some have even suggested Meryl Streep.
Streep might be a great actress, but even in her prime, she didn't look half as good as Zeta-Jones.
I guarantee you that half the reason that people are flocking to Entrapment is to see Zeta-Jones.
Young guys aren't going to spend money to see Meryl Streep in an action film.
They certainly aren't going to pay to watch her writhe through the much publicized laser beam shots in which Ms. Zeta-Jones' behind is so prominently displayed.
Am I just a sexist pig?
Or is it just realistic to think that Hollywood makes movies with the intention of making money.
And Catherine Zeta-Jones is going to get a whole lot more people into the theater than an older actress.
I'd like to see Angela Landsbury look that good in spandex.
And now, our feature presentation.
Entrapment is what I like to call a popcorn film.
It is your typical big budget summer movie.
It is all style and the plot is a fairly simple one.
Although, it does manage to throw a few curve balls.
The chemistry that Sean Connery and Catherine Zeta-Jones had on screen was amazing.
Quite frankly, I got so wrapped up watching the two of them that I might not have even noticed if there was no plot at all.
He is still one of the top leading men in movies, even though he is almost 70.
Zeta-Jones, in addition to her obvious stunningly classic beauty, is one of the most talented actresses that is working in film today.
Her beauty gives her a captivating screen presence, but her considerable talent certainly doesn't hurt either.
The combination of Connery and Zeta-Jones plus some of the most stylish direction that I've seen in a while, all adds up to one fun film.
The supporting cast of Ving Rhames and Will Patton are like icing on a great cake.
Entrapment focuses on insurance investigator Gin Baker (Catherine Zeta-Jones).
She has set her sights on bringing to justice master thief Robert MacDougall (Sean Connery).
In order to catch him, she must first gain his confidence.
She does so by pretending to be in need of his services for a very high profile robbery.
He agrees, and the two team up to pull off the ultimate heist, using the latest in amazing high-tech devices.
Of course, this is Hollywood, so not everything goes quite according to the way we the audience thinks it will.
I don't think that I have ever seen a movie in which Sean Connery gave a bad performance.
Entrapment doesn't change that.
Connery still looks as much at home in the role of action star as he did in 1962, when he first played James Bond, the role that made him a household name.
I suppose that it's a bit of an irony that many people who will undoubtedly flock to see this movie may never even have seen some of the original Bond films.
Catherine Zeta-Jones made her mark in 1998's The Mask Of Zorro.
She held her own against Anthony Hopkins in that film, and she proves that she is more than capable of doing it again in Entrapment.
I would go so far as to say that she even outshines Connery in a few scenes.
Contrary to popular belief, she didn't just become an overnight success with The mask Of Zorro.
She was an accomplished actress for over a decade before that film was made.
Her experience shows with her performance in Entrapment.
The Mask Of Zorro might have made her a star, but her performance in Entrapment will ensure that she stays one.
Ving Rhames plays a sort of assistant to Connery's thief.
He is the man who procures all of the high tech tools of the trade that are used in the spectacular robberies.
Will Patton is also present as Zeta-Jones' boss at the insurance company.
Both Rhames and Patton were a little under used in my opinion, but both give the solid performances that audiences have come to expect from them.
The plot was a bit over the top in places, but it didn't hurt the film.
Most of the questionable plot devices led to spectacular stunts or nifty visual effects.
So, I for one, wasn't complaining.
And the twists and turns of the story line more than made up for any minor weaknesses in my book.
Entrapment is a great looking film.
And I'm not just talking about Zeta-Jones.
Director Jon Amiel makes the most of the exotic scenery that, more often than not, surrounds his cast.
The high tech robbery scenes, in addition to being very well filmed, also have that air of believability about them.
Even as fantastic as some of them are, I was never left thinking that none of it could possibly happen.
Entrapment is a light summer film.
The story is a fun one, and I appreciated the extra effort of some of the plot twists in the story.
Of course none of these plot twists are designed to make you think real hard -- just keep you guessing a bit.
I'm going to go out on a limb and say that Entrapment will probably end up as one of my favorite movies of 1999.. . 
