Thanks for the message about my X Files review.
Enclosed is one for ARMAGEDDON.
When ARMAGEDDON opened on July 1, my son and I visited the only cinema  in our small city.
We entered the largest auditorium, which was the  original theater, circa 1930's.
(Three much smaller screens were added  recently to please the college crowd.
). For close to two hours we viewed the film, watching as NASA discovered  they had 18 days to figure a way to save the planet from an asteroid the  size of Texas;  we followed the escapades of the world's best  oil-drilling crew, led by Harry Stamper (Bruce Willis), as they  hurriedly trained to drill 800 feet into the asteroid and plant a  warhead.
We arrived almost at the climax, both space shuttle crews  coping with crises in outer space.
Then the projector quit!
Rather,  the sound quit first, and we were treated to the amplified banter of the  teenage staff until they realized the problem and killed the projector.
We were glad finally when the harried manager refunded our money;  they  had monkeyed around so much, restarting the film and failing for over  half an hour, that the narrative had lost all continuity for us.
So when we tried again today in a multiplex in the county seat, we knew  most of what we would see.
And hear.
First of all, ARMAGEDDON is very  loud, especially on state-of-the-art sound systems.
Starting with the  title sequence, the fiery pieces of "ARMAGEDDON" break up and rush  toward the viewer with menacing racket.
The explosions are deafening as  well:  but they occur in context, and count as a convincing part of very  slick special effects.
What I noticed during both viewing attempts was  the bad science that happened each time large objects rushed through the  vacuum of space.
They groaned and galumphed past each other like mad  Jabberwocks, the space rock past the moon, the shuttles past the  camera's eye -- whooshes engineered to inspire awe.
Then there is the trite characterization.
Having already met most of  the deep-sea drillers when Harry chases A. J.
Frost (Ben Affleck) around  after finding him with daughter Grace (Liv Tyler), we are subjected to  countless scenes in which each crew member's eccentricities are further  highlighted.
Moreover, we must sit through almost remedial explanations  of space protocol, including Dan Truman's (Billy Bob Thornton) spelling  out of the exact mission.
Apparently director Michael Bay and the  multiple writers forgot that APOLLO 13 educated movie-goers about  sling-shotting around the moon, as well as about the particulars of  gravity.
The acting does not draw as many complaints.
Bruce Willis plays a very  likable drilling expert, a leader well-liked by his crew.
His timing  seems especially good during the action sequences.
Only toward the end,  when Stamper has no less than two tear-jerking scenes that rival the  sentimental schlock of Forrest Gump's talking to Jenny's gravestone, is  the acting over the top.
And that is the script's fault.
Rock-faced  Billy Bob Thornton smiles only a few times, but manages a solid and  sympathetic performance.
Liv Tyler, the only female aside from a token,  beautiful astronaut, acts well off Harry and off her love interest, A.  J., her wide lips alternately pouting and puckering.
William Fichtner  plays Colonel Willie Sharp, the shuttle pilot charged with ensuring the  success of the mission, with expert coldness;  he's the closest to a  human villain, though he reminded me of the psychotic SEAL in THE ABYSS.
Other strong points are editing and cinematography.
From sweeps around  the NASA conference room to quick close-ups, from split-second  backgrounds (that was Michael Bay in one, no?
) to the simulated,  striking aerial view of the double launch, the camera work tells the  story with stylistic, often frenetic motion.
Once again, though, the  script intrudes:  the result, well-shot but terribly clichéd montages,  many showing Bay's vision of a type of classic America, people listening  to news of the catastrophe, gathered in a Mayberry-like barber shop or  sitting in vintage pickups, near American flags and farmhouses.
In one  shot a group of boys even runs past a clapboard store sporting a faded  campaign mural of JFK!
I got the notion I was back in the first days of  the old theater, and could walk out into the slightly fuzzy, pure  American air, the dust motes of nostalgia floating around me.
I enjoyed the ending more than I thought I would, after seeing the  beginning and middle twice.
ARMAGEDDON is just above average as summer  entertainment, but I would advise finding a theatre that is neither too  cold nor too loud, and that owns a projector with a fully functioning  platter system.. . . 
