Fox Searchlight / 1:30 / 1997 / R (language, nudity) Cast: Robert Carlyle; Tom Wilkinson; Mark Addy; Steve Huison; Paul  Barber; Hugo Speer; William Snape; Lesley Sharp; Emily Woof  Director: Peter Cattaneo  Screenplay: Simon Beaufoy . The male dancers in the much-hyped "The Full Monty" are more hamburger  than beefcake, but the unanticipated surprise is that a group of Average  Joes -- some shrimpy, some overweight, some, well, just plain average --  hesitantly getting down to tunes by Tom Jones, Sister Sledge and Gary Glitter yields some of the best laughs of the season.
What "The  Birdcage" did for drag performers, The Full Monty does for strippers.
A  lot.
Robert Carlyle, whose turn as "Trainspotting"'s violent psychopath  Begbie earned him rave reviews last summer, has the lead role of Gaz, an  ex-steelworker in Sheffield, England suffering from problems both  monetary and family-related -- trips to the unemployment agency are  frequent, the amount of time his ex-wife allows him to spend with his  son (William Snape) is not.
The same goes for his best friend Dave (Mark  Addy), an overweight security guard who is upset over his current inability to perform sexually, and his ex-foreman Gerald (Tom  Wilkinson), who is too afraid to tell his big-spender wife about his  recently-acquired pink slip.
After the Chippendales come to town, strip down to their boxers and attract a large female crowd, Gaz hatches  a plan -- he'll recruit a team of his own dancers, and they'll get an  even larger following by takin' it all off (i.e., the "full monty").
Three more unlikely subjects join Gaz's troupe: Horse (Paul Barber), a  middle-aged black man who can do the funky chicken with the best of  them; Lomper (Steve Huison), a timid, suicidal security guard; and Guy  (Hugo Speer), who makes up for an amazing lack of coordination by having  quite a full monty himself, if you take my meaning.
Together, the  half-dozen males attempt to cast their daily difficulties and physical  inadequacies (or surplus thereof, in Guy's place) aside and begin a  rehearsing schedule that includes choreography, practice, breakaway  pants and tiny red leather G-strings.
"The Full Monty" is very similar to last summer's Demi Moore vehicle  "Striptease" in setup -- her character, like the ones here, turn  exhibitionist to get themselves out of dire financial and familial circumstances, and they, like she, react to their situation with more  than a little trepidation.
In execution, however, you can't find two  more different films.
The latter movie was ineffective because it used  Moore's well-toned and -oiled bod to promote better living through  stripping.
"Monty," however, fully realizes that its basic story is  plenty rich in comedic value, and mines the predicament for all it's  worth.
Moore's "Striptease" daughter (played by her real-life kid) was  on hand to obviously condone her actions.
A child also plays a part in  "Monty," but he is allowed be an active component of the humor and has  no ulterior motives.
There are themes here (concerning determination and  self-confidence), but "The Full Monty" never attains the level of naked preachiness that "Striptease" tapped into regularly.
The actors are uniformly good, and thankfully so.
If the performances  weren't as game or farcical, the movie could have easily sank.
Carlyle,  in particular, carries Gaz to memorable lengths.
In one early scene, he  does an impromptu strip to "You Sexy Thing" to demonstrate to his  cohorts how easy it all is.
Haplessly swinging his jacket around his  head and unintentionally pelting the chortling onlookers with pocket  change, he creates a character that is both self-effacing and reckless.
Everyone else appears to be having a jolly good time too, whether pelvic  thrusting their way through the unemployment line or getting moves for  their routine by studying "Flashdance.
" . "The Full Monty" is so intent on delivering a crowd-pleasing strip  finale that its promised agenda brings around some of its few flaws --  several dramatic developments that center around the  "will-they-or-won't-they?
" issue feel unnecessary even if they do (no  pun intended) flesh out some of the personality of the cast members.
And  for those of you with no ear for thick foreign brogue (think  "Trainspotting"), most of the dialogue and references will likely stump.
A few subplots venture into problematic areas; one in particular not  only feels modish but also underdeveloped and unnecessary.
Despite those errors, however, "The Full Monty" is still an exhilarating  comedic blast.
It has its head and heart in the right place and succeeds  in making you either laugh, smile or nod in agreement with every joke or  sight gag.
It even ends on just the right note -- even though some of  the female audience will reasonably be a tad disappointed.
Gaz and  company may have quite a few shortcomings, but The Full Monty sure  doesn't.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck  E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/. . 
