     "I just have this feeling that everything is completely safe,"  says the local sheriff, late in LAKE PLACID.
I don't think anyone  in the film, or watching it, would disagree with him. This has got to be one of the worst creature flicks ever, because  its creature, a giant crocodile, is so terribly lifeless.
Timid, too:   a character played by Oliver Platt (he's an, um, croc-spert) is swimming  very slowly backward, away from his subject, the crocodile following  closely, and never once is there an attack at the opportune time.
Later,  Bridget Fonda - forgive me, actual character names didn't stick - is  engaged is some kind of underwater battle (and, BTW, when you finally  do resurface, maybe be more out of breath so we can at least pretend you  were down there that long) with the crocodile, as it languorously  swings open its long jaws just at the potential victim's feet, but only  tries for the kill once Fonda is safely behind a tree big enough only  to shroud her tiny frame.
Could she outswim the beast, when we've already  seen it swiftly lunge ashore and drag both a cow and a bear into the water?
Not likely.
But, there's a trend:  no actor with star billing  is killed.
Or, severely injured; not one of them.
Only in the beginning,  with a diver tagging beaver, and then with a town deputy, do deaths occur.
Ok - I sound morbid; don't mean to, it's just that with something that moves as quickly as this crocodile does on land, to have it be so laidback and non-threatening the rest of the time, namely during confrontations  with most of the cast, is boring.
Earlier, the Platt character explains  that freshwater crocs do not usually attack _in_ the water.
So, what about  the aforementioned diver?
Or, Fonda's narrow escape?
Contradictions in logic aside, LAKE has a pleasant, sunny look, and  some witty, insult-laden dialogue for Fonda.
All of which is cute, while  it lasts; you can literally feel the film run out of energy and resources  and plot, and then all but evaporate from the screen.
100 minutes seems  like 30, here, because there's nothing going on.
And, every time our monster makes an appearance, the effect is that of a wet blanket thrown  over a wet blanket.
It moves too slow, but maybe that's because of it's  age (150 years, we are told); plus, there was all that swimming from Asia.
And, when it takes to land, it will thrash about, chomping every which  direction, but will not make contact.
How unbelievably dull.
Best line:  hard to choose one more ridiculous than, "Don't throw  heads at me!
". . 
