Starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne and Carrie-Anne Moss Directed By Andy and Larry Wachowski Running Time: 2 hours 16 minutes (U.K cut). After the minor thriller Bound, the Wachowski brothers follow up their directing debut with this nifty piece of sci-fi action.
Keanu Reeves plays Thomas, a lowly worker who works for a software firm.
He is soon contacted, however, by Morpheus (Fishburne) who wishes to talk to Thomas about the 'matrix.
' Thomas agrees, and Morpheus tells Tom the unthinkable: Tom's 'world' is created by computer, and the entire human race appear to be plugged in to this fake existence.
Morpheus identifies Thomas as 'Neo,' the messiah who can save the human race from the matrix.
Yes, Keanu is indeed Jesus.
The film then follows Neo, Morpheus and the rest of the rebel clan as they try and destroy the matrix machine, while trying to avoid the sunglass clad 'Agents' who wish to destroy them.
The plot is cliched, the acting occasionally off, and the dialogue not so hot, but The Matrix is a surprisingly well made, and even intelligent movie.
Reeves, it appears, is back on track after the hiatus after Speed.
Although lacking in some areas, The Matrix delivers where it should: sci-fi hokum with some violence chucked in to boot.
The action is a real stand out, using 'flo-mo,' a system where the action goes into slo-mo, while still 'panning' around the actors.
It's an awesome sight, but sadly not used much until the end of the movie.
Also, the movie seems to spend a helluva long time explaining what the Matrix actually is, which gets tiresome.
Still, the kung fu and gunfight sequences that punctuate the movie are fast paced and well done, and are good entertainment.
The actors also play a part in providing some fun.
Although Reeves still has little or no acting talent, he is curiously suited to the role he is given here.
His 'where the hell am I?
' look actually fits around his confused character.
I'm sure this was all completely unintentional on Reeves behalf, but it works anyway.
Fishburne, usually confined 'Samuel L. Jackson Jnr.
' roles, holds his own here, and is the highlight of the film.
Unfortunately, his character is curiously underwritten, and is given little to do at the end of the film.
Although he is given a lot of dialogue, much of it is 'plot forwarding' and not much development is given to the character itself, which is a shame.
Maybe in the inevitable sequels we'll see more of him.
Carrie-Anne Moss provides eye candy as the attractive but empty Trinity, and Hugo Weaving is evil enough as the relentless Agent Smith.
Much of the stuff contained in The Matrix has been seen in many other films, but not with this much style or energy.
The special effects actually help the film, with some nice scenes of the Matrix itself (although it still looks like one large computer graphic.
) The film has a gritty, Blade Runner feel that adds to the disturbing atmosphere.
The gun battles are well staged, and there's enough twists and turns in the plot to hold the viewers attention.
In summary, The Matrix, while not making any great leaps in screenwriting or acting, is a well crafted and directed thriller.
Don't go in expecting non stop action, however, as you'll be disappointed.
Only the first and last 15 minutes contain 'pure' action.
The rest of the movie is a taut, sometimes slackly plotted (the movie is overlong) that provides enough interest and laughs (sometime unintentional) to be above average sci-fi hokum.
Star Wars will have to go a long way to beat this, especially for the adult crowd.
The epitome of hip sci-fi.. . 
