***Moviereviews.org has been asked to start collecting a list of readers  in the Washington, DC area who would be interested in attending advanced  promotional screenings of major motion pictures for free.
If this  interests you, please e-mail Moviereviews.org at passes@moviereviews.org  with your name and zip code (to verify that you are in the Washington,  DC area).
Then check back at Moviereviews.org  (http://www.moviereviews.org) as often as you like to see what  screenings you could be eligible to attend!
***. ---Starting on Christmas Eve you can hear Mac VerStandig's movie reviews  on the radio in Portland, Maine once a week in addition to reading them  on Moviereviews.org.
Details on time and dial placement still to come.
Stay tuned!---. *** A copy of this review can be found at  http://www.moviereviews.org/bicentennial_man.htm ***. Bicentennial Man is an impuissant and confused movie that follows a  robot through 200 years neglecting to ever develop another character in  depth or share with the audience that the title-referenced bicentennial  will mark the end of a journey that seems to be equally as long and  laborious for the audience.
Director Chris Columbus' film centers around  a not-very-entertaining Robin Williams as Andrew, the aforementioned  machine, and his trials and tribulations which are as unexplored as the  West Indies that other guy named Columbus supposedly discovered.
In "the not too distant future" we meet the Martin family and their  newest household appliance: Andrew.
Our protagabot ventures from  generation to generation of a cliched and overly dull Martin family-  mostly women.
He also comes across a few other humans and robots, but  none interesting enough to warrant any attention in this review.
They  come and go, Andrew stays, and the movie limps it way through a  Jetsons-style future setting.
Now banished to a fate worse than ordinary reruns, TV Land, there was a  delightful 1960's Don Adams show (that Fox unsuccessfully tried to bring  back a few years ago) called Get Smart.
Richard Gautier, a relative  unknown that never ventured past G. I. Joe fame, played Hymie the Robot.
Much like Andrew, Hymie was a machine that actively sought life and  commonly found himself in hilarious situations were his inner-workings  were experimented with ineptly.
Hymie was friendly and romantic, yet  inevitably robotic.
Richard Gautier may not be Robin Williams, but the  show is just as funny and doesn't cost $7.75 and an otherwise good  Friday or Saturday night.
The positive end of this almost-dead battery does have some traits of  which to boast.
In a time where they are rare, Bicentennial Man is a  movie that you needn't be embarrassed to take Grandma and the tots to.
Robin Williams is very funny and touching with some traditional Disney  tear-jerking scenes.
The explanation offered of sex is edited to a level  of general appropriateness.
But the movie is even confused about its  family traits as we learn that being human is the ultimate  accomplishment and you needn't mourn the dead (for all those that pass  away, only one tear is seen).
We are also told that imperfection is the  key to life and marriage can be taken lightly.
This film also marks 1999's Christmas time family film that most wants  to be the next Miracle on 34th Street or It's a Wonderful Life.
Last  year, Chris Columbus entered Stepmom into this notorious yet largely  unspoken contest, following his slightly more appealing earlier bids  which include Home Alone and Mrs. Doubtfire.
Mr. Capra, rest assured, we  don't need a robot to locate the West Indies.  . . 
