Starring Hugh Grant, James Caan and Jeanne Tripplehorn Directed by Kelly Makin Running Time: 1 hour 42 minutes. After the astounding success of Notting Hill, Hugh Grant returns to the screens again in this humorous comedy.
Hugh Grant 'plays' (although he always just acts as himself) Michael Felgate, an auctioneer.
He proposes to his girlfriend Gina (Tripplehorn) who refuses.
Michael tries to find out why she won't marry him, and it turns out the problem is her dad, Frank (Caan) who is a member of the mob.
Grant tries to sort the situation out so they can get married, but soon gets himself tangled up in all sorts of trouble with the mob, passing himself off as 'Little Big Mickey Blue Eyes from Kansas City.
'. Although nothing particularly special, with an almost television movie feel about it, Mickey Blue Eyes has a good sense of humour and enough charm to get itself through.
The film relies heavily on Hugh Grants shtick as the stuttering Englishman, and thankfully the film survives because of this.
Although Grant tries nothing new, apart from an hideous Italian accent, he charming enough to hold the audiences attention, and gets us through the film.
The same can't be said for Tripplehorn, however, who gives an uneven performance.
There's little chemistry between Grant and herself, and I couldn't care less if Grant would get back with her.
She comes off as a little irritating, and not very watchable at all.
James Caan, despite his limited screen time, is fun as the mobster father, and a large supporting cast of Italian stereotypes are fun enough to make sure the plot keeps going.
The plot itself is nothing special, and the script is also uneven to make this film truly funny.
Mixed in with some funny lines are some obvious, horrible gags that raise a groan rather than a laugh from true predictably.
The screenwriters, Adam Scheinman and Robert Kuhn, could of thrown in a few more gangster film references, and apart from the Godfather theme playing in the background during some scenes, there's a distinct lack of parody.
The writers also seem to have a problem with the non Italian supporting characters, with James Fox's character being a stumbling British plot element that serves little purpose but to power a few gags and get the silly ending to work.
He's nothing more than a plot device, which is a shame.
In fact, only Grant, Tripplehorn and Caan get any meat in the roles, the other Italians look like they could provide many laughs, but the writers push them to the side.
The direction, from Kids in the Hall: Brain Candy director Kelly Makin, in bouncy enough, and keeps the plot moving.
Most of the gags provide a smirk and a smile, but none are laugh out loud funny.
Although Mickey Blue Eyes is good fun, there's an odd air about the film that it could of tried a little harder, rather than relying heavily on the cast, Grant in particular, to get the laughs.
Still, with it's fun performances, some good jokes and a nice soundtrack with the usual Italian tunes mixed in, Mickey Blue Eyes is a good vehicle for Hugh Grant, and provides 100 minutes of amusement.
Well intentioned fun.. . 
