Cast:  Nicholas Cage, John Travolta, Joan Allen, Alessandro Nivola, Gina Gershon, Dominique Swain Directed By John Woo.         To tell you what, I was not impressed at all by the only other John Woo film I have seen.
Starring Travolta, BROKEN ARROW was a mediocre action movie at best, and I really could have cared less about anything when I saw it.
Not ture here.
I went into FACE/OFF expecting the same and was blown away!!
This is by far, one of the best films of the year.
Amazing action sequences, stunts, explosions, some hott girls, and (is this the best thing?
)  Characterization!!!!!
John Travolta (PULP FICTION, PHENOMENON) stars as Sean Archer, leader of an L.A.
Anti-terrorist squad.
He is still working to find and kill Castor Troy, Nicholas Cage (THE ROCK, CON-AIR).
Cage, you see, had killed Archer's son several years back and his life hasn't been the same since.
After an amazing shoot out involving aiplaones and hangars, Troy is captured as is his brother Pullocks (Nivola).
However everything is fine from peachy as Castor has planted a bomb somewhere in L.A. and Archer has no idea how to find it.
So, the doctors recommend switching faces, so Archer can be at jail as Troy to find out where the bomb is.
In a rediculous sequence, Travolta and Cage switch faces.
However Cage is left without one and is out like a light.
Prolems begin when Cage wakes up and is able to get Travolta's face on him, then he kills the medical staff.
The movie really takes off from there and let me tell you, Cage deserve's an Acadamy Award Nomination for this one.
First he is the evil cold heated villian Troy, then he must win back our hearts as Archer.
Not that Travolta good either, he certainly had fun.
Joan ALlen plays Archer's wife who is confused and hen scared as she slowly realizes the man she's living with is not her husband.
Dominique Swain is great as Archer's misunderstood daughter.
And Gina Gershon (remember SHOWGIRLS) gives a good performance as Troy's ex-girlfriend, who tells Cage (as Archer) that her son is his.
The action sequences here are memorable.
One of the best includes Gerhon's son listening to "Over the Rainbow" as a fight goes on all around him.
ANother includes a mexican standoff in a church, complete with the doves and the whole megillah.
The only prob's i had with FACE/OFF is that its about 25 minutes too long,  Just when you think its over, there is another chase scene involving speed boats, etc.
This scene is actually better then the entire movie of SPEED 2.
Thats another stor yall together though.
FACE/OFF runs way too long at 2:20.
It is rated R for violence and language.
See it, but check your brain at the door.
*** 1/2. Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net  Jesse A. Kaplan. . 
