   It's not that EVENT HORIZON isn't well made.
It's just that I've    been there before.
In fact, I'm hard pressed to think of another    film more entirely fabricated of quotes from other movies.
Barely    five minutes into the story I found myself sidetracked with    references from obvious candidates like ALIEN, LIFEFORCE, and 2010,    but the quotespotting soon brought forth non-SF films such as DON'T    LOOK NOW and THE SHINING, and culminated with SOLARIS and, God help    me, Disney's THE BLACK HOLE.
Why is it - pardon the pun - that black hole movies always suck?
It's a fascinating subject that still hasn't been treated right by    Hollywood.
In this case, the Event Horizon is not the rim of a    black hole, but the name of a spaceship that reappears in Neptune's    orbit after a seven year absence.
But maybe it's really a    non-Event Horizon.
It's a Marie Celeste in Space scenario, the    kind of story that early STAR TREK episodes bought the patent on    years ago.
To be fair, the opening scenes are writ large upon the    screen, at least proving once again that SF cinema was the reason    that Panavision was invented.
The actors - Laurence Fishburne and    Sam Neill head the cast - are all fine, the sets are great, the    budget is big, there is some legitimate haunted-house atmosphere, a    couple of gripping sequences, and at least one moment that made me    laugh (when Fishburne decisively announces they're vacating the    ship).
But there are still holes in the plot, and I don't mean the    black kind either, that keep the film from being solidly grounded:    the abandonment of all scientific rationale (even Neill's pragmatic    Doctor gives up) shows that the film-makers were less interested in    explanation than effect.
And, come to think of it, isn't there a    crew member unaccounted for at the end?
It may not be the movie's fault.
I guess I was expecting something    more purely science-fictional, and instead got that SF-horror    hybrid that seems to have consumed the genre of late.
If I had    seen EVENT HORIZON fifteen years ago I would have no doubt loved    it.
But you can only jump out of your seats from the same shock    effects so many times, and after that there's not a lot left for a    story to go on.
Which is a shame, because I wanted to enjoy this    film more than I did.
Contrary to its title, EVENT HORIZON didn't    take me into unchartered territory.
The most unexpected thing    about the ending was hearing a song by the Prodigy played over the    final credits.. . 
