Directed by Paul Thomas Anderson.
Screenplay by Anderson.
Starring Philip  Baker Hall, Jason Robards, Tom Cruise.
Running time: 188 minutes.
Rated R  for offensive language (MFCB).
Reviewed on March 20th, 2000.
I am almost surprised to find myself reviewing "Magnolia", two months  after viewing the film.
But although I have seen several movies in the  intervening weeks, the images of "Magnolia" have remained strong in my  mind, and so here I sit at my keyboard.
This is not to say that  "Magnolia" is a perfect film; in some respects, it is deeply flawed.
But  it is one of those movies which demands to be viewed, contemplated,  remembered, even if the verdict is not entirely positive.
"Magnolia" is the brainchild of Paul Thomas Anderson, and is a sequel of  sorts to his "Boogie Nights", featuring many of the same cast and crew.
Some critics have reviewed "Magnolia" on this basis, but I have not seen  "Boogie Nights" (yet) and would prefer to discuss "Magnolia" on its own  merits anyhow.
"Magnolia" tells the stories of several people on one day in California.
Jim Kurring (John C Reilly) is a police officer who is well-meaning but  sometimes too earnest.
On a routine call, he meets drug-addled Claudia  (Melora Walters).
Claudia's father is popular game show host Jimmy Gator  (Philip Baker Hall), who has recently learned he is dying and must now  break the truth of his sordid private life to wife Rose (Melinda Dillon).
The current star of Gator's quiz show is young Stanley Spector (Jeremy  Blackman), both encouraged and terrorized by his father Rick (Michael  Bowen).
Stanley has raised the spectre of the legendary "Quiz Kid" Donnie  Smith (William H Macy).
Smith became famous on Gator's show, but has  fallen on hard times as an adult and is now contemplating crime.
Meanwhile, Frank T.J. Mackey (Tom Cruise) is a "motivational" speaker who  teaches men how to seduce women.
Mackey's estranged father is rich TV  producer Earl Partridge (Jason Robards), now on his deathbed in almost  constant pain.
Partridge is cared for by nurse Phil Parma (Philip Seymour  Hoffman), who desperately wants to reunite father and son before Earl's  imminent demise.
Partridge's much younger wife is Linda (Julianne Moore),  who married him for his money but has grown to love him, and does not  know how to deal with his death.
There are a number of themes competing for attention in "Magnolia".
The  most obvious is that Strange Things Happen, introduced in three amusing  opening vignettes.
The movie, obviously, is awash with coincidence and  happenstance, as characters from otherwise unrelated plot threads cross  each other's paths.
This theme is almost comically illustrated at two  points in the film's second half: once when all the characters begin  singing along to the excellent Aimee Mann soundtrack, and once shortly  thereafter when a totally unanticipated event occurs.
It would be  criminal of me to reveal the controversial details of the latter, but  suffice it to say that it is presaged by a few carefully-planted clues  in the film itself (not to mention the prologue), and does not feel at all out of place within "Magnolia"'s narrative framework.
If the first event  is the calm before the storm, the second is the storm itself; together  they pave the way for the events that form the movie's conclusion.
While this in of itself would be the basis for an intriguing movie, and  is certainly the fulcrum upon which "Magnolia" turns, there is a lot more  going on.
The struggle between fathers and children crops up often:  between Hall and Walters, Robards and Cruise, Bowen and Blackman.
Events  have conspired to force each pair to confront their relationship, in one  way or another, whether they want to or not.
Both Robards and Hall are dying.
Both Moore and Walters wrestle with  substance abuse.
Both the Robards/Moore and Hall/Dillon marriages are  built on a foundation of lies.
Both Parma and Reilly are caregivers  flailing in the face of their own impotence.
Both Walters and Macy are  looking for someone to take care of them.
Macy has already suffered from  the false glamour of childhood fame; now it looks as though Blackman may  endure the same fate.
Even at over three hours, "Magnolia" is bursting with material, throwing  so much at the viewer it is hard to get bored.
But this is both its  blessing and its curse: Anderson puts so much into the movie that some  things get lost in the shuffle.
It is difficult to tell if the movie  really comes together, or just amounts to a lot of sound and fury.
Early  on, for example, Reilly investigates a murder which never gets resolved.
Sure, it's not integral to the movie (Reilly's scenes with Dillon and  Macy are much more important), but so much is made of it early on that  ignoring it makes "Magnolia" feel incomplete.
And a few of the subplots  just don't feel as well-developed as others.
Blackman and Bowen's  relationship, in particular, gets short shrift compared to some of the  other stories.
It is ironic that, for such a long movie, one of the  dominant feelings I was left with afterward was of wanting more.
But  maybe that isn't necessarily such a bad thing, either.
The large cast mainly rises to the quality of Anderson's script.
Cruise's  Oscar-nominated performance has gotten the most attention, and not  undeservedly.
Here he turns his public persona on its head in a role  which matches "Eyes Wide Shut" for how deeply it plumbs.
Also excellent  is Hoffman, quiet yet passionate as Phil Parma.
Really, only Moore  disappoints, with a performance that can best be described as shrill.
Although by no means bad, she does exhibit the skill shown in "The End of  the Affair" and "An Ideal Husband".
"Magnolia" is a rarity in today's Hollywood: a film honestly deserving of  the term 'epic'.
Brilliantly acted, richly scripted, tantalizingly  directed, it more than overcomes its flaws and proves to be a truly  singular filmgoing experience.
It is little wonder it has stayed so fresh  in my mind so long; would that I could say the same about more movies.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/Magnolia.html. . 
