CRUEL INTENTIONS Cast: Sarah Michelle Gellar, Ryan Phillippe, Reese Witherspoon, Selma Blair, Christine Baranski, Joshua Jackson Director: Roger Kumble Screenplay: Roger Kumble, suggested by "Les Liaisons Dangereuses" by Choderlos de Laclos Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 2 stars. Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe) and Kathryn (Sarah Michelle Gellar) are two manipulating upper class Manhattan teenagers, who agree to partake in a wager of sexual contest.
Kathryn challenges Sebastian - who is known for his sexual sleaziness - to seduce a pristine student named Annette (Reese Witherspoon), who is incidentally a headmaster's daughter.
If Sebastian loses, he has to hand over his 1956 Jaguar to Kathryn.
If he wins, he gets to do Kathryn in the position of his choice.
But Sebastian begins to fall in love with the gentle spirited Annette, whilst Kathryn immerses herself in cocaine and meaningless relationships.
Cruel Intentions has so many plot twists and turns that it is easy to feel as manipulated as the film's characters, but for few of the right reasons.
Although this film has a distinctly 90's touch - with homosexuals, lesbian references, drug use, you name it - it rarely feels fresh or original.
The central romance between Sebastian and Annette is uninspired, with not even one scene portraying their emotions in an insightful or mature manner.
The script has its ups and downs; the film's first half is considerably better than its second, or at least a little more intriguing.
The acting here does not contribute much to the production.
Sarah Michelle Gellar quickly becomes little more than a passing joke - whilst there is nothing particularly wrong with her performance, her dialogue is ridiculously egotistical and cold.
Reese Witherspoon, however, gives a sensuous and exciting presence.
Cruel Intentions is directed and edited with precision, and shifts through its various subplots seamlessly.
The filmmakers have produced a sharp and shifty piece, but one that fails to entice audiences or bring them into the picture.
It has a lot of bickering, biting and slandering, but little intrigue.
Furthermore, squeezing in a happy ending is not just a bad choice - given the subject matter, it's also painfully ironic.. . . 
