Visit Online Film Critics at http:/www.ofcs.org. Shakespeare is spinning in his grave.
Picture this figure of speech.
It's not so much poetic as graceless and  gross, much like Gil Junger's 10 Things I Hate About You, a film loosely  based on the Bard's The Taming of the Shrew.
Here's the premise:  two beautiful sisters living in Washington state  stand for opposite worldviews – one superficial and pleasure-seeking,  the other feminist and intelligent.
The position of Bianca Stratford  (Larisa Oleynik), peeved that she is not allowed to date boys, worsens  when her obstetrician father changes the rule.
Now Bianca can date only  when Kat dates!
This seems unlikely, as Kat is the shrew of  Shakespeare's title, a determined little termagant who shuns guys only  after she has mentally outshone them.
Here now – complications.
At  wit's end, Bianca exploits a boy with a crush on her, a new kid in  school named Cameron (Joseph Gordon Levitt).
In a convoluted series of  schemes, a handsome bad boy (Patrick Verona, played by Heath Ledger) is  paid to woo Kat.
Hence Bianca is free to date the slimy Joey Donner  (Andrew Keegan), although she had suggested she'd be dating Cameron in  return for his favor.
Still with it?
The basic love stories are promising, especially a minor  one involving a friend of Cameron's and a friend of Kat's.
But the  turns of romantic plot are too predictable, and the resulting  relationships fall flat.
How can viewers believe a repulsive young man  like Verona can become a desirable, even noble character?
Does Bianca  truly overcome her shallowness and attain a mantle of decency?
And most  crucially, why is the shrew tamed so relatively easily?
Heaps of  questions occur to the watcher of this film.
Julia Stiles is the most striking cast member, and does a strong job  portraying Kat's feminist bent.
Karen McCullah Lutz's screenplay,  though, casts Kat as a closet Barbie, ready to comply when she is  pleased.
A strong facial resemblance helps Oleynik in being convincing  as the sister.
Oleynik is fine as Bianca, especially in portraying the  occasional shallowness that is such a strong contrast to Kat's cultural  politics.
Larry Miller plays the father of Kat and Bianca as an overprotective  buffoon.
He's an undeveloped caricature about whom we ultimately care  very little.
Let it be enough to say that the writing has him telling  us about his character, when real characters show themselves.
Needless  to say, his wife is missing from the scene.
The result does not make us  sympathize for the plight of his single parenthood, as much as it makes  us wonder if screenwriters don't kill parents off just to have less  characters to flesh out fully.
In a couple of small roles, David Leisure and Daryl Mitchell play  teachers who add funny moments to the film.
But the tones of their  characterization again intrude, and the viewer wonders if she is  watching realism or over-the-top camp.
The filthy language and personal  insults used by Mr. Morgan (Mitchell's teacher) are downright  unbelievable.
It's almost as though the film is trying to exaggerate in  the same way the situations in Clueless were exaggerated – but 10 Things  is much less successful.
The film's faults are many.
For one, Budweiser must have paid dearly  for product placement.
How advisable is it, however, to place your  product in the hands of hundreds of actors playing underage drinkers?
Another, larger flaw is the sense of irresponsibility.
Again and again  the youngsters peopling the film do nasty things to  each other and fail  to pay for them.
From silly schtick – Bianca shooting her coach with an  arrow – to major deception, 10 Things I Hate About You reinforces the  notion that horrible behaviors often don't carry consequences.
Yes,  there are the conventions of teen movies:  references to sex, scanty  clothing (enough navels, already!
) and endless sight gags.
Not that a  film must be politically correct, but this one also points out several  cliques, poking fun at each of them.
The satire is done nicely, but in  the end the tone is less than tolerant.
Oh, besides Mitchell, there is  one African-American actress, Gabrielle Union, as one of Bianca's  shallow friends.
The lack of diversity is one shortcoming, but it's the  film's careless accenting of reckless attitudes that crosses the line  from harmless fluff to become offensive drivel.
In the current flood of   teen-oriented films, when is a director going to respect this line?
The tie-in with Shakespeare is what drew my attention.
No similar  relation exists with the spate of new teen flicks.
So for the millions  of moviegoers not targeted by filmmakers exploiting this genre, do not  hesitate to miss them.
Even the use of Good Will could not add weight  to this piece;  come on, how much more lightness do the young people of  the world need?
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com. . 
