Canada/UK.
1999.
Director/Screenplay - David Cronenberg, Producers -  Cronenberg, Andras Hamori & Robert Lantos, Photography - Peter Suschitsky,  Music - Howard Shore, Visual Effects/Special Effects Supervisor - Jim Isaac,  Digital Effects - Toybox (Supervisor - Dennis Benardi), Makeup Effects -  Steven Dupuis, Creature Effects - Kelly Lepowsky, Production Design - Carol  Spier.
Production Company - Alliance Atlantis/Serendipity Point  Films/Natural Nylon.
Jennifer Jason Leigh (Allegra Geller), Jude Law (Ted Pikul), Willem Dafoe  (Gas), Ian Holm (Kari Vinokur), Don McKellar (Yevgeny Nourish), Robert A.  Silverman (D=Arcy Nader), Callum Keith Rennie (Hugo Carlaw), Sarah Polley  (Merle). Plot: An assassination attempt is made on celebrity virtual reality games  designer Allegra Geller as she premieres her new VR game eXistenZ in a   church.
She flees, accompanied by her appointed security aide, Antenna  Research corporate intern Ted Pikul.
Attempting to introduce the VR neophyte  Ted to her work, she has him implanted with one of the spinal bio-ports into  which the organic consoles plug.
But once inside eXistenZ, they are drawn  into a disturbing game between two rival factions that are seeking to gain  control of the game where they are no longer sure what is real and what is  illusion.
If 1998's big theme was asteroid collision and tv-turned-reality movies and  1997's was volcano disaster movies and 1996's was big budget alien invasion  films, then this year's trend is shaping up to be Virtual Reality movies -  what with ‘The Matrix', ‘eXistenZ' and the upcoming ‘The Thirteenth Floor'.
‘eXistenZ' is the second of the year's VR movies.
Although jumping on the  Virtual Reality trend, or any type of bandwagon, is never exactly something  you could accuse Canadian director David Cronenberg of doing.
Cronenberg is  probably one of the most unique and original voices in the sf/horror genre.
His body of work - which ranges from ‘Stereo' (1969), ‘Crimes of the Future'  (1970), ‘Shivers' aka ‘They Came from Within/The Parasite Murders' (1974),  ‘Rabid' (1976), ‘The Brood' (1979), ‘Fast Company' (1979), ‘Scanners'  (1981), ‘Videodrome' (1983), ‘The Dead Zone' (1983), ‘The Fly' (1986), ‘Dead  Ringers' (1988), ‘Naked Lunch' (1991), ‘M.
Butterfly' (1993) and ‘Crash'  (1996) (with all bar ‘Fast Company' and ‘M.
Butterfly' being sf-horror  works) - is something that rings with a voice of startling originality.
Throughout Cronenberg's work runs a fascination with bodily horrors - he  could be accused of being the first Manichean horror film-maker.
Cronenberg  regularly crafts striking metaphoric images - be it a woman's body being  taken over by a vampiric organ under her armpit in ‘Rabid'; psychological  repressions manifesting themselves in flesh form in ‘The Brood' or the  scientist slowly melding into a fly in ‘The Fly'.
But, unlike any classic  horror film, the process of mutation, indeed the mad scientists themselves,  in Cronenberg's oeuvre, are rarely processes of horror in any established  sense - they are ones that seem to be welcomed as transformational  experiences by the victims.
In ‘The Fly', for example, the protagonist  welcomes his transformation with an eager scientific fascination; in  ‘Videodrome' and ‘Crash' we see people integrating with tv's and cars in  ways that offer perverse new combinations of humanity and technology.
‘eXistenZ' is Cronenberg's most overtly commercial film in more than a  decade.
From ‘Dead Ringers' onward Cronenberg has determinedly pushed  boundaries in terms of sheer perversity while having left behind any easy  pigeonholing as a genre director.
His adaptations of ‘Naked Lunch', William  S. Burroughs' surreal and plotless ramble through drugs and homosexuality,  and ‘Crash', J.G.
Ballard's work of ‘auto'-eroticism, have been  controversial to the say the least, being dogged by jittery financiers and  distributors, while his mainstream adaptation of ‘M.
Butterfly' was a  commercial flop.
During this time Cronenberg's career was on such shaky  financial ground he was been forced to make ends meet by working as an actor  in films like ‘Nightbreed' (1990), ‘To Die For' (1995), ‘Extreme Measures'  (1996) and ‘Last Night' (1998).
Amid the dross that is being churned out on in the name of Virtual Reality  cinema, one looks with interest to see what Cronenberg's peculiarly carnal  fascinations would bring to the subject.
His fascination with bio-technology  immediately starts to creep in.
Instead of keyboards people manipulate  consoles that look like sheep's bladders which are attached via an  intestine-like cable to a puckered orifice in the spinal column.
Naturally  being Cronenberg, the spinal bio-port orifice is played up for maximum  sexual imagery with people seen tonguing and fingering it.
Meanwhile  assassains wield guns that are made out of human bone and tissue, in order  to get past metal detectors, and which fire teeth.
The start of the film  with the assassination attempt, the flight and the encounter with Willem  Dafoe (in an amusing cameo that in any lesser budgeted film should be  mandatorily played by Brad Dourif) is engrossing.
It is all aided by a  marvellously brooding and oppressive score from regular Cronenberg  collaborator Howard Shore.
The first entry into VR doesn't come until nearly 30 minutes into the film  and is well led up to.
But thereafter the film sorts of falls apart.
In fact  for the high standards that one expected of Cronenberg, the script falls  into some of the more disappointingly hackneyed cliches that has dogged the  VR film.
Like engaging in the series of perpetual flips where people are  wondering if the game is over yet and what is assumed to be reality is  intruded in upon - ‘Total Recall' (1990) (a disappointing treatment of the  VR theme which incidentally was originally to have been made by Cronenberg)  did these types of flips with far greater dexterity than Cronenberg does  here.
There's a labyrinthine (and never entirely clear) plot (reminiscent of  the 1993 tv mini-series ‘Wild Palms') involving two different factions  trying to, for reasons obscure, gain control of the VR game.
As one of the  character's eventually says "There are too many twists going on to follow.
"  Indeed the rules of the VR game ‘eXistenZ' are never spelt out.
Nor does  what happen ever seem particularly game-like - Cronenberg seems to have  taken a leaf from the book of David Lynch in having people standing about  muttering surreal non-sequitirs in arch deadpan.
The VR sequences are not  without their amusements - like when the two leads find themselves  controlled by character development and being forced into a gratuitous love  scene.
But when the film ends on what has rapidly become the VR equivalent  of the old "It was all a dream" twist ending, one wants to yell at  Cronenberg at the corniness of the device.
‘eXistenZ' feels like Cronenberg's least personal and most routine film  since his adaptation of Stephen King's ‘The Dead Zone'.
It feels less like a  Cronenberg film than like a film in which a by-the-numbers VR plot has had a  handful of Cronenbergian imagery grafted onto it.
And when one looks for the  characteristically perverse Cronenbergian flourishes, the imagery seems  conspicuously lacking in any of the vividity of scenes in past Cronenberg  films - like Samantha Eggar's brood of external foetuses in ‘The Brood'; the  wonderfully queasy image in ‘Videodrome' of James Woods tentatively poking a  gun inside the hole in his stomach then losing it; or in ‘Crash' of James  Spader having sex wherein he treats the wound in Rosanna Arquette's leg as a  substitute vagina.
Even the most vivid image of the organic gun here seems  to be one that Cronenberg has cannibalized from the image of the literal  ‘hand-gun' fusion in ‘Videodrome'.. . . 
