Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. As I watched "Entrapment" I found myself wondering if Sean Connery could  estimate the quality of a script he was shooting.
If he can, he surely realized this one was mediocre.
It's the story of Robert MacDougal (Sean Connery), called "Mac.
"  He's a  world-class art thief, and the insurance company that covers the stolen  works is very upset.
Waverly Insurance employs an expert, Gin (Catherine  Zeta-Jones) to analyze his methods.
Overzealous, Gin is granted permission  actually to track down Mac, in London.
The old and wily thief is soon on to  her, but she convinces Mac she is a sort of double agent, a thief herself  only posing as an expert in solving crimes by dismantling them.
Soon she  and Mac land at his remote castle on the coast of Britain, where they  rehearse the methodology of this particular crime - the stealing of a golden  Chinese mask.
With daring skill they break into an enormous manor, and Gin  begins her practiced body movements to elude the lasers that would trip the  alarm.
Watch these scenes for Zeta-Jones doing her martial arts of  elusiveness, bending and twisting along what seems to be an open floor.
After this caper is successful, the control of the criminal duo shifts.
Now  Gin seems to be the one manipulating "Mac," and as they travel to Malaysia  to engineer the scheme she has created, a romance clearly begins to develop.
The climax of the film is a high-tech bank heist on the crack of the new  millenium, and indeed the high points of the story include the actual  robberies I've described.
But there are too many low points for the film to take its place as anything  more than a minor espionage flick.
Connery is a masterful actor, and  Zeta-Jones holds her own opposite him, except during occasional bouts of  adolescent anger.
What these players are working with is not enough help.
The cuts are often too fast, and director Jon Amiel does not allow adequate  time for the development either of character or of meaningful relationships.
Will Patton is miscast as the honcho from  Waverly insurance:  he's given  a darkened mustache and Hispanic name, Hector Cruz.
Ving Rhames sketches  his character - Thibadeaux, apparently a right-hand man for Mac - with  authority and menace, a performance that is effective but perhaps too easy  for the physically imposing actor.
(Someone, please cast this wonderful  presence against type!
)  The film does benefit from changes in scenery, its  international locales lending variety and at times stunning beauty.
But are  these elements enough to salvage a film that tries to draw its strength from  the oldest tricks in the spy/thief genre?
And yes, we know early what's in  store for us - as many turnabouts of identity as can be packed into a plot,  some of them downright red herrings.
"Entrapment," a solid one-word title, is passable entertainment, but I would  suggest seeing it as we did, in a second-run theater.
You'll like the  gadgets and the figurative meanings that reflect about the screen like  deflected lasers.
But you'll also sense the places responsible for  mediocrity. . . 
