   More MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton at:  http://welcome.to/movieviews. In Steven Spielberg's newest film, he demonstrates what the word war really means.
Utter, complete hell.
And then he pits us there, right in the middle of the most realistic battle scene ever experienced on screen.
That scene is the landing on Omaha Beach, which starts off Saving Private Ryan and then doesn't end for a painful and unquestionably brutal 25 minutes into the movie.
The deaths are not quick and painless like in other war movies.
Men have their limbs blown off left and right, blood splatters in every direction, young soldiers lay on the ground holding their own guts screaming for their "mommy", all of which sends shivers down your spine.
Spielberg's three hour WWII epic is a masterful achievement that ranks easily as one of the best movies of the year.
But that doesn't mean it's perfect.
There are some moments when you feel the final impact should have been more dramatically satisfying.
But still, after two films (The Lost World and Amistad) that I thought weren't up to Spielberg's average quota, this one will set him back on track.
The Private Ryan of the title is one of four brothers fighting in World War II.
After the other three are killed in battle, a squad is sent out to recover the remaining Ryan (played by Matt Damon) and bring him back safely to his family.
Leading the platoon is shaky captain Miller (Tom Hanks, wonderful), and a loyal soldier who always sticks by his side (the surprisingly commanding Tom Sizemore).
Jeremy Davies plays a frightened translator to such a stunning effect for a rookie player, and the young cast shows they are capable of the most grating of tasks: to hold their own in a Spielberg movie.
When the squad finally finds Ryan, 2/3 of the way into this three-hour film, he turns out to be a stubborn yet likeable lad who doesn't want to leave his platoon behind.
This means Hanks and his team must stay to defend one of the last remaining bridges from incoming Nazi's, in a final sequence that is one of the most incredible scenes I've ever witnessed on screen.
The editing is marvelous, done to near perfection, and once the smoke clears the final impact of the amazing battle will stay with you long after you exit the theater.
Saving Private Ryan is one of the best war films of our time, standing strong next to Glory and Platoon.
When Steven Spielberg has a vision, it usually seems to work out.
Unlike his mindless rampaging dino movie of 1997, this is a true vision.
And it seemed to work out just fine.
Jamey Hughton writes a Published Column   in The StarPhoenix (Saskatoon, Sk Canada)     and was a 1999 Writing Finalist in the       Canadian YTV Achievement Awards.. . 
