54 (1998) - Mike Myers, Ryan Phillippe, Neve Campbell, Salma Hayek.    Based on the true story of a New York nightclub, "54" strives for the    essence of all things cool - sex, drugs and disco.
It's got plenty of    all three and a number of rich stories trying desperately to get out    and be seen amidst all the '70s ambience.
On the surface, it's the story of Steve Rubell (Mike Myers), the owner    of Studio 54 - the place to be seen in the Big Apple.
Steve is cast as    a visionary, a man who wants to host a never-ending party.
But Steve's    success is based as much on his crooked b ookkeeping as it is on his    club's wild, lurid atmosphere.
Into the mix comes Shane (Ryan Phillippe), a gas-station attendant    from New Jersey who sees the exclusive club as his way out of a quiet    life of seeming mediocrity.
After getting hired on as a busboy, he is    quickly immersed in the dangerous lifestyle of S tudio 54 and its    celebrity clientele.
"54" has a number of equally deep stories hiding behind the disco    beat: Steve's business practices; Shane's search for his own identity    and a touch of romance with soap-opera star Julie Black (Neve    Campbell); and the shaky marriage of another busboy and an aspiring    singer (Breckin Meyer and Salma Hayek).
It's a shame that some of those great stories are barely touched upon,    but the elaborate sets that upstage them are so eye-catching that you    may not notice.
Whether for good or ill, the real star of "54" is the    club itself, with true-to-life recreations of famed set pieces like    the cocaine-snorting crescent moon.
Its twisted, dark atmosphere fits    the dark deeds associated with the club, like drugs served along with    the champagne.
In contrast to the shadowy sets, the late '70s soundtrack is bright    and uplifting but rarely distracting.
In fact, it complements the film    perfectly, providing that essential reminder that "54" is loosely    based on real life.
Myers, best known for his roles is odd comedies like "Austin Powers"    and "Wayne's World," isn't likely to win any Oscars for this film, but    at least he has the chance to demonstrate that his acting talents    range beyond pure comedy.
Most of the other actors are under-utilized    and rarely given a chance to shine - even Phillippe, whose Shane is    ostensibly the main character of the film.
"54" is a classic example of style over substance.
Visually and    aurally, it's a sharp movie, but it's not so sharp that you completely    forget about the stories.
Director Mark Christopher tries to take us    to the best of all possible worlds, but j ust leaves people wondering    what happened to the characters.
Rather like the dying drugs-and-disco    scene of the time, "54" is shallow, decadent and ultimately not    fulfilling.. . 
