It is the near future.
Ubiquitous genetic screening and engineering  has divided society in two: the genetic gifted, their organic problems  ironed out and their futures assured; and the "in-valids", those whose  chromosomes make them a poor risk and suited for only menial labour.
Vincent (Hawke) is the result of a natural birth, untouched by the  genetic scalpel.
But he dreams of going to the stars and when chance  comes to assume the place of the genetically perfect Jerome (Law) he  jumps at it and enters the starfaring Gattaca corporation.
However a  police investigation brought about by the murder of one of Vincent's  new colleagues threatens his identity.
Films with broad themes often stumble, particularly those adapted from  books.
The metaphors that can suspend disbelief in print, on film may  appear exaggerated and cartoonish.
Recall "1984" and "Brave New  World".
Thus, "Gattaca" is fighting an uphill battle.
Despite this,  first-time director and writer Andrew Niccol has achieved something  rather wonderful, a good looking picture with no glitzy special  effects nor choreographed fighting but instead a thoughtful,  intelligent air.
Perhaps he learnt his lessons well from predecessors.
The large  echoing sets are reminiscent of Godard's "Alphaville" with their  depiction of the future-as-present.
Conversely, the past-as-future  gets a run (via "Bladerunner") in the details on the set.
Large  finned sedans abound, Vincent's childhood home has an antique fridge  (that I remember from a student shared household in the late 1980s),  he reads worn handset books on astrogation.
The identical suited  masses of the Gattaca corporation could come straight from  "Metropolis" or "2001".
Neither Hawke nor Thurman are (yet) great actors, yet they are oddly  suited to their roles.
Hawke's Vincent is an energetic dreamer whose  optimism has been filed away to leave a repressed, fearful soul.
Thurman (as Irene, a coworker of Vincent) has an alien look and manner  suited to the genetically blessed.
The supporting cast is full of  rather nice performances as well: Jude Law as an empty and angry  genetic superman, Gore Vidal as a patrician bureaucrat ("I haven't a  violent bone in my body," he sniffs, without being in anyway  figurative), Alan Arkin as a grungy old-hand detective.
Resisting the  Hollywood ploy of sprinkling one-liners through the script, "Gattaca"  nevertheless slips in some sly humour.
Irene sneaks a hair of  Jerome/Vincent's in for genetic analysis, and browses the resultant  pages of polynucleotide strings like a womens magazine.
The dour  police, anonymous in identical fedoras and grey trenchcoats, are  dubbed "hoovers" - two jokes for the price of one.
Then we come to the heart of "Gattaca", the idea of rational  discrimination.
When the frail child Vincent is turned away by a  school - which can't afford the insurance in case something happens to  him - their bias is completely sensible and still wrong.
(The  parallels to HIV-positive children is irresistible.
)  When he is  refused a job because of his genetic profile, the action is entirely  logical.
Despite his dedication and superb work-record, his true  identity would lead to his firing.
You can't help but think about  racism and sexism (and all the other "isms") and how one doesn't need  prejudice - just unfeeling rationality - to support discrimination.
If a system tipped in the favour of a particular class recruits the  best candidates, it will select those like itself.
In "Gattaca" this  is the genetically pure, for our own world white heterosexual males.
And this requires not the slightest bigotry.
Perhaps the road to hell  is paved not with good intentions, but with cold logic.
"Gattaca" leaves us much to think of on these lines, an issue that  is highly relevant in an age rich with information and genetic  technology.
Yet it does not look at this starry eyed.
Vincent  sacrifices a lot, even something of himself, to reach his goals.
His  victories are small, but touching.
I would be tempted to give  "Gattaca" the highest score and recommendation, but two things prevent  me.
First, it is perhaps slightly - just 10 minutes - longer than the  material will bear.
Second, some viewers will find its slightly aloof  air too remote to enjoy.
But otherwise it comes well recommended  [***/interesting] and "I Heard the Owl Call My Name" on the Sid and  Nancy scale.
------ paul-michael agapow (agapow@computer.org), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse "There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire.
" Archived at . . 
