There has always been a constant battle over whether sequels really have the potential to become great films that surpass their originals.
While not a sequel, (it was actually a prequel if you wish to get literal), Star Wars - Episode I: The Phantom Menace didn't even come close to its three originals.
There was no heart, no substance, and no real meaning to anything that went on in the movie.
Not to mention the acting was horrendous.
Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me wasn't very good either.
It was full of bathroom humor and extremely stupid gags that were unfunny and distasteful.
I think that we should both agree never to mention I Still Know What You Did Last Summer.
But every once in a while a movie comes along that is not only better than the original, it surpasses the original film tremendously.
The last film that comes to mind to do this was Scream 2, and the same type of thing has been introduced in Toy Story 2.
In the first movie, they were doing a trial and error picture, seeing if the audience and the general public would like what the movie had to offer.
Once they learned that they did, the sequel contained even more of the original material, and a couple of new surprises.
When talking about Toy Story 2, the only word I can come up with is, "Wow!
" This is one of the best movies of the year, is beautifully animated, and (Gasp!
) will be enjoyed by all members of the family.
Woody is trying to save a dust-filled toy named Wheezy from being sold at the family garage sale.
He accidentally gets stuck in a 25 cents box and is found by a vintage toy collector who steals him to complete his vintage cowboy collection.
It turns out that Woody used to have his own show in the 1950s.
He was extremely popular and had a numerous amount of merchandise made with his picture on it.
"I’m a yo-yo!
I used to be a yo-yo!
" Woody exclaims.
But there is bad news, the entire collection of Woody's Round-Up toys are being sent to a toy museum in Japan, and Woody doesn't want to leave his home.
So it’s up to Buzz, Rex, Hamm, Mr.
Potato Head, and Slinky to venture across town and find him so that he can return home before Andy gets back from his vacation.
They meet various challenges on the way, including Barbie dolls, a dangerous highway crossing, and a visit to the Al's Toy Barn.
Will they get to Woody on time?
Or will he be lost overseas forever?
The geniuses at Pixar have done it again.
The animation in the film is breathtaking.
Each frame is brightly colored and vibrant, each new scene creates a realistic looking setting, and the facial expressions on the toys and people are amazing.
There are plenty of hidden jokes and gags from previous Pixar productions.
Watchful viewers will notice A Bug's Life calendar in Andy's room, as well as Bug Life toys in the Al's Toy Barn scene.
If you've seen A Bug's Life, or like animation, will be quick to notice that the man who fixes up Woody is the same man who played chess with himself in the animated short Geri's Game.
Geri's Game was screened last year before A Bug's Life.
The script helps the film greatly, it never ventures far from its original formula, and is chock full of all of the zany characters that you love.
You'll get to see a lot more of the supporting characters too.
Much unlike last year's Babe: Pig in the City, even when the characters go out for a big adventure, they never lose their loving heart.
Extreme laughter is to be found around the theater from grandparent to teenager, which is one of the things that makes the film so special.
It's an extremely rare thing to find a film that the entire family can watch (and all enjoy) together.
So go and see Toy Story 2 (which is breaking box office records) now, you'll love it.
This great sequel (I'm ready for a third one!
) gets *** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains just one slightly frightening scene involving a fight between two characters.
Good Age: 2 & Up. A Review by Frankie Paiva The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com Visit my website at http://www.homestead.com/teenagemoviecritic/mainpage.html. . 
