Director:  Martin Campbell Cast:  Antonio Banderas, Anthony Hopkins, Catherine Zeta Jones, Stuart Wilson, Matt Letscher Screenplay:  Terry Rossio, Ted Elliott, John Eskow Producers:  Doug Claybourne, David Foster Runtime:  135 min.
US Distribution:  Sony Pictures/Tristar Rated PG-13:  intense action and violence. By Nathaniel R. Atcheson (nate@pyramid.net).         The Mask of Zorro is a decent action picture, with an adequate script and good acting.
The story is straightforward and cohesive, and the characters are reasonably well-defined.
It's also a film that, aside from the obvious effort that the performers have put into it, could have been made by a machine on an action film assembly line.
Sometimes it's thrilling, sometimes it's not, but it's always the same old action film stuff -- simple entertainment and instantly forgettable.
Mix in some irritating cliches common in Hollywood period pieces, and we have another big, loud blockbuster that you'll stop thinking about thirty seconds after the credits roll.
Is that what you want?
I mean, is that what people in general want?
I suppose that's possible; Armageddon, by comparison, is a film that aspires to be about as much as this one does, but I found the asteroid flick a lot more exciting and much more satisfying in the end.
Maybe it's because this subject matter is so common (the film feels almost exactly the same as The Man in the Iron Mask, and has many of the same problems).
Maybe it's because I've already seen entire cities explode this summer, and so seeing a mine blow up just isn't all that thrilling.
Maybe it's because, once again, I've walked away from a movie getting exactly what I expected to get.
Here's an official dare to all mainstream directors -- try surprising me for a change!
I have no particular affinity towards the legends of the legendary Zorro, but the story here seems like a nice one to continue the tale.
It begins with Zorro himself as a middle-aged man, played by Anthony Hopkins.
His real name is Don Diego, and his nemesis is Don Rafael Montero (Stuart Wilson).
Montero loves Diego's wife, but, in a fatal engagement, his guards kill her.
Montero has Diego imprisoned, and takes Diego's young daughter to raise her himself.
Twenty years pass, and focus is shifted to a young bandit, Alejandro (Antonio Banderas) and his brother.
When his brother is killed by a wicked general (Matt Letscher), Alejandro vows to take revenge.
That's when he meets Diego, who has just escaped from prison.
It turns out that the two knew each other when Alejandro was a child, and so Diego decides to teach the young man how to fight.
The two men then help one another to put their demons to rest, but not without the aide of a long series of semi-interesting action sequences.
The Mask of Zorro is not a dull picture.
Director Martin Campbell (Goldeneye) seems to have a knack for observing characters who swiftly overcome twenty-to-one odds and then smirk at their adversaries.
Some of the sequences here are very well-staged -- I liked the scene that has Zorro on the backs of multiple horses, as he overtakes a group of guards from behind.
The final sequence is also well-done, and features a lot of people falling from high places.
On a technical level, there's a lot to admire here, such as the authentic sword battles and the impressive sets.
But very little of it had me gaping with amazement or shaking with excitement.
The music and cinematography are both very routine, and films like this are where film makers should go over-the-top with style (as Michael Bay did in Armageddon).
Yes, it's fast-paced, and there are enough explosions to hold the focus of even the most hopeless victims of ADD.
I found the film pleasing to look at, but the only moments that will be etched in my mind are the ones I saw twenty times in the previews.
In addition, the script is not very witty, and lacks a substantial amount of humor; the few laughs present are supplied by the performers.
Ironically, what I liked most about the picture is the acting and the characters.
While the characters aren't strong, they are at least consistent, and the exceptional cast is impressive.
Banderas is always charming, and he's charming here, and wrings what humor he can out of the script.
Hopkins forces us to care about his character; there's one extremely touching scene that almost changed my entire view of the film.
This scene also includes Catherine Zeta-Jones, who plays the young lady to whom Montero has been lying for twenty years -- she is the true daughter of Zorro.
Zeta-Jones is luminous and spunky in the role, and holds up well against the pros.
Wilson is terrific, giving the villain a little bit of depth, while Letscher has fun giving his villain no positive attributes whatsoever.
As a period piece, the film feels sloppy.
While Hopkins and Wilson are both good, neither of them manage a Spanish accent, and therefore the film never sounds authentic (even Banderas seems to be covering up his natural inflection).
The dialogue is adequate, and while it never reeks of anachronisms, there isn't a single line of memorable dialogue in the film.
When all is considered, The Mask of Zorro is just another summer blockbuster -- technically adequate but utterly methodical.
It's nice to see a loud movie that isn't stupid, but this film just doesn't have much of a personality.  . . 
