THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY (Fox - 1998) Starring Cameron Diaz, Matt Dillon, Ben Stiller Screenplay by Ed Decter & John J. Strauss and Peter Farrelly &   Bobby Farrelly Produced by Frank Beddor, Michael Steinberg, Charles B. Wessler,   Bradley Thomas Directed by Peter Farrelly & Bobby Farrelly Running time: 118 minutes. Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    "There's something about Mary," croons comic troubadour Jonathan    Richmond by way of explanation at one point in the remarkably silly    film of the same name, which prompts one to take inventory: as    portrayed by Cameron Diaz, perpetual object of desire Mary Jenson is    gorgeous, kindly, wealthy, sunny and altogether charming.
She has    the propensity to change clothes while standing in front of open    windows, and even watches SportsCenter, which, needless to say,    induces one to ponder what's *not* to like about her?
Well, okay,    she's a golf aficionado -- nobody's perfect.
The ridiculously idealized Mary is the eye of the vortex in THERE'S    SOMETHING ABOUT MARY, an assemblage of zany bits of scatological    humour themed around -- err, stalking.
Unlike the sugar-coated    nastiness of last year's ADDICTED TO LOVE, though, this year's    summer stalking comedy (a most improbable genre, one would have    thought) has a bright, bubbly core; amidst all the crude sight gags,    the decidedly-politically incorrect witticisms, and lowbrow    raunchiness, the film has such an infectiously cheerful, carefree    spirit that its offensive material comes across as mischievous rather    than malicious.
Indeed, the sibling filmmaking team of Peter and    Bobby Farrelly clearly take such glee in stretching the limits of    good taste that it's nigh well irresistible to simply toss decorum    aside and revel in the bawdiness.
The film's (semblance of a) plot is a basic underdog tale structured    around a lovelorn geeky guy named Ted Stroehmann (Ben Stiller) and    his earnest attempts to woo the seriously-out-of-his-league goddess    Mary while competing for her affections against a bizarro,    ever-expanding collection of misfits, chief of which is the caddish    Pat Healy (Matt Dillon), the private eye whom Ted hired to track Mary    down.
In its outline, then, it's a tried-and-true, well-worn formula    which leaves no doubt where the film is headed, though familiarity    isn't much of an impediment given that the narrative essentially    serves as a framework for a series of gags.
There's little doubt where the film's greatest strengths lie; there    are moments in THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY which are as funny as    anything that's been released to theatres this year.
And, as per the    reputation of filmmakers, the humour isn't exactly sly and subtle --    the comedy is brazen and in many cases quite literally in-your-face,    all gross sight gags and frenetic slapstick.
In its best moments,    the silliness is so abundant that one can't help but choke with    laughter; there's one scene where the audience is lulled into    complacency by madcap discussion of a certain uncomfortable    circumstance that when the brothers Farrelly fling the image onscreen    (in a zoom shot, no less), filling the frame in all its    wince-inducing glory, it's hilarious not only in its absurdity and    grotesqueness, but also for its sheer unexpectedness.
"I can't believe they *showed* that!
" murmured someone behind me    during one of the film's big comic moments.
"That's *so mean*!
"    gasped the woman next to me.
(The guy in front of me was too busy    howling with laughter to comment.
)  The film's humour is so broad and    unabashedly confident that it often provokes not only laughter, but    bonafide audience reaction; at the screening I attended, one prime    sequence left the crowd buzzing so loud and long that the dialogue in    the entire subsequent scene couldn't even be heard.
However, this didn't prove to be a problem, and here lies the down    side of the film.
THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY is deliriously    scatological, tossing practically every sick joke in the book at the    screen in its attempts to elicit laughs, with a rather iffy success    rate; its big moments are explosively funny, but more often than not,    the gags sputter and fizzle, and in between comic crescendos the    whole thing gets rather dreary.
As a result, the film seems to run    far too long -- some liberal trimming could have be conducted with    negligent effect to the narrative while improving the overall pacing.
In addition, the film curiously seems to consider its romantic angle    far more sweet than it actually plays, frequently lending a sense of    sincerity to scenes that isn't really merited.
Still, while wildly uneven, the film is a hoot, replete with a    handful of memorably audacious moments.
It left me considering which    was preferable -- a carefully-modulated picture of consistent    amusement, or an agreeable one peppered with instances of hilarity,    like THERE'S SOMETHING ABOUT MARY.
While in general I find myself    leaning towards the former, I can't help but appreciate a film which    takes the tired Good Times montage endemic to the romantic-comedy    genre, and gives it a special hook.
-- Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/ "...a first screenplay unaccompanied by a powerful agent or industry  sponsor is generally a pathetic fetus of a film, nothing more.
"                                - Andrew Sarris. . 
