DINOSAUR (2000)  Rated PG; running time 82 minutes  Genre: Animation  IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0130623  Official site: http://disney.go.com/DisneyPictures/dinosaur/   Directed by: Eric Leighton, Ralph Zontag  Cast: The voices of D.B.
Sweeney, Ossie Davis, Julianna Margulies,  Samuel E. Wright, Alfre Woodard, Max Casella, Hayden Panettiere,  Joan Plowright, Della Reese, Peter Siragusa. Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000 Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsdinosaur.html. Way back when, I fell in love with a movie called THE BEAR, a film that  explored the non-animated, non-comical lives of two bears fighting  against man and nature.
When it finally came out on DVD, I bought it,  savoring the memory of having seen a rousing story told without the  trickery of singing beasts and wisecracking sidekicks.
I mention this  because, for a short while, I had a glimmer of a hope that - given the  beautifully epic sweep shown in its previews - DINOSAUR could also tell  its tale without smarminess, or at least with the finesse of a TOY STORY.
The Story (WARNING: **spoilers contained below**): After being mistakenly dropped, as an egg, into a group of lemurs--among  them, father and group leader Yar (Ossie Davis), mother Pilo (Alfre  Woodard), Zini (Max Casella), a hopeful (hopeless?
) bachelor and Comic  Relief, and daughter Suri (Hayden Panettiere)--Aladar the dinosaur (D.B.
Sweeney) is brought up as a member of the lemur family.
Aladar and the  lemurs' world is changed forever when giant meteors fall onto their  island, and they find themselves among other plant-eating dinosaurs, led  by Darwin-loving Kron (Samuel E. Wright), his heart-of-gold sister Neera  (Julianna Margulies), tough guy Bruton (Peter Siragusa), Baylene the  slow-moving Brachiosaur (Joan Plowright), and Eema (Della Reese), a  Weary Ol' Styrachosaur--all searching for the "nesting grounds", while  trying to stay two steps ahead of the dreaded meat-eating Carnotaurs.
The Upshot: Actually, I'm probably being unfair to DINOSAUR in comparing it to the  cinematic wonders of a "Bear" or the Fun Enough For An Adult (But It's  Made For A Kiddie) fare found in a "Toy Story"; then again, with the  oodles and oodles of dough Disney dumped into this project, you'd think  they'd remember the number one rule: make the story interesting.
Instead, they blew their wad on making the pretty pictures, and  scripting some awfully pedestrian lines which were proffered up by good  actors like D.B.
Sweeney, Ossie Davis, Joan Plowright, and Alfre  Woodard--all actors whose talents belie what sounded like mere  journeymanism on their parts.
I was never convinced that these were  anything but actors reading scripted lines (don't laugh; Toy Story had  me every step of the way); instead of seeing big dinos and silly little  monkeys, I found myself listening for familiar voices ("yep, that's  Julianna Margulies reading 'Neera', sounding a whole lot like 'Carol  Hathaway'...and hmmm, I wonder what James Earl Jones would've sounded  like as 'Kron'...").
The filmmakers seemed to count on childrens' love of dinosaurs (and, uh,  hasn't that fad played out by now?
Last I checked, Pikachu was the  in-thing with the young'uns) and All Things Disney, to carry the day by  coming to see this movie in droves.
That they'll get the kids in, I  have no doubt.
Will the movie keep their hyperactive attention?
Well,  that's another story.
Will it reel in the adults?
Well, it's a  certainty that it didn't keep my attention.
Why?
That one's easy: it lacked the spirit of fun, going instead for  the preachiness of  pounding a number of morals into the audience's  head, to the point where I went begging for aspirin for the headache I  developed.
It certainly didn't help that for some bizarre reason, a  narrator was tacked on to the beginning and ending, a'swingin' away with  the Whifflebat Of Exposition.
I reckon it's not A Good Thing when you  start rooting for the bad meat-eating dinosaurs to corner the cute  little plant-eaters and thrash them about the head until they just shut  up, ya think?
And if I see and hear another wisecracking movie monkey,  I think I might do Damage.
[And at risk of being roasted by parents of young kidlets everywhere -  "This is a children's film, you insensitive cad!
" - let me just say that  Black folk ain't the *only* ones who talk at the movies.
Maybe It's  Just Me; maybe it's asking too much to expect parents to tell their  children that, no Billy, it's not polite to scream at the top of your  lungs every time you get bored and want more JuJu Beans.
Yeah.
It's  probably Just Me.
]. DINOSAUR certainly had its Moments.
On the technical front, it was  drawn beautifully, and the creatures' movements seemed to be handled  realistically (as much as one could expect); the lemurs, for instance,  were made to move in a somewhat-sideways gait, not the straight-ahead  walk of, say, apes.
[And, speaking of lemurs, correct me if I'm wrong-- but since when would there be dinosaurs occupying the same era as lemurs?
I mean, *talking* lemurs are bad enough; d'ya really expect me to swallow the lemurs talking before their proper time?
I think not!
]  Story-wise,  I chuckled a few times at Della Reese's Weary Ol' Black Chick lines.
And if you've seen the long trailer--the one without the talking  lemurs--you've pretty much seen the most exciting part of the flick.
But a few Moments here or there do not an interesting story make,  especially in a movie that's supposedly a Big Summer Event.
The  animation-lover in me was dazzled by the drawings, but like a  badly-dubbed karate flick, the pictures and the sound didn't quite match  up.
I don't doubt for a second that this movie will make a gazillion dollars  this year and beyond, judging from the number of rather loud (but,  noticeably, not laughing) kids in my audience.
Still, box office  considerations aside, DINOSAUR is a big and pretty airhead of a movie.
Bammer's Bottom Line: DINOSAUR may have been great eye candy to look at--and until the monkeys  first spoke, it was indeed beautiful, without distraction--but they  forgot to build something into this movie: heart.
Fun- and story-wise,  the toys in Toy Story and the ants in A Bug's Life ran circles around  the big dino brutes.
One thing in its favor, though: at least there  were no singing prehistoric critters.
DINOSAUR (rating: flashing yellowlight):  This one's sense of wonder went extinct about 10 minutes in.. . 
