     I missed a 1 ošclock for łStir of Echoes˛ by six minutes and, not being one to miss a second of the movie-going experience -- Išm talking lights dimming, previews, even that THX thing with the cows (mšI psycho, or what) -- I caught a 1:15 of this film, instead.
Mistake.
Produced with an MTV-eye, łStigmata˛ is all photography direction.
The story, next to impossible to concentrate on one second to the next because the filmšs visual style is so abrasive, follows Atheist hairdresser Frankie Page (Patricia Arquette) as she becomes łafflicted˛ with the titular phenomena.
Meaning, wounds of Christ; receive five, and you die.
So, the film is more or less a countdown to her death.
Well.. why is this happening?
As a form of extreme punishment on a non-believer, or a method of _making_ them believe?
Dunno.
Either way, thatšs not entertaining, itšs depressing.
We get loving shots of large nails being hammered into feet and hands, over and over again;  divine imagery, right?
If it isnšt Arquette getting slashed or impaled, itšs blood dripping into water, water dripping into water (Frankiešs apartment has a convenient leak), or rain -- everything in annoying close-up.
Tip: try to make everything look cool (microwaves, candles, coffee cups, more candles.. did I mention water), and nothing does.
As for the gore, I wonder how a movie like this one skirts the NC-17 rating.
One scene, featuring an open wound on Arquettešs wrist that gushes blood so profusely for, like, five seconds, or thereabouts, made me nauseous.
That, plus images of carnage scattered throughout at what seemed like two-minute intervals; wherešs the line?
A minutešs worth of sex in greater cinema like łEyes Wide Shut˛ is too obscene for mass audiences, but 100 minutes of bloodshed here isnšt?
Oy... the hypocrisy continues.
If anything, I enjoyed Gabriel Byrnešs performance as the priest/scientist/whatever the hell hešs supposed to be.
Hešs got a couple reaction takes, off the possessed Frankie, that felt natural.
Of course, then they get all doe-eyed toward one another, and flirty, and talk about how he misses sex, and drink beer:  how is there time for this?
Hešs supposed to be a man of the cloth, what would she see in a -- nevermind.. . 
