TRUE CRIME (Warner Bros. - 1999) Cast: Clint Eastwood, Isiah Washington, Denis Leary,       Lisa Gay Hamilton, James Woods Screenplay by Larry Gross and Paul Brickman and Stephen Schiff Produced by Clint Eastwood, Robert D. Zanuck and Lili Fini Zanuck Directed by Clint Eastwood Running time: 127 minutes . Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    Clint Eastwood's latest picture, the death-row drama TRUE CRIME, is a    carefully deceptive one; given its core elements -- a man condemned to    die for a murder he denies committing, a stubborn reporter hot on the    trails of "discrepancies" in the case -- the obvious expectation is    that of an urgent high-octane mystery thriller, and indeed, we're    subjected to all the generic trademarks of the film genre: the    meaningful shots of ticking clocks, the final walk to the death    chamber, the lingering image of the direct line to the governor.
Still, under Eastwood's characteristic quiet authority, the film    distinguishes itself from the pack by being decidedly more of a    character study than a potboiler, and despite its beat-the-clock    scenario, the movie seems almost defiantly leisurely-paced.
The central characters, journeyman newspaper reporter Steve Everett    (Eastwood) and convicted murderer Frank Beachum (Isiah Washington),    are introduced in parallel storylines kept so determinedly separated    that they encounter each other but twice throughout the entire film.
Nonetheless, there's a certain intimacy created as the picture closely    observes their minutiae over the span of a fateful 24 hours.
A somber dread permeates Beachum's narratively familiar storyline,    which follows the doomed inmate through the hours leading up to his    scheduled execution.
Convicted for the murder of a pregnant    convenience store clerk, a hollowed Beachum steadfastly maintains his    innocence but seems resigned to his fate.
While the scales are tipped    a bit too far by painting him as a selfless born-again Christian, the    thread is sufficiently poignant and affecting, and Beachum's final    farewell scenes with devastated wife Bonnie (Lisa Gay Hamilton) and    especially his confused little daughter are powerful and moving.
Meanwhile, upon the untimely demise of a colleague, Everett inherits    her piece.
Assigned to interview Beachum for the so-called "human    interest" beat, he's immediately convinced that something's amiss with    the capital case, and to the protests of the paper's editor-in-chief    (James Woods) and exasperated city editor (Denis Leary), insistently    delves into the story.
What follows is largely a routine    investigatory procedural, as Everett visits the scene of the crime,    wades through old case files, interviews witnesses and leeringly    insinuates "But how could you see over the potato chips?
".    All standard fare for the typical clock-is-ticking thriller, to be    sure, but where TRUE CRIME departs from the formula, and where, I    suspect, Eastwood's interest truly lies, is with the loving    construction of wily Everett as a fully-realised three-dimensional    character with all his flaws and idiosyncracies intact; this is a    picture whose fascination with character outweighs intrigue with its    story.
Few have played flawed heroes more regularly than Eastwood,    and he's in familiar territory as Everett, an aging womanizer and    recovering alcoholic whose self-destructive behaviour inflicts    suffering to those around him.
A washout as a husband and a father,    and with a tendency to get on the bad side with his editors, Everett's    life is a complete mess, punctuated by an endless series of casual    (and not especially discreet) infidelities, broken promises and    familial neglect.
We've seen this sort of character before, but    rarely in a film which freely diverts from the storyline to indulge in    illumination his ruefully thoughtless manner so attentively, and never    in a thriller which gladly stops dead in its tracks to depict our hero    racing carelessly through the zoo with his young daughter (Eastwood's    own adorable child, Francesca Fisher-Eastwood) so that he can rid    himself of her companionship.
While there's an obvious parallel    between the film's two leading characters -- both of them have special    relationships with their daughters and are in need of redemption --    Eastwood makes the point with trademark subtlety.
With a refreshing    novel-like emphasis on rich characterization, the film's appeal lies    with observation of Everett's own personal struggles.
While the film isn't afraid to address ethical issues involving    capital punishment -- it's a conceptual challenge to develop a film    where the hero has to rescue a man from death row which remains    apathetic to the material -- it's not overly concerned with the topic    either.
While leaning towards an anti-death penalty position, we're    not browbeaten with rhetoric -- indeed, a surprisingly gentle and    sympathetic eye is cast on the kindly prison guards and compassionate    warden, who carry out their duties with stoicism and professionalism.
If anything, what's vilified in the picture is narcissism; all of the    dislikeable characters in the film are essentially self-serving, and    the most unpleasant one reveals himself by the way he attends to his    coif.
Eastwood elicits typically solid performances from his ensemble cast,    particularly from Washington, who turns in a reserved performance    vastly different from his work as a violent would-be rapist in OUT OF    SIGHT; he lends Beachum a nobility and dignity that renders his    momentary emotional lapses especially stirring.
As always, it's great    fun to watch Woods in action, but his gesticulating and animated    facial expressions produce an energy level which are at odds with the    tone of the rest of the film; something more subdued would be in order    here.
Loose but never slack, TRUE CRIME feels like a throwback to    old-fashion filmmaking, before the days when testosterone narrative    jolts replaced inexorbable accumulation of tension.
Eastwood oversees    the proceedings with a cool confidence and, being the jazz fan that is    he, freely riffs the picture with interesting moments which appear    narratively cryptic but, in their own quiet way, reveal a great deal.
There's an ostensibly pointless scene of a vagrant pestering female    pedestrians with lewd behaviour.
In most pictures, the hero would    knock some sense into the crude lowlife; TRUE CRIME is the sort of    movie where the hero gives him ten bucks.
-- Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/ "X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them  in on the whole conspiracy.
Half the time I have no idea what they're  talking about.
" - Martin Landau. . 
