Rated: R for some language and nudity.
Starring: Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Paul Giamatti, Courtney Love, Jerry Lawler, Jeff Conway, Marilu Henner, Judd Hirsch, Lorne Michaels, Carol Cane, Christopher Lloyd, Norm McDonald, Caroline  Reah, David Letterman, Paul Shaffer.
"Man on the Moon" which is based on the life of Andy Kaufman one of the greatest comedy acts of our time is that of a brilliant movie.
It not only introduces a generation who didn't know Kaufman, but it also introduces us to the real Kaufman himself, not a comedian, not a goof, but a real person.
Throughout the film we get to know Kaufman as a person not as a stage act.
Jim Carrey who plays Andy Kaufman himself gives a brilliant performance that screams Oscar to the highest octave.
The film starts with Andy talking to us about how they edited out the parts of the film and it isn't the way he wanted it to be.
So the credits role and the screen goes blank.
Audiences will probably wonder what the heck is going on and Andy's head pops on screen and explains that if the people left then they just didn't get his sense of humor.
Then he introduces us to his life...as a young boy he always wanted to be before an audience...always wanted to entertain, always wanted to sing.
Then we cut to Andy singing in a nightclub, not doing a very good job Andy is fired and forced to find work elsewhere.
When performing on a stage and impersonating Elvis he is spotted by George Shapiro who asks Andy where he comes up with these things.
Later on George tells Andy that he has been offered to star in a TV sitcom entitled "Taxi" as long as he plays his foreign character.
Andy hesitates but agrees and starts a long-running career.
Andy gets in trouble here and there and pulls many practical jokes and meets the love of his life (Courtney Love) who is always great in the movies she plays in.
Throughout Andy's life he was known as a brilliant comedian and horrible person but which was he brilliant or horrible?
During the movie we are forced to make a decision until the end which is heart wrenching and at the same time thought-provoking and makes us ask ourselves: Was Andy really a good person, or was he just another comedian.
In my opinion I say andy was a good normal person and all of his jokes and pranks were just part of his act.
Milos Forman does a terrific job of making Andy come to the screen and he directs with skill and style.
Jim Carrey who gave a terrific performance in 1998's "The Truman Show" yet again shows us that he can give good dramatic and believeable performances that scream Oscar.
He is very funny and brings Andy to a younger generation.
To me I think Jim might have just out did his Truman Show performance and in my case gives the second best performance of the year (Behind Michael Duncan in The Green Mile).
The supporting cast isn's a letdown either and all of them Courtney Love, Danny DeVito, and Paul Giamatti all support Andy and give stand-out performances especially by Courtney Love.
The screen play written by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski   is very funny but at the same time thoughtful and realistic.
It would not surprise me if "Man on the Moon" gets Oscar nods for acting or picture and it comes out at not better time than Christmas.
When you see "Man on the Moon" you almost become Andy in a way and see the world through Andy's eye's instead of the movies eyes.
Around the middle of the movie I felt cherished to get to see such a touching film that after it was over I cheered and clapped.
The theme song by R.E.M.
adds much to the excitement and don't be surprised if you eyes fill with tears by being both sad and happy.
Let's just hope that by making this movie Andy Kaufman's spirit will stay alive and that everyone will remember him as a comic genius.
Even though I wasn't alive when Andy was famous I can tell by this movie that it would have been a pleasure to know Andy Kaufman...and know that he was just a regular guy.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring December 20, 1999.
Brandon Herring Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html. . 
