David Fincher's previous film, "Seven" showed great improvements on his  first, "Alien 3".
"The Game" is another step forward for Fincher, though  in a slightly different direction.
This is a thrilling, suspenseful and  frightening, though somewhat unsatisfying film.
As with many of today's  pictures, a certain amount of "suspension of disbelief" is necessary in  order to appreciate the events unfolding before you on the screen.
But  Douglas' performance, Harris Savides' photography and Fincher's gothic  (though not at all grungey) direction makes this a classic thriller.
Douglas plays Nicholas Van Orton, a middle-aged investment banker living  in the lap of luxury in San Francisco.
He is divorced, he has no  children, seemingly, no life at all.
When he is not ruling the corporate  world from the office, he is sitting at home, watching financial news, or  flashing back to his childhood, when his father leapt from the family  mansion to his death.
Van Orton's younger brother Conrad (Sean Penn)   visits him and gives him a birthday gift certificate for a company called  Consumer Recreation Services, CRS.
"Tell me you'll call", he says, trying  to convince his older brother that this game will change his life  forever.
The events that occur after the call make it impossible for Van  Orton to tell the difference between his own life and what he thinks is a  game.
Events based in reality happen in his club, in his home, in his car  and in his office, and as the film progresses, things get worse.
He  begins to confront more and more people in a haze of paranoia, never  having a firm grip on what is actually happening to him.
Each non-related  disaster that hits him justifies his paranoia, when he begins to feel  that this CRS is out to destroy him financially and even kill him.
Sean Penn is terribly miscast as Conrad Van Orton, the black sheep  younger brother.
Penn, who  receives second billing only because of his  stardom, has essentially three scenes totaling approximately 15 minutes  over the 128 minute film.
An actor of his depth and intensity is wasted  in such a small, unchallenging role.
Only the cleft in his chin makes him  the right choice to play a Douglas.
Second billing would much more  appropriately go to Deborah Kara Unger, who's performance as Van Orton's  mysterious femme fatale is sexy and sinister.
San Francisco is used quite beautifully in this film.
Fincher's expected  grunge look is nowhere to be seen in this film.
Rather he cleans up the  look and shows us San Francisco in a rather different light.
Very little  in this film is bright and colorful, but the blues and grays that he uses  give the buildings of the financial district an overpowering look at  times, almost as if they are a big part of the world Van Orton is trapped  in.
Unlike "The Rock", in which San Francisco is primarily shown through  tourist-like skyline shots, "The Game" shows San Francisco's downtown  from mostly street level and constricts Van Orton and all the other  characters, creating a claustrophobic feeling.
"The Game" is a thriller of the highest degree, with lots of things that  you probably won't expect and probably havn't seen before.
The shock  ending will make you think about the events that developed, and justify  some of them, and others may just bug you.
But either way, Fincher keeps  you glued to the seat.
(I really had to go...I held it in the whole  time.
) He gives you an interesting look at an interesting city, and he  gives you some things to think about.
The frustration that builds up  during the film should be relieved at the end, but whether or not it  builds up again after you think about all of it, is up to you.
Three and a half out of Four stars.
Copyright (C) 1997 Nicholas Amado ***************************** Comments?
Complaints?
Criticism?
Debate?
Email me: NAMIAM@AOL.COM. . 
