More MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton:  http://welcome.to/movieviews. In Notting Hill, Julia Roberts plays an internationally renowned movie star named Anna Scott, who is in such demand that her last project carried a paycheck of 15 million dollars.
If there ever was a wonderful role for Roberts, this is it - as she, a famous actress, portrays one just as famous on screen.
This character showcases all the positive shades of her acting abilities, but even as her performance sparkles in every scene, there is still much more to relish in this delightfully charming movie.
I am no big fan of the romance genre, save for the occasional teaming of Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan.
I sometimes have difficulty sitting through a film where nothing gets blown up.
Notting Hill, however, is something special.
It relies on chemistry to carry itself until the credits start to roll, and noting that the chemistry in the movie is genuinely believable, it has no trouble achieving success.
The title location is a small, friendly community in the city of London, where a shy and reserved book store owner named William Thacker (Hugh Grant) sells Travel guides.
One day, Anna Scott herself trounces in the door, much to his amazement and surprise.
She buys a book about Turkey, smiles innocently, and leaves the store.
But surely they will meet again.
In this case, William collides with Anna walking down the street, staining her shirt with orange juice.
Despite the amazing awkwardness of the situation, they begin to fall in love.
From here, Notting Hill becomes a clash of two separate worlds: William's quaint, boring day-by-day life versus Anna's busy, media hounded schedule.
Scenes where "normal" people, such as William's friends and family interact with the enormous movie star are both hilariously truthful and fun to watch.
The script, by Richard Curtis (Four Weddings and a Funeral), is like a breath of fresh air.
The dialogue is sharp and witty, the characters are interesting, and not a minute of the romance feels artificial.
William' s apartment flatmate, Spike (Rhys Ifans), provides a few roars of laughter, but doesn't steal too much of the star's important screen time.
This is Roberts' best film vehicle in some time, but don't overlook Grant's modest, charming performance.
He fits the role and all of it's demands perfectly.
Scenes involving his tendency to say "whoopsidaisy" and going over Anna's lines from her upcoming film, generate just the precise amount of sparks.
Notting Hill is unique, adorable and insightful.
All of which, suffice to say, adds up to one of the most enjoyable romances since Sleepless in Seattle.
Jamey Hughton writes a Published Weekly Column    in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix (Sk.
Canada). and MOVIE VIEWS Movie Vault    http://moviething.com/members/movies/movieviews/index41.shtml. . 
