SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS (Touchstone - 1998) Starring Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer,   Jacqueline Obradors Screenplay by Michael Browning Produced by Ivan Reitman, Wallis Nicita, Roger Birnbaum Directed by Ivan Reitman Running time: 101 minutes. Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS is one of the summer's early disappointments,    an utterly pedestrian effort which plays it so safe that the stunt    actors wind up taking more risks than the screenplay does.
It's an    uninspired rehash of the old Bicker-Bicker-Bicker-Smooch formula, and    even if the smooch here comes in the form of an homage to the famous    FROM HERE TO ETERNITY beach clinch, the film's escapist plot barely    contains enough viable material to sustain interest.
Establishing scenes quickly introduce Robin Monroe (Anne Heche), an    ambitious young associate magazine editor who's whisked away from    Gotham for a romantic South Pacific vacation by her amorous beau    Frank Martin (David Schwimmer).
After happily accepting a moonlight    marriage proposal, Robin is summoned to oversee an emergency one-day    photo shoot in nearby Tahiti and commissions laid-back charter pilot    Quinn Harris (Harrison Ford) to take her there in his beat-up    DeHavilland Beaver.
Miracle of miracles, Robin and Quinn happen upon an unexpectedly    vicious storm while en route, and are forced to crash-land the plane    on a deserted tropical island after a lightning strike fries the    aircraft's electrical system.
Stranded with no means of    communication to the outside world, the squabbling pair are left to    fend for themselves, while back at the hotel, Frank and Quinn's    sultry young girlfriend Angelica (Jacqueline Obradors) fret, worry,    and make eyes at each other.
An unabashedly formulaic adventure-comedy backdropped by noteworthily    lush scenery, the film is written at a TV sitcom-level and features    individual scenes which play breezily and make for cute,    trailer-ready excerpts, but fail to gel as a whole.
Our protagonists    aren't confronted by sufficiently challenging or ingenious obstacles    in order to pique viewer attention on the adventure front (it's    telling that the two inexplicable appearances by pursuant pirates    seems almost arbitrary), while the flirty banter zinging back and    forth between the duo falls far short of being endearing, registering    as cute at best.
And the less said about the vapid Frank / Angelica    subplot, the better.
Credit the agreeable presence of the film's two leads for salvaging    the production to the point of watchability.
Mr. Ford and Ms. Heche    share an easy, unforced chemistry, and are best as Quinn and Robin    inevitably gradate from quarreling antagonists to mutual admiration.
Mr. Ford has a pleasant charm about him; it's fun to watch him    contort his deadpan face and dryly utter a sarcastic witticism, and    Ms. Heche makes for a pleasantly feisty combatant.
The star power    present easily surpasses the quality of the film's material.
"Aren't you one of those Guy guys?
" Robin demands of Quinn as they    survey their bleak situation.
"You know, one of those guys who they    send out in the jungle with a Q-Tip, and come back and build a    shopping mall?
"  And while Quinn rolls his eyes and demurs, it's a    given with this sort of film that the hero ultimately does    demonstrate some MacGuyver-like aptitude.
SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS    handles this obligation with a hootworthy plot development in its    homestretch -- the discovery of a handy piece of equipment so    preposterous in its convenience that it deflates any sense of    investment one may have built for the dilemma faced by our heroes.
To unfairly drop a hokey pat solution from out of the blue places the    entire proceedings in a dubious light.
Michael Browning's screenplay for SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS faithfully    abides by genre conventions, vaguely aping conflicts and scenarios    from such predecessors as ROMANCING THE STONE and THE AFRICAN QUEEN    (also, an early scene which sees Quinn prepping his creaky bucket of    bolts and assuring Robin of its flightworthiness interestingly echoes    to Han Solo doing likewise in STAR WARS), but for the most part, the    snappily suggestive dialogue is forgettable and the strong narrative    drive is lacking.
To its detriment, it's got all of the shadings of    similarly-themed earlier works, but none of the spark.
Director Ivan Reitman does what he can, treating the audience with    panoramic tropical visions and keeping the proceedings moving along    briskly.
It's surprising that such a big-budget Hollywood production    features some startling artificial visual effects works, such as that    of the storm sequence.
Ultimately, SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS suffers because of its eagerness    at palatability, its resolute target of mainstream appeal.
Absent of    any flair or genuine excitement, the film trods through the    conventions of a tired formula with little except the winning    performances of its lead actors to garnish much attention.
"I want    my life to be complicated," confesses Quinn at one point.
If only    the film shared similar sentiments.. . 
