(Dialog in German, English subtitles). This film was released under the English title "Run Lola Run".
A recent series of television beer advertisements pokes fun of the stereotype of abstract and conceptual tendencies in German literature.
Coming almost as proof of the stereotype is this film -- a nonlinear, kinetic story filled with action, suspense, color, and music.
The frenetic adventure for Lola and Manni is immediately hinted by the punk couple's colorful appearance.
Lola (Franka Potente) has florescent hair, florescent clothes, and tattoos.
Manni (Moritz Bleibtreu) is also tattooed, and works as a courier for a small time gangster.
The narrative begins when Lola receives a phone call from a distraught Manni explaining that he is in deep trouble.
Manni was running an errand for the boss, but he accidentally left the payoff on the subway.
He needs to meet the gangster in a short time, and he will be in deep trouble if he does not deliver the 100,000 marks.
Manni gives Lola 20 minutes to come up with a plan to raise the money, or else he will hold up a store to get it.
Lola's moped was stolen earlier, so now she is left without transportation.
The only way for her to get the money and then get to Manni is to sprint across town.
The story is presented in a cleverly nonlinear fashion.
The plot is split between actual events and the imaginations of the characters without any clear indication beforehand which is which.
The narrative has its share of improbabilities and implausibilities, but these do not detract from the film because its focus is clearly on the mood and flow of the story.
It attempts to tell story in which imagery (both visual and sonic) are as important as the actual events.
Writer and director Tom Tykwer intentionally created the imagery first, and then developed the story to drive it.
However, the narrative is not merely a formula in service to the effects.
The story follows multiple threads of time and explores the ripple effect of decisions made early in a sequence of events.
Most of the story consists of Lola sprinting through Berlin in a race against time, trying to reach Manni before he makes a stupid mistake out of desperation, and somehow getting the money along the way.
This automatically sets a high energy level, which is well regulated by effective breaks that allow the story elements to emerge and develop.
Although the high adrenaline approach help to camouflage story weaknesses, it also creates an involved viewing experience.
The fact that it effectively intersperses action and suspense makes it an engaging film.
Highly recommended.
The film is a fast-paced, high-energy, visual and musical experience.
It evokes the feel of an extended music video in its use of techno music and its mix of live action, cartoon, and stills.
The appeal of the film is more for its imagery than for its story, which is interesting, but slightly porous.
This would be a good choice for a group of people to watch together as a midnight movie.
It may not appeal to an audience that does not appreciate modern electronic music, and expects a straight forward plot.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/ Share what you know.
Learn what you don't.. . 
