Dreamworks SKG / 2:02 / 1997 / R (violence, profanity)  Cast: George Clooney; Nicole Kidman; Marcel Iures; Gary Werntz; Holt  McCallany; Rene Medvesek; Alexander Baluev; Michael Boatman; Armin  Mueller-Stahl  Director: Mimi Leder  Screenplay: Michael Schiffer . Dreamworks SKG, the high-profile collaborative production team of Steven  Spielberg, Jeffery Katzenberg and David Geffen, gets off on the right  filmmaking foot with "The Peacemaker.
" A big, dumb, loud adventure that  combines enough tawdry foreign intrigue for 14 James Bond flicks with sparkling star power and enthralling visuals, "The Peacemaker" isn't a  particularly strong genre entry, but even its weaknesses don't hinder it  from being an entertaining lark.
The only big names in the cast belong to the two leads: Current Batman  George Clooney and ex-Batman flame Nicole Kidman.
The latter plays Dr.  Julia Kelly, a top presidential aid and the acting head of the White  House's Nuclear Smuggling Group.
Kelly becomes embroiled in an important investigation surrounding the theft of 10 nuclear missiles  from a speeding train by Russian terrorists.
When one is "accidentally"  set off, an entire Middle Eastern countryside is vaporized.
Enter Clooney's gung-ho Colonel Thomas Devoe, who fast becomes Kelly's  unlikely ally as they trot around the globe and try to keep track of the  missiles throughout various trade-offs and other shifty dealings.
It  turns out that a potential buyer (Marcel Iures) has vengeance on his  mind and would very much like to use one to annihilate the area  surrounding our United Nations building, where a treaty is going to be  signed involving the very governments he holds responsible for the murder of his wife and child.
When it devotes its time to action movie dynamics, the movie is a great  deal of fun.
Exhilarating sequences abound -- there's a spectacular  round of bumper cars between Devoe and the bad guys in Vienna's exotic  locale, as well as a literal bridge-hanger where he attempts to secure  some of the remaining nukes.
After the faulty send-offs of "Air Force  One" and "G.I.
Jane," it's refreshing to see "The Peacemaker" save some  of its most riveting moments for its climax -- a suspenseful (if over-the-top) chase through New York City, culminating in one of the  most effective explosion-countdowns ever put to film.
However, if "The Peacemaker" needs a pacemaker, it's in the plot area.
It's a good thing the heros have engaging demeanors, because Iures'  villain is about as interesting as burnt toast.
The attempts to develop  a sympathetic character out of him are dull and ordinary, and as a  result, he's low on personality, a big no-no for this type of film.
Also  disconcerting is "The Peacemaker"'s rather dull setup of events.
Only  when Clooney and Kidman enter the frame does the movie ever become involving, making the opening segments something of an uncomfortable  sit.
Speaking of the performers, they really carry "The Peacemaker" to  memorable lengths.
With a great turn here, Clooney proves he can carry a  dramatic adventure as well as a horror film ("From Dusk Till Dawn"), a  comic book adaptation ("Batman & Robin") or a romantic comedy ("One Fine  Day").
He's a very agreeable actor, and even gets numerous chances to  crack wise amidst the explosions and mass death.
Kidman is also in top  form and even gets to play a bigger part in the story than expected --  she's never quite resorted to a damsel in distress.
The most beautiful  woman working in movies today, Kidman even looks flawless covered in  sweat and caked in mud.
Also of note is Mimi Leder, whose you-are-there,  Emmy-winning directing prowess on "ER" serves her work here well.
Maybe  filming gurneys and doctors in constant motion is good preparation for  an action film.
While "The Peacemaker" fumbles occasionally (more so in its first half),  it's always diverting and never unwatchable.
Almost every movie has its  flaws, and although "The Peacemaker" is never an exception to that rule,  it's certainly something special to see a film with enough notable  merits to outweigh and overpower its drawbacks.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck  E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/. . 
