Cast: Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea DuVall, Brittany Murphy, Elizabeth Moss, Jared Leto, Jeffrey Tambor, Vanessa Redgrave, Whoopi Goldberg Director: James Mangold Screenplay: James Mangold and Lisa Loomer and Anna Hamilton Phelan, based on the book by Susanna Kaysen Rated R 127 minutes. It's time to soak up the estrogen with the chick flick version of "One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest.
"  "Girl, Interrupted" stars the dynamic duo of homely Winona Ryder and Power Puff Girl Angelina Jolie.
Also along for the ride are the latest pseudo-teen stars, Clea DuVall (the dyke in "The Faculty") and Jared Leto (Angel Face in "Fight Club").
Thrown in for ethnic sprinkling is Whoopi Goldberg.
So get some Kleenex and the Spice Girls CD because Girl Power rules for two hours.
The year is 1967; Susanna (Ryder) is dazed and confused.
She's the only senior not going on to college.
She attempts suicide, fails and is sent off to Claymoore by her parents.
Claymoore's a Boston psychiatric ward with several colorful patients.
There's Georgina (DuVall) the compulsive liar who's Susanna's roomie; Daisy (Brittany Murphy), the stuck up daddy's girl with an eating disorder; Polly (Elizabeth Moss), the deformed pyromaniac; and Lisa (Jolie), the sultry sociopath.
It's the job of Valerie (Whoopi Goldberg), the head nurse, to keep them all in line.
"Girl, Interrupted" chronicles Susanna's 18-month stay at Claymoore and at times, it's an intriguing one.
Don't think for a second that it's because of Winona Ryder.
She seems almost monotonous compared to the extravagantly prodigious Angelina Jolie who is going to get the recognition she deserves come award time.
Since Jolie won a Golden Globe for her ardent performance in "Gia" she seems to only get better with age.
Goldberg gives an a-OK performance as the nurse who watches Susanna shave her legs.
Jared Leto struts around topless as Susanna's boyfriend who mutters some "this is not right" BS in an after school special manner midway through the film.
Jeffrey Tambor delivers a "square" performance as Susanna's psychiatrist.
And Vanessa Redgrave provides us an unnecessary mediocre performance that should've been edited out.
Winona Ryder has been trying to bring Susanna Kaiser's autobiographical book to the screen for years.
And now that she finally has, she can go back to doing ping-pong ball tricks.
James Mangold does an admirable job of helming "Girl, Interrupted.
"  He takes an attenuated and conventional approach at the film.
Often it works.
Often it doesn't.
Dig the groovy tunes on the soundtrack and behold the historical clips of 'Nam and Martin Luther King Jr. in this seemingly ambitious 60s period piece.
Dread the all-too-predictable basement confrontation finale that is "Girl, Interrupted's" most fatal flaw.
Crazy people are people too...despite my proof that they aren't!
Don't judge a book by its cover.
It doesn't matter how you look on the outside, it's what's on the inside that counts.
Most of you know the cliched moral of the story already.
Therefore, the only real reason to see this film is Angelina Jolie's magnetic performance.
If that doesn't interest you, pass on this formulaic work and get yourself some Maxi Pads with wings.. . 
