A copy of this review can be found at = http://www.moviereviews.org/the_green_mile.htm. ---Starting on Christmas Eve you can hear Mac VerStandig's movie reviews  on the radio in Portland, Maine once a week in addition to reading them  on Moviereviews.org.
Details on time and dial placement still to come.
Stay tuned!---. The Green Mile, the film Warner Bros. is grooming for best picture  glory, commits the same sin as Paramount's prized contender Angela's  Ashes: the movie uses the emotional sentiments that death presents as a  crutch of support for an otherwise weak and underdeveloped production.
Both films also run too long, with Angela's Ashes weighing in at 140  minutes and The Green Mile at 190 (that is 11,400 painful tic-tocks).
Set in a Louisiana penitentiary during the great depression, The Green  Mile, based on Stephen King's novel, is a story of death row inmates and  guards.
The film's title is the term used for the walk from an inmate's  cell to the electric chair, nicknamed "Old Sparky.
". The protagonist is Paul Edgecomb (Tom Hanks who merits a best actor  nomination), the head guard.
Having walked the mile numerous times and  witnessed more deaths than one man ever should, Paul has come to respect  most of the inmates and offers them whatever dignity he can, especially  in their final hours.
Warner Bros.' deceptive marketing campaign tells  you that Paul forms a special relationship with one inmate in  particular, John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan, deserving of a best  supporting actor nomination), who possess magical healing powers.
Coffey  does have mystical abilities but there is no special relationship (or,  if there is, it is on the editing room floor).
Rather than develop Coffey or explore Edgecomb's personal life in depth  (his wife seems interesting, but we hardly get to know her), the film  chooses to focus its attention on another guard and another inmate, both  cruel people.
(Caution: SEMI-SPOILER AHEAD!
) These two characters are as  clichE9 as Hollywood can make them.
The inmate is responsible for the = murders that Coffey clearly didn't commit, something that seems a tad  too ironic since there are only three inmates.
It is also rather  coincidental that the same revelation takes place in The Shawshank  Redemption, a film from the same writer and director.
The guard is  single-dimensionally cruel to others, emotionless and death loving,  making him the perfect Superman villain.
But this film is neither a  bird, a plane nor Superman, it is a serious death row drama and the  character doesn't fit.
The Green Mile doesn't introduce Coffey's Cinderella qualities for the  first hour and a quarter, the length of time that many films take to  reach their conclusion.
Even after that, the magic is a limited aspect  of the movie until the end.
Cinderella and death row probably don't mix  in the first place, but not giving the silver slippers a fighting chance  is self-destructive and yet another argument for a further development  of Coffey.
The Green Mile could have been the contender that Warner Bros. wants it  to be; the material is there.
By cutting the evil guard and inmate you  free up a lot of time.
Fill some of the time with more Coffey and some  of it with more of Edgecomb's home life.
Stop there.
Cut the movie  between 120 and 135 minutes and this critic would consider the final  product a modern classic.. . 
