Miramax / 1:41 / 1997 / R (sex, brief nudity, adult themes) Cast: Helena Bonham Carter; Linus Roache; Alison Elliott; Charlotte Rampling;  Elizabeth McGovern; Michael Gambon; Alex Jennings  Director: Iain Softley  Screenplay: Hossein Amini . Fast on the heels of October's "Washington Square" comes "The Wings of the  Dove," another Henry James-based tale that glamorously showcases the 19th-  and 20th-century author's brilliance in creating robust characters.
"Square"  and "Dove" are James' second and third adaptations to hit theaters in less  than a year -- couple last December's opulent but uneven "The Portrait of a  Lady" with these two dazzlers and you've got enough arty appeal to crown  James as *the* dead literary author of the moment.
(He takes the crown from  Jane Austen, as 1995 through 1996 saw the hot streak of "Persuasion,"  "Clueless," "Sense and Sensibility" and "Emma.
") . In bringing "Wings" to a contemporary screen, director Iain Softley and  screenwriter Hossein Amine have changed a few details, like pushing the  story's setting ahead a decade into 1910.
But the film still boasts an  anti-heroine for its lead role, spirited free-thinker Kate Croy (Helena  Bonham Carter).
Following the death of her mother, Kate moves in with her  financially loaded Aunt Maude (Charlotte Rampling) and is quickly inducted  into the upper rungs of high London society.
But Kate is lustily involved  with journalist Merton Densher ("Preist"'s Linus Roache), a commoner who  doesn't comply with her aunt's elitist ideals.
Kate wants to be with Merton,  but requires the wealth of Maude's upscale offerings to care for her  impoverished father.
Into this complicated picture comes American heiress Millie Theale (Alison  Elliott), who fast becomes close friends with Kate and even accompanies her  and Merton on a trip to Venice.
But under Kate's civil exterior lies a  diabolical scheme -- upon learning that Millie is stricken with an eventually  terminal disease, Kate leads her to believe a relationship with Merton is  possible.
He'll seduce her, she'll die and leave her fortune to him.
Millie's  money will be able to solve all of Kate's problems, but the plan comes with a  high price.
The narrative employs most of Henry James' usual focuses (wealth, social  status, etc.
), so anyone familiar with his literature or films or melodrama  in general will probably be able to anticipate "The Wings of the Dove"'s  downer of an outcome.
The predictably tragic story arc, however, is  overshadowed by superb technical credits.
The production design and  cinematography are tops.
Director of photography Eduardo Serra's camera  captures palazzos and gondolas in all of their old-time extravagance, and the  steamy, rain-soaked clinches between Kate and Merton will induce swooning  among more romantic audience members.
"The Wings of the Dove"'s cast and characters are its two most laudable  assets.
Carter, Roache and Elliott are never cheap enough to do one-note  riffs on any of Amine's strongly-scripted roles.
Period piece veteran Carter  ("A Room With a View," "Howards End" and the Mel Gibson "Hamlet") plays Kate  as both a manipulative and sympathetic force -- it's a difficult combination  to bring to an already-difficult part, but she aces it.
The other two leads  aren't quite what they seem either; Roache's Merton is smarter and more  passionate than his hesitant, easily-influenced guise, and Millie is far from  brittle -- she's nobody's victim.
As played by the feisty Elliott ("The  Spitfire Grill"), the latter is also a sunny scene-stealer.
Director Jane Campion infused her Portrait of a Lady with surreal ostentation  that occasionally doused its potency.
Softley ("Hackers" and "Backbeat")  renders "The Wings of the Dove" in a much more straightforward manner --  delivering his best film yet -- and although it's not as polished as  "Washington Square," it's still beautiful and moving.
And perhaps it's no  coincidence that "Wings" and "Washington" are playing simultaneously --  they'd be quite a lovely afternoon double bill, and make one look forward to  James' next screen venture with dizzy anticipation.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck  E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/. . 
