Thailand, 1862.
Back then it was called Siam.
A great monarchy ruled by the powerful King Mongkut (Chow Yun Fat).
He did everything his ways.
Until Anna Leonowens (Jodie Foster) came.
This movie is a remake of The King and I (which I haven't seen), and based on a true story.
Anna comes with her son Louie to teach the King's children.
All 68 of them, coming from 23 mothers.
Surely makes me wish I was the King.
But instead of just teaching the kids, Anna also tries to "show" the King the ways of the world, which is better known as the ways of the English.
Anna storms in as if she were a Spice Girl yelling Girl Power, standing up in front of the King, while the whole country goes down on their knees, saying things in to the King that even the closest advisors don't dare to, and in the end even prevents a war.
Wow, she must be related to either Margaret Tatcher or Wonder Woman.
The scenery is absolutely great.
Shot in Malaysia, it shows the beauty of nature and the beauty of the Siamese kingdom.
Too bad that the movie concentrates too much on Anna's views, and not on the King's.
The cultural impact of an Anna seems too much, especially for a Monarchy who did survive colonialism (Siam is the only South East Asian country who was never been colonized by another country).
The kingdom has is own way of doing stuff, and Anna was forcing change upon it.
No wonder that this movie is banned in Thailand, because it was insulting them.
I feel the same way what the Thais are feeling.
You cannot change a culture by handing out copies of Uncle Tom's Cabin, or by teaching how an egg can fit a bottle.
The true story was probably during a long span, and the moviemakers are putting that into a 2-and-a-half hour movietape.
Not that I'm saying that it was impossible to happen, but if you're going to show a movie about culture, please show both sides of all the cultures.
Not just the bad ones and replace them by the good ones (which is always the Western way).
Jodie Foster is as though as always, while Chow Yun Fat without his long leather jacket and guns looked different.
He did have the charisma of a king, but at sometimes he didn't show the powers of a king.
Or maybe this girlpower is way too much for him.
So guys, be careful.
Even a king can be helpless against girlpower.
A movie worth watching because of the scenery.
Because of the Siamese kingdom and culture.
Because of the 68 kids from 23 wives.
And to learn another language, Siamese.. . 
