PUSHING TIN Cast: John Cusack, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Angelina Jolie, Jake Weber, Kurt Fuller, Vicki Lewis, Matt Ross Director: Mike Newell Screenplay: Glen Charles & Les Charles Australian theatrical release: July 22, 1999 Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 1 and a half stars. "Pushing tin" is a term that refers to the ability to move planes quickly, but don't be deceived by the film's trailers - it's not so much about controlling air traffic, but rather the controllers themselves.
Writers Glen and Les Charles have an obvious interest in the high-pressure job of their central characters, but ultimately this is a very simple story about human relations and traits; jealousy, I suppose, the key one on show.
The really bad news is that the vast majority of this humdrum drama - advertised as if it were the year's most exciting film - is awkwardly paced and far, far too conventional.
Consequently, it's boring.
Booorrrriinnng.
Pushing Tin begins promisingly, but it's a down hill ride.
The film systematically topples over itself again and again, destroying the already crippled plot elements it depended on.
I mentioned the word "conventional" in a disapproving context, which is rightfully so because I want to make it clear that Pushing Tin does not lack in the flow its narrative due to the prevalent style its screenplay - marriage dilemmas are perhaps too common in film nowadays - but rather the continually obvious and quite uninteresting plot elements at work.
The Charles' have developed a screenplay that takes familiar formulas from different genres and sticks them together.
As a whole, the film is not entirely predictable, but contains many scenes that are laced with cliches; the kind of cliches that were bad even when they first appeared oh so many years ago.
I found myself constantly wanting to be involved and entertained by the picture, but my frustration dominated as the story generally worsened.
Nick Falzone (John Cusak) is an ace air traffic controller - a real hot-shot in the industry - who is challenged to give up his legendary status at work upon the arrival of Russel Bell (Billy Bob Thornton).
Russel is even greater a hot shot - he "pushes tin" - thus Nick gets a severe case of green-eyed jealousy.
So much so, that both parties suffer marital problems with their wives (Cate Blancett and Angelina Jolie) that result in some bitter confrontations, and (yawn), some life lessons.
"This is pretty boring," the person sitting next to me said, and I think we both had that reaction when the formalities of the story became tedious.
If Hollywood will insist on reissuing cliches again and again, surely they can stage them in the right context.
The moral of the story - scenes and dialogue in a screenplay should not be there simply for the narrative to keep jumping as the plot proceeds.
Don't write dialogue for the sake of it being heard, write it for enjoyment and to sustain interest in the story.
The dialogue in Pushing Tin is very average, and the film's pacing is very awkward - it seems to be constantly trying to build up momentum, only to slow everything down again.
The cast list of Pushing Tin is certainly an impressive one.
I believe John Cusak and Billy Bob Thornton are two of better, if not best, actors working today.
Cusak is a rare find, an actor who effortlessly conveys subtle absurdity in many of his roles, and somehow manages never to look bad in the process.
I could almost say the same thing about Thornton, although he usually looks for something a little more deep.
His incredible debut in Sling Blade, his jokingly serious part in Armageddon and his riveting performance in A Simple Plan made him a reliable choice for a difficult dramatic role.
The strange thing is, these two actors bored me in Pushing Tin, due to a lack of chemistry between the male leads.
Cusask's very intentionally charismatic acting becomes irritating, and Thornton is supposedly portraying a wise, mysterious character, but he appears like one of those annoying people whose every spoken word is an attempt to prove their supposed intelligence.
Veteran director Mike Newell, whose credits include the messy but very enjoyable Four Weddings and a Funeral and Donnie Brasco, doesn't find a good rhythm in Pushing Tin, and doesn't drive his narrative into enough intriguing scenarios.
There are some worthwhile parts in the film, most of which occur inside the air traffic control headquarters.
But that's nowhere near enough.
Call me fussy, call me pretentious; but if one more person makes an artsy-fartsy joke at my expense, I'll be forced to hibernate through the winter and re-emerge when next year's Oscar contenders arrive at Christmas.
So please refrain from giving me crap.
There's plenty of that at the cinema.. . . 
