Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. 'A Simple Plan' contains that wonderful adjective, a modifier that  usually is what is says, simple.
But words in our language are often  charged with connotations that have other plans.
The opening shots establish the protagonist Hank (Bill Paxton) in the  small Wisconsin town where he works as a bookkeeper in a grain mill.
Hank's wife Sarah (Bridget Fonda), who shelves books in the local  library, is pregnant with their first child.
Their love seems pure,  their lives innocent, until one evening when Hank's brother Jacob (Billy  Bob Thornton) visits.
Intending to place a poinsettia on their father's  grave - cold weather notwithstanding - the brothers drive into the snowy  country.
With them in the truck is Jacob's drinking buddy Lou (Brent  Briscoe) and Jacob's dog.
Before long the trio find themselves in the  woods, the dog disappeared, tensions heating up between the unemployed  ne'er-do-well Lou and the college boy Hank.
What puts a stop to the  tension is the discovery of a crashed plane;  Hank investigates and and  finds a dead pilot and a large duffel full of money.
Will they keep it?
Give it back?
Are there other choices beside these two?
Thus the scene is set for a modern allegory, perfect chances for greed  and betrayal and treachery to take over the plot in the same way they do  in Chaucer's 'The Pardoner's Tale.
'  The fate of the money is almost  irrelevant;  it's like Hitchcock's macguffin.
It's enough to say the  story of three honest men who return over four million dollars is not  worth watching for two hours.
Much of what makes the film successful is the way in which decisions  seem to make themselves.
Almost nothing is premeditated, and no matter  how much Hank the new father intends to remain harmless, he travels into  deeper trouble.
Bill Paxton does a solid job transmitting the feelings  of a likable average Joe.
We admire his humanity as he proves himself a  warm husband and caring brother.
When his life conflicts with outside  forces, though, Hank displays his real character.
He's a formidable  enemy to Lou; their jealous relationship is one of the main pivots of  the story.
"Who would you choose, if you had to," Hank questions Jacob,  "me or Lou?
"  It's clear that, when put in tight situations, Hank  intends to emerge alive and free, and hopefully wealthy.
Key to his  performance is the sympathy of the audience, which Paxton is able to  engage even after Hank veers into savage behavior.
The best acting in the piece, however, is done by Billy Bob Thornton as  big brother Jake.
Already the recipient of a Best Supporting Actor  Award from the Online Film Critics Society, Thornton is bound to command  other nominations and acclaim for this role.
If Bill Paxton plays  Joe  Average, Thornton plays the subtly wise loser, a Mortimer Snerd of a  man.
Sporting longish hair, bad teeth and duct-taped eyeglasses, Jacob  seems a comic character tramping straight into tragedy.
And what's  nearly ludicrous is that we remain sympathetic to his plight even after  he too commits heinous acts.
That's the queer magic of the film -- that  it serves as a canny study of the innocence and remorse of men after  they've forfeited all claims to mercy.
In his expressions - the  now-trademarked pouchy cheeks and piercing eyes, Thornton is able to  transform Jacob into an unlucky Everyman, a big brother who is not quite  right but who, at the same time, is wise and protective.
As Lou, Brent Briscoe does a delightful reprise of Rub, the best friend  of Donald Sullivan, in 'Nobody's Fool.
'  Lou is just a bit brighter, but  more tragically flawed.
Briscoe plays him with a straight-forward  presentation, and Lou comes off as a drunken dumbass, another character  who rushes into action before he is even able to think.
In another  supporting role, Bridget Fonda seems under-utilized as Sarah, Hank's  wife.
Fonda is good with the deadpan seriousness of a woman not quite  happy with her life.
She often surprises us with her suggestions;  we  can feel Sarah's presence in Hank's actions even when she is offscreen.
The settings of the film are functional, the wintry scenes beautiful and  symbolic.
From the forest where the wrecked plane lies, to the  middle-class kitchen where an ordinary couple schemes about the  unspeakable, the locations in the film do not call undue attention.
Likewise, music serves a fairly transparent role, at times sustaining  suspense with a score built around stark piano chords.
The final quarter of 'A Simple Plan' does smack of contrivance, but not  enough to impede the immensely sad narrative of greed and its  reckonings.
Director Sam Raimi reins in his film just before it can go  over-the-top with violence, though I would not suggest dragging along  anyone under 16 to see it.  . . . 
