Directed by: John Singleton Written by: Ernest Tidyman (novel), John Singleton, Richard Price, Shane  Salerno. John Shaft (Samuel L. Jackson) is back after a 19 year hiatus.
This time his  enemy is a racist young punk named Walter Williams (Christian Bale), who  killed a young black man and skipped off to Europe on bail.
Now, two years  later, Walter has turned up again and Shaft hasn't forgotten him.
Walter's  father, a rich real-estate agent, has seen to it that no one can pin  anything on his son by scaring the only witness out of her mind and causing  her to run.
The witness is a waitress named Diane (Toni Collette), who saw  the whole thing happen.
Now Shaft has to track her down before the case goes  to trial again.
Assisting him are a narcotics officer named Carmen (Vanessa  Williams), an unusual friend named Rasaan (Busta Rhymes) and his uncle, John  Shaft (Richard Roundtree).
Unfortunately for Shaft, Walter has a little help  too, which comes from the local drug lord, Peoples Hernandez (Jeffrey  Wright).
Now the two groups are in a race against time to find Diane,  Shaft's group so she can testify, and Walter's group to try and silence her  for good.
Okay, before everyone stones me for my low rating of this movie, let me say  that I really enjoyed 1971's "Shaft".
That version had an interesting plot,  adept direction, and Shaft was a regular guy who we could relate to in some  way.
This version has none of these qualities.
Singleton, who showed at  least a trace of promise back in 1997 when he directed "Rosewood", seems to  have lost his directing abilities.
The plot, in this version, consists of  nothing more than watching Shaft beat people up while delivering  entertaining dialogue (my favorite line was: "Don't make me chase you more  than fifty yards!").
Shaft was a normal guy back in 1997, but now he's been  turned into some kind of super hero.
I don't think I saw him so much as run  out of breath throughout the film, much less face an opponent who could  match up to him in a fight.
I also found it puzzling and a little annoying  that there was no womanizing on the part of Shaft in this version.
I know,  that sounds odd, but think about it - Richard Roundtree's Shaft was a cool,  suave woman magnet.
I don't even remember seeing Jackson's Shaft kiss a  girl.
It felt a little odd watching "Shaft" with all the sex sapped out of  it.
It's not easy for an actor to carry an entire movie on his shoulders.
Denzel  Washington did it with "The Hurricane" and Angelina Jolie almost pulled it  off in "Girl: Interrupted".
Samuel L. Jackson is asked to do just this in  "Shaft", but the script is too much of a dud for even this great actor to  manage it.
Don't get me wrong, it's a blast watching Samuel L. Jackson as  the ultimate bad a**, but it's not enough to keep a movie going for long.
The rest of the cast (with the exception of Christian Bale) does nothing to  help Jackson carry the load, but I don't think they'd have been much help  anyway.
Richard Roundtree has little more than a cameo appearance, which is  too bad since the audience went nuts the moment he showed up on screen.
Vanessa Williams ("Soul Food") may not be the world's greatest actress, but  she certainly deserved more screen time than she got here.
Then there's poor  Dan Hedaya ("Dick"), who shows up as a fellow officer, and looks woefully  out of place throughout the film.
Last we have Christian Bale, who was  brilliant in "American Psycho", yet adds nothing to this film.
Don't get me  wrong, he turns in a great performance, but he plays a pathetic excuse for a  villain.
He's whiny and insecure and clearly no match for Shaft.
The film's  real villain is Peoples (or the script writers, depending on how you want to  look at it), but he's not much more threatening than Walter.
I think one of the most irritating things about this new "Shaft" is that it  plays more like a video game than a movie.
The fight scenes go as follows:  Shaft opens a door, guy jumps out, Shaft shoots him; Shaft turns a corner,  guys jump out, Shaft shoots them.
This got old and tedious after about ten  minutes.
In fact, that's the biggest problem with this movie; the entire  thing felt old and tedious.
Everything, from all the stereo-typical  characters to the out of place soundtrack (except for the great Isaac Hayes  score of course), felt old and dated, despite Singleton's attempts to change  Shaft for the new millenium.
Then there's the film's ending, which I'm  obviously not going to go into in great detail, but after the movie ended I  sat and pondered whether it was anti-climactic or realistic.
I decided that  since I had to think about it that made it anti-climactic, but you may  disagree.
So overall, what do I think of the new "Shaft" movie?
I think the  man should have stayed in the '70s.
"Shaft" runs only 99 minutes, but it  feels quite a bit longer.
I'd recommend it only to people who worship the  ground Samuel L. Jackson walks on (not that I can blame them for that) and  give it two and a half out of five stars.
Comments?
Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net. Past reviews can be found at: http://www.dependentfilms.net,. http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or  http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem. * * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.. . 
