Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com. DIRECTED BY:      David Fincher STARRING:         Brad Pitt, Edward Norton, Helena Bonham Carter, Meat Loaf, Jared Leto WRITTEN BY:       Jim Uhls RATED:            R for disturbing and graphic depiction of violent anti-social behavior, sexuality and language.
SCRIPTURE REFERENCES:       James 4:1-3, Ephesians 6:12, Proverbs 4:14-19. Just two weeks ago, I reviewed a movie in which sixteen different kinds of devil spirits could be identified as influencing the actions of the on screen characters.
Of course, there are more than just those sixteen classifications.
Now I understand why the one film only used the sixteen.
The others were needed on the set of FIGHT CLUB, a disturbing and twisted cinematic roller coaster of a ride.
David Fincher (SEVEN) does not flinch or shy away from depicting a nihilistic view of society.
Instead he embraces the challenge of making two self-destructive characters his likable leads.
He paints the bleak and darkly comedic picture with the skill and adeptness of a genuine auteur.
The film is original, inventive, and spiritually nauseating all at the same time.
Edward Norton (AMERICAN HISTORY X) narrates the film for us as Jack, an insomniac so disillusioned and disenfranchised with life that he regularly visits different support groups in order to experience some kind of cathartic release which enables him to sleep.
Testicular Cancer, Alcoholics Anonymous, Brain Tumors R Us... it doesn't matter, although it would appear that the more painful the affliction, the greater the emotional release.
Ergo, the sweeter the sleep.
His need for this perverse charade is eliminated once he meets Tyler Durden (Brad Pitt, MEET JOE BLACK).
In hindsight, his continuing the pretense of having testicular cancer would have been a lot saner than following the direction of this charasmatic, unconventional, soap salesman.
Together, Tyler and Jack discover the therapuetic benefits of beating the living daylights out of another human being (or conversely, being knocked senseless by another person).
Dubbing their new organization "Fight Club," they begin attracting other followers who, like them, want to fight another person in order to feel the adrenaline rush through their bodies, even as their blood is pouring out.
Only then do they truly feel "alive.
". This perverse type of logic runs throughout the film.
More and more "members" are recruited, joining what has become a "don't ask, don't tell, don't think" army.
Having two men pummel one another is no longer sufficient for Tyler's demented psyche, so plans for "Operation Mayhem" are put into action.
Fight Club takes on the shape of an underground terrorist organization with their aggression turning outward, targeting the societal ills Tyler deems "responsible" for the desperate plight of mankind.
Jack watches the evolution of the Fight Club he helped to found, feeling a bit left out as the club takes on a life of its own, moving inexorably to an end he cannot control.
The acting is superb, both Mr. Pitt and Mr. Norton demonstrating their consummate talents in difficult and complex roles.
Helena Bonham Carter (THE THEORY OF FLIGHT) is very much their acting equal as a tough but troubled girl who inserts herself into Jack's life and home, first by invading his support groups and later by engaging in a violently sexual relationship with Tyler.
Meat Loaf (CRAZY IN ALABAMA) and Jared Leto (URBAN LEGEND) also provide strong support as two very different Fight Club members.
As artistically fascinating as the movie may be, the spiritual sickness that it depicts is, at the very least, distasteful.
While I have given the movie high praise for its artistic elements and director's vision, the lack of a star rating indicates my strongest caution.
This is a movie that depicts characters with no spiritual insight and therefore no defense against devilish logic, influence or possession.
The "glitzy" style and the boisterous performances may make it palatable for today's audiences, but when stripped down to its ugly essence, the negative anti-social messages at its core give nihilists worldwide something for which to cheer.
At one point, the no-named, dehumanized members of Tyler's army learn that upon dying, one becomes "human" and finally worthy of being called by a proper name.
This sick message is something the author of death would dearly love to promote.. . 
