That horribly smarmy Robinson family get (woah!
) lost amid a veneer  of plot, many special effects and minimal logic.
Surprisingly enough,  it's all quite fun.
In its never-ending search to drag more people to the movies,  Hollywood has resurrected yet another old TV series for the nostalgia  value.
(I, for one, have zero fond memories of that rather dreadful  series.
Go and look at a few episodes sometime - it's singularly  awful.
)  Wrapped up in muchos SFX, bankable stars and few surprises,  one shouldn't hold much hope.
But as cynical as the whole exercise  is, "Lost in Space" is rather entertaining.
It's mind-candy to be  sure, but inoffensive mind-candy.
In some ways, the movie is quite faithful to the premise of the old  series.
In a future where the Earth is on the edge of ecological  collapse and the technology for buttons has been lost, Professors  Robinson (Hurt) and Robinson (Rogers) are taking a ship to a nearby  star.
There they will build a hypergate-type thingie to allow Earth  people to pour through and despoil another planet.
But the evil  Sedition (evil largely for not being the Robinsons) wants to get there  first and sics the rabid Dr Smith (Oldman) onto them.
The Professors  Robinson, their nuclear family and Smith don their many velcro'd and  zippered uniforms and then get "lost in space".
The plot is garbage on most scientific and even logical levels.
Given the profligate way the Robinsons live, I'm not surprised that  the Earth is running out of resources.
All that pollution seems to  effect their brains, because they later forget that planets exert  gravity.
(It's amazing what the user manuals to spacecraft don't  mention.
)  In many cringeworthy scenes, Dad Robinson is made to be  ashamed that he spent too much time saving the Earth, and too little  supervising young Will's crosstime experiments.
Most bizarre of all, they let the murderous Dr Smith loose on their  ship.
Now you know and I know and any sane person would know that if  Gary Oldman stows away on your spaceship [presidential jet / apartment  building / etc.
], it is only a matter of time before he goes spastic  with large quantities of automatic weapons and kills everyone.
(Warning: should you ever be in this situation and Gary appears to be  quiescent as he takes large quantities of drugs - this is no reason to  relax.
The drug-taking Gary is just a larval stage, and soon the  ur-Oldman will emerge, go spastic with large quantities of automatic  weapons and kill everyone.
Do not let your guard down.
Similar  warnings are issued for John Malkovich, Steve Buscemi and Christopher  Walken.
). But as said above, "Lost In Space" charms despite or perhaps because  of its cliches.
Dr Smith chews much scenery and snarls out cutting  one-liners.
(At first the filmmakers keep him relatively under  control, but by the end of the picture just stand back shouting, "Look  out, he's gonna blow!".
)  Matt LeBlanc, who plays a dumb,  over-sexed lug on "Friends", here plays pilot Don West as a dumb,  over-sexed lug.
As a consequence, he is involved in by-the-numbers  sexual tension with the eldest Robinson daughter and some nice space  fight scenes (in very cute fighters adapted to 3D combat).
Penny  Robinson makes an entertaining, angst-ridden teenager who keeps a very  funny half confessional / half fantasy video diary.
Will pals around  amusingly with the robot.
William Hurt - who has build an acting  career of looking vaguely disconcerted by everything - be it  castration, devolution into primordial energy or imprisonment in a  Latin American jail - looks appropriately agonised by every little  decision.
Only Judy and Professor Mom Robinson come across as a  little dull, although they are at least competent, a thankful point of  divergence with the original.
Slap in some glossy SFX, big  explosions, a groovy set of end credits and you get nicely entertained  for your 10 bucks.
At times the movie does slow down, chiefly where they  insist on pursuing the plot or blabbering about Big Issues and the  Importance of Family, but these occasions are mercifully brief.
Do we need another brash, big and meaningless picture?
Maybe not.
But  in a balanced diet of entertainment and edification, "Lost in Space"  makes a worthy entry on the entertainment side.
[***] and lemonade on  the Sid and Nancy scale.
-- paul-michael agapow (agapow@computer.org), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse "There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire.
". . 
