*DOGMA* (rated R, 125 minutes, Lions Gate Films)- "Dogma", the most ambitious and highly anticipated film from comic auteur Kevin Smith ("Clerks", "Chasing Amy"), opens with a disclaimer.
It states that the film, which puts a satirical spin on Catholicism, is not meant to be taken seriously.
The disclaimer, which was recently added after many pointless protests and death threats from Catholic radicals, contradicts what I think Smith was trying to accomplish.
"Dogma" is more about faith than it is about blasphemy, but how can anyone realize that if they don't take the film seriously?
The convoluted plot of "Dogma" involves an abortionist (Linda Fiorentino) who finds out that she is the only remaining descendant of Jesus.
Along with Smith regulars Jay and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes and Smith himself), she must save the world from two bad-boy angels (Matt Damon and Ben Affleck) who plan to pass through the arches of a New Jersey church and thus negate all existence.
Along for the wild ride are George Carlin, Salma Hayek, Jason Lee, Alan Rickman, Chris Rock, Janeane Garofalo, who play some of the most quirkily conceived characters I've ever seen (and yes, Alanis Morrisette plays God).
Once you get over just how funny "Dogma" is (it provides as many laughs as I've had this year), you may realize that just about everything else about the production is flawed.
Linda Fiorentino doesn't make a competent lead as Bethany, and the Affleck/Damon pairing adds up to no more than a distraction.
Kevin Smith wrote "Dogma" before his "Jersey Trilogy" and it shows.
Smith, who mixes toilet humor with profound existential statements, takes a step back into adolescence with this flick.
When compared with the simplicity of "Clerks", or the unexpected poignance of "Chasing Amy", the overly ambitious and overlong "Dogma" just doesn't cut it.
It takes a couple viewings to really cut deep into "Dogma", and to realize that its biggest surprise is an emotionally hollow center.
On the surface, there's too much going on to absorb in one viewing, but deeper down there's not enough emotion to fill even half of that.
In the end, "Dogma" doesn't tell us much about the nature of belief (besides the opinion that African-Americans are underutilized in the Bible), and the flat, cartoony result is more like Kevin Smith's beloved pastime; a comic book.
After watching this hilarious but overblown mess, I wanted to see something as different as possible.
I wanted to see a Kevin Smith movie.
(now in theatres). . . 
