Starring Tom Hanks, Sally Field, Robin Wright, and Gary Sinise Directed by Robert Zemeckis.      What a surprise!
I cannot say enough about this film.
It didn't seem to appetizing from it's ad campaign, but it sure has taken me unawares.
I was glad I went to see it, even though it was strictly from the curiosity factor.
A definite good time at the movies.
FORREST GUMP is the story of a rather remarkable individual named, as you might have already figured out, Forrest Gump.
He's a rather unremarkable individual on the outside, but when you listen to the things he's been through in his life, you sit there in amazement.
How can a simpleton from Alabama get into so much that is happening in the world?
How can someone so suggestible be so suggestive?
It's a feat that makes for pure movie entertainment.
Tom Hanks is, as always, superb as the not so smart Gump, who through unlikely coincidences and very plausible scenarios gets to meet three presidents, becomes a war hero, starts and maintains a million-dollar business, and marries the girl of his dreams.
It all sounds very fairy-tale-ish, but you have to see the movie to understand how this all happens.
It's not all handed to Gump on a silver platter.
Often times he just gets it without really trying.
But that's his appeal--that a man so simple--simpler that the average everyday Joe--can get into such extrordinary circumstances and still come out shining.
Forrest Gump shows that life is how you look at it.
Even the most horrible things in the world can be looked at simply.
The character and the movie FORREST GUMP is a refreshing alternate look at recent history and today's events, through the eyes of a man you would have never thought would be affected by any of it.
It seems, instead, that he had an effect on history, rather than history affecting him.
This movie is a pure treat.
It has something for everyone.
The battle scenes are amazing, historical figures are made to say things they never said, the story in just plain funny, and the special effects are something to see (I challenge people to find *all* of the effects in this movie--they were that good).
I came out of the theater with my jaw in my lap.
I never thought I would come of out a theater like that when it was playing a story about normal everyday events, but I just did.
Go see it--it's worth any admission price!. . 
