FORCES OF NATURE Cast: Sandra Bullock, Ben Affleck, Maura Tierney, Steve Zahn, Blythe Danner, Ronnie Cox, Meredith Scott Lynn Director: Bronwen Hughes Screenplay: Marc Lawrence, Ian Bryce, Donna Roth Australian theatrical release: May 6, 1999 Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 2 and a half stars. A considerable portion of Forces of Nature feels like a 90's remake of Plains, Trains and Automobiles, with only a couple of notable differences.
Whereas Steven Martin desperately tried to make it home for thanksgiving in 1989, Ben Affleck is engaged to be married and is battling against time (and a fear of flying) to attend his wedding ceremony.
From trailers and posters, it's no secret that this is a boy meets girl film, but again, there are couple of exceptions.
This is not your average Hollywood romantic comedy since its two principal characters carry weighty emotional baggage with them.
Whilst there is nothing drastically wrong with Forces of Nature - a very likeable piece - it ends up stabbing itself in the foot by trying to be too smart too quick.
There will undoubtedly be many smiling faces walking out from the movie; others, like me, will feel a little cheated.
Affleck plays Ben Holmes, a man who is about to get married and everybody is telling him how marriage is a bad idea.
His best man is demanding that he sleep around before committing himself, and his agitated parents hardly provide a welcoming example of holy matrimony.
On his way home, Ben's plane skids off the runway and he quickly finds himself forming a partnership with a sexy, mysterious lady named Sarah (Sandra Bullock) as they fight traffic, police and, yes, forces of nature to get to their destinations.
Sarah's gorgeous looks and fearless spirit tempt Ben, but he soon realizes that there is more to her than she would like him to believe.
Much of Sandra Bullock's character is purposely self-explanatory, but it's hard to grasp where she is coming from and what she is after.
Sure, she works on more levels than just pleasing eye candy for the guys, but this doesn't substitute the fact that she is not properly digested by the film's screenplay.
Consequently, this slightly hinders Bullocks appealing performance and the believability of Sarah and Ben's relationship.
Affleck has a better grasp on his material, and he delivers his lines with the kind of goofy sincerity that made Steve Martin a star.
This is quite a funny, and definitely likeable film littered with many cynical jokes about marriage and relationships.
Look out for some impressive work by cinematographer Elliot Davis, who gives the film a lively visual feel - he even succeeds in making a rain storm the basis of one of the film's best choreographed sequences.
With so much romantic fluff, it's a wonder why director Bronwen Hughes decided on a rather cynical novelty ending that is poorly staged and written.
Love, it seems, carries confusion with it, and this is quite a confusing completion to an otherwise simplistic story.
Forces of Nature succeeds in giving viewers plenty to talk about in the car ride home, but this is one film in which an unexpected ending works to its disadvantage.
Not a bad film, in fact it's quite a good one.
But Forces of Nature tries to be too smart too quick, when it should have been dumb but enjoyable.. . . 
