Review by Lars Lindahl (larsattacks@mail.com). "Keeping the Faith" (2000) **1/2 (out of four). Starring Ben Stiller, Edward Norton, Jenna Elfman, Anne Bancroft, Eli Wallach, Ron Rifkin, Hollan Taylor, Lisa Edelstein, and Rena Sofer.
Edward Norton burst into the movies with his memorable award winning performance as a young choir boy accused of murder in Primal Fear.
He proved he wasn't a one hit wonder after impressive acting in American History X and Fight Club.
How does Norton fair in the romantic comedy Keeping the Faith?
Well he once again shows off his acting skills except this time he shows them off a little too much.
In a very simple movie like this, Norton just overacts and brings an excessive amount of emotion into his character.
By also directing the film, it's as if he is trying to create his own Hamlet and direct himself to an Oscar.
Keeping the Faith is a classic case of an actor bigger and better than the picture.
Co-star Ben Stiller, on the other hand, is perfect for his role in the film.
Much like his character in There's Something About Mary, Stiller plays a normal, likeable guy who has the worst luck when it comes to the ladies.
Maybe he isn't the best actor on the planet and he most likely will be typecast in these roles for the rest of his life, but Stiller saves the movie.
With as many one liners as physical comedy, he just seems so comfortable in his "everyman" role.
No wonder he appears in more scenes than the critically praised Norton, when it comes to these types of movies, Stiller is the true professional.
Keeping the Faith follows two successful, popular, iconoclastic best friends, one a priest (Norton) and the other a rabbi (Stiller).
The two have known each other since the pre-teen years and their relationship is seemingly unbreakable.
However, their friendship becomes somewhat turbulent when a female friend, Anna (Jenna Elfman), who grew up with the two boys, comes back to town and both guys find themselves attracted to her.
Not only do their sudden feelings for Anna endanger their relationship, but also respect of others in their professional fields.
The priest shouldn't even be thinking about Anna and because she is not Jewish, the rabbi fears he will be widely scrutinized.
The mistake Keeping the Faith makes is that it spends way too much time trying to teach the moral that you must have faith in yourself and others equally in order to make it in this world.
In order to convey this message, screenwriter Stuart Blumberg constantly interrupts the quickly paced premise with long, boring conversations that are neither romantic nor comedic.
In a romantic comedy, everything should be one or the other.
Don't get me wrong, I laughed several times during the movie but even though the jokes were many, they were very far between.
The movie just dragged on to a point where it was nearly unbearable, then Stiller would appear in top form and pump some energy into the story, then back to the dragging.
A number of segments during the movie contained little or no development.
The supporting cast is superb.
Anne Bancroft, in particular, is great as Stiller's mother who pressures him into dating only Jewish women.
Lisa Edelstein is also noteworthy as one of the annoying girls who Stiller is set up with.
As "the date from hell," Edelstein's slapstick performance provides a number of laugh-out-loud moments.
As for Jenna Elfman, she definitely brings some of Dharma into her character.
Honest, gregarious and loquacious, Anna has everything the two men are looking for.
Elfman believably plays Anna and makes it easy for the audience to understand why they instantly go gaga for her.
Like Stiller, she seems fit for roles like these and dives right into her character with complete control.
Keeping the Faith won't be the funniest comedy of the year but it is recommended for a few chuckles.
And Norton, I expect him to win an Oscar within five years, maybe even two.
Just not for movies like these.. . . 
