starring Kevin Kline, Matt Dillon, Joan Cusack, Tom Selleck screenplay by Paul Rudnick directed by Frank Oz. Kline stars as Howard Brackett, a dedicated high school teacher engaged to the lovely Emily (Cusack).
One of his past students, Cameron Drake (Dillon), is up for an Academy Award, for a film about a homosexual army soldier titled "To Serve and Protect".
Brackett is happy as a clam, until Drake wins and outs his favourite teacher before the world.
Over the next three days, Brackett has to decide whether or not to deny the charge and carry on a charade by marrying his fiancee, or take the advice of gay newscaster Selleck, and jump from the closet.
Rudnick, an openly gay screenwriter, is frequently a razor sharp wit, and no character, straight or gay, is spared.
Take supermodel Shalom Harlow (an Oshawa, Ontario, Canada native, and once a schoolmate of mine!
), who, as Drake's waif-girlfriend, doesn't want to leave her house at one point because she still has to "shower and vomit.
" Or Wilfred Brimley, as Brackett's father, who loves his son unconditionally, even if he "got drunk, climbed the clock tower with a shotgun and took out the whole town.
" But amusing as it is--there are a great many belly laughs--the picture feels curiously cold, and the mechanics of the plot curiously manufactured, as if it were a bad script with a good dialogue doctor.
The Oscar ceremony is virtually laughless, if only because it's the most off-target recreation of the event this side of The Bodyguard.
I realize that realism may not have been the goal of this sequence, but aren't imitations and impressions funnier when they're dead-on?
Kevin Kline is terrific, as always; Dillon's character starts out bitingly mean--is he doing Brad Pitt?--and then goes disappointingly soft.
Selleck is good--Magnum P.I.
fans everywhere will no doubt be shocked by a certain standout scene--in a TV-ready sort of way.
Director Oz, who has in his lifetime voiced Fozzie Bear, Yoda, and directed the brilliant Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, has a good sense of pace, and his comic timing is often spot-on, but he lacks the edge to make a truly cynical movie, and so the proceedings are best described as wishy-washy.
More reviews to be found at the fascinating inept website: "Film Freak Central"-- http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Set/7504 Feel free to sign that ridiculous guestbook!. 
