---A copy of this review can be found at  http://www.moviereviews.org/magnolia.htm ---. ---Those of you in the Portland, Maine are can hear Mac VerStandig's  movie reviews every Friday morning on 98.9 The Point radio.---. Despite opening with footage of old black and white 16 millimeter film,  Magnolia quickly splices away from many time-revered filmmaking  fundamentals and bravely ventures into cutting-edge territory.
In that  sense, the film is a true first effort and, like many freshman attempts,  the end-product is only semi-interesting but extremely noteworthy  because of the boundaries it crosses.
The film, however, isn't director P. T. Anderson's initial voyage into  Hollywood.
He previously achieved momentary fame with the critically  acclaimed but Academy-snubbed Boogie Nights.
Many of the cast and crew  members from that 1997 effort join him again here.
He re-embraces a  similar filmmaking style in Magnolia, but those that think Boogie Nights  was as new-age as they could handle, will likely struggle through this  production.
A dying father, woman at his side, a nurse taking care of him, a quiz  show host, a well-intentioned cop, a coke-sniffing daughter, a former  quiz show champion, a current quiz show champion and a sex-craving  instructor of "Seduce and Destroy" courses.
Throw in some men at the  gallows, Hustler magazine and a mind-boggling biblical reference and all  the pieces fit together as in a very fragile jig saw puzzle.
But don't  dare blink, because the one major connecting piece is quick, quiet and  very subtle.
It is trying to connect those pieces that is the film's  plot.
Not only does the movie venture outside the lines with the  aforementioned unconventional plot, but the actual filmmaking technique  used by P. T. Anderson might give some Tisch professors nightmares.
The  supposedly unbreakable 180 degree rule, which states that no cut should  be made in one scene that jumps more than 180 degrees, is flagrantly  ignored.
Ditto the concept of never intentionally cutting off someone's  head in the frame while they are talking.
Yet the most shocking  violation comes when Anderson uses shaky handheld footage, a technique  normally only utilized when absolutely necessary, voluntarily.
In front of the camera is a rather impressive cast including Jason  Robards, Philip Baker Hall, Philip Seymour Hoffman, William H. Macy,  Julianne Moore and John C. Reilly.
But the real treat is Tom Cruise who  ventures into this film having just played a sex-craving New Yorker in  legendary director Stanley Kubrick's last movie, Eyes Wide Shut.
Here he  is a sex preaching Californian whose in-your-face course includes  lessons like "How to fake like you are nice and caring.
" (I would list  more, but this is a family website.
) Cruise will likely finally get an  Oscar for this film in the form of Best Supporting Actor, after his  previously being snubbed in the lead actor category for films like Born  on the Fourth of July and Jerry Maguire.
I am told that P. T. Anderson's director's cut of this movie was five  hours long.
I have little doubt that those 300 minutes of footage are  boldly original and might fascinate hardcore film junkies.
But to most,  the movie will lose steam after about two hours in its current three  hour state.
Although its too early to tell, P. T. Anderson could  ultimately end up leading a filmmaking revolution in Hollywood.
Lets  hope he doesn't cure insomnia in the process.  . . 
