Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. When you decide you don't like a film while you are still watching it,  it is hard to turn back.
Sure, I like when films take quirky and unexpected turns as much as the  next moviegoer.
But when the final third of 'Rushmore' commenced its  pointless darkness - a futile evocation of the whimsicality of revenge  and friendship - I had nearly made up my mind that all the press  received by the film was wrong-headed.
The final minutes were more to  my liking, but the film was still marred for me.
'Rushmore' opens with a fantasy in which the main character, Max Fischer  (Jason Schwartzman), imagines himself solving a math problem that would  baffle Will Hunting.
His classmates in the private academy are  ecstatic, and Max is a hero.
Of course this scene proves ironic, as we  soon see that Max is one of the worst students on campus.
Having  attended Rushmore since his primary grades, Max has immersed himself in  extra-curriculars - he is either an officer or the founder of  organizations involving beekeeping, fencing, lacrosse, French,  wrestling, stamp and coin collecting, and many others.
Most  impressively, Max writes and stages his own plays.
In fact, one of the  film's strengths is these productions:  their exaggerated grittiness  becomes a tour-de-force, and we cannot help but admire and like their  creator.
Behind the set of Max's 'Serpico' a small-gauge elevated train  runs through a miniature city more detailed than David Letterman's set.
Aside from Max's fantasies and quirky imagination, we also see inventive  narrative techniques, such as a theater curtain opening and closing, the  months of the story's span flashing across the velvet folds.
So there  are several charming and eccentric elements that endear the story to the  viewer.
Unfortunately, Max's behavior itself ends up over-the-top.
After 15 year-old Max meets and falls in love with a Rushmore first  grade teacher (Rosemary Cross, played by Olivia Williams), he begins a  pattern of behavior that is at first worshipping - pouring her lemonade  as she grades papers in the library - and finally obsessive.
Practiced  in the pathology of lying, Max deceives and manipulates countless  friends;  because his actions become so despicable, we are perhaps  unwilling to forgive him wholly.
Further, would the victims of such a  young skunk realistically not only accept apologies but befriend Max  again?
Here's the rub.
Bill Murray acts very well in the film.
As Herman Blume, a wealthy  alumnus of Rushmore, Murray tempers his goofy comic expression with a  cynical ennui that fits just right with his part.
Max compares very  favorably to Blume's twin hooligan sons, and Blume likes Max's  sycophantic ambition so well that he chucks Max a job offer.
One of  Murray's strong suits is his sudden bursts of silliness, sprinting away  across a playground or darting into a children's basketball game to  block a shot.
Later begins one of the major conflicts, the subplot  encompassing the rivalry between Max and Herman, after Herman too falls  in love with Miss Cross.
Again Murray is properly deadpan, the camera  lingering on his jaded but hilarious expression just long enough.
Note  his matching shirts and neckties, a wink at classy tackiness!
Jason Schwartzman does a fine job as well.
His resemblance to a very  young Dustin Hoffman is inevitable, especially his head-on approach to  other characters.
It's a shame that the screenplay by -------and  director Wes Anderson does in the credibility of his character.
The  writing also short changes Olivia Williams' character:  Miss Cross is  pretty, but aside from missing a dead husband and reading to her  students, she never does anything that develops her character.
We fail  to witness even a montage of moments that bond her to either male  character trying to win her attention and love.
Mason Gamble as Dirk Calloway, Max's protégé at Rushmore, and ---------  as Margaret Yang, Max's quasi-girlfriend and gun moll in one of his  plays, both hand in wonderful performances.
Most of their motivations  seem right, and their acting shows a nice transparency.
The time of 'Rushmore' - 89 minutes - is right.
My wife looked at her  watch even during this duration.
I am a man who like to fall in love  with a movie, and with 'Rushmore" I was just able to like its  characters.
Instead of watching a thoroughly engaging story, what I saw  was a dark and underdeveloped character study.. . . 
