Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. What we experience in watching Tim Burton's "Sleepy Hollow" is a modern  treatment of an eighteenth-century tale.
As such, it is very slick and  rather fast-paced.
It is not, however, anything close to Washington  Irving's "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow.
". Instead of the gangly schoolmaster Icabod Crane, Johnny Depp portrays Crane  as a mildly buffoonish constable whose ambition is to be a criminal  investigator.
In New York City proper, he complains of the brutal and  backward police work he sees all around him.
Thus a burgomaster (played by  Christopher Lee) sends him up the Hudson River to a village called Sleepy  Hollow, where three people have been murdered, their heads sliced cleanly  off.
Arriving to a rather cold welcome, Crane begins to practice his  version of the scientific method, exposing all the evidence he can.
Immediately we meet four leading citizens of the town, men who may or may  not be involved with the grisly crimes.
Michael Gambon as the rich Baltus  Van Tassel, Richard Griffiths as Magistrate Phillipse, Ian McDiarmid as  Doctor Lancaster, and Michael Gough as Notary Hardenbrook - these character  actors are masterful choices of casting.
Unsavory and gruff, these titled  citizens support one of the film's themes, that appearance is very different  from reality.
One aspect already given away in the trailers for the film is that the  horseman is no legend.
Differing from Irving's scenario, in which we think  the horseman is probably Brom Bones - the jealous boyfriend of Katrina Van  Tassel - Burton's version gives a very frightening physical incarnation to  the specter.
When the doubting Ichabod encounters a fake horseman - Brom  with padding and a cape - we run up against a red herring that is one of  many flaws in the script.
But when we see the real spectral Hessian, the  narrative abandons Irving's ideas.
Why is the ghost of a Hessian mercenary keeping the heads he lops off?
Is  there a pattern or a reason in the selection of his victims?
Andrew Kevin  Walker's screenplay tries to cover these possibilities, but it is only  partly successful.
Although the ghost's motivations are conveyed rather  clearly, we don't quite understand those of Ichabod Crane, or even of the  young woman with whom he falls in love, Katrina Van Tassel (Christina  Ricci).
The film begins to weave a sort of subplot consisting of a series  of disturbing nightmares.
It seems the 7 year-old Ichabod had a beautiful  mother who is an "innocent.
"  What happens with her and Crane's father  amounts to a failed search for motives, and a third-rate attempt at  emulating the supernatural plot threads of a director like Ingmar Bergman.
Here, the thread unravels.
As usual, Burton's film is beautifully photographed.
The sets are  appropriate, often painted by special effect that capture New York of 1799,  as well as pastoral landscapes captured on canvases of that time.
As might  be expected in a horror film, there is a lot of imagery - in this case  involving darkness, fire, smoke and blood.
Burton displays a morbid  penchant for showing not only on-screen decapitations, but other wounds.
We  spy angry-looking yet bloodless wounds on a few characters' hands and  bellies and shoulders, aside from the cauterized necks of several victims.
Several times we witness a bizarre, womb-like image in the place from which  the horseman springs before galloping across the western woods in the next  murderous venture.
Johnny Depp's acting is usually solid, and here Burton's pal does a nice job  of depicting his character.
This Crane is, like Irving's, shaky and often  unsure of himself.
But the very nature of the newer Crane calls for an  amount of courage the original Crane would never exhibit.
Depp's Crane is  an aspiring pathologist who actually brings bits of dark comic relief to the  autopsy-like procedures he practices.
His being squirted with blood becomes  a running joke.
As Katrina Van Tassel, Christina Ricci is underused.
Her character  increases in importance as the narrative advances, though her true role is  kept obscured by the filmmakers.
She and her  stepmother (Miranda  Richardson) both appear to dabble in the black arts (though Crane calls  Katrina's magic "white").
Richardson actually plays a double role, as she  did in "Merlin" she and her twin play interesting roles in the intrigue.
Richardson's acting is believeable and smooth.
The supporting cast contributes much to the tone and direction of the story.
In an uncredited appearance as the horseman-with-a-head, Christopher  Walken is wild-eyed and menacing, his teeth filed to devilish points.
But  even he seems baffled in one scene, when he has no lines but must only  breathe with hatred.
Ray Park is one of the doubles for the headless rider,  and his fight scenes are sharp and deadly.
The accoutrements of ghostly  murder work well in his hands:  a saber and a battleaxe were never so  expertly wielded in a Revolutionary War-era film.
So many of the action scenes are fascinating, their ILM-buffed special  effects amazing and transparent.
The background for these scenes is  memorable and truly gothic - something of which Burton is no doubt proud.
But the script falters so many times, and the main plot - though gripping -  is not supported well either by explanations or subplots.
I question the  need for so many graphic beheadings, and also the frequency of characters  practicing witchcraft or magic.
Do modern audiences really require such  dark meanderings into the subhuman parts of humanity?
Or is this what it  looks like to see another film falling far short of greatness?. . . 
