A review from the Stockholm Film Review http://www.fortunecity.com/lavendar/heat/435/. Blade (Wesley Snipes) is a vampire hunter with a difference - he seems  to be part vampire himself.
With the help of his assistant, Dr. Abraham  Whistler (Kris Kristofferson), he emerges after dark to do battle with  the blood-sucking creatures of the night, who prey on humans.
The  vampires 'infect' humans with their bite and contaminated humans become  vampires too.
Based on the eponymous comic-book hero, Blade is breathtaking in its  monotony and lack of originality.
The twist, if you can call it that, is  that the vampires consist of two classes those who have always been  vampires, and those who have been infected, but who were originally  human.
The two factions are engaged in a power struggle, with the leader  of one faction, Deacon Frost (Stephen Dorff) planning to overthrow the  present leadership.
And that is as complex as the movie gets,  unfortunately.
The story of vampires has inspired many filmmakers, from schlock-horror  hacks to A-list directors.
Since F.W.
Murnau's Nosferatu (1922), the  themes of immortality, the allegory between sex and the vampire's bite,  and the blood imagery have inspired works by Neil Jordan, Francis Ford  Coppola, John Landis, Abel Ferrera and Tony Scott amongst others.
However, David Goyer's script seems to be content to leave these themes  unexplored and Stephen Norrington's heavy-handed direction consists of  one tedious, overblown fight scene after another.
The prospect of Blade as a sort of iconic figure is simply risible.
Wesley Snipe's performance makes one yearn nostalgically for Passenger  57 and Demolition Man, while I hope Stephen Dorff sent a good portion of  his fee to Kiefer Sutherland, since Dorff's performance is a leaden  imitation of Sutherland in The Lost Boys (hardly a classic in itself).
I  can only presume Kris Kristofferson is saving up for something expensive  as an excuse for appearing in Blade - I hope he got well paid.
This is  completely forgettable stuff.. . . 
