There aren't many things that can match the allure of Friday Night  High School Football.
Twenty two young men who have been made  mythical heroes by their school pouring their guts out in front of  the bright lights.
Many of them playing for a future, most playing  for pride.
In small Texas towns like West Canaan, the allure is even  greater.
The town lives and dies by it's football teams.
1983's All  the Right Moves, which instead focused on football in small  Pennsylvania steel towns, did a good job of capturing this feeling.
Varsity Blues captures this feeling too, but where it fails and All  the Right Moves succeeded, is in it's basic human drama.
In the past 30 years, West Canaan head coach Bud Kilmer has won 22  district titles.
He plans on doing whatever he can to get that 23rd.
Unfortunately, when the teams starting quarterback, a schoolboy  legend, goes down with a season ending injury, that title appears to  be slipping away.
The coach must turn to backup quarterback Jonathan  "Mox" Moxon.
Mox doesn't really buy into the sleep, eat, breath football ideals of  the town.
He's working for a scholarship to Brown university.
He's  been playing football since he was young, not because he enjoyed it  necessarily, but because of the pressure he faced from his father.
But when he finally gets his chance to play, things begin to change.
Suddenly Mox gets wrapped up in all the hype and glory.
Mox also begins a bitter war with Kilmer, who despite his success, is  a mean-spirited sadist.
Voight plays this character with snarling,  colorful, over the top enthusiasm.
Been there, done that.
This  particular section of the film I did not care for.
Kilmer's character  is way too one dimensional and the attempt to humanize him comes way  too late.
The family drama is also poorly played out.
Mox's father is  as one-dimensional as the coach and his mother is given absolutely  nothing to do.
The film also attempts to document the wild behavior of the players,  and the extent to which they can get away with anything.
It goes way  too far over the top here.
In one scene, a player steals a cop car  and rides around with naked girls in it.
In another, the boys go to a  strip bar, where they are shocked to discover their sex-ed teacher is  a stripper.
Neither of these scenes are funny, or beleivable.
Despite all of this, I did enjoy Varsity Blues.
Van Der Beek is solid  as Mox, able to show his character's admirable traits alongside his  flaws, but careful not to overplay either (maybe he should give  Voight lessons).
Ron Lester has a very good role as Billy Bob, the  massively overweight lineman who has been playing football since the  pee wee level and wonders if any of it was actually enjoyable.
Ali  Larter also has a nice role as a cheerleader who comes on to Mox  since she has to date the starting quarterback.
One scene she finds  some very creative use for whip cream in her attempt to win over Mox.
Now that WAS funny, if still not beleivable.
Brian Robbins does a surprisingly good job staging the football  scenes.
Everything is easy to follow.
I particularly liked one  segment where a breakdown in blocking leads to disaster.
I also  enjoyed the debate of philosophies (Kilmer's control the clock  conservative style versus Mox's five wideout aerial assault ideas).
And yes, the film does fall back on the predictable formula of the  big game finale.
And the final play of the game is set up much  earlier in the film, so we know the screenwriters know their Syd  Field.
These complaints might matter one iota to me if the film  wasn't so successful in executing it's formula here.
The final game,  and the final play, are both very exciting.
I guess that's the allure  of high school football.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm. . 
