Miramax / 2:06 / 1997 / R  Cast: Matt Damon; Robin Williams; Minnie Driver; Ben Affleck;  Stellan Skarsgĺrd; Casey Affleck; Cole Hauser  Director: Gus Van Sant  Screenplay: Ben Affleck; Matt Damon . Just in time for the holidays comes "Good Will Hunting," a  well-cast drama intent on delivering that warm-and-gooey feeling,  so much that it's a surprise to learn this wannabe-uplifter comes  from usually-dark director Gus Van Sant.
A December 25th release  date actually couldn't be more appropriate, because this movie is  so much like the big Christmas dinner you'll be downing on that day  -- it certainly looks appetizing, but it'll leave you overstuffed,  even ending with a send-off so drawn out that it's the cinematic  equivalent of L-tryptophan.
Good's icky title refers to its main character -- Will Hunting  (Matt Damon), a janitor at the Massachusetts Institute of  Technology.
Will's secretly much brighter than most of the students  attending there; said attribute is revealed after esteemed  Professor Lambeau (Stellan Skarsgĺrd from "Breaking the Waves")  posts a too-tough math problem on a blackboard for his students to  solve, and only Will is bright enough to crack the answer.
Initially, Will and Lambeau are rivals, but the latter comes to the  former's aid after the young ruffian is jailed on an  all-too-frequent assault charge.
Lambeau has a couple conditions for keeping Will on the streets:  One, they work side by side on math theory; two, Will see a  psychiatrist on a regular basis.
After several unsuccessful  pairings, a spark is ignited with unorthodox therapist Sean McGuire  (Robin Williams), an old friend of Lambeau's.
Will's time is then  divided between being helped by McGuire and hanging out with his  old Boston buddies, namely best pal Chuckie (immensely likeable Ben  Affleck from "Chasing Amy").
There's also time for a romantic  subplot involving Skylar (Minnie Driver), a beautiful, brainy  Harvard student who falls for Will.
Van Sant, who last directed the explosive media satire "To Die  For," keeps things moving in a conventional way.
The movie bears  none of his eccentric trademarks; just when you think things are  about to get engaging, they stay steady with disinteresting  development.
The screenplay, co-written by Damon and Affleck, is  pretty standard; they know how to create compelling characters but  don't do much compelling with them.
At best, "Good Will Hunting" is  watchable, but it's rarely moving or sentimental.
If the heart of "Good Will Hunting" is the relationship between  Will and McGuire, then it's a shockingly empty one.
Their first few  sessions, as they begin challenging each other's minds, hold  promise, but future interaction is formulaic, predictable and  uninvolving.
Far better is the screen time devoted to Will with  Skylar and Chuckie.
There might be a better movie there, but the  problem is that this development is secondary to Will's therapeutic  process.
Damon and Affleck are close friends in real life, and  their chemistry is apparent, adding much potency to scenes that  aren't very important.
Driver, as she did in last April's "Grosse  Pointe Blank," turns what could have been a throwaway role into  something special; I found her scenes with Damon to be far more  concentrated than anything else in the film.
Because "Good Will Hunting" is a performance-driven piece, I can  recommend it.
There's an abundance of good acting here, including  Williams scoring big with an atypically serious role; he does that  goofy shtick so often (most recently in tripe like "Flubber" and  "Fathers' Day") that it's easy to forget what a good dramatic  player he is.
It's just that there's little emotional investment  made in the story.
When "Good Will Hunting" stacks on a plethora of  stirring climactic events, it's akin to going to a party where you  don't know anyone and something disastrous happens -- you really  just don't care.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck  E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1. . 
