Copyright 1998 Nathaniel R. Atcheson. As a viewer who is intensely devoted to the sci-fi/action genre of film, it's difficult for me to separate myself from the genre to write a review from a purely objective standpoint.
It's also hard when the film is as astonishingly good as The Matrix.
The problem in this case is that the film, which has been written and directed by the Wachowski brothers (Bound), is a marvel in just about every way a film like this can be.
Where do I begin?
Do I start by praising the truly amazing visual image that the Wachowskis have brought to the screen?
Should I first mention the story, which pays homage to numerous other stories while still managing to create its own world?
Do I rave about the characters and the dialogue?
A frequent complaint about films like this is that they're all vacuous eye candy.
The Matrix is pretty, but it's not vacuous:  in addition to having made one of the most visually stunning pictures of all time (yes, of all time), the Wachowskis have created a story that matches those visuals in every way.
It's not a lopsided production like so many action thrillers tend to be.
No, The Matrix is a thriller with a heart, a science fiction epic with real people and conflicts at the center of it.
True, it has the feel and posture of a comic book, but that's not a bad thing:  The Matrix takes a familiar formula and builds upon it, resulting in an exhilarating and invigorating cinematic experience.
It's also the first movie I've ever watched that made me want to fasten an imaginary seatbelt.
Another problem with writing this review is that I really can't say anything specific about the film.
Part of the experience comes from seeing it with your own eyes.
I can't accurately convey what I've seen in words.
So I'll begin with the premise:  Keanu Reeves plays Tom Anderson, a computer programmer by day, and a computer hacker by night (his hacker alias is Neo, and he's mostly referred to as such).
Towards the opening of the film, Neo is contacted by a strange woman named Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss).
Trinity piques Neo's interest by mentioning the Matrix.
"What is the Matrix?
" he asks.
She says that the answer lies with Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne).
Neo meets Morpheus, and the journey into his question ensues.
All of this takes about twenty minutes.
The film goes on for two more hours, but I can't tell you what happens.
All I can say is that when Neo sees the Matrix, he vomits.
I can't even discuss the other characters in the film and why they're significant, just because doing so would give away crucial elements.
One of the things I liked most about The Matrix is that, before seeing it, I thought I had it figured out.
But the Wachowskis showed me things that I didn't imagine.
The story has all the necessary elements for success.
Neo, for instance, is a likable main character.
He has no personal history, but that's the point of the film.
Reeves, though inappropriate in any production of Shakespeare, is more than adequate here.
There's not a moment during which he doesn't look woefully confused, and that's exactly what this character needs.
The film is also saturated with colorful supporting characters.
Fishburne and Moss make a strong pair of protagonists; Fishburne effortlessly makes every word sound very important, while Moss is strong as the female lead.
Character actor Joe Pantoliano has a juicy role as Cipher, one of Morpheus' sidekicks.
Australian actor Hugo Weaving gives a scene-stealing performance as Agent Smith, one of the antagonists whose intentions are part of the big secret.
All of these great characters are placed at the center of a familiar formula.
The originality comes in the details, which the Wachowskis have worked out with amazing precision:  I dare any viewer to find a significant plot hole in The Matrix.
If you do, then you're too picky.
The film works because the story will hold your interest into and beyond the action scenes.
Honestly, though, you're going to be concentrating on those action scenes when they're going.
I've never seen cinematography or special effects like this; I've never seen such flawless use of slow-motion and computer-generated images.
The Wachowskis have a better eye for a shot than nearly any modern director I can think of.
Their crowning achievement is in the last thirty minutes, and involves a helicopter and a lot of bullets in slow-motion.
I'm going to go out on a limb here:  this is the best action sequence ever committed to celluloid.
When it was over, my heart was racing and I was short of breath.
And I'm not exaggerating.
If The Matrix doesn't get your attention, then you need your pulse checked.
The film isn't perfect; the main characters are often forced to kill a lot of people, and I would have liked to see them address the moral issues behind mass murder.
And some of the background information reminded me a little too much of similar films.
I only mention these things to prove that I am capable of looking at the film objectively.
It's not likely that they'll hinder anyone's enjoyment of the picture.
So, here's a pop quiz for anyone planning to create an entry into the sci-fi genre:  What's more important -- style or substance?
The Wachowskis have created perhaps the best science fiction film of the 90s, and they did so by balancing style and substance.
Like all the great films of the genre -- including Metropolis, 2001:  A Space Odyssey, and The Terminator -- The Matrix will show you images you've never seen before, and it will make you care by telling a good story.
You don't have to be a sci-fi junkie to recognize the skill here.
The Matrix is the kind of film that gives fans of the genre a burst of hope:  there are still filmmakers out there who know how to use special effects to tell a story.   . . 
