Cast: Antonio Banderas, Anthony Hopkins, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Stuart Wilson, Matt Letscher Director: Martin Campbell Screenplay: John Eskow and Ted Elliott & Terry Rossio. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 4 stars. There are old films, and then there are films that capture the spirit of decades ago perfectly.
The Mask of Zorro is one of these; it is spellbinding and old fashioned, containing every element of a traditional superhero film.
It is how these elements are balanced by director Martin Campbell that makes Zorro a non-stop feast for the senses, and the clever handling of its script makes it one of the unexpected highlights of 1998.
Colombia Tri-Star delayed the release of Zorro for well over a year, allegedly due to the success of Titanic.
I don't see why, since this film is better than blockbusters Godzilla and Armageddon put together, and I haven't been this mesmerized by a purebred action flick since John Woo's Face/Off in 1997.
Much of the credit goes to Martin Campbell, who made 1995's Goldeneye - one of the best James Bond films ever.
Campbell refrains from using crafty camera angles and excessive special effects; instead he focuses on genuine, exciting action.
The result is breath taking.
Zorro's many sword fights are captured incredibly on screen, with clashes and clangs bringing hoots and thrills from the audience.
Anothony Hopkins plays Don Diego de la Vega, an elderly Zorro, who is a masked hero that fights for the people of Mexico.
After a plight to save innocent peasants, Don Diego's archenemy Don Rafael Montero (Stuart Wilson) captures and imprisons him, and forcefully adopts his daughter Elena (Catherine Zeta Jones) and raises her as his own.
Two decades later Mexico has still not forgotten the legend of Zorro, but when Don Diego escapes from jail, he realizes he is far too old to continue the never-ending fight for independence and justice.
Enter Alejandro Murieta (Antonio Banderas), a bandit who suffers from the death of his brother at the hands of Captain Harrison Love (Matt Letscher).
Don Diego transforms Murieta into the new Zorro, and teaches him that the best way to avenge his brother's death is to live to celebrate it.
Campbell balances the spectacular action with drama and comedy, and the mixture is always entertaining.
Whilst Murieta learns how to sword fight, he also learns how to be a gentlemen, and that revenge can often lead to good things.
In one of the film's touching moments, the primary meaning behind wearing a black mask is revealed, and Murieta learns that not only does the mask hide his identity, it also hides his hatred.
Few actors can maintain a respectable presence while working with Anthony Hopkins, one of the true masters of American cinema.
He gives power, presence and experience to his roles and is a lifeboat for many movies.
Hopkins saved Amistad from being a total disaster, and is still remembered for his difficult (and Oscar winning) part in Silence of the Lambs.
However as the young Zorro, Antonio Banderas almost steals the show, with a sparkling and exciting performance that is almost always on cue (though sometimes he seems all too aware of his heroic guise).
The beautiful Catherine Zeta-Jones is charming in her first film role, and the sexual chemistry between her and Banderas is successfully steamy.
The key to how very gratifying The Mask of Zorro is lies in Campbell's mixture and pace of plot elements.
With a running time of 137 minutes, he paces the story slowly and allows setting and character to be developed at a comfortable speed.
How he achieved that without making one boring moment is quite amazing, but Zorro has more immediate benefits than just a pleasing atmosphere.
This celebrated tale is told with pizzazz and artistry, and never pretends to be anything more than it is - an old fashioned tale of love, hatred, devotion and revenge.
The Mask of Zorro has all the spectacle of an epic, and all the heart of a classic tale that will never be outdated.
Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com for any inquiries or feedback. Read more of my reviews at Alphalink Movies: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au. . 
