   Steve Martin was hilarious on "Saturday Night Live".
Eddie Murphy was hilarious on "Saturday Night Live".
Therefore, we know both of these men can be hilarious.
Yes, I know, I am the master of the obvious.
Anyway, we know these men have potential.
However, it seems their movie careers are always a bit shaky.
For every Dr. Dolittle, Eddie Murphy follows up with a Holy Man.
But, Bowfinger is a great follow-up.
It capitalizes on the strengths of each actor and makes for an all out funny film.
Now, most of you have read my review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me.
In my opinion, it is the best comedy of the summer.
I gave it four stars out of a possible four stars.
My review of Bowfinger is three and a half stars out of a possible four star rating.
Just to reiterate my Powers review, I do not necessarily mean that this is an epic film.
Bowfinger, like The Spy Who Shagged Me, is a comedy.
It does not need Oscar-caliber acting, only a clever script and believable acting.
Now on with my review.
Bowfinger is hilarious.
If you have any idea of the movie industry, you will be laughing throughout the film.
It combines a clever script with knockout humor.
No matter what kind of comedy you prefer, you will either be laughing out loud or just chuckling to yourself.
Either way, Bowfinger is a very funny and enjoyable experience.
Steve Martin wrote the script and stars in Bowfinger.
He plays Bobby Bowfinger, a struggling filmmaker who tries to act the posh life of a Hollywood movie man.
However, he fails miserably.
He thinks he strikes gold when his accountant gives him a script entitled, Chubby Rain.
Right from the get-go, the movie makes fun of the typical Hollywood blockbuster.
It moves on with Bobby Bowfinger trying to give the script to a studio.
He finds a studio executive, played by Robert Downey Jr., who thinks it is a joke and will only make the film if Bobby can get Kit Ramsey, the hottest star in Hollywood, to take the lead role in Chubby Rain.
So, Bowfinger tries to get Ramsey by trying to act "ghetto" and fails miserably.
But, Bowfinger cannot let his cast down, so he tells them Ramsey accepted the role.
What is his plan?
To get his actors to run up to Ramsey and say their lines without Ramsey knowing.
Let's just say comedy ensues.
Steve Martin is great in this film.
Not only does he mock Hollywood, but also he creates clever jokes and funny one-liners that do not necessarily spoof the movie industry.
This makes it a unique film because it does not rely on spoof jokes to carry it through all ninety-six minutes.
Eddie Murphy is back with a vengeance in Bowfinger.
He does double duty as Kit Ramsey and Jiff, Ramsey's look alike and brother.
He plays both roles superbly, with a sharp contrast.
Kit Ramsey is a black superstar, and despite his success, he is a paranoid man who thinks aliens are after him and that "The Man" is holding him down.
Jiff, on the other hand, is the lovable loser who gets laughs with his dopey comedy.
Murphy plays both roles with wit and charm.
His Jiff character falls short at the end, but his role as Kit is terrific.
This film probably would have been a bust if not for Murphy.
We believe that Murphy believes aliens are after him, which makes the film even funnier.
The supporting cast is great, as well.
They do not get in the way that much, and feed off the humor of Martin and Murphy.
Christine Baranski plays a diva, and is funny despite a lack of screen time.
Jamie Kennedy plays Martin's right hand man, and does it with flair.
He does not go over the edge and just sets up Martin's humor.
The only member of the supporting cast who does not do that well is Heather Graham.
She starts off as a wishful actress, leaving Ohio for Hollywood and asking, "Where do I become an actress?
" once she gets off the bus.
But, she then becomes some sleeping around actress who just wants more lines.
The transition is hardly believable, and keeps Bowfinger from becoming an even better comedy.
Overall, Bowfinger is a must-see.
Besides, Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me, Bowfinger is the best comedy of the year.
It is witty, clever and most of all, unique.
It does not rely on spoof jokes, but clever jokes as well.
And it is aided by the sharp and hilarious performances by Steve Martin and Eddie Murphy.
You will not see Murphy and Martin at the Academy Awards, but you will see them entertaining audiences for the last few weeks of the summer.
Four Stars out of Four Stars The Movie Page- http://jump.to/moviepage Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!. . 
