Cast: Kevin Kline (Howard Brackett), Joan Cusack (Emily Montgomery), Matt        Dillon (Cameron Drake), Tom Selleck (Peter Malloy), Debbie Reynolds        (Howard's Mom), Wilford Brimley (Howard's Dad), Bob Newhart (Tom        Halliwell).
Directed by: Frank Oz Written by: Paul Rudnick.         It is no small feat to say this, but this is one of the funniest  movies that I have ever seen.
I have never laughed so much in a theater  before.
But beware, there exists a cynical approach to the movie that if  taken, could force you to miss the point.
Allow me to first dispel the cynical viewpoint that this movie essentially stereotypes gay people.
As you watch this film, you have to  suspend political correctness, as the writing displays through his  exploitation of misconceptions about gay  people that many have.
This is not a movie about being gay, but about  how gay people have been perceived, making the portrayals and reactions of  people in this movie are more real than any watered down effort  would bring.
If you choose to take a less cynical approach to the movie, you  will find that "In and Out" is full of good intentions and rich in laughs.
Welcome to Greenleaf, Indiana, where everyone knows you and your  business, probably better than you do.
Howard Brackett, English teacher  and lifelong resident, is preparing for his wedding to Emily Montgomery  (Joan Cusack) after a three year engagement.
It never dawned on him that  this delayed wedding, combined with his tastes for poetry and drama, his  clean look, and his affinity for everything Streisand would even cause  others to question his sexual preference.
It is not until former student,  Cameron Drake (Matt Dillon), wins an Academy Award for portraying a gay  soldier in "To Serve and Protect," and outs Howard as his gay inspiration in  his acceptance speech, that Howard's reality comes crashing down around him.
Greenleaf comes to a standstill as many were watching the  telecast, and all know Howard.
Almost immediately, Howard's  parents (Wilfred Brimley and Debbie Reynolds) arrive searching for  answers.
In a classic scene Howard denies this, and the small town  conspiracy theories spring up as to why Cameron would sabotage Howard's  life.
Spouting non-sequitors, which any townie will appreciate and  identify with, Howard's parents drag Cameron's name through the mud in  their support of their son.
The problem is, Howard is torn between two identities, one of  which is a lie.
To help him sort out his life comes gay tabloid reporter  Pater Malloy (Tom Selleck).
For a ratings jump, Malloy decides to spend  the week cataloguing Howard's every move.
Hounded, Howard begins to see  the error of his lies to all that he loves and realizes that he will only  be a better person for the truth to come out.
It is both painstaking and  humorous to watch as the loacals do all the predictable actions when  Howard is around.
Students he coaches cover up in the locker room,  fellow teachers spout their suspicions, and the principal threatens his  job.
In an effort to live up to his lie, Howard seeks out ways to seem  more masculine.
He uses self-help tapes and even goes to a priest, who  offers some unique advice about premarital sex.
The biggest snag he faces will be Emily's reaction.
She has been  losing weight to improve her self image so that she could make Howard  love her more, creating a double lie around her life.
Howard  does make right, but at the most inopportune time in front of everyone he  knows.
This sends Emily reeling and creates some of the best comedic  scenes of Joan Cusack's career.
She rants, she reels, and she gives the  most memorable quote in defaming Barbara Streisand.
The Oscar-nominated Cusack ("Working Girl") is flamboyently  funny as the disshevelled bride, while Kline's vulnerable and scared  teacher is many times funnier than his Oscar winning performance in "A Fish  Called Wanda," not an easy task to accomplish.
There does not seem to be a  part that Kevin Kline takes to which he cannot bring some sort of  credibility.
He excels in the great movies ("Wanda," "Dave") and adds  respectability to lesser films like "Consenting Adults" or "Fierce  Creatures.
"  The acting standouts do not stop here, though.
The supporters take the characters to which they are accustomed  and make them soar in "In and Out.
"  As the school principal, Bob Newhart  stutters his way through in Porky Pig fashion whenever the tension  rises.
Wilfred Brimley is the venerable old everyman and Debbie Reynolds  recaptures her "Mother"ly instincts as the overbearing mom.
In smaller  roles, Dan Hedaya ("Clueless") plays an army officer in the film within the  film, drawling his way into the memory, and Ernie Sabella ("Perfect  Strangers") captures the small town attitude toward the media as Howard's  barber.
The only departue from character comes from Magnum P.I.
himself.
Selleck has done wonders in revamping an acting career that had suffered  under the likes of "Mr.
Baseball," and has forsaken nothing to prove his acting  chops.
The scenes with him and Kline are the best and will leave you  talking afterward.
Toward the end of the movie, Greenleaf High is graduating, and  nearly-exiled Howard shows up.
Cameron comes home to save the day and  interrupts the ceremony a la Al Pacino in "Scent of a Woman" inciting a  display which echoes the ending of "Dead Poet's Society" in a more humorous  tone.
"In and Out" is loosely based on Tom Hanks' Oscar acceptance  after winning for "Philadelphia," when he thanked his openly gay drama  teacher.
Writer Paul Rudnick, who wrote another politically incorrect gay  comedy "Jeffrey" and director Frank Oz (Muppet movies) have landed a gold  mine with this film.
It is not only funny, but they might have finally  mainstreamed gay characters by exploiting the very assumptions surrounding  them that independant films have been combatting for years.
By ignoring  the sacred cow, this movie could open doors for future movies.
This  would make "In and Out" not only one of the best comedies I have ever seen, but one of the most meaningful.     . . 
