Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    Nobody in Hollywood could have been more pleased with the scientific    breakthrough announced earlier this year that British researchers had    performed the first successful cloning of a live sheep than those at    Sony Pictures associated with the GATTACA project.
In terms of    timing, such news couldn't have been more perfectly orchestrated,    bringing to the forefront of public awareness the increasing    sophistication in the science of genetic research over the past    decade.
When one combines this with the rampant paranoia and    mistrust of the government pervasive in popular culture -- the number    of conspiracy-oriented books lining shelves in stores and the success    of similarly-themed TV show THE X-FILES is indication enough -- it's    the perfect climate for the release of a film like GATTACA, which    profiles a dystopic world of the future where one's DNA is the most    crucial and valuable commodity.
Yet, like most great science-fiction, the strength of GATTACA is that    the film really isn't exclusively a science-fiction film -- at its    core, it's a very human and often poignant story which deals with the    themes of potential, spirit and identity.
There's no heavy reliance    on showy visual effects or displays of stunning future technology, as    is typical in most sci-fi films; GATTACA is essentially a    character-oriented drama spun off from a dynamite premise.
It's the not-too-distance future, and scientific advancements have    reached an advanced state where genetic tinkering allows the rich to    create offspring literally devoid of any imperfection.
Society has    been divided into two distinct classes, where success is determined    by science: the genetically-engineered 'Valids', and the    naturally-conceived 'In-Valids' who are limited by society due to    their imperfect DNA structures to serve as working drones.
It's a    world where prosperity is predetermined at birth; the Valids have the    world at their feet -- an infinite realm of possibilities to pursue    -- while the In-Valids have nary a reason to hope.
So what's Vincent    Freeman (Ethan Hawke), an In-Valid with nearsightedness, emotional    volatility and a congenital heart condition, to do?
Burdened his    whole life by living in the shadow of his Valid brother Anton (Loren    Dean), and by his seemingly-unfulfillable ambition to become an    aeronautics navigator for the elite Gattaca Aerospace Corporation,    he's left toiling as a maintenance worker, eyes aimed upwards at the    stars.
Of course, Vincent is not content to passively accept his fate, and    GATTACA, then, is essentially an Underdog Film -- a familiar One Man    Against Society story.
On that level it works well, but where the    film truly flourishes is when it focuses upon Vincent's indomitable    determination to surpass expectations and push himself to the    boundaries of physical limitation in order to attain his dream,    against all forms of adversity.
His relentless drive to succeed in a    near-suicidal, virtually hopeless piece of subterfuge is powerfully    affecting.
Aided immeasurably by Michael Nyman's stirring score --    to date, the best score I've heard this year -- it's a genuinely    moving celebration of the human spirit, while avoiding the trappings    of becoming schmaltzy or sentimental.
In fact, New Zealander screenwriter-director Andrew Nicol's feature    debut is such an auspicious piece of work that it's mildly    disheartening that the film delves into a generic thriller subplot,    dealing with a murder mystery on the grounds of the Gattaca Aerospace    Corporation.
While this successfully taps into paranoiac elements --    given that Vincent's true identity can be traced through any form of    DNA residue left, it's entrancing to observe his ritualistic grooming    each morning to attempt to mask his true identity, and fascinating to    watch him attempt to cover his tracks by stealthily vacuuming his    desk and leaving decoy DNA samples (it reminded me in a sense to the    great moment in WAIT UNTIL DARK where Alan Arkin's Harry Roat Jr.    markedly pointed out that he hadn't *touched* anything in Susie's    apartment) -- it also leaves gaping holes in logic which push    credibility beyond the bounds of belief; consider, if you will, wily    Detective Hugo (the aforementioned Mr. Arkin) unable to match a    completely undisguised Vincent against a clearly-identical headshot    image -- perhaps *Hugo* is nearsighted too.
The murder mystery    flounders, adding very little to enhance GATTACA and distracts from    the film's primary theme, but it doesn't sink it.
Another vaguely ineffective subplot in GATTACA involves fellow    Gattaca Aerospace Corporation trainee Irene, a genetically perfect    woman (Uma Thurman - 'nuff said) who provides an interesting    counterpoint to Vincent in terms of their approaches to adversity,    but generally serves merely a decorative role in the film.
Among its arsenal of strengths (crisp, sharp visuals by    cinematographer Slawomir Idziak; wonderful costumes by the legendary    Colleen Atwood), GATTACA benefits from superb casting.
Mr. Hawke is    very solid and sympathetic as the undaunted protagonist and    demonstrates that he can carry the film, while Ms. Thurman makes what    she can out of her smallish role.
And who else would one cast as the    authority figure in the enormous future techno-bureaucracy of the    Gattaca Aerospace Corporation other than Gore Vidal?
The standout performance in the film, however, belongs to Jude Law.
His performance of the crippled Valid unable to fulfill his    predestined greatness, Jerome Morrow, is a remarkable combination of    pathos, wit, and quiet resilience and strength, and his subtle    blurring of the lines of identity between himself and Vincent is    interesting.
The strange, symbiotic relationship between Jerome and    Vincent is fascinating and compelling, and Mr. Law and Mr. Hawke play    well off one another.
While Jan Roelfs' top-notch production design assists in creating a    dystopic and conformist world, the ultimate credit must go to Mr.    Nicol.
His screenplay is intelligent, thoughtful, and well-written,    and his direction is most accomplished.
The impressive GATTACA marks    a science-fiction film which eschews effects and explosions in favour    of a more fundamentally human story, and succeeds wonderfully.
While    the world depicted in the film is cool, distance, and impersonal, at    the heart of the picture is real warmth.
-- Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/ "The separate forms of social behaviour that we associate with film and  television are also starting to break down..." - Jonathan Rosenbaum, 1979. . 
