    "The Game" is an unbelievable experience.
The entire movie feels like a roller coaster ride combined with an acid trip.
From the opening moments to the final credits, you go from moments of slow compassion to sheer terror like the drop of a hat.
For this and other reasons "The Game" makes for an absolutely wonderful movie that this reviewer never, ever got sick of.
"The Game" tells the story of Nicholas Van Orton (Michael Douglas), a multi-millionaire investment banker.
For Nicholas's 48th birthday party his brother Conrad (Sean Penn) gives Nicholas a gift that "even someone with everything would love".
It's a trip to Consumer Recreational Services to play some sort of game.
After enough prodding by Conrad, Nicholas decides to give this game a try.
The rest of the movie I leave to you the viewer, as going through the twists and turns that Nicholas goes through are half the fun.
Director David Fincher creates an experience so surreal half the time the audience doesn't know whether Nicholas's experiences are reality, or all part of the game.
To truly make the plot of "The Game" as engrossing as it is for the audience, the cinematography, becoming almost a trademark of David Fincher's work, is simply stunning.
It's all lead by Harris Savides, who is an expert at making the audience see through Nicholas's shoes.
Sudden camera jerks and pans are made to create a sense of urgency.
Moments of Nicholas's childhood are played with old home projector clips and piano music in the background to create a somewhat quaint yet eerie experience.
As much as plot and cinematography are huge strengths, quite possibly the biggest plus "The Game" has running for it is the acting.
Michael Douglas plays one of his best performances I've ever seen, he brings Nicholas's character to life and still makes him believable the entire way through.
All in all, "The Game" is a movie that grabs you and won't let go.
The direction, plot, cinematography and acting all make for a movie that in my humble opinion, has been, and likely will be, the best movie that I've seen this year.
Nick's Rating: +4 (Highly Recommended). . 
