I can remember my teenage movie-going and the stars that shone the  brightest.
Clint Eastwood could always be counted on for a good two  hours.
Jack Nicholson won Best Actor for 1975 as Randal Patrick  McMurphy in "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest," a film that aroused my  young hate of injustice.
Warren Beatty (along with Julie Christie) was  cool in "Heaven Can Wait.
". The fact that all of these professionals are not only still working, in  late-middle-age, but winning awards and nominations (Eastwood's Oscar  for "Unforgiven," Nicholson's for "As Good As It Gets," Christie's nod  for "Afterglow," Beatty's statuette for "Bugsy") says a lot.
Mostly it tells of the importance of social issues in movies.
Beatty  especially has been taking jabs at human foibles for a long time.
I  wasn't a teen any longer when "Reds" was released;  I was an English  major who appreciated the rendering of journalist Jack Reed (and the  featuring of Eugene O'Neill!
), and who admired, with heady idealism, the  importance of historical drama.
In "Bulworth," Beatty's attempts at satire are broad.
His targets, his  methods, his humor – all are as broad as the mouth of the caricature of  Beatty used to advertise the film.
Jay Billington Bulworth, Democratic senator from California, is a cliché  of a politician.
Estranged wife.
Businessmen buying his interests.
At  film's start we see him locked in his office, depression bearing down  hard on him, surrounded by photographs from his career (one with Beatty  from his "Shampoo" days is superimposed in a shot with Bobby Kennedy).
What Bulworth does to emerge from the jaded funk is even more cliched –  he commissions a hit on himself.
The bigger chunks of the film are more original, though.
Of course the  self-ordered murder motif surfaces throughout, but Beatty's handling of  the falling and rising of Jay Bulworth makes for superior satire.
Beatty supposedly had full creative control – no studio honchos lurking  on the set.
This advantage seems to have made all the difference.
Not  many groups escape Bulworth's desperate, liberated tongue.
Rushing  through Los Angeles on a bid for re-election, he alienates  African-Americans, Jews, the entire insurance industry.
But it's  refreshing, and as one might guess, his candor wins him votes.
Venturing into the world of three young African American women, Bulworth  risks all respectability.
Here Beatty succeeds:  he has Bulworth go  back to his political boyhood tricks, reading people's backgrounds and  delivering on their wishes.
Bulworth's knack for picking up on black  slang and, Zelig-like, using it for his own survival, serves as one of  the film's funnier running jokes.
It was also chancy for Beatty to  explore the underworld of rap, once again assuming the language and even  the dress of a "homie.
"  The result is a brilliant rendition of the  contrasts of Americans who are black and white.
Halle Berry turns in a solid performance as Nina, one of the women the  couldn't-care-less senator invites into his stretch limo.
Berry almost  underplays her character, a nice counterpoint to some of the  conventional histrionics portrayed by other African American actresses.
I wonder if Beatty will garner more controversy for his interracial  relationship in the film, or for his winning a much younger woman.
(Didn't Nicholson raise hackles when he won Helen Hunt in "As Good"?
). As Bulworth's chief of staff, Dennis Murphy (Oliver Platt) provides a  good foil.
Not in the evil sense, but in the politically advisable one.
He is appalled when Bulworth self-destructs;  yet he rallies and  compensates hilariously.
Platt delivers a biting send-up of  behind-the-scenes hyposcrisy when, railing against his boss's  tendencies, he snorts cocaine with another toady.
Can an actor direct the subtleties of his own performance as well as he  can the performances of others?
Mostly, Beatty's instincts take over  and enable him to create a convincing character.
Occasionally, however,  Bulworth seems too silent, his eyes hooded in confusion.
Granted, the  man has neither eaten nor slept in three days, and he throws back a  large dose of jetliner liquor;  but even at his physical worst, Bulworth  should be played as exhausted, not empty-headed.
Lately Americans have been treated to "Wag the Dog" and "Primary  Colors," films as well-made and funny as "Being There," which I saw with  my dad when I was in high school.
Bulworth reminds us how important it  is to hate injustice and inequality, as well as to embrace tolerance.
In short, it reminds us of the important role of satire.. . . 
