A sore subject with many Americans is the absence of a national memorial  dedicated to the men and women who served and perished in World War II.
Steven Spielberg's SAVING PRIVATE RYAN will not stand as this memorial.
But the film is noteworthy because of the ways it bestows a profound  tribute and respect.
I was lucky to be able to watch with my father, a WW II veteran.
We sat  in the third row, the crowded theater taking our options.
Glancing  behind me during the film, and talking with my father afterwards, I  concluded that no other film about war packs the sustained power of  Spielberg's treatment.
Only ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT and GALLIPOLI carry similar moments  that show personal horrors.
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN opens with a prologue  in which a veteran visits an American cemetery in France.
The man walks  ahead of his extended family, his face caving in under his memories.
Soon we see the men in the LCIs landing on Omaha Beach on June 6, 1944.
Some soldiers retch, some kiss the crucifixes of their rosaries;  all  are afraid.
From a monologue delivered in a dark church to the private  torment of a shell-shocked translator, the film creates a relentless  emotional tension.
One of the agents that makes this mood is the camera.
We witness the  first hour from the points of view of hand-held cameras, some shots so  jerky they are uncomfortable to watch.
After Captain John Miller (Tom  Hanks) receives orders to bring to safety Private James Ryan, whose  three brothers have been killed in action, we continue to watch many  skirmishes from on-the-spot vantages.
Matched with editing that is  quick and transparent, the camera work makes the viewer's experience  visceral.
The sets and costumes further the terrifying realism.
Although there  are no long shots of the entire Operation Overlord, the part of the  invasion we can see is dead-on.
Machine gun nests, bunkers, weaponry  and vehicles -- these elements engage us easily into the narrative.
After Capt.
Miller picks his squad and sets off behind enemy lines to  locate James Francis Ryan of Iowa (Matt Damon), we see more locations  that telegraph the story's accuracy.
Bombed houses, splintered planks  everywhere, and rubble-strewn streets resemble photographs of real  battle scenes.
And the costumes are correct.
My father says perhaps a  few too many helmets are covered in netting, but otherwise the designers  are sharp.
The canvas belts, the jackets, the occasional puttees laced  around the calves -- these are the outfits of 1944.
Do technical aspects make the actors' work easier?
They are certainly  related, but the acting here is self-reliant.
It is hard to identify an  unnatural performance or an unnecessary character.
Tom Hanks tints John  Miller with mannerisms and tone that evoke sympathy.
The motif of his  shaking hand reminds us that even the strongest and wisest leaders are  human.
If politics are just this year, Hanks will pull nominations for  major awards.
I would also cite Tom Sizemore as Sergeant Mike Horvath,  a sturdy confidant to Miller.
Perhaps the toughest supporting role is  Damon's.
The long build-up  of the squad's resentment toward Pvt.
Ryan  is dispelled almost immediately when we finally see him.
(I understand  there was some actual resentment because Damon did not experience the  mini boot-camp imposed upon the actors in Miller's squad.
)  . I'll offer one critical comment about the director, and then I'll praise  him.
The ending of the film, while effective, does not flow as well as  the last moments of SCHINDLER'S LIST.
The frame tale to which LIST  returns works better, developing a personal epic weightiness.
Anyhow,  Spielberg has a talent for choosing important themes, whether or not his  film is a serious drama or a lighter "entertainment.
"  RYAN links  mesmerizing episodes of war with moments of characterization you would  expect in a fine short story.
It even throws in some laughs for relief.
We are fortunate that Spielberg has wrought an honest portrayal, one  that affirms the values of the 1940's and deems them worthy today.
As a boy in the 1960's, playing "Army" with cap guns and real surplus  canteens donated to our Scout troop, I saw the Second World War as a  romantic adventure.
It was like following Vic Morrow from "Combat"  around our backyards.
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN reinforced to me that the war following the Great  War was just as hellish as the fighting in Vietnam -- which I heard  about on television every night as I grew up.
The film reminded me why my father and hundreds of thousands of people  of his generation sacrificed their time and their lives.
We, their  daughters and sons, must live in a free world.
We must inherit or cause  the eventuality of not having to fight and die ourselves.
Perhaps the hushed audience in the multiplex realized these ideas as the  credits rolled.
It's one type of memorial I'm sure our parents and  grandparents would want, an anti-war movie viewed by millions.. . . 
