More MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton at:  http://welcome.to/movieviews. The idea of a teenage comedy set in a high school has been used extensively over the past few years.
It seems we're also seeing a pattern in the plot of these movies: a guy or girl is masquerading as something they are not, they fall in love in the process, and then their girlfriend or boyfriend finds out about the scheme they are pulling.
It happened in She's All That, it happened in 10 Things I Hate About You, and now budging in line is Never Been Kissed.
Here, Drew Barrymore plays Josie Gellar, a young reporter for the Chicago Sun Times.
She's given the breakthrough opportunity of her career: an undercover story about the lifestyle of today's teenagers.
This means that Josie must disguise herself as a 17-year old and go behind enemy lines at a local high school to get the scoop.
She must elude the school geek (Leelee Sobieski) and become chums with the `in' girls without hurting anyone's feelings.
Ah, to be young again.... Barrymore has come a long way since her turbulent childhood, and has proven herself to be a great young actress.
Even as the film becomes increasingly hard to swallow, Barrymore has the ability to sweep us off our feet at any given time.
I hardly believed a moment in Never Been Kissed, but the film and it's stars are so unexpectedly charming and sweet you will have to fight off the urge to smile.
There is one aspect of the story that is quite different.
The main character here has two alternatives for love.
There's her kind English teacher (Michael Vartan) or a hunky classmate (Jeremy Jordan) who both have their respective eyes on Josie.
Director Raja Gosnell decides to take the easy route, tying up the loose ends in an unsurprising manner, but the film's genuine charm still manages to catch you off guard during the final scenes.
This also leaves room for a few key supporting players to shine.
David Arquette plays Josie's once popular brother, in a funny performance that rings nicely true.
John C. Reilly is her editor, and Garry Marshall plays the big boss of the paper.
The screenplay is about as lumpy as a disastrous Thanksgiving gravy, but that's the least of your worries.
When you actually stop to think about the movie's plot, you may realize how completely ludicrous it sounds.
Never Been Kissed even ends with the ultimate teen movie cliché: the Prom.
How in the world the film develops into a sheer delight I may never know, but the probable reason is the young executive-producer and star.
These are high times for Drew Barrymore, and here she displays the charisma and magnetism that all great Hollywood actresses possess.
I hope the world is ready for Drew, because she's making her move in high style.
Jamey Hughton writes a Published Column in   The StarPhoenix  (Saskatoon, Sk.
Canada)      and was a 1999 Writing Finalist in the        Canadian YTV Achievement Awards.. . 
