Antz (1998) - voices of Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Sylvester Stallone, Gene Hackman, Christopher Walken.    "Antz" is the Secret roll-on of movies - strong enough for an adult,    but pH balanced for kids.
It's full of computer-generated eye candy,    obviously targeted toward the "buy me a bunch of toys" set, but the    humor (and occasional mild profanity) are meant for their parents.
Neurotic New Yorker Woody Allen provides the voice of Z, a neurotic    worker ant.
Unhappy with his lot in life, his world is shattered when    the lovely Princess Bala (Sharon Stone) goes slumming in a bar where    worker ants go after a hard day of digging.
Predictably, Z falls madly    in love, but the best scheme he can think of to see her again is to    switch places with a soldier ant for a day.
Then General Mandible (Gene Hackman) declares war, in an elaborate    plot to overthrow the caste system and assassinate the queen ant (Anne    Bancroft).
Thrown into the goriest massacre this side of "Saving    Private Ryan," Z eventually sets on a quest for the mythical    Insectopia, all to win Bala's heart.
"Antz" is just "your basic boy meets girl, boy likes girl, boy changes    underlying social structure" movie, according to Z.
And that's just    the kind of humor many children won't understand.
Fortunately,    screenwriters Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz and Paul Weitz realize who    their audience is.
Liberated from his body, Allen's one-of-a-kind    anxiety seems fresher than ever.
Working within the limitations of computer-generated insects, the    characters are wonderfully expressive.
They all look pretty much the    same, except the good-natured soldier ant voiced by Sylvester Stallone    - for better or worse, he looks like Stallone.
And the supporting cast    is a veritable Hollywood "Who's Who" - Christopher Walken, Dan Akroyd,    Jane Curtin and Jennifer Lopez all lend their voices to "Antz," with    each lending his or her distinctive character to the characters.
The visual effects are little short of stunning.
Imagine thousands of    ants combining to form a giant wrecking ball, or storming across a    field to combat the termite menace.
The effects carry well for the big    to the small - you can almost see the actor's facial expressions on    the computer-generated bugs.
"Antz" might not be the most appropriate movie for the children that    its ads are trying to suck in.
But if you go with your family, you can    have some interesting discussions on "Community vs. Individuality" and    a lot of good laughs.. . 
