Rated: R for graphic horror violence and gore, and some sexuality.
(And TONS of heads). Starring: Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Casper Van Dien, Michael Gambon, Christopher Walken, Christopher Lee, Martin Landau.
Only Tim Burton could to it: Make a big-budgeted horror flick based on the classic tale by Washington Irving....and make it great.
'Sleepy Hollow' works on so many levels that in the middle of the movie, I had a huge smile on my face and thought 'Man this is awesome!'.
Of course most of you know the Legend of Sleepy Hollow and the book by Washington Irving which has always been one of my favorites.
TIm Burton directs with such skill that he has created one of the most beautiful films put on print.
The movie opens with a creepy and scary little montage of the Headless Horseman's first victim.
From there on we meet Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) New York's constable who is sent in my the judge of the town to Sleepy Hollow where many people have been losing something there.
Here in Sleepy Hollow he stays with the Van Tassel's.
He hears the story of the headless horseman and does not really know what to believe, he meets the Van Tassel's daughter Katrina (Christina Ricci), who's mother and father are Lady Van Tassel (Miranda Richardson) and Baltus Van Tassel (Michael Gambon).
He really doesn't believe in the fairy tales of the headless horseman until he himself has an encounter with him which scares him out of his wits.
He however sets out to find the headless horseman, and for once and for all stop him from killing again....before he becomes the next victim.
I must say the best things about this movie are: Johnny Depp's wonderfully comical performance which he does so good it would almost surpass his Edward Scissorhand's performance.
Christina Ricci seems to also give one of her best performances to date with strong back-up from Miranda Richardson (always good) and Michael Gambon.
I think the strongest thing of the movie however is the Headless Horseman himself.
Part CGI part man in suit, he is nothing more than astonishing.
He looks incredibly like he has no head, and when you see him a chill goes down your spine.
When he rides his horse its very creepy and when he chops off someone's head it really does make you scared.
For the person who plays the Headless Horseman he was well-cast and very scary when they tell how he died.
Astonishingly enough this isn't the kids story it was before.
This is a very mature film that has so much smartness and cleverness in it, that you have to wonder why it could not have been made before.
It has a dark, creepy atmosphere and a beautiful setting with incredible costumes.
The whole film has a sort of gothic feel to it, and may be too dark for some people.
It is also incredibly gory and bloody with over twenty beheadings, all resulting in bloody messes.
The beheadings are also very graphic and only one or two are off screen.
The violence and gore may not appeal to everyone so I am just trying to warn you so you know about it.
For those fans and even non-fans of the horror genre I don't think you will be disappointed.
The directing was also incredible and Tim Burton did just like he did with Batman and gives it a special touch to be something you didn't think it would be.
He did a great job with shadowing and in the end it's very surprising and satisfying.
One flaw was some slow parts in the movie and one scene that went on forever, but besides that 'Sleepy Hollow' doesn't have much wrong with it.
The performances are all strong  (except Casper Van Dien YUCK!
)as is the clever writing with a surprising amount of comedy.
Even though the story has been done many times before, this one seems to the be the best of them all.
The 65m dollar budget shows quite clearly and in the end pays off.
It is a beautiful film, with some amazing camerawork, along with the neat little opening titles.
The film is very intense, with some downright scary moments that had me holding on to my arm chair.
'Sleepy Hollow' does have a few changes in it than the movie did and adds some surprising twists especially in the end, and the person who plays The Headless Horseman was quite scary and well-cast.
'Sleepy Hollow' will go down as a new classic in the horror genre, and shall not be remade anymore.
I would not be surprised if this movie is a hit with both the young and old crowd.
The movie is all entertaining, scary, funny and gory.
It has a touch of this and a touch of that and should have something to impress or please someone.
TIm Burton gives us a great film worthy of the rating above.
With its creepy atmosphere, its graphic violence and witty comedy 'Sleepy Hollow' is nothing but a great movie.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring November 18, 1999.
Brandon Herring Http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/movie/3160/moviereviewheaven.html. . 
