  With a few exceptions, Martin Scorsese has generally been a favorite director of mine.
With such classics like Raging Bull, Goodfellas and my personal favorite Taxi Driver, I usually am interested in what his latest project will be.
Bringing Out The Dead may not be up to par to Taxi Driver, but it's by far his best film since Goodfellas, which might be a relief for hard-core Scorsese fans.
If you know Scorsese, there's not much of a plot to his films, because he likes to explore the characters to his films, like in Taxi Driver, which had a huge impact on critics.
In Bringing Out The Dead, his characters aren't explored that deeply.
Cage's character in this film was deeply disturbed.
He wanders the streets of New York in an ambulance with his fellow medics, as they rescue dying patients.
The first stop is with an old man, who we see throughout the film.
When the old man arrives at the hospital, Cage gets acquainted with the man's daughter (Patricia Arquette).
For some reason Cage runs into her often, as he runs back and forth in his ambulance.
When he's out on the streets he is haunted by patients he couldn't save.
It's like ER in hell for Cage, as he experiences these horrifying moments on a regular basis.
You would think that seeing dead patients would spark more interest for the viewers, but quite frankly that never occurs.
The whole film I was waiting for something more, but unfortunately Schrader never delivered.
It's not like Scorsese to keep the pace steady the full time.
I was quite disappointed by the film's effort.
It should have changed direction, or at least had a unique climax.
On the brighter side the acting was the only enlightening feature that kept the film flowing.
Even though the film was displeasing, Nic Cage still managed to perform his part rather well.
If anyone looks like he's been through hell, it's him.
Those depressed eyes, and dreary look really added to the atmosphere that Scorsese was shooting for.
The other supporting actors added some enjoyable tones as well.
John Goodman is the serious partner, Ving Rhames the religious one, and Tom Sizemore is as crazy, if not crazier than Cage.
Despite Sizemore's hostility towards others, I couldn't help but be intrigued by what could possibly posses such cruelty towards injured or sick patients.
Pretty disturbing if you ask me.
Martin Scorsese turns in a typical directing approach.
Some noteworthy remarks I had were the camera angels, as they speed past the ambulance so that we get the same rush that the characters feel.
There's also some twisted side shots of the ambulance going down a dark alley.
He does this a few times, and it's quite appealing for those interested in technical uses.
Like Goodfellas, Scorsese continues to put out a rocking soundtrack with tunes by the R.E.M, The Clash and Van Morrison.
You have to applaud at his choice of music, because oddly enough, these songs fit the film perfectly.
He definitely chooses wisely.
Although "Bringing Out The Dead" is a let down, fans will enjoy it's attempt.
Some may hate it's never-ending story, but others may like what it has to offer.
Not for people with low attention spans.. . 
