John Carroll Editor/Critic for The Movie Page (http://moviepage.hypermart.net/) Review of ANALYZE THIS. Analyze This, starring Robert DeNiro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Chazz Palminteri, Bart Tangredi, Michael Straka, Joseph Rigano, Joe Viterelli, Richard C. Castellano, Molly Shannon and Max Casella.
Directed by Harold Ramis.
1999.
After the buddy comedy Rush Hour, with Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker, Analyze This was another chance to capitalize on this market.
Directed by Harold Ramis, Analyze This is able to get similar laughs to Rush Hour, but just like Rush Hour, Analyze This fails when it strays away from its main duo.
Robert DeNiro and Billy Crystal play the double trouble team of Analyze This, and I must admit, DeNiro in this type of comedy is very scary.
I was skeptical, but DeNiro is able to salvage a slightly above average performance, mainly because of Crystal's amazing comic wit.
The rest of the cast, aside from Lisa Kudrow and Molly Shannon, are mainly unknown Italian actors, playing Paul Vitti's (Robert DeNiro) associates.
Analyze This is a very funny comedy at times.
And at other moments, it is downright boring.
It starts off very dull by examining the life of Paul Vitti.
However, a hilarious sequence between psychiatrist Ben Sobol (Billy Crystal) and one of his patients, Caroline (Molly Shannon), gets Analyze This back on the right track.
The interaction between DeNiro and Crystal gets downright hilarious, with DeNiro being able to play upon his tough-guy image and still get laughs.
Even better, he gets sensitive, and when that happens, Analyze This becomes a downright laugh-riot.
Lisa Kudrow never seems to find the right film.
No matter where she goes, she still reminds everyone of Phoebe, from the popular TV series "Friends.
"  Kudrow tries to surmise a new side of her comic mind by playing Ben Sobol's wife-to-be, Laura MacNamara.
However, her character comes off stale.
She plays the fiancee of Sobol, and is very upset and Paul Vitti becomes one of his patients.
The only times when DeNiro and Crystal do not fully function is when Kudrow gets in the way.
Director Harold Ramis (Groundhog Day, Caddyshack, Animal House) adds this comedy to his already populated list, and while it is definitely not the cream of the crop, he has had far worst.
Ken Lonergan and Peter Tolan are credited with the script, and while their interaction of Crystal and DeNiro is flawless, they fail with Kudrow's character and the mob implication.
Kudrow never gets any laughs, despite being paired with Crystal and DeNiro, a horrible feat to say the least.
Also, whenever Vitti's fellow mobsters get involved, laughs are usually dry.
One exception is Joe Viterelli, who plays Jelly, Paul Vitti's right-hand man.
Jelly is sorely lacking in on-screen time, but when he does show up, he always gets a laugh.
1999 was a great year for comedies.
While Analyze This is not in the range of Steve Martin's comic masterpiece, Bowfinger, Billy Crystal and Robert DeNiro play off each other perfectly to deliver another solid comedy for everyone to enjoy.
Final Verdict: B The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/ Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!. . 
