     I went with a group of friends to see the new Batman movie, and when we left, I was scared.
I was scared to mention to my friends that the movie I just witnessed was horrible.
Finally in the car, I said, "Would anyone be truly offended if I say that was an awful movie?
" They felt relieved.
All four of us hated it.
Ok, you probably want to know why.
I liked Batman Returns.
Everyone else in the world didn't, but it remains my favorite of the three.
BATMAN FOREVER was just ridiculously stupid.
From frame one, I realized that movie was truly awful.
Lets get the good point out first, this is an extremely well made film.
The stunts, the special effects, and just the overall look of the film were all top-notch.
That's it for the good.
First, in the first two films, Batman was not an idiot.
How many times in this movie did Batman get caught in some situation and only luck saved him?
So, if the bank guard in the vault at the beginning didn't wear a hearing aid, Batman would be dead?
Come on.
Second, Batman doesn't need to be cracking jokes.
When Michael Keaton played the character, the humor came out of Bruce Wayne.
Batman was the dark one.
It reversed in this one.
Third, THE BATMOBILE DOES NOT NEED TO BE DRIVING UP WALLS!
I wanted to leave at this point.
Fourth, there was no satisfactory explanation for Two-Face's origin.
Some guy at a trial somehow manages to get A VAT OF ACID to the stand and throws it in Harvey Dent's face (by the way, Billy Dee Williams must be mad as hell) while Batman looks on.
Yes, Batman, not Bruce Wayne attended this trial, comfortably seated in the front row.
Fifth, did anyone else find it stupid when Robin had a fight WITH HIS LAUNDRY???
Was this supposed to be a cool moment?
Once again, I wanted to walk out.
Sixth, did the Riddler's riddles have anything to do with anything?
So eventually they decoded to spell The Riddler's name.
Oooooo.
Big help for Batman and company.
Seventh, the cliches.
When Grayson got into that street fight, I said to myself, "Watch, these 200 punks are going to attack him one at a time.
" They did.
And why would Robin want to save Two-Face?
"Yeah, I'm going to beat you to a bloody pulp and throw you off this cliff, but when you start to fall, I'll save you.
"  Come on.
There are MANY other things that I had a problem with in this film, but they will probably be considered as nit-picking, so I'll end my review by saying that I hope this Batman doesn't last forever.. . 
