http://members.aol.com/DeWyNGaLe/MoviePED.html. Loosely based on the Shirley Jackson novel The Haunting of Hill House, and the 1963 film The Haunting, The Haunting is the first memorable haunted house flick since 1979's The Amityville Horror.
The film's trailers appeared to be sporting a psychological, eerie horror flick, but while The Haunting is eerie, special effects are overdone, therefore making it impossible for your imagination to scare you.
Unlike the 1963 adaption of the novel, The Haunting explains what is happening at almost all times, therefore creating constant tension, but few scares.
The first adaption never actually explained what was happening when strange noises or images would pop up, allowing your imagination to take off and allow fear to be felt.
Nell Vance (Lili Taylor), Theo (Catherine Zeta-Jones), and Luke Sannerson (Owen Wilson) have all been hand picked by Dr. David Marrow (Liam Neeson) to be subjects of an insomnia study which will be held at the eerie, gothic, New England mansion of Hill House, which "sits all alone," after "something bad happened.
"  After one night at Hill House, Nell believes it is haunted with spirits of children, and is targeting her to live in the creepy home.
As the film prepares you for the exciting second half, we view Hill House, inside and out, making Hill House the real star of the show.
The $10 million sets are unbelievable, and if it weren't for all the special effects that come in the film's climax, The Haunting's environment could have served a much greater purpose.
The screenplay, written by David Self, and the direction of Jan De Bont (Twister) take their marvelous sets for granted, as the stunning visual effects are overused, and the house is used as a backdrop for these events to occur.
Sure we see plenty of Hill House during the guest's arrival, but the house is never used in a scary way, unlike the 1963 adaption.
The screenplay is particularly weak, as we hardly get to know the characters, and there are so many scenes with horrifying potential that go down the drain due to special effects, which should have been watered down about 50%.
I felt like I was watching 1997's Austin Powers at times, as David Self's screenplay has what Richard Pryor would call, "The Honky Syndrome.
" There is an abundance of plot gaps, including - After Liam Neeson unlocks the gate to Hill House to let out his injured assistant, he seems to have forgotten later on when he needs the key, that he actually has it.
Even I could make a screenplay that makes more sense then that of David Self's, as could anyone else with the education of a 5th grader.
Nell is the only developed character, as in the film's opening moments, we see Nell thrown out of her apartment carelessly by her family, leaving her no place to go, except Hill House.
Nell decides to go to Hill House for the experiment in which she will be paid $900 a week, hoping the experience will be a standout from her otherwise ordinary, normal life.
Lili Taylor pulls off the role for the most part, but come the second half of the film when Nell totally loses it, not Lili Taylor, nor anyone could pull off some of the actions and lines that Nell presents.
Catherine Zeta-Jones, who makes her third appearance as the popular actress she is today, does what she can with the weak character she has, as in the first half of the film Theo's presence is noticeable, as she delivers line after line of witty dialogue, but in the second half, the film concentrates only on Nell, as Theo, along with Liam Neeson's Dr.
Marrow and Owen Wilson's Luke become just a background image.
Liam Neeson, who has come to be one of today's most distinguished actors, after portraying Jedi Qui Gon-Jinn in Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom Menace, and receiving an Oscar nomination for Schindler's List.
In The Haunting, Neeson is given nothing to do at all, as Dr.
Marrow doesn't take action at anytime, and only listens to the characters as they share their experiences.
Neeson is used as the doctor to setup the plot, but is used no further, as the special effects are unleashed.
Although The Haunting suffers major flaws, mainly due to its screenplay, the film is still extremely enjoyable, and it does call for me to bring up a few good points.
The Haunting is suspenseful, as the creaks and cracks in the night are eerie, and the visual effects are amazing, as we see ghosts swim through bed sheets, and a room literally comes alive.
The Haunting gets the title of "summer- blockbuster-popcorn flick," but the film is fun enough and keeps your attention for the full 2 hours it runs, and therefore I recommend this creepy, fun film.
The Bottom Line- Although The Haunting may be this year's Armageddon, it is still worth your time and money.. . 
