One of the multitude of angels that looks over Los Angeles (Cage)  falls in love with a surgeon (Ryan) who is facing personal and career  turning points.
"City of Angels" is not a bad film, but it is a poor remake of Wim  Wenders' "Wings of Desire".
For those who came in late, the central  conceit is that angels walk amongst unseen amongst us.
They do not  interfere, just witness, eavesdropping on thoughts, marvelling at the  travails of humans, silently offering solace.
Given the growing  popularity of angels as (strangely secular) icons of optimism and  spirituality, it was perhaps inevitable that the aloof, (largely)  monochrome and very European "Wings" be remade in the Hollywood mode.
This apparently involved the use of a Waring blender to edit the  script into an appropriately dumb form.
Where "Wings" was ponderous,  "City" is frothy.
Where "Wings" is remote and oblique, "City" is  superficial.
Where "Wings" is romantic, "City" is a romance.
In  short, where "City" diverges from "Wings", it mostly does so for the  worst.
But the result is not all bad.
It is a trifle ludicrous though.
Instead of Bruno Ganz struck with  wonder at the dissolute acrobat Solveig Dommartin, we have Nicholas  Cage lust-struck with idealistic heart-surgeon Meg Ryan.
(Hey, it's a  romance.
It needs - nay, requires - Meg Ryan.
)  Subtlety has quietly  been thrown out the window.
When the angelic Cage reveals himself to  Ryan, she gasps "You're beautiful!".
This is not - repeat, not - a  great moment in cinema.
Cage's male pattern baldness and (ahem)  excess of chest hair are distracting, to say the least.
A celestial  chest wax and toupee would go a long way.
Slap in some trite  aphorisms about the wonder of the world and love (which could only be  uttered in a wealthy city like Los Angeles, and not one like Berlin  wedged between two warring military powers), add an intrusive  soundtrack, and there is every reason to expect "City of Angels" to be  irritating.
But, for the sentimental viewer (which I confess to be), there is  worth even in something as potentially trite as "City of Angels".
Much like "Faraway, So Close", the somewhat mundane sequel to "Wings  of Desire", there are moments when it beautifully flares to life.
Angels crowd the beach, in rapture at the sunset and dawn.
A dead  girl nostalgically remembers pyjamas.
A robber is agitated by self-doubt  and guilt during a holdup.
A fallen angel rejoices in the mundane  sensations of life.
Despite its lumbering gait, these ideas shine  through and save a simple movie from becoming simple minded, and  admitting both the wonder of complexity of life.
This mission is  aided by the competence of some its components.
There is some  genuinely beautiful photography in this film.
Cage and Ryan, who have  both at times turned in cliched performances, here give two  restrained and humane portrayals.
"City of Angels" may not be high  art, but it is worthwhile.
"Is this God punishing me?
"  whimpers a character.
"You know better than that," his colleague answers.
And that's not a bad thought to  take away from a movie.
[**/ok] and "Everything I Needed To Know, I Learnt In Kindergarten" on the Sid and Nancy scale.
------ Paul-Michael Agapow (agapow@computer.org), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse "There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire.
". . 
