Warner Bros. / 2:16 / 1997 / R (language, violence, sexuality) Cast: Guy Pearce; Russell Crowe; Kevin Spacey; James Cromwell; Danny  DeVito; Kim Basinger; David Strathairn; Ron Rifkin  Director: Curtis Hanson  Screenplay: Curtis Hanson; Brian Helgeland . In the down-and-dirty "L.A.
Confidential," almost nobody is without  blemish.
The good guys are bad, the bad guys are worse and practically  everyone's actions hide a shady hidden agenda.
But don't think of the  film's surplus of complex facets as confusing -- rather, they make "L.A.
Confidential" a smart, intriguing synergy of film noir and crime drama,  where most of the recent genre pictures have solely revelled in  pretentiousness.
Take, for example, last year's "Mullholland Falls," which  only lived up to the second half of its title.
"Confidential" chronicles the lives of three LAPD detectives in the early  1950s: haunted strongman Bud White (Russell Crowe), prissy but ambitious  Ed Exley (Guy Pearce) and smooth shark Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey).
White and Exley's lack of common ground -- one's a hothead, the other  quite level-headed -- results in each's hatred of the other, as the former  relies on the brash techniques that the departmental-climbing latter  totally abhors.
Meanwhile, Vincennes serves as a technical consultant on a  hit true-crime show and spends his evenings schmoozing with celebrities,  reporters and assorted sleazy types, people like Sid Hudgens (Danny  DeVito), the editor of the trashy tabloid "Hush-Hush" who never met a  photo op he didn't like.
A mass murder -- apparently the result of an armed robbery -- at a local  diner called the Nite Owl throws these three men into an eventual,  unlikely union.
Upon the discovery that a recently-dismissed cop and a  rumored prostitute are two of the victims, the Nite Owl killings suddenly  appear to be more than a random, run-of-the-mill crime.
Leads give way to  the investigation of inter-office corruption and dealings with a pimping  service where the girls are surgically enhanced to look like movie stars.
One of these hookers -- a comely dead ringer for Veronica Lake named Lynn  Bracken (Kim Basinger) -- strikes up a hot-and-heavy flirtation with White  and, much later on, Exley.
Conspiracy is everywhere in "L.A.
Confidential" -- people scheme against  and double cross each other on a regular basis -- but the film is smart  enough to level out its playing field and never provide so much  information that it never becomes too hard to take in; it's always  mesmerizing and absorbing, frequently providing a sometimes necessary,  sometimes not story summary.
Even the character-defining subplots don't  feel like time-filler.
Those regulated to smaller roles come across with a  fully-developed personality, and no one is lost in the shuffle of  occurrences.
Keen period detail and dazzling cinematography heighten the experience, as  does DeVito's on-again, off-again narration.
I usually think that  voice-overs are unnecessary, but as he riffs about how Los Angeles is like  "the Garden of Eden, but there's trouble in paradise," the feel, for once,  is perfect.
There are flaws -- several frayed plot strands exist by the  time the credits roll -- but they're all insignificant and never hamper  the enjoyment of "L.A.
Confidential.
" The colorful cast occupies the  picturesque setting with much gusto, character is just as important as  plot and sharp twists and turns await every development.
"L.A.
Confidential" is based on the same-titled book by James Ellroy, a  novel of which I have heard both things good (it's an entertaining read)  and not-so-good (it makes absolutely no sense whatsoever).
If the last  statement is true, then that's just another reason why Brian Helgeland and  Curtis Hanson -- who also directed -- deserve an Oscar nod for Best  Adapted Screenplay.
The whole package glistens with the utmost  showmanship, style and verve, making "L.A.
Confidential" one of the best  bits of pulp fiction since "Chinatown.
" . Š 1997 Jamie Peck  E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/. . 
