Release Date: July 10, 1998 Starring: Mel Gibson, Danny Glover, Joe Pesci, Rene Russo, Chris Rock, Jet Li, Steve Kahan, Kim Chan Directed by: Richard Donner Distributed by: Warner Brothers MPAA Rating: R (violence, language)  URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/lethal.htm. For the second time this summer - in just as many weeks - Hollywood has proven to audiences everywhere that action-adventure is the best genre for exploiting formula to get box office dollars.
Although in most respects, the world 'formula' is used by critics to sink new releases - hence garnering its bad connotation - it is applied with better spirits to the latest installment of the LETHAL WEAPON series.
Helmed by Richard Donner, who has worked with Mel Gibson in two of his last three pictures and has directed the other three Lethal pics, number four combines an exciting mix of explosive action and comedic dialogue for a sure-fire success of a motion picture.
Back for LETHAL 4 are Gibson, Danny Glover, Rene Russo, and Joe Pesci; they're joined this time by comedian Chris Rock in one of his biggest and best performances yet.
Gibson and Glover are the real stars, though, reprising their roles as Riggs and Murtaugh to chase down some Chinese counterfeiters.
After discovering some Chinese illegal aliens aboard a boat in the Los Angeles harbor, they track them to a sweatshop where the immigrants work to create bogus cash.
The story in the Channing Gibson script, however, almost plays second fiddle to the intense rush of pyrotechnics that is heavily dispersed throughout the movie.
Equally present is the vulgar language, although it doesn't make the movie any less enjoyable and is rarely outstanding.
It could be said that Director Donner stretches the limits of reality when providing the action content in LETHAL WEAPON 4, for there's no limit to the amount or convenience of the items that the story will have blown up.
For instance: in the opening scene, Riggs and Murtaugh take on a crazy in a bulletproof suit, armed with an assault rifle and a napalm gun.
Of course, there's a napalm tank on his back, and his chosen ground for the standoff is a gas station with an oil truck parked outside.
Guess what happens to the bad guy, the oil truck, and the gas station?
Or in another scene: Riggs and his girlfriend Lorna (Russo) are trapped at a train crossing by some thugs in a Suburban.
Just in time, Riggs pulls out of the way of the oncoming train so that it hits the Suburban; and moments later, another train comes bearing down to hit the other side of the Suburban.
There are these examples and many more, but the bottom line is that Donner gets the stuff to blow up really well.
Following on the heels of the noise-laden, fire-filled ARMAGEDDON, action fans will surely be pleased by LETHAL 4.
It sticks to its guns and nimbly mixes humor (thanks, in no small part, to the thinly disguised standup routine of Chris Rock) with action.
It's been quite some time since a movie has been able to truly recreate the exciting eye candy style of action perfected by DIE HARD ten years ago, and LETHAL WEAPON 4 does just that.
Of the many films that have been or will be released between Memorial Day and the end of July, this one will surely be among the most memorable.
FINAL AWARD FOR "LETHAL WEAPON 4": 3.0 stars - a good movie.. 
