Trinity, an outlaw, attempts to evade capture by a group of mysterious darksuited agents, a chase that involves progressively more implausible stunts.
Meanwhile Neo, a hacker who is searching the network for an enigmatic figure called Morpheus, is warned of his impending arrest.
Things get more complicated from this point on .... "It's like totally virtual reality dude!
". It seems unlikely that an overdue entry to the big idea SF genre would involve Keanu Reeves, who is still wanted in 20 countries for crimes committed during "Bram Stoker's Dracula" and the wretched "Johnny Mnemonic".
But even given the presence of the gnarly one, "The Matrix" has a promising pedigree, including the Wachowski brothers (former comic book artists who contributed the deft script to "Assassins" and directed the excellent film-noir "Bound") and a top notch Hong Kong stunt & action choreography crew.
It's a winner alright but what sort of one?
As is always the case with movies that contain twists, this review must talk around the surprises and be somewhat cryptic and brief.
Many others have sung the praises of "The Matrix" and I am not inclined to disagree in any major way.
There's some kinetically absurd action that Jet Li or John Woo would be proud of, some handy plot twists and turns, lovely SFX, and good acting.
(With the exception of Keanu "cigarstore indian" Reeves, who at least doesn't hurt the film.
Actually his essential blandness is strangely appropriate.
)  There's a literate substructure, a nice joke or two, snappy clothes and hardware - there's a lot to love.
And the film carves its own path in many ways.
Some plot developments are never explicitly spelt out and the scenario is an uncommonly nihilistic one for a Hollywood film.
And to partly repeat a previous point, Hong Kong acrobatics are long overdue in mainstream cinema.
"The Matrix" is _the_ popcorn, brain-filler movie for the season.
Is there anything wrong with "The Matrix"?
Although you wouldn't think it from general reactions, there is.
It's terrific fun, but falls short of the film it nearly is.
The intellectual content isn't so much explored as just dumped in front of you.
It doesn't have the mazelike complexities of "Bladerunner" or even for that matter "Total Recall".
The implications of the scenario are never explored, which is possibly just as well, for like many comic books worlds it doesn't hold up to much examination.
The inevitable talk of a sequel points how high on detail and low on implication the world is.
Conversely, one might get the impression from promotional material that "The Matrix" was a nonstop actionfest.
Actually the first half is packed to the gunwales with talking heads and exposition.
It's to the credit of the Wachowski brothers that "The Matrix" survives and thrives on this schizophrenic nature, managing to be both a dumb action flick and a thinker.
Again, Keanu is oddly appropriate, having been in both "Speed" and "Little Buddha".
His character is actually problematic, a saviour who is never explained, does nothing to earn his superiority, and conveniently gets his act together just in time to end the film.
In this way, "The Matrix" echoes "Dark City", a film to which it bears an uncanny resemblance.
These problems aside, "The Matrix" is terrific and a hopeful sign that some classic SF may be on the way over the next few years.
It isn't a great film, it isn't a mindblower, but it is great fun.
Don't miss it.
[***/good] and really partying like it was 1999 on the Sid and Nancy  scale.
"The Matrix" Released 1999.
Directed by Andy & Larry Wachowski.
Starring Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Hugo Weaving. -- Paul-Michael Agapow (p.agapow@ic.ac.uk), Biology, Imperial College "We were too young, we lived too fast and had too much technology ...". . 
