The advertising line on Spice Worlds poster reads: They cant just sing.
Which is news to me  because I never knew they could sing anyway.
Having now seen their film, my opinion has differed considerably: the obvious talent they possess in vocals and dance (not to mention their looks) is what has earned them a position at the top of the music industry.
Fortunately, acting was never part of the groups forte - until now. Before the film started I was shocked - shocked I tell you, when I realized that I had been suckered into a devious scheme to cram as much advertising as possible into a two hour experience.
First came the Polaroid Spice Cam, then the Impulse Spice Deodorant, and when the film began it didnt even stop there.
For what else is Spice World than a movie length endorsement of this mega popular group?
The soundtrack is from the groups latest album (of the same name), and after seeing the movie who wouldnt want to spice up their life?
However, spicing up your life means slicing up your wallet.
Its just a good thing that Spice World is more than worth its admission price.
The group of five consists of Emma (Baby Spice), Geri (Ginger Spice), Melanie B (Scary Spice), Victoria (Posh Spice) and Melanie C (Sporty Spice).
Their clichi characters come through sharp and clear, and although they are obviously exaggerated to suit the needs of fans and mammoth commercialism, this is all the more fun.
The film follows the pressure, tension and adventure leading up to the Spice Girls first live concert ever.
The girls are faced with their own set of dilemmas, including making time for their pregnant friend (of which they are the Godmothers of) and avoiding a nasty scheme to split them up, concocted by a lunatic newspaper owner.
But the documentary style of this film is almost deceiving - this is by no means a serious or even accurate account of the girls experiences.
The biggest surprise in stall for viewers is the elements of tame slapstick humor that Spice World welcomes with open arms, and occasionally is not unlike what we have seen in films such as Austin Powers or even Robin Hood: Men in Tights.
But whereas those films based their entire plot around that kind of humor, Spice World contains it as an added bonus  so the comedy aspect of this film wont bore or patronize the audience.
Celebrities Richard E. Grant, Meatloaf and Roger Moore help the plot move swiftly along its entertaining ride of comedy and music.
As for the girls themselves; their performances are naturally not of the highest standard, but thankfully their acting time is limited and impressive dance/music scenes occur numerously.
There is no doubt in my mind that the Spice Girls were perfect characters for a movie ever since the start of their career - Spice World knows this and often parodies that idea and the sketchy structuring of the film.
During the movie girls are able to appreciate the music and exaggerated personalities of their idols whilst the guys will have more than a good time, as their eyes will no doubt wander across the screen depending on where the Spice Girls are sitting, crouching or dancing.
Its somewhat surprising that Spice World turned out to be such a clever contraption of comedy and song, and whilst the obvious strength of the movie is its fabulous music scenes, everything shown is sexy, catchy and great fun for teens of both sexes.. . 
