Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    The venerable LETHAL WEAPON franchise continues its frightful    tailspin in this tired fourth installment, a formulaic entry whose    sole apparent purpose is to reunite its familiar cast of characters    and recycle their old shtick -- we've got Riggs (Mel Gibson) and    Murtaugh (Danny Glover) squabbling like an old married couple (which,    after eleven years of onscreen partnership, they more or less are),    Leo Getz (Joe Pesci) throwing another hissy fit, Lorna (Rene Russo)    kicking butt (while pregnant, yet), Murtaugh's family endangered    *yet* again, action and pyrotechnics galore .. hey, it even has Riggs    doing his signature weirdo arm-socket popping thing!
Terrific, but haven't we seen this all before?
In the studio's mad    rush to get the picture in the can -- LETHAL WEAPON 4 began filming    in January and hit theatres by July, a breakneck pace for a    heavy-duty star-driven studio flick -- it's clear that the idea was    to churn out cookie-cutter material by simply dusting off the    increasingly-sanitized cops the audience has grown to love.
Their    escapades are all framed within some lazy excuse of a plot -- an    uninspired piece of vapidity involving Chinese Triad members    smuggling immigrants for slave labour -- which nobody takes very    seriously, least of all the film's wisecracking characters.
The    filmmakers' obvious smug inference is that reassembling the cast and    running them through the usual series of hijinx *should* be    sufficiently entertaining.
Familiarity breeds complacency, and    apparently contempt.
Well, it almost comes together.
The supporting cast accumulated from    previous films are obligingly trotted out for requisite appearances,    legitimately adding little to the mix other than a sense of assuring    recognition.
My hopes were pinned upon the traditional infusion of    new blood for this entry coming in the form of outrageous comedian    Chris Rock (and given the series' growing reliance on jokey    sensibilities, it was inevitable that a bonafide comic would    eventually be cast), joining the fray as brash rookie cop Lee    Butters.
Sadly, his formidable gifts are wasted here, stifled by the    confines of his surprisingly straight character -- other than his    eager-to-please relationship with Murtaugh, the film gives Butters    has no personality of his own to speak of.
The franchise's indelible appeal, for better or worse (and it's the    latter if you ask me -- consider its devolution from an edgy action    thriller centered on a fearlessly suicidal cop to a resolutely    mainstream product where everybody seems ready to break out into    group hugs), is the good-natured sense of camaraderie in sickening    full display here.
From its action-packed opening to its photobook    conclusion, LETHAL WEAPON 4 is a film *about* its characters -- this    is, after all, a picture in which an explosive firefight with an    armoured maniac actually serves as glossy window-dressing for scenes    of character background and development -- and it's ultimately a    showcase for the quintessential mismatched buddy team of Riggs and    Murtaugh, trading quips as they bicker their way through the motions    of cracking the case.
By now, they've become as all-American as    apple pie, and the polished, engaging chemistry of their actor    counterparts remains intact, but by this stage of the game, they're    going through the motions.
On the plus side, the film features a few inventively staged (albeit    logically ludicrous) action sequences and some dynamic mano-a mano    fight scenes courtesy of Hong Kong wunderkind Jet Li, but as the    series creatively wheezes and sputters (an obvious tip-off: resorting    to the use of a Cute Young Kid -- a typical death-knell), my    idealistic side hopes that the filmmakers have the good sense to    gracefully mothball the franchise after this picture.
My cynical,    anything-for-a-buck side, on the other hand.... -- Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/ "...a first screenplay unaccompanied by a powerful agent or industry  sponsor is generally a pathetic fetus of a film, nothing more.
"                                - Andrew Sarris. . 
