ROUNDERS Cast: Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, Martin Landau, John Malkovich, John Turturro, Famke Janssen, Vernon E. Jordan Jr., Melina Kanakaredes, Michael Rispoli Director: John Dahl Screenplay: David Levien & Brian Koppelman Australian theatrical release: January 28, 1999 Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece):  3 stars. When gambling isn't used to illustrate amazing streaks of luck, it is often used in association with society's criminals and lowlifes.
Well there are plenty of criminals and lowlifes in Rounders, a film that is careful to keep its priorities in the right order.
Card games and risky bets take the spotlight, but the harsh game of surviving in a world full of crooks always seems significantly more important.
When players take to the table in the desperate hope of winning some serious dough, Rounders provides great entertainment.
Away from the table, however, a compelling dramatic core is missing.
Mike McDermott (Matt Damon) learns the valuable lessons of playing high-stake card games the hard way.
One night he plays against Russian card shark KGB (John Malkovich, in a role that seems a little too easy for him) and loses a cool thirty grand.
So from then on, Mike works hard in legitimate jobs, swearing that he will never return to the gambling table again.
But when his loser best friend Worm (Edward Norton) is released from jail, Mike is dragged into the game once again in order to help Worm repay his debts.
One refreshing aspect of Rounders is that it treats its subject matter with respect.
Not endorsing gambling yet not discouraging it either, the film chronicles a realistic (though somewhat sensational) account of two men's triumphs and misfortunes.
It not only examines gambling as a hobby and a sport, but as a way of life - as a source for putting bread on the table.
John Turturro is given the difficult task of portraying the only sensible gambler, a man who "grinds" the game by playing smart and playing safe.
Turturro has a knack for taking simple characters and giving them complexity (Exhibit A, Barton Fink, Exhibit B, Quiz Show), and serves as an integral (although small) part in Rounders.
As Mike and Worm welcome the chaos that eventually engulfs them, Turturro's character stands strong and tall, silently knowing that although he has taken a smaller spotlight, he has outplayed both of them.
Matt Damon is solid in the lead role but is overshadowed by some terrific performances from the supporting cast.
Norton plays Worm with sleaziness and extravagance, but also brings an eerie sense of repression and sadness.
Malkovich and Turturro are excellent, and Gretchen Mole (playing Mike's girlfriend Jo) is also fine, although debut scriptwriters David Levien and Brian Koppelman have written her part predictably and blandly.
Director John Dahl has an obvious fascination with professional gambling.
On numerous occasions Rounders feels like a fun documentary on the sport, with human diversions along the way.
It is then disappointing that Dahl rarely gives his gambling scenes more than just visual interest.
As Matt Damon says during the film, the game is not about playing the cards, its about playing the people.
Dahl shoots card scenes much better than he examines characters.
The success of the drama between Mike and Worm is off and on, whilst Mike's relationship with Jo is purely a tool to get a female actor into the picture.
The writing and direction of Rounders is impressive, but the sports side of the picture is so much better than its dramatic side that the film becomes unbalanced in the quality of its scenes.
Whilst Rounders occasionally touches on themes with meaning and relevance, this is ultimately just a good and enjoyable sports film.
Had it focused a little more on the players, it may have been great one.. . . 
