Cast: Trey Parker, Matt Stone, Mary Kay Bergman, Isaac Hayes, numerous cameo voices Written by: Trey Parker, Matt Stone and Pam Brady Directed by: Trey Parker Running Time: 80 minutes Date Reviewed: July 8, 1999. I guess I should start out by saying that I am a huge fan of the animated series "South Park" which runs on Comedy Central.
I've followed it since it's debut, and while it has had it's occasional ups and downs, overall it provides more laughs than any other show on television, cable or otherwise.
I should also point out that just because I'm a huge fan of the series didn't automatically guarantee this movie a high rating.
There have been other shows that I have been a major supporter of that didn't do much for me in their big screen outings (Twin Peaks:Fire Walk With Me comes to mind immediately).
While South Park:Bigger, Longer & Uncut runs about four times as long as an episode of the television series, it never once wears out it's welcome or becomes tiresome.
As the story goes, the four main characters (Stan, Kyle, Cartman, and Kenny) sneak into their local multiplex to see the new R-rated Terrance and Phillip movie Asses of Fire.
When they emerge, they have discovered even worse language than they use on a daily basis (thanks to an extremely profane yet irresistibly catchy musical number from Terrance &. Phillip).
This enrages their parents who blame Canada (Terrance and Phillip are Canadian you see) and war is soon declared on our neighbors to the north.
What's encouraging about South Park:Bigger, Longer & Uncut is that isn't. just an R-rated version of the hit show.
Series creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone could have very easily made just another episode for the big screen, but instead they've given us a movie with social commentary about hypocrisy, censorship, and (gasp!
) parental responsibility.
Yes you've read correctly... this movie has a message.
Don't let that scare you off though, there are more laughs in this film than you'd think would be possible.
Parker and Stone hit a number of "sacred" targets in their film, but as they've said in interviews "We're equal opportunity offenders".
No single organization or racial group is targeted more than another.
And what makes the potentially dangerous comedy work so well is because it is so absurd in it's presentation.
The situations which the laughs come from are so outlandish that I personally can't see any of them as being offensive.
Sure the language is harsh, but if you've seen any R-rated movie before there shouldn't be anything here that would shock you.
However, I don't advise you take your kids either.
It is definitely not. for youngsters unless you, as a parent, explain to your kids about "foul. language" and why it's not always appropriate in the REAL world.
Curiously, I think that many of the ideas and situations in this film are far "worse" than anything in Trey Parker's Orgazmo, which the MPAA rated. NC-17.
Why that film is rated NC-17 and this one is rated R goes to show the randomness of the current ratings board.
Surprisingly, it would to be hard to classify South Park:Bigger, Longer & Uncut as either a comedy or a musical.
Normally I abhor musicals, but when they are this funny and the songs are as memorable, I can overlook my feelings.
And I have to give credit where credit is due.
I've taken a couple of harsh shots lately at Marc Shaiman and his overblown scores in. films like Patch Adams and The Out of Towners.
In this case, the music he has written (along with Trey Parker, mind you) fits perfectly.
Mocking all different types of musical numbers from Disney animation to the grand, sweeping musicals of the 60s to Les Miserables, everything works.
The soundtrack album is a must have.
On a sidenote: I would have loved to sit it on the recording sessions to see the chorus singing some of the extremely filthy lyrics they have to sing in this film.
South Park:Bigger, Longer & Uncut is a great time at the movies if you love the series, or if you just love to laugh.
Sure the animation is crude and you may say the humor is even cruder, but a lot of the comedy here requires a good bit of intelligence to "get".
Those of us who do get it have something great to enjoy.
[R]. The Jacksonville Film Journal -- Film Reviews by Chuck Dowling URL:http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/. Email:chuckd21@leading.net. Š 1999 of The Jacksonville Film Journal.
No reviews may be reprinted without permission.. . 
