There was once a time when drugs were funny, Cheech and Chong are living proof of this.
I was reminded of this as I watched Thompson's alter ego Raoul Duke (Depp) and his lawyer Dr. Gonzo (Del Toro) try to walk into a hotel on a psychedelic mix of acid, mescaline, ether, cocaine, and alcohol.
Seeing Depp react as a hotel lobby lady's face distorts and contorts into a ghastly beast and wondering if you have to be on drugs to think the Casino carpets are weird.
The first half of this film has many such laughs.
Depp and Del Toro are on an assignment in Las Vegas in search of a story they never follow up, and mostly staying high on drugs and trashing everything in their path.
Depp talks with longing of San Francisco "great" acid trips and his cigarette holder dangling from his lips while his equally strung out lawyer gives his professional advise like, "As your lawyer I suggest you take two hits out of the brown case.
" . The film's look is that of a frenzied trip.
Wide lenses and distortions in showing Las Vegas and the hallucinations the characters have while looking at everyday objects.
The cinematography is off the wall, wacky as the camera spins out of control with the characters.
Different lighting and colored editing processes are also used generously to compliment the acting and unusual state of mind required.
There is one moment of pure genius as Thompson drives down the road at an incredible rate after consuming mass of drugs and skipping on his hotel bill.
A highway patrolman flashes his lights and pulls up to him telling him to pull over.
Instead he leads him on a chase while playing with the expectations of the cop and narrating that it gives the cop some excitement and he would prefer chasing him rather than him getting nervous and pulling over immediately.
This leads to a huge laugh.
I don't know how the public will react to this film.
The critics seem to love it or hate it and the constant drug use is raising some controversy and hatred towards the film.
I am giving the film a marginal recommendation but the film is definitely not for everyone and may rely on if you think drugs are or could be funny.
Those not familiar with the book or Thompson may have trouble deciphering the action.
Others can sit back and expect to see a wacky film that will have you see the world in a frenzied light for hours after.. . 
