Mumford, Starring Loren Dean, Hope Davis, Jason Lee, Martin Short, Alfre Woodard, Mary McDonnell, David Paymer, Jane Adams, Pruitt Taylor Vince.
Directed by Lawrence Kasdan     .  The advertisements and promos for Mumford tell you that it is the story of a psychologist, who isn't really a psychologist.
Going into the film with this knowledge gives you an entirely different prospectus about the goings-on because Mumford's deception isn't revealed until well into the storyline.
Mumford is both the names of the psychologist, and of the town where he practices his craft.
The real story, or rather stories surround the supporting players.
Each has a story to tell, and most of them tell it to Mumford, much to the chagrin of the other `head doctors' in town, as well as to the daffy attorney played by Martin Short.
Mumford has that wonderful ability of being able to listen to what others are saying when the other people in their lives are ignoring their needs.
As a viewer, you quickly realize what causes many of their insecurities, just as he does.
Ted Danson does a walk-on cameo as the husband of a woman who is a compulsive shopper.
Her children (his stepchildren) also have their problems.
The son, for example, carries a 22-gauge shotgun with him wherever he goes.
Alfre Woodard, who is Mumford's landlady, Lily, and runs a local café, seems to be about the only sane person in town although she really doesn't want a man in her life.
She prefers long showers!
The opening scenes are wonderful.
They are in black and white and reminiscent of the films of the 40's.
At first I thought that they were showing the wrong movie, but it surprisingly turned into the perfect intro for the tale.
There is a little nudity and bad language used but they are done extremely well, and greatly add to the plot.
Especially funny is a scene in the Panda Modem Lab, owned by the town's Billionaire (Jason Lee) who has created a new `toy'.
It is a delightful light comedy, one that I wouldn't mind seeing again, probably when it comes to TV.
I give it a solid B.. . 
