Cast: Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, Christina Applegate, Avery  Brooks, China Chow, Antonio Sabato Jr., Elliot Gould, Lainie Kazan,  Bokeen Woodbine, Sab Shimono.
Directed by Che Kirk Wong.
Written by  Ben Ramsey.
In 1996, a film called "2 Days in the Valley" made a misguided  attempt at becoming the next "Pulp Fiction" by intertwining several lives  amid a ring of smalltime crime, examining the inner humanity of the  lowlives involed.
Essentially, "Pulp Fiction" borrowed this formula  from Robert Altman's classic "Short Cuts," but did so successfully.
Another copycat has emerged in "The Big Hit," a film so derivative of  genres and directing styles, that the real enjoyment is indentifying  where you have seen this happen before.
Four idiosyncratic hit men, Melvin Smiley (Mark Wahlberg), Cisco (Lou  Diamond Phillips), Crunch (Bokeen Woodbine), and Vinnie (Antonio Sabato  Jr.), work for ringleader Paris (Avery Brooks).
Unauthorized, they kidnap  the college-aged daughter (China Chow) of a failed media mogul (Sab  Shimono) looking for quick ransom.
A problem arises  when the girl, Keiko, turns out to be Paris' goddaughter, angering him.
What ensues is a series of double- and triple-crossing that plays out  like a bad cartoon.
Sensitive, morally-challenged Melvin is engaged to airhead Pam  Schulman (Christina Applegate), whose Jewish parents (Lainie Kazan, Elliot  Gould) disapprove of the pairing since Melvin is Catholic.
Meanwhile,  wild-and-crazy Cisco is caught between his loyalty to his fellow  kidnappers and his loyalty to Paris, who asks him to find the  culprits.
Phillips broods and rants, chewing up scenery, as a villain  who defies death about as well as Glenn Close in "Fatal Attraction" or  any enemy in the "Scream" series.
Woodbine ("The Rock") becomes a sight  gag as in each scene he has a different and increasingly bigger  hand-strengthening apparatus after denying he enjoys self-pleasure in  an opening scene.
This is all supposed to be funny stuff.
Rookie writer Ben Ramsey and accalimed director Che Kirk Wong,  making his big time American debut, seem to have gained their cinematic  eye by watching all the movies they could get their hands on.
In one  scene, hitmen have come to take out Melvin as he and Pam's family sit  down for dinner.
As they sit there, guns are pulled under the table,  while a drunken Elliot Gould spews insults and his insides across the  table.
The Gould part of this scene is reminiscent of Oliver Stone in  "Natural Born Killers" or "U-Turn.
"  As the tablecloth is pulled off the  table, the guns go off in a less-than-spectacular scene that producer  John woo could have turned into a masterpiece.
The gunfight moves to the  kitchen invoking memories of "Grosse Pointe Blank.
"  .         Want a search and car chase?
Borrow from "Law and Order" or "NYPD  Blue.
"  Want to tape up the kidnapped?
Watch "Excess Baggage.
"  Hey,  what about a slow motion scene of guys walking?
Steal from "Reservoir  Dogs" which adapted elements from "A Clockwork Orange.
"  Want to turn  stuffing a chicken into a romantic encounter?
That pottery scene from  "Ghost" works.
This film touches Scorsese and video from the O.J.
Simpson car chase.
It borrows from everything, because it wants to be  the next "Naked Gun," which is setting its sights far too high.
"The Big Hit" gives us the spectrum of movie stardom.
Mark Wahlberg  is a nearly established star thanks to "Boogie Nights," but is green  enough to make films like this without ruining his potential career.
Lou  Diamond Phillips and Christina Applegate are in the positions of being  typecast as a hothead and airhead respectively, and should aim higher.
TV-ready Gould should stick to his sitcom spots on "Friends" and "Getting  Personal," while Kazan should book her ticket for a ride on the new "Love  Boat.
"  There is always potential for them to return to their heydays  (both are past Oscar nominees) with some smarter choices.
As Burt  Reynolds, Robert Forster, and Pam Grier proved last year, it is never too  late to make a comeback.
The lucky escapees?
Chow and Sabato Jr.  Their  stars are rising and gain valuable exposure in this high profile film.
After all, Wahlberg had his "Fear" and underwear model career before  making an A-list name for himself.
If "The Big Hit" is a spoof on every movie ever made, then it is  successful in its inclusiveness.
The sum of these parts, though, makes a  choppy, annoying movie.
The only truly funny thing about this film is  its ironic title.. . 
