ANALYZE THIS (Warner Bros. - 1999) Cast: Robert De Niro, Billy Crystal, Lisa Kudrow, Joe Viterelli,       Chazz Palminteri Screenplay by Peter Tolan and Harold Ramis and Kenneth Lonergan Produced by Paula Weinstein and Jane Rosenthal Directed by Harold Ramis Running time: 103 minutes . Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    Harold Ramis' comedy ANALYZE THIS is a film whose central conceit    winds up being more interesting than its screen realisation.
Lampooning mafioso stereotypes with abandon, the picture runs out of    gas fairly early on and lurches the remainder of the way to the    finish line.
With the public's fascination with the dangerous glamour of organized    crime reaching the level where media saturation on the topic has made    the John Gotti-led Gambino crime family as fabled and familiar to the    masses as the Corleones, it was inevitable that accompanying    cinematic attention to the Mafia would ultimately lead to the    evolution of an unlikely film sub-genre -- the mob comedy.
Joining    Andrew Fleming's THE FRESHMAN and Jim Abraham's unfortunate MAFIA!
in    this category is ANALYZE THIS, which attacks one of the more curious    what-if scenarios of late (though not *singularly* curious -- I    understand that there's a new HBO series operating on the same basic    premise): what if a mob boss was stricken with panic attacks and    enlisted the services of a psychiatrist?
Billy Crystal, adorning the requisite shrink beard, plays the doctor    and Robert De Niro lends his iconic status as the angst-ridden    gangster who finds his life as fearsome New York mob boss Paul Vitti    increasingly crippled by his volatile emotional state.
An inability    to brutally bash in a turncoat's head with a steel pipe?
Can't    perform in bed?
For a macho overlord whose dominance over the Big    Apple is threatened by a rival mobster (Chazz Palminteri), this    simply will not do.
And becoming teary-eyed at sentimental    commercials?
Unforgivable.
Vitti commandeers the unwilling services of Crystal's mild-mannered    Dr. Ben Sobel at a rather inopportune time -- the shrink is headed on    vacation to Miami where he's scheduled to marry reporter Laura    MacNamara (Lisa Kudrow).
After this setup, the Florida-based segment    of this film mostly plays like a Mafia-tinged version of WHAT ABOUT    BOB?, where the befuddled Sobel is constantly hounded by his    demanding new patient who continues to appear at the most    inappropriate moments.
Of course, fitting the stature of a crime    boss, it's not Vitti himself who pesters Sobel -- his dim, sad-eyed    right-hand man Jelly (Joe Viterelli) is the one to break into the    shrink's hotel room and haul him out of bed in the middle of the    night.
The culture clash between the hardened world of the mob and Sobel's    suburbanite is often amusing, and there are several funny comic    routines and sight gags, but it gradually becomes apparent that the    film is content to skewer the Mafia in a series of repetitive riffs,    toying with the tough, family-loving, God-fearing, honour-bound    archetype familiar from the movies; the picture establishes a rhythm    which plays itself out quickly.
On the flip side, although hinting    at it on several occasions (at one point, when instructed to be    vague, Sobel notes that his profession has left him well-equipped for    imprecision), the picture fails to add a little variety to the comedy    by doing little to send-up the psychiatric profession, and indeed    winds up endorsing mushy therapeutic cliches during the story's    uninvolving resolution, dulling the carefree irreverence of the    picture.
Beyond its premise, the film doesn't really have much of a compelling    story to speak of, and what that there is evolves in the weaker    latter half of the picture as the action shifts back to New York.
It's mostly routine and uncompelling material -- FBI stings, mob    summits, yet *more* goofy wedding ceremony fiascoes (a tired gag    which has been pretty much been run into the ground) and serves as a    rather flimsy hanger upon which to float more comic bits.
Howard    Shore attempts to inject energy into the piece with a jaunty score    which only serves to underline how muddled the film has become.
While De Niro demonstrates his good sportsmanship in the picture    through his cheerfully straight portrayal of the stressed mob boss,    Kudrow's imitable quirkiness is largely wasted in a tiny, generic    role, and Palminteri's saddled with a two-dimensional character he    could play in his sleep.
On the other hand, it's been so long since    his heyday with WHEN HARRY MET SALLY... and CITY SLICKERS that I'd    begun to actually forget about Crystal as a solid screen comedian and    found myself thinking of him mostly as The Guy Who Knows How To Host    The Oscars.
In the final reel of ANALYZE THIS, he gets to shed the    second banana role worn throughout the bulk of the picture to deliver    one of his best onscreen moments in quite some time.
The result was    silly and predictable, but it had me chuckling.
-- Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/ "X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them  in on the whole conspiracy.
Half the time I have no idea what they're  talking about.
" - Martin Landau. . 
