There's a lot to like in actor Edward Norton's directorial debut, KEEPING  THE FAITH.
First, it's a solid romantic comedy, a hard genre to make.
Second, it's intelligent in its treatment of religious themes, in a time in  which it is rare to see the spiritual side of characters.
Finally, the  acting and cast are first rate.
For how much more could a viewer ask?
A small frame for the story has Father Brian Finn (Norton) stagger into a  bar to continue his jag of drinking.
He gets the tender of the deserted bar  (Brian George) interested in what seems like the most outlandish rabbi and  priest joke of all time.
Of course the story ends up being an account of  his own life, starting with his childhood.
It seems Brian and his best  friend Jake met as boys, and added another best friend in the form of `Anna  Banana,' a tomboy named Anna Reilly (Jenna Elfman).
The only problem was  that Anna broke up the young Musketeers when her father moved the family to  California.
But now Anna is back as an assertive and canny corporate type; she's `like a  plumber,' only she fixes leaky companies.
Although she works far too many  hours, she makes time to spend with her old buddies Jake and Brian.
The  film follows the renewal of the three-way friendship, including some  hilarious bits in which Jake – a very eligible rabbi – plays the dating game  with women sent his way by numerous matchmakers – everyone from a  exercise-obsessed Jewess to a rising star at ABC News, Rachel Rose (Rena  Sofer).
So, what's the big conflict already?
Well, Jake begins seeing Anna, and the  two decide to keep their passion secret – not only from Jake's congregation  but also from Brian.
Meanwhile, Brian experiences his own crisis, dreaming  about Anna and reading signals wrong until he confesses his own love for  Anna.
So the theme of love permeates the story.
Often it is kept very human,  especially when we see two men of God struggling to come to terms with the  strictures that hamper or forbid relationships.
And some of the shtick with  Ben Stiller invites out-loud laughter – though it would have been nice not  to have had a few of these moments spoiled by the trailer!
As boys, Jake and Brian always showed acceptance and curiosity about each  other's faith.
Fortunately, the film preserves the tone set by the boys: it  explores many of the ideas and rituals important to Catholicism and Judaism.
Often Brian visits the temple at which Jake is junior rabbi, and Jake  visits the church and rectory at which Brian is associate pastor.
Some of  the most charming scenes outside of the triangular love plot involve  ministry: for instance, Brian in the confessional (where was the  reconciliation room, eh?
) with an Hispanic kid whose raging hormones cause  his sinful thoughts.
The temple and church even get together to sponsor an  interfaith community center, complete with kareoke machine.
All of this  niceness becomes an artifice, though, when it becomes clear that the board  that runs the temple is displeased with Jake's behavior: why is he dating a  shiksa when there's all these nice Jewish girls?
And would a real priest,  who does not drink, instantly resort to large quantities of booze, creating  suddenly that trite monster, the alcoholic Irishman?
Realsitic, no.
Funny,  yes, and largely because Stuart Blumberg's screenplay does not go out of its  way to be politically correct.
Still in his twenties, Edward Norton has shown amazing versatility.
Comparing Father Brian Finn with the reformed skinhead Norton played in  AMERICAN HISTORY X gets a stunned reaction.
Everything from the hair and  eyebrows to the attitude and mannerisms is drastically different.
And  Norton mines the wealth of Catholic and Jewish material fairly well.
Ben  Stiller even gets to do a grand bit of physicality with a building security  bull named T-Bone.
Stiller does a nice job of playing the modern man of religion, improvising  much of his sermons, causing doctrine to be more accessible to his  congregation.
And the man has just about perfected his comic timing.
(Why  doesn't he make a movie with both his parents, by the way???
)  I didn't mind  the way Jake dressed; his black leather jacket went well with Father Brian's  Roman outfit and with the elder rabbi's garb.
But Stiller's spiky hair  looked a little silly sticking up around his yarmulke!
It's not hard to imagine Norton asking several of his older pals to play  support.
The director Milos Forman has a small role as Father Havel, the  Czech refugee who's been a priest in New York since he fled his homeland in  1968.
On what subject does he counsel Father Brian?
Love!
The priest's counterpart is played by Eli Wallach.
It's always enjoyable to  see such a veteran on the screen again, with his easy manner and very  recognizable voice.
Anne Bancroft plays Mrs. Shram, Jake's mother.
Apparently she has disowned  Jake's older brother (they've not even communicated in two years) for  marrying a non-Jewish girl.
Hence Jake's added anxiety over dating Anna.
Bancroft is a wonderfully natural actress.
A small problem that confronts  her here, though, comes when she makes a sudden and uncharacteristic  decision toward the end of the story.
Without a few of the suggestive love scenes between Jake and Anna, KEEPING  THE FAITH would have been rated PG, instead of PG-13.
Too bad.
The current  release RETURN TO ME is showing a refreshing `return' to more wholesome  romantic comedy, and FAITH contains many of the same successful conventions.
Anyway, both films are a welcome break from the excess of `R' flicks  gazing down from the marquees of America's multiplexes!. . . 
