On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 4 and a half stars. Over the last decade films have stumbled over themselves in their attempts to be "politically incorrect," and many have lost sight of the reality that they intended to display.
Happiness, by independent filmmaker Todd Solondz, never falls into that trap.
The film grounds itself in the bleak and unforgiving modern world of its dozen or so principal characters, and Solondz never relents from making his cold surroundings feel that much colder.
Yes, the title is intentionally ironic, and yes, the film is very sad.
One scene, in which a character bitterly masturbates whilst ringing random numbers in a phone book, speaks volumes about the isolation of society as it approaches the new millenium.
Controversial, off-putting and uncomfortable are three words that can describe Happiness, but there's much more to it than that.
I propose that Happiness is not just a brilliantly constructed social commentary piece, but one of the most sarcastic, unapologetic and indirectly insightful black comedies ever made.
The film regularly cuts to each of its characters lives, all of them with distinguishable and quite unlikable personalities.
Perhaps most tragic is that of Bill Maplewood (Dylan Baker), a married man who is also a pedophile, and is attracted to his eleven-year-old son Billy's (Rufus Read) friends.
Trish (Cynthia Stevenson), Bill's wife, is a sister of Joy (Jane Adams), an aspiring songwriter who struggles to maintain a happy spirit through emotional tribulations.
Successful author Helen (Lara Flynn Boyle), also a sister of Trish and Joy, receives obsessive phone conversations from neighbor Allen (Philip Seymour Hoffman), who longs for her whilst being oblivious to similar feelings towards him from Kristina (Cynthia Stevenson) a few doors down.
That's without mentioning Joy's boyfriend (Jon Lovitz), who doesn't react well after being dumped, and the sisters' father (Ben Gazzara), who abandons his wife in search for contentment in life.
Each of them pursue their desire to be happy, in expense of everybody else, but delve deeper into a world of uncertainty and despair.
Make no mistake about it; this is a painfully sad story.
Interestingly enough, the film's dramatic side arrives second place in terms of focus and ingenuity to its incredible sarcasm and wit.
The result is a dialogue driven film that is both unnerving and at times very funny, in a sadistic, glass-is-half-empty kind of way.
It's a neat trick that Solondz uses to great effect, leaving viewers simultaneously shocked and amused, scathed and entertained.
Exceptional performances are contributed from all cast members, who dissect their characters with appropriately somber mannerisms, displaying the sadness of a world corrupted by greed and populated by people whose foremost desires are to pursue happiness.
During all of Solondz's ranting and raving - his biting views on relationships, his misanthropic philosophies on the togetherness of society, and even his graphic shots of seamen - the film remains coherently structured, and maintains audience interest for all of its running time.
Don't underestimate the importance of Happiness.
See it, if not just to say that you've witnessed the bleakest film this side of a Shakespearean tragedy, and laughed guiltily whilst the actors in front of you sobbed miserably.. . . 
