HILARY AND JACKIE Reviewed by Jamie Peck. That'd be Emily Watson, whose staggeringly brilliant work as the tragic  Jackie is pretty much everything Academy voters look for in a Best  Actress candidate.
However, the Hilary du Pré character, played by  Rachel Griffiths ("My Best Friend's Wedding"), doesn't get top title  mention for nothing, and it'd be a shame if her subtle - but every bit  as moving - acting was overshadowed by Watson's far showier role.
The  jury's currently out on whether or not that will happen, but already  assured is that these lovely ladies put power and presence into a  true-life tale filled with the kind of emotion and human drama that  requires such treatment to really hit its heartbreaking story home.
"Hilary and Jackie" sets up a tale of pseudo-sibling rivalry in 1950s  England, when the du Pré sisters were young girls (nicely embodied by  Keely Flanders and Auriol Evans, respectively) and it appeared Hilary, a  natural on the flute, would become their family's claim to fame.
But  when Jackie reveals herself to be a cello prodigy after watching  Hilary's gift garner much attention, their futures are altered forever;  the former puts away her dreams for a fulfilling domesticity while the  latter spirals into madness brought on by her musical success.
For the  second time in her life, Jackie begins to long for what Hilary  possesses: sheer, stable normalcy with a loving husband (David  Morrissey) and kids.
This story is told in halves - first from Hilary's point-of-view and  then Jackie's - a gimmick that seems initially frustrating but pays off  beautifully in the concluding hour, when viewers are allowed to finally  see most of the puzzling past events from both sides of the coin.
There  are a few underexplained forays into the deeper, more questionable  branches of their relationship, especially some bed-hopping business  after Jackie asks Hilary to help fulfill a shocking favor, but even in  the film's weak moments, Watson and Griffiths (one or the other is  nearly in every frame) deserve and demand attention.
Simply put, these  women work wonders.
Also remarkable is how debut director Anand Tucker avoids the pitfalls  of this type of picture by slathering his potentially devastating canvas  with restraint - "Hilary and Jackie" never stoops so low as to indulge  in blatant manipulation or false emotion.
Screenwriter Frank Cotterell  Boyce ("Welcome to Sarajevo"), who based his work on real-life Hilary  and brother Piers' memoir "A Genius in the Family," might skimp on  certain details that better the bond between Hilary and Jackie, but  makes up for his shortcomings by concocting scenes that will hang in the  memory for a long time.
One such rendering is a haunting beach-set coda  that perfectly emphasizes how unforgettable certain pieces of this movie  are.. . 
