Seen on 30 July 1998 with Andrea at the SONY Lincoln Square for $9. Knowing that Out of Sight was from "the makers of Get Shorty" was like saying "from the makers of Illtown starring Tony Danza.
" Most everyone I know (okay, just Cathy), hated Get Shorty, but many liked this one.
So, I caved in to the demands of a boring summer, moviewise, as American-made summer fare goes, and parted with $9.
Well, no one told me Steven Soderbergh directed it, did they?
Out of Sight lived up to the positive word of mouth, and while I enjoyed it and recommend it, now that I am out of the cool glow of the movie screen, I cannot tell you why I enjoyed it so much.
Well, three things.
First, there's the very interesting camera work for which Soderbergh (sex, lies, and videotape, and Kafka) is known.
Second, the utterly charming George Clooney's characterization of Jack Foley, who assiduously talks bank tellers into handing over lots of unmarked bills taking advantage of his observations yet never raising his voice, or a gun.
Third, some of the writing was just superb.
Clooney's interaction with his co-stars is a lot of fun to listen to.
His flirtation with Lopez while actively evading her was entertaining, however unrealistic.
So what didn't I like?
Well, charm and sex appeal aside, what makes a smart US Marshall like Karen Sisco (Jennifer Lopez) risk it all to help out a felon?
Yeah, exactly.
Makes no sense.
So Out of Sight might just be referring to the many ways we get to see her, cop with an hourglass figure, slink around in what is clearly not regulation uniform, toting a rifle.
Also, the easy-to-follow-yet-complex plot is interesting, well paced but not exactly engrossing.
This is one of the two dozen adaptations of Elmore Leonard's novels for the big screen since 1957, and after seeing Jackie Brown, and seeing my brother dozing through it, that was not an attraction either.
But, it is good summer moviegoing or future rental fare, for light, fluffy entertainment with a little bite and a less than predictable plot.
Above average for what it is, but not compelling either.
Catherine Keener, Luis Guzman, Dennis Farina, Michael Keaton, Albert Brooks, Samuel L. Jackson, and Nancy Allen turn in good performances, in roles of varying performance.
Also noteworthy: original music by David Holmes (IV) and interesting cinematography by Elliot Davis.
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html. . 
