Runaway Bride has the same characters, lead cast, director, and genre as  the 1990 hit, Pretty Woman.
Yet it simply isn't as good as its  antecedent, because the plot can only work one time before becoming over  used, or perhaps because the R rated sexual humor from Runaway Bride's  nine year predecessor is largely absent this time in favor of a family  friendly PG rating.
Julia Roberts plays Maggie Carpenter, a woman who has three times used  her walk down the aisle as a warm up to the sprint that soon followed as  she escaped the wedding vows.
A very flirtatious and beautiful woman,  she seems to have no qualms about going from man to man.
Her father even  quips "She may not be the longest running joke in town, but she sure is  the fastest.
" Roberts' portrayal of Vivian Ward in Pretty Woman was very  similar if not identical.
In Pretty Woman, Vivian began to reform when a very conservative man,  Edward Lewis (Richard Gere) entered her life.
Nearly a decade later,  Gere does it again when he enters Maggie's life as a New York City  newspaper reporter, Ike Graham.
Continuing with the long list of  similarities, Runaway Bride includes a scene where Gere has to negotiate  to buy Roberts' time and attention, and another where he takes her dress  shopping- perhaps the two most memorable and acclaim scenes from Pretty  Woman.
Runaway Bride is a visually astounding film.
The panoply of scenery is  never better highlighted than the opening sequence where images of a  horse trotting through a field in the marvelous country side are quickly  cut to images of New York City.
The many scenes out of city are  beautifully framed with lovely background and pastel colors.
The city  scenes are more edgy and harsh visually, providing a nice juxtaposition  of the opposite lifestyles that collide.
The only sexual jokes you'll find in Runaway Bride come from Maggie's  grandmother, and are watered down references to "the one eyed monster"  and its duties on the wedding night.
The biggest laughs come from hair  dye and a cheesy FedEx joke about on-time delivery.
You can't help but  miss the numerous references to condoms, drugs, and prostitution that  the jokes in Pretty Woman provided, creating far bigger laughs than  anything you'll find here.
Runaway Bride holds itself to a higher standard by choosing to display  numerous similarities to Pretty Woman, and never being the slightest bit  shy about it.
Because of that, it ends up committing a suicide of sorts;  having attempted to shoot for the stars and not being willing to settle  for the sky instead.
At one point in the film, Ike explains his  profession by saying "We push, we stretch, we go out on a limb.
" Runaway  Bride does just that, it pushes, it stretches, and it goes out on a  limb.
But I think the limb just snapped. . . 
