A powerful and unforgettable film, Spike Lee's Summer of Sam is, to  date, the best drama of 1999.
The chief feature of the production is its  background setting, one so intriguing that it is capable of being an  entire plot: New York City in the summer of 1977.
By adding a  fictionalized subplot putting several characters under a magnifying  glass, the film is able to not only use these rich events, but a study  of human paranoia resulting from them as well.
The movie uses these  great settings and shockingly forthright violence to tie these plots  together so well.
In the summer of 1977 New York City had a heat wave bringing  temperatures well over 100 degrees, the Yankees were on there way to a  world series victory led by Reggie Jackson's three dramatic home runs,  a blackout occurred that put the city that never sleeps in a zombie-like  state for days, and the city's first genuine serial killer, David  Berkowitz, calling himself "Son of Sam," roamed the streets preying on  innocent young women.
As the temperatures rise, and the body count increases, a certain  insanity comes about the city that is only further stimulated by the  other events.
Spike Lee's fictionalized group of characters from the  Bronx, led by Vinny (John Leguizamo) slowly fall victim to the paranoia  that a serial killer presents, and seek a scapegoat to reassure  themselves of their safety.
Using fractured logic they reach the  conclusion that this murderer, whoever he may be, must be from their  neighborhood.
So a list of everyone they consider to be a weird-o is  drawn up, and at the top of their list is aspiring punk rocker Ritchie  (Adrien Brody) who soon becomes the subject of continuous persecution  from the group.
Son of Sam (Michael Badalucco) actually has less than 15 minutes of  screen time in this production.
The time that he is on screen proves to  be some of the most horrifying and frightening moments of the entire  film.
Every murder he commits during the movie is shown with explicit  detail for a period of time just long enough to make it sink real deep  inside of you.
Not once during any of these beautifully choreographed  murders do you see the killer's face, just those of people realizing  that they are about to lose their lives.
Summer of Sam also features a strong sexual content aside from the  violence and obvious use of foul language.
Several scenes focus on  conversations regarding oral sex techniques, and styles.
One scene  includes three-way sexual activities.
Being that a subplot of marriage  problems with Vinny and his wife (Mira Sorvino) comes about, this  otherwise excessive sexual content is actually a building block of the  film's excellence.
The production includes an incredible panoply of background settings and  musical pieces.
Scenes range from the streets of New York to Studio 54,  with music from groups like ABBA to Elton John.
The film also uses a  delightful contrast technique using upbeat music as the murders take  place, creating an incredible chill.
When David Berkowitz announced that he had received orders to kill from  a dog, people were equally shocked and amused.
He had been a strong  presence in New York City for over a year, and that was his reasoning.
Comparatively, Summer of Sam is both shocking and entertaining, making  it a strong presence and great film at the same time.. . 
