SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE Cast: Gwyneth Paltrow, Joseph Fiennes, Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth, Ben Affleck, Tom Wilkinson, Imelda Stuanton, Judi Dench, Simon Callow, Rupert Everett Director: John Madden Screenplay: Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 4 and half stars. Shakespeare in Love's recipe for success is a simple one.
Due to the film's superb screenplay and sound acting, director John Madden is able to pick and match the best parts of three different genres.
Clever comedy, charming romance and absorbing drama fit neatly into this period piece, which has a distinctly contemporary feel.
Ordinarily it would be fair enough to point out that a director probably shouldn't attempt to have the best of both worlds (so to speak); but here, Madden has the best of three.
Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes) has writers block.
He's just begun working on a proposed play titled "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter," but struggles to find inspiration to express himself.
But, like the play's title, Shakespeare's life soon changes for the better.
He finds motivation in the form of Lady Viola (Gwyneth Paltrow), who is destined to marry the snobby Lord Wessex (Colin Firth) at the command of Queen Elizabeth herself (Judi Dench, in a cleverly arrogant performance).
Shakespeare and Viola live out their doomed romantic fantasy, whilst the formalities (and informalities) of producing a theatrical production blare in the background.
Those interested in Shakespearean times will appreciate the film's suggestions and insights into what happened during this era.
Shakespeare in Love suggests how the mysterious death of famous playwright Christopher Marlowe (played by the always dependable Rupert Everett) occurred, and hints at how the prohibition of women on the stage was eventually revoked (during the era, men had to play women in drag).
On the other hand, those who desire two hours worth of solid entertainment will get more than they paid for.
Comic performances from Geoffrey Rush as a struggling theatre owner and The Full Monty's Tom Wilkinson as the play's producer aid the film in keeping it accessible for everyone.
Joseph Fiennes and Gwyneth Paltrow shine in the two meatiest parts.
Scenes in which Shakespeare puts pen to paper work better than you may expect; each bringing a magical touch and an involving atmosphere.
As he writes, we can almost feel the love that inspires him.
Paltrow delivers one of - if not the - best performances so far in her career.
She has always had enough talent to make a difficult part work, and should have made a performance like this a long time ago (her roles in A Perfect Murder, Hush, Sliding Doors and others restricted her charisma).
With so many films nowadays that try to tell too much in too little time (or, alternatively, films that tell too little in too much time), here is one that never oversteps the mark.
There are so many paths the film could have taken, but Madden focuses almost entirely on the central relationship and the first ever production of "Romeo and Juliet.
" Shakespeare in Love's recipe for success is a simple one, but not an easy one to pull off.
Its carefully crafted screenplay interlaces drama, romance and comedy smartly and efficiently in this charming and passionate tale.
Shakespeare in Love has a big heart, but never loses its grasp on reality or the tragedy of forbidden love.
Not only does it work as an upbeat period piece, but also as just about anything you want it to be.. . . 
