Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Warner Village (Birkenhead Conway Park) Released in the UK by Entertainment Film Distributors on 24 March, 2000;  certificate 18; 179 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1. Directed by Paul Thomas Anderson; produced by Joanne Sellar.
Written by Paul Thomas Anderson.
Photographed by Robert Elswit; edited by Dylan Tichenor.
"They f--k you up, your mum and dad.
They may not mean to, but they do.
They  fill you with the faults they had and add some extra, just for you.
" --Philip Larkin, "This be the Verse". "If you refuse to let them go, behold, I will plague all your country.
" --Exodus, Chapter 8 Verse 2. Both these quotes have meaning in relation to "Magnolia", a film of bold  dramatic strokes from which the sins of fathers, sons and lovers come pouring  onto the audience in a torrent of stifling intensity.
In most scenes it is  raining.
By the end of the movie, this water will stop, to make way for a  biblical plague.
Because the film is a tapestry of pathetic Los Angeles lives, epic in length  and emotion, we could compare it to Robert Altman's "Short Cuts" (1993).
But  the work, by "Boogie Nights" creator Paul Thomas Anderson, is not that  distant or darkly comic; it's a penetrating tragedy comprised of painful,  sweaty close-ups.
Jason Robards and Philip Baker Hall both play influential  showbiz players at different stages in terminal cancer, who want to repent  for being lousy husbands and parents.
Robards's son is Frank TJ Mackey (Tom  Cruise), a self-help guru who feigns confidence to give dangerous single men  lectures on how to be effective misogynists.
Hall's daughter, played by  Melora Walters, is less skilled at masking her emotional scars.
She uses  cocaine and self-destructive sex to punctuate a life of screaming and weeping.
Robards produces and Hall presents a television game show entitled "What Do  Kids Know?
" One former star contestant, Donnie Smith (William H. Macy), has  grown up into a dangerously insecure loser after being mistreated by his  parents.
A current one, Stanley Spector (Jeremy Blackman), looks like a  candidate for the same path.
Around these characters are good people who understand the pain and want to  help.
John C. Reilly's widower cop will love and listen to Walters and Macy.
Philip Seymour Hoffman, as Robards's nurse, may not succeed in reconciling  the old man with anyone, but he can pray for and forgive him.
Julianne Moore  is like a one-woman Greek chorus representing everyone else in the cast; her  character's role in the story is inconsequential, and her job is to bookend  the scenes of others with tense looks, strained eyes and frantic breath.
Like  the film's constantly climactic music, she appears to be waiting for  everything to come to a devastating halt.
Somehow hope and redemption shine through the film's closing moments, but  even without it, "Magnolia" is compelling, not depressing, because Anderson  moulds the material into a dreamlike flow.
His camera spins and jolts with  the freedom of the imagination, and transitions between situations are  connected by audio-visual motifs.
In one shot a pack of Camels sits on a  bedside table.
Cut to a pharmacy whose shelves are filled by nicotine  replacement therapies.
Bizet's "Carmen" is mentioned among one set of  characters, and when we meet up with the next, an aria from the opera is  blaring on the sound track.
Many contemporary films deal with loneliness, bitterness and despair --  "Short Cuts", "American Beauty" and "Happiness" are among the most acclaimed.
"Magnolia" is better than all of them because its confidence and passion is  so much louder.
At times, it creates emotions so extreme it's like our hair  is being pulled.
But I don't go to the movies to feel unmoved.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani. Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
