Written and Directed by Cameron Crowe.      If you remember '70s rock, you'll swear you remember the band  Stillwater and its Rolling Stone cover.
You may even have their album  somewhere in your stack of yellowing, tape-patched LP jackets.
That's  how real Cameron Crowe ("Jerry Maguire") makes the universe of his  semi-autobiographical movie, "Almost Famous", with its improbable story  of a 15-year-old rock critic touring with the band and writing a cover  story for the 'zine of record of the record scene.
Improbable, but true.
Crowe was a teenage writer for Rolling  Stone, he did tour with bands like Led Zeppelin and the Allman Brothers,  and the stories and situations with which he packs this tender,  romantic, and exhilarating love letter to a bygone era are drawn from  life.
William Miller (Patrick Fugit) is young, younger even than he  knows: his mother (Frances McDormand) has lied to him about his age as  she pushes him forward in school.
An English professor of fierce  intelligence and discipline, she won't even let rock records in the  house ("Look," she says, confiscating a Simon & Garfunkel album from his  older sister and pointing to their eyes on the cover.
"Drugs!
")  But  when his sister (Zooey Deschanel) runs away to become a stewardess, she  leaves him her contraband cache of albums.
Leafing through the  forbidden jackets, he discovers a minefield of exotic temptation.
He's  sucked through the looking glass into the siren world of rock.
His break comes when he meets the (real life) legendary rock critic  Lester Bangs (Philip Seymour Hoffman), who fills his ear with sage  advice ("Don't become close to them.
These people are not your friends.
Friendship is the booze they feed you") and hires him to write a  concert review.
There he meets the lovely Penny Lane (Kate Hudson), a  groupie who rejects that nomenclature ("We're Band Aides.
We inspire  the music.
")  He also meets Stillwater, with its charismatic guitarist  (Billy Crudup) and lead singer (Jason Lee), and makes enough of an  impression that they invite him to tag along to L.A.
The story line of "Almost Famous" is neither complex or important.
It's a coming-of-age story, a loss-of-innocence story, an end-of-an-era  story ("You're coming along at a dangerous time for rock 'n roll," Bangs  tells William.
"The war's over and they [commercialism] have won.
")   But Crowe's unerring feel for the personalities and the moments make  this movie soar.
There is a scene on the bus of Stillwater's "Almost  Famous" tour which begins with the group sullenly isolated from each  other following an ego-fueled dust-up.
Elton John's "Tiny Dancer" is  playing, and gradually, almost reluctantly, they all begin tapping,  humming, and finally singing joyfully along.
It's a paean to the  healing power of music.
There are a few minor potholes.
A confessional scene in a plane in  a storm serves its purpose but feels a bit forced, ditto a scene in  Rolling Stone's office trashing William's story.
A few lines smack of  "I couldn't resist" - a reference to Mick Jagger at 50, and a ponderous  coy line about the early days of faxing.
But most of it is perfect  pitch.
One of the best moments has McDormand on the phone with Crudup,  admonishing him to take good care of her baby, and wiping the rock star  smirk off his face.
Fugit's debut balances innocence and savvy, and grows in maturity  across the film's arc.
Hudson is luminous as the not quite invulnerable  groupie, and she captures a couple of the film's most indelible scenes.
In a performance that should catapult him out of the "If we can't get  Brad Pitt" category, Crudup radiates sex appeal, self-confidence, and  self-doubt, and Jason Lee does a deft mix of rock star charisma and  neurosis.
All the cast is outstanding, from the overqualified  Band-Aides (Anna Paquin and Fairuza Balk) to the look-alikes playing  Rolling Stone editors Ben Fong-Torres and Jann Wenner.
Best of all are  the flexibly puritanical McDormand and the hiply uncool Hoffman in  terrific supporting roles that merit Oscar recognition.
"Almost Famous" is about what's real and what isn't, about love and  friendship and hero-worship, about the loneliness common to cool and  uncool, about the transitoriness of style and the staying power of  intelligence.
Cameron Crowe combines them all in a movie that really  rocks.. . 
