While going into this film, I found myself asking the question that many were probably asking- "What is the matrix?
"  Never did I think walking into this film The Matrix would turn out to be one of my favorite movies of all time.
The trailers made the film look quite confusing, but the film cleared everything up very simply and easily for me.
I was worried that the film would be confusing just like Wing Commander, but I was wrong.
Because of the high secrecy level about The Matrix, I will not reveal what the matrix is or what it is even about.
The entire film is extremely unpredictable, and I do not want to ruin this one of a kind film.
I will tell you this about The Matrix.
Laurence Fishburne is Morpheus, a leader that is trying to overthrow the matrix.
He is one of few in his group of people that is trying to do so.
Trinity, played by Carrie-Ann Moss, is one of those people.
This group is out to find "the one", the one who can overthrow the matrix.
They believe "the one" is Neo, a computer hacker, played by Keanu Reeves.
In their quest to overthrow the matrix, they must battle against "agents", people who are out to make sure the matrix isn't overthrown.
Right now, it must sound very confusing, and much like a video game, but when seeing the film, everything will be cleared up.
The special effects are marvelous in The Matrix.
Some of the visual effects are unlike any other I have ever seen.
They are very realistic and believable.
Particularly, in a scene where Neo is trying to shoot down one of the agents, the effects are highly original and outstanding.
In many films, the film relies on special effects to make it good, but the special effects weren't even half of what was so good about The Matrix.
Not only the effects in the film are wonderful and top notch, but the music and sound is also astounding.
The sound and effects together pretty much put you in the film itself.
The music is upbeat and generation x, which is very similar to the music in Blade, only much better.
The acting in The Matrix is perfect.
The characters of Neo and Trinity stood out the most.
They are hardly developed at all, but you don't need development when you have so many other great things to concentrate on.
Keanu Reeves is very believable and dramatic as Neo, and he realistically acts out the pain and confusion that Neo goes through.
Although Trinity is very silent through most of the film, the character is still a lot of fun to watch.
Laurence Fisburne's character was a very helpful one.
He explained what the matrix was so it could be understood with somewhat ease.
The character of Morpheus was also a very likable one.
The setting in The Matrix ranges from many different complex locations.
Places contained outside the Matrix are very strange and dark, but at the same time interesting and original.
I would not be surprised if The Matrix grabbed an Academy Award nomination for Art Direction next spring.
It certainly deserves one.
The costume design in The Matrix is quite simple, but simple means perfect in this case.
Neo, Trinity, and Morpheus all wear a variety of interesting outfits.
The agents all wear the identical outfit- a suit with a wire connected to their ear.
They almost seem like villains from a video game.
Just to give you some idea of how much I loved this film, I would compare it to Star Wars, one of my all time favorites.
Empire Strikes Back, the second Star Wars film, which is another one of my favorites, is not as good as this wild ride.
Not only is it a great movie, it is so much fun to watch.
The action sequences are fast, exciting, and interesting.
With the special effects thrown in, they are all the more dazzling.
The action sequences are without a doubt the best action sequences I have ever witnessed in a film.
The Matrix is an instant classic.
No science fiction movie since Star Wars has been as good and original as this wonderful film.
The Bottom Line- Just like the "Matrix", this film is in a world of its own.. . 
