A copy of this review can be found at  http://moviereviews.org/review_-_end_of_days.htm. End of Days goes up in flames- literally.
With both the hereditary flaws  of an apocalyptic film, poor acting and a lack of that magical quality  that oftentimes makes unrealistic action movies seem plausible; it is  most fitting that the title card in the opening credits is on fire.
There are certain liberties which movies like this can take.
Over the  summer Universal, the parent of this work, released Bowfinger, a comedic  satire which explained that if the action is good, the plot doesn't have  to make sense.
James Cameron knows about this.
His Terminator films  hardly hold their own weight in a world of Jane Austen (incidentally,  there actually is a Jane Austen film opening opposite this movie) but  the effects are grade-A and Arnold Shwarzenegger (from here on out known  as "Arnie") is at his best.
Unfortunately, director Peter Hyams doesn't  have those Cameronian effects and the key performance is Arnie-lite.
After a brief opening stint in 1979's Vatican City and New York City, we  are taken to the big apple of December 28, 1999.
In three days, 1000  years will be over and Satan has a plan to end all humanity.
The end of  days will require the rape and pregnancy of the chosen one (named  Christine York and played by Robin Tunney) between the hours of 11:00pm  and midnight, Eastern Standard Time.
The offspring will then come alive  Rosemary's Baby style and all of existence will be negated.
The details  on how exactly this takeover will occur are omitted (if they ever  existed in the first place).
Arnie plays a security guard for hire.
He takes a bullet for his client  (actually, the movie uses an old bulletproof vest joke to create the  false illusion that he is dead, something that clearly can't happen to  the star only 15 minutes into the movie) and pursues the shooter.
The  man with the gun turns out to be a priest who chose a life of poverty  over the church.
Arnie catches up with him and he mutters an apocalyptic  phrase before Arnie shoots him.
Seem strange yet?
It gets more bizarre.
The guy doesn't have a tongue.
The movie continues in this worn-out chase, kill, chase, kill, etc85 = format until you are absolutely fed up with apocalyptic mythology.
The  only interesting or original revelation the movie makes is that Simon  and Garfunkel were right, "the words of the prophets are written on the  subway walls.
"  . Somewhere in this tangled plot lies a corrupt police officer, some  bodies that are taken from the dead, a few explosions, a flying  helicopter sequence, Latin codes, stigmata and a whole lot of burning  candles.
There is a basic flaw in films that threaten to end all existence: they  very rarely do.
Most directors are far too frightened to produce a movie  that ends by telling everyone in the audience that they are dead.
On  occasion, exceptions are made.
Recently (SPOILER OF ANOTHER MOVIE  AHEAD), The Astronaut's Wife used this tactic which raised a few brows  but hardly cleaned up at the box office.
Not long ago, the Catholic Church got in an uproar over the release of  Dogma, another film that used the bible and some astray theories to  threaten a negation of existence.
End of Days takes it all even further  with gun toting priests, ritual birth ceremonies with snake's blood and  a massive shootout in a church.
It remains a mystery as to why the  church didn't get upset over this production.
The movie does have some other problems.
Satan is a far too agreeable  character.
At one point many viewers may actually root for him.
As in  many action works, there are numerous continuity issues such as the  convenient vanishing of walls and violations of physics.
The writers  must have seen how Kevin Pollak was merely reprising his excellent  performance from The Usual Suspects in this film and slipped in a  blatantly ripped off line, "Satan's greatest trick was convincing man he  didn't exist.
" Perhaps the movie's tagline, "The end is near," is meant  to reassure audiences of the closing credits.. . 
