Ronin (1998) - Robert De Niro, Jean Reno, Natascha McElhone....    Ronin, noun.
In feudal Japan, a samurai warrior without a master,    operating independently.
This was considered dishonorable, and many    ronin committed ritual suicide.
"Ronin," noun.
A new movie starring Robert De Niro which has very    little to do with the previous definition.
Sam (De Niro) is a ronin of sorts, a modern warrior separated from his    former master, the CIA.
His latest job: working with a group of fellow    fired guns, retrieve a briefcase before it can be sold to the Russian    mob.
Their enigmatic employer (Natascha McElhone) won't tell them    what's in the briefcase, or even who they're really working for, but    at least the pay is good.
Sam's partners in crime include Gregor (Stellan Skarsgaard), a quiet    electronics whiz; Vincent (Jean Reno), French coordinator; Larry    (Skipp Sudduth), the designated driver; and Spence (Sean Bean),    English weapons specialist.
Whether CIA, IRA or KGB, each of these    warriors are ronin in the waning of the Cold War.
"Ronin" is best described as a thinking man's action film - more time    is spent on setting up the action than the action itself.
A good    portion of the movie depicts the characters sketching out plans on a    whiteboard, then carefully executing these plans.
A real-world mercenary would, of course, need to do this, but in-depth    planning isn't exactly exciting.
The cerebral aspect is emphasized for    these scenes, and viewers with a bit of patience will appreciate this    nod to realism.
De Niro is, as always, excellent.
His portrayal of the independent,    professional, often arrogant Sam is on target - and that's the    problem.
Sam is entirely too detached from his work, making it hard to    relate to the character.
The rest of the cast follows that lead,    turning in uniformly good performances, but everyone seems distant.
At long last, though, the action starts, one shoot-out per plot twist.
It's carefully thought-out, emphasizing the intellectual.
Everyone    relies on his firearms, and people who get shot tend to stay dead,    just like in real life.
The camera work is a bit shaky at times, but    effective overall.
"Ronin" also has an abundance of increasingly    outrageous car chases, each one expertly executed, even if they strain    credulity towards the end.
Like the ronin in the movie, "Ronin" has a veiled master plan.
The    shadowy manipulator in this case is playwright David Mamet (writing    under a pseudonym), and his influence is evident.
The result is a film    that is intelligent, sharp and worth seeing.. . 
