Release Date: June 26, 1998 Starring: George Clooney, Jennifer Lopez, Ving Rhames, Don Cheadle, Dennis Farina, Steve Zahn, Michael Keaton, Samuel L. Jackson Directed by: Steven Soderbergh Distributed by: Universal Pictures MPAA Rating: R (language, some strong violence)  URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/outofsight.htm. Amidst a rather noisy summer of asteroids, aliens, and masked Mexican bandits comes this rather unassuming gem about money, love, and mo' money.
Written by Scott Frank (HEAVEN'S PRISONERS) in a quirky, ultra-hip style and laced with a retro-cool soundtrack, there's more than enough story and sizzile here to go around for all of the other summer movies.
Marked by one critic to be the only summer film with sex in it (the closest competitor being THE X-FILES' one half-kiss), the character love story provides plenty of depth and excitement for an original concept.
It stars George Clooney (THE PEACEMAKER) as Jack Foley, a notorious but aging bank robber who gets nailed making a getaway from a stickup.
In the slammer, he uses some Latino friends to make his daring escape, shortly thereafter reuniting with his best friend Buddy (Ving Rhames, CON AIR).
The only thing that limits the escape from being perfect is the coincidental presence of a Federal marshal named Karen Sisco (Jennifer Lopez, U-TURN).
From here, the story takes off into Jack and Buddy's plan to heist a large sum of uncut diamonds from a source they had heard about in a previous incarceration together.
Their characters are immediately likeable, in the glorified sort of way that most good-guy bank robbers are; if anything, Jack and Buddy are present day versions of THE NEWTON BOYS.
The acting is of a superb quality here.
George Clooney redeems himself for his last three films, all of which were stinkers, by giving a toned-down performance.
It works out for the better, as though he's almost more relaxed in a less flamboyant role.
Ving Rhames is similarly pleasurable, and almost every line he says comes out with some degree of humor due to his low, gravelly voice and stoic facial expressions.
Jennifer Lopez is sensual as ever, lending an eroticism to the crime caper story.
The other supporting roles are just as solid (Don Cheadle, Dennis Farina, and the stupefying Steve Zahn), and there's even a few bizarre cameos - Michael Keaton and Samuel L. Jackson make appearances in the middle and end, respectively.
There's no doubt that OUT OF SIGHT will be a hit with genre fans, although it's questionable as to how large that fan base is.
Anyone who's not in tune with the retro-hipness atmophere that the movie exudes is going to feel, understandably, that the film is too off-the-wall to be appreciated.
On the other hand, those who are of a PULP FICTION nature will see a product like this as top-of-the-line material, something that can't be missed for a true follower.
On the whole, there's nothing that can't be enjoyed, and it may simply be too crass or crude for some types.
FINAL AWARD FOR "OUT OF SIGHT": 3.0 stars - a good movie.. . 
