rated R starring John Cusack, Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett, Angelina Jolie, Jake Weber, Kurt Fuller, Vicki Lewis based on the article "Something's Got To Give" by Darcy Frey written by Glen Charles and Les Charles directed by Mike Newell. According to a character in PUSHING TIN, Mike Newell's very interesting new comedy, air traffic controllers have a higher risk of depression, alcoholism, and suicide than workers in any other profession.
When I first heard the remark, I took it as a joke, but after the film was through, I understood that it was indeed a fact.
John Cusack stars as Nick Falzone, a New York area air traffic controller who, according to himself, "pushes tin" better than any of his colleagues.
His marriage to Connie(Oscar nominee Cate Blanchett) is working out fairly nice, and he doesn't let the fact that he has to make thousands of fateful choices every day bring him down.
But then Russell Bell(Billy Bob Thornton), the Marlboro Man of air traffic control, gets shipped from his southern post to New York.
An intense rivalry between Nick and Russell begins.
Nick begins to crush on Russell's young, voluptuous, alcoholic wife Mary(Angelina Jolie), while Russell starts to take a liking to Connie.
Nick and Russell's rivarly ensues during work and at home, with each character trying to outdo each other so intensely that they end up trying to control not only planes but their own lives.
John Cusack is fine as always as the protagonist, and PUSHING TIN is a film in which he can show off his dramatic and comedic chops.
It has been a while since Cusack's sarcasm and charisma totally shine in one performance.
Billy Bob Thornton stays low-key during most of the film, but he portrays his villain nicely.
Thornton is indeed talented, but I'd like to see him play more SLING BLADE-type roles instead of being typecast as a southern devil who just happens to have a certain amount of grace.
Cate Blanchett's performance, though, is questionable.
First of all, why should this actress of tremendous skill be miscast in her first American role?
She tries hard enough to perfect a New York drawl but her Australian voice pops through one too many times.
Blanchett is a commanding actress, and she deserves a role with more prowess.
And then there is the great Jolie.
Angelina Jolie.
There is nothing that special about her performance in PUSHING TIN(she is very underused), but she is much different than her characted in PLAYING BY HEART, so I guess I'll say that she shows some depth.
Seriously, everyone should take notice.
Angelina Jolie is going to take over Hollywood.
Director Mike Newell has shown his knack for drama(DONNIE BRASCO) and comedy(FOUR WEDDINGS AND A FUNERAL), and PUSHING TIN gives him the chance to combine both.
For the most part, it works very well, but the last 1/3 of the film features a couple plot elements that are too contrived to take seriously.
If nothing else, Newell has provided a film that works on many levels, both as a drama and a comedy, and also the film shows us very interestingly a job that many of us have never seen or even thought about.
PUSHING TIN is also partly a romance, but mostly it's just the kind of film you want to see.
That's my recommedation.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic akiva@excite.com. http://www.angelfire.com/mo/film watch me on TBS' "Dinner And A Movie" May 21, 8:05pm EST. . . 
