---A copy of this review can be found at  http://www.moviereviews.org/whole_nine_yards,_the.htm ---. Hollywood conservatives beware!
The two best films of the new millennium  aren't great dramatic narratives, heart-tugging romances or even  intellectual studies.
First The Big Tease, a lowbrow mockumentary  cracking jokes at Scottish and homosexuals.
Now The Whole Nine Yards, an  uproarious date flick full of over-exaggerations.
"Oz" Oseransky (Matthew Perry) is a dentist, which, according to several  sources throughout the film, makes him a likely suicide candidate.
This  isn't helped by the fact that his ex-partner, who also was his  father-in-law, embezzled massive amounts of money before dying.
Now Oz  lives in misery with his wife Sophie (Rosanna Arquette), his  mother-in-law (Carmen Ferlan) and a mammoth debt.
Jimmy "The Tulip" Tudesky (Bruce Willis) is a 17-times-veteran contract  killer fresh out of the slammer thanks to a loose tongued plea-bargain.
But Jimmy refused witness protection so he has turned to a new life in  Canada for safety and good gardening soil (tomatoes grow quickly)- next  door to Oz.
Janni Gogolak (Kevin Pollak) is the son of the crime-boss that Tudesky  ratted out.
He lives in Chicago with several hit-men, Tudesky's  estranged wife (Natasha Henstridge) and a contract on Tudesky's head.
Everyone from oz's secretary to Gogolak seems to want or need someone  dead for either revenge, money or necessity.
Who are the double agents?
Who will live?
Who will die?
And which one turns out to be the cop?
The Whole Nine Yards proves to be a hysterical blend of Airplane and  Goodfellas.
Of all the dark comedies over the past several years, none  have managed to make murder as funny as it is here.
Responsible for this  phenomenon is undoubtedly the cast.
Perry's innocent facial  expressions, Willis' ability to deliver absurd lines with the utmost  seriousness and Pollak's beautifully overacted gangster are certainly  contributing factors.
But the real treats are Michael Clarke Duncan  (recently in The Green Mile) and Amanda Peet (recently in Isn't She  Great) as a hit-man and secretary, respectively.
Duncan, for those of  you not familiar with him, is a huge African-American man who  demonstrates his comedic ability with this intentionally cliched  tough-guy character.
Peet is an exceptionally attractive female with a  knack for delivering nutty punch lines in a fashion even more impressive  than Willis.
Another key factor in the film's success is its ability to handle  murder in such a hysterically nonchalant manner.
For every bit as  ultra-disturbing and spine tingling as The Talented Mr. Ripley was, The  Whole Nine Yards is boisterously entertaining.
This goes to show that a  grade-A comedy ensemble can make extraordinary light of what was equally  serious when presented in another manner.
There are actually more deaths  in this film than Ripley and The Whole Nine Yards plays at a fraction of  Ripley's time.
Critics will likely quip that the movie loses points at the end due to  over-sappiness and a forced romance.
I beg to differ.
The Whole Nine  Yards truly achieves its full pomp when it manages to integrate these  "awe!
" scenes with its uproarious comedy.
The end result is something  that Hollywood hasn't seen a quality version of in a long time: a  Friday night date flick.. . 
