SLIDING DOORS Reviewed by Jamie Peck. Great gimmick, mundane movie.
Following this sensational intro, both of  "Sliding Doors"' story tangents settle into the tedious complications  and contrived crises that hamper so many contemporary romantic comedies;  in fact, remove the delectable set-up and the fine acting of Paltrow and  Scotsman John Hannah ("Four Weddings and a Funeral"), as a potential  paramour for the newly-unattached Helen of Branch A, and this film has  practically nothing.
True to stints in past flicks, Paltrow shines  brightly, especially here, while playing opposite the equally charming  Hannah.
Too bad the screenplay fails to give her an alter-ego who  engages on pretty much any level.
Still, it could be worse - it could be Branch B, which teams the already  dull Helen with Lynch's scummy squeeze and Tripplehorn's just-as-scummy  other woman.
There's really nothing wrong with either Lynch or  Tripplehorn's performances, parse - you get the feeling they're doing  what they've been instructed by writer/director Peter Howitt - but when  a movie like this doesn't even conjure up truly hissable antagonists,  trouble can't be far.
And as annoying as it is, Lynch's neurotic  hem-hawing probably resides among the more lively elements of "Sliding  Doors," if only because it's a near-perfect aping of Woody Allen - were  Allen British and 30 years younger, of course.
Let's at least give Howitt credit for keeping his dual tales straight  and untangled, even as they overlap from one tedious scene to the next.
His casting of the lovely always Paltrow is a definite asset - and  permitting her use of the adorable Cockney accent she flexed in "Emma"  is also a pro - but one wonders if such an interesting premise had to be  squandered in service of such a uninteresting plot-and-character combo.
By the time "Sliding Doors" reaches a weird conclusion that attempts to  tie the two Helens' fates together, audiences will presumably examine  their own Branch As and Bs, but maybe only in the sense of where the  past two hours could have taken them.. . 
