The old saying is that you "shouldn't judge a book by its cover.
"  Perhaps that is true in the field of fictional literature, and perhaps  it is not.
But it certainly doesn't hold true in Hollywood.
Notting  Hill, the first major motion picture from director Roger Michell, may  not be overtly obvious from its title, but you needn't look much farther  to discover what the production really is.
The movie is a combination of  the oldest, most proven plot in cinema, a love story; premium character  humor; and top quality acting from two household names.
This combination  brings forth a brilliantly fun and beguiling film, that ranks among the  best date films of the 90's.
However, to quote the work itself, Notting  Hill is "no Jane Austin.
" . Anna Scott (Julia Roberts) is an American actress at the top of her  field.
She is considered to be one of the movie business' top leading  ladies, and is even on the cover of Newsweek.
With all of her fame has  come financial success as well.
For her latest film she was compensated  $15 million.
But Anna is forlorn.
Much as Woody Allen demonstrated in  Celebrity, fame has certain aspects that are not so glorious.
And as a  sexual icon, Anna experiences them all.
The tabloids prey on her like an  eagle on its dinner, and privacy is the rarest of things.
She even  resorts to checking into hotels under cartoon characters' names.
William Thacker (Hugh Grant) is a prosaic British man.
He lives in  Notting Hill, England, where his largest claim to fame is probably his  blue house.
He has the absolutely mundane job of running a travel book  store so small that for a celebrity to enter would be an extraordinary,  unprecedented event.
Keeping with the tradition of nearly every romance in the history of  cinema, the two protagonists meet via an unusual set of circumstances  and fall madly in love.
In this case, the events include spilled orange  juice, a poorly written travel book, and a shoplifter who uses his  trousers for assistance.
However, unlike most films of this genre, the  great obstacle standing between William and Anna for the two hours that  the film occupies, is not someone else, or something else, but  themselves.
Notting Hill is the story of opposites attracting, then  being forced to deal with the opposites and still create a nirvanic  state.
In this sense the production goes one step further than, and  actually deals with the realities that follow.
Aside from being a wonderful romance, Notting Hill is a hilarious film.
The humor is largely based on character traits, not punch line jokes,  although some do find their way into the script.
A good example is  William's house maid, Spike (Rhys Ifans).
His scraggly appearance mixed  with the character's lack of responsibility make for a light, enjoyable  moment every time he is on screen.
In order for a film of this nature to be successful, the acting must be  stellar.
Roberts and Grant make for an absolutely enchanting on screen  duo.
The two are different actors, one sporting an English accent and  the other a perfect typecast for the pretty-girl-in-bad-industry role,  as she displayed in Pretty Woman.
The contrast makes their job of being  opposites very simple.
Everything from the looks they exchange before  kissing to their use of the English language works perfectly for their  roles.
Although they have both done better work before, the two actors  certainly don't slouch here.
A love story is a love story.
Whether it be Bogart and Bergman, Grant  and Roberts or the leads in a 3rd grade play, the plot is always the  same.
But with the finite amount of variance allowed, Notting Hill does  stand out.
Between the characters, the acting and the man-meet-woman  plot, this film is a solid work.
I promise Jane Austin is nowhere to be  found here, and this is one that you can judge by its cover.. . 
