Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Manchester City Centre) Released in the UK by Buena Vista International on April 28, 2000;  certificate 18; 117 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1. Directed by Wes Craven; produced by Cathy Konrad, Marianne Maddalena, Kevin  Williamson.
Written by Ehren Kruger; based on characters created by Kevin Williamson.
Photographed by Peter Deming; edited by Patrick Lussier.
CAST..... Neve Campbell..... Sidney Prescott David Arquette..... Dwight 'Dewey' Riley Courteney Cox Arquette..... Gale Weathers Patrick Dempsey..... Detective Mark Kincaid Scott Foley..... Roman Bridger Lance Henriksen..... John Milton Jenny McCarthy..... Sarah Darling Parker Posey..... Jennifer Jolie. The character Neve Campbell plays in "Scream 3" has been so badly shaken in  the first two movies that she now lives in Monterey with a reclusive  anonymous lifestyle.
When she finally drives to California to join in with  the rest of the action, she's quieter, thoughtful and more authoritative.
Watching this makes us realise what great potential Campbell has for  performing in serious drama.
I kept fantasising about writing a great  screenplay for her, to showcase her captivating presence and win her  international acclaim.
It's not just time for Neve to move on, though, but everyone involved.
When  the original "Scream" was released in 1996, it was a stunning comic idea -- a  film with the structure of a slasher pic in which the characters knew all the  clichés and had self-referential conversations about them.
Unfortunately, the  idea was copied, and quickly became a cliché in itself.
Now almost every  American movie starring kids under 20 is filled with smug, cynical allusions  to pop culture that just make us groan and yawn.
Given that its options are limited and it's the third trek over the same  ground, "Scream 3" does a pretty good job of engaging us.
The filmmakers have  announced that it's the last in the series, and while I'm not about to  complain, at least their latest work is watchable.
It comes up with a pretty  ingenious way of generating more jokes, in fact, by setting its story in  Hollywood, and featuring the production of a movie called "Stab 3".
A horror  movie, wouldn't you know it, based on characters from the first two "Scream"  pictures.
This gives the director, Wes Craven, and his screenwriter, Ehren Kruger, the  freedom to blur the line between what's going on in the 'reality' of the  story and the world of movies.
The plot involves another mystery about who is  perpetrating a murderous rampage, and at this point in the trilogy we've been  introduced to so many characters with so many conflicting personality traits  that there is indeed a fair amount of suspense about the identity of the  killer.
In the end, Craven and Kruger come up with an unpredictable and  arbitrary solution, but hey, at least we're not bored, as we were in "Scream  2".
That sequel made a bad mistake in thinking it was a real horror movie,  and ditching the humour.
"Scream 3" is generally easy to watch, with colourful, sexy visuals, and  although its form of parody is becoming old hat, there is enough successful  ironic chatter to get us giggling.
As I've suggested, it's better than  "Scream 2".
But somehow it doesn't work well enough to recommend.
The idea  has been stretched too far.
They should have made one movie, and called it  quits.
My biggest concern is that a lot of the violence is excessive for a  lighthearted flick.
Every time a knife is pulled out, for example, there is a  disgusting metallic 'zing!
' on the sound track, and a bright gleam on the  screen.
People get slaughtered in cruel, not amusing, ways.
Unnecessary.
Sick.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
