Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. It's hard to find a film franchise with more artifice than James Bond.
And  what ensures the survival of this species is the natural acting of Pierce  Brosnan.
The spy who is as ageless as Barbie finds himself the unwitting conveyor of  a death weapon, a turnabout he finds most unsatisfying.
An oil magnate and  friend of M - Bond's boss at British Intelligence, played by Dame Judi Dench  - has been blown apart; what's worse, the sacred ground of MI6 headquarters  as been desecrated.
The businessman's daughter has escaped her kidnappers  just in time for her father's funeral.
This woman, Elektra King (Sophie  Marceau), has inherited the fortune, and immerses herself in completing an  oil pipeline that will span western Asia and help supply the entire Western  world into the next century.
Our hero sets out to guard Elektra's body, as he believes a dreaded  terrorist is back in circulation, and Elektra may be his next target.
Of  course Bond is successful in saving her life, but then goes out on his own  in an attempt to find the evil Renard (Robert Carlyle).
During this  self-directed sub-mission, Bond encounters a young and brilliant scientist  named Dr. Christmas Jones (Denise Richards).
It is in an underground  mission complex that Bond and Dr. Jones (catchy name, no?
) fall into the  clutches of the saggy-faced fox Renard - just another level in the game of  following the Bond formula.
Will James even have time to get friendly with  Christmas?
The conflict is more complicated than this, and very formulaic.
There's  really nothing we haven't seen before.
So how does Pierce Brosnan figure?
This man's acting is not as stylized as the acting of Sean Connery - the  only better Bond.
But Brosnan is strong precisely because he calls little  attention to the artifice; he simply engages in corny one-liners and then  gets into the next action sequence.
Somehow he manages to maintain his  dignity and wit throughout;  it's as though he tolerates the whimsical  demands of the script, and focuses his talents on what he's good at -  interacting with others in the cast.
No one before him has played a more  sympathetic Bond.
Most viewers won't even get angry at him for the loose  morals he continually displays, or for the downright tacky sexual puns.
We  even get a tiny glimpse of vulnerability.
Once it is implied that Bond has  lost one close to him, and at various points we are convinced by Brosnan's  wincing that his collarbone is not fully healed from the hi-jinx near the  start of the story.
As in any Bond installment, the women are beautiful, and Sophie Marceau is  believable enough in the multi-faceted role she is called upon to play.
As  the American scientist Jones, Denise Richards speaks and reacts sufficiently  well, but gives herself away when she opens her mouth.
With the accent and  looks of a teenager, Richards fails to create the illusion of scholarly  wisdom and worldly sophistication needed for the role.
As Bond's superior,  M, Judi Dench acts with understatement;  we hope to see her in more scenes  than are usually allotted , and we are not disappointed.
We even get a peek  at the skills that helped her gain her status.
One underutilized character is Desmond Llewelyn's Q.
He appears in only two  scenes, showing Bond a couple of gadgets and scolding him for stealing a  miraculous boat he was saving for his retirement.
Yes, it is suggested that  he's going, as we meet John Cleese, that master of the cameo appearance, as  R, Q's slightly buffoonish yet haughty replacement.
Renard does an adequate job as the main villain.
Early in the narrative we  are treated to a holographic profile of this evil man.
What's scary is that  he has suffered a gunshot wound to the head, the bullet lodging in his  brain, unable to be removed.
Slowly it is killing him.
The right side of  his face resembles melted plastic, and he sports a shaven head, which causes  him to resemble a young Alan Arkin.
He is hateable enough, but one wishes  for a bit more motivation, a few more explanatory tidbits from the too-slick  script.
Robbie Coltrane does a reprise of his character from "Goldeneye," Valentin  Zukovsky, offering a degree of comic relief, and support for Bond.
Michael Apted is a very accomplished director -- he was at the helm of  "Nell," Gorillas in the Mist," and "A Coal Miner's Daughter," among many  others -- and it shows in this film's pace and tone.
Apted takes risks here  and there, but never goes too far over the top.
The chase scenes are  plenty, and have the necessary conventions of action.
Apted is able to  blend scenes of exposition well with the action.
His only handicap is the  script's lack of detail;  the set-up is too fast, and we sometimes find  ourselves wondering if we missed something.
The short review is that Apted links his scenes well, and delivers a solid  third campaign in Brosnan's naturally suave Bond.
This whole franchise has  always been a method of delivering sex and style, wit and chase.
Don't miss  it if you're a fan of things Bond. . . 
