Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Bromborough) Released in the UK by UIP on January 7, 2000; certificate 15; 105 minutes;  country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1. Directed by Tim Burton; produced by Scott Rudin, Adam Schroeder.
Written by Andrew Kevin Walker; from a screen story by Kevin Yagher, Andrew  Kevin Walker; based upon the short story "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" by  Washington Irving.
Photographed by Emmanuel Lubezki; edited by Chris Lebenzon.
Washington Irving's short story "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow", first  published in 1819, is a well-respected folk tale of supernatural secrets, and  has survived the generations long enough to spawn several film adaptations --  among them an Emmy-winning mini-series for kids and a Disney animation.
When  Tim Burton, that distinctive director of twisted heroic journeys and gothic  fantasies, decided to do his own remake of the Irving work, the project was  expected to be his prestigious bid for Oscar success.
If David Lynch can make  a subtle movie with a premise as weird as that of "The Straight Story",  people thought, surely Tim Burton can take a delicate approach to a classic?
Actually, this "Sleepy Hollow" is as Burtonesque as possible, a gory  special-effects extravaganza set in 1799 that plays like a cross between  Thomas Hardy and "The Evil Dead".
Tim has determined to stay in his own wild  world, and along with his screenwriters, Andrew Kevin Walker and Kevin  Yagher, has confidently shuffled around the details of Irving's plot for his  own purposes.
Even the image of the famous literary figure Ichabod Crane has  been altered -- he's no longer a lanky, curious schoolteacher who lives where  the story is set, but a clumsy New York City police constable played by  Johnny Depp.
Burton and Depp's Crane travels to the village of Sleepy Hollow to  investigate the murders of three local men -- all of whom were found in the  woods without heads.
The town elders -- Van Tassell (Michael Gambon),  Hardenbrook (Michael Gough), Steenwyck (Jeffrey Jones) and Phillipse (Richard  Griffiths) -- inform Crane that they suspect the legendary 'Headless  Horsemen' of the crimes, a warrior ghost who is said to stalk and decapitate  the inhabitants of the area in search of his own noggin.
But the constable  does not want to listen, claiming to be a man of science and reason, and  searching for a human culprit.
There is fun to be had in just watching Crane try to operate his newfangled  scientific gadgets, which are elaborately designed for no visible purpose,  with windows and panels and knobs aplenty, which constantly spring out of his  control.
Depp plays the character as a clearly preposterous man who  nonetheless attempts to maintain serious authority, and who rigidly keeps  eyes wide open, head upright and mouth poised properly even while cowering  from a spider, or shrieking in peril under bed sheets.
The amusingly clumsy fellow soon learns that the Headless Horseman is indeed  a real figure, and also finds such sights as a witch and a magical tree.
Crane carries out silly interrogations, investigates town records and digs up  the victims' graves for further research, getting closer to the explanation  behind Sleepy Hollow's odd events, and to a violent confrontation with the  villain responsible.
There are slow patches, and at times the film gets  tangled up in unnecessary confusing details on the way to its simple  resolution.
But the payoff redeems the flaws, thanks to Burton's visuals,  which are not inaccurate to the location and period, but are larger than  life, with the depth of Emmanuel Lubezki's photography slightly swelling  every image and casting a sinister blue mist over the night air.
When the  horseman jumps out from these clouds, the camera rushes around in jarring  close-ups to follow the havoc he wreaks, and this makes for stunning action  sequences.
Admittedly, I expected terrific production values and an amusing Johnny Depp  performance from "Sleepy Hollow".
Burton, as I keep stressing, is one of the  most visually astute of all working filmmakers, and Depp has performed  creatively in the challenging title roles of the director's "Edward  Scissorhands" and "Ed Wood".
The pleasant surprise here is Christina Ricci, a  young actress whose recent persona has only been fit for satire, with its  rebellious, dead-eyed, flat-voiced arrogance.
She is sincere and subtle as  Katrina, the innocent maiden who loves and protects Icabod Crane, displaying  versatility I believed her to have lost.
No doubt Ricci was just so amazed by the movie's carefully constructed  atmosphere that she could not stand in the way of it with her usual  distracting sarcasm.
"Sleepy Hollow" proves -- as do "Pee Wee's Big  Adventure", "Batman", "Edward Scissorhands" and "The Nightmare Before  Christmas" -- that the offbeat crannies of Tim Burton's mind are worth  visiting, and he knows how to take us into them.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani. Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website,  http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
