Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre) Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on 24 March, 2000; certificate 15; 125  minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1. Directed by James Mangold; produced by Cathy Konrad, Douglas Wick.
Written by Lisa Loomer, James Mangold, Anna Hamilton Phelan; based on the  book by Susanna Kaysen.
Photographed by Jack Green; edited by Kevin Tent.
"Girl, Interrupted" argues that mental institutions keep the sane and release  the unstable, because of stuffy procedures and restrictive rules written by  bureaucratic doctors disconnected from reality.
While I am sure these things  are true, the film never makes us care, because its heroine is a bitchy  little nut-job.
"Haven't you ever confused a dream with reality, stolen something when you  had the cash, or thought your train moving as it sat in the station?
" she  pleads with us in the opening scenes.
But that's not the kind of behaviour  she's being locked up for.
This is a young lady who responds "What?
" whenever  anyone asks her a question, drifts into daydreaming in the middle of  sentences and thinks it's perfectly acceptable to guzzle great quantities of  pills and vodka.
Her name is Susanna Kaysen, a real-life figure whose book this movie is based  on.
If the film is anything to go by, I'm lucky that I never read it.
"Girl,  Interrupted" is a pathetic example of someone denying she's in denial; it's  as stupid as Sylvia Plath's "The Bell Jar" without the engaging style.
There  are journal entries in the film we're supposed to accept as profound  philosophising.
Most of them are just the kind of pretentious  stream-of-consciousness drivel that many teenage girls write, only to look  back on years later and cringe with embarrassment.
The story is set in the 1960s -- boys are being shipped to their deaths in  Vietnam, and Susanna (Winona Ryder) thinks she's got a hard life because her  mother is hassling her about going to college.
After a suicide attempt, she  is encouraged to sign herself into Claymoore, an expensive mental hospital  where the head nurse (Whoopi Goldberg) gives a straightforwardly accurate  diagnosis: "You are a lazy, self-indulgent little girl who is driving herself  crazy.
". Susanna does a lot of mellow lying around, drunk on her own superiority,  convinced she's "artistic" rather than crazy.
Fellow inmate Lisa (Angelina  Jolie) offers her support, probably because the two women have the same  problem -- thinking they know the secrets of the universe, when they're  actually defective jerks.
Other friendly faces include a pathological liar  (Clea Duvall) and a girl who likes to set herself on fire (Elisabeth Moss).
Anyone in a position of authority, or who displays the least bit of  conventionality, is portrayed as an uptight white-collar conservative square.
I am reminded of "Reality Bites" (1994), another film starring Ryder in which  the alleged heroes were self-obsessed layabout losers.
"Girl, Interrupted" is moronic and arrogant crap, not least because its  obnoxious onscreen behaviour is accompanied by a voice-over that asks,  essentially, "Can you BELIEVE these stuffed shirts thought I was obnoxious?
"  Perhaps the book or true events would lead me to a different conclusion, but  the Susanna Kaysen of this film could use a good hard slap in the face.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani. Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
