All of my film reviews are archived at  http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix. This review has been submitted to The Shrubbery   http://www.theshrubbery.com. Any comments about this review?
E-mail me at justinfelix@yahoo.com. Based on the novel THE GREEN MILE by Stephen King.
Starring Tom Hanks, Michael Duncan, and James Cromwell.
Rated R (contains scenes of extreme violence and profanity). Synopsis:  1930s Death Row warden Paul Edgecomb begins to suspect his  newest prisoner, a huge bulking man convicted of killing two small  girls, possesses supernatural powers and a philanthropic outlook on  life.
Comments:  Stephen King initially wrote THE GREEN MILE, the story from  which the movie is based upon, in installments.
In other words, the  story appeared in serial form and was later collected and republished as  a novel.
While some considered this a ploy to garner even more money  from King's legions of fans, others saw this as an attempt to recapture  the feel of serials from the 19th Century.
Charles Dickens, for  example, wrote many of his novels in a serial form.
Several  contemporary critics are beginning to accept King as the "Dickens of our  day".
King's voice, in other words, is the voice of the latter half of  the American 20th Century, they say.
Whether or not you feel King is a great writer, a good writer, or a  god-awful writer is largely irrelevant when you see a movie based upon  one of his books.
While a number of turkeys exist (the recent CARRIE 2  for instance), there can be no denying that several of the finest films  produced in the last decade and a half are based upon King's stories.
THE SHINING, the understated STAND BY ME, and the Academy-Award-winning  suspense classic MISERY are just a couple examples.
The film which seems to garner the most fan praise, though, is THE  SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION.
Because of this, die-hard Stephen King fans and  movie buffs have been waiting for THE GREEN MILE, in some respects a  sequel to SHAWSHANK, to be released.
THE GREEN MILE, like SHAWSHANK,  revolves around a prison, is based on a King novel, and features the  same director, Frank Darabont.
Was it well worth the wait?
Yes.
Is it perfect?
No.
In fact, THE  SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION may stand as the superior of the two films, though  I do not necessarily wish to detract from THE GREEN MILE's appeal.
THE GREEN MILE deals with rather unpleasant issues.
The main character,  portrayed by Tom Hanks, suffers from a urinary infection and is in  constant pain during the first half of the film.
He is the warden at a  prison for Death Row inmates, most of whom are not pleasant people.
His  staff includes a sadist who wishes to hurt the inmates in any way he  can.
The audience is presented with three electrocutions during the  course of the movie (set, by the way, in the 1930s), and these  electrocutions are presented in a methodically slow and deliberate  manner.
The dark subject matter is contrasted, however, with dim-witted John  Coffey, who seems to offer hope to all around him in the prison.
Coffey  has been sentenced to death for the murder of two girls, though the  audience, from the very beginning, suspects correctly that he is  innocent of the crimes.
Coffey seems responsible for several "miracles"  which occur throughout the film, and his sacrifices are obvious  allusions to Christ (note that they both share the initials J.C.).
While this all may seem "heavy" and dark, there are quite a few moments  of human compassion and humor in the movie as well.
A mouse, christened  Mr. Jingles by an inmate, in particular, provides several comic moments.
These moments are necessary, for the movie runs well over three hours.
Add in trailers and theater promotions, the audience sits for nearly 3  1/2 hours.
This is perhaps THE GREEN MILE's weak spot.
While a lengthy  running time is certainly justifiable in many films, I couldn't help but  feel that THE GREEN MILE could easily have been cut by about 20 or so  minutes.
Several scenes seem to take too much time to develop.
The acting in THE GREEN MILE is superb, and I wouldn't be surprised if  an Academy Award nomination or two are in the works for the cast.
Tom  Hanks is good as the lead, but he's supported by quite an ensemble which  includes veterans like Graham Greene, James Cromwell, and Michael Jeter.
Michael Duncan seems to steal the show, however, with his massive  presence as John Coffey, a presence which seems to hang over all the  scenes that he isn't in as well as the ones that he is in.
THE GREEN MILE was released during the Christmas season.
While it  doesn't seem like a Stephen King film would make a good family holiday  movie (and, make no mistake, THE GREEN MILE is certainly an adult film),  its theme of redemption and sacrifice, oddly, do seem to resonate with  the holiday spirit.
After the atrocious THE RAGE: CARRIE 2, it's good  to see that America's most popular storyteller is again being  well-represented by the movie industry.. . 
