THE MATRIX Cast: Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss, Joe Pantoliano, Hugo Weaving, Julian Arahanga Directors: Andy Wachowski, Larry Wachowski Screenplay: Andy Wachowski, Larry Wachowski Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 4 stars. The first immediately impressive aspect of The Matrix is its spectacular visual style, the second its fascinating story line.
Directors/writers Larry and Andy Wachowski have made a dark and often chilling Sci Fi piece; one that sucks its audience into an incredible futuristic world and never relents until the final credits roll.
Kudos to the Wachowski's for providing enough intrigue to disguise some of the film's weaker moments; intrigue that is created not just from clever scripting but also from testosterone charged performances.
Keanu Reeves and Australian Hugo Weaving are exhilarating opponents who face off towards the end in a few breathtaking action sequences.
Like in 1998's Dark City, there are significant holes in the plot, but none that can't be overshadowed by the nightmarish atmosphere that is evoked.
In fact, The Matrix often feels like a bad dream sweetened by amusing (although derivative) subplots.
Posters, theatrical trailers and even the film's web site pose the same question: what is The Matrix?
Well, that would be telling.
Since much of the interest in this film comes from not knowing what it is about for a lengthy period, it would be unfair to reveal the diagnostics.
Thomas Anderson (Keanu Reeves) - a computer hacker known as "Neo" - is told that he is "the one;" a man who will free the human race from the clutches of The Matrix.
Anderson joins rebel-warriors Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne) and Trinity (Carrie Ann Moss) in a journey across time and reality, all the while battling a group known as "the agents," led by Agent Smith (Hugo Weaving).
If that synopsis sounds a little silly, rest assured that the basic story line makes a reasonable amount of sense.
Bit by bit, we are eventually told what is wrong with the seemingly ordinary world our characters are based in, and yes - what The Matrix is.
At more than one stage I was reminded of "The Force" - The Matrix is also a power that can be manipulated to the hero's advantage.
Anderson undergoes Skywalker-esque training, and these scenes provide great bits of martial arts action and daring stunts including roof-to-roof leaps.
Morpheus is our Yoda, and he has the right amount of wisdom and courage thanks to Laurence Fishburne's enigmatic presence.
Filmed and edited entirely in Sydney, The Matrix will help put Australia on the map as one of the best places in the world to make movies.
It is rare for special effects to aid story as much as they do here, and it is equally rare for a Sci Fi blockbuster to build as much premise and intrigue as this one.
The Matrix is not only a crowd-pleasing success - it is a fascinating look at reality and how it is perceived.
No doubt this film, like The Truman Show, will make us look at our world in a suspicious new light.. . . 
