CRUEL INTENTIONS Reviewed by Jamie Peck. A contempo update of the malicious goings-on in Choderlos De Laclos'  1782 novel "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," also the basis of the 1987 Glenn  Close-John Malkovich dazzler "Dangerous Liaisons," "Cruel Intentions"  substitutes the aristocratic France setting with a posh New York  boarding school on summer break.
It retains the deliciously  agenda-minded characters, however, because the teens of today can  presumably be as vicious as the patricians of yesteryear.
Buying this is  a bit of a stretch, if somewhat vital to immerse yourself in the film's  warped atmosphere - exaggeration has never been so enjoyable.
Gellar's Kathryn and stepbrother Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe, her co-star  previously in "I Know What You Did Last Summer") are so bored with their  very blue-blooded existence that they've taken it upon themselves to  bring down everyone who crosses them - and even a few who haven't.
Kathryn's current project concerns sexually soiling the naive new  girlfriend (Selma Blair, from TV's "Zoe, Duncan, Jack & Jane") of her  ex-squeeze, a task Sebastian isn't up to because it's far too easy for  his extensive debauching talents.
Oh, well.
Guess she'll just have to  initiate the corruption herself.
He, meanwhile, is far more taken with the headmaster's daughter  ("Pleasantville"'s Reese Witherspoon), mostly because she wrote an  article for "Seventeen" about her bold (well, for this day and age)  decision to stay abstinent until marriage.
Sebastian and Kathryn, then,  see this as an opportunity for a little pseudo-incestuous wager over  whether or not he can rip her of her innocence: If Kathryn wins, she  gets his hot 1956 Jag.
If he wins, he gets her - in the Biblical sense.
"I'll let you put it _anywhere_," Kathryn not-quite-demurely purrs,  which pretty much cements the deal for Sebastian.
"Cruel Intentions" eventually covers some iffy terrain when real-life  couple Phillippe and Witherspoon actually warm to each other after  initially rocky introductions; his charismatic but necessarily  stone-cold portrayal makes their rushed courtship a little hard to  totally buy, while it's difficult to comprehend why someone so smart and  determined as she could ever fall for a smooth operator like him.
If  this were the only storyline, "Intentions" would be in trouble.
But it's  not - the subplots have subplots, which, in turn, have subplots still  (some of them iffy as well).
It's a complex tale, but one in which even  the corners are dressed with delicious trappings.
Gellar's icy hauteur is chief among them, but she's got some serious  competition from WB network co-actress Blair.
The latter steals the  movie with her giddily self-depreciating demeanor, and gets to share a  racy scene with Gellar destined to go down as an audience favorite - at  least for the males.
Witherspoon is fine, too, wisely making her part's  lifestyle choice neither sanctimonious nor self-congratulatory.
And  director/writer Roger Kumble hardly misses a beat as far as the smirky  tone is concerned, from the opening sequences of one-upmanship to the  guaranteed closing comeuppance.
Kumble is also successful with style and locale.
The sumptuous  production design - posh bedrooms, blush poolsides - is as sensual as  any of the lead performers, the cinematography crisp and darkly  colorful, and the subdued rock soundtrack - available, ironically, on  Virgin Records - only furthers "Cruel Intentions" satiny ambience.
(The  score, however, just isn't on par, with some annoying techno loop  constantly in the background.
) Nothing, however, overpowers the games  these people play, nasty and naughty though they may be.
For a movie  with its intentions mostly in the right place, "Intentions" is cruel but  cool.. . 
