RUSH HOUR Reviewed by Jamie Peck. For the record, I don't mind Tucker much at all.
Sure, he can be as  irksome as fingernails on a blackboard at times, but so could Jim Carrey  back in his pre-"Truman Show" days.
Rather, the problem with him in  "Rush Hour" is that his squealy self and frantic antics just don't sit  well with the role he's playing - a rogue LAPD detective named James  Carter.
Check out the opening scene (which genre fans know has  ultimately _very_little_ to do with the rest of the film), in which  Carter takes part in a sting operation to trap an explosives dealer.
Um,  could he or his cop-endangering shtick be any harder to swallow?
"Rush Hour" becomes a little more palatable once Jackie Chan enters the  picture, cast as a Hong Kong inspector who teams up with Carter to crack  the kidnaping of the Chinese Consul's 11-year-old daughter, a case that  spans their respective countries.
Chan fans might be disappointed by how  little the master martial artist gets to simultaneously display his  flair for physical comedy and killer moves; a scene where he battles bad  guys while protecting the priceless exhibits in an art museum is classic  Chan, a scene where his Carter-inspired use of a racial epithet gets him  in trouble in a bar full of African-Americans is not.
That bit aside, "Rush Hour"'s humor of choice seems to be disparaging  quips directed at Asians ("I've been lookin' for your sweet-and-sour  chicken a--!
" Carter screeches to a Chinese bad guy); it wouldn't be  funny if it were the other way around, and it's not funny the way it is.
Much more successful is the film's comedy when it plays up the culture  clash between Chan and Tucker; this star and star-on-the-rise have a  nice rapport both on-screen and off, the latter evidenced by the  now-notorious Chan tradition of showing outtakes over the end credits.
Here, it's good stuff worth sticking around for, especially when the two  slip up together.
The title must refer to a gridlock of cliches instead of cars -- not  only do we get the mismatched-buddy-cop story, we also get the  fish-out-of-water and renegade-man-of-the-law angles and a climactic  red-wire-or-blue-wire moment to top everything off.
Though nobody will  presumably accuse "Rush Hour" of breaking new cinematic ground, it's a  tad on the disheartening side that this match made in odd couple heaven  fails to enhance the familiar plot motions to memorable lengths.
If  you're a praying person, get on your knees - then, maybe Chan and Tucker  will get a screenplay that's up to their collective speed in the  inevitable "Rush Hour 2.
". . 
