Rush Hour (1998) - Jackie Chan, and a bunch of people that aren't as cool as him.    You have to give Jackie Chan some credit.
He's absolutely determined    to break into the American action-star market, but has he gone too far    with "Rush Hour"?
Neither Inspector Lee (Chan) nor Detective Carter (Chris Tucker) are    used to working with partners, and both have reputations for causing    more trouble than they're worth at times.
So when they're both    assigned to work on the same case - the kidnapping of a Chinese    consul's daughter - the FBI agent in charge (Tom Wilkinson) just tries    to get them both out of the way.
They keep getting in the way, of    course, doing their best to solve the case on their own.
This new film divorces Chan from many of the elements that made him a    minor celebrity in the States with a small but devoted following.
Gone    are the rest of the Hong Kong action stars who, like Chan, perform    their own stunts; gone are the equally famous Chinese directors and    their sometimes-bizarre camera styles.
More traditional, and therfore more predictable, American elements    take their place.
The humor is much more pedestrian, dominated by the    inevitable "fish out of water" humor as the stereotypical uber-hip    L.A. cop (Tucker) is forced to work with the quiet professional    (Chan).
The fights are more American, with far more gunplay than the    typical Chan movie.
Tucker, best remembered for his role as the bizarre, cross-dressing    reporter from "The Fifth Element," once again flexes his comedic    muscles to the fullest.
His snappy wit is a bit risque at times but    keeps the movie rolling nicely along.
This is contrasted with the more    subtle, drier humor of Chan, and it makes for a brilliant combination.
The two play off each other well, helping ensure you'll leave the    theater with a smile.
You want action?
"Rush Hour" has some of that, too.
It's standard    action-movie fare, nothing spectacular.
In particular, Chan's    incredible talent is underutilized here.
(You want real action, go    rent "Supercop.
") But the stunts are all competently done (even if    most of the cast, save Chan, called for stunt doubles).
"Rush Hour" is tongue-in-cheek, but so are most of Chan's movies.
And    his "straight man" to Tucker's more overt comedy only helps.
Don't    take it too seriously, and you'll have a great time at this movie.. . 
