Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. Raja Gosnell's 'Never Been Kissed' is a slick and likable film, a  formulaic but ultimately satisfying romance targeted toward you, if  you are part of the 18-34 demographic that causes Hollywood directors  to look over their shoulders at every gag and angle.
Executive producer Drew Barrymore is so hard to dislike:  she has a  talent for seeming genuine, ingenuous, sweet, amicable.
This vehicle  has her portraying Josie Geller, a 25 year-old, brilliant young editor  at the Sun-Times, a Northwestern graduate who has never gotten around  to having a personal life.
A whim of her crusty boss gives her the  chance at being a reporter - long an ambition of Josie's.
Better yet,  she'll be an undercover reporter at a high school, enrolling as a 17  year-old!
Her  brother, Rob Geller (David Arquette) isn't so sure  this ruse will work, but Josie nevertheless drives up to the school in  Rob's gauche Vega.
Will Josie be popular enough to penetrate the  cliques-that-be?
The answer, which we discover as Josie in her white  jeans sashays into Spanish class:  NO!
Josie, as it turns out, still suffers from terminal over-compensation.
She is so preoccupied with pleasing others, that she stumbles  clumsily through the halls and life, even once walking into an opening  door.
Rob, as it turns out, saves her act by re-enrolling also.
He  has faked his ID, and wishes to reactivate his chances at a minor  league baseball contract.
Smoothly Rob reverses the opinions of the  superficial student population:  he lies continually until Josie has a  sterling, awesome reputation.
Now she is liked not only by the  "Denominators" - a nerdy math group led by a girl named Aldys (Leelee  Sobieski) - but by the cool crowd as well.
Alas, her major problem persists:  even as she masquerades as a part  of the teen crowd that rejected her the first time through high  school, Josie Geller is scooped by reporters from other papers.
She  simply cannot uncover the right story, the juicy scandal that would  invite the notoriety for which Mr. Rigfort (Garry Marshall) has sent  her.
The film is expert at recreating "Josie Grossie's" zit-covered high  school years.
Barrymore navigates her innocent way into gross  injustice.
Even before the prom she is set up, Carrie-like, to take a  humiliating dive.
In flashbacks disturbing in their reality, we watch  the insensitivity of youngsters.
Later on, of course, there is too  much moralizing about this selfishness;  but Barrymore pulls off the  preachiness without being too pouty.
David Arquette acts well as Rob, his manner properly crazy and  supportive.
In posing as a teen, he has a bit more trouble than  Barrymore, though:  too mature and mannish.
Garry Marshall?
This guy is the original Brooklyn smoothie:  he does  it all (with canny knowledge of how to make his own directing efforts  succeed), and acts with abandon in a role replicated from his  performance as network chief in 'Murphy Brown.
'  Good at creating a  living caricature, this guy is.
Michael Vartan as English teacher Sam Coulson is accomplished at  playing through in the game of overcoming stereotypes:  he's the  caring and supportive teacher, young and good-looking and himself  artistic yet athletic.
A he-man with a momma's-boy 'do.
What amounts  to the film's key plot element as well as its horrendous artifice is  the relationship between Sam and Josie.
Apparently the audience is  not supposed to be bothered when Sam longs for Josie, her precocious  knowledge enthralling him.
What's worse, Rigfort and  another of  Josie's bosses, (funny guy John C. Reilly, miscast here) try forcing  Josie's hand into an ethically messy situation involving Sam.
And we  are not supposed to dislike them for this scheme?
Molly Shannon supplies great support as Josie's newsroom friend Anita.
Her role also demands several nods to stereotypes, namely promiscuous  ones.
But Shannon shows that her comic muscles are in shape in scene  after scene.
As an aside, what causes screenwriters to fall for silly or obscurely  allegorical names?
Who out there knows the meaning of the name of  Josie's vacuous office assistant???
'Never Been Kissed' ranks above average in the surplus of teen films  hitting the market.
Its strength is sincere acting, its weakness a  cloying predictability.
It's obvious the film is  aware of its own  need to meet the formula that will satisfy an audience.
The paradox  here is that the ending makes us wait, and then indeed IS satisfying.. . 
