Columbia / 1:33 / 1998 / PG (brief nudity, innuendo) Cast: Victoria Adams; Melanie Brown; Emma Bunton; Melanie Chisholm; Geri  Halliwell; Richard E. Grant; Alan Cumming; George Wendt; Mark McKinney;  Naoko Mori; Roger Moore  Director: Bob Spiers  Screenplay: Kim Fuller . Hello.
My name is Jamie, and I'm a Spiceaholic.
Well, not really.
Let's  just say I'm a casual fan of the Spice Girls; I know they're not too deep  or challenging, but their British bubblegum bounce is good enough to keep  me on the stairmaster for a long while.
(And, a definite plus, group  members Geri "Ginger Spice" Halliwell, Emma "Baby Spice" Bunton, Melanie  "Sporty Spice" Chisholm, Victoria "Posh Spice" Adams and Melanie "Scary  Spice" Brown are all easy on the eyes.
) I fearlessly admit that I'm  familiar with their music, and now I'm familiar with "Spice World," their  feature film debut, as well.
A kind of hybrid between "A Hard Day's  Night," "Clueless" and the "Naked Gun" movies, "Spice World" isn't quite  tasty, nor does it leave you with a bad case of indigestion.
It's alright,  but I'd probably rather be on the stairmaster listening to them than sit  through their movie again.
There isn't much of a story here, as "Spice World" is basically a series  of interchangeable, scattershot skits and spoofs stuck between some  adequately spirited musical numbers.
The movie is framed around a hectic  couple of days for the girls, as they ready themselves for a big concert  in England.
Along the way, there are dozens of potential comedic  catastrophes -- a documentarian (Alan Cumming) trails the group endlessly,  a pregnant pal (Naoko Mori) prepares to give birth and sleazy tabloid  types conspire the end of the Spice Girls for good, all while a  mysterious, T.J. Eckelberg-like figure (Roger Moore) watches from above.
And of course Posh, Baby, Scary, Ginger and Sporty are in just about every  scene, talking about clothes, guys and "girl power" whenever they aren't  singing.
Perhaps the big question mark here is regarding the Spice Girls' acting  capabilities, but I'm not too sure of the answer.
They're not thespians  (hey, neither were the Beatles), but they boast a perky, self-depreciating  buoyance that's sort of difficult to deny.
The rest of the cast is nice  enough to acknowledge that this isn't their show, with George Wendt and  Mark McKinney getting the best bits as American filmmakers on a quest to  convince the quintet to make their American movie debut.
Meatloaf seems to  be cast as their tour driver simply so he can make groan-inducing  allusions to his album playlists, while weird Richard E. Grant ("Bram  Stoker's Dracula"), as the Spice Girls' manager, is decked out in so many  emerald suits he looks like a refugee from Oz.
And those familiar with the  British entertainment scene will note sometimes-clever, sometimes-not  cameos by the likes of Bob Geldof, Stephen Fry, Bob Hoskins and Jennifer  Saunders.
The fundamental problem with "Spice World" is an even hit-or-miss gag  ratio.
For every moment that scores (a hilarious faux-movie trailer for an  action flick called "Spice Force Five"), there's one that comes close to  embarrassment (the ladies' impromptu performance of their hit "Wannabe" in  a coffee shop-flashback).
The best sequences arguably come whenever the  Spice Girls are holed up inside their tour bus, which is modeled after the  British flag.
They poke the most fun at themselves here; watch each's  reaction when one whines that the media has a tendency to stereotype them  too often.
Around the 45-minute mark, things seem to screech to a halt,  certainly not helped by a dwindling sense of humor (what's up with that  goofy labor scene?
) or stuff that's just too stupid to work (what's up  with that dopey alien encounter?).
At least the film is capped-off nicely  with a vibrant live rendition of their current tune "Spice Up Your Life.
" . "Spice World" definitely isn't going to win any of the gals' detractors  over, and it isn't likely to sway those who are neutral one way or the  other.
Those seeking a message or any kind of social relevance had better  look elsewhere; the closest "Spice World" comes to either of those is a  sequence that illustrates the dangers of driving a bomb-equipped bus in  stiletto heels.
It's an hour-and-a-half of brainless comedy and music,  starring five pleasant-looking pop divas who don't seem to fear  self-parody.
And that's presumably all that die-hard Spice fans really,  really want.
Š 1998 Jamie Peck  E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/. . 
