The funniest moments in Jackie Chan's American movie Rush Hour happen  when cultures clash.
There's a scene in which impetuous Detective Carter (Chris Tucker)  points his pistol at wise Hong Kong Inspector Lee (Chan).
Watching the  gun-happy could-be crooks, a cabbie pulls out a gun of his own and makes  them freeze.
There's Lee's conflict with FBI agents, who get Carter assigned to  actually keep Lee off the case.
The premise of the film, of course,  relies on the failure of Carter's baby-sitting;  the action becomes  hilarious when Lee gets away from Carter and outwits a houseful of  federal agents.
Finally, there's the running joke of the Chinese detective who is  repeatedly confused by African-American culture.
The audience gets many  chuckles from the initial tension between the two cops.
Whatever  egotistic ruse Carter tries out, Lee thwarts or shames or betters him.
Chan is at his best when his comic skills run on naiveté;  it's even  better when his innocence gets him into big trouble, as it does in a  pool hall.
Oh, how quickly Chan charms us with humor and veers into  well-choreographed violence!
The reason Inspector Lee visits the States is to assist in a kidnapping  case: the daughter of the Chinese Consul Han (Tzi Ma) has been taken.
What's moving is that Lee takes the crime somewhat personally; he's like  an uncle to her, good-naturedly taking punches from the girl as she  departs China.
It is Lee's connection as strong family friend that  motivates his relentless battling of kidnappers as well as other  officers.
Tom Wilkinson does a passable job in his role, though his character  could have been made more round.
As the evil Sang, Ken Leung combines  the right amount of sour stares and shakiness;  he's also a horrible  shot with a machine pistol.
It's unclear why Elizabeth Pena appears as  a partner - and sometime foil - to Tucker's loud-mouthed Carter.
She  is always likable, but here fails to convince us she is a demolitions  expert.
Jackie Chan's closing credits usually show out-takes from the shooting.
Once again we get an idea about how rigorously the cast worked to  produce the slick and athletic mayhem that is a trademark of Jackie  Chan.
How many takes were needed to produce the fight in the Chinese  restaurant?
In the abandoned building?
Did Jackie break or sprain  anything during the shoot, we wonder?
Originality is the key element in these slugfest sagas; let's face it,  plots in Chan films can be found in Kojak or Beretta episodes.
But  director Brett Ratner has created a film with smooth transitions and  spots of characterization that actually make us care about Lee and  Carter and some of the people they work with.
In seeing Rush Hour, what  gave me my money's worth?
First, my son and I had the theater to  ourselves.
OK, it was a small auditorium, but still it was like viewing  a video on an extra large private screen.
Bottom line, I laughed out  loud at Jackie's over-the-top stunts and martial arts gimmicks.
The man  knows the power of exaggeration, and he knows that the audience is smart  enough not to take him too seriously.. . . 
