Craig (Cusack) is an unemployed puppeteer married to animal  loving Lotte (Diaz).
Their house is a menagerie.
Craig is a  good puppeteer, but his choice of material is bizarre and gets  him beat up.
He finally caves in and looks for a job,  following up on a peculiar ad for fast fingered, small  statured people.
He reports to the 7 1/2 floor of an office  building (the explanation how it got to have 7 1/2 floors is  one of the film's funnier moments) and, after a bizarre  conversation with a receptionist (Place) who can hear nothing  correctly, gets the job.
In a few days, he makes two  discoveries:  Maxine (Keener) with whom he falls desperately  in love with and a door in his office which is a portal into  John Malkovich's brain.
Things get increasingly complicated as Maxine wants to cash in  on the portal, Lotte meets and also falls in love with Maxine,  and Malkovich catches on to what is happening.
And then  there's Lester (Bean), the mysterious businessman who hired  Craig and may know more about all of this than anyone suspects.
The first half hour or so of this film is full of sly wit.
Not  laugh out loud sight gags, but really funny moments that you  have to pay attention to enjoy fully.
They range from Craig's  bizarre puppetry, to the story behind the animals in Lotte's  menagerie, to the story of the 7 1/2 floor, and finally to  Maxine's very funny first date with Craig.
But the final hour  and a half is quite a disappointment.
Oddly, the film slows down when we get into Malkovich's head.
It stops being a wacky comedy, and that's certainly what this film should be, and tries to be  a philosophical film with moments of humour.
Even that might have worked had the movie hit the right philosophical note.
But it errs there.
Craig briefly discusses the significance of having access to another person's brain and  the responsibility of having such access.
Maxine ponders the issue of being loved by two people and yet attracted to neither alone and one only when within Malkovich.
Issues of gender identity are briefly touched upon.
But the most interesting issue that could have been raised, the issue of whether it is right to sacrifice one person to save many others, is never even mentioned.
I know many critics have praised this as one of the best movies of 1999.
But I cannot understand why.
This is a moderately funny film that never gets as surreal as its topic would allow it to.
It's a film with a strong point to make which it never makes.
It's a film with good actors giving good performances for a failed cause.
It's worth watching, but not worth all the hype.   . . 
