rated R Touchstone Pictures 96 minutes starring Loren Dean, Hope Davis, Jason Lee, Alfre Woodard, Mary McDonnell, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Zooey Deschanel, Martin Short, David Paymer, Jane Adams, Dana Ivey, Kevin Tighe, Ted Danson, Jason Ritter, Elizabeth Moss written and directed by Lawrence Kasdan. "Mumford", a hit and miss ensemble comedy from Lawrence Kasdan ("The Big Chill"), is more weird than quirky, and more quirky than funny.
Which, as you can tell, isn't saying very much.
Newcomer Loren Dean plays Dr. Mumford, a man who in four months has become the most popular psychologist in a town called...Mumford.
His unorthodox approach gains him a new friend, lonely skateboarding billionaire Skip Skipperton (Jason Lee).
Mumford tells Skip a secret which he has successfully hidden in his four months in town.
He isn't, nor has he ever been, a psychologist.
In a scarily odd flashback sequence, Mumford confesses about his former life as an I.R.S.
investigator.
A life filled with drugs, adultery and paranoia.
But the Doc seems to be helping people get back on their feet; most notably Sofie (Hope Davis), a woman suffering from chronic fatigue syndrome and quickly becoming the object of Mumford's affection.
The cross-section of his individual patients include Mary McDonnell, Zooey Deschanel, Ted Danson, David Paymer, and a very un-"Heavy" Pruitt Taylor Vince.
But a district attorney (Martin Short) can't help digging up dirt on Mumford, and soon he finds himself caught in quite a dilemma.
As a film, I wish "Mumford" could have stuck exclusively to the scenes with Jason Lee.
In all his films, he shows his own brand of cynicism laden humor which never tires.
Hope Davis is also good in her role, but the romance between her and the Doc is not very believable.
"Mumford" often drags and feels much longer than its short running time, but at times it is effective, if not at all funny.
If Loren Dean, as the lead, was a better actor with more charisma, "Mumford" could have worked.
He has a bland appearance and no real guile.
If you're looking for a light, almost enjoyable but downright weird "comedy", then "Mumford" is for you.
If not, stay far, far away.
a capsule review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic akiva@excite.com. http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com . . . 
