  Good-bye Pokemon, hello Toy Story.
The toys are back in town and more entertaining than ever.
With the addition of new characters, and a more involving story, children and adults are sure to love this animated classic.
In this sequel, Woody is abducted by a toy dealer named Al (Voice of Wayne Knight) who is obsessed with the Roundup gang, and is dying to sell them to Tokyo for a huge price.
The Roundup gang includes Jessie The Cowgirl (Joan Cusack), Stinky Pete the Prospector (Kelsey Grammer), Bullseye the horse and Woody (Tom Hanks) himself.
Now Buzz Lightyear (Tim Allen) and a few of Andy's other toys are out to rescue Woody.
Unfortunately for Buzz and the gang, they must face a number of dangers on the way, such as crossing the street.
What's so good about Pixar's films are that they are so imaginative.
They take the audience into another world, and make it charming and highly enjoyable.
I've never had so much fun with animation films until Pixar came into view.
They're an absolute delight.
Enough of my jabbering and on with the film!
There are a number of reasons, why the sequel is superior to the original.
For one, we now know the characters, so no introduction needs to be made for them, that is if you've seen "Toy Story.
" It's a necessity to be comfortable with your characters, so you know what to expect, much like James Bond or any other film that has made sequels.
There also was some incredibly hilarious homage's to Star Wars and Jurassic Park, that will keep you smiling.
Even the animation is sharper this time around.
The opening sequence is dazzling and is breathtaking to watch, as well as many other new technical breakthroughs.
It's like something out of a dream.
The characters are as lovable as ever.
Rex (Wallace Shawn) is still my favorite character.
As you know, he attempts to be a frightening dinosaur in the first one, but in this one he only wants to be a hero.
Thankfully the little dinosaur gets his wish.
Hamm (John Ratzenberger), SlinkyDog (Jim Varney) and the always charming Mr.
Potato Head, who now has a Mrs.
Potato Head are their usual rowdy selves.
Rounding out the crew are a number of new toys.
Jessie The Cowgirl, Stinky Pete and Bullseye.
None of these characters really stand out except Bullseye.
Although he says nothing, his constant licking and smiling will undoubtedly give audiences a pleasurable time.
The only thing missing in this sequel, is Randy Newman's music.
Instead we must suffer with 2 minutes of Sarah Maclachlan trying to sing.
Aside from that minor complaint, Toy Story 2 is very refreshing.
I'm glad that animated features aren't overstuffed, and disappointing like these big budget films that are out now.
Disney is simply the best when it comes to making family fun.
There's nothing left to say except go see it.
It's about time we get a fulfilling movie, that will dazzle our minds and give children something other to do than talk about Pokemon.
In the words of Billy Crystal "It's Absolutely Marvelous.
"   By the way, there's a trailer for the next Pixar film called Dinosaurs.
This could be the most spectacular achievement yet.
Worth seeing Toy Story 2 just for that.. . 
