LOST IN SPACE Reviewed by Jamie Peck. In 2058, Earth is sustaining itself by branching out into the cosmos,  and one family is selected to play a key role in the colonization  process.
They are the Robinsons -- Professor John (William Hurt), his  wife Maureen (Mimi Rogers) and their children Judy (Heather Graham),  Penny (Lacey Chabert) and Will (Jack Johnson) -- and the intended plan  is for them, along with gung-ho pilot Major Don West (Matt LeBlanc), to  board the spacecraft Jupiter 2 and make a many-year journey to the  distant planet Alpha Prime.
Once there, the crew will establish some  sort of portal that will allow Earthlings to make the jump to Alpha  Prime in no time.
But thanks to villainous saboteur and stowaway Dr.  Smith (Gary Oldman) and his Global Sedition cohorts, things don't quite  go so smoothly.
Around a half-day into the flight, the Jupiter 2 is  thrown off course.
When everyone comes to, they're in a foreign place in  an unspecified time, and must find their way back home or remain lost in  space forever.
In patches, "Lost in Space" is as glibly fun as a video game.
Director  Stephen Hopkins (that awful killer-lion flick "The Ghost and the  Darkness") brings the major action sequences, surprisingly few though  they are, to giddy, palpable life.
Two extended bits stand out from the  eventual blur: the initial siege on the Jupiter 2 by the nameless Robot  programmed to protect and aid the Robinsons, and the search through a  creepy ghost ship as the movie nears its midsection.
That Robot (yes, he  gets to say the immortal line, "Danger, Will Robinson!
Danger!
"), by the  way, is a far better way to entertain the family audiences than the  computer-generated Blawp, a cuddly, Gizmo-esque creature the Robinsons  pick up on their trek.
The Blawp doesn't even look like it's sharing the  same scenes with the human actors, but most of the other special effects  work nicely, especially the movie's sleek sets.
The interesting ensemble cast is partially ill-used.
Oldman always makes  a good bad guy, and his "Lost in Space" work makes one wish that the  movie hadn't cut to some special effect every time his Dr. Smith  threatens to become a complex personality.
On the plus side, Hurt and  Johnson have a realistic father-and-son chemistry.
Matt LeBlanc is  essentially playing his "Friends" alter-ego as a hotshot hero (complete  with one-liners like, "Okay, last one to kill a bad guy buys the  beer!
"), but his aloof swagger works, and this movie is, at least, way  better than Ed.
Mimi Rogers and Heather Graham (Rollergirl from "Boogie  Nights"), lovely and talented though they are, are trotted out whenever  a reaction shot is needed; Graham's sexual flirtation with LeBlanc is  never developed and largely feels like wasted time.
Spunky Lacey Chabert  ("Party of Five") fares the worst, sounding like she's been sucking on a  helium tank while offscreen.
"Lost in Space" was written by Akiva Goldsman, the man behind the script  for the very underrated (and surely I can't be the only one to think so)  "Batman & Robin.
" He's toned down the series' high camp factor in place  of a dark, more sinister edge, which serves the first 60 minutes of the  movie well.
But "Lost in Space"'s murky tone and visuals just don't mesh  with part two's elongated family therapy session.
This year's first  official summer release is a botched one, with too many distractions and  flaws to even rank as pleasing eye-candy -- a big no-no as far as  seasonal movies are concerned.
As Robot might say, "Danger, moviegoers!
Danger!
" . . 
