                Sylvester Stallone can't act.
Sylvester Stallone can't act.
I've had that phrase drilled into my head in every Stallone movie I've ever watched for the notable exception of "Rocky".
Finally, I'm pleased to announce that after watching "Cop Land" Stallone CAN act, and act wonderfully.
Furthermore, "Cop Land" plays out well in almost every aspect, making for a very fine movie.
"Cop Land"'s plot involves a corrupt set of NYPD cops who live across the river in a fictional small town.
Stuck in the middle is Freedy Heflin (Sylvester Stallone), an overweight sheriff who finds himself torn between his dirty cop friends (Harvey Keitel, Ray Liota) and revealing the truth to Internal Affairs' Mo Tilden (Robert De Niro).
As much as the trailers may suggest it, "Cop Land" is by no means any action/adventure/thriller movie.
Instead, it's more of a methodical & dramatic psychological movie.
We don't see shoot-out after shoot-out, as most of the action is centered around Freddy and the struggles he goes through.
In a way I enjoyed this change of pace, it makes the movie original and more thought provoking.
However, to make a true "drama" succeed in the movies, you need good acting.
Luckily the talent just flies in, De Niro, Keitel and Liota all do (as always) superb acting jobs.
The big question I'm sure you're asking is: How is STALLONE?
Stallone is great, and has possibly the best performance of the movie.
His body movements, speech and eyes all work together to paint the near perfect picture of a sheriff in sorrow and doubt.
Hopefully, with any luck Stallone will continue to take acting roles like this, he's much better here then playing Rambo.
In conclusion, while flicks like "Face/Off" were fun summer entertainment, the movies just "skim the surface".
I walk out of the movie theater enjoying the ride but I don't really give the movie much thought afterwards.
"Cop Land" is a much deeper picture - you can't walk in and expect guns blazing.
However, you can expect just as, if not more bang for your movie buck.
To see Stallone light up the screen is almost worth the price of admission alone.   . . 
