Rating: ***1/2 (out of 4) Directed by Roger Kumble Starring Ryan Phillippe, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Reese Witherspoon,  Selma Blair, Joshua Jackson, Sean Patrick  Thomas, Eric Mabius,  Christine Baranski, Louise Fletcher, Swoosie Kurtz. "The movies are so rarely great art, that if we can't appreciate great trash, there is little reason for us to go" - Pauline Kael. I don't entirely agree with Ms. Kael's pessimistic view, but it is  the proper frame of mind when viewing something like Roger Kumble's  Cruel Intentions.
The film is a modern day version of Dangerous  Liasons with upper class high school kids filling in for the main  characters.
While it's certainly no great peice of cinema, it's  enormously entertaining.
Sebastian (Ryan Phillippe) and Kathryn (Sarah Michelle Gellar) are  stepsiblings who control the masses at their high school with their  seductive wickedness.
One day Sebastian reads a magazine article by  the school headmaster's daughter Annette (Reese Witherspoon)  proclaiming how she is a virgin and plans to wait until marriage.
Katherine bets him that he can't seduce her.
If she wins, she gets  his speedster.
If he wins, he gets to have his way with her.
Thus  begins the sleazy games of sexual manipulation.
Kathryn tries to get revenge against a new student named Cecile, who  stole her boyfriend away over summer break.
She promises Cecile's  momthat she will look after her goody two shoes daughter and keep her  out of trouble.
What she really does is attempt to turn her into a  tramp and send incriminating evidence of it to her mother.
Meanwhile,  Sebastian begins to make his moves on Annette, but soon learns that  she will not be a simple conquest.
As played by Reese Witherspoon,  she is more than resourceful and intelligent, and mere pick up lines  or false gestures won't do the trick.
What I particularly liked was how the filmmakers didn't try to hide  the film's trashy nature.
Director Roger Kumble is a talented  craftsman and he is smart enough not to underestimate his audience.
Many films similar to Cruel Intentions have been made, but they were  made without any real effort.
The material here is executed so  expertly it rises to a level of sophisticated sleaze.
Ryan Phillippe is a fine actor who brings the right amount of  sexuality and vulnerability to his role.
We must be able to beleive  he could seduce all these women, and we also must buy the scenes in  the 2nd half of the film where he begins to fall for Annette.
Phillippe is able to pull both of these off perfectly.
Even better is  Reese Witherspoon, perhaps the most talented young actress working in  Hollywood.
She balances innocent charm with sensuality.
Another actress could be  annoying in this role, but Reese is perfect.
She makes it beleivable  that her character would fall under Sebastian's spell without  allowing her character to look like a moron in the process.
And Sarah  Michelle Gellar has a great time playing the evil wicked queen of her  school who tries defend her innocent reputation while manipulating the student body at the same time.
The technical credits are also superb.
Special kudos to the art  direction team for their view of the large, stylish homes in which  these spoiled kids wage their battle of conquest.
The films moves  along at a brisk pace thanks to timely editing and a first-rate music  score.
I'm not sure I like the ending very much, but it works fine on  it's own terms.
I won't deny that the final shot is just perfect.
Larry McGillicuddy - The Cinemaniac More reviews at http://members.xoom.com/lmcgill/movpage.htm. . 
