 AUSTIN POWERS: THE SPY WHO SHAGGED ME Reviewed by Jamie Peck. This inspired silliness carries into and throughout the entire film, which finds '60s nemeses Austin Powers (Myers), the swinging sleuth with a ghastly Shirley Partridge-'do and ghastlier Nehru jackets, and Dr.
Evil (Myers again), the wicked mastermind with a kooky affinity for his hairless kitty and kookier plans for world domination, again clashing in the '90s.
Evil's nonsensical schemes involve using time-travel to steal Powers' mojo (or, for those not in the know, his libido), though in the funnier self-referential bits, Myers and Co. draw attention to plot holes and suggest that overlooking them is in full enjoyment's best interest.
But do people really care if the story adds up?
Far more pressing matters involve whether or not Myers, both as scribe and performer, is at his cheekiest.
The answer -- a strong "don't worry" -- comes long before he debuts yet a third role, that of a slobbering, Scottish Dr.
Evil henchman called Fat Bastard.
Giving life to this loathsome brute enables Myers to not only hide under what looks like a ton of latex, it permits the kind of kilts-and-haggis humor he mined so effectively in "So I Married an Axe Murderer.
" He'd be guilty of spotlight-hogging were he not so dead-on in all three parts, each of which could probably occupy their own farce alone.
Like Myers' hats, the film fuses cast members old and new.
Showing up from the former "Austin" are familiar favorites such as Number Two (Robert Wagner), Frau Farbissina (Mindy Sterling) and Scott Evil (Seth Green).
Misunderstood Scott, the bad Dr.'s son, partakes in clashes with dad that are utterly priceless, leading the elder Evil to instead play father-figure to his 28-inch-tall clone (Verne Troyer), a malevolent munchkin he affectionately dubs Mini-Me.
This "Island of Dr. Moreau"-inspired character gets used and abused frequently, reaffirming how "Spy" shuns political-correctness in its search for a quick giggle fix.
But the jokes are never offensive, even if they spend a majority of the time in and around the toilet.
As with all spoofs, misfires occur -- how not original to cut to an erupting volcano following suggested sexual activity -- and every single punchline doesn't quite hit a home run; "The Spy Who Shagged Me" has a tendency to drag a few shenanigans out to the point of overkill, though that's less of a stumbling block here than it was for its predecessor (remember the interminable urination bit?).
One area done better by the previous installment, however, would be the female lead: Elizabeth Hurley brought her an appealing mix of sensuality and sportsmanship.
Hurley gets explained away in a nifty prologue, thus opening the door for Heather Graham, who looks fetching in mesh but seems out-of-sync with the groovy goings-on.
No matter.
With Myers, Mini-Me and more delightfully gag-worthy gags than "There's Something About Mary" -- a naughty shadow show and a coffee pitcher full of feces blow low and lower -- these flaws hardly register.
"Austin" 1 did about $50 million at the box-office and then found an audience of avid devotees upon its video release.
With those folks now foaming at the mouth over the prospect of future films, "Austin" 2 is practically guaranteed to destroy the notion of diminishing returns.
In fact, from the wit, love and craft on display here, another "Austin" adventure promises to generate the same solid hype and eager anticipation.
"Goldswinger," anyone?. . 
