OCTOBER SKY (Universal - 1999) Cast: Jake Gyllenhaal, Chris Cooper, Laura Dern, Chris Owen,       William Lee Scott, Chad Lindberg, Natalie Canerday Screenplay by Lewis Colick, based on the book "Rocket Boys" by   Homer H. Hickam Produced by Charles Gordon and Larry Franco Directed by Joe Johnston Running time: 108 minutes . Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    Judging by what made it to the screen in OCTOBER SKY, it quickly    becomes clear why Universal greenlighted a film based on the memoir    of NASA engineer Homer H. Hickam Jr. -- if we're to believe the    events depicted in the picture, his story as an ambitious adolescent    trapped in a dying West Virginia coal mining town plays exactly like    a Hollywood movie.
Other than a few touches (I can envision studio    executives pensively musing "Now, does he *have* to be named Homer    Hickam?
"), this tale of a teenager struggling against adversity    adheres to the conventional inspirational drama formula so closely    that the "Based On A True Story" opening title card seems as much of    a shield against skepticism as it does a selling point.
In today's market, this modest film feels like a throwback: an    unabashedly earnest, clean-cut bit of storytelling which reveals its    colours as surely as the movie's teacher will gently chide students    mercilessly teasing the resident science kid by drawling "He's right,    y'all.
"  Set in 1957 in the relatively-isolated town of Coalwood, the    picture follows the story of Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal), a teen    who becomes inspired by the launch of Russia's Sputnik satellite and    starts to build his own rockets, enlisting the help of friends Roy    Lee (William Lee Scott), O'Dell (Chad Lindberg), and math whiz    Quentin (Chris Owen).
Coalwood is a mining town through and through,    where the only visible means of escape is via a football scholarship    like Homer's older brother Jim (Scott Miles); everybody else is    relegated to an unpromising life down in the mines.
While Homer's    dreams are buoyed by his supportive teacher Miss Riley (Laura Dern),    who suggests that competing in the regional science fair may net    college scholarships and a way out for the rocket boys, he's    dissuaded and disparaged at every turn by his stern father John    (Chris Cooper), who tidily happens to be the town's mine supervisor    and considers Homer's ambitions to be foolhardy.
While director Joe Johnston employs frequent usage of the easy    contrast between Homer's skyward aspirations and the gloomy depths of    the mine, he also diffuses the grimy claustrophobia of the depressed    milieu with the old-fashioned wholesomeness of the community; this is    a place where a girl can scamper up to our young hero, bat her eyes,    and sigh "Golly, Homer, it sure was exciting watching your rockets go    up!
" without any ironic or tongue-in-cheek connotations.
If the    period dress and liberal use of archetypes wasn't enough to remove    any residual doubt of its aim to depict an ostensibly simpler, more    innocent time, the film lazily establishes the era by deluging the    soundtrack with wall-to-wall classic rock 'n' roll.
(A montage of    comic misfires is unimaginatively set to "Ain't That A Shame?
").    Although the utterly pedestrian OCTOBER SKY is a textbook example of    cookie-cutter filmmaking, there's nothing much to really fault with    Mr. Johnston's workmanlike helming or the sincere, capable    performance of young lead Mr. Gyllenhall, but it's all so generic    that it's easy to resist.
The story's trajectory is so unwaveringly    apparent that there's no sense of wonder to accompany the shots of    characters gaping at their amateur rocket blasts, and the film is    riddled with such cardboard stereotypes and typecasting that I found    it difficult to invest much emotion in their plights.
Just when John    seems ready to cross the line from strict authoritarian to unfeeling    tyrant, you can count on him to reaffirm his gruffly loving nature by    performing a good deed, and as helpful teacher Miss Riley, Ms. Dern    so earnestly strains to light a fire under her students that I    expected her to pull a facial muscle.
While the picture is    reasonably pleasant, it's narratively stupefying -- a shot of a    disgusted John throwing a spent rocket into the trash is a given, and    it's inevitable that an oft-mentioned legendary outsider makes a    fleeting appearance -- and the syrupy score by Mark Isham    condescendingly serves as an emotional guide for the audience.
Ironically, for a picture about a boy whose hard work and ambitions    sent him shooting for the stars, OCTOBER SKY is depressingly    unambitious.
For all its good intentions, it's telling that the home    video footage which closes the picture is infinitely more touching    and awe-inspiring than the preceding hundred-odd minutes of    celluloid.
-- Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/ "X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them  in on the whole conspiracy.
Half the time I have no idea what they're  talking about.
" - Martin Landau. . 
