     The first warning signal flashes on the screen with the opening  credit: "an Amblin/Stanley Kubrick production.
"  Amblin, of course,  means Steven Spielberg, and the promise of this collaboration is about  as reassuring as a duet between Perry Como and Yoko Ono.
Spielberg is about sentiment, Kubrick was about detachment.
When  you combine those two approaches, what do you get?
A robot with  emotions.
A machine ingeniously constructed and programmed to simulate  the responses associated with human feelings.
You get David (Haley Joel  Osment), a mechanical device with the look of an eleven-year-old boy and  a capacity to love and yearn for love in return.
This project, based on a Brian Aldiss short story called "Supertoys  Last All Summer Long", lay on Kubrick's drawing board for years, and he  had conferred at length with Spielberg about it.
After Kubrick's sudden  death in 1999, his friend picked up the baton.
His desire to create an  homage to Kubrick is understandable, but the movie that came out of it  is often labored, schizophrenic, self-indulgent, derivative, hackneyed,  and long.
The story begins against rolling ocean and a Ben Kingsley  voice-over informing us that this is the time after global warming has  melted the polar caps and submerged much of the world.
Livable land is  now at a premium, most of the world's poorer population has been  drowned, there is strict governmental control over reproduction, and  robots have taken over the menial work.
The scene shifts to the lab of  Dr. Hobby (William Hurt), who explains the history of robots to his  colleagues in a painfully expository lecture.
When he broaches his plan  to build a mecha (mechanical device) that can love, he's interrupted for  a Meaningful Question: "If we create a mecha that can love, can we get  humans to love it in return?
". This is the central issue of A.I., and it's a straw man.
Humans  can love anything, animate or inanimate.
We love our cars, we love  stuffed animals, we love all sorts of things that have neither a heart,  nor a brain, nor courage.
Stripped down, A.I.
's premise amounts to  this: love is the most essential of emotions, it is mechanically  reproducible, and the computerized version is purer and more dependable  than the human kind.
After a number of years (leapt, thankfully, at a single bound)  Hobby creates his prototype loving mecha, and it is brought home  unannounced by Henry Swinton (Sam Robards) to his wife Monica (Frances  O'Connor) as a replacement for their son Martin (Jake Thomas), who lies  frozen in a very Kubrick-like cryogenics chamber with an incurable  disease for which a cure will probably never (hah!
) be found.
Spielberg's screenplay dresses story in logic with the grace of an  ugly stepsister's foot being crammed into a glass slipper.
For reasons  passing understanding David is accepted in the Swinton home, programmed  to love Monica (but not Henry), and provided with a best friend, the  comatose Martin's Supertoy Teddy bear (voiced by Jack Angel) who  presumably comes from the shelves of some futuristic Toys R Us but is  smarter than the cutting-edge David, and wiser indeed than anybody else  in the movie.
In a cool Kubrickian land of banked emotions, Teddy is pure essence  of Spielberg, with his rolling gait and his gruff voice and his cuddly  fur.
And when malevolent circumstances conspire to get David thrown out  of paradise (if the chilly Swinton household can be so described), Teddy  goes with him, a steadfast Jiminy Cricket to his lost Pinocchio,  comforting and guiding him in his quest to find the Blue Fairy and be  turned into a real live boy so he can go back home to Mommy and bask in  her love.
The most interesting character in the movie is Jude Law as Gigolo  Joe, a robotic sex toy who befriends David and accompanies him on his  search for the Blue Fairy.
"She will make you a real boy," he promises  leeringly, "for I will make her a real woman!
"  But the performance the  movie depends on is Osment's; and while there's no denying this kid's  acting talent, we've seen his trademark scrunched-up face and manic  intensity before and it's beginning to suffer from exposure and  advancing age.
A.I.
's 2 hour saga winds through three acts: home, the quest,  and a resolution two millennia in the future.
Along the way it dazzles  us with special effects and technical accomplishments, but they perform  their wonders in the service of a story that is so full of shallow  trickery, and so cluttered with elements hijacked wantonly from other  movies ranging from The Wizard of Oz to Planet of the Apes with side  trips through most of the Kubrick and Spielberg canons, that it abuses  our patience and betrays the promise of true intelligence that made it  the most anticipated movie of the summer.. . 
