The day starts off as usual for Helen Quilley, the sole female in a London Public Relations firm, but the morning meeting suddenly  leaves her jobless and on her way home.
Unknown to Helen, her live-in lover, Gerry, is having a  meeting of his own with Lydia, a former girlfriend who has come back into his life.
The SLIDING DOORS of the underground train shut before Helen can board.
Then, the film goes into reverse causing Helen to walk backwards up the stairs.
Switch to forward and this time, she manages to squeeze through the SLIDING DOORS before they close, enabling her to arrive home earlier than expected.
>From this point on there are two story lines that show how her life could unfold.
To enable the viewer to keep them straight there are obvious differences such as a bandage, or a different hair color.
In one scenario Helen discovers Gerry in bed with Lydia.
In the other, she only has suspicions that Gerry is having an affair.
While Gerry, Lydia, and their friends remain more or less the same in both plots, it is Helen herself who displays the greatest differences.
One Helen becomes a self-sufficient, semi-successful business woman while the other Helen becomes an object of our pity.
It is a wonderful acting job by  Miss Paltrow, probably her best to date.
Although Gerry tries to get up nerve to tell Lydia that he wants nothing more to do with her, he can't bring himself to end the relationship.
Enter James, a charming, Monty Python quoting suitor who meets Helen and begins to pursue her.
The movie is so well written that you find yourself changing back and forth.
Sometimes you're wanting her to be with James.
Other times you want her to make up with Gerry.
There are many character traits that you like and dislike about each Helen from self-sacrifice to self-confidence.
It is definitely a screenplay that makes you think.
What if?
In my case it particularly hit home.
As luck would have it, I was in London less than a month ago.
I entered the Underground at the same station, rode the same moving sidewalk, and boarded a train that looked exactly like the train that Helen boarded.
I couldn't help but ask myself....  What if?. . 
