`The Bone Collector' is a grisly serial killer retread that aspires to reach the grotesquely unnerving high that `Seven' achieved with such a controversial note in 1995.
Filled with scalded, dismembered and rat-covered carcasses, it's not a movie you want to experience right after dinner.
And while there are notable flashes of style and an effectively dank mood that wafts over the proceedings like a dark cloud, `The Bone Collector' dissipates into a movie that's more muddled than frightening.
Study a block of Swiss cheese for awhile and you'll understand the basic plot structure of `The Bone Collector'.
The filmmakers are up to their elbows in flaws, but they also possess the skill to craft a decent movie.
Early on, we dismiss the plot holes and try and absorb the impressive style that director Phillip Noyce (`Patriot Games') has injected.
As time passes, however, we lose the ultimate grip on the storyline.
There's no effective movement after the opening half-hour; the movie is strung together in a rather lethargic fashion by gory shocks and mysterious clues.
While it hits the occasional note of interest, even perhaps fascination, `The Bone Collector' is a disappointing effort.
What a good, solid actor Denzel Washington is.
In everything from his Oscar-winning performance in `Glory' to the terrorist thriller `The Siege', Washington is simply superb.
Playing paraplegic police detective Lincoln Rhyme, the actor once again derives humor and sensitivity from a character that would be lost at sea without his light touch.
Granted, the performances are not the problem  with `The Bone Collector'.
What is?
The constant utilization of preposterous plot mechanisms and the lack of a solid spine-tingling mystery is a good place to start.
Detective Rhyme, bed-ridden ever since a near-fatal accident in the line of duty, is called upon for his intellect to study the evidence in a gruesome homicide.
The killer drives a taxi, and when he picks up a passenger, it's basically common knowledge that they're not going to make it to their final destination.
Yes, it's another one of those icky serial killer movies.
After she shows some expertise at a crime scene, Rhyme enlists the help of patrol officer Amelia Donaghy (Angelina Jolie) in the detailed case.
Investigating the aftermath of a bloody murder, Rhyme leads Donaghy through the darkly lit innards of the New York City sewer system, hoping to locate evidence and examine the nature of the killing.
From the bed in his apartment, Rhyme can do little more than bark orders toward his young trainee.
Working together, they could solve the identity of the serial killer - even if the audience has figured it out a great deal ahead of time.
That's my central grievance with the film.
The elusive murderer in `The Bone Collector' leaves clues behind that are merely genre clichés, and he continuously manages to elude the entire police force despite their best efforts.
Is the killer incredibly brilliant, or is the police force incredibly stupid??
The answer is a little of both.
Despite such an unwelcome number of plot holes, the film is darkly effective with it's establishment of mood and slickly entertaining with it's presentation of the facts.
All of this... until the ill-conceived finale, which reveals the identity of the murderer in a hammy and unbelievable fashion.
It feels like a cop-out ending that only exists in a cheap `Scream' knockoff, where the killer reveals his motive in a strictly connect-the-dots fashion to accommodate the audience.
Even Washington loses concentration, biting his lower lip in an expression that seems to convey: `Damn.
Who wrote this into the script?
'. To be fair, both Washington and Jolie are excellent.
The remainder of the cast straddles the line between solid and obvious, with the exception of Queen Latifah, who delivers a well-rounded performance as Rhyme's bedside nurse.
Michael Rooker plays the disgruntled Captain Cheney, who wears a dastardly scowl and serves no purpose other than creating conflict with the lead characters.
It's got certain promise, but `The Bone Collector' has an overbearing tendency to lose focus.
I would recommend `Seven' for a truly frightening, gut-wrenching experience on a gloomy night.
This average entry is strictly for genre fanatics.
Your Comments Appreciated:  movieviews@hotmail.com. . 
