Washington Irving's story The Legend of Sleepy Hollow is a classic Halloween tale, so it is a bit odd that this interpretation of that story was release during the Christmas season.
Perhaps it was intended for the October time frame but was delayed.
Only a scant few elements of the original story are kept.
Character names are preserved, but the story is completely different.
Whereas the original is a simple story of jealousy and deception, this Gothic film is a much more complex and intricate work.
Deeper themes of objectivity and reason, spirituality, treachery, and even pure carnage are incorporated.
In this rendition, Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) is a police investigator in 18th century New York.
His rigorous insistence on rigorous scientific inquiry and thorough investigation is seen as meddlesome by the courts, so he is banished to the rural village of sleepy hollow to investigate a series of brutal murders.
The people of the village attribute the gruesome decapitations to the legendary Headless Horseman, a mythical figure inspired by pure bloodlust.
Ichabod sets up residence at the home of village elder Baltus Van Tassel (Michael Gambon), but dismisses the beliefs of his host and the others.
To Ichabod, the world is starkly rational, with scientific explanations for all processes.
His patronizing attitude causes him to be not particularly well-liked except perhaps by his host daughter, Katrina Van Tassel (Christina Ricci).
The world that Ichabod enters is dark and eerie, a signature creation of director Tim Burton.
The most enjoyable parts of the film are the noir mood and Gothic themes that are elaborately constructed.
Unfortunately, the story is weak, and does little to complement the cinematography.
Although the film is able to maintain suspense and keep its mysteries hidden, the story is ultimately muddled and it builds into a ridiculously frenetic and overly cathartic climax.
Moderately recommended.
The success of the film is in its mood and visuals, not its story.
The narrative is clumsy and becomes uninteresting, but the imagery and special effects are entertaining.
It is not a retelling of the classic story, but a complete reworking of it that fits it into a different vision.. . 
