The Coen brothers make two kinds of movies.
The first kind are  idiosyncratic takes on established Hollywood genres: BLOOD SIMPLE,  MILLER'S CROSSING, THE HUDSUCKER PROXY.
The second kind are just  plain idiosyncratic: dark comedies which can only be described as  Coen-esque, and represent their best work (RAISING ARIZONA, BARTON  FINK, FARGO).
Their latest effort, THE BIG LEBOWSKI, belongs in the  latter category, in that it is a non-generic dark comedy (unless  KINGPIN-meets-EXCESS BAGGAGE is a genre)--but it is not one of their  better efforts.
Jeff Bridges stars as Jeff Lebowski, aka The Dude, Duder, or, if  you're not into the brevity thing, El Duderino.
He's a pretty simple  L.A. guy with a pretty simple life: he's unemployed, he smokes pot,  and League Bowling is his first priority.
He bowls with opinionated,  borderline-psychotic Vietnam vet Walter (John Goodman) and dimwitted  Donny (Steve Buscemi).
But the Dude's simple life is complicated when  two men burst into his apartment, dunk his head in the toilet, ask him  to cough up a lot of money which he doesn't have, then urinate on his  rug when he can't help them.
It turns out that these men were looking  for another Jeffrey Lebowski (David Huddleston), this one a  millionaire, and when The Dude goes to the other Lebowski's mansion to  get his rug replaced, he is soon embroiled in a complex plot involving  a kidnapping, a botched ransom exchange, a severed toe, a nymphomaniac  porn starlet (Tara Reid), some neo-Nazis, a flaky New Age feminist  (Julianne Moore), and malicious law enforcement officials.
THE BIG LEBOWSKI is certainly idiosyncratic, but there is a sense of  strain about it.
It's cluttered with contrived attempts to be  original and offbeat: there's a man in an iron lung, a philosophizing  character called The Stranger (Sam Elliot), an elaborate  dream-sequence production number.
By trying so hard, it comes across  as forced; the Coens' vision is naturally skewed, and by pushing it  they needlessly call attention to that fact.
There is a lot wrong with the movie, but since it's a comedy, the  fundamental issue is this: is it funny?
The humour is irreverent in  the extreme: death, pornography, child abuse, and disabled people are  treated purely as sources of humour.
Some people in our PC 90s will  doubtless object to this material on principle; my feeling is that if  it's funny, it doesn't matter how offensive it is--when something's  not funny, that's when I start to feel offended.
Fortunately, THE BIG  LEBOWSKI is very funny, and that is its saving grace.
Bridges wins a  lot of laughs as the hapless, laidback everyman thrown into an  absurdist nightmare and unable to extricate himself; Goodman is  wonderful as his headstrong best friend whose well-intentioned  interference just makes matters worse and worse.
The other characters, however, exist only because they're funny, not  because the script is particularly interested in them (most notably  Julianne Moore's Maude), and the plot is a grab-bag of ideas, many of  them inspired, but thrown together in a slapdash way.
The movie lacks  any sense of coherence, and while all the actors are great, several  are wasted in minor roles: John Turturro has fun with a manically  over-the-top character, stealing his scenes, but David Thewlis and Jon  Polito have only walk-on parts, mildly amusing but unnecessary, while  Buscemi is woefully underused.
The dialogue is refreshing because it  allows the characters to talk in a roundabout, unhurried, verbose way,  but frustrating because it takes them an awful long time to get to the  point.
The Coen brothers have taken pride, through the years, in doing  things their own distinctive way--they confound expectations--but here  that strategy has backfired.
For many people (myself included) FARGO  signalled the Coens' arrival as filmmakers: they had fulfilled their  potential, and their next movie was expected to be great.
But it  seems that they have deliberately set out to not make a great movie in  THE BIG LEBOWSKI, confounding the critics once again.
It is an  extravagant entertainment, but shallow and ultimately pointless.
Considered as a self-contained work, it is good; in the context of the  Coens' career and their considerable talent, it is a disappointment.. . 
