        Robert Zemeckis could easily separate himself from Forrest Gump.
After all, that movie is three years in the past.
By now, he should  realize that not every movie he touches needs to have the same elements.
Unfortunately, he doesn't.
The technical wonder that was Gump invades some scenes of  Contact, and they are unwelcome.
Unwelcome to the eye and apparently to  the man in those scenes, Bill Clinton.
What we have here is similar to  Gumps meeting with President Kennedy, where characters are superimposed  onscreen during a presidential speech that makes the archived footage  seem to be a part of the movie.
Here we find two mistakes: one in  motive, one in the technical uses of the President.
By now, we are  aware that Zemeckis can do this sort of thing, and it has swerved into an  annoying pattern.
Also, we can tell that the President did not make his  speech indoors as sunlight glistens off his gray hair.
My other complaint with Zemeckis' handling of this film is the  gooey sentimentality to which we are subjected early on.
We discover how  the main character, Ellie Arroway (Foster), has become the way she is  through a series of flashbacks.
Groans were apparent during these scenes  and should have been handled differently.
Nonetheless, Contact survives  the heavy hand of Robert Zemeckis, and succeeds.
The story has been in the making for seventeen years, the  brainchild of super-astronomer Carl Sagan, who died last year of cancer.
Pushed by a fascination with the prospects of alien life, Sagan turned  Contact into a novel as production hit snags endlessly.
Translated to  film, the effort is seamless.
Ellie is a scientist who feels that there is someone out there  trying to communicate.
Like the efforts to make the movie, Ellie  hits bumps in her search for intelligent life as funding keeps  disappearing from her projects.
Behind the sabotages is David Drumlin  (Skerritt), a good old boy who has paid his dues and seeks the fame for  himself.
However, just as the sheet is pulled from beneath her, Ellie  finds a way to keep listening for signals, and one evening one appears  from the star cluster of Vega, and it packs a punch.
In a series of wrenching scenes, we watch as Drumlin successfully  pulls the project away from Ellie.
The project consists of building an  aptly named "machine" to launch someone to Vega to meeet the aliens.
Soon enough the government takes over, led by skeptical Michael Kitz (Woods).
Woods is once again brilliant as the sarcastic wit who has no reason to believe that anything here is sensible.
These, however, are the mere bones of the  film.
Palmer Joss (McConaughey) is a Christian leader who plants the  issue of God into the minds of the viewers and actors.
The science  versus religion debate emerges and erupts.
As the machine is being  built, religious and science fanatics line up along NASAs property to  protest or support the mission.
Meanwhile, Drumlin and Arroway vie for  the job to meet the Vegans.
Drumlin plays dirty to attain the position,  while Arroway speaks from her heart during sessions.
However, after a tragedy strikes, Ellie is allowed to run the  mission.
She is guided by the Carl Sagan-as-billionaire, S.R.
Hadden  (Hurt), who helps her reach her goal, the stars.
Amazing are the  wormhole effects of her entering different atmospheres and galaxies, as  well as the Vegan land itself.
While on Vega, her meeting must remain a  surprise.
Zemeckis does have a tocuh of flare with these scenes, and  could have used more of them.
Angela Bassett deserved more scenes, and comes up as the wasted  talent.
Casting Rob Lowe as the conservative and Jake Busey as a lunatic  were smart decisions.
I believe that Face/Off is the best film we've been given this summer,  but Contact is Academy-friendly.
It is almost assured that Foster will  gain a nomination, and Skerritt, in his icy and calculating performance,  deserves consideration.
Zemeckis almost blows it, but with the  fascination behind Contact, even he could reap the benefits of an overall  good movie.. . 
