Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre) Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on July 14, 2000; certificate 15; 157  minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1. Directed by Roland Emmerich; produced by Mark Gordon, Gary Levinsohn.
Written by Robert Rodat.
Photographed by Caleb Deschanel; edited by David Brenner.
CAST..... Mel Gibson..... Benjamin Martin Heath Ledger..... Gabriel Martin Jason Isaacs.....
Colonel William Tavington Joely Richardson..... Charlotte Selton Chris Cooper.....
Colonel Harry Burwell Tom Wilkinson..... General Cornwallis. You don't send a boy to do a man's job.
Roland Emmerich -- the director of  such dreadful action films as "Independence Day", and the recent "Godzilla"  remake -- should not have been assigned an epic about the American  Revolutionary War.
It's nonetheless unsurprising that my opening maxim never  occurred to anyone involved with "The Patriot".
After all, they did approve a  script in which two small boys are given guns and told to shoot at British  people in the woods.
The tots are about ten years old, or maybe a little younger.
The film's hero,  played by Mel Gibson, is a widower whose farm is unjustly attacked by  'Redcoats' (the nickname for the Brits); he's also the one who supplied the  kids with their weapons, and ordered them to commit murder.
After their  shooting spree, when Gibson is tucking the lads into bed, one of them reports  "I'm glad I've killed, pop!
". America -- although a film as blindly patriotic as this would never admit it  -- already has enough gun-crazed maniacs.
Their defence for bearing arms is  that 1) the constitution allows it, and 2) they need to do so for home  protection.
With scenes like the one above, "The Patriot" serves as an  incitement of those freaks, and also of the pathetic flag-wavers who wear  stars-and-stripes shorts at street parades and recite "We really do live in  the land of the free and the home of the brave!
" as if paraphrasing a line  from one's national anthem is the same thing as seriously examining one's  country.
"The Patriot" is being advertised as the Revolutionary War equivalent of  Gibson's great Scottish epic "Braveheart", but it's nowhere near as  entertaining, and does a much more methodical job of demonising the British  while glamorising a revolt.
The narrative essentially consists of Gibson and  a small band of merry men wandering around the country discussing "the  cause"; although now and again Gibson meets up with his family, or there will  be another attack from those horrid Recoats.
Of course there is a token black  character among Gibson's troupe, who gets some racist comments at first, but  then apologies, so none of the Americans come off looking evil.
When the level of the storytelling becomes apparent, we hold out hope that we  can at least expect some spectacular sequences of dumb action.
But there is  hardly any fighting until the climax, when comes a highly implausible battle  scene, with Gibson running through the bloody lines unharmed, carrying the  American flag.
Then he thrusts it into the ground and has a ridiculous clash  with a British officer (Jason Isaacs), where each man wields two swords in  each hand, and juts them at each other in time to swashbuckler music chords.
To picture this, recall the Jim Carrey comedy "Cable Guy", with its parody of  the famous "Star Trek" fight.
Gibson opens every scene with a flustered, confused expression and then turns  it into a frown.
It's like "Braveheart" going senile but sporadically  returning to his old self.
The dialogue that he and all the other actors have  to speak varies from horribly stilted ("Men!
Richly fight for the cause about  which you spake!
"; "Father... this yonder boy be two years younger than I!
")  to nonsensical ("I'm a parent, I don't have the luxury of principles") to  lazy and pedestrian ("Daddy, daddy, come back!").
And there are scenes of  ineptitude, such as when Gibson's platoon creep up behind a British ship, and  then Emmerich cuts to a wide shot to show the boat blow up.
How the hell did  that happen?
Did they throw a hand grenade?
Where did they find one of those,  being in the 1770s an' all?
Like "U-571", another dreadful recent war movie, "The Patriot" has drawn fire  for its reworking of history.
The real-life figure Gibson's character is  based on was known for shooting civilians for sport, and raping his slaves  (in the film, he doesn't even keep slaves; the Negroes working his land are  free men).
And William Tavington, the English colonel who the screenplay pits  him against, did not murder children or use any unorthodox tactics.
Even if  you don't care about the facts, "The Patriot" is incompetent and  disappointing.
I dragged a buddy to the screening with me, and felt compelled  to apologise both during and after.
I think I'll ring him again right now.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
