Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. What provides 'Elizabeth' with a good deal of tension?
As a viewer, it  is not being sure that the woman who lends her name to the period will  survive.
We know she flourished, of course, but the early days of her reign were  assailed by divers types of intrigues:  social, political, even sexual.
And it is always fascinating to follow a figure when failure is not yet  an impossibility.
We are quickly introduced to the religious persecution that went on in  Great Britain in the 1550's.
Three Protestants are brutally shaved and  tied to a mammoth stake, the square filled with onlookers.
A bishop of  the Roman Church presides at the spectacle, and his very words, directed  to the victims of the impending auto-de-fe, show the terrible results of  politics mixing with religion.
Princess Elizabeth appears first outdoors, dancing with her ladies in  waiting.
But she soon suffers the wrath of her half sister, Mary Tudor,  the ailing Queen.
Imprisoned and then released, Elizabeth is warned not  to consort with anyone perceived as dangerous to the Crown.
Various  factions form, a Catholic one led by the Duke of Norfolk (Christopher  Eccleston), a Protestant one led by Sir William Cecil (Sir Richard  Attenborough) and Sir Francis Walsingham (Geoffrey Rush).
There are  other players in the political intrigue, such as Mary of Guise (Fanny  Ardant), and various ambassadors and underlings.
After Elizabeth ascends  the throne, she continues her affair of the heart with Sir Robert Dudley  (Joseph Fiennes), but the reality of ruling sobers her attitude  considerably.
The realm's coffers are depleted, its army and navy  ineffectual.
France and Spain are enemies waiting for a chance to  consume the entire island.
Does she have it in her to transform her  callow and impish demeanor?
She is the daughter of Henry VIII, after  all.
Already the recipient of a Best Actress Award from the Online Film  Critics Society (OFCS), Cate Blanchett is riveting in the role of the  Virgin Queen (the film's slightly sarcastic subtitle).
Blanchett's  Elizabeth is vibrant and principled, spirited and sharp, beautiful and  bitter.
In a very demanding role, Blanchett is able to assume an air of  originality, a quiet determination to find or create the inspiration she  will need to preserve the traditions and power of the monarchy.
Look  for Blanchett's face on the big screen for years to come, and her name  on many nomination lists.
Geoffrey Rush is just as strong.
As Francis Walsingham, a man returning  to court after a period of exile, Rush depicts consummate dedication to  Queen Elizabeth I.  Walsingham is charged with protecting the Queen, and  he immerses himself in the arduous task of security.
There's a slight  resemblance between Walsingham and Inspector Javert, whom Rush played in  the recent remake of 'Les Miserables.
'  Javert is nearly psychotic in  his pursuit of the quasi-saint, Jean Valjean;  Walsingham's hunting of  those disloyal to the Crown is almost as obsessive.
Much is implied by  the script, perhaps a weak point:  perhaps we could have seen more of  this early Renaissance knight commanding his forces.
We see him only  once giving orders to a spy.
Still, Rush assists in a steady building  of plot, until the film resonates with the overtones of power and  ambition and love of country.
As Sir Robert Dudley, Joseph Fiennes gives a sturdy performance.
His  part demands him to be first a sincere lover and later a treasonous  outcast.
Fiennes plays the range well, except that at times he seems  too arch, his chin beard and cocked brow the harbingers of cliché.
He  is good here, but better as the Bard of Stratford in 'Shakespeare in  Love', a fortuitous companion piece whose humor compliments the  historical tone of 'Elizabeth'.
'Sumptuous' is an apt word for the costumes and cinematography.
They  function in tandem to create a visual banquet of images.
The few  peasants we see are appropriately scruffy.
More noticeably, the  noblemen who are the focus of 'Elizabeth' are outfitted expertly.
The  retinues of Queens Mary and Elizabeth are stunningly coordinated, and  all the accoutrements worn by Blanchett are painstaking in their detail.
My only criticism is the black leather look of the traitors,  particularly the garb of the main villain, Norfolk.
But the look of the  film is memorable, to say the least.
Like the momentum of the plot, the  beauty of the photography causes the viewer a degree of awe;  toward the  end there is a retrospective montage, almost a collage of greatest  visual hits, that summarizes the rise and, more importantly, the growth  of Elizabeth into a mature head of state.
Shekhar Kapur has accomplished a remarkable feat for a director with  only a few films behind him.
The scenes are well shot, especially ones  that exploit the mood of such a period piece - bishops held in a dingy  cell, Walsingham looking down on them from a low-angle vantage.
And at  the end, as Elizabeth assumes the aspect of born-again virgin, she  becomes an icon of power and pallor, her servants applying the lead and  arsenic to her skin.
As the undisputed ruler she crosses a roomful of  admiring subjects, and for an instant she gets almost too close to the  camera.
For an instant we are too close to this monarch.
Then we cut  away to see the young but stern Elizabeth more distantly, and we glimpse  the bright future of the British Empire.. . . 
