Written by the Farrelly Brothers  and Mike Cerrone.      When your comic inventiveness runs to a guy crapping on his  neighbor's lawn or commandeering a suck at the breast of a nursing  mother, you'd better have a helluva comic actor to bail you out.
This  must have been the game plan of the Farrelly Brothers, looking to ride  the wave of their gross-out blockbuster There's Something About Mary.
They hired Jim Carrey, filmdom's highest-priced comedian, and gave him a  script that could have been written during recess at junior high.
The  guy does his best, but it's like bailing with a sieve.
Carrey leaps, he crawls, he slithers, he rubber-faces, he crashes  through windows and tumbles down embankments, he even drops his pants  for that revenge squat (not the only time he'll lower his trousers in a  search for laughs), but it's no use; Carrey is funny, but he's not that  funny.
He plays Charlie, a mild-mannered Rhode Island highway patrolman.
His troubles start when he's humiliated on his wedding day by the  African-American Mensa-president dwarf who chauffeurs the limo.
When in  the fullness of time his wife produces black triplets, Charlie willingly  suspends disbelief.
He raises them on Richard Pryor videos, and grown  up, they become huge louts (Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, and Jerod  Mixon) who use "motherfucker" as everything from article to adverb, but  are actually smart.
When Charlie's wife runs off with the dwarf, he  sublimates his feelings.
And develops Advanced Delusionary  Schizophrenia with Involuntary Narcissistic Rage.
In other words, a  split personality.
His alter ego is Hank, a mean, crude bastard with a  Dirty Harry swagger who dishes out revenge.
Charlie has medicine to  keep him bottled up, but when he forgets it, his evil genius bursts  loose.
There's a plot.
Irene P. Waters (get it?
), played as wallpaper by  a resigned Renee Zellweger, is a greenskeeper who may know something  about a nefarious scheme that involves a rich guy and a golf course and  most of the New York State Police.
It's important enough to have almost  everyone in the movie except Carrey trying to kill her, but not  important enough to tell us what it is.
Charlie's supposed to escort  Irene back to New York and turn her over to the authorities, but when  the attempts on her life start, he and Hank spring to the rescue, and  both fall in love with her.
By the end of this mess I was trying to find places to laugh out of  sympathy for Carrey, who really tries.
He does some nice  two-characters-fighting-for-control-of-the-same-body schtick, but Steve  Martin did it better in All of Me.
He works hard for his $20 million,  but that sieve just won't hold water.. . 
