Three Kings is the most unusual war movie you will ever see, and surely one of the best.
This brilliant Gulf War action / comedy is brimming with razor-sharp comedy, deliriously exciting action and thoughtful drama - with just a pinch of good old-fashioned Hollywood patriotism thrown in to boot.
In most films, all of these elements would create an awkward and overstuffed dilemma for the audience.
But, in Three Kings, the finished product is expertly polished and wonderfully engaging.
In simple terms, the movie is flat-out great.
Any dedicated filmgoer with a true sense of passion for cinema is sure to appreciate Three Kings.
Where director David O. Russell could have opted for a mere conventional approach, he transforms the film into sheer outlandish brilliance.
But, the thing is, the messages conveyed in the film are also straightforward enough to please the average action fan.
It depends on your critical eye, but you may leave the theater thinking either `That was awesome!!
' or `That was unique, original and totally absorbing.
Why couldn't Hollywood be this brave more often?
'. Russell doesn't waste any time with revealing his true intentions.
The film begins in 1991, just as the Gulf War has come to a close.
American soldiers are celebrating their dismissal with loud music and alcohol, but not everyone is so anxious to return home.
Sergeant Troy Barlow (Mark Wahlberg), Chief Elgin (Ice Cube) and Private Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze) have stumbled upon a map that supposedly leads to a hidden stash of gold bullion (stolen by Saddam Hussein from Kuwait).
Major Archie Gates (George Clooney), only two weeks from retirement, gets wind of their plans and wants to join the expedition to the Iraqi bunker where the bullion has been stored.
The four soldiers set out with the intentions of getting filthy rich.
The gold is recovered, yes, but other problems arise.
The Iraqi rebels, encouraged by President Bush to rise up against Saddam, are attempting to fight for their freedom.
But they were also informed that they would get the support of American troops, and that has not happened.
Gates sees that the rebels are suffering, and suddenly the game plan has changed: the soldiers are to stay and help the people from the grasp of Saddam's army, and then they will continue on their way.
Gates, Barlow, Elgin and Vig get far more than they had originally bargained for - each addressing certain moral issues that they feel strongly for, but have never spoken up about.
Three Kings is probably the funniest movie I've seen all year, handling it's comedy with a wry pleasure that most will find courageously liberating.
In the same respect, the film is heartbreaking and tragic as well, offering many scenes of graphic war violence that are frightening to watch transpire.
Russell (who last directed the critically acclaimed comedy Flirting With Disaster), with a watchful eye, balances everything in a miraculous fashion.
His screenplay, while containing a few periodic lulls, is sure to remain one of the most striking and enjoyable of the movie year.
The characters here are not emotionless cardboard stand-ups.
You actually feel for them.
Clooney, who has always been a likable hero in films like Out of Sight and From Dusk Till Dawn, is strong and charismatic as always.
Now that the actor has left ER, he is in dire need of a theatrical hit (and if this won't deliver for him, nothing will).
Wahlberg is a convincing performer, and rapper Ice Cube adds some impressive, subtle sub-texts to his character (even if his facial expressions remain rather monotonous throughout the movie).
The supporting cast is led triumphantly by Spike Jonze, who is indeed the `fourth king', even though the title may prove otherwise.
Although at first glance Private Vig appears to be just an annoying hillbilly weasel, Jonze (a director himself) adds layers of unexpected personality to the character - perhaps even emerging the standout.
The film has a fuzzed-out appearance that only assists in making the desert climate more realistic.
Russell's camera angles are nothing short of glorious, including an interesting scene in which we see the effects of a bullet ripping through a soldier's torso.
For a film to be so successful in so many areas is almost disarming, but Three Kings pulls it off with incredible style.
This is one of the most thought-provoking, insanely original movies of the year.
I recommend you drop any gold bullion you may be carrying and rush to see it.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *          MOVIE VIEWS by Jamey Hughton          http://Welcome.to/MovieViews. http://MovieThing.com/members/movies/MovieViews. Comments Appreciated:  movieviews@hotmail.com. . 
