Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre) Released in the UK by UIP on January 28, 2000; certificate 15; 105 minutes;  country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1. Directed by Bruce Beresford; produced by Leonard Goldberg.
Written by Douglas S Cook, David Weisberg.
Photographed by Peter James; edited by Wark Warner.
"Double Jeopardy" wants us to be amazed at the ingenuity of its gimmick, and  enthralled by the emotion of its story.
But the gimmick doesn't make any  logical sense and the drama has all the power of a soppy TV movie.
All that  remains is an unremarkable thriller plot, which moves dully and mechanically  toward a foregone conclusion.
Ashley Judd stars as Libby Parsons, an affluent young wife and mother who,  while on a boating trip, wakes to find that her husband Nick has gone  missing, and her cabin is covered in blood.
There is a knife on the scene.
There is no sign of anyone else's presence.
Libby is convicted of Nick's  murder and sent down.
While in prison, Libby discovers over the phone that Nick (Bruce Greenwood)  is still alive, having faked his own death.
So she behaves well, gets  released on parole and determines to track her villainous spouse down, to be  able to clear her name and get her son back.
She steals a car from her parole  officer, a sullen ex-law professor named Travis Lehman (Tommy Lee Jones),  then dashes across America on her search.
She feels comfortable about how to  handle Nick when she finds him, because of something she's been told by a  fellow jailbird: Under the 'double jeopardy' clause of the US constitution's  fifth amendment, nobody can be convicted twice for the exact same crime -- so  Libby can kill her husband and the law can't touch her for it.
Yes, this is the gimmick I was referring to, and it's not half as clever as  the screenwriters seem to think.
Since Nick is has been pronounced dead, you  see, Libby would officially be killing someone else, and could of course be  convicted.
Besides, she would have to serve the remainder of her life  sentence for violating her parole conditions -- they do not allow her to  leave the state in which she resides or own a weapon of any kind, let alone  get away with all the destruction of property she perpetrates over the course  of her country-wide trek.
Travis is supposed to be chasing her all the while, but "Double Jeopardy"  never develops into an effective game of cat-and-mouse, because we see very  little from the pursuer's point of view.
Most scenes just show Libby getting  a little closer to finding Nick, then almost getting caught by Travis and  having to scarper.
We're supposed to be engaged by Libby's desire to find her  son, but I don't know why -- although the film's opening passages do indeed  show her enjoying maternal pastimes, they come across as the typical  calm-before-the-storm moments that are present in every Hollywood thriller,  rather than something for us to get passionately wrapped up in.
Judd holds her own rather well as the film's heroine, creating body language  tough enough to convince us she's really survived an ordeal, yet preserving  the tender gaze of a caring parent.
Jones is okay, too, but he's played the  same role before; in "The Fugitive", which was a great thriller, and its  sequel "U.S.
Marshals", which was certainly not.
"Double Jeopardy" ranks  somewhere in between those two films -- it's not amazing or annoying, just a  pretty well put-together popcorn flick that's impossible to care a damn about.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani. Please visit, and encourage others to visit, The UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
