Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre) Released in the UK by UIP on March 3, 2000; certificate 18; 182 minutes;  country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1. Directed by Frank Darabont; produced by Frank Darabont, David Valdes.
Written by Frank Darabont; based on the serialised novel by Stephen King.
Photographed by David Tattersall; edited by Richard Francis-Bruce.
CAST..... Tom Hanks..... Paul Edgecomb David Morse..... Brutus 'Brutal' Howell Michael Clarke Duncan..... John Coffey Bonnie Hunt..... Jan Edgecomb James Cromwell.....
Warden Hal Moores Michael Jeter..... Eduard 'Del' Delacroix Graham Greene..... Arlen Bitterbuck Sam Rockwell..... William 'Wild Bill' Wharton Doug Hutchison..... Percy Wetmore. Here is a thoroughly absorbing supernatural fairytale about good and evil  living under the same roof.
Decent men work with cruel ones in this movie,  and a creature with miraculous healing power winds up in a place inextricably  linked with death.
Perhaps that's the most appropriate place to witness him.
The location is E-block in a 1935 Louisiana prison, where inmates await the  electric chair, and the condemned man's 'last mile' has been nicknamed 'the  green mile' after the lime-coloured linoleum on the floor.
We meet some of  the guards: Paul Edgecomb (Tom Hanks), Brutus Howell (David Morse), Dean  Stanton (Barry Pepper), Harry Terwilliger (Jeffrey Demunn), Percy Wetmore  (Doug Hutchison).
All of these, except for the slimy Percy, who got his job because of a  powerful relative, are good and patient men, who are firm yet kind to their  prisoners.
They view their role, correctly, as being a calming influence on  inmates who would be dangerous if they got too nervy.
"Think of this place as  like an intensive care ward in a hospital," advises Paul.
One of the new guests is John Coffey (Michael Clarke Duncan), a gigantic  black man who has been convicted of the rape-murders of two young girls, but  seems to exude simplicity and goodness, and turns out to have a very special  ability.
Other odd plot points creep up and get a fair bit of attention, such  as a urinary infection Paul suffers from, an unusually talented mouse, and a  boorish prisoner named Wharton.
We wonder what significance all these things  could possibly have, and then finally they come together in a climax of  moving drama, religious symbolism and clever epilogue.
My vague descriptions are intentional.
"The Green Mile" does not announce  what it is about, but drops little clues here and there, letting its story  unfold carefully, intriguing and enveloping us with its atmosphere.
That is  why virtue and depravity are set at equal levels throughout the film; the  conflict is needed to create quietly gripping tension.
And it is exactly how  the original Stephen King source material worked -- slyly revealing the story  by taking things slowly, letting us settle in, earning our care.
King released "The Green Mile" as a novel in six parts, leaving intervals of  several months between instalments, engaging his public in a guessing game  about what direction the material would go in.
Even if you read the whole  series at once, as I did, you still felt led through it slowly, because the  author's prose was so delicate and detailed.
The film captures this  remarkably well; Frank Darabont, the writer and director, who previously  adapted a King work into the great "Shawshank Redemption", recognises  deliberate pacing as an essential part of this story, and never falls into  the trap of condensing it into a series of meaningless spooky events.
If only Darabont had bought the rights to Alex Garland's "The Beach", instead  of that hyperactive boor Danny Boyle!
The way he lets "The Green Mile"  develop involves us with the intimacy of a good book.
The film is three hours  long, but contrary to the opinions of some critics, extensive length is not  the film's problem, but its appeal.
We get so immersed in the routine of life  on the 'green mile' that when paranormal activity starts to happen, we accept  it, and are amazed along with the characters.
Audience members prepared to  sit still and give the movie a chance will be handsomely rewarded.
Not that you'd think it from the ads.
This week two brilliant new releases,  "The Green Mile" and "Three Kings", have been so badly misrepresented by  their television commercials that many cinema-goers will be persuaded to stay  at home.
Darabont's film has been portrayed as some sort of mawkish  sentimental drama, with its scenes of good fable taken out of context, and  made to look like bad attempts at realism.
This is a movie that knows exactly  what it's doing, and while it does have its fair share of tender moments,  they're needed to balance out the brutality.
One scene, for example,  graphically depicts an execution Percy has rigged to go wrong, and is one of  the most horrifying single moments ever shown on film -- my hand  instinctively jumped to cover my eyes.
I was able to remove it, and look on,  but it really means something when a film can trigger involuntary defensive  movements.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani. Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
