Starring Antonio Banderas; Anthony Hopkins; Catherine Zeta-Jones; Stuart Wilson & Matthew Letscher. The Mask Of Zorro is by far the best movie of the summer of 98.
While Armageddon and Deep Impact wowed we the audience with spectacular special effects, no other movie was as much fun as Zorro.
I've never been a big Antonio Banderas fan -- actually to be perfectly honest I've never thought that he could act his way out of a paper bag.
Maybe in retrospect that's because he has never had the right roles.
There is no doubt that he was very good in The Mask Of Zorro.
It takes real talent to shine when you are acting next to Anthony Hopkins in a movie.
Hopkins plays Zorro, who, after being imprisoned by the Spanish government escapes to try to make contact with the daughter (Catherine Zeta-Jones) who was taken from him many years ago when she was just an infant.
Now, many years later she is all grown up.
And may I be the first to say WOW!
Catherine Zeta Jones has got to be one of the most beautiful women that I have seen in a movie in a long time, and unlike some of the other lovely starlets that populate today's movies, Zeta-Jones is actually a very good actress.
But I digress.
Hopkins meets up with a thief (Antonio Banderas) who has a score to settle with some of the same people that Zorro does.
Since Zorro is now in his late 50's, he really can't don the mask anymore, so he sets out to train Banderas' character to replace him as Zorro.
Going into much more detail would probably ruin the movie, but lets just say that tons of sword fighting and other assorted action abound in this movie.
I can't say enough about how impressed I was with Banderas' performance.
He was charismatic and funny, and if he can continue to find roles as good as The Mask Of Zorro, he will undoubtedly become one of Hollywood's biggest stars.
As usual, Hopkins gave a tremendous performance, and manages to make a role his own to the point where you could never imagine another actor playing that role.
I can't say enough good things about The Mask Of Zorro.
It was funny; well acted; great sets; the fights were well choreographed and Catherine Zeta-Jones, well, I could go on for hours about her.
Do yourself a favor.
Go see this movie.. . 
