Cast: Ben Stiller, Edward Norton, Jenna Elfman, Eli Wallach, Anne Bancroft, Brian George, Ron Rifkin, Milos Forman, Rena Sofer, Holland Taylor  Written by: Stuart Blumberg  Directed by: Edward Norton  Running Time: 128 minutes . Barring the obvious comparisons to any jokes, priest Brian (Edward Norton, making his directorial debut), and rabbi Jacob (Ben Stiller), both fall for their grade school chum Anna Reilly (Jenna Elfman) when she blows into town on a business trip.
Brian believes Anna has fallen in love with him over the course of the few weeks she's been in town when in truth, she has actually started seeing Jacob.
Jacob is happy with their noncommittal relationship at first, but when Anna starts to get serious, he begins to have doubts about what his parishioners and mother will think about his relationship with a non-Jewish girl.
Can Brian forgive Jacob for lying to him about the relationship he has been in?
Can Anna forgive Jacob for placing his career above their relationship?
Will Jacob's congregation and mother understand and accept that he's in love with a gentile?
Every once and a while, a film somehow manages to capture my frame of mind perfectly and for the entire running length of said film, I am completely in tune with the message being conveyed.
Keeping the Faith was just such a movie (Instinct is another good example of one).
Although I'm not personally embroiled in a struggle over a girl with a friend of mine, I was somehow able to relate to all of these characters' struggles in my own personal way.
I won't bore anyone with the details but suffice to say, the theme of choice is a major one in the film and I have been faced with several MAJOR life altering choices of my own in the last two months.
The performances are remarkably solid in this film.
Edward Norton has quickly become one of my favorite actors (and certainly one of the best of the newer crop) and here he certainly doesn't disappoint, even getting to show off a little bit of his slapstick ability.
The scene where Anna and Jacob's relationship is revealed to Norton's character is utterly amazing, and really shows off his ability as an actor.
Ben Stiller is always reliable as a comedic actor and here it is no different, but we also get a chance to see his rare dramatic side (which oddly still contains a hint of comedy).
The always gorgeous Jenna Elfman gets a chance to shine as well, with a deftly balanced role as the hard edged business woman that still remembers her childhood hanging out with the guys and longs to rekindle that spirit again.
All three actors share such a camaraderie and natural chemistry in this film that it almost seems as if they did spend their childhoods together.
The supporting cast turns in pretty decent performances as well.
Eli Wallach plays the understanding mentor to Stiller's rabbi Jacob character, Lisa Edelstien plays the rough and tumble date that Jacob has been set up on (most of the scenes of which are shown in the trailer, but all of which occur fairly early on in the film), Anne Bancroft is perfect as Jacob's understanding but imperfect mother, and Ron Rifkin (the heavy in films like The Negotiator and, to a lesser extent, Boiler Room) plays the head of a board of rabbis that will either make or break Jacob's career in the synagogue.
Perhaps the biggest surprise comes from the appearance of director Milos Forman (who directed Norton in The People vs. Larry Flynt) as a wise priest who teaches Brian to decide what's best for himself and his faith.
Despite the romantic comedy clichés Keeping the Faith seems trapped in, the screenplay remains fairly intelligent.
None of the emotions seem forced, and the comedy certainly doesn't (despite a pretty awful joke towards the end of the film involving a woman's comment about confessions "these days").
Although it may date the film in the long run, it is also very topical.
There are several in-jokes about recent films (released within the last five years) and countless other modern pop culture references scattered throughout.
I found Keeping the Faith to be an extremely good film.
Who knows, depending on the way things turn out in the next few years I may look back on this movie and feel totally different about it.
For now though, I find it to be incredibly charming and intelligent, and for once I actually agree with everyone who says it would make a good date film.
[PG-13]. Reviewed by Brian Matherly - bmath2000@hotmail.com The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/. . 
