Christian Critic's Movie Parables - http://www.christiancritic.com. DIRECTED BY:      Kelly Makin STARRING:         Hugh Grant, Jeanne Tripplehorn, James Caan, Burt Young, James Fox, Joe Viterelli WRITTEN BY:       Adam Scheinman, Robert Kuhn RATED:            PG-13 for brief strong language, some violence, and sensuality SCRIPTURE REFERENCES:       1 Corinthians 15:33, Proverbs 27:17, Proverbs 1:10-16. I don't know if I would say that Hugh Grant (NOTTING HILL) is a great actor, but there is no doubt that he's a great personality.
For the second time this summer, Mr. Grant goes to the romantic comedy well and, once again, completely wins us over with his charm and self-effacing humor.
He doesn't show us anything new, but when the familiar works so well, what does it matter?
In MICKEY BLUE EYES, Hugh Grant is Michael Felgate, the manager of an art auction house, who is head over heels in love with Gina Vitale (Jeanne Tripplehorn, SLIDING DOORS).
But soon after Michael "pops the question" (in an extremely funny scene set in Chinese restaurant), he learns that Gina's father, Frank (James Caan, THE GODFATHER) is involved in the family business... a family whose members are named after types of food preparation (as in Vinnie the Butcher.
). Even though he gives his assurance to Gina that he will never be drawn into her family's world of crime and corruption, he did not anticipate that their world might come to him.
He quickly finds himself unintentionally entangled in mob business.
When an accident results in the death of the son of mob boss Uncle Vito (Burt Young, ROCKY), Michael tries, with the help of his future father-in-law, to not only extract himself from future dealings, but also to avoid being "whacked" himself.
As with ANALYZE THIS (now out in video), much of the humor of MICKEY BLUE EYES comes from the incongruity of a "normal," decent man trying to fit in with the caricatured personas of mobsters, racketeers, and hit men.
Add Mr. Grant's cultured English accent contrasted against the Italian-American Brooklynese of Gina's family and this fish-out-of-water story becomes a whale of a comedy.
In what might arguably be considered the funniest moment in the film, Frank coaches Michael on how to sound like a gangster, as he has to try to pass himself off as "Mickey Blue Eyes" from Kansas City.
The result is an hilarious accent that is completely unidentifiable.
As he was with NOTTING HILL, Mr. Grant is ably supported by a talented cast.
James Caan gives a very strong and amusing performance as a man torn between his love for his daughter and his loyalty to Vito and the mob.
Jeanne Tripplehorn is lovely as Michael's intended Mafia princess.
Burt Young is appropriately "godfatherish" in a comically understated way.
Joe Viterelli (ANALYZE THIS) adds yet another Mafioso role to his resume, which by this time must resemble a 'Who's Who List of Wise Guys.
". The film was produced through Simian Films, the company founded by Mr. Grant and Elizabeth Hurley (AUSTIN POWERS).
It was directed by Kelly Makin (BRAIN CANDY: KIDS IN THE HALL). Hugh Grant's character finds himself immersed in a untenable position because he failed to heed the Gina's advice.
She had predicted what would happen:  "A little favor, a tiny lie, and you're theirs.
". Her point was valid, and a cautionary tale for us.
Her concern was that once "the family" did a small favor for Michael, or if he accepted a small token from them, an unspoken obligation would then exist.
A debt that could never be repaid leading to an offer that could not be refused.
This is why we should always be extremely careful with whom we associate and to whom we become "indebted.
"  As the scriptures say:. "Do not be misled: Bad company corrupts good character.
" 1 Corinthians 15:33 [NIV]. God never tells us to tolerate evil or coexist with it.
We are told to avoid, eschew, and resist it.
In contrast, we are told to seek out and fellowship with those spiritually strong in heart and mind so we may benefit from their strength.
For any actor who wishes to grow stronger in his ability to properly make a romantic comedy...he merely needs to seek out and learn from a guy by the name of Hugh Grant.. 
