  I have heard numerous speculations of the new Ron Howard movie, EDtv, as a copycat of last year's overrated The Truman Show.
Well, having seen EDtv, I can safely say, it is in no way at all like Truman.
EDtv is funnier and more fun to watch the cast of talents, including Matthew McConaughy, Jenna Elfman, Martin Landau, and Ellen DeGeneres.
McConaughy stars as 31-year-old Ed Pukerny, a video store clerk whose life is suddenly shot into fame when he is "cast" in his own 24 hour, seven days a week television show called "ED-TV.
"  This is the brain-child (I hate that word, but, oh well) of a TV production company producer (DeGeneres), whose studio has suffered from lackluster ratings.
"The all-Garden channel is beating us.
People would rather watch soil" she says.
After a couple of days of ED-TV, Ed becomes a national star, somewhat of a real star: Being trashed in the tabloids and savaged by media news critics (one played by Michael Moore, as, himself I think).
But, ED-TV also becomes a target for his friends who don't particularly like being filmed 24-7.
Especially Ed's brother's (the always great Woody Harrelson) fiancee, Shari (Elfman).
And things get really stinky when Ed and Shari fall in love, unintentionally displaying this to their millions of fans, and Ed's family.
EDtv is somewhat more believable than Truman Show.
Not that it is likely we will be seeing a real life Ed Pekurny soon.
But, I can definitely see that happening faster that Truman's elaborate premise.
Look at The Real World, however bad it is, it is still basically the same thing.
Truman was a fairly involving movie, but, not wholely satisfying.
EDtv is very satisfying and hilarious.
I especially liked the part when Ray, Ed's brother, gets drunk and spills the beans on his family, everything from his sister being an alcholic to her husband being a bad lounge singer, all to get a laugh.
Howard, who also directed the funny Splash, has made a very well-done comedy.
It could also be looked as a satire on TV producers.
Either way, it is a surprisingly touching, always funny film.. . 
