     Producer Jerry Bruckheimer, in a philanthropic moment, bought the  rights to a grade C 1974 quickie called Gone In 60 Seconds, which was  made by a guy named H.B.
Halicki and is remembered, if it is remembered  at all, for a 40-minute car chase.
Halicki himself was gone in short  order, erased in an accident while filming a sequel.
Both movies involve stealing a lot of cars, and driving recklessly  and very fast.
A less sensitive man than Bruckheimer might not have  felt this was worth paying the big bucks for, but Jerry's the man who  brought us The Rock and Armageddon, so he has certain standards to  maintain.
Bruckheimer veteran Nic Cage is the central character, an ex-car  thief known even to his family as Memphis.
Cage once won a Best Actor  Oscar, but he's been trying successfully to live it down ever since.
Memphis is going straight, working at a go-kart track with little kids,  but his brother (Giovanni Ribisi) has run afoul of a homicidal crime  boss (Christopher Eccleston), and Memphis has to heist 50 high-end autos  in a night to save the lad's bacon.
Gone In 60 Seconds  is all speed and shiny surfaces, with odd  little moments of pathos spotted in to support Bruckheimer's assertion  that this movie is "character driven".
Driven, yes; character, no.
I could tell you how Memphis puts together a "team", and mention  names like Robert Duvall, but that would give you false hope.
I could  mention Delroy Lindo, reduced here to an Inspector Javert-like detective  who grouses "I should have put you away when I had the chance," sounding  like George Bush bitching to Saddam Hussein.
I could mention Angelina  Jolie, yet another Oscar winner, but that would give you the impression  that there's a female presence here.
I couldn't figure for the life of  me what Jolie was doing in the movie, except to ponder with Cage the  question "Which is better, boosting cars or sex?
".      The answer is neither, when it becomes as monotonously repetitive  as it does here.
Boosting one car could be pretty exciting.
Boosting  50 is just plain tedious.
It's like one of those tours that takes you  to 12 European cities in 6 days.
If all you ask for in a movie is lots of car chases, you'll find  plenty of that in this one.
Memphis's main automotive squeeze is a '67  Shelby Mustang GT 500 (similar to the car  Steve McQueen drove in  Bullitt.
)  Her name is Eleanor, and he comes a lot closer to orgasm with  her than he does with Angelina Jolie.. . 
