--- A copy of this review can be found at http://www.moviereviews.org/scream_3.htm ---. The best part of Scream 3 is Jenny McCarthy in a ditsy Hollywood-actress role that is humorous to both the uneducated movie-going rookie and the seasoned Hitchcock fan (there are references to his work throughout the film that the trained eye should have a relatively easy time catching).
Then, within 15 minutes of the movie starting she.d'oh!
It's okay though, because the second best part of the movie is good old Liev Schreiber.
Then, before the opening credits even get started his character.d'oh!
The third best thing?
Well, I'll have to think about it.
Obviously, the film is a teenage slasher flick.
Not only do respected actors and attractive Playmates get butchered, but a head roles, a fire engulfs and some other victims have their last supper Benihana style.
The production, which actually prides itself in being and spoofing a cliche-filled horror flick also uses flickering candle light, bullet-proof vests, nightmares and, who could forget, a finale in the dark.
Those of you not already acquainted with Scream and Scream 2 will likely find little more than confusion in the third and final installment which neglects to thoroughly lay out its background.
Basically, a third Stab movie is being made based on our protagonist, Sidney Prescott (Neve Campbell) and the rest of the gang's frightening adventures a few years back.
Someone involved in making the movie decides it is time to butcher Sidney and Co., but, for artistic reasons of course, chooses to do it in the order that they are terminated in the script.
From there, it is all chaos, scream, blood and (a?
)  masked murderer.
Confused?
Then you either need to take a couple of trips to Blockbuster or, more wisely, forget that this movie even exists.
Since the film does enjoy its status as a popcorn horror flick, many jokes are cracked at the genre.
Just as in Scream 2, the rules of engagement are explained by an expert on sequels and trilogies- never mind that he died in the last movie.
Hardcore fans of the Scream trio anticipate this scene as some sort of a holy grail.
That is all fine and good, but, unlike in the previous works, our expert proves to be wrong.
Horror junkies who are familiar with Hitchcock will find some nicely tucked away jokes throughout Scream 3.
Similarly, those familiar with the underground success of Silent Bob and Jay will be pleasantly surprised to see them cameo even though Kevin Smith isn't involved with this movie.
Although the aforementioned cinema tidbits are stashed away throughout the work, don't expect to find any deep meaning or social commentary in your excavations.
The movie does attempt to touch on family ties and the psychology of a homicidal maniac, but things get just about as deep as the knife in Jenny McCarthy's throat.
The movie also has some more minor faults that hardly help its case.
A fine example is when star Courtney Cox's hair grows about 16 inches in three minutes.
It is also interesting that obvious victims are always abandoned by their bodyguards or the police right before they either answer a scary phone call or meet their destiny.
The third best thing?
Hmm.
I got it!
The establishing shot of the movie: the famous Hollywood sign.
Maybe that is some sort of foreshadowing.. . 
