        This movie is one of the better ones that I have seen in a long time, although I have not read the book by Carl Sagan I am fairly sure that this movie does the book justice in every respect.
The acting in this movie is just superb and casting for the parts could not have been done better I think.
Although I think this movie is something along the lines of perfect I did find a few small flaws...
There is a scene that kind of makes you think whoa this is not happening this is too cheesy.. well that scene makes sense if you think about it but it kind of struck me as being dumb at first.
A few other small things would be that I noticed that in one scene they were panning in on a building and it was cloudy and foggy and really rainy.. but when the scenes shifted to inside the building it was already sunny through the windows.
As mentioned above the acting in this movie is superb.. Jodie Foster produces another stellar performance and in my opinion it is her best to date.
She shows emotion beautifully and fills the shoes of a very demanding role as if the role had been made for her.
Not one moment in this movie did Jodie Foster seem like she was out of her element.
In my humble opinion her performance in this movie should at least get her an Oscar nomination if not the prestigious award itself.
Matthew McConaughey also delivers a grand performance in the movie.. although the movie centers around Jodie and her character all the other actors in the movie gave great performances.
The sheer magnitude of some of the scenes was spectacular.. to bring together such large crowds for certain scenes and knowing when to use spectacular effects shows a certain genius from the point of the director Robert Zemeckis.
Although there are parts in this movie that are predictable and the movie itself is rather lengthy neither of these things makes much of a disturbance.
Mind you if your bladder can't take a large sized drink for more then 2.5 hours.. you might want to consider a medium.
hehe...
I highly recommend this movie and it is one of the better ones that have been released this year... it might not make the millions of JP2 but I would have to say that this movie should be one of the best of the year and maybe one of the better movies that have been made recently.
Go see it if you have the chance.. . 
