---A copy of this review can be found at  http://www.moviereviews.org/man_on_the_moon.htm ---. ---Those of you in the Portland, Maine area can hear Mac VerStandig's  film reviews every Friday morning on the 98.9 The Point morning show.---. Man on the Moon is a brilliant movie that tells you absolutely nothing  about its subject.
At the end of two hours you are no closer to  understanding what made Andy Kaufman (Jim Carrey) so zany, innovative or  genius.
Rather, you come away with a complete comprehension and  subsequent newly found appreciation of the man's work.
"Hello, I am Andy and I would like to thank you for coming to my movie.
I wish it was better" is the opening line of Man on the Moon.
Soon you  learn that Andy (Jim Carrey) wishes it was better because, once all the  bologna was done away with, the movie is now finished.
Credits role, you  are instructed to go home and the screen goes black.
Anyone that gets  up, demands a refund or even thinks of heading for an exit at this  juncture becomes the punch-line of the film's first joke, one that would  make Mr. Kaufman proud.
Soon Andy is back on screen and inviting you to  at least attempt to understand his career by watching the biography that  follows.
Kaufman's roots are the same as most comedians': at home, with family  looking on.
Years later Kaufman is bombing at an improvisational comedy  club because, despite a radically different type of audience, his act  hasn't changed from his days as a bedroom performer.
Tapping his guitar  and making funny sounds, Andy soon gets a clear message from the  manager: get with it or get out.
Andy returns with a dead-on Elvis  impression that is definitely with it.
Like many stars, Kaufman is discovered in the aforementioned humble  night club environment.
Agent George Shapiro (Danny DeVito) doesn't take  long to get his new client on Saturday Night Live and a little show  called Taxi (for those of you still scratching your head as to exactly  who this Kaufman guy was, he played Latka Gravas on the hit series whose  cast returns to play themselves here, minus DeVito who is obviously  occupied otherwise).
Kaufman begins to perform in many different arenas  with unheard of material.
Whether it be wrestling women, disrupting a  live TV show or taking the audience at Carnegie Hall out for milk and  cookies; Kaufman ventures where few have previously gone and soars to  the top in the process.
But everything that goes up must come down.
Academy Award winning director Milos Forman helms this project with  experience in both insanity and reality having also done One Flew Over  the Cuckoo's Nest, Amadeus and The People Vs. Larry Flynt.
Here is  joined by screenwriters Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski who penned  The People Vs. Larry Flynt (supporting actress Courtney Love, giving a  delicious performance in a limited role here, is also an alumni from the  pornographer's bio-pic).
There is little doubt that Forman and the  writers will be nominated for Academy Awards.
The other person who will likely be in The Shrine Auditorium on Oscar  night is Jim Carrey.
Once considered a funny-faced comedian doomed to a  career of potty-mouth fart-fests, Carrey suddenly shows up here with one  of the greatest dramatic performances of our time.
Much like Robin  Williams, Carrey's new trend (with the primarily dramatic The Truman  Show in the not to distant past) seems to be playing funny people in  serious movies.
Andy Kaufman probably died in 1984.
Some people are of the opinion that  he is still very much alive, and Man on the Moon actually provides a  very nice "out-clause" should that ever prove to be true.
Regardless,  Kaufman's public recognition was at an all time low on May 16, 1984 and  has hardly risen since.
This film will likely project his name into  household status once again, perhaps permanently.
Although Man on the Moon may not win battles at the box office or even  on Oscar night, although it certainly deserves to, the movie will likely  be one of only a handful from 1999 that is still fresh in minds several  years down the road.
Andy Kaufman aimed to give his audience an  experience they would never forget, and Carrey and Forman do just that  in Man on the Moon.. . 
