A copy of thsi review can be found at  http://www.moviereviews.org/toy_story_2.htm. Toy Story 2 is the perfect film to carry the Disney torch into the next  century.
Good old Walt's studio became synonymous with heartwarming and  purely innocent children's fare during the last 75 years.
Branches from  the Mouse House like Touchstone and Miramax adapted to adult genres as  well, making stirring and suspenseful dramas.
This product of the Magic  Kingdom isn't too lowbrow for adults nor highbrow for children; Toy  Story 2 is the perfect family film and the happiest of all compromises.
"Back in 1995, retailers did not order enough toys to meet demand.
" Tour  Guide Barbie speaks a truth that almost all of us remember vividly.
(That was after Power Rangers and before Tickle Me Elmo.
) It is no  coincidence that this movie is opening twenty four hours before the  year's biggest retail shopping day.
The original tale of the toys was a phenomenon.
So was the original  Austin Powers.
Remember what happened when that sequel rolled around a  few months back?
It made more money in its first weekend than the first  Austin Powers did in its entire theatrical run.
And with Pokemon quickly  fading after a huge opening, Toy Story 2 can expect enormous box office  numbers, enhanced by retailers' ability to learn from their previous  mistakes.
Woody (voice of Tom Hanks), Buzz (voice of Tim Allen) and the rest of  the gang are all back for their next great adventure.
This time around,  the villain isn't the little boy next store, it is the big man with the  toy store.
Al (voice of Wayne Knight) spots Woody at a yard sale and  realizes that our former hero is the missing piece to a very valuable  collection.
Soon Woody is abducted and living with the rest of the  Roundup Gang, a series of dolls from an old television show that was  canceled after its first week.
Our new hero, Buzz Lightyear, jumps to  the rescue explaining "Woody once risked his life for me.
I couldn't  call myself a friend if I weren't willing to do the same.
" He is joined  by Mr.
Potato Head (voice of Don Rickles), Slinky Dog (voice of Jim  Varney, Rex the dinosaur (voice of Wallace Shawn) and Hamm the piggy  bank (voice of John Ratzenberger).
Their mission entails a venture  across town and should they make an error the consequences are obvious:  "ham sandwich with fries and a hot dog" plus a couple of toys for the  not-so-happy meal.
Pixar, the animation company behind this feat, starts the movie with a  short film.
In the immediate wake of Pikachu's Vacation, a rather  unfortunate opening piece from Pokemon: The First Movie (of course,  everything in that movie is rather unfortunate), comparisons must be  drawn.
Toy Story 2's opening is a cute and very short sequence involving  two lamps and two balls.
It is introduced at Pixar's first film from  1986 (most kids in the audience will likely group that year and the  stone age next to each other).
Pikachu's Vacation is an original piece  that drags on for some 20 minutes and is absolutely indecipherable.
Needless to say that quantity isn't quality.
Toy Story 2 also thrives off of sheer eye candy.
The animation is so  real that you often wonder if it really is animation or some sort of  Roger Rabbit-like combination of cartoons and people.
This is best  highlighted by the ending sequence which takes place at (Caution:  SPOILER ahead) an airport and a mid-feature scene with a major highway.
The gang is back and better than ever, there is no question about it.
Buzz Lightyear says it best, this film is headed "to infinity and  beyond!
". . 
