Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. Robert Altman's latest begins with the free-floating point of view sometimes  employed by the novelist Sinclair Lewis.
We first see a black man inside a  dark bar, Theo's Place.
He's drinking heavily, and when he leaves he spots  a cruiser passing in the street.
The drunken Willis Richland (Charles S.  Dutton) drops his pint of Wild Turkey, returns to the bar and steals  another.
Meanwhile, across the town of Holly Springs, Mississippi, we are shown a  rehearsal of an Easter pageant, Camilla Dixon's (Glenn Close) version of  Oscar Wilde's 'Salome'.
Camilla is bossing around the players, including  her sheepish and slow-witted sister Cora (Julianne Moore) and a young  sheriff's deputy, Jason Brown (Chris O'Donnell).
Thus Altman establishes the arena in which his story unfolds.
He adds  dashes of other characters to the recipe, and somehow manages quite a  successful result:  a small movie with a large cast, an art film that is in  no way snooty or snotty, the kind of picture that stars worth their salt  give up scads of cash to be in.
These threads of plot keep crossing as the narrative gets passed among the  many eccentric and convincing characters.
Willis appears to be breaking  into a house through a kitchen window.
He stumbles upon a cabinet and  begins to remove several handguns, just as an old woman descends the steps  and surprises him.
We discover they are friends, and the woman (Patricia  Neal) - the Cookie of the title, Jewel Mae "Cookie" Orcutt, beloved widow of  Buck Orcutt - treats this man like a son.
The two keep a running count of  wrongs they've done each other, and Cookie has been wronged more often:   it's a playful and endearing piece of characterization.
We find out that Cookie's relatives have abandoned her.
Nieces Camilla and  Cora are not on good terms with her (rather, Camilla is not, and Cora  blindly follows any direction coming from Camilla).
Niece Emma Duvall  (apparently Cora's daughter, played by Liv Tyler) has just returned to town  from a life of alleged decadence.
She hasn't had the chance to see Great  Aunt  Cookie before the old woman, in a state aggravated by loneliness,  senility, and some heavenly descriptions she got from Willis, uses one of  Buck's old pistols to blow out her brains.
What keeps our interest is the  filmmaker's handling of the body's discovery.
Again the camera seems to be  floating:  Altman is wisely unafraid to sustain a shot when very little is  happening.
Hence we see Camilla searching the house in real time, and we  are treated to a masterful scene when she finds the body in bed, a ruined  feather pillow covering the head, pistol dangling from a dead finger.
Thinking quickly, Camilla reveals her true colors:  she begins to gather any  traces of Cookie's crime against the family name; knocking over jewelry  boxes to simulate a robbery; stuffing the suicide note, which is addressed  to Willis, into her mouth, to hide it from the approaching Cora;  finally  lifting the pistol out of the peaceful grip of Cookie's hand.
In short,  Camilla flagrantly violates the crime scene.
Needless to say, Camilla's actions hold serious repercussions for most of  the characters.
What is very impressive is Altman's sense of humor - a  refined dark comedy that also functions as social satire.
This director is  experienced in manipulating the large cast, as he did in 'Mash',  'Nashville', 'Short Cuts' and others.
We watch brilliant spurts of  characterization followed by astounding revelations about human nature.
Viewers can tell Altman is always on task, whether it's coaxing crazy  expressions out of the actors, timing the implications of a lingering shot,  or even including a couple of visual jokes other directors would shun (such  as Close's Camilla getting caught with her hand in Cookie's cookie jar!).
The acting is thoroughly solid in this piece.
Close shows her mastery of  megalomania:  she plays Camilla as an aging Southern belle more concerned  with appearances than with family relations.
Sister Cora, who sleeps in the  same room with Camilla, and kneels dutifully during Camilla's self-righteous  prayers, is a classic example of a dominated adult.
Sometimes Moore's  expressions are hilarious in their simple-mindedness, as when she sucks in  her lips, as though they are zipped, when one of the cops comments about the  terrible scene in the bedroom upstairs.
Moore has worked with Altman  before, in 'Short Cuts', the adaptation of Raymond Carver's superb short  stories, and she shows a marvelous range here.
Cora is so plain she's  almost unattractive, and some of the most funny and subtle moments are given  to her, as when she incorporates Biblical-sounding poetry from 'Salome' in  her everyday speech.
Just as good is Patricia Neal, the title character, as  she shows her attachment to Willis, and especially to her dead husband Buck.
Finally, Charles S. Dutton seems to be the main character - he links the  other characters with strands of plot that many times display their foibles  and his virtue (as when he buys a pint of bourbon and returns it to the  shelf in Theo's bar).
Supporting roles are jewels as well.
Chris O'Donnell as Jason Brown is a  green but over-confident deputy, and receives with telling ignorance the  condescension of Camilla and his superior officers.
Jason is in lust with  Emma, played with low-key loyalty by Liv Tyler.
Ned Beatty plays Lester  Boyle, another deputy, who is not afraid to point out the incompetence of  senior investigators on the case of Cookie's death.
I don't know if Beatty  has the most acting credits among the cast members, but he's certainly one  of the more natural-acting veterans Altman has ever found.
In a smallish  role, Lyle Lovett's Manny Hood is quietly obsessed with Emma, employing her  in his catfish business and refurbishing a caboose in which he is hoping she  will live.
My sole complaint is the convolutions that come in late.
Yes, some of them  are crucial and well-explained, but others seem like they're included out of  respect for the novel from which Anne Rapp developed her screenplay.
A few  details are crammed in and possibly expendable.
Another of Altman's recent films, 'Gingerbread Man', is set in the South,  and 'Cookie's Fortune' furthers the director's exploration of things  American and gothic.
There are wonderful depictions here of manses and  gardens, gentility and jealousy.
It would take me awhile to come up with a  director comparable to Altman;  if he were purely a writer he would be  called literary, sprawling but coherent, sarcastic but touching.
At last,  he's an original, big-name independent whose small masterworks should be  included in any canon. . . 
