    One of the most stunning pictures of 1997, "GOOD WILL HUNTING" emerged from winter season as one of the best films of the year, and a blockbuster hit for Miramax.
Featuring a hip, young cast, and a wonderful role by Robin Williams, "GWH" was rewarded with 2 Oscar victories, including Best Original Screenplay, and Best Supporting Actor, for Williams.
The plot is relatively simple and straightforward.
Will Hunting (Damon) is the classic definition of a rebel.
Born and raised in South Boston by foster parents, Will is a fighter, a kid of the streets, who gets into fights without being asked, who bums around bars with his friends, having a few drinks between jobs.
Will is also a genius.
His mind is brilliant, and he has the education of a Harvard student, without the degree.
His secret is discovered when one day, he is caught by Professor Gerald Lambeau (Skaarsgard) while working on a complex Fourier system Lambeau had put up on a blackboard as a challenge to his students.
Lambeau immediately "rescues" the boy from an impeding jail term, and takes him to a number of therapists to heal his mind.
Finally, he asks college roommate Sean McGuire (Williams), himself a Southie as well, to help the boy.
What follows is a journey for Will and Sean, as both grow closer during the sessions.
The story also deals with Will's development, his love for Skylar (Driver), and his complicated friendship with Chuckie (Affleck).
The screenplay is riddled with old movie cliches, and is as predictable as any other.
What sets "GOOD WILL HUNTING" apart, however, is the direction of Gus Van Sant, as well as the acting of the principal roles.
Van Sant uses all sorts of angles and lighting to acheive brilliant technical shots while drawing the audience into the story.
While the story may be flawed, the dialogue certainly isn't.
Damon and Affleck wrote an endearing script, one which rewards excellent performances with great pieces of dialogue, and fantastic set pieces.
The performances are nothing short of exquisite.
Damon and Affleck are wonderful, absolutely wonderful.
Driver is sweet and touching, and Skaarsgard is as good as ever.
But the film belongs to Williams' tortured performance as McGuire.
It is his story that is told as well, his change from sorrow to relief.
The script tracks a parallel story in Sean McGuire's, and Williams pours more into this performance than any other in recent memory.
Damon is nothing short of outstanding in his lead role, but Williams just steals every shot he has.
With a wonderful score and a gorgeous ending, this film is certainly one of the finest of 1997, and a stunning debut for screenwriters Damon and Affleck.. . 
