Air Force One A Film Review By Jesse A. Kaplan. cast Harrison Ford, Gary Oldman, Glenn Close, Wendy Crewson, Xander Berkeley Directed by Wolfgang Petersen.  Before I make any comments about this flic let me say this, at the last Harrison Ford movie I saw, THE DEVIL'S OWN, I was dismayed at the show and how mediocre it was.
I began wondering the impossible, IS Harrison Ford getting to old for action movies?
The verdict, most definitely not.
Ford (STAR WARS, RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK) stars at James Marshall, The President of The United States who must respond single handily as his plane, Air Force One, is hijacked by Russian Extremist terrorists led by Ivan Korshunov, Gary Oldman (THE FIFTH ELEMENT, MURDER IN THE FIRST).
THe terrorists demand the release of the great rebellious Russian leader, General Alexander Radek.
The President must respond as the free world is held hostage.
Thinking Marshall has Escaped, Oldman and his thugs put their plan into action.
However, as a chief of White House staff puts it, "(Marshall) knows how to fight.
"  Marshall surprises the terrorists and does what he can to save the day.
On the ground, Vice President Katherine Bennett (Glenn Close, 101 DALMATIANS), is a resourceful and knowledgeable leader, helping to bring about the safety of the hostages which include Marshall's wife and daughter.
The Music is exciting and the shots of AF1 look great.
It seems that no expense in the air was saved as great shots of the planes are seen.
The computer special imagings are also quite god and realistic.
Ford is terrific as President.
So many actors have recently tried the role.
Some look good as Michael Douglas in THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT, others ridiculous such as Jack Nicholson or Bill Pullman.
Ford acts diplomatically and distinguished but is also a first rate ass kicker.
However, Oldman steals the show.
As Ivan Korshunov he plays the role almost too convincingly.
While on screen, I loathed his prescience.
Rude, Nasty, and evil, Oldman is the best villain in Hollywood.
Close is also quite good as VP and Xander Berkeley, William H. Macy, and  Wendy Crewson are excellent in smaller supporting roles.
AIR FORCE ONE checks in at a little over 2 hours and by the end my adrenaline was flowing.
Certainly the best action movie of the summer so far, a little better (and even more realistic!!!
) then FACE/OFF.
Could the events in this film actually happen?
Probably not.
Is it far fetched?
Definitely, but its Hollywood and a great Harrison Ford movie.
I recommend this film to all and give it my top rating of **** (Rated R for graphic violence and language).  Copyright 1997 paladin@mhv.net  Jesse A. Kaplan. . 
