The slasher movie was reborn last year with the success of   Scream, a clever self aware thriller written by Kevin        Williamson.
Scream was notable for it's characters           commenting on the very cliches that they found    themselves placed in.
But I think the reason it was so good  and so successful was that it didn't insult the intelligence of it's audience.
When the slasher movie began to die out in the late 80's (remember Jason Takes Manhattan?
), it was      because they had hit rock bottom in terms of acting,         writing, and production values  Kevin Williamson understands that his audience is smarter than that.
His follow up to     Scream is a smart and terrifying horror movie that works on  nearly every level.
Suddenly it's one year later, and Julie (Hewitt) has come    home from college.
One of the things that makes this movie   work is that it creates actual characters and gives them a   few scenes of development.
It's alot scarier when a          character you care about is in danger.
Most of this occurs   here, as the movie depicts how the characters have grown     apart and never recovered from the incident.
Anyways, when   she arrives home, Julie gets a note that says you know what.
Suddenly, they are all being stalked by an unknown man in a  fisherman outfit.
The lighting and camera work, which hide   his face, are extremely effective in making this figure very frightening.
The screenplay throws in numerous suspects,     trying to fool the viewer as to the identity of the killer.
But this is not a whodunit.
It's a slaher flick, and it is   the best possible example of that genre.
The acting is top notch across the board.
Jennifer Love      Hewitt (Scott Wolf is awaiting the next Williamson script)   is just as good as her Party of 5 co-star Neve Campbell was  in Scream.
Sarah Michelle Gellar, from TV's highly           entertaining Buffy the Vampire Slayer, has a terrific screen presence and is a star in the making.
And Anne Heche has a   creepy cameo as the demented sister of the accident victim.
First time director Jim Gillespie seems like a pro the way   he creates a spooky atmosphere and hits the viewer with one  scare after another.
In the old days of slasher movies, they hired actors based   on who could scream the loudest and who had the biggest      breasts.
During this rebirth, they find talented actresses   from quality tv shows and seem to actually be auditioning    for the supporting characters.
This movie is told pretty     straight, and makes no excuses for being a slasher movie.
This is a good thing, because I am a fan of this genre and   it's about time talented people started to work in it again.. . 
