        Absolutely nothing happens in "The Mod Squad," MGM's new misguided big-screen remake of the "classic" (in the same way that the rusted Chevy stacked up on cinder blocks and leaking oil in your neighbor's front yard is a classic) television show.
Three juvenile delinquints are offered a choice between going to prison or assisting the police department in an undercover investigation.
Although they lack experience, training, or discernible personalities, they agree to the terms of the deal.
The "kids" in question are Julie Barnes (Claire Danes), Pete Cochran (Giovanni Ribisi) and Linc Hayes (Omar Epps), who are deemed a valuable resource by their sponsor, Adam Greer (Dennis Farina).
"They can get into places we can't," he solemnly explains to anyone who'll listen.
The outcasts sign aboard as "unofficial officers," which means they're forbidden to carry badges, firearms, or the audience's interest.
When Greer is found dead shortly thereafter, his "mod squad" are identified as the prime suspects.
Knowing they've been set up, the trio vows to solve the murder and clear their name.
Julie apparently thinks the best way to assist in the investigation is to sit in the bathroom floor and drink, which leaves Pete free to wander around like a brain-damaged yak in a china store.
It's up to Linc to save the day, and he does not disappoint: the way he dramatically sneers at one of the villains is the closest thing to an action sequence contained here.
Excuse me, I mispoke: there are no "villains" in "The Mod Squad.
"  To be a villain, one must have a discernable goal, something towards which the character (and movie) is building.
"The Mod Squad" just has "bad guys," with the most evil character still being at least a thesis away from true villainhood.
The idenity of film's chief "bad guy" is so astonishingly obvious that I was surprised the movie even attempted to make it into a mystery.
I mean, duh.
Giovanni Ribisi is rapidly proving himself to be one of the most annoying actors working in movies today: I submit this movie, "The Other Sister," and "First Love, Last Rites" as evidence.
He's supposed to be comic relief here, but his performance is like being cornered at a party by an obnoxious drunk.
Claire Danes, who is often excellent, is barely going through the motions, while Omar Epps, bless his heart, is all the more pityable because he's actually trying to save the movie.
It's so cute!
E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm. If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write to: joefilm-subscribe@listbot.com. -----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==---------- http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    . . 
