Kid yourself not, Patch Adams is an awful comedy.
The jokes are rare,  and often are overpowered by the circumstances surrounding them.
Fortunately, though, despite Universal's advertising campaign, Patch  Adams is far from a comedy, and most certainly a drama.
And one of the  best films of the year at that.
Through a combination of a strong story,  brilliant acting, and overall power, Patch Adams is one of the best all  around films of the decade.
Hunter "Patch" Adams is a suicidal mental patient in the beginning of  the film.
Early scenes show him as what appears to be the one sane  person in a crowd of insanity.
Much resembling the 1975 film, One Flew  Over The Cuckoo's Nest, this part of the film is remarkably powerful and  stunningly effective.
But the similarities between the two films are few  enough that Nicholson's role seems to be missing, and just the scenario  seems familiar.
Soon Patch leaves this institution, and begins a new life with a new  goal.
His objective is to become a doctor and help people.
So it is that  we now move to medical school, were the rest of the film is to take  place.
Patch is a new student who is clearly older than the rest of the  crowd.
He has a "prick" for a roommate, and is immediately thrown into  classes that offers principles he disagrees with.
He becomes a rebel  constantly fighting for humanity, and is perceived to be far from a hero  in doing so.
The rest of the film tracks these adventures of the medical student that  dares.
Patch encounters everyone from a love interest to a pancreatic  cancer patient to a friend that seems to be little more than the  stereotypical medical student.
The story is clearly the force behind  this incredible film.
Based on the autobiographic book, Gesundheit!
:  Bringing Good Health to You, the Medical System, and Society Through  Physician Service, Complementary Therapies, Humor, and Joy by Hunter  Doherty Adams, the films goes on to explore many darker and harsher  realities.
This is far from a hero-always-does-well type story, and no  part of this incredible film seems to be too much like Hollywood, always  maintaining a real world aspect to it.
Robin William is OscarAE worthy as Patch Adams.
He gives what is most = certainly the best performance of the year by anyone.
Despite much  resemblance to his previous film, Awakenings, he has created a new and  original character here.
He also seems to have proven once again that  his talent reaches so far from comedy alone, that he truly can do  anything.
But the talent doesn't stop there.
Hollywood newcomer Philip  Seymour Hoffman (Bullworth, Happiness) and Monica Potter also give award  worthy performances as the roommate and love interest respectively.
Director Tom Shadyac has truly created a film that is an all around  masterpiece.
Parts are visually stunning, others are tragically  dramatic, and some just a pleasure to watch, but none are anything less  than extraordinary.
Although it is Williams' performance that will be  remembered, this film goes so far beyond one man's talents, not matter  how perfect that man.
To not see Patch Adams would be to deny yourself one of the great  privileges of the film industry.
It is an incredible achievement worthy  of the highest praise possible.
So, do yourself a favor and don't miss  this one, it's worth every penny of the $7.50.. . 
