A small Canadian town copes with a terrible tragedy when a school bus slips off an icy road and plunges into a river killing most of the children on board.
A lawyer, Mitchell Stephens (Ian Holm) arrives shortly after to convince the suffering parents that they should sue for damages.
Who exactly they should sue is not a concern for Stephens yet.
He will blame someone.
Stephens interviews the parents and survivors with varied success to his cause.
Most of the parents, including Delores Driscoll (Gabrielle Rose) the bus driver who survived the crash, join Stephens in his lawsuit.
Others are not so convinced, including Billy Ansell (Bruce Greenwood) who lost both of his children and refuses to help, feeling that the lawsuit will divide the once peaceful community, and Nicole Burnell (Sarah Polley) a survivor now confined to a wheelchair.
Stephens' case is also hindered by his own personal turmoil.
His daughter Zoe (Caerthan Banks) is a drug abuser who has been through (and dropped out of) countless rehab centers and clinics.
Through frantic phone calls at inopportune times, Stephens learns that his daughter is in serious trouble.
In effect, Stephens anguish is similar to that of the parents in his lawsuit.
He is dealing with the loss of a child.
Atom Egoyan is an impressive director.
The Sweet Hereafter is similar to his previous work - 'Exotica' in many ways.
From his non-linear form of storytelling to his beautiful, long shots of landscapes (The rugged snowy mountain in this film and the big grassy prairie in 'Exotica' are great examples).
Many people (my wife included) felt the bouncing time line a bit distracting, but I felt that it was effective and that it enhanced the story.
Dealing with grief and loss is the major issue with this film.
Egoyan skillfully introduces the characters and reveals how they are dealing with the tragedy.
Very painful, touching and sometimes disturbing memories unfold, as secrets of the inhabitants in the town are revealed.
Adding to the poignancy of the story is the wonderful narration of a Robert Browning poem "The Pied Piper of Hamelin" (where the film gets its title), drawing similarities between Nicole and a character in the poem.
This is an impressive ensemble cast, even though there are no big name actors in this film (except Holm).
Most noteworthy Sarah Polley (the Boston Society of Film critics gave her their award for Best Supporting Actress), who not only portrays the courageous moral center of the film very well, but also wrote and performed most of the songs on the soundtrack.
She deserves an Academy Award nomination.
The Sweet Hereafter leaves many loose ends and questions unanswered, most notably the situation with Stephens daughter.
It is unlikely that a film like this could possibly have a happy ending, but a lesser film could easily have forced some kind of resolution or closure to some (or even all) of the characters.
Egoyan trusts his audience.
This is one of the best films I have seen this year and eagerly await Atom Egoyans next film.
Written by Randy Turgeon.
January 15, 1998. . 
