In her 1988 novel Beloved, Toni Morrison mints the word "rememory.
"   Although Jonathan Demme's film does not make use of the word, its  connections are there, reminding us that memories are what we're made  of;  more insistently, they are what we cannot escape from.
The film stands as a personal history of pain inflicted by slavery and  by hatred built against blacks during the Reconstruction era.
The  product is part romance, part ghost tale, part indictment of American  society 100 years after some of its citizens declared themselves free.
The person at the center is Sethe (pronounced SET-ta and played by Oprah  Winfrey).
We meet her and what's left of her family in 1865, just a few  years after their traumatic flight from slavery.
Her children include  boys Howard and Buglar, their younger sister Denver and, disturbingly,  the menacing ghost of another daughter, Beloved.
Until the time of her  death as an infant, the baby had been called "crawling already?".
Now,  in the 1870's, Beloved is terrorizing the family, injuring the dog "Here  Boy" and causing her brothers to stuff a rucksack full of food and run  off.
Almost as unsettling as the flashback in which the baby dies, the scenes  of her poltergeist-like violence grip the viewer.
Demme directs them  with a rapid pace.
It's a relief that they end only a few minutes into  the film, when Paul D (Danny Glover) enters and puts up an angry  resistance.
The kitchen has been destroyed (in the book it takes Paul  weeks to mend the furniture) but the manifestations are apparently gone.
Despite resentment from Denver (Kimberly Elise), Paul D stays and  develops a relationship with Sethe.
His presence is like a redemption  after 18 years of wandering and fleeing and witnessing the degradation  of other blacks.
Perhaps Paul's romance with Sethe begins through their  common ties: they were owned by a brutal Kentuckian known as  "schoolteacher"; but the most peaceful time in the film follows the two  old friends' falling in love.
It's been ten years since the first stages of the film's production -  since the book won Morrison the Pulitzer (later she received the Nobel  Prize in Literature, the first African American woman so recognized).
As one of the producers, Winfrey no doubt had strong creative control.
One of the results is the brilliant casting.
First, Winfrey herself  sketches Sethe with a character and strength that is almost  indestructible.
Her role in The Color Purple showed us her canny and  solid screen presence, and this film makes us realize the scarcity of  her roles since.
Winfrey endows Sethe with just the right ways, her  stares knowing, her gestures purposeful, her words picked to both assert  and guard her spirit.
In a scene outside the restaurant where she  works, Sethe is flattered that Paul has come to pick her up.
Instantly  her expression turns to consternation when she suspects Paul will  announce he is leaving her, and just as easily she beams when Paul says,  "I want you pregnant!
"  The face of a lesser actress could not  accomplish such a range.
As the title character, Thandie Newton delivers a startling performance.
>From the time she tramps out of a creek, dressed in dark colors and new  shoes, and collapses on the bank to sleep, she lends a creepy presence  to the story.
Beetles engulf her as we hear the rasp of her snore.
Later she turns up in front of Sethe's house, propped scarecrow-like --   a turning point.
What is not clear is why Sethe does not realize that  here is a living wraith, the incarnation of the child that previously  haunted the house and their lives, making them a family of outcasts even  among blacks.
The young woman - she appears as the age she would be in  life - croaks out the letters in her name, but it is not until later  that Sethe's daughter Denver realizes the stranger's identity.
In her  portrayal of Beloved, Newton is appropriately clumsy and regressive in  speech: she's reminiscent of those who have been aroused from a coma and  act much less than their age.
After seeing Danny Glover as Paul D. Garner, it's hard to imagine any  other actor in the role.
He brings a veteran instinct that telegraphs  the story's direction clearly.
At times gentle, swaggering, aggressive,  disillusioned, Paul D leaves his mark as a man who cares and who accepts  the responsibilities he lays out for himself.
Because Paul is so  straightforward and strong, we are all the more disheartened when the  creature from beyond his world mesmerizes him.
Is Beloved carrying out  a sort of revenge for Paul's ousting her possessive spirit?
Among the  most riveting patterns in the plot are the scenes in which Paul finds  himself repulsed by sleeping in Sethe's room; he moves to a rocking  chair to an empty bed in a spare room, to a shed across the back field.
It's here that we see the consummation of the second hellish scene to  take place in the shed.
Baby Suggs is one of Toni Morrison's most memorable characters.
She is  the mother of Halle, one of the Sweet Home slaves owned by Mr. Garner.
Halle has worked extra to buy his mother and send her north, across the  Ohio River to Cincinnati.
Morrison is masterful in showing how  slaveowners were oblivious to the humanity of their captives.
Even  though he is one of the more humane owners, Garner is not aware of Baby  Suggs' name; he calls her "Jenny Whitlow" from her original sale papers.
In the film, Beah Richards achieves the right status of nurturerer and  prophet.
Grandma Baby, Sethe's mother-in-law and Denver's grandmother,  preaches atop a rock in the woods, bringing her listeners wisdom and  hope.
She is called "holy" in the book, and proved so in the film.
"Love your flesh" and "Kiss your hands," she intones, and we see more of  the body imagery that spreads throughout the work.
As Denver, Kimberly Elise also shows a variety of moods.
Hateful toward  Paul D, protective of her reclaimed big sister, finally mature at the  end, Denver's story ends happily.
In a namesake role - Amy Denver, who  delivers Sethe's child beneath the surface of the Ohio (again, water  images) - Kessia Randall is perfectly talkative and compassionate.
And  as Stamp Paid - another of Morrison's wonderful names - Albert Hall  plays well as an ex-slave who delivers Sethe to Baby, and who later  delivers a revelation to Paul D.. Because Morrison's novel is not a linear narrative, the film resorts to  a risky series of flashbacks.
These slices of past lives, many of them  disconcerting in their depiction of abuse and murder, are shot in grainy  and incandescent tones, helping us to distinguish them from the main  plotline.
Even though some of the scenes resemble bad videotape, the  craftsmanship of storytelling has to be admired.
The soundtrack is also  remarkable, made up of period instruments, voices, and curiously  effective sounds of insects and birds.
The film's astonishing content does not quite fill its nearly three  hours.
Editing down the last quarter of the story would have made for  tighter composition.
No matter how riveting the story, viewers have  time to look at their watches, an indication of a saggy pace.
Why the filmmakers shot the bulk of the film around Philadelphia instead  of Cincinnati, I don't know.
The city locations grab our eyes, after so  much of the story is told around Sethe's farmhouse.
Names like  "Shillito's", an early Cincinnati department store, show the attention  to detail paid by the set designers.
We are treated to vistas of the  muddy Ohio, the distant sky beclouded by industrial smoke.
A hog  capital before Chicago, Cincinnati is seen as a typical heartland town.
Very appropriate, considering Morrison adapted a story that appeared in  the January 29 and 30 editions of the Cincinnati Enquirer.
The model  for Sethe was Margaret Garner, a 23 year-old who joined fugitive slaves  from two farms south of Covington, Kentucky.
The real-life Stamp Paid  was probably Elijah Kite, an ex-slave who assisted in the Underground  Railroad.
The Bodwins are given a brief part in the film;  their  counterpart was Levi Coffin, a Quaker storeowner who was the "president"  of the Railroad.
Morrison also preserves the number of Margaret's  children:  Samuel, 5, Thomas, 6, Mary, 3 (the ill-fated Beloved in the  book), and Silla, a 3 month-old boy.
The Garners' owner was Archibald  Gaines, part of the dreaded posse that tracked them down.
Considering how important it is to know one's history, it would be good  if every American citizen were to see Beloved.
Whereas so many films  are useless, Beloved proves itself a useful part of our culture.
For  those interested in researching their ancestry, it is difficult to find  information farther back than a few generations.
How infinitely more  difficult to discover the identity of relations who were slaves.
Beloved is also important as a genealogical study of pain and healing.. . . 
