Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    I think there's one thing that its many enthusiasts and handful of    detractors can safely agree on: there isn't anything remotely    innovative about Gus Van Sant's latest film, GOOD WILL HUNTING,    co-written by stars Matt Damon and Ben Affleck.
It is what it is --    a relentlessly feelgood drama following a conventional, utterly    predictable storyline focused upon a directionless young man with    talent to burn, and the attempts of those around him to help him find    the right path.
The film's about as unsubtle as a brick through your    front window, but damned if it isn't effective.
20-year old Will Hunting (Matt Damon) is a once-in-a-generation-type    genius who can instantly recall obscure passages from texts and has    the inherent raw ability to casually solve mathematical problems    which are considered year-long endeavours by some of the world's    greatest minds.
However, Will's decidedly working-class, and    cheerfully so; the film presents the irony of a high school dropout    toiling as a janitor at the prestigious MIT who's more brilliant than    any of the university's students *or* teachers.
He's also a bit of a    handful; orphaned and in and out of foster homes during his    childhood, Will's had several run-ins with the law.
When    award-winning professor Lambeau (Stellan Skarsgard of BREAKING THE    WAVES and INSOMNIA, in another fine performance) presents his class    with a thorny mathematical challenge, he's taken aback when the    correct solution appears on the blackboard outside the lecture hall    the very next day.
None of the students take credit for the    anonymous answer (they must be pretty honourable over at MIT; at my    old school, you'd find no shortage of brownnosers who'd falsely lay    claim to the honour in a heartbeat), but Lambeau is stunned to find    that it's Will who's the resident genius when he catches the janitor    scrawling the solutions to a second challenge on the blackboard.
Before Lambeau can take the prodigy under his wing, Will finds    himself under arrest after zealously striking a police officer    intervening in a neighbourhood altercation involving him and his    buddies Chuckie (Ben Affleck), Morgan (Casey Affleck), and Billy    (Cole Hauser).
Lambeau convinces the authorities to give Will    parole, hinging on a weekly math session and the promise of    counseling.
It's at this point where the film shifts its focus to where its    interest lies: the relationship that develops between Will and    similarly-wounded therapist Sean McGuire (Robin Williams), and how    after initial dislike and mistrust, they slowly bond and eventually    help each other overcome past traumas.
Cue the maudlin music.
The film's hokey and sentimentalist, but it works, successfully    remaining uplifting and heartwarming despite its obvious generic    formulism.
To a good extent, the film's ability to overcome problems    associated with predictability can be credited to the solid    performances turned in from its impressive cast.
Mr. Williams is    fine in his quiet, self-contained role, never lapsing into his    typical zany persona; he carries himself with demeanour of a man    whose silent sadness weighs upon him like an anchor.
Meanwhile, Mr.    Damon impresses as the title character, effortlessly alternating    through Will's many faces -- street tough, brilliant genius, charming    suitor, exasperating smart-ass, fragile soul -- he's convincingly    persuasive in all of them.
Credit has to be allocated to helmer Gus Van Sant as well, who    fortunately refrains from beating the audience over the head during    the film's frequent emotionally poignant moments.
His helming is    thoroughly competent workmanship, with one scene standing out as    particularly visually striking: a sequence with Will and new love    Skylar (Minnie Driver) contentedly chatting in bed, which is    wonderfully lit and shot in close-up by cinematographer Jean Yves    Escoffier as a great tapestry of flesh and shadows filling the frame,    gently shifting and rolling like a series of wakes on the sea.
The GOOD WILL HUNTING screenplay is exceedingly neat and tidy,    ensuring that everything is brought full circle, and that every major    event in the film meticulously ties into a prior anecdote.
This may    or may not be a good thing -- it's certainly tidy screenwriting, but    it comes across as overly calculated, and plays out onscreen with a    noticeable loss of spontaneity, particularly in the film's coda where    key lines are dropped like dominos.
I admired that the film's screenplay had the temerity to make its    protagonist not only impertinent and belligerent (albeit, naturally,    in a loveable, audience-winning sort of way), but even occasionally    downright cruel to those around him, goading other sympathetic    characters and zeroing in on their soft spots.
However, the change    in the Lambeau character as the film progressed seemed particularly    arbitrary, an artificial means with which to bring the plot to a    head.
The themes and storyline of GOOD WILL HUNTING are hardly fresh; they    are, however, executed effectively.
There's a great deal of    crowdpleasing material in the film -- one-upmanship of hissable    characters, warm fuzzy emotional epiphanies, cute snappy one-liners    -- and if one can ignore the sheer predictability of the story and    overlook the shameless tugging on the heartstrings, there's much to    enjoy.
If anything, the genesis of the GOOD WILL HUNTING project is more    interesting than the film itself.
Penned by childhood buddies Matt    Damon and Ben Affleck while they were struggling actors, their    screenplay generated a bidding war among the studios which quickly    elevated to a figure of an even million dollars -- if the actors    would detach themselves from the project.
Resolved to stay on as    actors on their project, the duo stuck to their guns and eventually    sold the screenplay (with themselves attached as stars) to Castle    Rock Entertainment for a lesser fee of $500 000.
The project    eventually made its way over to Miramax, who have to be delighted    with the way things have worked out; during the interim, these two    then-unknowns have blossomed into the hottest young actors working    today -- Mr. Affleck, fresh from the critically-acclaimed Kevin Smith    film CHASING AMY, will appear in the upcoming summer Bruce Willis    vehicle ARMAGEDDON, as well as Dimension's sci-fi thriller PHANTOMS    and New Line's comedy BALLING THE JACK.
Meanwhile, Mr. Damon seems    to have been anointed as Hollywood's new It guy (taking over from pal    Matthew McConaughey), scoring coveted roles with directors as    esteemed as Francis Ford Coppola (JOHN GRISHAM'S THE RAINMAKER) and    Steven Spielberg (the upcoming SAVING PRIVATE RYAN).
Well done,    gents -- but as for GOOD WILL HUNTING: cripes, what's with the    ridiculous title?
-- Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/ "There was a six-year-old girl sitting near me, and she piped up 'That's  Harvey Keitel' within seconds of the film's start.
I want to know what  that kid's been seeing.
" - Charles Odell. . 
