Release Date: June 19, 1998 Starring: David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau, William B. Davis, Blythe Danner, John Neville, Mitch Pileggi, Armin Mueller-Stahl Directed by: Rob Bowman Distributed by: 20th Century Fox Film Corp. MPAA Rating: PG-13 (intense violence and gore)  URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/xfiles.htm. For a long time one of the top-ten rated shows on network television, THE X-FILES has generated a cult following of enviable size.
Its jump to the big screen format, then, is only a natural progression of evolution; similar, in some ways, to the movement of another staple of twentieth century pop culture, STAR TREK.
Although producers of both television series are most concerned with box office dollars (requiring the movies to be watchable by viewers who are not fans of the show), the writer-director team behind THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE have managed to integrate some continuity with the TV show and at the same time make an enjoyable movie independent of its base.
This success will surely garner it money that would otherwise be lost by bad word of mouth.
The television show focuses on the activities of two federal agents.
Fox Mulder (David Duchovny), the lead, is obsessed with the paranormal and devoted to a series of cases that can be classified as such.
His partner, Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson), is almost the opposite: a rationalizing doctor of medicine assigned by the FBI to debunk Mulder's claims.
In the movie, Mulder and Scully investigate a bomb threat at a Federal Building in Dallas, Texas, but when the bomb goes off a committee is formed to assess blame.
Mulder, suspecting the real intent is to break his partnership up, gets drunk and runs into a shady character named Dr. Allan Kurtzweil (Martin Landau).
Kurtzweil tells him that the bomb was planted as part of a cover-up; the Federal Emergency Managment Agency offices in the building had evidence of a deadly virus that the government was concealing.
Kurtzweil also points the inebriated Mulder toward the American Southwest to investigate further.
It's in these opening scenes that the characters show both the greatest moments and their biggest shortcomings.
The dialogue is the most strewn-out here - later on it takes second position to more intense action - and it offers the actors to show their talents.
David Duchovny gets plenty of chance to show his talent as an actor, and even a line which makes fun of his own trademarked stoic look.
Gillian Anderson, who mostly plays second fiddle to the leading man, is there to offer a bit of sexual diversity in a cast almost entirely composed of males.
Her presence, though not outstanding in any particular manner, is rather welcome.
The cast of supporting characters, too, highlights the story's focus on the paranormal and paranoia which is such a core component of THE X-FILES' ideology.
As the story continues, it takes our heroes Mulder and Scully to more diverse regions, including the wastelands of Antarctica.
There are quite a few memorable special effects sequences, and this is the movie's stronger point.
Although the opening scenes give way to screen time exposure, what's actually being said is of little value to the uninformed viewer.
Because the movie draws heavily on the characterization developed through several seasons' worth of network airing, there's not much to establish the characters in the movie.
Although being a fan of the series isn't necessary, having watched a few episodes will be a great help, almost an extension of the characters in the movie.
Having an enlightened friend explain it is also preferrable.
Once the viewer is past the slow take-off, though, the tension meter steadily climbs, and this is what makes THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE a more enjoyable suspense-adventure film.
FINAL AWARD FOR "THE X-FILES": 3.0 stars - a good movie. . 
