I imagine that upon the initial release of George Lucas's Star-Wars there was much excitement; too this day SW is the greatest adventure film of all time.Imagine what it would be like to enter the theatre with no expectations and to exit having seen a revalation in the entire history of cinema.
I can't remember the first time I saw the film but it must have been early in my life.
Like 'Singin' In The Rain','The Wizard Of Oz', and Disney's 'Dumbo'  ( all of which I saw on video ) it made an impression on my imagination and my life.
The excitement never let up.
The story was beautifully simple, the characterizations a  total delight.
So when I heard it was to be re-released in theaters I was wonderfully excited.
I was convinced it would be a life changing experience, something         I would never under any circumstances forget.
The movie was not a dissapointment; I saw it at an advance screening for the press and it was a truly moving experience.
I have seen SW so many times that I know the dialogue by heart.
The very sight of C3PO scolding R2D2  before entering the pod relluctantly brings a goofy grin to my face.
When they arive on Tatooine I feel beautifuly nolstalgic.
I love to think to myself that this galaxy does exist.
It all works for me and  everytime I see the film I am completely engrossed from start to finish (  I have the same reaction to The Godfather, Casablanca and Singin' In The Rain ).
Yet seeing it on a big screen was completely different.
I first saw it at the afore mentioned critic's showing.
Then I saw it on the third day of it's re-release with a friend.
It was truly a communal experience, the most exilarating experience I have ever had staring at shimmering images on an other-wise blank screen I knew that it would be wonderful as soon as I saw the trailer for Volcano; halfway through the preview someone yelled "booor-rrrrrring", and there was cheering.
That's the kind of experience that money can't buy.
Why is the movie so wonderful?
It takes a little adventure and stirs it around with some wonderful special-effects and charming performances.
But what really makes the film special is it's sense of wonder and innocence.
I think it's fair to say that we would'n't have seen Independence Day if it hadn't been preceded by Star Wars and I think Independence Day's makers have seen Star Wars ( did anybody else notice the tribute to Empire Strikes Back when Goldblum and Smith are escaping from the mother ship?
).
I think that ID4 wants to be like Star Wars - a film that will always be remebered.
Yet it won't, and I'll say why.
Star Wars believed that there was something wonderful waiting to be discovered.
It believed that if it WAS discovered ( and it probably never will ) there would be a sense of wonder to it all.
And that is what ID4 ( and Twister, Waterworld, Jurassic Park and it's sequel ) are all missing; that wonderful mysterious sense of awe.
That is why Star Wars will always be remembered.. . 
