After his stunning debut, Resevoir Dogs, Tarintino followed it up with four tales all interlinked with each other.
Each story is well written, well acted, and well directed.
It's is one of the most clever films out there.
The film starts with two people (Amander Plummer and Tim Roth) discussing robbery in a restaurant, and then they rob the restaurant.We then get to the four stories.
In the first story, Travolta and Jackson are excellent as two hitmen who have to kill some kids who haven't been following their bosses orders.
It's horribly violent, yet wickedly funny at the same time, and actually quite scary.
The second story concerns Travolta taking out the bosses wife, played by Uma Thurman.
Unfortunatley for him, she has a drug overdose, and he has to try and get her back.
Again, it's another funny story, and well acted again.
The third story concerns a boxer, Bruce Willis, trying to get back his gold watch (although there's a lot more to it than that), and the final story is continuing what happens at the start of the film, with Travolta and Jackson trying to control Plummer and Roth.
It's another tense scene, still funny, but terrifying.
It's a masterpiece of direction and acting.
Of course, the film is full of swearing, extreme violence (although not as bad as Natural Born Killers, it's a bit more violent than Dogs) and even a bit of rape (the Deliverance way) Although not quite as 'gritty' as Dogs, the violence is still shocking.
It's played more for laughs though, and, of course, it's full of Tarintino's witty dialouge.
The film looks really good, especially the diner where Thurman takes Travolta.
There's a fantastic soundtrack running throughout.
This film has all the hallmarks of a classic.
Naturally, it was totally ignored by the OSCARS, but did win the Palme D'or at Cannes.
Be warned though, this film is not for the faint of heart, and is not really a good film to show the kids either.
But overall, this is a brilliant, witty, violent masterpiece.
Rent it out now!. . 
