Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. As a boy I looked forward to "The Willd, Wild West" on Friday evenings;   after a busy week of grade school, it was a cool way to begin the weekend.
Even cooler were the gadgets produced by Artemus Gordon (Ross Martin) and  the swagger of Jim West (Robert Conrad).
"Wild,Wild West" is the latest movie revival of a classic TV show.
So for  fans of the campy series of 1975-70, the origin alone makes it a must-see.
As a film divorced from its thirty-something ancestor, it is just better  than average.
In this incarnation, Will Smith plays James West, and Kevin  Kline is Artie Gordon.
One thing the movie does well is preserve the edgy friendship between West  and Gordon.
Just as Bob Conrad was younger than Ross Martin, Will Smith is  several years' Kevin Kline's junior.
In one scene they play the comic  counterparts of The Defiant Ones, linked together by Dr. Loveless' deadly  magnets instead of by chains.
The scene is hilarious, containing the wit,  timing and physical comedy of two experienced actors.
Even at the end, when  the new Secret Service agents are friends, there is the bite of competition  between them. Premise:  The world isn't safe because of the devilish Dr. Arliss Loveless  (Kenneth Branaugh).
Cut in half in the Civil War, Loveless has resurfaced  in 1869 with a plot to use his evil technology to take control of the United  States, and divide it up between himself and the empires that formerly  occupied North America - England, France, and Spain.
An associate of  Loveless', a former Confederate general called "Bloodbath" McGrath, the  Butcher of Libertyville, leads the heroes to Loveless.
President Grant, who  commissioned West and Gordon to track down the arch-villain, is himself put  in grave danger when Loveless puts to use a terrible engine of war.
The  machine is a Gargantuan metal spider, its legs supporting a body occupied by  sophisticated furnaces and pulleys and a cockpit captained by Loveless and  his vampy sidekicks.
All these elements combine to make "Wild, Wild West" into an action  period-piece with very watchable special effects.
Besides the tank-spider,  Loveless uses an amphibious ironclad, a way-advanced wheel chair (which  highlights the effects that take away Branaugh's legs), and a murderous  propelled saw blade that tracks down its victims, who wear a magnetic  collar.
Of course Artie Gordon has his own arsenal of martial gimmicks.
All of them are introduced early in the narrative, James Bond-style, and  utilized later.
The tamest perhaps is a pistol smaller than a Derringer;   the weirdest is a human head used as a projector, with Artie discovering the  last image (burned into the retinas) seen by the victim.
In all, the film  blends special effects quite well with the action that surrounds them.
As James West, Will Smith has been discussed as an unusual choice.
(George  Clooney was first offered the role, with Smith as Artemus Gordon.
)  Because  of his versatility, though, Smith pulls it off.
He is fast-talking and  -punching, and what adds an interesting dimension to his situation is the  script's use of racial humor.
I have not yet decided if the film makes too  much mention of Smith's race, but I admire Smith and director Barry  Sonnenfeld, as well as the screenwriting team, for attempting this risk.
A  couple of times, the African-American James West uses Stepin Fetchit  stereotypes, before resorting to his considerable skills, to escape tricky  situations.
One scene, when a mob tries to lynch West for tapping a woman's  breasts, falls far short of Cleavon Little in "Blazing Saddles.
"  It's  engaging, though, when West and Loveless exchange hateful puns, West  attacked for being black, and Loveless for being "half a man.
". Kevin Kline delivers another seamless performance, getting into the part of  Artie Gordon with good humor.
A master of disguise, inventor of ingenious  weaponry, factotum of the highest order, Gordon is very likable, and Kline's  comic sense puts Gordon just the right amount over-the-top.
At various  times this sharp U. S. marshal masquerades as a buxom woman and President  Grant.
(After 'Dave', it's the second flick that's given Kline a chance to  play a president and his double!
). Salma Hayek plays Rita Escobar, who appears first as a caged playmate of  Loveless'.
After Gordon liberates her, Rita reveals she is the daughter of  one the scientists kidnapped by Loveless to design and build the monster  spider.
She accompanies the two agents throughout most of their hi-jinx.
Though Hayek is a solid actress and easy to look at, she is used mainly for  decoration here, her function to cause conflict between potential boyfriends  West and Gordon.
In smaller roles, Ted Levine plays a grimy, disgusting, head-injured General  McGrath.
M. Emmet Walsh plays a cagey train engineer who transports the  agents about on "The Wanderer,"a train loaded with one-of-a-kind gimmickry.
Walsh has been around films and television a long time, and has a memorable  character actor face;  his performance is strong here, especially in his  reactions to double-entendres exchanged by West and Gordon.
By now Barry Sonnenfeld has a famous relationship with Will Smith;  he's  even called Smith a 'co-director.
'  Sonnenfeld controls the pace well,  except many scenes follow each other too quickly, editor Jim Miller relying  too much on two-second establishing shots.
Set decoration is marvelous, with each interior showing a Victorian rococo  style.
Loveless' wheelchair, for instance, sports the metal scrollwork seen  atop the fancy smokestacks of riverboats.
Walls of saloons and the White  House are equally intricate.
The exteriors rely on the breath-taking vistas  of the West - one half of the meaning of the title, after all.
A shortcoming is that the plot is a bit too straight-forward.
It seems to  lack the complications, both in sublplots and in character development,  needed for depth.
Jim West's personal stake in doing away with McGrath and  Loveless is a bit hard to swallow as well.
What amounts to a one-act chase  scene is what the viewer sees, though it makes for a pleasurable watching.
There's a good deal of the charming camp I spied first in the television  series, but there's also the late nineties language and innuendo that makes  this a strict PG-13.
Watch it with a teenager today.. . . 
