I might as well go out and say it: I like Kevin Costner as an actor.
Some may argue he has little range, but that only assists in adding an everyman appeal to the endearing actor.
After taking such a lashing for his post-apocalyptic bomb The Postman, Costner has returned to a subject that has brought him much success: the American past-time of baseball.
For Love of the Game proves that, with Kevin Costner and baseball, you really can't go wrong.
Joining an actor who is very experienced in this category is a director who is not.
Sam Raimi, best known for his gore-splattered Evil Dead series, has made an amazing transition within the past few years.
A Simple Plan, his chilling tale of small-town crime, was widely hailed as one of 1998's best films.
And now Raimi (a fan of baseball himself) has taken the reins of a project that is a total contrast to his 80's horror films.
It looks like the dedicated director may have success in any genre (with exception of western, which he attempted in the ill-fated The Quick and the Dead).
Costner plays aging Tigers' pitcher Billy Chapel, who is told by the owner (Brian Cox) that the franchise has been sold.
Pondering retirement, Chapel steps out on the field at Yankee Stadium to pitch what could be his final game.
The spectators in New York greet the pitcher with disgust (`Chapel, you suck!!!
' and `You couldn't pitch a tent!
'), but he uses his concentration to block everything out.
Chapel begins to look back at his long and successful career, which also revives memories of romance and family - mainly involving Kate (Kelly Preston) and their relationship ups and downs through the years.
A friend of mine commented that he would have liked less Love and more Game from the film, and I would have to agree.
The baseball action is used sparingly, but it captures the spirit and excitement of the great game.
The romance between Billy and Kate contains a few fundamental flaws, but the stars have palpable chemistry and play their boundaries perfectly.
This is easily Costner's best performance in years.
The actor's undeniable appeal allows us to look past the lack of information about Chapel's past.
We see (unnecessary) flashbacks of his parents, but know little about them.
There is also great work from Preston, Jena Malone, and John C. Reilly as a loyal catcher named Gus Sinski.
Raimi adds a swift momentum to any given situation.
For Love of the Game is solidly entertaining from beginning to end, which causes a refreshing absence of flashing Indiglo watches during the show.
The director supports the material so well, perhaps with the one exception: a rushed ending that denies the audience room to breath.
The script Raimi has to deal with is dependable but problematic.
All the flaws seemed to be drowned out by the consistent, reliable pace, which links romantic flashbacks to the present game with seamless precision.
For Love of the Game also has wide appeal.
Anyone who enjoys baseball will be glued to their seats.
I was a little disgusted to see a few sports clichés - such as a couple of close calls involving hits that just tail off into foul territory.
But when Chapel begins to work on a perfect game, Raimi handles the tension and unease perfectly.
Romantic film buffs will also love it, as will any Costner fan that still exists (I hope there are still a few).
Needless to say, this film is sure to be a widespread crowd-pleaser for all ages.
I still prefer Field of Dreams, a wonderful fantasy that honors baseball like a religion, to Costner's latest entry.
But For Love of the Game is an actual, genuine `good movie' from the Hollywood factory.
I thoroughly enjoyed it's loving tribute to a great game, and anyone with similar feelings is sure to agree.
Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com. . 
