Visit Online Film Critics Sociey at http://www.ofcs.org. I'd say the studios needlessly delayed the release of many movies, out of  fear of losing money to George Lucas' institution back in May.
There's a  spate of above-average and solid ones out now, too many for me to justifying  paying to see!
The one we shelled out for last night is "Mystery Men.
". You know the premise if you go to movies regularly.
Or perhaps you know it  because of hype that permeates other media.
Skip the next paragraph if you  don't need it.
Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear) is such an efficient superhero that he has  virtually cleared the gothic streets of Champion City.
Because he is  commercial-minded, he wears sponsorship patches, a la race car drivers,  plastered across his rubber armored suit.
The problem is he's lost the big  account, the Pepsi endorsement, so he decides to finagle the early parole of  his nemesis, Cassanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush).
This way he'll have an  arch-villain to quash again, and his name will stay in the news.
Well,  Frankenstein captures Amazing rather easily.
So it's up to a group of  clumsy vigilantes to protect the city from Frankenstein and the group of  disco-themed henchmen that surround him.
The original trio is comprised of   Mr.
Furious (Ben Stiller), The Shoveler (William H. Macy) and the Blue Raja  (Hank Azaria).
Because their numbers and skills are not a match for the  insanely bad Frankenstein, the eccentric crimefighters begin to interview.
With whom do they end up?
A revolting, zit-covered schmendrick called the  Spleen (Paul Reubens), Invisible Boy (Kel Mitchell) and The Bowler (Janeane  Garofalo).
Faced with the task of rescuing Captain Amazing and stopping  Frankenstein from destroying Champion City with his souped-up death ray, the  team of wannbe superheroes goes under the tutelage of the "terribly  mysterious" Sphinx (Wes Studi).
They also enlist the help of Dr. Heller  (Tom Waits), a brilliant but grizzled scientist who specializes in creating  non-lethal weapons.
Will they prevail?
What's funniest is the self-reflexive jokes.
The film works best as a  send-up of all the cliches and conventions of superhero stories you've read  and heard and watched.
The premise turns post-modern in the sense that so  many elements are parodied -there's so much subtlety.
When Mr.
Furious,  tired of the Sphinx's trite Yogi-isms, beats him to the punch line, we see  also the off-center skepticism that marks so many works that recognize  viewers-have-seen-this-before- so-let's-do-it-a-different-way.
Ben  Stiller's humor functions so well here because of his style, at once deadpan  and dumb, seems funnier when it fails the first time; like a Letterman  monologue, Stiller's jokes plod on until they become self-conscious and  hilarious.
Any character who holds his breath and pushes and talks in  stilted phrases like "rage building, blood pressure climbing" gets laughs  out of the sheer stupidity of his shtick.
Mr.
Furious is also the most  well-rounded of the team, Stiller causing us to like his character because  he is the neglected underdog.
William H. Macy is even more droll as the Shoveler, the self-effacing  crimefighter whose wife threatens to leave him.
This guy wears leather work  clothes and a catcher's chest protector and a lighted hard-hat, and carries  a chrome shovel that he uses deftly as a weapon.
"I shovel," he says.
Macy's sincerity comes across perfectly;  he's perhaps the most humorous one  of the bunch because we don't think of him as a comedian.
The Blue Raja is "an effete British superhero" who dresses in cape and  turban (with no hint of blue) and throws forks and an occasional spoon.
Never knives, though.
As with the personal life of The Shoveler, we get to  see behind-the-scenes with Raja, and watch his officious mother ask what is  going on in her grown son's room.
In a turn-about that's good for several  chuckles, she ends up proud of him, giving him heirloom flatware to throw  and asking him to do his British accent again.
Hank Azaria' voice and eyes,  full of exaggeration, are also perfect in the role.
A casting coup was done with Geoffrey Rush.
This Academy Award winner goes  just enough over-the-top with the fiendish Frankenstein, who dresses like a  gothic transvestite and makes his ridiculous pronouncements in a German  accent.
Too bad not many comic roles are nominated for Best Supporting  Actor!
Worthy of mention is the vehicle used by the team - which is not called by  the title epithet until very late - in their assault on the gates of  Cassanova Frankenstein.
It's a Herkimer Battle Jitney, a half-sized bus  that Mr.
Furious pinches from the scrap yard where he works.
What a great  name for a vehicle that looks both silly and awesome.
It's only in a couple of places that the film falls into the same potholes  of cliché we've been fed by other stories.
There's a half-hearted romance  between Mr.
Furious and a waitress at a diner where the heroes eat and  schmooze.
Claire Forlani is woefully underused as Monica the waitress,  giving Mr.
Furious first scowls and then looks of longing.
Further, for  ordinary people who dress up in outlandish outfits, a couple of them  actually seem to have super powers!
The Bowler, for instance, pulls out a  Lucite ball in which the skull of her father is entombed.
She throws the  ball with near-deadly effect, but many times the lurid-looking thing floats  around by itself.
And you tell me:  doesn't Invisible Boy actually  disappear, even though no one is watching?
Director Kinka Usher paces the film well, and the comic timing is what seals  the success of the film.
Based on the Dark Horse comic, "Mystery Men"  blends action and satire so smartly that it reaches a very wide audience.
It's the kind of movie that piles up one-liners and visual jokes one on top  of the next, so that a belly laugh is followed by a series of chuckles  before the next belly laugh.
And it's surely a tribute to say there's not  much laugh down-time.
If you want to see a knock-down funny film, you must  be willing to knock down a film with funniness!. . . 
