Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me.
When the original Austin Powers was released in cinemas around three years ago, the screening I attended had about five people in total watching the film.
The Spy Who Shagged Me, (TSWME) the inevitable sequel, had about thirty times that figure, a testament to Austin's video popularity.
The hip spy from the sixties returns to celluloid in this colourful, largely funny sequel to 'International Man of Mystery.
' Mike Myers plays the titular Austin Powers, now living in the nineties with Vanessa Kensington.
Unfortunately, Austin's mojo is stolen by the evil Doctor Evil (Myers again).
Austin must return to the sixties to regain his mojo from the evil doctor, and must also stop Dr.
Evil from blowing up the earth with a large "laser.
" He teams up with sexy CIA agent Felicity Shagwell (Graham) and sets off on his rather silly quest.
Mike Myers always seems to be lazy when making a sequel, usually by recycling jokes from the original film to a less funnier extent.
That problem occasionally rears it's ugly head here: for example, the dancing interludes don't seem nearly as funny as the original film, and barely raise a laugh.
However, although rather hit and miss, TSWME has enough laughs to keep the film running until it decides to end just before it runs out of steam.
The cast, largely made up by Myers who plays three roles, is energetic and fun.
Robert Wagner repeats his brief part from the original movie, before being replaced by Rob Lowe, who basically plays Robert Wagner rather well.
Mindy Sterling is fun as the German scarebag Frau Farbissina, and Seth Green returns as Dr. Evils estranged son Scott.
Heather Graham is only slightly disappointing as Felicity, although this is largely to do with the fact that her character is intensely shallow, little more than a sex object.
She looks great, but is more than a little empty.
Finally, Verne Troyer is rather good as Dr. Evils smaller clone, Mini-Me, although the character is largely wasted until a funny fight between him and Austin near the end of the movie.
The gags are largely good, stand outs include a funny tent gag, and a funny performance of 'Just the Two of Us.
' The film seems to have benefited from a larger budget, with a much sharper, funnier look than the first film.
It all looks like a large set however, and clearly not filmed much in England (as Austin points out.
) The plot is full of inconsistencies, but Myers and Co. desperately try to cover this up by telling the audience to 'go with it,' which seems like a cop out.
Vanessa Kensington's fate, for example, is badly handled and then thrown away.
But although the set pieces are funny and some of the one-liners sharp, there are some parts of TSWSM that just don't work.
'Fat Bastard,' a Scottish assassin who weighs a metric ton, is largely unfunny, although he gets one of the best lines near the end of the movie.
Mini-Me is never fully used.
Austin is also curiously underused, and Dr.
Evil gets far more screen time.
This is largely a good thing however, as Dr.
Evil is much funnier than Austin Powers, which is a bit odd seeing as Austin is meant to be the star.
But all the gags are delivered with a likeable charm, so even the ones that don't work can get a smirk.
There are some dead bits, but the belly laughs that follow usually compensate.
The film also delves into toilet humour far more often than it's predecessor, and this gags aren't as funny or original as the rest of the films jokes.
Overall, TSWSM is short and sweet enough to be good for some light comic relief.
It will keep you laughing, and Mike Myers charm practically flows from the screen.
There's enough effort to make this film work, and it is a worthy enough successor to the already cult movie.
It won't get you thinking, but Austin Powers will certainly get you laughing.. . 
