Wonder Boys (2000)  Rated R; running time 112 minutes Genre: Dramedy IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0185014  Official site: http://www.wonderboysmovie.com/   Written by: Michael Chabon Directed by: Curtis Hanson Starring: Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, Frances McDormand,  Robert Downey Jr., Katie Holmes, Richard Thomas, Rip Torn . Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000 Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamswonderboys.html. As a movie critic, I take copious notes (yes, it's pretty tough to do in  a darkened theater, but I manage), even though I rarely use them for my  reviews unless it's been awhile since I've seen the movie in question.
Usually, I refer to my notepad to pinpoint an interesting bit of action,  or as a reminder of what the movie is trying to "say".
In the case of this movie, it didn't help.
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below): Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas) is a creative-writing professor, constant  joint-smoker, and burnt-out writer whose current wife (of many previous)  left him a few hours before he finds out that his girlfriend, university  Chancellor Sara Gaskell (Frances McDormand) is pregnant--a fact that  "would greatly surprise" Walter Gaskell (Richard Thomas), Sara's  husband.
As if that wasn't enough, one of his students, Katie Holmes  (Hannah Green) has a crush on him; another student, James Leer (Tobey  Maguire) has the potential to be a top-notch writer, but is...a bit  off-kilter; and Terry Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr.), his book editor, is  pressing Grady to finish his second novel.
Oh yeah: I shouldn't forget  Walter's blind dog Poe, who doesn't like Grady, much to his demise.
The Upshot: That's pretty much the storyline, I reckon.
But throughout my copious  notes, I seemed to keep noting, "so what's this story about?
"  I still  don't know.
This, my friends, is Not A Good Thing.
I've been wanting to see this movie from the first time I saw the  trailers for it.
And from the storyline, it reads like--in the right  hands--it could be a pretty funny comedy.
With the pedigree the movie  had going for it--Douglas has been known to be funny in a movie or two;  McDormand was wonderful in "Fargo" and could certainly tickle a funny  bone on her own; Maguire, great in "The Cider House Rules" and  "Pleasantville" would be, if nothing else, a decent straight-man; and  in-between prison terms, Downey has the acting chops to be capable of  greatness--from all that, I would've sworn that those were the "right  hands".
So wha' happened?
Two things, I think: first, contrary to the misleading trailers, "Wonder  Boys" was not an all-out comedy.
True, it had some humorous moments,  but for the most part, it was much heavier on the "drama" part of the  "dramedy" equation.
Second, it seemed more literary (for lack of a  better term) than most movies; while some of that can be attributed to  the movie being about writers, I wouldn't be surprised if writer Michael  Chabon was more a novelist than a screenwriter.
Strangely enough, that  particular attribute didn't work in this movie's favor: perhaps because  I've become so accustom to movies being written as movies as opposed to  being written as literary stories, the "feel" of this movie didn't click  for me.
In fact, it wasn't until the ending that it seemed like a  movie-movie.
And strangely enough, that scene felt out of place.
While I think it would've done better as a comedy than as the thick,  somewhat dragging Social Statement (of what?
I still ask) that it was,  "Wonder Boys" still had its moments--most of which were populated by  Robert Downey Jr. in a performance that actually angers me.
It angers  me because he was so naturally good--something rare in actors these  days, especially younger actors--that it only highlights the mess he's  made of his personal life: last I knew, he was in prison for, basically,  stupidity (something about not fufilling probation terms for his  habitual drug abuse).
When he's on his game, I'd take Downey over a  dozen DiCaprios, any day; Robert acts circles around Leo and his posse.
Just as his costar in "Cider", Charlize Theron, did in "Reindeer Games",  Maguire disappointed me here.
His depressed (and depressing) James did  not suit him well; his boyish face betrayed his scripted lines, and the  bizarre storyline he was involved in, just wasn't working.
As for the  rest of the cast, Douglas' uncanny resemblance to "Mrs. Doubtfire" threw  me for a loop at first--and Grady's whole makeup (constant marijuana  smoker, non-committal boyfriend, "blocked" writer who refuses to  acknowledge his block) didn't do much for me.
I was never sure what The  Point was with him (unless it was to say that Drugs Make You Look Bad.
If so, that was a long way to go to make a weak point).
It was  refreshing, though, to see what happened between Hannah and Grady; as  much as I liked "American Beauty" (which has a comparitive situation  between an older man and younger girl), it was nice to see Holmes play  Hannah's attraction to Grady, in a non-dysfunctional manner.
I'm still at a loss to know what purpose Quentin "Q" Morewood (Rip Torn)  played; maybe his Important Scenes were left on the same cutting-room  floor that Thomas' "Outraged Husband" scenes surely were left on (which  would be the only explanation I can see for not further exploring the  dynamic that must have existed between Walter, Sara and Grady).
But  perhaps that's another movie--the movie that I would've preferred to  watch way more than this one.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]: In one of the many "huh?
" moments that seem to be generously scattered  throughout this flick, a Little Richard-lookalike takes issue with Grady  having possession of his vehicle, and Does Something About It.
I'd be  tickled pink if someone could explain what that whole subplot was about  to me, so I can stop going, "huh?".
Bammer's Bottom Line: ...and continuing on with our "Just Say No" theme for the week  ("Reindeer Games" having led us off), "Wonder Boys" serves as a strange  vehicle for Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, and Frances McDormand; they  each seemed out-of-place in this trippy tale.
But "Just Say No--NOW!
"  Poster Boy Robert Downey Jr. was brilliant, as he often is when he puts  his mind to it.
And where has Richard "John-Boy" Thomas been all these  years, anyway?
"Wonder Boys" (rating: yellowlight):  I still Wonder about them thar Boys--and about why Downey insists on  derailing his career.
There's nothing more galling to me than wasted  potential, and he has it in spades.. . 
