George Clooney, Jennifer Lopez, Ving Rhames, and Steve Zhan star in the comedy about a bank robber.
George Clooney stars as Jack Foley, a professional bank robber.
He has robbed over 200 banks in his time.
He has been caught a few times, and he has been sent to jail a few times.
One night at the jail, he and a couple of buddies plan an escape from the jail.
Ving Rhames plays Buddy, the man who has a car waiting for Jack and the other two escaping with him.
Buddy isn't the only one waiting for Jack and company that night.
Federal Marshall Karen Sisco, played by Jennifer Lopez, is there ready to make the bust.
Jack makes it out of the jail, but the other two are shot dead.
Buddy and Jack shove Karen into the trunk of the car to make sure she doesn't make the bust.
Jack stays in the trunk with her, and they discuss many things, including life and movies.
At a gas station, they see Glenn, an old pal, played by Steve Zhan.
They put Glenn in the car also, so no information gets out.
Jack and Buddy step out of the car to discuss the plan on what they are going to do, and while this happens, Karen persuades Glenn to drive away, getting away from Jack and Buddy.
Now, Jack and Buddy must find Glenn, and Karen must find Jack and Buddy.
Karen asks Jack's ex-wife about where Jack may be, and doesn't find out much information there.
Karen sees Jack around as she looks for him, and doesn't do anything, acts like he isn't there.
When they do meet up, they talk, and she doesn't try to arrest him or anything.
She discovers that she is in love with the man she has to take to jail.
He loves her to, and doesn't want to hurt her.
Karen also has to find Glenn now as well.
She remembers him saying he was going to Detroit, so she suspects she might find Glenn, as well as Jack and Buddy there.
At a boxing match, she catches Glenn trying to steal a car from the parking lot.
She lets him go, because she has better things to do than to make a bust.
She learns from Glenn that the plan is to go to Richard Ripley's house, played by Albert Brooks.
Ripley has five point two million dollars worth of uncut diamonds, and everyone is after them.
Little does Glenn know that Jack, Buddy, and the others they met up with, changed the plan to stealing the diamonds that same night, so Glenn wouldn't tell anyone.
Jack, Buddy, and the others go to Ripley's house to get the uncut diamonds.
The maid answers the door, and the four of them bust into the house.
Little do they know that Karen is sitting outside ready to make a bust.
Jack finds the diamonds on his own, and gives them to Buddy to drive off with.
The others with Jack assume that Jack and Buddy are trying to rip them off, but they aren't.
Snoopy, (one of the others with them), played by Don Cheadle and Jack get in a fight, but Karen ends it by entering the house and shooting Snoopy dead.
She doesn't want to hurt Jack, because they are in love.
The ending is also surprising and well done.
Out Of Sight is a cheaply made film, but price doesn't mean anything.
Out Of Sight is without a doubt one of the best, most original films of 1998.
All of the acting was done wonderfully, the plot was developed, and the setting was great and realistic.
George Clooney and Jennifer Lopez do outstanding jobs as their characters, and they make you believe that they are real people.
Samuel L. Jackson and Michael Keaton also make short cameos in which they do a good job of acting in.
I wish that more people would see Out Of Sight, because of how good it was.
It was a little confusing at times, but that doesn't make much of a difference when you have such a great film.
All in all, Out Of Sight, is definitely out of sight. . . 
