Traditionally, the big-budget bio-pic has generally been reserved for  historical figures of great nobility or significance (Mozart, Malcolm X,  Gandhi, Oscar Schindler, etc.
), so it's somewhat jarring at first to  see unredeemed '70s smut-meister Larry Flynt get the same treatment.
The  fact that it turned out to be one of the best pictures of 1996 is  equally surprising, until you realize the amount of talent involved.
As  his previous films ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST and AMADEUS have  shown, director Miles Forman has a knack for humanizing even the most  potentially unredeemable characters, of which this film gives you a wide  assortment.
(The scriptwriters, Scott Alexander & Larry Karaszewksi,  seem to be making a career out of stories about the historically  unsavory; they also wrote ED WOOD, and are presently working on a  screenplay about the late, great, and totally freakin' nuts comedian  Andy Kaufman.
). The cast is up for the challenge as well.
In the lead role, Woody  Harrelson does a wonderful job playing a man whose very outrageousness  and outward loathsomeness make him strangely appealing: his best scenes  occur late in the film, after Flynt has been paralyzed from the waist  down and starts taking his war against censorship to a new level in the  courts.
Courtney Love, no stranger to controversy in her own life, gives  a jawdroppingly good performance as Althea, Flynt's drug addicted,  ex-stripper wife; the role might not be much of a stretch for her, but  the amount of feeling she invests into it is amazing.
The standout,  though, is Edward Norton as Flynt's long suffering lawyer.
After only  two movies (PRIMAL FEAR and this one) he's already at the top of his  field.
His wonderfully naturalistic final summation in front of the  Supreme Court is the best scene in the film.
This movie isn't perfect; there are a few too many times when the  heavy-handed moralizing of Executive Producer Oliver Stone can be caught  peeking out from behind the curtain, but what it accomplishes is  remarkable.
I never thought that a movie about pornography could make  you feel proud to be an American, but this one somehow does: by the end,  I was ready to buy a flag.
Copyright 1997 The Critic Formerly known as Andrew Wright For more Reviews check out http://www.seanet.com/~louk/ email louk@seanet.com. . 
