Release Date: June 12, 1998 Starring: Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline Obradors, Allison Janney, Danny Trejo Directed by: Ivan Reitman Distributed by: Buena Vista Pictures MPAA Rating: PG-13 (language, sensuality, brief violence)  URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1998/sixdays.htm. Harrison Ford's track record with romantic comedies has left him a bit high and dry with fans who saw more in his original, action-adventure roots (e.g.
STAR WARS, RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK).
This new conglomeration of quasi-adventure and romantic comedy, SIX DAYS SEVEN NIGHTS, has Ford living up to everyone's expectations, and unfortunately, those weren't high.
Although marketed early on as an Indiana Jones-type vehicle in order to nail the males, and as a smart, snappy romance to nail the women, it doesn't manage to do anything solid with either of the two genres.
Instead, it comes out a bit limp, which is disappointing considering the promise and talent involved.
Director Ivan Reitman (Fathers' Day) heads up three noteworthy stars in this film about finding love where it's least expected.
Frank Martin (David Schwimmer, of TV's FRIENDS), an extra-sweet and extra-sensitive guy, takes his girlfriend and soon-to-be-fianceé Robin Monroe (Anne Heche, WAG THE DOG) on a trip for six days and seven nights at a remote island paradise in the south seas.
However, Robin, a magazine editor, is called to Tahiti for a photo shoot, the only ride available is with Quinn Harris (Harrison Ford, AIR FORCE ONE), a grumpy, isolated, aging pilot of a dilapidated cargo plane.
While on the way, the plane is struck by lightning and forced to land on a largely unknown island, and the two are forced to brave the tropical wilds and nearby pirates before reconstructing their damaged plane in a part-MACGYVER, part-A-TEAM sequence so they can hopefully return home.
Ford, who's by far the most solid of the three principals, is again left high and dry.
His performance in this movie shows that he's looking for something more from the script, and from the way he moves on camera it's painfully obvious that he's rather confined.
His character - a pissed-off, tequila-drinking loner - should be a great source of snappy one-liners; unfortunately, he's more of a wimp than not.
Heche, on the other hand, is full of talk, perhaps almost too much.
Her character is too dynamic, swinging from the loudmouthing New Yorker to the subdued romantic, and she never provides much chemistry for the relationship with Ford.
In fact, the only palpable feeling of drama comes near the end, when Robin visits Quinn in the hospital.
Schwimmer is adaquate, although his screen time is nil and he can't make much of it.
All told, the promise that SIX DAYS shows in the previews is not delivered upon.
The romance here should revolve around a dark comedic tone, much as it did in the much-funnier GROSSE POINTE BLANK of last year.
It takes quite a bit for a comedy to actually work in situations such as this, and it's obvious from the first moments of the film that it's not going to work here.
Ford, although he has expressed sentiments not to, should stick to action-adventure films, and Heche, whose performance in her last several films has been moderate at best, may need to work more on big screen performances.
This summer, there are better movies to see.
FINAL AWARD FOR "SIX DAYS SEVEN NIGHTS": 2.0 stars - a fair movie.. . 
