THE WATERBOY Reviewed by Jamie Peck. So if these raucous antics will remind audiences of vintage Sandler,  it's a pity that the star himself doesn't make it to the endzone.
The  crude comic is at his best when he's rough and abrasive, qualities that  made his turn in "Gilmore" a vulgar delight; his "Waterboy" role, a  bayou man-child named Bobby Boucher and pronounced Bobby Boo_shay_, is  naive, soft-spoken and genuinely sweet.
What's worse, the movie can't  seem to make up its mind whether he should be laughed at or felt sorry  for.
Bobby's not the kind of character you'd care to kick while he's  down.
Thank goodness for some genuinely funny supporting actors, or "The  Waterboy" would have drowned fast.
Kathy Bates, a farce MVP based on her  stellar work here, is a delight as Bobby's no-nonsense mama, whether  she's whipping up an extravagant snake dinner (complete with an apple in  its mouth) or constantly referring to all influences in the world  outside their swamp-shack home as "the debil" - even Dick Clark.
Henry  Winkler also racks up a hefty laugh quotient as the coach of the Mud  Dogs, a low-rent college football team on a seemingly non-stop losing  streak.
Coach recruits Bobby as the Dogs' "water distribution engineer" after  he's fired from doing the same job for the University of Louisiana's  oft-winning Cougars.
It is then when Bobby reveals a bang-up talent for  tackling; imagining his opponents are the assorted hecklers and jerks  who have taunted him all his life is all he needs to flaunt his on-field  prowess.
The plot mechanics are painfully obvious from there, but  Sandler and Tim Herlihy's screenplay sometimes coats them with a  deliciously naughty sheen.
What they insert into the climactic,  slow-motion victory montage is a base keeper.
It has to do with pierced  nipples.
The one-joke "Waterboy" almost falters under the same sloppy sentiment  that crippled "The Wedding Singer," but the amusing combination of  throwaway lines and outlandish sight gags may prove that Sandler's more  clever than his creative detractors might claim.
That "Happy Gilmore"  and this diversion are career highs in a career that also lays claim to  the dreadful "Billy Madison" and "Airheads" might not be saying much,  but maybe it's not without payoff to hope that Sandler ventures back to  the recreational arena for his next funny flick.
Badminton, anyone?. . 
