Directed by Curtis Hanson.
Screenplay by Steve Kloves, based on the novel by Michael Chabon.
Starring Michael Douglas, Tobey Maguire, Robert Downey Jr. Running time: 114 minutes.
Rated AA.
Reviewed on March 19th, 2000.
A quiet, understated character piece, "Wonder Boys" is the sort of movie  which, when recalled afterward, seems more like a dream than something  actually experienced.
Slow-moving but never plodding, funny and original  without being absurd, it is a pleasurable journey through one man's  personal struggles.
Grady Tripp (Michael Douglas) is a University of Pittsburgh English  professor who wrote a critically-acclaimed novel seven years ago and  hasn't published anything since.
Most people think Tripp is washed up,  but the truth is that his new novel just isn't finished yet; it is now two  thousand single-spaced pages long and counting.
Tripp, whose wife has  just left him, is having an affair with the university chancellor, Sara  Gaskell (Frances McDormand).
Sara's husband Walter (Richard Thomas) is  the head of the English department and hence Grady's boss.
Tripp's most  promising student is James Leer (Tobey Maguire), a dour and eccentric  youth held in disdain by most of his classmates.
The lone exception is  Hannah Green (Katie Holmes), who is also boarding with Grady and is  clearly interested in taking their relationship beyond the academic.
The movie takes place during WordFest, a weekend-long writers' convention.
The Gaskells host a party to kick off WordFest, during which Sara reveals  to Grady that she is pregnant.
Going outside for a draw, Tripp  (aptly named, given that he spends most of the movie under the  influence of drugs, both prescription and otherwise) encounters James,  standing in the backyard with a gun he insists is just a fake.
The two  sneak upstairs to have a look at Walter's collection of memorabilia.
When Grady is attacked by the Gaskells' dog, James shoots it dead.
At a  loss, Tripp ends up lugging the canine corpse around in his trunk until  he can figure out what to do about it.
All this is just set-up for a sometimes harrowing, always amusing odyssey  through the streets of Pittsburgh and the problems which plague Grady's  life.
He finds himself having to deal not just with the end of his  marriage and the complication of his affair, not just with the dead dog  and a stolen piece of Walter's collection, not just with editor Terry  Crabtree (Robert Downey Jr) whose own job is riding on the publication of  Tripp's new novel, but with the enigma that is James Leer.
James isn't  just a writer; the entirety of his behavior is one big creative process  (at one point, intoxicated, he begins narrating out loud) and it is  impossible to take anything he says or does at face value: the  fake-gun-that-isn't is just the tip of the iceberg of James' fantasies  and deceptions.
"Wonder Boys" is a smart movie that understands its characters and takes  the time to develop and explore them fully.
Written by Steve Kloves from  the novel by Michael Chabon, it is populated by believable individuals who  make believable choices, not ones dictated by stereotypical Hollywood  expectations.
For example, both Terry and James are clearly not strictly  heterosexual, but when they finally do end up in bed together, it is  dealt with almost offhandedly.
The event is just a natural development of  both characters, and the script does not grind to a halt to exploit it.
Nothing in "Wonder Boys" feels staged or melodramatic; realism seethes  from its characters, their relationships with each other, and the  decisions they make.
But perhaps this is all to be expected.
"Wonder Boys" is a movie all  about making choices and the consequences of avoiding them, and a film  with such a theme lives and dies on the conviction of its characters.
Grady  has spent the past half-decade evading decisions, and it has cost him his  marriage.
Here, then, is the story of how he comes to rise above his  personal apathy and seize control of his life.
Nowhere is this theme of  making choices more clearly illustrated than with Grady's epic novel.
Even  Hannah, Grady's potential new love interest, finds it impossible to  finish, but not because it is poorly written.
On the other hand, Hannah  thinks it is beautiful, but she tells Grady, "you didn't make any  choices": Grady has not found the will to leave anything out of the text,  and as a result it has ballooned to mammoth proportions.
The manuscript's  final fate depicts another important fact about decisions: that sometimes  they're made for you, not by you.
The movie's dialogue is sparkling throughout, and there are plenty of  laughs, many of them derived from the film's frank view of reality.
Surprisingly for a movie which muses on so deep a theme, "Wonder Boys"  has many of the elements of a screwball comedy, complete with mistaken  identities and misplaced valuables.
But the screwball elements are always  in service to the overall plot, complementing it rather than fragmenting  the film.
As a result, "Wonder Boys" is appealing and enjoyable on a  number of different levels.
The acting is uniformly excellent.
Douglas finds just the right note as  the harried Grady, portraying him as confused and aimless without making  him seem weak.
Maguire, always a quiet, reserved actor, is a perfect fit  as James -- he is quirky, inspired and fragile, all at the same time.
Amongst the supporting cast, Richard Knox gives a hilarious performance  as a man who claims to be the real owner of Grady's battered car.
For a movie about choices, "Wonder Boys" makes all the right ones.
It is  smart and well-acted, and the top-notch script finds a good balance between  drama and comedy.
Although its sheer placidness may work against it in such  a crowded box office, it should not be overlooked.
This may be one of the  first Oscar contenders of the year 2000.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/WonderBoys.html. . 
