Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. What do you get when you combine literary elements with a "B" storyline?
A film that's hard to brag about but difficult to dislike.
'The  Faculty.
'. Kevin Williamson, the writer of 'Scream,' has churned out another  post-modern horror flick, a yarn targeted toward teenagers, in which  teenagers are targets.
Into the formulaic plot he has mixed a pinch of  motifs, a smidgen of imagery, a dash of foreshadowing.
The result is a  movie full of flavors, another self-reflexive romp that does not stay  with you for long.
At Herrington High School in Ohio, most of the kids are punks and most  of the teachers are burnt out.
There's Mrs. Drake the principal (Bebe  Neuwirth), who plays the part of a frank realist.
She tells Mrs. Olsen  the drama teacher (Piper Laurie) that no, plays will not receive the  proper funding - but football will.
"Have you seen the stands on Friday  nights?
The whole town is there," she quips.
There's also an alcoholic  teacher who does not even know what chapter the class is supposed to be  covering.
Finally we meet the foul-mouthed football coach, played  wonderfully by Robert Patrick with his smooth face and squinty eyes.
It's Coach Williams who is first infected, or rather invaded, by the  alien species that eventually takes over the faculty, most of the  student body, and ostensibly, at one of those Friday games under the  lights, the entire town.
It takes awhile for all this to happen, and along the way we watch as  Williamson and director Robert Rodriguez sketch in the traits that help  us to tell the six teen heroes apart.
Casey (Elijah Wood) is the  photographer for the school paper, a computer geek who has not yet  raised a whisker and who is continually harassed by various badasses of  the school.
Zeke is played by Josh Hartnett (a dead ringer for a young  Tommy Lee Jones);  his character is a dealer of anything illicit.
From  the trunk of his muscle car Zeke peddles pills, cherry-flavored condoms,  and a drug of his own concoction, a white powder that can be sniffed  from the barrel of a ball point.
The final male is Stan (Shawn Wayne  Hatosy), the star quarterback who decides to quit the team so he might  focus on his studies.
Stan's decision poses problems for his girlfriend, the shallow Delilah  (Jordana Brewster), a stunning cheerleader and editor of the school  paper.
She implies she'll drop him but quick.
Delilah also has  problems with a girl named Stokely (Clea DuVall), calling her a violent  lesbian.
The third female is Marybeth, a slim blonde from Atlanta, an  unassuming new kid in school who tries to befriend everyone.
Thus the  stereotypes are set.
Although the mild-mannered Casey and his editor witness, through the  slats in a closet door, a couple of the alien-possessed teachers  graphically recruit the school nurse, they cannot get their friends to  believe them.
It takes a scene of full confrontation with the erstwhile  science teacher.
He corners the six and says, "This won't take long" -  as if he expects the teens to line up compliantly for the grotesque  inoculation.
What follows - a turning point - is one of the strongest  scenes in the film.
Soon afterwards, we see one of the weakest.
Yes, the film is  derivative, and for the most part the script tries to be witty about its  borrowing;  but the scene in which suspicion raises its Gorgon head  smacks too much of Kurt Russell and the crew from John Carpenter's 'The  Thing.
'  Here even the acting lapses into a congeries of wooden,  menacing expressions.
Many of the other allusions work well.
Stokely, who wears black eye  shadow, doesn't bother to dispel the rumors of homosexuality;  they  allow her to be a loner.
She makes use of her extensive reading of  science fiction - especially Robert Heinlein - to guide her harried  school mates in their quest to escape and, hopefully, to conquer the  aliens.
We also glean elements of 'Invasion of the Body Snatchers,'  'The Puppet Masters,' and, when one of the youngsters is compared to  'Ripley,' the 'Alien' movies.
There's a neat scene near the end when  Casey is running from the thing, and we see shadowed cross-hatching on  the floor of the locker room - reminiscent of the lighting in 'Aliens.
'. Water imagery is remarkable as well.
Rodriguez comes close to being  heavy-handed here, placing water in several key scenes:  there's the  sprinkler system on the football field (a sure sign that academics are  being neglected!
); the tank in the science room, where an embryonic  alien is revived; a rainstorm into which the thing inhabiting the coach  extends its thin tentacles;  bottled water and the faculty room cooler;  and the indoor pool in which one of the creatures does an instantaneous  shape-shift into the fanged lobster-snake hybrid chasing Casey.
All  these images work, though, lending unity and even a certain comedy to  the plot.
Cool special effects, too.
What's gratuitous in this late '90's teen treatment?
For one, the  language goes too far, probably in the service of sending up real  problems in many American high schools.
The drug use gives a tawdry  tone, though figuring prominently in the resolution.
Most noticeably,  the behavior of the teachers, after they are taken over, is inexplicably  bold and sexual.
Bebe Neuwirth as Principal Drake dresses in skimpy  outfits, flaunting her skinny curves.
Another teacher, Miss Burke  (Famke Janssen), threatens and curses out Zeke, and later speaks  provocatively before attempting to, well, impregnate him.
Again and  again Rodriguez and Williamson cater to young viewers, working sex and  screams into the same sentence.
'The Faculty' knows it is smart.
Though it is not packed as full of  self-reflexivity as the 'Scream' movies, the clever and engaging tones  are there.
Fans of science fiction and horror, teenagers 16 and over,  teachers seeking easy laughs, go to see or rent this film.
Hokey, yes,  but light entertainment blended with just a touch of literature.. . 
