8MM (EIGHT MILLIMETER) Reviewed by Jamie Peck. Like a recipe assembled from scraps of other dishes, "8mm" is less than  the sum of its parts, delicious to fans of the dark and brooding though  they may be.
But, oh, does this two-hour-plus ode to unpleasantness make  good on its engaging creative pairing, while a further boost is given by  the casting of Nicolas Cage in the lead, one of those progressively  unhinged roles the Oscar-winner excels at playing.
The hot-button  subject matter - pornography - should determine whether uncertain  potential viewers will love it or leave it early, though you can  probably already tell from this description alone if this is your kind  of movie.
That Cage stars as a private dick in a film that heavily incorporates  the adult entertainment industry is worth a small chuckle, but this  possible in-joke is close to the extent of "8mm"'s humor quotient.
Like  "Seven," the story is played with almost no comic relief, yet another  cause of probable diminishing audience appreciation.
(Then again, that  didn't stop "Seven" from being a $100 million hit, but that movie only  fleetingly relied on sexual violence.
) Those seeking cheap, explicit  thrills are better off visiting a seedy video store somewhere, however,  because Schumacher knows that the unseen is far more terrifying than  what's in plain view.
Cage's professional sleuth goes by the name Tom Welles and has just  accepted a case from the widow (Myra Carter) of a recently deceased and  immensely wealthy steel tycoon.
While going through his private things,  she located a reel of eight millimeter stock on which a young girl is  raped and murdered by a creep wearing a leather mask.
Yowza.
But is it  an actual snuff film or something feigned to give perverts their  jollies?
And how did it come to be in this rich guy's belongings?
Those  are the questions Welles gets bankrolled to answer, and he starts by  identifying the alleged victim and tracing her back to her hometown.
There, he meets her mother (Amy Morton) but not her, and these scenes,  perfectly handled by Schumacher, are a powerful reminder that every  missing child is more than just a statistic.
This'll have to do - and it  does - for "8mm"'s emotional content, because Welles' relationship with  his wife (nice work from Catherine Keener) and his new baby are somewhat  ill-defined.
That flaw hardly matters, though, because "8mm" devotes  much of its attention on Welles' unfolding, engrossing search for the  truth, and if you can make it through some of the early scenes without  the need to exit the theatre, you'll be OK for the long run.
Without giving away too much, Welles' trail leads him into the seamy  world of underground sleaze, and needless to say, it isn't a pretty  place.
The seedy ground he covers with a porn clerk (game Joaquin  Phoenix), his only ally, begins to transform him, though it's no fair to  say in what ways.
Plot twists are guaranteed; some are predictable, some  are not, and an example of the latter is a disturbing climax (one of  several) that takes place in a rain-soaked graveyard, complete with  vivid flashes of lightning.
Perhaps Schumacher's gorgeously gaudy  "Batman" takes prove he isn't one for restraint, but the stylish  overkill of "8mm" works more often than it doesn't.
He does, however, treat the whole porn/snuff area with moderation - and  thankfully so.
We're treated only to fleeting glimpses (the worst  depicts a "nurse" preparing to do something to a "patient" that probably  isn't covered on his HMO), but we get a strong enough reading of their  explicit content from Cage's bountiful terrified - but eventually  desensitized - reaction shots.
Those who appreciate this dissection of  humanity's dark side can wonder what sort of dreams Andrew Kevin Walker  has while they wait for his next screenplay.
This much appears to be a  given: It'll be solemn, it'll be somber, and it'll have some form of the  number nine in its title.. . 
