Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre) Released in the UK by Warner Bros. on March 31, 2000; certificate 15; 170  minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1. Directed by Oliver Stone; produced by Lauren Shuler Donner, Dan Halsted,  Clayton Townsend.
Written by John Logan, Daniel Pyne, Oliver Stone.
Photographed by Salvatore Totino; edited by Stuart Levy, Thomas J. Nordberg,  Keith Salmon, Stuart Waks.
"Any Given Sunday" is a dramatic immersion in the world of American Football,  looking further than commentators and managers, and jumping right in there  with the guys in the huddle.
The film gives us its view on the current state  of the game, with character studies of both players and executives, but also  reminds us of the intense physical experience of playing.
For true sportsmen,  that's the real thrill; for a lot of people in this movie, it's just  something that they must go through in order to get big pay cheques.
At the heart of the movie's narrative are scenes showing pitch action from a  first-hand point of view.
If sometimes they seem irrelevant or confusing --  well, that's the point; players often look at their games in the same light.
Some reviews have accused the moments of being unnecessary stylistic excess,  but that's just because many journalists feel obliged to make unfounded  attacks on the director, Oliver Stone, a man who does not avoid using bold  techniques to tell his stories.
This time he follows a season in the life of the Miami Sharks, an American  Football team coached by Tony D'Amato (Al Pacino).
Tony has lost a few games  in a row, and his old-school patience for things to get better is not shared  by today's press, who savage him whenever he puts a foot wrong.
The new owner  of the Sharks, Christine Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz), is just as hasty, and  demands an immediate solution to her squad's poor performance.
A young hotshot quarterback called Willie Beamen (Jamie Foxx) could be the  answer, because he has made some great plays in a few successive games, and  looks slick on magazine covers.
Tony is cautious, though; he senses that  Beamen's ego could be dangerous, and the lad would not be a wise replacement  for 39-year old star performer Jack "Cap" Rooney (Dennis Quaid).
Egos are a big influence on all this, because professional sport is a  business built around the talents of temperamental athletes.
Disagreements  over management strategy also play a big part, because it's a business full  stop.
And it's an atmosphere where ethical standards are hard to keep up --  one of the doctors in "Any Given Sunday" feels it's his duty to allow players  to go on the field when injured, even at risk of death, because "for these  guys football IS life!
". We're so used to thinking of everything as corrupt in this day and age that  none of the above is particularly surprising.
It's impressive, though, that  Stone has managed to cover so many areas and get such a convincing overview  of a sport.
My only complaint is that the structure could have been tightened  into something more urgent.
Stone's best films -- "Platoon", "Talk Radio",  "Born on the Fourth of July", "JFK" -- sweep us off our feet with angry gusto  and big emotional payoffs.
"Any Given Sunday" is content to document, observe  and convey.
While it does all these things well, a little more passion would  not have gone amiss.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
