Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. There's something classic about the word "American" when it's used in a  title.
It's appeared in the names of films, fiction, music and many more  genres, and gains a certain amount of dignity perhaps from the nomenclature  of history:  wars and political events.
"American Beauty," from director Sam Mendes, spins this proper adjective in  an altogether new direction.
The film opens with an aerial shot, voice-over narration running as the  camera closes in on a city and then a neighborhood and street.
Lester  Burnham (Kevin Spacey) tells us this is his town and street - his life.
And  he will be dead within a year.
Why the artifice, the super-removed point of view from a crucial character?
It's part of the approach that lifts "American Beauty" beyond mediocrity and  places it on the level of classic.
This guy Lester is your basic loser - at least his wife Carolyn (Annette  Bening) and their only child Jane (Thora Birch) think so.
A schmuck that  slaves for an advertising agency, Lester is on his way out due to  downsizing.
His marriage is loveless, his wife caught up in her business as  pusher of real estate, seemingly obsessed with beating out her competition,  Buddy Kane, the "King" of Real Estate (played by a graying Peter Gallagher).
Daughter Jane is part of a high school troupe, sort of dancing  cheerleaders, and often shows her sullen teen demeanor.
When Mom and Dad  actually show up at the half time of a basketball game to catch the dancers'  performance, Lester catches sight of Jane's friend Angela Hayes (Mena  Suvari) and begins a fixation that traces his fall from typical American  grace.
It is as though Angela dances for him alone, and we see the first of  segments set in unreal time, the fantasies that feature Angela in sensual  poses, surrounded by loads of red rose petals.
But Lester's life is not the only one beset by unhappiness and miserable  hope.
Wife Carolyn becomes smitten by no other than Buddy the "King"  himself, and Jane shows fascination with a new neighbor kid named Ricky  Fitts (Wes Bentley), who has come out of two years in a mental hospital and  now sells exotic marijuana to a wide clientele.
Ricky's father is a  military retiree who introduces himself as "Colonel Fitts, U. S. Marine  Corps.
". What goes down largely involves Lester's abandoning of the American work  ethic.
He writes an absurd diatribe of a job description for himself,  ensuring his firing, but blackmails his way into a year's full salary and  benefits, using knowledge of managerial infidelities.
After Angela comments  to Jane that she would find Jane's dad attractive if he would just work out  a little, Lester indeed begins to work out.
He also begins to speak his  mind to his wife, and to smoke Ricky's very best blend.
We never expect  Lester to be happy in the long term, as we know his fate already;  but he  does have a heck of a good time in his reconciliation with reality.
The ensemble cast does a marvelous job of portraying individuals with lost  dreams.
Kevin Spacey fills in the blanks of Lester's life with terrible  nuances:  we are at once repelled and drawn by his devil-may-care antics.
For a long time Lester is caught in his unsmiling rut.
When he finally  breaks out and grins, we are happy for him, and realize the best side of the  film:  it's a very dark comedy that pokes you in the ribs, getting as many  winces of pain as it gets laughs.
For his sketching of Lester Burnham,  Spacey deserves at least a few nominations.
Annette Bening shows her talent for comedy and melodrama, often in the same  scene.
At one point she shows a hopeless cause of a house (which she  herself cleans) to several reluctant couples.
After the open house is over,  Carolyn leans against the patio door and sobs, finally slapping herself out  of it.
She is a creature attracted to success to an extreme degree, using  mantras like "I am going to sell this house today," and "I will no longer be  a victim.
"  Carolyn's love for Lester is on hold, but she could connect once  again if she could stop worrying about his ruining the furniture.
Thora Birch is wonderful as Jane, an angry girl looking for any type of  attention.
With a talent for using a deadpan expression, Birch shows utter  contempt for her parents, yet commences to see the beautiful side of her  creepy neighbor Ricky.
This actress also shows perfectly natural, if a bit  reluctant, nonchalance when she is the subject of Ricky's ever-present  videocamera.
Chris Cooper, one of the best character actors now working, plays Colonel  Fitts with gripping naturalness.
Although we need to know more about his  motivation, Fitts treats son Ricky with extra-stern discipline, virtually  jailing him for two years after the boy smokes pot and severely beats a  schoolmate.
Late in the film Fitts shows more of his butch-headed mania;   in every scene he thrills us with what he might do to any character around  him.
First-time film director Sam Mendes does a nice job with Alan Ball's script.
One criticism is that Mendes, a veteran of theater, is overly enamored  with the medium of film.
Composition and framing are often very noticeable,  distracting viewers from the action, and in fact causing the action to move  at a slow pace at times.
But the shots are nevertheless amazing to watch:   perfectly groomed living rooms, double and triple images of Jane on Ricky's  camera and television screens as she poses for him across the side yard.
Further, imagery involving red roses and water lend the story a whimsical  resonance.
Several scenes benefit from a stark soundtrack of piano and  marimba.
What the film ultimately takes as its topic is just what the title suggests:    Beauty.
Angela Hayes is as beautiful as the red rose of the film's name,  but beauty is in fact skin deep.
Ricky often mentions beauty when talking  of his filming.
In one sequence that he shows to Jane, a white plastic bag  is tossed in a tiny whirlwind among the leaves on an empty sidewalk, a  symbol of the beauty that results from being human - from being tossed about  and absorbing the aches we get from love or the lack of it, which is  neglect.
The beauty these characters experience or miss is again typically  American, and the result is a tale of immorality and wonder that causes  mixed feelings toward the characters and their actions.
"American Beauty" has come out a couple of months before December's Oscar  competitors, but some nominations should come its way.
The film is rated R  for language and drug use, a couple of scenes of extreme violence, and  strong sexual content.
I would hesitate taking along anyone under 17, the  American recommendation for mature viewing audiences.. . . 
