It is rare to see an action-adventure film that evokes memories of the action serials of yesteryear - remember The Masked Avenger or Buck Rogers?
A commonplace argument is that recent action films focus more on Dolby-ized explosions and car crashes than any story or plot.
"The Mask of Zorro" is that rarity - a fast-paced, rollicking action film that brings back the snap and vigor of Zorro in all its glory, without resorting to extreme violence or heavy explosions, and it has a reasonably decent story to tell.
During the opening sequence, we learn that Zorro, otherwise known as Don Diego de la Vega (played with panache by Anthony Hopkins) is the masked hero of the Mexican people.
Some prisoners are about to be executed by a firing squad led by Governor Don Rafaelo Montero (Stuart Wilson), and the crowd bawls.
Before you know it, Zorro comes out of thin air and rescues the prisoners with sword, whip, a trusty steed, and attitude.
Unfortunately, he is apprehended by Montero's guards resulting in the death of his wife.
Twenty years later, Alejandro Murieta (Antonio Banderas) is a wandering street thief who inexplicably becomes Zorro's star pupil - I say inexplicably because who would want to tutor a curly long-haired wanderer on the street, but never mind.
Zorro teaches Murieta everything about swords, chivalry, matters of etiquette, conversation, and well-groomed appearances.
Thus, Murieta becomes the new, dashing Zorro slicing his way through several of Montero's minions, and dancing elegantly with Montero's daughter, Elena (British-born Catherine Zeta-Jones), who is really Vega's daughter.
"The Mask of Zorro" has plenty of stunts and action scenes, but its main thrust is an expanded backstory about Vega's past and the revenge he seeks on his wife's death.
This exposition with the well-cast Hopkins shows more flair and promise than I might have anticipated, even for a hokey Hollywood production like this one.
As for Banderas and Zeta-Jones, they do have sparkling chemistry, culminating in a romantic kiss during a sword duel.
The biggest weakness is Stuart Wilson (previously a villain in "Lethal Weapon 3") as the fatuous Montero, who isn't remotely threatening or evil.
Still, "The Mask of Zorro" is as escapist and fun as Hollywood has been getting lately.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/. E-mail me with any questions, comments or general complaints at Faust667@aol.com or at jerry@movieluver.com THE NEGOTIATOR . . 
