Directed by James Mangold.
Screenplay by Mangold, Lisa Loomer and Anna  Hamilton Phelan, based on the book by Susanna Kaysen.
Starring Winona  Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Whoopi Goldberg.
Running time: 147 minutes.
Rated  AA for mature subject matter and offensive language.
Reviewed on February  28th, 2000.
Shortly after her 1967 high school graduation, Susanna Kaysen (Winona  Ryder) nearly kills herself with a cocktail of aspirin and vodka.
"I had  a headache," she explains after being committed to the Claymoore mental  hospital.
But Susanna's brush with death is really symptomatic of the  sheer aimlessness of her life.
She is the only member of her class not  heading off for college.
While much of the United States is swept up in  the furor of the Vietnam War, Susanna seems almost oblivious.
So it is  hardly surprising that someone so lacking in direction could allow control  of her life to be handed to the doctors and nurses at Claymoore.
At  least now, direction will be forced on her if nothing else.
"Girl, Interrupted" is based on true events, depicted in Kaysen's book of  the same title.
Kaysen lost a year and a half of her life in a women's  mental ward, and the film recounts the experiences which inspired  Susanna to retake control of her own destiny.
Despite a lack of real incident, the first half of the movie is  riveting.
We are introduced to some of the other girls in Susanna's  ward, including a disfigured young pyrophile named Polly (Elizabeth  Moss); Susanna's roommate Georgina (Clea DuVall), who seeks refuge in the  "Oz" books of L Frank Baum; and Daisy (Brittany Murphy), a woman with  peculiar dietary beliefs.
These characters are portrayed evenhandedly;  their mental problems are neither sugarcoated nor demonized, and they  seem real.
Watching over everything is Valerie (Whoopi Goldberg), a stern  but caring nurse who understands in minutes what the psychiatrists  themselves never really figure out: that Susanna has come to Claymoore  not for help, but simply to be.
"Do not drop anchor here," Valerie warns  Susanna, knowing that the doctors are perfectly content to keep her  locked up forever.
Since there is nothing really wrong with Susanna, how  can she ever be cured?
Everything is stirred up by the arrival of Lisa (Angelina Jolie), an  aggressive young woman who is no stranger to Claymoore.
Despite the fact  that Lisa herself has no desire to remain hospitalized (when we first  meet her, she has just been recaptured after a two week absence), it  is her presence which is Susanna's most attractive reason for staying in  the asylum.
Lisa plays the leader of the ragtag band of patients, taking them on secret midnight excursions through secret passages and into  restricted areas of the hospital.
For a time, Claymoore seems less like  an insane asylum and more like summer camp.
Of course, a mental ward is  not summer camp, and eventually events conspire to remind Susanna of this fact.
It is this reality -- and how Susanna reacts to it -- which  comprises the film's second, more uneven half.
Much of "Girl, Interrupted" is a careful character study.
We are witness  to how insanity affects everyone from the delusional themselves, to those  charged with their care, to the average people who by some happenstance  come into contact with them.
The film also observes how madness can be a  relative and elusive concept.
Some of Claymoore's patients have no  business being there (Susanna herself, for instance), while some are  there purely because of social tenets which today seem increasingly  outdated (one woman's only "problem" is that she is a lesbian).
But, more  darkly, not all of those released and declared sane truly are, and this  sets up the movie's most disturbing sequence.
Unfortunately, after an hour of terrific characterization and   well-chosen set pieces, "Girl, Interrupted"'s final twenty minutes are a  huge step backward into melodrama.
These scenes feel awkwardly grafted  onto the rest of the film, as though scriptwriters James Mangold (who  also directed), Lisa Loomer and Anna Hamilton Phelan were afraid  audiences would not be satisfied with a straightforward character study.
Instead, the movie ends with a lot of contrived angst and, yes, even a  chase scene (albeit one that is nicely photographed by Mangold).
The cast is well chosen; while it would be very easy to play any of the  Claymoore inmates over the top, all the actors stay grounded in reality,  and this lends authenticity to the picture.
Jolie is terrific in a role  that has already earned her an Oscar nomination and Golden Globe award.
Of all the characters, it is Lisa who could most easily have been taken  too far, but Jolie knows her limits.
It is clear that she is having a  great deal of fun in the role; Jolie really gets her teeth into the part,  portraying as much of Lisa's personality in her body language and the  inflection of her voice as in her actual words and deeds.
Ryder's  performance, meanwhile, is understated but not bland, projecting Susanna's  uncertainty and desperation while making it clear that she should never  have been committed.
Denouement aside, "Girl, Interrupted" is an absorbing venture inside the  walls of a mental institution.
Both scripting and acting are up to the  challenge of translating Kaysen's experiences convincingly onto the  screen.
Although it lacks the power and drama of "One Flew Over the  Cuckoo's Nest", to which it is perhaps most readily comparable, "Girl,  Interrupted" should not be overlooked.
Copyright Š 2000 Shannon Patrick Sullivan.
Archived at http://www.physics.mun.ca/~sps/movies/GirlInterrupted.html. . 
