In grand pulp tradition, a man (Sewell) wakes up amnesiac in a hotel  room with a dead woman.
Terrified he flees into the shadowy city,  pursued by a puzzled cop (Hurt), his supposed wife (Connelly) and a  group of mysterious figures cloaked in black, none of whom have  Australian accents.
There's a deranged doctor (Sutherland) in there  too.
The pursued amnesiac murderer is an oldie but a goodie, a hook around  which one could build a tight and twisty plot.
But that's not what  happens here.
The most mysterious thing about "Dark City", is why the  plot starts shrouded in such mystery and then so easily gives up its  secrets to lumber into a comic book action plot.
Was this intentional  or has the writer and director (Alex "The Crow" Proyas) misjudged his  audience?
I suspect the second, but let's look at the good things  first.
(As always with mystery films, one must speak elliptically on  certain plot points so as to preserve the surprise for viewers - even  if the filmmakers don't find the surprise useful.
). >From the opening scenes, Proyas' visual style draws you in.
Our hero  awakes in a bathtub, the camera drinking in a lazily swinging naked  lightbulb, a syringe loose on an intricately tiled floor, a bundle of  clothes folded loosely on a chair.
Later, we move through the  Escher-like streets of the city to where a singer sways slowly in  front of a microphone as her band plays in the darkness just outside  the spotlight.
The dark city itself is a kind of painting, a  composition carefully constructed for each shot.
Indeed, the actors  do not so much move through each scene as just stand carefully within  them.
Movement would disrupt the careful placement and so characters  are more part of the scenery than part of the plot.
Although this objectifying of the cast is often bad, within "Dark  City" it works.
William Hurt as the laconic police lieutenant is  playing little more than a cliche, but this cliche belongs here and is  done very well.
Likewise, Jennifer Connelly's role could best be  described as "The Girl" and wouldn't go astray in dozens of other  movies.
Nor does it go astray here.
Kiefer Sutherland, who was  nearly due for lifetime membership in the Bad Movie Actors Guild  (whether you read it as "BAD movie ACTORS" or "BAD MOVIE actors") here  turns a surprisingly good job as the oddly pathetic collaborator Dr  Schreber, struggling pathetically against his controllers.
But this returns us to the plot.
The sad fact is that the mystery is  all but over 40 minutes into the film, leaving nothing but the visual  style.
After the teasing open scene, the director is in a tearing  hurry to explain it all to us, with a disastrous opening monologue  which all but tells you what's going on.
(Even one of the poster  blurbs gives the secret away.
)  So by the halfway mark, the battle  lines are drawn and all that remains is for our hero to go mano a mano  with the bad guys.
And you don't seriously think that he's going to  lose, do you?
This is mighty little to hang the rest of the film on.
Actually it's surprising that Dark City works as well as it does given  that thinness of its plot.
Some viewers might complain that "Dark  City" is illogical.
Given the immense levels of technology and powers  dealt with, it's more "a-logical".
Anything could happen.
It's more  fantasy than science-fiction.
This tends to underline the  arbitrariness and lack of mystery.
"Dark City" is thus a bit of a mixed bag, the product of a single  person's vision that perhaps needed some tempering by an outside point  of view to bring it to full fruition.
However, just on the basis of  the first half and visuals I'd rate it [***/interesting] and Peter  Greenaway on the Sid and Nancy scale.
"Dark City" (aka "Dark Empire", "Dark World") Released 1998.
Director and writer Alex Proyas.
Starring Rufus Sewell, Jennifer Connelly, William Hurt, Ian          Richardson, Kiefer Sutherland, Bruce Spence, Richard O'Brien, Colin          Friels, John Bluthal, Melissa George.
-- Paul-Michael Agapow (p.agapow@ic.ac.uk), Dept.
Biology, Imperial College "We were too young, lived too fast and had too much technology ...". . 
