While technically well-made, Stigmata never possesses a very logical story or enough originality to warrant a recommendation.
It's a spiritual thriller that most audiences will either find offensive or preposterous, depending on their religious view-point.
The plot asks for too much of the viewer's co-operation, and the film itself is an all-together numbing experience for all who get involved.
The Stigmata are the wounds of Christ on the wrists, feet and back.
Certain religious individuals have been afflicted by these bizarre lacerations over the years.
The latest victim appears to be single hair-dresser Frankie Page (Patricia Arquette), who has began suffering strange demonic attacks.
On more than one occasion, Frankie is admitted to a hospital with bleeding wounds that appear to be self-inflicted.
It's only after a public attack on a subway train that the Vatican begins to take notice.
They send a Roman Catholic Priest named Andrew Kiernan (Gabriel Byrne) to investigate the phenomenon, and see for himself whether the Stigmata are involved.
One argument to prove otherwise is that Frankie does not attend church, and the victims are always `deeply religious people'.
Video director Rupert Wainwright is behind the camera for Stigmata, and his sense of style oozes through every frame.
The entire movie is shot in a bizarre tone of bleached colors.
It looks as if Wainwright was glazed over the film, accentuating certain colors with a neon tint and blocking out others.
He also uses stylish camera work, but unfortunately, this approach grows tiresome after a while.
It seems as if when one aspect of the production is working, the other is flagging hopelessly behind.
The set-up of the story is awful, but the movie looks great.
Then, as the plot shifts into high gear, the film develops into a reasonably competent thriller.
Of course, by this time, the quick-flash editing and camera trickery are getting old (not to mention tough on the eyes).
If you're a very patient person and you love Patricia Arquette, then Stigmata is definitely for you.
For others, I would advise to stay clear.
Some people are not going to be very pleased with the religious undertones presented here.
As the story develops, the Cardinal (Jonathan Pryce) becomes worried that the new reports could destroy the Vatican.
But, despite some obvious potential, there are few twists and turns involved in the initial story.
There's nothing particularly fresh or new.
Just a plot that delivers an occasional jolt to maintain the viewer's interest, including graphic attack sequences that will make your head spin in a dizzying rage.
Some of these bloody scenes could have been toned down, in violence and momentum.
The cast is quite good.
Arquette is perfect in her role as the tormented twenty-something victim, but it's the Vatican members who make the biggest impression.
The talented Byrne plays Kiernan as a wise and authoritative individual, even when his actions seem relatively implausible.
In minor supporting roles, Pryce and Rade Sherbedgia are both commanding.
Without the willing participation of these actors, Stigmata would have been a big, bloated mess.
It's not very pretty as it is, but the movie has some strengths.
The director does a fair job of involving the audience in the mindless muck, and some of the information is moderately interesting.
But all of this is only to a point.
Once Stigmata abandons it's over-the-top approach and begins leaning toward a more conventional thriller, things (ironically) improve.
Wainwright, though, demands too much attention for a feature-length film, and should stick to the MTV profession.
Who exactly is this movie for?
People wanting a revised story of The Exorcist?
Even those loyal followers may be frustrated by this mixed bag of spiritual shenanigans.
Sorry folks, no flying green phlegm here.
Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com. . 
