Seen on 24 October 1997 with Lynne and Sandy for $8 at the Squire Cinemas, Great Neck, NY. It was not too difficult to imagine, based on the commercials, to think that Devil's Advocate was going to be crap.
Seeing Al Pacino boiling Holy Water with a single finger, who wouldn't?
Happily, I wound up seeing one of the more satisfying commercial vehicles of the year.
It is not as subtle as Rosemary's Baby, but is much more safisfying and sophisticated than the classic Devil and Daniel Webster.
Kevin Lomax (Keanu Reeves) is a prosecutor turned criminal lawyer who has never lost a case on either end of the spectrum, who lives with his devoted wife Mary Ann (Charlize Theron) in Florida.
After ensuring the freedom of his client--a pedophile junior high school teacher--he is approached by a representative from a high-profile law firm in New York.
They offer everything--first class transportation, a huge salary, an eight-room apartment in the posh Carnegie Hill neighborhood near Central Park.
In fact, isn't it a little weird that the entire building is inhabited by members of the law fim?
Boss John Milton has the penthouse atop the spooky, urban haunted house.
While Kevin thrives in the high-pressure atmosphere and passes the tests before  him, his hitherto happy wife has her reservations.
She doesn't quite like being left on her own, shopping wih the superficial, creepy wifes of the other associates, and wondering if Kevin is sleeping with the slinky Christabella (Connie Neilsen).
She doesn't quite like her nightmares either--and neither will you.
During a visit, Kevin' Bible-quoting mother notices how poorly Mary Ann is doing; Kevin does not.
Al Pacino's performance as John Milton (a/k/a The Devil) changes the whole tone of the film whenever he appears on screen.
The movie is well written, but it seems especially well written for him.
Larger than life (as Satan should be, I guess), it is a joy to see his eyes and face light up whenever he appears, whether he is luring Kevin into temptation, or confronting a hooligan on the subway (the only way he will travel).
It is also gratifying to watch a basic morality story that does not hit you over the head over and over again.
Obviously the temptations offered are evil, but watching how Kevin reacts to them, rationalizing them, helps keep the film nicely paced.
Like Young Goodman Brown, Kevin too will see demons  everywhere.
Brava to Roberta J. Holinko, the set decorator.
Milton's office and apartment are as wide as widescreen will allow, and decorated appropriate to his satanic position.
Devil's Advocate shows a lush superrich side of New York most people do not see, like the courtrooms with WPA murals, or high-rise apartments with gilts wall and ceilings and spectacular views, or offices that have Manhattan at your feet.
A lot of churches appear in this movie too, some of the most beautiful, cavernous ones Manhattan has to offer.
Yet, there is always a firey glow somewhere in the distance, or down a hallway, to remind you what road you are on, even if the best intentions are propelling you.
All of this is so enjoyable, the ending(s) sort of take the wind out of you as they hit you repeatedly over the head.
There are other ways I would have ended the movie.
If you would like to know, email me and I will tell you (sethbook@panix.com).
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html. . 
