Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Liverpool City Centre) Released in the UK by UIP on January 21, 2000; certificate 18; 102 minutes;  country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1. Directed by Rupert Wainwright; produced by Frank Mancuso Jr.
Written by Tom Lazarus, Rick Ramage.
Photographed by Jeffrey L Kimball; edited by Michael J Duthie, Michael R  Miller.
"Stigmata" starts as a badly made film, proceeds as a muddled one and ends up  as psychotic.
The final moments of this movie attack the Roman Catholic  Church in the manner of a deranged ex-girlfriend -- wasting our time,  solemnly declaring ridiculous accusations, making a lot of noise but no sense.
The first act introduces us to Frankie Paige (Patricia Arquette), an  attractive Pittsburgh hairdresser who exists in one of those fairytale movie  worlds where, at work, she walks in to find everyone greeting her like she's  just come back from holiday, and, at night, she always gets to her favourite  night club to find her friends already waiting there.
There are lots of  lingering close-ups of her drinks and cigarettes; look, kids, she's  naughty... this is what big grown-up people call a 'wanton lifestyle'!
Meanwhile a priest played by Gabriel Byrne, Father Andrew Kiernan, is  travelling around the world investigating reports of miracles.
He's an  objective, scientific fellow, we learn, who would never be taken in by a  hoax.
But when he assesses a statue of the Virgin Mary that cries blood, and  comes to the conclusion that the relic is genuine, the cardinals at the  Vatican don't pay it any mind.
Instead, they just send him on another assignment, this time to examine  Frankie.
She has been seen reacting to hallucinations and displaying signs of  stigmata, a phenomenon whereby Christians with strong faith and empathy with  Jesus will break out in the wounds their saviour suffered on the cross.
But  Frankie is an atheist, and the pointless middle of "Stigmata", which is a  battle to stay awake through, mentions this discrepancy a lot without  actually explaining it.
Instead, every "How could this happen to me?
" moment  is interrupted by jarring music chords and fits of screaming, as Frankie  freaks out like Linda Blair in "The Exorcist".
Is she possessed by something evil, as Blair's character was?
I'm still not  sure.
If I followed the movie correctly, the soul of a dead Catholic priest  has invaded her by storing his soul in magic rosary beads, to use her as a  messenger and announce his discovery of Christ's own version of the Gospel.
The stigmata is a side-effect of all the holy phenomena floating around, and  this joyful miracle only seems like an attack by a demonic force because the  priest is so darn angry at the state of the Vatican.
This is ridiculous, but gets even more farfetched, when the film explicitly  accuses Catholicism of being a conspiracy against God.
Just before the end  credits, factoids and statistics appear onscreen to tell us how many reports  of miracles the Vatican have dismissed as fake.
That the director, Rupert  Wainwright, could think this is serious evidence of corruption suggests he's  the kind of guy who would look at the circus antics of a kooky talk show like  "Jerry Springer" and declare them to contain compelling social exposé.
Even  his visual style gets on my nerves -- from the outset he keeps switching  between grainy documentary realism and saturated slow-motion montages of bad  dance music, which play like demented Coca-Cola commercials.
Watching Gabriel Byrne in this movie, I pondered the possibility that he  enjoys deliberately appearing in bad religious pictures.
Only a few weeks ago  he played Satan in "End of Days", which, like "Stigmata", used half-baked  knowledge about Catholicism as an excuse for a lot of ugly gore and noise.
Byrne is a good actor; if you ever pass by a film set and see him, try to get  his autograph.
If you see a crucifix anywhere nearby, though, ask him the  title of the movie he's working on and tell all your friends to avoid it.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani. Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
