Lost Highway (1996) *1/2 out of ***** - Cast: Bill Pullman, Patricia Arquette, Balthazar Getty, Robert Blake, Gary Busey, Robert Loggia, Jack Nance, Henry Rollins.
Written by: David Lynch and Barry Gifford.
Directed by: David Lynch.
Running Time: 135 minutes.
In just about every review I've read for director David Lynch's latest self-indulgent nonsense, no matter if the review is positive or negative, the main point is clear.
The reviewer cannot explain what the movie is about.
Well, neither can I. I won't even try to give any sort of synopsis of this film.
It just can't be done.
And I'm sorry, if I watch something that makes absolutely no sense whatsoever (and ultimately isn't MEANT to make any sense), I do not enjoy it and therefore cannot give it a favorable review.
Surprisingly, despite my dislike of Lynch, the first part of the film is greatly entertaining.
First off, the opening credit sequence, as simple as it is, gets me in the mood for a good movie.
I can't explain why, I just really like everything about the film's opening credits.
Then "Lost Highway" is almost a normal film (for Lynch anyway), becoming very intriguing as it proceeds along.
I was extremely interested in the situations being presented and the direction of the story.
But unfortunately, I know how Lynch's mind works.
And so the story progresses along for about an hour to a plot twist, which then ruins the entire movie.
It must have killed the man to do anything during his outstanding TV series "Twin Peaks" which satisfied the audience.
Now, as it seems, he takes great pleasure in telling the audience to screw off, because he's going to make a movie for himself and no one else.
So when the closing credits roll and we realize that we understand even less of what's going on than we did ten minutes earlier, I can just hear Lynch squealing with delight at the joke he's just played on the audience.
Hey, I've got a joke for you David, it's called pathetic box office returns and another five years before someone finances another one of your "films".
Enjoy that one.
The cast is fine with what they have, but Lynch has no ear for dialogue.
As with most of his work, conversations take forever, as characters pause forever before responding.
Entertainment Weekly said that Arquette "acts with her breasts" in the film, and it's true.
That's all Lynch gives her to do.
I'm not saying that's bad, I'm just saying.... On a "Twin Peaks" sidenote: Eric DaRe, who played Leo Johnson (a major character) on the show, is listed in the closing credits as a member of the crew.
A grip or a best boy or something like that.
And Jack Nance, who played Pete on "Twin Peaks" and who passed away recently plays a mechanic in the film.
I believe this was his last role.
[R]. Visit Chuck's Movie Reviews at http://users.southeast.net/~chuckd21/ Over 1,600 movies rated and/or reviewed!
Movie news, film related links, and reader's reviews.. 
