  "The Hurricane" is hands down the most powerful film of 1999.
Although it has a few minor flaws, one can't help hide it's uplifting message, not to mention a breakthrough for both Denzel Washington and director Norman Jewison.
As you may or may not know, the film follows the life of the famous boxer Rubin "Hurricane" Carter, Hurricane being his nickname.
The film starts out with a murder that was pinned on Rubin, but only we know that he's been wrongfully accused.
The story then focuses on a young boy named Lesra (Vicellous Reon Shannon), who is struggling in life as well, until he reads the autobiography of Rubin Carter, which gives him a little inspiration.
So the background story of Rubin basically unfolds as Lesra reads the novel.
After he finishes the book, he is determined to help Rubin out by any means, and he does with a little help from his friends (Liev Schriber, Deborah Kara Unger and John Hannah).
This leads us to the 2nd part of the film, in which all 4 people investigate the crime, so that they can give Rubin Carter a fair trial.
I'll admit, I thought the trailer was a bit sappy, but I must have came into the movie with an open heart, because I was blown away by it's emotional impact.
Sure it was formulaic and had a simple premise, but there was far more to it then.
A story is only a small portion of the film.
The film's messages are what really worked here, not to mention Denzel Washington's performance, which I will get into later.
The film mainly deals with the racism (in the first half of the film) towards black men and woman during the 60's, and how they were treated improperly, while the second half dealt with the inner struggle to survive with love and hate by your side.
It may not seem like much in words, but is far more descriptive on screen.
Absolutely uplifting.
Unfortunately there are a few flaws.
The whole investigation in the film seemed to have brought it down a notch.
I would have rather seen more of Washington or something with meaning rather than these empty scenes.
It just didn't quite fit.
Also as I said before, it is a typical Hollywood film with a formulaic story.
If it was not for that, it would have easily been an excellent film, but it falls slightly below that.
Now for the real knockout in the film, Denzel Washington.
Not only is this his greatest performance, but it's also the best of 99.
If someone else was in his position, I doubt it would have been as believable, nor as powerful.
He delivered here big time.
He's got an Oscar Nomination in the bag, maybe even a win as well.
Everyone else in the film did a good job as well.
Director Norman Jewison has a hit on his hands for once.
I have never really been impressed with his work (with the exception of Moonstruck) up until now.
He has outdone himself and it's about time he's put his good direction skills to work.
I suggest you go see "The Hurricane" ASAP, because quite frankly next to "The Green Mile" and "Toy Story 2" it's one of the best films playing in theaters now.
A must see.. . 
