STARRING:   Mike Myers, Neve Campbell, Ryan Phillippe, Salma Hayek DIRECTOR:   Mark Christopher WRITER:     Mark Christopher RATED/YEAR: R/1998.         It's always disappointing to realise, halfway through a movie, that you have no idea what it's about.
On the surface, "54" seems to be straightforward enough: it tells the story of a legendary '70s Manhattan nightclub, a place so trendy that the doorman refused admission to 9 out of every 10 people who tried to get inside.
For those lucky enough to gain entrance, drugs and sex were free for the asking.
Simply being seen at the club could get you invited into an elite social circle, which included not only royalty, but the biggest celebrities of the day.
Shane (Ryan Phillippe) is a teenager with a crush on soap-opera star Julie Black (Neve Campbell).
When a newspaper article reports that Julie has been spotted at the nightclub several times, the handsome but dim-witted Shane pays a visit.
Gaining admission via his rugged good looks, he manages to land a job as a busboy, eventually working his way up to bartender.
The club's owner, Steve Rubell ("Wayne's World" creator Mike Myers, in a highly-touted dramatic role), is a drug-addict who runs the nightclub his way, with little regard for the consequences of his actions.
(In a nationally-televised interview, for example, Rubell cheerfully admits that he lies to the IRS about how much money the club makes.
)  His is a world of pills, music, and regrets, none of which are easily remembered the next day.
This had the potential to be an interesting story, but the execution is, alas, very clumsy.
The script is unfocused; it doesn't really succeed at conveying either the excitement of the era, or any indication why the club was so highly regarded.
It's "The Last Days of Disco" meets "Boogie Nights," with all the high-points somehow lost along the way.
But whatever flaws the film may have, they are not the fault of Myers; indeed, so convincing is his performance that all thoughts of Wayne Campbell and Austin Powers were forever purged from my mind.
Myers knows that Rubell is not a hero; he's just a junkie trying to get by the best way he knows how, and he plays the role accordingly.
I have new respect for his abilities as an actor.
In fact, Myers is so good that the film suffers when he's not on the screen.
Although the character of Rubell is intriguing, he's reduced to a relatively small part.
Considering that nearly all the events which happen in the movie (including an IRS audit of the club and the death of a patron) would significantly affect his character, it's surprising that he's given so little screen time in comparison to the exceedingly bland Shane.
Ryan Phillippe seems to be sleep-walking through his role, mumbling his lines and showing little interest in any of the remarkable things that happen to him.
Neve Campbell turns in her usual competent performance, but the script never allows her to become a "real" person.
She remains just another face passing briefly through Shane's life.
This is one of the most disappointing facets of the movie: getting to know the "real" person behind the Famous Actress persona that Julie wears should be fascinating; instead, it comes off as trite.
The movie succeeds, however, at capturing the claustrophobic feel of a crowded nightclub.
Nearly every scene is "lit" only by neon signs or disco strobe lights.
The grainy, underexposed look which results from this method of shooting is just right.
The music is also well-chosen, capturing the feel of the late '70s.
Rubell's spoken introductions to many of the songs are also quite amusing.
An "A+" for atmosphere, but alas, that alone doesn't make a great film.
"54" isn't horrible, but it steps all over itself while attempting to convey a story.
Rather than needing MORE plot, the film needs to drop its superfluous elements and instead focus on its most interesting storyline: Steve Rubell's struggle to keep the club open in the face of adversity.
The film rolls along nicely during Mike Myers' scenes, but overall it plays out like the disco music featured on its soundtrack: occasionally pleasant, but ultimately going nowhere.
E-Mail: jbarlow@earthling.net Joe Barlow on Film:  http://www.ipass.net/~jbarlow/film.htm. If you'd like to receive new film reviews by e-mail, please write to the above address and ask to be put on my mailing list.. . 
