USA/Australia.
1998.
Director/Story - Alex Proyas, Screenplay - Proyas,  Lem Dobbs & David S. Goyer, Producers - Goyer & Andrew Mason,  Photography - Dariusz Wolski, Music - Trevor Jones, Visual Effects -  Mason, Mara Bryan & Arthur Windus, Digital Visual Effects - DFilm  Services, Sydney, Model/Miniature Supervisor - Tom Davies, Special  Effects Supervisor - Tad Price, Prosthetics - Bob McCarron, Production  Design - George Liddle & Patrick Tatopoulos.
Production Company -  Mystery Clock/Dark City Productions/New Line Cinema.
Rufus Sewell (John Murdoch), Kiefer Sutherland (Dr Daniel Poe Schreber),  William Hurt (Inspector Frank Bumstead), Jennifer Connelly (Emma  Murdoch/Anna), Ian Richardson (Mr Book), Richard O'Brien (Mr Hand), John  Bluthal (Karl Harris), Bruce Spence (Mr Wall), Colin Friels (Detective  Walenski), Melissa George (May). Plot: In a mysterious city where the sunlight never shines, John Murdoch  wakes in a hotel room with no memory of who he is.
He is pursued by  police who suspect that he is responsible for a series of  killings of   prostitutes; a creepy doctor who insists that he is insane; and  mysterious aliens in black coats and fedoras who place the entire city  to sleep on the stroke of midnight while they manipulate its fundamental  structure.
However Murdoch finds he is the only person who can not be  made to sleep by the aliens and that he shares some of their  reality-manipulating abilities.
In his efforts to understand the  situation, he comes to discover that the entire city is a vast  laboratory being used in experiments by the aliens to reorder and  transplant people's memories in an attempt to penetrate the secret of  the human soul.
Forget about what Variety and a number of the other trained-monkey  mainstream reviewers have said about 'Dark City' being confusing and  hard to follow.
I can say without any hesitation that this is one of the  most conceptually audacious and best sf films I have seen in the last  few years.
It is the second film of Alex Proyas, who made a striking debut with the  darkly driven and nihilistic 'The Crow' in 1994.
The film is clearly a  very personal project of Proyas's - he also had a strong hand in the  script - and marks him as one of the directors most worth keeping an eye  on in future.
It is a film that eludes any easy pigeonholing.
It  seemingly takes place in a world of self-conscious artifice that  suggests a collision between 'Brazil' and 'The Maltese Falcon'.
Here  Proyas deliberately evokes film noir - everyone dresses in trench coats  and hats, the women come across as slinky vamps, the cars are all period  and the technology has a striking 1940s retro look.
(The city was built  entirely stagebound inside Australia's Movie World studios).
But there  is also a dystopian feel to it too - there are times the film is  extraordinarily threatening -  a visit to a cafe where each item of food  sits in a compartment of its own in a backlit glass case is striking.
Proyas shoots it all in a beautiful, virtually monochrome lighting  scheme that renders the city as permanent night-time - one where the  recurrent vision of a sunlit, palm-shaded beach (even when it is  revealed as only a faded mural) becomes an achingly palpable  representation of all hope.
Of course in this noir world everything is far from normal.
In an almost  classical setup the hero wakes in a hotel room with complete amnesia and  to find himself on the run from the police as a suspected killer.
But  then in the first of the film's wild spins finds he is immune to (and  maybe even one of) a group of bald aliens beneath the city who on the  stroke of midnight each night cause the populace to fall asleep while  they rearrange the spatial geometry and the very fabric of reality  within the city.
After several wild (but completely logical) twists the  hero makes a classical conceptual breakthrough to discover that the city  is an experiment set up by the aliens to determine the nature of the  human soul by manipulating and transplanting people's memories.
One of  the most emotionally powerful scenes in the film comes when he tries to  explain to his wife that the memories of their marriage are entirely  false and were only implanted the previous night, only to have her  tearfully protest "But they can't be - I love you.
" An extraordinary  film.. . . 
