SCREAM 3 (2000) by JOHN SYLVA , associate of OFCS (www.ofcs.org). It's sure been a rocky road to the third and final chapter in quite possibly the most talked about and celebrated slasher series in history.
In May of 1999, Kevin Williamson, breakthrough writer of the first two "Scream" films, dropped out of the project to finish his directorial debut, "Teaching Mrs. Tingle" (Which was slammed by critics, and struggled to reach 10 million domestically), leaving writing duties to relative newcomer Ehren Kruger (Arlington Road).
The question everyone on everyone's mind:  How can the third film live up to its predecessors when the man responsible for the edge of the series is gone?
Well, after seeing "Scream 3," it's obvious that it can't entirely; But Kruger certainly gives it a shot, ending up making a film that is more of a loner than part of a series.
Our reigning heroine, Sidney Prescott (Neve Campbell) has gone into hiding after the turn of events at the southern Ohio Windsor College, and works for California Woman's Crisis Counseling in her solitary home in the hills of Monterey.
Down in Hollywood, production on "Stab 3: Return to Woodsboro," a fictional account inspired by the characters of the first two "Scream" films has begun, under the direction of Roman Bridger (Scott Foley) at Sunrise Studios.
As filming begins, so does the body count, as it's apparent this killer doesn't want "Stab 3" to finish production.
Along for the ride are the ambitious reporter Gale Weathers (Courteney Cox Arquette) and goofy cop Dewey Riley (David Arquette), both returning from the previous two films, along with Cotton Weary (Liev Schreiber), once convicted killer of Sidney's mother, Jennifer Jolie (Parker Posey), over the top actress who portrays Gale Weathers in "Stab 3," Detective Mark Kincaid (Patrick Dempsey), who is assigned to investigate the murders, Sarah Darling (Jenny McCarthy), a spunky actress who is unhappy with her role in "Stab 3," Angelina Tyler (Emily Mortimer), a suspicious and downright weird woman playing Sidney in "Stab 3," Steven Stone (Patrick Warburton), Jennifer Jolie's bodyguard, Tyson Fox (Deon Richmond), struggling African American actor, and John Milton (Lance Henriksen), producer of "Stab 3" who seems to know a little too much about Sidney, and her mother.
The large ensemble cast is one of diversity and talent, with everyone handling their share of the work, even if its one scene, with ease.
The current "Scream Queen," Neve Campbell, handles her character with care and emotion, as she has in the past as well.
Sidney has always been the one character that the audience can relate to and sympathize for, because her character has always had an overwhelming amount of authenticity to it.
Once labeled the "indie queen," Parker Posey is hilarious and sharp as her well-written character.
Posey gives a performance that is meant to mock today's mainstream actresses that usually star in films like this one; She's a complete riot.
Courteney Cox Arquette and husband David Arquette both fit their character's shoes as well as they did in the previous two films.
Wes Craven, who has helmed all three films, directs "Scream 3" with intelligence and care.
Craven certainly knows how to stage good jump scenes, but his ability to cause suspense in the viewer seems to be vanishing.
Craven's direction is accompanied perfectly by Marco Beltrami's slick, powerful score that at times is a bit overwhelming, but the score lives up to his previous work in the "Scream" films.
The cinematography is rather dull this time around, unlike the eerie and bold photography seen in the previous two films.
"Scream 3" is a completely different film than one would expect; It's campy, fun, light, and rather predictable; What the "Scream" films are not known for.
"Scream 3" is more of an excellent spin-off of the first two rather than a part of the series.
Kruger's script holds hardly any suspense, many characters flat as cardboard, but he tops it all off with an amazing and poignant ending that couldn't have been more perfect.
The premise of "Scream 3" is something to scream about all in its own, but it's too bad that aside from Jennifer Jolie, none of the actors or crew on "Stab 3" are around long enough for us to get to know them before they meet their bloody death.
By the time all is said and done, there is a body count so large, it's difficult to even remember who bit the dust.
(Unlike the first two films, where the characters were individuals, characters who seemed like real people.
). It may not completely be a "Scream" movie, but on its own merit, "Scream 3" is one witty and rewarding ride.
The pacing is brisk and the dialogue is snappy; This is where the film totally lives up to its expectations.
But what "Scream 3" has that the previous two don't is a certain level of campiness, one at which you're laughing more than you're screaming, jumping more than you're screaming.
I was reminded of the 1985 classic "Clue" at many moments, as the character's reactions to one's death are more entertaining than the death itself.
The last 30 minutes of "Scream 3" are a complete riot- Unbelievable, superb, and tense fun.
The idea of whether or not this is a "Scream" film completely slips your mind by the time it reaches its conclusion, as although it's hardly suspenseful or unpredictable, "Scream 3" is without a doubt the most entertaining of the three.
It'd certainly be interesting to see what Williamson would have done with the final chapter; Whether or not he'd try and match the previous films' atmosphere or take the road of being an individual, as Kruger did.
Either way, "Scream 3" is a satisfying and fun film.
Hands down to a fine conclusion to an even finer trilogy.
We can all breathe a sigh of relief now.
The most shocking, fresh, and unpredictable slasher series of all time is complete.
The Bottom Line: Some diehard "Scream" fans may be disappointed, but all in all, "Scream 3" is a guaranteed good time.
As the first two "Scream" films, "Scream 3" is destined to become a cult classic. . . 
