I love L.A.
Despite the traffic, L.A. is the best place to live if you're looking for a casual lifestyle.
Los Angeles has been a major player in films from "Chinatown" to "Short Cuts", perhaps because all the major players in film reside there; the city translated as "city of angels"(how ironic; I guess all they all moved away).
An overlooked aspect of Albert Brooks' terrific comedy "The Muse" will be the way Brooks' presents L.A., as a paradise-like city where you could sit home during the day, write a bit of your new action screenplay, and make enough so that your family could live in a Palisades estate.
"The Muse" is Woody Allen territory, both in the way the film business is presented and in the slightly supernatural mystical storyline.
However, what "The Muse" will gain its notoriety for is for being Sharon Stone's return to comedy(her last one was "Irrenconcilable Differences", her first major film role) after years of forgettable dramatic performances("Casino" being an exception).
Although her role as the title character won't recieve an Oscar, her natural charm shines through and she is surprisingly likable.
"The Muse" is the story of Steven Phillips(Albert Brooks), an Oscar-nominated screenwriter who is told by his boss that he has lost his edge.
He is subsequently fired and turns to his more successful friend(Jeff Bridges) for he advice.
He tells him about Sarah(Sharon Stone), who is a real Muse, the daughter of Zeus, who can inspire creativity.
Steven decides to give this Muse thing a try, when he realizes that the Muse has absolutely no concept of money.
Sarah will inspire you, but in return you must give her everything she wants.
So Sarah ends up moving in to Steven's home, and as well as subtly inspiring Steven, she inspires Steven's wife(Andie MacDowell) into becoming the next "Mrs. Fields".
A lot of the fun in "The Muse" comes from watching different celebrities admit to using the Muse.
Rob Reiner thanks her for "The American President", James Cameron thanks her for "Titanic", Martin Scorsese thanks her for inspiring his remake of "Raging Bull"(hopefully a joke), and Sarah claims that she did "The Truman Show".
The only real flaw in "The Muse" is a slightly unsatisfying ending which doesn't live up to the comic genius which preceeded it.
But Albert Brooks has created a very funny comedy that entertains at Hollywood's expense.
What could be better?
"The Muse" also proves that real inspiration can only be found within yourself, which is something that writers of all kinds need to learn.
I, myself, have started work on a few screenplays, only to give up after 5 or so pages.
Creativity is certainly not an easy trait.
Well, at least Albert Brooks is in top form, proving that he won't be needing a muse for a very long time.. . . 
