        Here is a film that is wrapped in a 95 minute package that should  be about three hours long, and still would be enjoyable.
Director/writer  James Mangold probes into the lives of 5 different personalities that only  touched the surfaces of their lives.
He could have and should  have gone deeper.
Despite this lapse, though, Cop Land is a great film  with great acting across the board.
Sylvester Stallone is an intelligent guy.
After all, he wrote  the Academy Award winning Rocky (1976), and was nominated for the  screenplay.
It was also the last time we saw him truly act.
Maybe urban  dramas are a place he could inhabit and reap benefits from for movies to  come.
After failing to impress in comedy (Stop, Or My Mom Will  Shoot, Oscar) and in his specialty, action (the last few Rockys and  Rambos, Judge Dredd), Stallone has delivered an understated performance  that rightfully has Oscar buzz flying around him.
As the lonesome loser, Freddy Heflin, Stallone has to portray a  half-deaf, overweight (he added 40 pounds and watched muscle  deteriorate), and joke of a cop, who never became a Cop.
He is the  sheriff of Garrison, New Jersey, a haven for New York's most  corrupt police officers.
He keeps a peaceful town, but no one takes him  seriously.
He watches the cityscape pass him by, a place his hearing  kept him from working.
However, he wasn't always this buffoonish.
He lost his hearing while saving the woman (Annabella Sciorra) he has  come to love, and protect, after she plunged off a bridge in her car  years before.
This kept him from becoming the decorated city officer he  yearns to be, but in Cop Land he is presented the chance to achieve hero  status.
Ray Liotta could have won me over years ago, had I seen  GoodFellas before witnessing his performances in Unlawful Entry, the  ironically titled Unforgettable and the atrocious Turbulence.
I can  finally say, he has won me over.
In fact, he puts in the most impressive performance in this well- stocked film.
As an ambiguously moral cop, Liotta dives into his  own personal dilemma of doing what's right and doing what's fashionable.
He has some questionable dealings as a result of using his police  privileges which extend to a drug habit and insurance fraud.
But, on the  good side, he serves as Freddy's mentor.
Perhaps to show HIS seriousness, Liotta has beefed up as well.
In one chase scene, its enjoyable to watch Stallone and he become  out-of-breath as a result of their weight gain.
With his usual  intensity, Liotta puts in a performance for all-time, that should be  recognized come Oscar time.
He's the one to watch.
Harvey Keitel is the bad cop.
Robert De Niro is the good  internal affairs cop.
Michael Rapaport is the fallen-hero cop.
Noah  Emmerich and Janeane Garofalo are the small-town Heflin-wannabes.
All  are terrific.
Keitel is unforgiving as ever as .
He is the one who created  Garrison for his profit and to run his shady dealings.
His nephew,  Michael Babitch, played by Rapaport, made a mistake.
He had saved six  black children's lives, recently, but became trigger-happy after being  side-swiped by two black teens, and kills them.
His uncle, Keitel's  Ray Donlan hides him as others plant a gun in the deads' car.
A  bogus funeral is held after Babitch and Donlan fake a suicide.
Everyone around knows this is false, including Mo Tilden (De Niro).
Yes, even De Niro has put on the pounds to capture the essence of an  overeating desk cop, who must chase down some of his own.
This meets  with the bad cops' disfavor, but also compromises Freddy's position  between his friends who got him the sheriff's job and doing the right  thing.
The deal is, Freddy has spotted Babitch, and Tilden  has gone after Heflin to get him to become the cop he's wanted to be:  An  heroic one.
Garofalo and Emmerich play the bumpkin deputies smartly, and  don't want to become involved in breaking up a mob-run dictatorship in  Garrison.
Its Freddy's turn to become the law.
The question is, will  he?
Stallone and De Niro together make sparkling confrontations over  right versus loyalty.
And we are finally shown that Stallone knows how  to act and can stand his own.
De Niro has returned to acting since  seeing a ridiculous bit in Marvin's Room and his patented psycho in The Fan.
Keitel and Liotta hold well, with Liotta putting in his best  performance yet.
The only lagging part comes from director James  Mangold.
This was a great script which could have gone on forever, and  been just as riveting.
We hardly got to know some of these fascinating  guys, but his direction was impeccable.
Watch for the deafened shoot-out  which takes place.
It is the second great shooting sequence of the  summer taking the lead of Face/Off's Over the Rainbow.
Still, when the  only flaw is that it was too short, it says something for the movie.
Come Oscar time, I ask that the Academy look favorably on  Stallone, recognize Liotta, and give Cop Land a much-deserved  nomination.
Its not one of the immortals, but its one to see again and  again.  . . 
