Cast: Bruce Willis, Toni Collette, Olivia Williams, Haley Joel Osment, Donnie Wahlberg  Written and Directed by: M. Night Shyamalan  Running Time: 107 minutes . When I saw The Sixth Sense for the first time during its theatrical run, I knew ahead of time that there was something amazing coming.
I knew that there was this fantastic ending that I was told I'd love.
So even though I was looking for something, when the end twist finally presented itself it was one of those moments where my jaw actually dropped.
I'm not saying that as a cliché... my mouth literally fell open in amazement.
So now, by watching it again for a second time to review the DVD release, comes the joy of getting to go back and pick up on all the little details I missed the first time around (because I wasn't even looking for them).
As a result, the first hour of the film (which I originally felt was dull and stretched too thin because we were all awaiting the inevitable "I see dead people" plot revelation anyway) is now completely absorbing.
I originally gave the film four stars, but upon a second viewing, I've bumped it up to five.
The Sixth Sense is fascinating now, from start to finish.
It's one of the best told stories I've seen in a long, long time.
The performances in this film are fantastic.
In particular, young Haley Joel Osment is the best child actor I think I've seen on film since the kids from the early scenes of It's A Wonderful Life (scenes that ANY child actor should be forced to watch by the way).
Forget his Best Supporting Oscar nod, he's the star of this film... he should have been up for Best Actor.
The Sixth Sense:Collector's Edition is available on DVD from Hollywood Pictures Home Video (a department of Di$ney).
It contains the film in its original theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1 (enhanced for 16x9 televisions) and Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround Sound.
Also included are several documentary segments covering many aspects of the film's evolution, deleted scenes, and the usual cast and crew information.
The original theatrical trailer and two TV spots are also on the disc.
The making of segments are great, especially considering the fact that Di$ney never EVER does extras.
Best of all is the "Rules and Clues" segment where many of the major plot points of the film are presented at once.
Also, the deleted scenes are all presented with introductions by writer/director M. Night Shyamalan.
Other discs usually throw deleted scenes out there and we have no idea where they were supposed to fall in the grand scheme of the film.
One deleted scene, an extension of the film's finale, packs quite an emotional wallop and I actually prefer it to the film's actual ending.
But just when it seems as though Di$ney does the right thing with their DVD content, they manage to screw things up even worse.
Apparently their new policy is to attach a plethora of upcoming Disney trailers at the beginning of each DVD that you CANNOT SKIP PAST to go directly to the main menu.
You instead have to watch them or you can fast forward through them (which means yes, you're still watching them).
Making it even more absurd is the fact that you are given an option on the menu screen to watch these trailers AGAIN.
I'm all for extra trailers on a disc, but I'd like it to be up to me if I decide to watch them or not.
Hey Di$ney, when will the amount of money you guys have be enough?
When will it be enough so that you can start acting like the other major studios?
Aside from that minor nuisance, The Sixth Sense on DVD is a great addition to your library.
You get one of the very best movies of the 1990's along with some good extras.
I'll give Di$ney the credit it deserves here... they're on the right path.
I hope they don't blow it.
[PG-13]. Reviewed by Chuck Dowling - chuckd21@fdn.com The Jacksonville Film Journal - http://www.jaxfilmjournal.com/. . 
