"Primary Colors" * * * * (out of four) Starring John Travolta, Emma Thompson, Billy Bob Thornton, Kathy Bates, Adrian Lester, Maura Tierney and Larry Hagman  Directed by Mike Nichols  Rated R for frequent profanity and mature themes  Running 140 minutes . As good a film as Mike Nichols' new political comedy "Primary Colors" is, I think it is very likely that many people will find it somewhat dissapointing.
The reason for this is simple: it is not nearly as satirical and vicious as people will be expecting from a movie mocking President Clinton.
So let's get one thing straight right off the bat; if you want to see a film in the nature of "Dr. Strangelove" or "Network", filled with blistering social comment, don't see this movie.
Having said that, I still believe this is a superb movie (perhaps because I wasn't expecting it to be biting political commentary) that takes what could have turned out as a run-of-the-mill, "Saturday Night Live"-esque spoof of Clinton and turned it into a fascinating, soft-hearted look into what it would probably be like being involved in a political campaign.
Is it as great as the films I mentioned above?
Of course not.
Those are timeless classics.
But when being judged as an informative comedy about the inner-workings of politics, it really comes off as quite an exceptional film.
The story, of course, revolves around the presidential campaign of Gov.
Jack Stanton (an obvious representation of Bill Clinton), a dim-witted but smooth talking and good hearted good 'ol southern boy, more intersted in eating apple fritters than making public appearences.
And you can't really have a character based on Clinton without having him screw around with other women besides his wife, can you?
So, naturally, he has sex behind his wife's back with virtually anything that moves (it's nice to finally have some realism in mainstream movies, isn't it?).
His wife (Emma Thompson, flawlessly shedding her British accent) is completely oblivious to his sexual escapades, too busy running the campaign to even care if she did know.
Pretty soon, Stanton starts to encounter some pretty sticky situations, one of which involoves a Gennifer Flowers-like hairdresser who claims that the two have been carrying on a long-term affair and even says she has the tapes to prove it!
Is she telling the truth, or merely trying to get publicity?
The scene where we find out the truth is one of the film's best scenes (there is some competition here).
But even though it may sound like the movie is starring John Travolta and Emma Thompson, the real star of the show is Adrian Lester as Harry Burton, a reluctant but loyal political addvisor.
Amazingly enough, Lester manages to carry the movie himself, with Travolta and Thompson taking on what almost seem like supporting roles.
Not that they aren't in it that much, it's just that it's easier to identify with Harry Burton and his problems that that of the canidate and his wife's.
The film, after all, is seen through Burton perspective.
Some other members of Stanton's political team include Billy Bob Thornton as a scene-stealing Richard Jemmons, the governor's redneck, skirt chasing strategist, Maura Tireney as the secretary-like Daisy Green and Kathy Bates as the feisty lesbian Libby Holden, fresh out of a mental hospital.
The only actor who is really wasted in a part is Stacey Edwards (remember her Oscar-callibar preformance in last year's "In the Company of Men"?
) as Libby's live-in (*cough, cough*) assistent.
She's only in a few scenes in the whole film.
It's also very fun to try to match certain key characters to their real-life counterparts.
It's only obvious that the Stantons are supposed to be the President and First Lady, but "Primary Colors" also takes some clever jabs at such figures as James Carville (represented here by Richard Jemmons) and Betsey Wright (Libby Holden in the film).
There's is also alot to be said about Mike Nichols' brilliant direction (making a nice rebound after the disappointing "Birdcage").
After about twenty minutes into the movie, I stopped seeing Jack Stanton as Bill Clinton incarnate, and started looking at him as a real person with real problems.
As much of a screw-up as the guy is, I actually started to care about him.
And any movie that can make you care about a politician has got to be good.
Check out Jason's "Filmaholics Anonumous" website at http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475. . 
