Cast: Michael Madsen, Natasha Henstridge, Marg Helgenberger, Justin Lazard, Mykelti Williamson, George Dzundza, James Cromwell Director: Peter Medak Screenplay: Chris Brancato Australian theatrical release date: July 9. The premise of Species 2 is not much different from the first: a hybrid alien/human is on the rampage in the US, screwing any and everyone it encounters in order to reproduce.
Wisely put by Michael Madsen, "It could fuck the human race out of existence.
"  And if this isn't an example of cinematic dopiness in its prime, I don't know what is.
Returning from Species is Natasha Henstridge, playing a half-human, half-alien government creation named Eve.
Also returning is Dr. Laura Baker (Marg Helgenberger), who conducts cruel experiments on Eve, and Press Lennox (Madsen), an ex-military assassin.
Lennox joins with astronaut Dennis Gamble (Mykelti Williamson), and chases another astronaut, Patrick Ross (Justin Lazard), who has been infected with alien DNA on a recent trip to Mars.
Patrick has cross-country sex, impregnating hookers and, for that matter, almost anyone he encounters.
Thus aliens burst out of the women's stomachs, and in no time Patrick's hideaway is chock a block with cocoons, ready to spit out fully grown, deadly reproductive killers.
Generally speaking, Species was a largely entertaining piece.
Henstridge's seductive alien character Sil was tantalizing to watch; she was dazzling when she took her shirt off, and spine chilling at the same time.
Though it sometimes pushed itself to the edge of acceptance, most of Species was guiltily enjoyable as a popcorn flick.
Dopey, yes.
But obliging and exciting - and that's what really mattered.
Species 2 quickly finds itself full of the cliches and witless formulas that its predecessor only narrowly avoided.
The characters appear as lifeless textbook creations, the action scenes look amateur and the special effects are dull and somber.
It's a pity that the screenplay by Chris Brancato (Hoodlum) has not been able to defy all odds, and make a film with a silly initial idea become a film with a worthwhile Sci Fi flavour, letting us suspend disbelief for the parts that don't make much sense.
But Brancato's writing is so consistently sluggish, so consistently stale that it ends up not only being a terrible Sci Fi, but also a terrible drama and a terrible action adventure.
But whatever it is, Species 2 is definitely not a terrible comedy.
It's just a shame that the most funny parts - and boy, there are quite a few of them - are it's most important, "serious" parts.
At the media screening, howls of laughter flew over the audience; with seemingly everyone eager to mock the film's pitiful dialogue.
It may not have been widely enjoyed, but people sure did enjoy not enjoying it.
Simply, because it is that bad.
I cannot understand why James Crowell decided to play the degrading part of Patrick's father, Senator Ross.
It's hard to believe that this is the same man who was Oscar nominated for his memorable performance in Babe, and who delivered a dynamic role in L.A.
Confidential.
And for that matter, why Ben Kingsley played one of the main parts in Species.
As for the other cast members, Michael Madsen looks good on the screen in his relaxed role, but there's not much else he can do with a script as bogged down as this.
Justin Lazard is as stiff as a board and twice as boring, whilst Natasha Henstridge performs adequately but ultimately serves simply as something nice to look at.
I can't say that I couldn't have seen this coming.
When I informed my local video clerk that the film was a disaster, he replied "You mean you needed to see it to know that?
"  But even if, like me, you did enjoy Species, some valuable advice would be to stay far away from its sequel.
Species 2 is without a doubt the worst written, and most horrifically sluggish film so far this year.
Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any inquiries or feedback. . 
