DIRECTED BY: John Woo WRITTEN BY: Ronald D. Moore CAST: Tom Cruise, Thandie Newton, Ving Rhames, Dougray Scott, Anthony Hopkins, Rade Serbedzija. MPAA: Rated PG-13 for intense sequences of violent action and some sensuality.
Runtime: USA:123. "The search for a hero begins with something that every hero requires, a villain.
"  - Vladimir Nekhorovich, "Mission: Impossible 2" . This is summer, and it is time for summer movies.
Time for super sized popcorns.
Time to have fun.
And no summer is a summer without great action films with terrible villains and noble heroes.
That's why Hollywood produces hundreds of clichés every year to satisfy the infinite demands of the hungry audience.
To create a refreshing and original action film in the midst of clones, is a mission: impossible.
And it is a mission that director John Woo chooses to accept.
In a secret laboratory scientists, searching for a miraculous cure, have created a monstrous virus, Chimera, that is capable of infecting the entire planet.
Realizing the incredible danger of their discovery, the project leader, Vladimir Nekhorvich (Rade Sherbedgia) sends a cryptic message to his contact - special agent Ethan Hunt (Tom Cruise) of IMS Secret Service, asking for protection.
If Chimera would fall into the wrong hands, the consequences would be catastrophic.
Hunt's mission is to retrieve a sample of Chimera.
This mission is made impossible due to the fact that he is not the only person after samples of this lethal disease.
Among others is a former IMF agent (Dougray Scott) who has already managed to steal the cure called 'Bellerophon' and now need 'Chimera' in order to pressure the governments and acquire complete economic control over the civilized world.
In order to infiltrate and locate the terrorist group he relies on the help of an international thief Nyah (Thandie Newton) of whom he quickly develops a love interest.
Time is not only running out for Agent Hunt to find and destroy 'Chimera' before the terrorists get their hands on it, but he must also find 'Bellerophon' so as to save his love interest who has already become infected by the disease from a terrible and rapid death.
This is a great action film created by the master of the genre.
It's not that the script is complex and intelligent or performances great.
It is filled with most ordinary type of action sequences: gun fights, car chases, combat scenes.
But John Woo manages to transform these ancient clichés into sheer eye candy.
The action scenes that looked dull in 'The World Is Not Enough', explode into colorful fireworks before your eyes in this energy packed thrill ride.
In fact every element that didn't work in 'WINE' is flourishing here.
This is James Bond resurrected.
This is action revitalized.
Every necessary element is carefully inserted at the right time in the right moment.
There is enough mystery and suspense for any audience member, and as the beautiful locations are frequently changing from elegant Madrid to beautiful Sydney, the intensity is growing.
Woo directs with such energy and elegance that no matter how silly the plot, you're fascinated, intrigued and stunned.
Cruise is a believable hero and the best of substitutes for James Bond.
He has always been a brave actor, willing to take chances in choosing risky parts.
In the latest years, his attempts have paid off.
With his several serious roles, one in Kubrick's 'Eyes Wide Shut' and another in 'Magnolia' (which earned him an Oscar nomination), Cruise has established himself with the critics as a serious actor, capable of virtually anything.
Now, with 'M:I2', he can become the hero of the box-office.
He not only stars, but also produces Woo's latest venture into the world of filmmaking.
This is Cruise-control at its best.
A truly delightfully energetic performance, that makes Bond look like a schoolboy.
Dougray Scott is Hunt's perfect nemesis.
From the beginning of the film it is established that he is one of the best agents that IMF has to offer.
He has even replaced Hunt on several missions, before he turned to the 'dark side'.
His frightening ease and cool ruthlessness, make him lethal, capable of anything.
Thandie Newton ('Beloved') is likewise a nice choic e are not required, her purpose is simply looking beautiful, which she does.
Rade Sherbedgia and Anthony Hopkins appear in small refreshing cameo roles.
But it is Cruise who really contribute more to the film than anyone else.
It is a much more explosive performance, than in De Palma's first installment.
And the film itself has changed along side with the main character.
It has got bigger muscles.
Woo has transformed De Palma's quieter thriller into a high energy, adrenaline-pumping adventure.
The film is drained in Woo's trademarks; deceiving appearances, mysterious events, and incredibly elegant action sequences (the famous pigeon scene is a true wonder).
He has no respect for the laws of physics and in his world the characters virtually fly in slow motion across the screen.
Hans Zimmer's techno score, Jeffrey L. Kimball's graceful cinematography and Steven Kemper's fast paced editing are all achievements of the highest artistic level that compensate for the almost complete lack of interesting dialogue.
But John Woo covers the plot up with so much beauty, elegance and energy that the plot holes and logical embarrassments explode before our eyes.
The fans of the original might complain, but for me this is a much more successful interpretation, because it doesn't try to seem more clever than it is.
It doesn't try to be anything else but pure and delicate action film.
And though it is not the best that this summer has to offer ('Gladiator' was an overall grander achievement), this is action on a grand scale.
Consider it mission accomplished.. . 
