URBAN LEGEND Reviewed by Jamie Peck. The movie takes place on the creepy campus of New England's Pendleton  College, where some freaked-out student or faculty member has begun a  murder spree (check), offing victims according to those titular tales -  most of them campfire and sleepover favorites - that doubly function as  social parables (check).
Our heroine is beautiful, brainy upperclassman  Natalie (Alicia Witt, check), who may hold the key to cracking the  mystery in a dark secret buried deep in her past (check).
Our hero is  handsome journalism major Paul (Jared Leto, check), a studious reporter  for the school paper who's determined to get this scoop no matter what  the price (check).
Carnage ensues (check, check, check).
Director Jamie Blanks and screenwriter Silvio Horta start better than  they finish, with an extended "Scream"-esque prologue that depicts the  film's first casualty, as a nervous little missy (Natasha Gregson  Wagner) on a late-night commute loses her head in a vivid variation on  the killer-in-the-backseat urban legend.
Yikes.
Most of the time,  however, the filmmakers' scare tactics include silly false jumps and  absurd red herrings; just about everyone around Pendleton, for example,  owns and wears our psycho's hooded Nanook of the North-type costume.
True, every movie in this genre relies on faux frights to generate  suspense, but "Urban Legend" plays with them far too often to be very  effective.
Yet another disappointing facet of "Urban Legend" is exactly how it  employs the villain's violent gimmick.
Only a handful of the urban  legends he brings to life seem genuinely inspired, and all the leftovers  don't seem to fully realize their grisly potential.
Horta leaves a lot  of possibilities unexamined, and ends up having the killer simply  splatter coed guts across dorm walls with a large axe when he runs out  of ideas.
The campy ending also doesn't satisfy; "Urban Legend"'s  unmasked villain not only seems physically incapable of pulling off an  early murder involving a a tree, a noose and a moving car, but they also  explain their master plan to the incompasitated good guy with ...  _a_slide_show_?
At least the motive makes too-pat sense and there are some good in-jokes  stretched throughout the movie's 98-minute running time; co-star Joshua  Jackson, of "Dawson's Creek" fame, exits "Urban Legend" earlier than  expected, but not before turning on a radio to the opening notes of  Paula Cole's "I Don't Want to Wait.
" These postmodern references, along  with the solid acting (particulary Witt and Michael Rosenbaum as a  party-hardy frat boy), sleek production design and clever concept, add  up to a so-so slasher film that falls a little short of delivering the  goods.
But delivering isolated scares is another matter entirely.
Let's  just say that, thanks to "Urban Legend," this critic will henceforth be  keeping a close eye on the backseat of his car.. . 
