Barry (Tom Green) has been a student at Ithica University for eight years.
Today, he is leading a tour group around the campus and displaying his lack of any knowledge about his school.
In order to keep his audience entertained he must tell a story about the bizarre events surrounding a road trip taken by his best friend, Josh Porter (Breckin Meyer).
Josh has been dating Tiffany (Rachel Blanchard) since he was about ten years old, and they have maintained their relationship even though they go to different colleges.
However, when he suspects Tiffany is cheating on him, he decides to pursue Beth (Amy Smart), a girl he has had his eye on for some time.
Beth is a willing participant, and the two create a home video of their first time together.
Unfortunately, Josh finds that Tiffany has not been cheating on him, and his friend Rubin (Paulo Costanzo) has accidentaly mailed the tape to Tiffany.
Josh, Rubin, and two other friends, E.L. (Seann William Scott) and Kyle (DJ Qualls), now must get to Tiffany's college before the tape reaches her, and she finds out about Josh's infidelity.
At long last, a film in the tradition of 1978's "Animal House" has reached theaters.
"Road Trip" is the kind of raunchy, hysterical, at times disgusting comedy that "American Pie" wanted to be.
A warning to everyone: if you don't like your humor as obscene and revolting as is humanly possible, stay away from this movie.
Some of the film's more abhorent parts include a scene where Kyle eats a piece of French toast that has been through a journey no food should go through.
This is the kind of humor which will make you either cringe away from the screen in disgust, or cringe from the scene while laughing hysterically.
In fact, you will probably react to the entire movie in one of these two ways.
Most of you have, no doubt, seen the film's previews in which Tom Green (The Tom Green Show) sticks a live rat in his mouth to encourage a snake to eat its dinner.
This scene would already be quite funny; but Green is such an insane looking actor that he makes you believe he might actually eat that rat on camera.
Again, if you don't find the thought of that scene at all amusing, stay away from this movie.
The acting in a movie like "Road Trip" isn't particularly important since the actors are only present to have disgusting things happen to them.
I was pleasantly surprised to find that most of the film's cast members possess some wonderful comic timing.
Tom Green isn't actually given a very significant role in the film, as he is only present in short scenes.
Breckin Meyer ("Go") does a great job as the one fairly normal guy in the film.
Amy Smart ("Varsity Blues") gives a wonderfully frantic performance, spending most of the film traveling from college to college, trying to track down Josh and figure out why he suddenly left her.
The two best performances come from Seann William Scott ("American Pie") and newcomer DJ Qualls.
Scott gives a wonderful, over-the-top performance, playing the most psychotic member of the road trip party.
His best scene involves him aquiring the group some new transportation from a blind woman.
DJ Qualls is a rather unique looking actor.
He looks to be over six feet tall, and appears to weigh less than one hundred pounds.
The entire movie is almost worthwhile just for a hilariously revolting scene in which he is with a girl for the first time.
Unfortunately, "Road Trip" certainly isn't without its weaknesses.
While it may be hilarious for the majority of its running time, it starts to lag a bit by the end.
Things also get a bit too serious and sentimental towards the end.
Points like college kids trying to live up to their parents expectations, and the difficulties of college students finding their ways in life are suddenly brought up in a movie where such messages don't really fit in.
Thankfully, Todd Phillips (who also produced the Norm MacDonald vehicle, "Screwed") pulls things back together for the last ten minutes, and the movie ends on a suitably funny and irreverent note.
Watch for amusing cameos by Fred Ward ("Tremors") as Kyle's father and Andy Dick (television's "News Radio") as a motel clerk, who needs some serious lessons in customer relations.
I'd recommend "Road Trip" to anyone who loved and misses movies like "Animal House", and to fans of Tom Green.
Despite a relatively small part, he provides some of the film's funniest moments.
The movie runs 91 minutes, and I give it a well earned four out of five stars.
Any past movies you want me to review?
Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net Past reviews can be found at either: http://www.dependentfilms.net or http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem. * * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.. . 
