Disclamer: This review may divulge a few more plot details than you'd like to hear.
If you wish to view the film, you may wish to skip this review.
Besides, you can't really be prepared for your experience when watching this film anyway.
Starring Christian Bale, Willam Dafoe, Chloe Sevigny, and Reese Witherspoon.
American Psycho (2000) tells the tale of Patrick Bateman, a 27-year old yuppy with an upscale apartment, rows of suits, a really nice watch, abs of steel, and a bunch of dead body parts decorating his apartment.
The film has been a subject of controversy over the past little while.
First of all, it is an adaptation of a book of the same name, which has been reportedly banned, and was also the book read by notorious Canadian serial killer Paul Bernardo (proving that yes, movies, books, and video games will turn an average joe into a cold blooded killer).
And then there's the little matter of a sex scene that has to be trimmed in order to avoid the dreaded NC17 rating.
After watching it, I'm still left with the nagging question of whether I liked the film or not.
American Psycho works on multiple levels.
On one level, it is a bloody slasher pic on par with Texas Chainsaw Massacre (which, if I'm not mistaken, is actually featured on a television in the background as the protagonist does situps).
On another level, it is a witty satire along the lines of RoboCop and Fight Club.
On another level, it is a hilarious comedy that makes you feel really bad for laughing.
But does it work as a combination on those levels?
The film takes place in the late 1980s and deals with the greed and materialism often associated with the "Me" generation, where everybody is so absorbed by their new CDs, their fancy business cards, their brand name stereo equipment, their cellphones, and their ability to get reservations at the fanciest restaurants.
The film attempts to make a social commentary about that, telling about how one man who has it all -- beautiful women, money, all the coke he can snort -- is dissatisfied by everything material and must kill people in order to be content.
Hence, we are treated to really graphic showings of him killing people with reckless abandon.
This is done in such an over-the-top manner that, a lot of the time, it just leaves you in stitches.
One scene involves Patrick inviting a co-worker rival to his apartment, which he has decorated with newspaper plastic sheets to cover the furniture and carpet.
He then pulls out a shiny axe, which he uses to hack his co-worker into itty bitty bits to the tune of Huey Lewis and the News' "Hip to be Square".
Another scene involves him wielding a chainsaw while chasing a prostitute, while completely naked.
These scenes are really sick and difficult to watch, yet you can't stop laughing no matter how hard you try.
As well, there is the scene that had to be trimmed for American audiences (I love being Canadian!).
In one scene, Patrick has picked up two prostitutes and is having a menage-a-trois.
But, all throughout the experience, he his actually staring at himself in the mirror, flexing his muscles and posing.
Towards the conclusion, the audience is given a Fight Club-esque plot twist, leaving the audience members confused as to the homicidal nature of the character.
This does make for an interesting message -- does having far too many material things ultimately lead to a hollow life, which in the end leads to something close to psychosis?
The unfortunate thing about the film is the way it handles the social message.
The film practically jams it down your throat, with constant mentions of material things and people's attachment to them (ie: Patrick goes through his daily routine and lists off the products he uses in minute detail).
>From a technical standpoint, the film is really well done.
With a $7M budget (half of which was recouped in the first weekend of release), the film has beautifully designed sets, good attention to detail, interesting camera angles, and is a good film to look at and listen to.
But the ambiguous ending leaves you a bit cold.
I do recommend this film, but mostly on the basis of Christian Bale's acting and the fact that this is not a film where one can just be told to like it or not.
This is the type of film where one has to see it for themselves to make their own judgement.
-- . . 
