Starring: Jack Johnson (Will Robinson), Gary Oldman (Dr. Zachary Smith), William Hurt (John Robinson), Matt LeBlanc (Major Don West), Lacey Chabert (Penny Robinson), Mimi Rogers (Maureen Robinson), Heather Graham (Judy Robinson), Dick Tufeld (voice of Robot). Directed by: Stephen Hopkins, Written by: Akiva Goldsman . Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, strong language, and sexual situations. "We're lost... aren't we?
" - Penny Robinson. Yes, the Robinson family is lost again, with Dr. Smith, Major West, and, of course, the Robot, all in tow.
You probably know about this, though, since it's been advertised since last August or so.
It's been advertised as much as your typical effects-heavy summer film blast, but it sure as hell isn't summer yet.
At any rate, as you can probably guess, LOST IN SPACE is based on the TV series of the same name that aired in the 1960s.
And, as such, the plot has a number of similar aspects in it.
In the future, the Earth is dying.
In only two more decades, it will be uninhabitable for human life.
However, one planet has been found that can be colonized to save the human race - Alpha Prime.
The planet is ten years away however - and that's where the Robinson family comes in.
The Robinsons, their pilot Major Don West, and a defensive robot are to take the ten year journey (spent in cryo-sleep - by the humans at least) on board the Jupiter 2 to Alpha Prime, and build a hypergate there.
This gate can then be used along with the identical gate built next to Earth so allow the citizens of our lovely blue planet to transport instantaneously to Alpha Prime.
It all seems like a fine plan, but no one counts on Dr. Zachary Smith, who, working in cooperation with terrorist faction, attempts to sabotage the Robinsons' mission.
Unfortunately for Smith, he's caught on board the Jupiter 2 when it takes off, and, thanks to his own efforts, he, along with the Robinsons, West, and, yes, the Robot, are now "lost in space.
" And I'm sure you know what that leads to.... "Danger Will Robinson, Danger!
" - Robot. And then the real questions arise.
What will happen when the Robinsons become lost?
What will they do with Dr. Smith?
What kind of strange dangers will they encounter out in the unexplored regions of the galaxy?
And what happens when talented director Stephen Hopkins and lord-of-destruction Akiva Goldsman team up to create a big-budget, major release, highly-anticipated film?
LOST IN SPACE swings wildly around the quality spectrum.
It has moments of intense coolness, as well as moments of intense idiocy.
In the end, though, despite cheesy aspects, I had a good time.
At first I felt like I had taken part in a guilty pleasure - perhaps I had no business enjoying a movie with the problems that it has.
But then, why should I feel guilty?
I had fun, and damn it, that's gotta be a good thing.
The direction is well handled, thanks to Stephen Hopkins, who worked well on films like PREDATOR 2 (1990) and THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS (1996).
The production design also looks great.
Gorgeous settings fill the screen.
Details down to the costumes - even those slightly BATMAN & ROBIN-like rubberish cryo-suits - looked good.
And the Robot was just plain nifty.
The special effects are incredible all around, from start to finish.
Well, okay, there's on exception to that, but I'll get to that in a second.
The sci-fi elements are, for the large part, well handled, even when they could turn out convoluted.
The things the Robinsons encounter are always interesting and fun (or creepy), whether animate or inanimate.
Well, okay, there's one exception to the "animate" part, but I'll get to that in a second.
Time is actually taken in this film to get to know the characters a little better.
Even in the midst of their problems, we learn a little more about their personalities.
A couple of these scenes are cheesy, but largely, they fit in, and help move the story along well, as well as helping us to care more about John, Will, Maureen and the gang, all the way down to dear old Robot.
As for the performances, the real find is Jack Johnson as Will Robinson.
Child actors often come across as annoying, but Johnson is extremely good in this role.
Gary Oldman's Dr. Smith is often somewhat of a friendly villian, but whatever take on the role that he's aiming for, he does it very well, as you'd expect.
William Hurt and Mimi Rogers are solid as the Robinson parents, with Hurt doing well as a busy-yet-caring father (almost becoming a film cliche) and Rogers... well, not having enough screen time.
Chabert also does nicely in the role of young Penny, but, this being the first time I've heard her voice, I was pretty surprised at the distrubingly inhuman crazed-chipmunk-that-rode-the-bat-out-of-hell high-pitch intonation in her voice.
And can someone explain why the special effects boys decided to obviously enhance her cleavage?
Matt LeBlanc, as West, was also surprising, but in a good manner.
He fit exactly as he should have into the role of the good Major, and, even though he didn't stray terribly far from his character Joey on "Friends," he might be able to have a real film career - something I always thought only Courtney Cox and Matthew Perry (okay, maybe Jennifer Aniston... ) would muster.
Dick Tufeld's vocal work on the Robot is something fans will recognize from the original series, as also Tufeld voiced the original Robot.
His work here is an indispensable asset to the production, and really drives up the old fun factor.
The Robot turns out to be not just another effect, but another good character.
But what about Heather Graham?
Well, this is the first film I've seen Graham in.
Maybe it's the fact that her role was underwritten, but Graham doesn't show much talent here.
She seems to have been hired largely for her looks.
Of all the cast members, she is the most painful to watch, mostly since too much of her time is taken up serving one of the film's lamer subplots.
And, as such, she's going to serve as my segue way into the bad elements of the movie.
That lame subplot is the flirtation between Don West and Judy.
It's pointless, it's stupid, it's badly written, and it really didn't need to be there.
It even leads into a short sexual-tease scene that feels very out of place in a film that's otherwise fine for most families (as long as they don't mind the profanity).
But there the subplot is, and it takes up screen time, as well as allowing for two or three fair jokes.
I guess we have to let it live.
Remember my certain "animate" problem?
And my one special effects problem?
Well, if you want to know what it is that manages to inexplicably be the only bad effect in the film, as well as be a slightly lame subplot in itself, I say only this: monkeyish Ewok-spawn must die.
The first half hour of the film gives a couple of indications that you might be lined up for something unsettlingly campy.
Never fear, though, as things definitely get better once people get frozen on the Jupiter 2.
And, yes, the dialogue reaches a number of points where it sounds overly dumb.
But most of the time, things are alright, and even when it sound stupid, it's not so bad that it can't be forgiven.
Despite all this, though, the film is a good time.
Cheesy at times, foolish at times, beautiful at times, unrelentingly cool at others, it's a mixed bag that finally stacks up to be a fine show.
Akiva Goldsman, who killed BATMAN & ROBIN (1997) and damaged BATMAN FOREVER (1995) seems to be going up, and maybe, with work, will be a solid screenwriter at long last.
Or hey, maybe not.
Just stay away from the superhero franchises, Akiva.
Hopkins is still solid.
The cast is good - Johnson is a real find - and the effects/settings/production designs are frequently dazzling.
It has humor, adventure, and creepiness.
It has good, and bad, and luckily for us all, the good wins out.
Yes, this is LOST IN SPACE.
There's been a lot of films created based on TV shows.
And for every funny THE ADDAMS FAMILY (1991) there's a painful CAR 54, WHERE ARE YOU?
(1994).
And, sure, you can't expect them all to turn out as good as THE FUGITIVE (1993) or even MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE (1996).
But LOST IN SPACE manages to join the ranks of the more entertaining movies in the genre.
It's not the best, but it's one of the good ones, and I have no problem with seeing more of the Robinson famly in the future.
"Get lost," and enjoy.
"Breathe, Penny, breathe.
" - Will Robinson. . 
