The 1963 thriller The Haunting (based on the book by Shirley Jackson) was a psychological thriller that creeped deep within the crevices of the human brain, exploring mental terror and ghostly happenings, seeing the film remade is frightening.
No, it's not because of the movie, but the fact that all of that is lost.
Doctor David Marrow (Liam Neeson) has gathered three insomniacs in the creepy Hill House, where no one lives closer than town.
So no one will be able to help them, at night, in the dark (or so tells Mrs. Dudley, the housekeeper.
) What he tells them is a study to help them is actually his own five year study into fear.
For what reason he does this, it's uncertain, but it's a pretty flimsy premise that doesn't work very well.
Theo, (Zeta-Jones) Eleanor, (Taylor) and Luke (Owen Wilson) are the lucky patients.
Eleanor begins receiving frightening visions, someone writes 'WELCOME HOME ELEANOR' on a wall in blood, she begins seeing bloody footprints, and spies a body hanging from the greenhouse rafters.
At first the group believes that she is in this for the attention, but they soon find that it is something completely different.
The film is sort of an anti-Blair Witch, the first three fourths of the film don't show what is after the people in the house, and it's a great effect.
Almost as great as the special effects which could have dominated the film, but remain suprisingly restrained until the end.
Of course, the good old computer animators had to spoil everything and show us who the villain is, what he looks like, his hair color, hobbies, etc.
It is kind of fun to see the plot unfold, but it becomes predictable very quickly.
While the film has some good moments (including an excellent performance from Taylor, who was a good choice, even if most of the audience has probably never heard of her) the film still remains incredibly flawed.
Flashy special effects and a good cast can't really help The Haunting (especially for those that saw the original) and for that I give it ** 1/2 stars.. . 
