The release of Stir of Echoes is a stroke of good luck.
Audiences have been widely flocking to the supernatural thriller The Sixth Sense, which is essentially a ghost story with a unique twist.
Perhaps they're in the mood for another offering from beyond the grave.
If this is the case, Stir of Echoes is just the film everyone is looking for - it's a masterful creation brimming with moments that succeed in causing goosebumps.
Even if The Sixth Sense continues to conquer the box office, this second offering still manages to hook you from minute one and never lose it's grip on suspense.
Kevin Bacon (after baring all in Wild Things) plays Tom Witzky, a telephone lineman who lives a settled life with his wife Maggie (Kathryn Erbe) and son Jake (Zachary David Cope).
One night, during a neighborhood keg party, Maggie's sister Lisa (Illeana Douglas) describes to the group the magical art of hypnosis.
Tom (who is drunk at the time), encourages Lisa to hypnotize him for the group's entertainment.
The method in which writer/director David Keopp (Jurassic Park) presents the scene is both intriguing and expertly executed; a model for other films to follow.
After the hypnotism, Tom begins to see frightening images in his mind.
These all seem to be centered around the spirit of a young girl, who appears in front of eyes in the most surprising places.
Tom thinks he is losing his mind, but he turns to his little boy for an interesting discovery: Jake has the ability to see the ghost as well.
Tom realizes that he is chosen for something important.
What this is, he doesn't exactly know.
As a ghost story, Stir of Echoes is both frightening and refreshing.
Keopp has balanced the familiar elements well, finishing with a product that glues the attentive viewer to their seat for the entire running time.
The mood is established early, and the sheer professionalism never drops even a smidgen.
Everything involving the set-up of the film is masterful: swooping and winding camera angles that recall Stanley Kubrick's best work, believable performances in the key roles of Tom and Maggie, and some genuinely effective atmosphere that builds efficiently for a few great scares.
Adapting from Richard Matheson's novel, Keopp's material isn't always on target, but his technical presentation is absolutely perfect.
In the lead role, Bacon delivers a very solid performance.
His character is easier to relate to than most, and because of this, we accept his unusual situation with ease.
In supporting roles, Illeana Douglas and Kevin Dunn are both immensely reliable, as is the talented Erbe and young Cope.
Stir of Echoes marks the second good performance from a child actor in the past month - although Haley Joel Osment's in The Sixth Sense is more than just 組ood', it's deserving of award recognition.
While first I must cross my fingers that Haley gets a nomination at Oscar time, I've got to commend Cope's wonderful presentation also.
I mentioned earlier that the set-up of Stir of Echoes is impeccable.
The second half, I'm afraid, isn't quite as good.
Keopp begins to lean toward more conventional thinking, and the momentum begins to fade slightly.
Still, you've got to hand it to him.
Where the director shows a weakness in one area, he compensates for it in another.
His screenplay is always well-written, and although some audience members may predict the ending before it eventually rolls around, Keopp's marvelous direction always has us strapped in.
Not only is this an intellectually superior thriller, but everything about it is distinctly eye-catching.
The use of the colors red and white is effective (particularly the first, used during a lot in instant flashes).
As we are taken along Tom's bizarre breakdown, the surprises are clever and consistent.
The film has a brain, and uses it well, making for a unique and frightening experience at the cinema.
1999 SUMMER MOVIE ROUND-UP  http://moviething.com/members/movies/movieviews/index137shtml. . 
