In this often-advertised sequel to 'Austin Powers,' there's a scene in which  Scott Evil (Seth Green), son of Dr.
Evil, pretends to sneeze, emitting the  word "Ripoff!
"  Oddly enough, it's the self-reflexive catchword of the film,  from the opening moments with the James Bond theme and 'Star Wars' narrative  script, to the wide-open-for-sequel ending.
Worse, all kinds of products  are forced upon the script and our eyes.
There's also no doubt the film will do well at the box office.
A theater  full of kids 12 through 18 or so - the buck-spending target audience - made  this no secret.
Clearly, what we demand is gross-out humor, and "The Spy  Who Shagged Me' does this best.
I have to hand it to Mike Meyers:  some of  the grossest moments in comedy appear in this flick.
Meyers' alter-ego "Fat  Bastard" is involved in fat jokes and poop jokes that had the audience  roaring.
And the part that made me laugh the loudest was a scatological  tour-de-force.
The premise:  not much of one.
Austin Powers (Meyers)  is single and  swinging again, but his nemesis Dr.
Evil is out to thwart him however he  can.
Evil has a tiny clone he calls "Mini Me" (Verne Troyer), and the two  of them time-travel back to 1969, their motive to steal the "mojo" - the  sexual life-force - from the cryogenically-frozen Austin Powers.
A minor  drawback to this premise is that we miss Robert Wagner's excellent henchman,  Number 2, for the rest of the film.
Rob Lowe, however, does play a right-on  imitation as Number 2 30 years younger.
You guessed it:  Powers follows the evil-doers back to the stereotypical  psychedelic decade.
There he runs into Felicity Shagwell (Heather Graham),  an agent on Austin's side.
The trouble is, even though Felicity  inexplicably falls for the crooked-toothed Don Juan, there can't be any  "shagging," as Powers' mojo has been stolen.
What complicates the plot is  Evil's plan to deploy a phallic-shaped laser to wipe out Washington D. C.   Will Austin save the world?
Beat Dr.
Evil?
Most importantly, will he get  the girl?
As the title character, Mike Meyers delivers on the flat-out silliness we've  come to expect of him.
He has a knack of making even badly written dialogue  funny.
The way he holds his mouth, the way he points his gaze  And  portraying the Scottish "Fat Bastard" as well as Dr.
Evil gets him triple  the giggles.
Something I found annoying, though, was how easy it is for  Meyers to get laughs;  he's like the class clown who gets the attention he  wants by making the stupidest and grossest comments imaginable!
Heather Graham performs well enough as Felicity Shagwell, though she does  not distinguish herself.
Part of the mediocrity is the way her character is  written:  she is far too compliant, a 'Laugh-In " dancer with lines.
(A  pointless motif takes the form of Austin dancing with these  vibrantly-dressed  groovers, by the way.
). Early on we see a schtick with Jerry Springer, in which Scott reveals his  plight as the son of a madman bent on world domination.
One of the film's  funnier bits of satire, this scene shows off the conflict between father and  son.
It helps that Scott comes along on the time machine;  the film is  better for Seth Green's presence.
What makes "Austin Powers:  The Spy Who Shagged Me" an average film at best?
It's that we are able to predict too much.
Sure, movies always rely on  viewers' knowledge of culture and clichés;  but there's just not enough  originality here to work with.
And when the film tries to get heady, we  actually hear explanations of allusions that flew over the heads of most  young viewers.
The bottom line is ambivalence.
If I believe that a film is  worthwhile if it gives me a belly laugh, then I should recommend this  'Austin Powers' sequel.
But I can't.
Not that it matters, as I heard a  teenager a few rows in back of me quip, "We have to buy this on video.
". . . 
