USA.
1998.
Director - Paul Anderson, Screenplay - David Webb Peoples,  Producer - Jerry Weintraub, Photography - David Tattersall, Music - Joel  McNeely, Visual Effects Supervisor - Ed Jones, Visual Effects - Matte  World Digital (Supervisor - Craig Barron) & Rhythm and Hues (Supervisor  - Jon Lesser), Miniatures - Cinema Producer Services (Supervisor - Mike  Boyd), Digital Effects - Rainmaker Digital Pictures (Supervisor - Doug  Tubach), Special Effects Supervisor - Clay Pinney, Makeup Effects  Supervisor - Steve La Porte, Production Design - David L. Snyder.
Production Company - Warners/Morgan Creek/Impact Pictures/JW (Jerry  Weintraub) Productions.
Kurt Russell (Todd), Sean Pertwee (Mace), Connie Nielsen (Sarah), Jason  Isaacs (Colonel Mekum), Gary Busey (Captain Church), Jason Scott Lee  (Caine 607), Michael Chiklis (Jimmy). Plot: In the year 2036 Todd is a solider who has been programmed from  birth as an emotionless killing machine.
But then the ruthless Colonel  Mekum introduces a new and superior breed of genetically-engineered  soldier designed to replace the other soldiers.
Todd is defeated up  against Mekum's top soldier, Caine 607, and, left for dead, is dumped on  the garbage world of Arcadia 234.
But Todd there survives and is granted  refuge by a group of survivors from a crashed spaceship who have built  their own peaceful community.
However his emotionless and violent  reactions have him barred from the community.
But as Mekum's forces move  in and start exterminating the community, perceiving it as a military  threat, Todd becomes their unexpected saviour.
'Soldier' came with enormous promise - there were many that hailed it as  a film that had the potential to become a genre landmark.
It had a  script from David Webb Peoples who had written such genre classics as  'Blade Runner' (1982) and 'Twelve Monkeys' (1995), as well as having won  a Best Original Screenplay Oscar for the stunning anti-Western  'Unforgiven' (1992).
The advance word on the film was good - Kurt  Russell was so enamoured with the script that he changed his schedule on  other films so that he could star.
And one can see much has been placed  into the production - the film is clearly made on an A-budget.
Which all adds up to make 'Soldier' seem even more of a disappointment.
What held the potential to be a landmark genre film turns out a  surprisingly ordinary variant on the cliched humanization of the inhuman  soldier/android theme tried and familiar from the likes of Harlan  Ellison's script for 'The Outer Limits' (1963) also entitled 'Soldier'  and films like 'Terminator 2: Judgement Day' (1991), 'Universal Solider'  (1992) and 'Solo' (1996).
Indeed the story arc that 'Soldier' carves is  so identical to 'Solo' - programmed soldier/android gets free from  military control, discovers a human side amid a group of simple but  honest villagers and stands up in armed conflict against his military  programmers and, at the climax, in hand-to-hand combat with his intended  successor - that one is tempted to cry plagiarism.
There are also times  where it is just shabbily written - Jason Isaacs' colonel is  single-dimensional and cliched, we never get to learn what drives his  ruthlessness, and his decision to cleanse the garbage world is very  poorly motivated.
The film proves a competent-enough run through of all the cliches and  had it been made on a much smaller, more intimate scale one suspects it  might have been a considerably more likeable film.
It's just on the  A-budget it is made on, its cliches collapse into over-inflated  pretension.
The scenes among the people on the garbage world are so  pumped up with patently artificial emotive cues - the honest and earnest  simplicity of the communal lifestyle, ragged but plaintive orphans, the  woman shot in warm and sensual silhouettes, even for God's sake the  pseudo-Celtic wailings of Loreena McKennit on the soundtrack - that it  collapses into a forcedness that verges on the absurd.
It all mounts to  an efficiently large scale but unmemorable action climax.
Director Paul  Anderson (no relation to 'Boogie Nights' director Paul Thomas Anderson)  is clearly shaping up as a regular genre contributor - he debuted with  the unpretentiously enjoyable 'Mortal Kombat' in 1995 and made 1997's  'Event Horizon', where his directorial style triumphed despite one of  the most brainless scripts of any sf film in recent years.
But, as  'Event Horizon' and this show, Anderson has a good deal of talent but  clearly little discernment when it comes to scripts.
The film is almost saved by Kurt Russell's performance.
Or more  ironically and accurately, his lack of a performance.
The very blankness  of Russell's battle-scarred face, the subtly-made up sunkenness of his  eyes, the blank minimalism of the dialogue he gets, creates a character  that fascinates in its hollowness.
All the emotion comes to be in the  smallest movements of the eyes.. . . 
