First, let us now praise Peter Weir and Scott Rudin for producing a film  rated PG, one suitable for my daughter on her tenth birthday.
THE  TRUMAN SHOW had two profanities I can recall, no sex scenes, no  gratuitous violence, and a lot of ideas.
All these elements make me like Jim Carrey more than I used to.
Although my students have talked about them for years, I have never seen  the Ace Ventura movies.
I'll admit I rented THE MASK, and got quite a  few laughs out of it.
And a student teacher in my film literature class  showed LIAR LIAR.
These are solid but minor comedies, thrust into  prominence by our culture's demand for vulgar slapstick.
(From what  I've heard about THE CABLE GUY, it's not worth my time even to rent,  though I do like to claim that, as a teacher of film, I am aware of  popular trends.
). What causes me to admire THE TRUMAN SHOW even more is that it's not  being hyped as purely a comedy.
Think back to 48 HOURS.
(I might better use THE CABLE GUY here, but  haven't seen it!
)  Wasn't this Eddie Murphy and Nick Nolte flick  advertised as a comedy?
But didn't its conflict revolve around one of  the most ruthless killers in any film of that year?
I remember sitting  in the dark and almost shivering at his heartless violence;  I was  unable even to chuckle at the one-liners Murphy lobbed during the more  tense parts of the plot.
Well, THE TRUMAN SHOW is not a comedy, but a heady satire of the  American consciousness, a send-up of the voyeuristic media addicts that  we've become.
When the picture opens with a close-up of Truman Burbank  gazing at himself in the mirror of his medicine cabinet, we are pulled  in by the wild imagination of his private monologues.
But here's the  rub:  we also realize that moments like this are prized, quirky products  of our privacy.
One of the reasons this film succeeds is that we are  reminded to hate ourselves, however mildly, whenever we see Truman  photographed through a "button-cam," or through the console of his  sedan.
(This is done cleverly, by the way, through lenses with edges  resembling coke bottles.
)  The eaves-droppers ogling the oblivious  Truman as he proceeds innocently with his life – the waitresses, the two  cops, the guy whose life is lived in his tub – these people are us.
This is one type of "winking" the film does.
Another type involves the placement of products.
No, these are not real  products, like the Reese's Pieces used in E.T.
Instead, they are  fictional kitchen devices and powdered drinks that Truman's sunny-faced  wife is forever pitching in the direction of one of the hundreds of  cameras hidden around their house.
These are self-reflexive winks,  reminding us of the ever-present products that are advertised within the  very texts of our films (not to mention in the fictions of writers  striving for verisimilitude).
That these endorsements have nothing to do  with our real lives is stressed in a powerful scene that has Truman  desperately confronting the actress playing his wife.
"It's a life," says the director of this television institution, in the  opening moments of the film.
The way in which writer Andrew Niccol and  director Peter Weir make Truman's life realistic is similar to the way  writers make their fantasies seem true.
Gabriel Garcia Marquez uses  minute details in his stories.
This is the secret of magical realism.
THE TRUMAN SHOW drops in on the title character rummaging through a  trunk containing boyhood memories.
We see photos of young Truman with  his father, now supposedly dead.
We see Truman burying his nose in a  sweater left behind by a girl named Sylvia (whose cast name is Lauren;   there are endless double and deceitful images at work here).
We witness  countless traces of Truman's past, even through flashbacks on the  screens of the world's viewers.
In the end, we realize the sanctity that  should be accorded Truman's life, and perhaps feel assured that no, our  society really would not stand by, letting a corporation adopt a baby  and permitting the construction of a set the size of a city, just to  broadcast every second of his life.
One weakness is the superficial handling of Truman's wife when Truman is  truly on to something.
Pushed beyond what she deems "professional," the  actress shrieks "Do something!
" and soon disappears from the scene.
Another actress is conveniently inserted as a possible love interest.
But wouldn't it have been more realistic to show the small scenes of  loneliness (or maybe relief) felt by Truman as he roamed the house after  his "wife's" desertion?
One test I often apply to comedies is, if it gets a belly-laugh out of  me, the film is a decent comedy.
This test is subjective, of course,  but it's just as valid as saying that a short story is good if it makes  you cry, a comment I overheard from a creative writing professor.
Although I only guffawed during THE TRUMAN SHOW, I relished the frequent  funny moments and absolutely loved their intelligence.
>From his sickbed, his voice played over a still shot of himself, Gene  Siskel said this may be a "watershed" movie for Jim Carrey.
I agree.
Carrey is no longer just another rubber face.
It's the first film of  his that I would show as a solid part of a high school film curriculum.
My daughter is grateful, too, that it is not among the majority of  talked-about films, the PG-13s and Rs which, for the next couple of  years, her parents will not permit her to see.. . . 
