THE X-FILES (Fox - 1998) Starring David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau,   Armin Mueller-Stahl, Blythe Danner, William B. Davis, John Neville Screenplay by Chris Carter Produced by Chris Carter, Daniel Sackheim Directed by Rob Bowman Running time: 120 minutes. Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    I feel obliged to begin by clarifying that I'm not exactly an ardent    follower of THE X-FILES, the acclaimed Fox sci-fi television series    which began its run five years ago as a bottom-dweller in the Neilsen    ratings only to steadily gain momentum and evolve from a beloved cult    fave into a outright mainstream phenomenon and bonafide international    hit.
I've watched about a dozen episodes of the TV show in full --    easily less than the typical rabid fan, but sufficient to be familiar    with the histories and adventures of FBI agents Scully and Mulder.
(Additionally, one of my current occupational hazards finds me privy    to amusingly avid, earnest discussion and reverential dissection of    the storylines for such TV series as THE X-FILES, STAR TREK: VOYAGER,    and BABYLON 5 -- in short, I couldn't get away from the show if I    tried.
)  In all fairness, Chris Carter's creation is probably one of    the most imaginative of today's television shows, and has    demonstrably struck a chord with the highly-coveted 15 - 24    demographic, making it an optimal candidate for translation to the    big screen.
However, as a film THE X-FILES (the FIGHT THE FUTURE subtitle    featured so prominently in its marketing campaign incidentally    appears nowhere during the title credits) faces some unique    challenges.
As with all television series-turned-cinematic events,    it's required to present sufficient backstory in order for newcomers    to get up to speed while still remaining palatable to the faithful.
The situation here, however, is even more of a precarious balancing    act -- as a rare TV series to make the leap to the silver screen in    the midst of its ongoing run, it's faced with the obstacle of    unraveling its intricately-woven storyline to a point where a    satisfying film conclusion can be achieved, yet is obligated to leave    enough plot points unanswered in order to keep fans hooked for the    upcoming television season.
As such, the film fares about as well as can be expected.
Familiar    regulars of the series such as The Lone Gunmen (Dean Haglund, Bruce    Harwood and Tom Braidwood), The Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B.    Davis), The Well-Manicured Man (John Neville), and assistant FBI    director Walter Skinner (Mitch Pileggi) are trotted out for their    obligatory appearances, while the film infuses prodigious veteran    talents like Martin Landau, Armin Mueller-Stahl and Blythe Danner in    newly-conceived roles.
Ultimately, however, the addition of new blood matters little, for    THE X-FILES is most assuredly a vehicle for the continuing mythos of    agents Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) and Fox Mulder (David    Duchovny) as they strive to uncover the truth behind the sinister    government conspiracy to discredit evidence pertaining to the    existence of extraterrestrial life here on Earth.
Resuming where the    '97-'98 TV season cliffhanger left off, the film finds our intrepid    duo struggling against a powerful faction of master manipulators to    overcome roadblocks thrown up from every direction as their own    gravely somber interpersonal chemistry continues to evolve.
(One    rather disingenuous subplot falls victim to the awkward circumstances    constraining the film -- while it's always a stretch to envision one    of the protagonists surrendering the good fight, it's virtually    impossible to swallow here given that the character threatening to    quit is the same one we'll see on the tube in September when the    series resumes.
).    It's perhaps inappropriate to dismiss the film as simply a    larger-scaled version of one of the TV episodes given the presence of    strikingly atypical elements which are clearly aimed to broaden its    mainstream appeal.
Unlike its dour tube counterpart, THE X-FILES is    notably more jokey, with Scully and Mulder trading the occasional    tongue-in-cheek quip and droll one-liner.
(The rooftop scene which    introduces our heroes is particularly self-conscious, calculatingly    playing riffs almost as if directly out of a buddy movie.
)  The sense    of humour isn't particularly clever and not exactly welcome, although    I did appreciate the light-hearted jab at Mr. Duchovny's legendary    expressive qualities.
Where the film differs the most from the TV series is in its usage of    extravagant set pieces, including the bombing of a Dallas federal    office tower (in shades of the infamous 1995 Oklahoma City event), a    cat-and-mouse helicopter chase through cornfields (an obvious homage    to NORTH BY NORTHWEST), and even an action finale in the snowy    reaches of Antarctica.
These showy sequences, competently staged in    the film, are virtually impossible to pull off under the budgetary    and time constraints of a TV series but fit quite nicely within the    scope of a summer event film.
Whether or not they properly coalesce    with a piece like THE X-FILES, however, is a matter of debate.
The show has always been at its best as an enigmatic, paranoiac    meditative with a pervasive atmosphere of mistrust, and consequently    it seems a bit off-kilter to witness the film as opened-up to such a    degree.
The small-scaled, low-key approach employed in the TV series    is most effective in conveying its grim, creepy tone; it's no    coincidence that the scenes in the film which remain most truthful to    the spirit of the series -- the shady exchanges between Mulder and    Dr. Kurtzweil in the darkened alleys -- are the most effective.
With    THE X-FILES, bigger is not necessarily better.
It's also a bit disconcerting to witness how gleefully THE X-FILES    embraces the slam-bam mentality of the typical Hollywood action    flick.
The novelty of the television series is that it's a show    propelled by ideas and imagination, and yet in the film we're reduced    to watching Mulder heroically charging through the snow like a    scrawnier, dapper Arnold Schwarzenegger clone to come to the rescue    of imprisoned damsel-in-distress Scully, a perturbing step backward    from the equal status the partners unquestionably share as TV    characters.
If joining the Hollywood brethren on the big screen    implies that THE X-FILES is going to hereinafter *emulate* them at    the cost of its foreboding signature style, perhaps it's best to stay    on its home turf.
Bridging the fifth and sixth seasons of the TV series, the film    version of THE X-FILES ultimately resolves very little of its    outstanding mysteries, as it logically must.
As the film concludes,    in many ways we've traveled shockingly little from where we were as    the opening credits rolled, and yet it's not a dissatisfactory watch,    liberally sprinkling adventure, conflict, and verve into its mix of    aliens, conspiracies, and overcoats.
Given the involved nature of    its storyline, it likely plays plays best to those who have invested    much into its characters.. . 
