The use of spirits and ghosts in stories has existed in ancient folklore and continues in modern literature.
It is a topic that is inherently interesting to some people, and automatically disinteresting to others.
The stories involving non-material spirits often presume their actual existence, which turns off those who do not believe in them.
When they are used for horror effect, which is one of their most common uses, it creates an uninteresting experience for non-believers.
This film is a rare instance of a ghost story which is engaging even for viewers who do not believe in the existence of ghosts.
The story centers around the relationship between two primary characters, Malcolm Crowe (Bruce Willis) and Cole Sear (Haley Joel Osment).
Malcolm is an expert child psychiatrist who is haunted by a past incident when a disturbed ex-patient shot him.
The young man was upset that Malcolm was not able to solve his problems so he attacked the doctor, and Malcolm feels guilty at not being able to help the desperate man.
After some time, he eventually decides to take on the case of Cole, a child who shows similar symptoms to his assailant.
Malcolm feels that his will give him a chance to redeem his shortcomings that lead to his assault.
Cole claims to see the ghosts of dead people.
His single mother, Lynn Sear (Toni Collette), has previously taken him to doctors who could not help him.
She struggles to help Cole lead a normal life, but the meek boy is harassed mercilessly by schoolmates because of his peculiarities.
Cole is initially wary of Malcolm, but Malcolm gently works to win Cole's trust.
The film is successful for two reasons.
First, it is a simple and cleverly crafted story.
Second, its use of spirits is ancillary.
This is foremost a story about the relationship between Malcolm and Cole.
If that aspect had not been adequately developed, the film could not have been successful.
Although the use of ghosts may appear to be a gimmick, it must be noted that the story also contains other dimensions that are carefully and successfully constructed.
Good performances are given by both Willis and Osment, but the prime credit for the film's success should be given to M. Night Shyamalan, who both wrote and directed it.
The strength of the film is the story, and the direction skillfully executes it.
The main complaint may be that the languid narrative becomes slow at times, and it even drags before the climax.
Highly recommended.
This film is the rare case of a ghost story that has appeal to viewers who generally dislike that genre.
It is anchored by a strong story and is supported by capable directing and good acting.. . 
