This week, upon returning to Los Angeles from my summer vacation, I tried to buy tickets to two separate R-rated films and was denied both times.
Despite the fact that I am under the age of 17, I am usually let into the films because I look much older than I really am(haha).
The reason why I was not let in was because of President Clinton's new "family man" policy, in which theatres must check the I.D.
of anyone trying to buy a ticket to an R-rated movie.
Because of this new law and the controversy surrounding it, there has and never will be a better time to release the hilarious satire "South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut", despite the fact that the Comedy Central TV series on which it is based has been steadily losing viewers.
The animated film unleashes its wrath on targets such as Canada, Saddam Hussein, Brian Boitano, Winona Ryder, The Baldwins, Satan and most of all, the MPAA, which threatened to slap the film with an NC-17 rating.
The timely storyline is about four kids(the fat Cartman, the Jewish Kyle, the braindead Kenny, and the "normal" Stan) who sneak in to an R-rated Canadian movie called "Asses Of Fire", starring their favorite comic duo, Terrence and Phillip.
The two prance around, fart, sing songs like "Uncle Fucka", and teach the "innocent" children words they never knew existed(and we thought the TV show was vulgar).
Once the children spread the word(s) of the forbidden movie which they have seen, and begin to curse nonstop, Sheila Broslofski(Kyle's mother) decides to "Blame Canada", and when the Canadians bomb the Baldwin residence, the war begins.
What follows is 80 minutes of the funniest and most shocking humor to ever come out of "South Park" co-creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone.
Finally, a film with a scathing social message that I'm with all the way.
The songs are catchy and the characters are irreverent.
"South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut" will remind viewers why we all clung to the show in its first season, and why we will become fans once again.
Parker and Stone can speak, though indirectly, to and for today's young people.
"South Park" is a wake-up-call to a world in which peace can supposedly be created by forbidding teenagers to see R-rated movies.
a review by Akiva Gottlieb, The Teenage Movie Critic akiva@excite.com. http://teenagemoviecritic.8m.com . . . 
