The Happy Bastard's Quick Movie Review. Any movie that has a musical number that goes "Shut your f***ing face, uncle f***er" can't be all bad, right?
Unlike most TV-show-to-movie translations, South Park: Bigger Longer & Uncut shows an incredible urgency as it arrives on the big screen, offering the same old visuals and the same old setting, but introducing energetic dialogue (complete with profanity) and musical numbers that really stand out from the usual disgusting comedy scene.
Trey Parker and Matt Stone are commended for not standing down to the viciousness of the MPAA.
The story's rather ironic, considering it's likely to happen in real life: the South Park gang, consisting of jewish Kyle, barfing Stan, big fat Eric Cartman, and the ever-dying Kenny, sneak into an R-rated movie called "Asses of Fire", starring their favorite Canadian duo, Terence and Phillip.
Upon viewing of the movie, they pick up several pieces of profanity that they begin spewing everywhere, particularly at their school, where trouble begins to brew.
That's when Kyle's overdefensive mother begins a campaign called Mothers Against Canada, and it soon brews into a war between the United States and Canada, with Terence and Phillip held as prisoners of war, scheduled to be executed following a big USO show with Big Gay Al.
On top of all this, if they do die, Satan and his new lover, the impeccable Saddam Hussein (whose real head is actually used on a figure in the movie) will take over the world.
Still with me?
As I stated, the animation is pretty similar to what was seen on the show.
At some points, there is some computer animation assistance, but not to the point that you're forgetting you're watching cardboard cutouts.
Still, everything appears as it would in the world of South Park, and I really wouldn't have it any other way.
The script and musical numbers, however, are the real surprise here.
Trey Parker and Matt Stone, the creators of South Park, simply could've filled the movie with obscenities and it would've sold, but they've gone the extra mile constructing great jokes and great little music bits like the aforementioned "Uncle F***er" and an extended, choir-backed "Kyle's Mom Is a Big Fat Bitch".
I even picked up the soundtrack just for kicks.
There's some great sick jokes in here, too, not to mention a clever little nod to The Phantom Menace and Dragon Ball Z.
The voicework is also top notch.
Although most of the voices are provided by Parker and Stone, celebrities like George Clooney (who's more than just a gay dog in the role of a doctor), Minnie Driver (who's humorous in her bit as Brooke Shields- yes, Brooke Shields), and Eric Idle (as a scientist who helps install a V-chip in Eric Cartman's head to stop his incessant cursing- he's hilarious) add icing to the cake.
Also, a nod of the hat to Marc Shaiman for helping organize the great musical numbers.
However, did we really need Satan doing a dramatic number?
The irony is kinda funny, but the number was flat.
There's plenty of sick, disgusting laughs throughout the movie, as it's smarter than your average curse-fest.
Sure, it's not for kids (make sure they go see Tarzan instead- and STAY there), but adults will have a riot of a time if they can tolerate the language.
I know I could, but, then again, I'm a South Park fan.
And I'm not "fat ass".. 
