  From the moment I saw trailers for Lost in Space, I knew I would probably like it.
I am a junky when it comes to `90s science fiction, especially Star Trek and The X-Files.
Now, after watching the DVD of Lost in Space, I can say that none of my expectations for the film were bashed.
Okay, Space is not a very good film, but it kept me entertained for two hours.
This is the film that knocked Titanic off the top spot on the box office charts earlier last year.
The movie adaptation of the schlocky `60s television series.
The show was a cheesy bore.
The movie version is the same thing, but, with lively visuals and a nice cast.
It's amazing what special effects can do for a film; Space is a mighty achievement in brain candy.
The story tells of the (space) family Robinson, who's goal is to travel to a distant planet (I forget the name) to make sure it can be colonized, for Earth will not last two more years, in the year 2043.
This is the only movie to feature a whole family, even the 10-year old kid, as scientists and astronauts.
When the Robinsons launch to space, a scientist (Gary Oldman), who was hiding in the ship's bowels, takes over the controls, while the family are in hibernation, and accidentally send the ship to a different galaxy through some space-gate or whatnot.
Lost in Space suffers from the usual Hollywood cliches and over the top action scenes that completely destroyed films like Armageddon and Con Air.
But, it does have a nice sense of adventure not found in many sci-fi movies anymore.
But, I have seen a number of better sci-fi films within the past two years, including The X-Files, Star Trek: Insurrection, Event Horizon, and Sphere.
Plus, the movie kept switching from kid-friendly fluff to scary monster flick.
The DVD features a number of fascinating tidbits, including a music video (for the annoying song that plays during the end credits), original cast interviews, a director commentary, and special effects featurette.
However, I was very disappointed with the soundtrack.
Low and unspectacular.. . 
