DIRECTED BY:      John McTiernan STARRING:             Pierce Brosnan, Rene Russo, Denis Leary, Faye Dunaway WRITTEN BY:         Peter Doyle, Leslie Dixon, Kurt Wimmer RATED:                   R for some sexuality, nudity, and language SCRIPTURE REFERENCES:    Proverbs 13:7, Revelation 3:17, Ecclesiastes 5:10. THE THOMAS CROWN AFFAIR is an attractive, stylishly-made remake of an attractive, stylishly-made 1968 film which starred Steve McQueen and Faye Dunaway.
Both films feature a playful but intelligent cat and mouse game between the two leads.
In the remake, Pierce Brosnan (TOMORROW NEVER DIES) is cast as the title character originated by Mr. McQueen.
Thomas Crown is a multi-billionaire for whom $100,000 is merely pocket change to be squandered on an impossible golf bet.
The high stakes of the "shark-infested" corporate waters in which he swims has lost its challenge.
He has bested every business opponent he has come across.
There is no more excitement in his life.
No more heights of which to climb.
So what is a man to do?
Of course!
Risk everything by turning to a life of crime.
He's not in it for the money.
He just wants (needs?
) the adrenaline rush.
After cleverly pulling off an art museum heist where he absconds with a million dollar Monet, he crosses paths with Catherine Banning (Rene Russo, TIN CUP), a smart and sexy insurance investigator who immediately senses that Crown is her culprit.
Not being confined to police procedures, legal niceties, or for that matter, common sense, Banning seductively confronts Crown with the fact that she knows that he stole the painting.
As the two main characters begin to weave an intricate dance...
Setting traps, springing traps, avoiding traps...
They become inexplicably drawn, both physically and emotionally to one another.
Trust and honesty become major stumbling blocks to them as they each consider the possibility of entering into a romantic relationship with their opponent.
Mr. Bronsan's cool 007-like demeanor works well for this "man who has everything.
"  He plays Crown as someone who has clearly become accustomed, even bored, with the finer things of life.
That he does so without turning in a boring performance is noteworthy.
Ms. Russo's character is a bit more enigmatic.
Banning's investigation seems to be more intuitive than anything else, having as she does a special prescient ability to somehow sense the truth.
By allowing herself to get emotionally attached to Crown, her judgment begins to break down, rendering her helpless to get a read on his true intentions.
Denis Leary (SUICIDE KINGS) does a fine job in his supporting role of police detective Michael McCann who, from the onset, is obviously outmatched by both Crown and Banning.
Faye Dunaway, who played the female lead in the original film, is given a extraneous and meaningless role as Crown's therapist.
Director John McTiernan (DIE HARD) has crafted a polished and entertaining romantic suspense thriller.
Like the original (which won an Academy Award for Best Song by composer Michel Legrand), the remake boasts a wonderful score, this time by composer Bill Conti.
The biggest difference between the two versions may be most noticeable in our modern day tolerance of more sexually explicit scenes.
"The Kiss," as it was come to be known, between Mr. McQueen and Ms. Dunaway has been replaced by an extended nude coupling of Mr. Bronson and Ms. Russo.
Personally, I look back fondly on the days when filmmakers could communicate the physical desire of their characters without taking the clothes off their performers.
Of course, it should be noted that Thomas Crown, with all his billions, was still fundamentally empty and lost.
His money did not buy him the peace of heart which he desired.
His life, despite his wealth, became meaningless and dull, which is why he foolishly began breaking the law by stealing precious artwork from museums.
Financial wealth is never the culmination of our dreams.
It is not the answer to our prayers.
It is not the final goal of a godly man or woman.
There are riches that will satisfy but they won't be found in a bank balance.
Spiritual riches are found in one's heart.. . 
