If there is any doubt that this sequel is not up to the original, forget it.
It's every bit as good, if not better.
There is no problem if you're one of the few people who didn't see any of the first three movies.
You easily learn who the characters are and how they relate to each other.
In its own way Lethal Weapon 4 reminds me of the old "Road" movies, or the Abbott and Costello series.
Each one is able to stand on its own, but you know the characters and you feel that you were watching old friends.
In this  episode there are two new figures to entertain us.
One, Jet Li, is a thing of beauty to behold.
As the cool, controlled bad guy, he moves with the grace of a ballet dancer but the malice of the deadly killer that he is.
The other, Chris Rock, becomes a continuing character as the new son-in-law of Murtagh [Danny Glover].
Chris, like Joe Pesci, utters most of the foul language in the film.
Strangely, it becomes comical when Pesci tries to talk without swearing so that he can be quoted on TV.
It is enjoyable  when seemingly unimportant scenes suddenly tie in and become parts of the story.
If you catch them early enough, you have a feeling of pride that you figured them out before they're explained.
It's also great to be in on the joke, such as when Danny Glover thinks that Chris Rock is gay, but we know that he is his son-in-law.
Although some of the stunts are highly improbable, they are nonetheless entertaining.
By now, you've probably seen most of them on clips on TV.
Even though you know that they are stunts and that everyone will survive, they are still harrowing.
The fire is almost too real.
This is a very violent film with some stomach turning scenes.
The garroting and the lancing made most adults grimace with pain.
As always, there is plenty of humor surrounding the stars.
The chicken sequence is a memorable on-running gag.
There are many, many moments that you keep remembering.
That is the mark of a truly entertaining movie.
You keep thinking about it.
I definitely want to see it again.. . 
