No one is what you think they are.
That is the basis of The Spanish  Prisoner, a new film by Pulitzer Prize winning playwright and sometime  director David Mamet.
This psychological thriller has the makings of a  big-time, whamm-o production, but still comes off as a rather small, soon  to be forgotten picture.
Which is too bad because it has a lot of bright  spots.
Belive it, Steve Martin is a bad guy, a rich guy, and not too  funny.
He is the mystery man who charms his way into techno-inventor  Campbell Scott's life, and attempts to ruin it.
Scott's character, Joe Ross, has made a brilliant invention for his  company (the details of which we never learn) but begins to feel slighted  that he will not be monetarily rewarded for it.
As his disappointment  grows he becomes entangled in a web of mystery that is spun by enigmatic  millionaire Martin (Jimmy) and a secretary for the company, Susua, played  by Rebecca Pigeon (writer/director Mamet's real-life bride).
The Spanish Prisoner begins to take on the feel of David Fincher's The  Game, as the lead characters from both are surrounded by uncertainty (as  is indeed the audience) and they lose control of the events in their  lives.
But Michael Douglas portrayed a sense of frustration and  helplessness that Scott was either unable to, or instructed not to convey  to the viewer.
As things get more and more out of hand, I never saw pain,  frustration or terror in Scott's face.
Though it is a good performance,  the strength of The Spanish Prisoner is found in the extremely "Mametian"  script, the refreshing performance by Martin, and the suspense  and mystery that I, personally, could not help but fall into.
There are, of course, a number of coincidental happenings that allow the  story to continue, and they, as much as anything else, make the film  completely unoriginal, but it still mangages to deliver.
The devices are  just crafty enough to make it work.
But I have a feeling that you will  need to go out and see The Spanish Prisoner rather soon if you want to  catch it on the big screen.
It just has that feel.
Comments, complaints, questions, email me at namado@concentric.net. . 
