Starring Patrick Stewart, Jonathan Frakes, Brent Spiner and F. Murray Abraham.
Directed By Jonathan Frakes Running Time: 1 hour 40 minutes.
The new Star Trek movie has a lot to live up to: it is an odd numbered Star Trek film.
(The ninth to be exact.
) It must therefore try to escape the dreaded 'odd numbered Star Trek film curse,' which is that every odd numbered Star Trek film is rubbish.
(Remember number five?
Ouch!
) Thankfully, while not brilliant, it is certainly not a mess by any means.
The rather silly plot centres around a planet with magical properties that Captain Picard (Stewart) wants to protect from an alien race, led by Abraham.
The film manages to cram in action, laughs and romance in even amounts.
Although it could be a little more light hearted (like the wonderful Star Trek IV) the film is entertaining.
The plot is alright, but there's a nice twist in the film when it threatens to drop dead.
The lines, though, are sometimes banal, especially the ones by the inhabitants of the planet.
There's the usual philosophising and grand speeches that come part of the Star Trek package, but there's nothing to cringe worthy in this film.
There's not as much action in the film until the very end, so the film has to rely on the characters.
They're played with the usual gusto by the Next Generation cast, and the actors are also given the opportunity to act a little younger.
(The planet enables people to remain young.
) There are some gratuitous love scenes involving a beardless Riker (Frakes) and Troi (Marina Sirtis), which are even more gratuitous when you consider Frakes directed the movie.
But there's some standout scenes: when LaForge (LeVar Burton) sees a sunset with real eyes for the first time, and anything involving the Klingon Worf (Michael Dorn) returning to puberty is also amusing.
The increasing popularity of Data (Spiner) is evident in this movie, as nearly the entire film centres around him.
Sadly, the film is missing a enemy as menacing as the Borg in the previous First Contact (1996.
) The alien race in this film are somewhat menacing, but Abraham isn't a strong enough presence to warrant as a 'good' bad guy.
Therefore, the Enterprise is lacking a definite evil to fight against.
Still, the bad guys look good, and they're suitable enough to keep the plot going.
The special effects are nice, and the Enterprise is looking as fine as ever (if a bit small.
) The effects are done entirely on computer, so some parts look like the Wing Commander game.
Still, they are generally exciting, and are used well in the action sequences.
Talking about action, when it finally arises, it's well handled, and is a break away from the heavy-handed plot that is taken far too seriously.
Star Trek: Insurrection is fine for trekkies, and good for non-trekkers as well.
I'm not a Star Trek fan, but I enjoyed this film.
It's nothing special, and Star Wars: Episode 1 will probably whoop it's ass (sorry) but it's good, solid entertainment.
Worth watching.
DAVID WILCOCK david.wilcock@btinternet.com Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR- http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061 Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to join the mailing list!
"You know, for kids"- Norville Barnes. . 
