Reindeer Games (2000)  Rated R; running time 105 minutes Genre: Action Adventure  IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Details?0184858  Official site: http://www.dimensionfilms.com/   Written by: Ehren Kruger Directed by: John Frankenheimer Starring:  Ben Affleck, Charlize Theron, Gary Sinise,  Dennis Farina, James Frain, Clarence Williams III. Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 2000 Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsreindeer.html. The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below): In what must have been a good idea to somebody down the line (though  lord only knows why), Ben Affleck stars as Rudy [Get it?
"Rudy", as in  "Rudolph"...you know, on the "Reindeer Games" theme?
Yah, that's what I  said, too.
], newly released from prison after doing time for car theft.
While in prison, Rudy bunked with Nick (James Frain), who was in a  serious pen-pal relationship with Ashley (Charlize Theron), a woman  he--and Rudy--obsessed over.
Nick was also due to be released at the  same time as Rudy, until he was attacked by a con who was after Rudy;  when Rudy got out, he assumed Nick's identity so he could get with  Ashley.
But Ashley's brother Gabriel (Gary Sinise) had plans for  "Nick": he needed Nick to set up a heist of the casino owned by James  Banks (Dennis Farina)--and Gabriel's not the type to take "no" for an  answer...
The Upshot: I know what you're thinking.
"Self," I hear you saying to yourself,  "just what's got that Chick up in arms about that description, enough  for her to say 'Reindeer Games is On Drugs'?
"  Well, I'll tell ya: the  way this story is told by writer Ehren Kruger and director John  Frankenheimer, has got to be the most preposterous load of baloney I've  ever seen--and it got worse as the movie got longer.
I sat there,  stunned, unable to believe that they really wanted us to run with this  one.
I couldn't play along; my Disbelief was Suspended so high, it  developed a nosebleed.
And what's more: from the stunned looks on the  faces of most of the actors, especially Ben Affleck and Charlize Theron,  I find it hard to believe that they believed it, either.
I'll be kind and blame it on the writer and director, giving the actors  the benefit of the doubt.
After all, it's not Affleck's fault that his  character seemed so dunderheaded throughout most of the movie [movie  character rule number one: if given the chance to escape your kidnappers  and you come back for no obvious reason, you deserve to be chained to  your bed], resorting to lame humor that fell completely flat during the  casino scenes.
I bet Affleck is regretting having raised such a stink  about being billed as the star of "Boiler Room" right about now; Ben,  old boy, maybe you should just count the money and run.
Affleck got off easy compared to the rest of the cast.
Sinise, so good  in even a quick cameo in The Green Mile, is as wasted here as poor  Dennis Farina is--though at least Sinise actually got to act during his  screen time.
I have no idea what it was that Farina was doing; alas,  it's a long way from his heyday in TV's "Crime Story" to this mess.
And  speaking of TV heydays, Clarence Williams III--"Linc" in "Mod Squad"  from back in the day--was so exchangeable with The Bad Indian and The  Bad White Guy sidekicks, I never noticed they had individual names.
As for Ms. Theron, my heart broke, seeing her so badly miscast (not to  mention, acting so badly) here after her good performance in "The Cider  House Rules" last year.
I have no doubt that Sinise, as talented as he  is, can bounce back from this bad idea; I can only hope the same for  Theron (Affleck, on the other hand, will probably do just fine.
There's  something to be said for being Flava Of The Month, and Affleck, Matt  Damon, and Leo DiCapitated seem to have that market cornered pretty  well).
It's hard to go into detail about exactly what ticked me off so about  this flick, without giving away "key" scenes, so I won't--except to say  that the "twist" at the end goes down in my book as the worst excuse for  a "reason why it all happened" that I've seen in a long time.
Suffice  it to say that if you go see it, when you hear yourself mumbling "what  the hell?
" over and over again, you'll know what I mean.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]: I wasn't gonna bother with the BF for this flick--Clarence Williams III  having such a nothing part in this that it didn't much matter--but on  second thought, there was one thing that I actually got half a chuckle  over.
In a blink-and-you'll-miss-it moment, Isaac Hayes (on leave from  "South Park" perhaps?
) shows up as a prisoner grossed out by  the..."protein" supplement in his jello.
My, Chef, how the mighty have  fallen.... Bammer's Bottom Line: Note to Movie Executives: please please a thousand times please,  institute a No Hallucinogens Allowed policy during your storyboard  brainstorming meetings with these wacko writers and directors.
Movie  viewers everywhere will thank you.
"Reindeer Games" (rating: redlight):  ...This is your writer/director On Drugs.
Any questions?. . 
