Insufferably mannered twerp (Fiennes) and fashion victim (Thurman) are  supposedly secret agents set out to stop weather-controlling madman  (Connery).
Despite the obvious charisma imbalance, the dearest wishes of  the audience and severe editing, they succeed.
Bugger.
"One should never fear getting wet," slathers nerdish supervillian Connery  to lust-thang and world's least plausible scientist Thurman.
But he's  forgotten that absolutely everyone is wet in this soggy, lumpish remake of  the cult TV series.
For those who came in late: "The Avengers" were a duo  of elegantly stylish superspies who nonchalantly dispatched grave threats  to British (and global) security every week.
Never mind that the plot  quickly degenerated into a parody of themselves, a disjointed haiku of  illogical setpieces, non-sequiturs, and contrived sequences:. But it was fun, and you might think it was ripe for a remake, or a  reinvention (a la "Lost In Space").
Of course, you might also think that  my grandmother was a tap-dancing Martian.
For "The Avengers" (or as we  might call it "The English Patient 2", except in this case the patient is  the film, DOA) is a dreary, incoherent mess.
It's not easy to say just what's wrong with this film, because everything  is wrong.
We meet Ralph Fiennes as the ultradangerous agent John Steed.
Dangerous, because you fear that at any moment he will don an anorak and  start to talk earnestly about trainspotting.
He's on the job because the  hightech satellite system that (stifle your laughter) controls Britain's  weather has been sabotaged.
Could it be the work of Dr Peel, the insectile  method nymphet Uma Thurman?
No, her mission is to use up the stockpile of  blue eye-shadow left over from the 1960s.
So after some single entendres,  our dull duo are off.
And then they're off to solve the case.
They go to talk to the eccentric Sir August, who turns out to be a toupee  with Sean Connery hiding underneath.
After he and Uma engage in some  sub-"Carry On" sexual banter, Fiennes is attacked by August's strangely  silent minions.
You might think that these henchmen say nothing because  they are actually the set carpenters, hauled on to fill in the gaping  crevasses in the screenplay.
No, they are silent because they have been  struck dumb by the quality of dialogue around.
In fact, one minion  suddenly develops stigmata during one of Fiennes and Thurman's romantic  clinches.
*thinks* No, just a moment, that was me.
There's a twin of Emma Peel running around at this point.
No, they never  explain this.
The baddies drop a map so our tepid twosome can find the secret lair.
Connery meets with his cohorts, who are all dressed in (I kid you not)  brightly coloured teddy bear suits.
Connery explains this is so no-one can  be recognised, and I find that explanation strangely plausible.
Fiennes  and Thurman try to spark their areactive screen chemistry, but (alas) there  is no catalyst that powerful.
However Uma strains so hard that you can  actually see her _trying to remember her lines_!
Dispirited by their  failure, the comatose couple are forced to reveal that the real mastermind  is the co-head of their organisation, the blind (and strangely like a  Thunderbird) Father.
There's that twin again.
What is that all about?
Connery, determined to never work again, dons a kilt and threatens the  leaders of the free world.
Just what the leaders of the free world are  doing in London, is never explained.
I guess after Connery buries London  in snow, they bugger off home.
("Sod this English weather.
")  Uma decides  that the only way to get to the bottom of things is to don a red catsuit  with leather hotpants (which looks much worse than you can possibly  imagine) and get captured.
While captured she begins to hallucinate,  making the audience very jealous.
But Ralph and her get together again and  the movie flickers to life briefly as they go mano-a-mano with Connery and  his henchman.
(That's hench-man.
One.
Count 'em, one.
Ohh, it's just so  horrible.
). "Still suspicious?
"  apostrophises Uma.
"Just wondering if you bought me  here under false pretenses," winces Ralph.
And the audience can then cry  out, "Yes, yes, oh yes!!
"  Avoid this dull, unworthy mess.
[0/bomb] and a  bad acid flashback on the Sid & Nancy scale.
-- Paul-Michael Agapow (p.agapow@ic.ac.uk), Dept.
Biology, Imperial College "We were too young, we lived too fast and had too much technology ...". . 
