        Martin Scorsese is known for his realistic violence and extreme profanity.
He is known for causing controversy with Christians because of his depiction of Jesus in "The Last Temptation of Christ".
But what he isn't known for is his role in a movie about peace and compassion, until KUNDUN.
KUNDUN gives us a interesting look into the lives of Tibetan Buddhist, and depicts the life of the fourteenth Dalai Lama, from the time of his discovery(Around age 2) until his late teens when he is forced into exile.
>From the beginning of his life he thinks he is important, insisting he sits at the head of the table, but when he is 5 he is taken from his family to become the next  Dalai Lama.
When he comes of age and is crowned head of Tibet he is forced to become the religious and political leader of the country.
He's greeted with an invasion from Communist China, which ends the peace that has existed for centuries in Tibet.
There are several touching parts in this film, these few parts give us a glimpse into a culture which seems strange and extremely foreign to most American movie-goers.
One particular scene that stands out in my mind is when the 5 year old        Dalai Lama is brought to his castle for the first time.
His family is seated before him and his older brother is smiling at him, until he is pushed to the ground and made to bow before his younger brother.
Unfortunately, there aren't many more scenes that show the effect on the family that their brother/son is Buddha's reincarnation.
The acting is admirable, considering the majority of the cast are real monks.
The script is to unquestioning of the Dalai Lama, and makes him seem like a perfect individual.
In addition the film's pace is way to slow, not a usual Scorsese complaint.
On a better note, the cinematography, costumes and art direction is great.
I would suggest you watch this film just for its look at the Asian culture, but wait till its out on video.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==----- http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum. . 
