Every now and then a truly memorable character enters the movie scheme.
In 1995, audiences couldnt help but feel sympathy for the slow-witted Forrest Gump.
Last year, Billy Bob Thortons character __ made us think twice about our place in society.
This year a horror of a human being (with a compulsive disorder) will somehow manage to nudge his place into our hearts.
Melvin Udall has a love for simple pleasures.
Cleaning his hands meticulously, only ever drinking bottled water and scoffing down a huge breakfast every morning are as important to Melvin as life itself.
Racist, sexist, unreasonable and repulsive, he seems to suit the title of a demented grouch perfectly.
Working as a romance novelist, Melvin keeps to himself for most of the time and, although his daily traditions are just they way he likes them, ultimately leads an unhappy life.
A dedicated romance novel fan asks Melvin How do you write women so well?
I think of a man, he replies, and I take away reason and accountability.
If what you have read so far tends you make you believe that Melvin is somewhat of a tough cookie, youre absolutely correct.
And when this type of guy gets a crush on a young, sweet and caring lady, interesting situations will no doubt occur.
Our young lady is Christine Cookie (Helen Hunt), who is Melvins favorite waitress at the local restaurant.
Well, favorite is an under statement  he simply wont eat his morning feast unless Christine is there taking his order.
So when she is unable to attend work due to a severe illness of her sons, Melvin does everything in his power to make sure she is at work the next morning  and funds all of Christines doctor and hospital bills.
An unlikely relationship forms between the two, and Melvins gay neighbor Simon (Boof Gert) gets thrown in amongst the emotional chaos.
Thus a three-way search for happiness begins, where each character craves their own set of desires.
Our man Melvin does what mainstream cinema would expect: realizes the error of his ways and begins to change into a nicer human being.
As he says to Christine during dinner, You make me want to be a better person.
If youre not impressed by the engaging character that is Melvin, As Good as it Gets wonderful acting and a plot that unravels with beauty and well-placed comedy; there is another factor that seems to have the greatest significance of all.
It starts with J and it ends with S.. Although the media spotlight may focus on Jack Nicholson as the selling point for As Good as it Gets, director James L. Brooks also deserves to take much of the credit.
His directing career has not gone unnoticed, but there is no doubt that this film is clearly his best work in the 90s.. . . 
