SHE'S ALL THAT Reviewed by Jamie Peck. A familiar story is spun under a fast pace and little else, true, but at  least award "All That" a bag of chips for exuding endless charm and  enthusiasm out of a cast of hot up-and-comers.
The particularly  appealing lead performers here are Freddie Prinze Jr. ("I Know What You  Did Last Summer") and Rachael Leigh Cook (the infamous "This is your  brain on heroin" commercial), respectively well-cast as popular jock  Zack and nerdish outcast Laney, senior schoolmates in sunny So Cal.
Taking a cue from "My Fair Lady"'s Henry Higgins, a bet is suggested  that Zack can't turn Laney into the class queen with just eight weeks  left until the prom.
He accepts and pursues.
She scratches her head at  the sudden attention.
It's a given that this star-crossed twosome is going to fall in actual  love, especially after she snips off her weird hairdo and trades in her  frumpy overalls for a hot little red number.
The source of suspense then  hinges on whether or not Laney will learn of the unfortunate wager, and  if so, whether or not there's still a happy ending waiting in the wings  for our mismatched protagonists.
Like, duh.
The results of this  eventually sticky dilemma is just as paint-by-numbers predictable as  everything that comes before it, a shortcoming that wouldn't be as big  if "She's All That" had supplanted the mechanics of its ho-hum narrative  with more real imagination and wit.
Still, there are plenty of lively elements discovered amongst the  clutter, and chief among them are the deft actors.
"Scream"'s Matthew  Lillard is a scream as a pugnacious former star of MTV's "The Real  World" who plays a central but secondary role in the Zack-Laney  courtship; Paul Walker ("Varsity Blues") and Jodi Lyn O'Keefe  ("Halloween: H20") also have fun with their villain roles even as they  fail to make much sense.
And the unexpected tweaking of seemingly  "ordinary" moments also provide welcome distraction, like a nicely  choreographed dance sequence, numerous jabs at pop culture and the  running commentary of a campus deejay (R&B star Usher Raymond) that  seems to function as a Greek chorus.
The eventual sum of honest goodies like these elevates "She's All That"  to a standing more notable than, as teen entertainment goes, at least  half of the WB's hit youth-oriented programming.
(And speaking of the  WB, "Buffy" fans will adore that the Slayer herself, Sarah Michelle  Gellar, contributes an amusing, wordless cameo.
Talk about a movie  counting on its target viewers.
) Even the film's broad attempts to  satisfy all tastes end up creating an oddly amiable combo of fairy tale  ambitions, coarse potty humor and quite a bit more.
It's like planning  to go to the prom with Mel Gibson, getting Mel Brooks for some of the  evening, and wanting to stick around to see how things turn out.. . 
