Tom Cruise emotionally portrays the title character, Jerry Maguire, in a story of a sports agent who develops a conscience.
Maguire is a guy who has everything to lose, and nothing to gain.
So he decides to make a difference, and types up a mission statement voicing his opinion about his profession, and distributing them to his co-workers.
He gets fired from his agency and has to attempt to make it on his own.
With the help of Dorothy Boyd (Renee Zellweger) and his only client, wide receiver Rod Tidwell (Cuba Gooding, Jr.), Maguire sets out on a mission to get back on top.
This is definitely another great film for Cruise, as he turns in a heart-felt performance.
Jerry Maguire is up there with some of Cruise's most memorable characters, including Cocktail's Brian Flannagan, and Born on the 4th of July's Ron Kovic.
His character continually develops as the film goes on, as Maguire's emotions continue on a windy roller-coaster ride.
Jerry Maguire features some cameos and supporting roles by big stars, both athletes and actors.
The Dallas Cowboy's Troy Aikman, the New England Patriot's Drew Bledsoe and figure skater Katarina Witt are only a few of the sports stars in the film.
Beau Bridges (The Fabulous Baker Boys), Jerry O'Connell (Joe's Apartment), Bonnie Hunt (Jumanji) and Eric Stoltz (Pulp Fiction) are a few of Hollywood's stars.
This film is definitely a drama, and it was about 2 hours and fifteen minutes.
Unlike The English Patient, however, Jerry Maguire's audience was constantly interested, with comedic scenes involving Gooding singing at a wedding, Hunt blabbing at a women-against-men meeting, and Dorothy's son, Ray (the adorable Jonathan Lipnicki), who was probably the funniest part of the movie.
He added a child's point of view, as Jerry confided in him with what was on his mind.
It's hard not to say that all the character's were well developed, because they were.
There hasn't been a film in a while that the audience felt some thing towards every character in the movie.
This film is very witty, combining hilarious comedy with heart-wrenching drama.
Tom Cruise's performance is definitely Oscar-worthy and Jerry Maguire should be considered, too.
Grade: A, ***** out of *****. . 
