Starring John Travolta, Robert Duvall, William H. Macy and Kathleen Quinlan.
Directed By Steven Zaillian Running Time: 1 hour 50 minutes.
A new courtroom thriller starring John Travolta that _isn't_ written by John Grisham?
There's a miracle everyday in Hollywood.
This interesting vehicle adapted from the true story novelised by Jonathan Harr is an straight forward telling of the lawfirm Schlichtmann (Travolta) Crowley and Conway (Zeljko Ivanek and Tony Shalhoub) and their involvement in a case against contaminated water.
However, this case proves to be hugely expensive for them, and they are drawn into a battle of money and wits against defendant lawyer Jerome Facher (Duvall.
). Adapted by Schindlers List writer Zaillian, A Civil Action is a better courtroom drama than most because much of the movie is set outside the courtroom.
In a nice sequence, the film introduces us immediately to Travolta's character and train of though, although the other members of the law firms seem to be compromised in the character developed area.
Although Travolta's character is delved into greatly, Conway, Crowley and accountant James Gordon (Macy) are rather faceless, although played with sterling effort by the cast.
William H. Macy is particularly good as the edgy accountant who grows more crazy as the firm goes deeper into debt.
Shalhoub, after an excellent performance in The Siege is good here, but plays a minor role in the big scheme of things.
Ivanek, sadly, doesn't get much of a chance to make an impression on the audience.
Robert Duvall is good as the world weary Facher, but it's far too simple a role for him and lacks any real depth.
He's fun, but he's not very deep.
Quinlan appears in and out of the movie as the leader of the group of parents who are fighting the pollutants of the water (their children died of leukaemia,) and her performance is merely average.
John Lithgow and Dan Hedaya, however, are both fun in incredibly minor roles.
Travolta himself has shown he can save nearly any movie, even crap like Phenomenon (but not Michael.
) He obviously enjoys working with Duvall again (and vice versa) and it's their scenes together that are the highlights of the movie.
Travolta is more than able enough to carry the movie, and his is the only character that's fleshed out with any depth.
But the movie never comes to an great conclusion about him, and the end of the movie may leave you annoyed by the fact that the film can't seem to wrap up a potentially interesting character.
Perhaps placing the words 'Based on a true story' at the start of the movie was the filmmakers way of wimping out: they must have thought the audiences would of loved these characters because their are real people.
But it doesn't work, and having faceless characters makes the film flat and sometimes boring.
Apart from the characters, however, the film in other respects is fine.
The direction is impressive and pacy enough, although their are some truly odd camera angles chucked in for no apparent reason.
Both the drama and the minor action scenes are handled well enough.
There's some suitably 'JFK' type music running throughout, written by Danny Elfman, who I still feel is more comfortable when writing music for darker films.
The pacing is fine, although it occasionally drags, and the ending is to abrupt.
Although flawed, A Civil Action does contain enough suspense and tension to keep audiences pleased.
Although it doesn't try anything new, A Civil Action is solid entertainment, and is probably worth watching if you want a quick fix of courtroom drama.
It's just a shame that a potentially interesting movie is nothing more than average.. . 
