VARSITY BLUES Reviewed by Jamie Peck. At least there are worthwhile messages about self-confidence and winning  not being everything buried amongst all the raunchy goings-on, but such  morals will likely be lost on the movie's core audience of fratboys,  users of Noxeema and avid "Teen Beat" readers.
That last group will  happily plunk down the admission price to watch "Dawson's Creek" hunk du  jour James Van Der Beek literally tackle his first big-screen role, a  high school football player whose moment to shine comes when his Texas  team's star quarterback ("Pleasantville"'s Paul Walker) suffers an  on-field injury.
Think of Van Der Beek's dull Jonathan "Mox" Moxon as  the anti-Dawson.
Not exactly hot off the newfound fame, Mox clashes with a coach (Jon  Voight) who'll do _anything_ to ensure the 23rd consecutive win of the  state championships.
That's the main storyline, but "Varsity Blues"  veers off course on matters risque and ribald enough to ensure it  doesn't flop like dissimilar gridiron flicks "Rudy" or "The Program.
"  Mox's obese, good ol' boy pal Billy Bob (Ron Lester) dips pancakes in  butter, guzzles maple syrup straight from the bottle and can't hold down  booze!
Mox's sexy biology instructor turns out to be a stripper who  bumps and grinds to Van Halen's "Hot for Teacher" at a local strip club!
Mox goes to a wild party where a couple does the nasty atop a vibrating  washing machine!
Mox is also lusted after by his ailing friend's girlfriend (Ali Larter),  but this character seems to exist solely so "Varsity Blues" can stage a  seduction scene complete with French kisses and Cool Whip.
Sure, pretty  Larter looks beguiling in her strategically-placed cream bikini, but a  romantic temptation subplot is the last thing this movie needs,  especially when it apparently doesn't have time or the creativity to  resolve earlier ones (like a forgotten-about illness for Billy Bob and a  black teammate who's trotted out only when a race card needs to be  played).
As you can probably guess, everything boils down to a  testosterone-fueled big game where the stakes are high and the tension  is non-existent.
See, we know everything will turn out alright, mainly because "Varsity  Blues" amounts to little more than a cinematic rendition of the ultimate  male fantasy - jocks, chicks, Coors and scores of multiple varieties.
It's nicely shot and well-performed by a mostly fresh-faced cast, but  these assets go to waste because the movie's ambitions rarely amount to  anything more than a "Porky's"-esque parade of boobs and liquor, liquor  and boobs.
(The most challenging shot prominently features both.
)  Perhaps there'd be nothing wrong with this were "Varsity Blues"' heart  in the right place, but it's conflicted between body parts a foot above  and a foot below.. . 
