"Scream 2" * * *  Starring Neve Campbell, David Arquette, Courtney Cox, Liev Schreiber, Sarah Michelle Geller, Jamie Kennedy and Laurie Metcalf  Directed by Wes Craven . Warning: This review reveals the endings of "Scream" and "I Know What You Did Last Summer".
If you have not seen these films, skip paragraph number six.
"Scream 2" has an opening very similar to that of the now classic orginal "Scream".
A couple (Jada Pincket and some other guy) are waiting in line to see the new movie "Stab", based on the book written by media mongul Gale Whethers which in itself was based on the murders that took place in the first "Scream".
Everyone in the theater is dressed up in that cool mask that the killer wore in the first one, going around with glow-in-the-dark butcher knives pretending to stab each other.
The guy goes to take a piss and wham!
; is stabbed right through the ear.
Then good ol' Jada is murdered in the middle of the crowded theater.
But, of course, no one notices because the whole place is packed wall to wall with screaming fans.
However, unlike the original's beginning sequence, this scene is not handled very tastefully.
In the first one, you had the caller playing a brilliantly scripted cat-and-mouse game with Drew Barrymore.
Here, the victims are just brutally slautered.
I hate to say this, but (although in a sick way), it was actually fun to see the killer torment poor Drew.
At least that was suspenseful.
This is just mindless gore.
It turns out that the couple attended the same college as Sidney Presott (Neve Campbell) and Randy (Jamie Kennedy), both survivors from the original film.
Sid is now majoring in drama and is the star of a school play and Randy is again the film geek, this time attending film classes.
Before I go on with the rest of the plot, I just have to talk about the conversation that takes place in Randy's film class.
They are discussing sequels and how they always suck when compared to the first ones.
I'm mentioning this because it, unlike most of the rest of the flick, is very smartly written.
It has the same self-aware feel to it that made the first one the great movie that it is.
And why do I consider it cleverly written?
Because of the simple fact that I was anticipating what each character would say next.
The rest of the movie (save the brilliant ending) is mostly very predictable and offers few surprises.
It may just be me, but I really dug this scene and think it's one of the best scenes in the whole flick.
Anyway, back to the story.
Needless to say, when Sid is informed about the recent murders, she totally freaks out and begins to fear for her life.
Rightfully so, because soon the corpses start pilling up and (in the words of Randy), everybody's a suspect.
So who is it this time?
Who is the real killer (or killers, maybe)?
Could it be Dewey (David Arquette), the now disabled bumbling cop from the first one?
I mean, his sister was murdered; isn't it possible that he's out for revenge?
Speaking of revenge, what about Cotton Weary (Liev Schreiber, in by far the best performance of the film), the man that Sidney wrongfully testified against for the murder of her mother?
Ever since people haven't looked at him the same way.
Even though his innocence has been proven, his life will never, ever be the same again.
Of course, you can't negate the possibility that it could actually be Gale Whethers.
Maybe she wants to have another killing frenzy so she could write another book.
I mean, the writer of "Scream 2" has pulled almost every trick in the book; in "Scream", it was revealed that there were actually two killers.
In "I Know What You Did Last Summer", the real killer was never unmasked.
Is it possible that this time, the surprise is that the killer is a woman, like in "Friday the 13th"?
Well, there's no way in hell I'm going to reveal the identity of the killer, but I will say that I guessed the ending (sorta).
It was pretty easy too, but I didn't guess everything.
You kind of have to see the flick to know what I'm talking about.
But just because this is not anywhere near as good as it's predessessor, when judged on it's own merit, it's basically a good movie with one of the best endings of the nineties.
So I'm going to give this one a marginal thumbs up.
Don't expect anything great, though.
Of course, there's always "Scream 3"... . Oh, and a word of warning to those of us with weak stomachs; this sucker's gory.
And I'm talking about throat slicings, brains, shots to the head, the works.
It's not really that bad, but if you're expecting mild violence as in the original, look elsewhere.
Just thought I'd warn ya.
Check out Jason Wallis' Filmaholics Anonymous web page at http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Boulevard/7475. . 
