At the tail end of the rock and roll era, 1973, William Miller (Patrick  Fugit) has just discovered music.
His mother, Elaine (Frances McDormand),  wouldn't allow her children to listen to rock and roll for years because she  claimed it encouraged drugs and promiscuity (She uses Simon and Garfunkle of  all bands for an example).
Despite his mother, William has made a name for  himself writing music reviews for the school paper and underground  magazines.
His talents are discovered by Lester Bangs (the excellent Philip  Seymour Hoffman), the editor of Creeme magazine, who hires William to write  a review of Black Sabbath.
While waiting for the band, William meets the  members of another band, Stillwater.
While first rejected, William soon  endears himself by befriending the group's lead guitarist, Russell Hammond  (Billy Crudup), and Russell's girlfriend (of sorts), Penny Lane (Kate  Hudson).
Actually, Penny and a small group of other girls are Stillwater's  band aids.
Band aids are similar to groupies, but they travel with the band  so as to give the members encouragement.
So, now a friend of the band,  William is hired by Rolling Stone magazine to travel with Stillwater, get  interviews with the band members, and write an article about them.
What was  supposed to be a four day trip soon turns into a month long journey.
Let me get one thing out in the open right now.
I don't like the 70's.
I  don't like what they stood for, I don't like the fashions, I don't like the  politics.
That said, I love 70's music.
Not necessarily what was sung, but  the way it was sung.
Now, please make note of this: if you don't like 70's  music, stay far away from "Almost Famous".
Classic 70's songs from Led  Zepplin, Elton John, and dozens more I'm not even going to try to list are  played constantly in this movie.
I'm sure you're wondering about the film's  humor more than its soundtrack, so let me set your mind at ease.
"Almost  Famous" is hilarious.
I don't mean it's funny to those who are able to  capture sly little in-jokes about the seventies, I mean nearly everyone  should find this movie to be more than just funny.
The dialogue is funny,  the banter is funny, there are a few classic slap-stick moments, but none of  it feels out of place.
It's a tribute to writer/director Cameron Crowe  ("Jerry Maguire") that he was able to use so many types of humor yet keep  the film feeling real (it is, after all, based on a part of his life).
Amazingly enough, there isn't one standout performance in "Almost Famous".
You're probably thinking I've lost my marbles, but it's the truth.
Every  performance in the movie is so good that no one actor outshines another.
Frances McDormand ("Fargo"), being the talented actress she is, manages to  make a character who could have been detestable not only sympathetic, but  even likeable at times.
Philip Seymour Hoffman ("Magnolia") turns in his  usual stellar performance, and it's unfortunate his screen time is so  limited because he could easily have snagged an Oscar nomination otherwise.
Billy Crudup ("The Hi-Lo Country"), who I'm usually not overly fond of,  makes Russell into such a likeable character you'll actually feel  embarrassed for him when he does stupid things (this happens fairly often)  like stand on a roof-top, drugged up, screaming "I am a golden god!
" Kate  Hudson is simply magnificent as the object of William's affections.
She has  an excellent scene, which could easily have been made melodramatic, where  William tells her Russell traded her off for a case of beer.
Tears just  barely come to her eyes, and she turns away for a split second.
She looks  back, her eyes red, but a smile on her face, and asks "What kind of beer?
"  It's enough to break your heart.
Finally we have newcomer Patrick Fugit.
If  this boy doesn't get a nomination come Oscar time someone's going to hang.
William Miller is easily the most endearing movie character not only this  year, but in the past three or four years too.
Part of this is due to the  way he is written, but all the credit should still go to Fugit.
One of the things that really amazed me about this movie was that Crowe  managed to keep it paced so well.
Every time a dramatic moment would arise,  I expected it to drag on far longer than was necessary.
Imagine my surprise  when Crowe would keep these moments just long enough to get his message  across, before throwing us another really funny scene.
Some of my favorites  were the conversations people would have with Elaine.
These scenes wouldn't  seem half as funny if it weren't for one thing, the characters are so real.
Take a scene where Elaine is talking to Russell on the phone.
He starts off  full of rock star bravado, telling her not to worry about her son.
Ten  seconds later, he's been reduced to saying "Yes Ma'am" to everything in an  almost child-like voice.
This wouldn't have been half as funny if we hadn't  come to know Russell.
Crowe's real gift is his ability to infuse even the  most minor of characters with a distinct and endearing personality.
In a  lesser movie, a character like Lester Bangs would have been nothing more  than a distant mentor to William.
Here, even with his limited screen time,  he comes to life.
Are there flaws in "Almost Famous"?
Yes, but they're negligible.
I suppose  the primary one would be that a few characters don't get the amount of  screen time they deserved.
Jason Lee's lead singer, for example, may get a  decent amount of screen time, but other than a few rants against Russell he  doesn't say much.
I guess this was supposed to parallel the situation his  character is in, always playing second fiddle to Russell, but that doesn't  explain poor Anna Paquin.
Paquin is one of the most gifted young actresses  in Hollywood, and here, just like in "Hurlyburly", her screen time as one of  the band aids is almost non-existent.
Okay, I don't want to complain about  this great movie anymore.
These minor complaints pale in comparison to what  a great film Cameron Crowe has given us.
In a year of mediocre films, this  one deserves to be seen by everyone.
While the film does run a full 122  minutes, it doesn't feel nearly that long.
I'd recommend "Almost Famous" to  nearly everyone, unless you truly detest seventies music, and give it a well  earned four and a half out of five stars.
Comments?
Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net. Past reviews can be found at: http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad or  http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem. * * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.
Share information about yourself, create your own public profile at  http://profiles.msn.com.. . 
