Bowfinger Review Starring: Steve Martin, Heather Graham, Eddie Murphy.   Steve Martin and Eddie Murphy are generally known as comic geniuses, but each have had their hits and misses.
During the 90's however, there has been more misses.
Thankfully, that streak has been broken, and it's just happened in the nick of time.
In this funny comedy, Bowfinger (Steve Martin) is a lousy director who's only goal is to make the film "Chubby Rain".
The only way it can be distributed however is if Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) is cast.
With a budget of only $2000 there is no way  he is going to be able to cast Kit.
So he rounds up a film crew, and cleverly films the actors going up to Kit whenever they see him.
Unfortunately Kit disappears, so they cast a look alike named Jeff (also played by Eddie Murphy) to help finish Kit's scenes.
This is where the film starts flowing.
It's so outrageously funny the way Bowfinger will literally do anything to get this film done, even if it means breaking the law, stealing etc.
It really shows how starved some directors are to make a film, at any cost.
The whole idea itself is very witty.
The type of film Bowfinger was creating was so ridiculous, it could have passed for an Ed Wood film.
It really shows how desperate people are for entertainment.
Actually in a way, Bowfinger was like the Ed Wood films.
He would steal props, beg on his hands and knees for the script to get a go-ahead etc.
The film's humor though, can't match Ed Wood's.
Bowfinger was witty , and wasn't particulary concerned with anything besides humor, but even some of the humor was rather amateurish at times.
It was as if the script was desperate for any type of laugh.
Ed Wood however was based on a true story, and that made it all the more stylish and amusing.
The film started out generally slow, but when Kit's brother appeared, the film picked up pace.
The guy was so nerdy and clueless, you coudln't help but like him.
Without his character, the film would have suffered, because Kit had too many moronic things revolving around him.
The whole Mind Head thing fell flat, and was not needed.
Steve Martin gave a nice enthusiastic performance.
What better actor could create an obsessed director striving for his film to be finished?
Heather Graham was a waste.
All she did was sleep around to get her way, but she was mainly there to look nice, and that's what she did.
Despite some of it's tiresome humor, the film really gets the general message across, and for that, it is inspiring.
Young directors will appreciate the film's power, because I'm sure many, like Bowfinger are going through the same experience, minus the comedic situations. . . 
