Rush Hour, starring Chris Tucker, Jackie Chan, Elizabeth Pena, Tzi Ma, Julie Hsu, Philip Baker Hall, Tom Wilkinson, Ken Leung and Chris Penn.
Directed by Brett Ratner.
1998.
The action genre had really gone sour ever since Terminator died out.
Stars like Jackie Chan and Jean Claude Van Damme had basically made carbon copies of their previous hits and re-released them under different names.
However, starting in 1998 with Rush Hour and moving on to hits like The Matrix, the action genre is gaining new life with unique mixes of stars and plots to add life to the mindless action that has plagued the genre in the past.
In Rush Hour, Jackie Chan comes back to the action genre, but brings a sidekick along for the ride.
No, not some Chinese action king who provides two lines of dialogue and mindless kicks and punches.
This co-star is one of the loudest and fastest talking on the silver screen today: Chris Tucker.
Tucker is a unique choice to co-star in a Chan movie, which adds the thrill.
Tucker's fast talking and quick humor sharply contrasts Chan's usual dull style.
Rush Hour starts off fast, and to the naked eye, looks to be the same old Jackie Chan styler.
Enter Tucker.
Enter fun.
Tucker adds life to Chan.
Tucker plays Officer Carter, an obnoxious LAPD officer who is cocky enough to not work with a partner.
Tucker adds explosiveness through his quick wit, an aspect lacking in most action films.
Instead of relying on the film's action sequences, director Brett Ratner relies on his duo's compatability, which is why Rush Hour is so successful.
Tzi Ma plays Consul Han, who travels to be an ambassdor in the United States when Hong Kong is relinquished by Britain.
However, when Tzi Ma's daughter, Soo Yung (Julie Hsu), is kidnapped by Chinese terrorists, crisis strikes and the plot is set.
When the Consul is upset with the FBI's work, he asks to bring Agent Lee (Chan) in to aid the investigation.
The FBI does not want the help, so they get Tucker from the LAPD to figuratively "babysit" Lee and keep him out of trouble.
However, their contrasting styles will undoubtedly lead to investigating the case.
The plot may seem mundane, and it indeed is, but Chan and Tucker are so likable that their personalities overshadow the mediocre plot.
The rest of the cast is virtually insignificant.
Sang, the main rival, has the most significant screen time compared to Chan and Tucker, and if you see his amount of screentime, you will relaize how dependent Rush Hour is on its two main characters.
Comedies like Rush Hour sink or swim based on their attempts at humor.
Going to watch Rush Hour, the obvious thought is to expect crude minority humor with the two contrasting ancestries of Chan and Tucker.
While Rush Hour does play off their differences, it is able to do it with class, taking no low blows, just connecting with smart humor and the big mouth of Chris Tucker.
Rush Hour is an action-comedy, so it is not an entire love fest with Chan and Tucker.
While Ratner's inclusion of action sequences is not completely off base, it does not completely gel with the fast humor between Chan and Tucker.
However, when watching Chan perform his stunts, you will still question how nuts the guy is to do some of the stuff he actually does.
The action-comedy hybrid may have been at a loss for some time, but Rush Hour pumps some new life into it.
While it is not a classic that will redefine the genre, Rush Hour still provides tons of laughter and a few "Whoas" at the sight of Jackie Chan's stunts.
Chan has found a way to reinvent himself, and that is the central focus of Rush Hour's success.
What's next?
Maybe the "Muscles from Brussles" with David Spade?
You never know.
The Movie Page- http://moviepage.hypermart.net/ Reviews, Previews, News and So Much More!. . 
