DIRECTED BY: Phillip Noyce WRITTEN BY: Jeremy Iacone, based on the book by Jeffery Deaver CAST: Denzel Washington, Angelina Joilie, Queen Latifah, Ed O'Neill. MPAA: Rated R for strong violent content including grisly images, and for language.
Runtime: USA:118. After David Fincher's "Se7en" (1997), there have been several attempts to create a film similar in story and impact, but without any success.
"Fallen" (1998), "Resurrection" (1998) and "Kiss the Girls" (1998) are some.
The latest is 'The Bone Collector' (1999!
), which is like most of its predecessors a failure.
The directors of these films have all tried to copy every aspect of Fincher's work: a dark detective story, lots of violence, a gritty atmosphere and impressive cast.
But though they all shot during night, had the most inventive murderers and murders (that successfully got them the necessary R-rating) they were unable to produce the most important, that what you can not copy -- talent.
The plot is a collection of stereotypes beginning with the brilliant policeman, philosopher and writer Lincoln Rhyme (Denzel Washington) who, under the investigation broke his spine and lies now at home, where he is taken care of the good nurse (Queen Latifah) and friend (Gary Swanson ).
He and the rest of the inhabitants of New York city are oblivious of the psycho-killer that realms the streets, picking up his victims in a cab and murdering them using the most ancient methods.
One of these innocent victim's body is found by Amelia Donaghy (Angelina Joilie), who has handled the episode with such professionalism that it catches Rhyme's attention.
The police, led by 'Bundy''s Ed O'Neill (I) is helpless and it is up to Rhyme and his young apprentice to catch the killer..
The story is filled with mysterious leads, bizarre puzzles and devastating events, but who cares?
It just isn't interesting.
It doesn't have any drive to it.
There is nothing that this movie can boast of.
It approaches familiar themes and enters explored territories, but it doesn't have neither the intensity and dark philosophy of "Se7en" or the sophistication of "Silence of the Lambs".
I think it's time for the directors to realize that there has to be a point, at least some intelligence in the story, besides the murders, chases and darkness.
Apparently that element was forgotten.
None of the performances are worthy of notice, the cinematography is a poor copy of Darius Khondji (Seven), the editing is average, the music a cliche.
In fact the whole film feels like a clone, an unsuccessful mutation of all the psycho-thrillers that we've seen before.
Joilie and Washington are unable to look as a potential couple, unable to generate tension, yet alone drive the story forward.
The other actors act as they are just waiting for their paychecks.
The sets are dark, but unreal.
And the whole film looks staged, pointless and even phony at times.
Even the awaited ending is a disappointment.
This is the classic example of an artistic failure, but it certainly doesn't mean that it's completely unwatchable.
It is a film for a rainy day and two free hours when you do not know what to do.
And then you just may insert this cassette into your VCR, press PLAY and let Washington and Joilie guide you on a pointless, but occasionally enjoyable ride through the dark streets of New York.. . 
