Varsity Blues is neither a good film nor a bad one, but rather a  mediocre production that had the potential to be far better, but could  have slipped even lower as well.
In some areas it was masterful, and  other were equivalently pathetic to put it frankly.
The outcome is  interesting, odd and unique, but not necessarily worth the trip unless  you are a teenage James Van Der Beek heartthrob or have some other  obsession with one of the cult aspects of this film.
In a small town in Texas high school football is a way of life.
It is  the heritage, it is the society, and it is the community's favorite  topic.
Bud Kilmer (Jon Voight) has coached the high school squad since  his current team's parents were playing.
Over that time he has brought  home 2 state titles and 22 division titles.
Grasped by immortality, he  can do no wrong.
Leading this year's squad is quarterback Lance Harbor (Paul Walker) and  lineman Billy Bob, (Ron Lester) who, as you can figure out early on, is  a stereotype right out of a Jeff Foxworthy book.
Then, as only Hollywood  would have it, through corruption, illegal drinking, and a whole lot of  other stuff that ATF doesn't like, Billy Bob misses a block and Lance  goes down.
Of course, this is where our hero enters.
Jonathan Moxon  seems about as perfect you can get, a scholarship to Brown, a great  girlfriend, and a steady life.
But all that must change when he becomes  the starting quarterback of a football team that is a way of life.
Varsity Blues tries to explore several proven aspects of film making by  putting them all together into one film.
Parts of the film resemble such  child favorites as Angels in the Outfield and others with a fairy tale  plot and overly predictable ending.
But much of the film is about sex,  drinking, and life in strip bars; thus making it a far cry from kiddy  material.
I suppose the goal is to settle on a teenage audience  somewhere in-between, but I have reservations as to just how anyone  could sit through these 90 minutes of contrast and be truly entertained.
One saving grace, however, is the acting.
Jon Voight is absolutely  stellar and offers a reminder to the world that he is one of the most  underrated actors in Hollywood.
In his freshman performance, James Van  Der Beek is great as well.
He seems to step beyond the typical teenage  role and gives his part some meaning that few others could add to the  film.
And most of the supporting cast fairs well also, but nothing  brilliant will come out of a bunch people playing drunk high school  students.
Overall, this film does have it's moments of glory, but they are matched  with shame.
The plot isn't very original, but the combination of plots  within is an unprecedented theory.
However, I get the feeling that there  is a good reason why no one had dared to do so before: it just doesn't  work.
So, although I tip my cap to the acting, I just don't see a  quality film here.. . 
