FALLEN Reviewed by Jamie Peck. As the film opens, Philadelphia homicide detective John Hobbes (Washington) is  attending the execution of Edgar Reese ("Crash"'s Elias Koteas), a serial killer  whom he apprehended single-handed.
What Hobbes doesn't know is that his  adversary's murderous motivation has been supplied by the dark, fallen seraph  that's inhabited his body, making Reese not your typical psychopath.
This  diabolical entity -- called Azazel -- is transferred through human hosts by  touch, and targets Hobbes as an eventual victim.
But Hobbes fights back with the  help of a pretty theologian (Embeth Davidtz) who's actually related deeper to  the case than she'd like to admit.
Also on hand to cast interdepartmental doubt  on Hobbes' seemingly out-there actions are his loyal partner (John Goodman) and  suspicious lieutenant (Donald Sutherland).
It takes a good while for "Fallen" to get moving, but when it does, things  become quite intriguing.
The film, which plays like an occasionally spooky mesh  of "Seven" and "The Exorcist," boasts an exciting gimmick -- how Azazel can be  transferred into just about anyone -- that leads to a handful of exciting  sequences where Washington must cast distrustful eyes on every person in his  surroundings.
Although "Fallen" might leave you with a detached feeling, it's  hard to not be engrossed with the story's unfolding details.
What keeps the  movie from being solid entertainment, however, is that too much of it remains  frustratingly ambiguous, like the interaction between Hobbes and his brother and  nephew.
And "Fallen"'s alleged "surprise ending" -- a denouement that Warner  Bros. issued requests asking the press to not spoil -- should shock no one who  has been watching attentively.
Washington is his usual sunny, likeable self, which contrasts nicely with the  movie's cold, grim atmosphere.
Other cast members are solid without being used  terribly well; Davidtz ("Schindler's List"), for example, creates the beginnings  of an interesting character, but later comes off like walking, talking  exposition.
Still, even if the good guys are an underdeveloped crew, the film  does manage to make Azazel menacing without the use of a constant actor or even  special effects aside from some periodic weird point-of-view shots.
But "Fallen"  is nonetheless an uneven film.
Screenwriter Nicholas Kazan ("Reversal of  Fortune") has traces of a true, terrifying tale in "Fallen" -- what could have  possibly kept his script so lopsided?
Could it be ... Satan? . . 
