PAYBACK Reviewed by Jamie Peck. In fact, it'd probably be a safe bet to accuse "Payback" of employing  nary a nice guy in its complex story.
Gibson's Porter character is the  closest thing to a protagonist it has, and audiences will get the gist  of his nastiness from the opening on: Not only does he narrate the film  in the gravelly, low-octave hush commonly associated with the rogues  gallery, we also get our first glimpse of him as he swipes a cash stash  from a crippled vet.
OK, so this panhandler turns out to be phony - even  the bit parts aren't sympathetic here - but the point is that this  Porter guy is someone with a vicious streak you definitely don't want to  provoke.
Too late.
Gibson starts off "Payback" already in a snit, and an  understandable one at that.
It seems he recently fell the victim of a  scam at the hands of his duplicitous partner Val (Gregg Henry); Val  helped Porter pull off a $140,000 heist from the Chinese mob and then  stabbed - well, shot, if you really wanna know - his buddy in the back,  leaving him for dead.
But heavies rarely go down without a fight, and  when Porter makes an unexpected recovery some months down the road, he  hits the mean streets to track down Val and collect his $70,000 cut by  any means necessary.
This is where all the afore-mentioned  unpleasantness kicks in.
"Payback" is so deliriously violent that audiences expecting a cuddly  crime yarn a la the last few "Lethal Weapons" are going to be shocked  into submission.
And speaking of submission, one of the recurring  vicious plot threads likely to distress unsuspecting viewers involves  the kinky machinations of an Asian dominatrix named Pearl ("Ally  McBeal"'s Lucy Liu), a gal who mingles pleasure and pain with malicious  glee.
Like it or not, the supporting cast includes many colorful roles  like the above, and their featured sidetracks are far more fun to behold  than Porter's pulpy lust for revenge.
As assorted lowlifes, David  Paymer, James Coburn, William Devane and Kris Kristofferson steal more  than their share of scenes.
Much has been made of the fact that "Payback" had quite a troubled  production schedule - apparently director Brian Helgeland's cut of the  film did not appease Gibson, or something of the like, and a decent  amount of new footage was reshot in order to lighten the tone a bit.
It  sort of shows: The first half of the movie is exceedingly dark and  brooding in ways that are almost distancing, while act two exceedingly  lets humor (mostly of the black comedy variety) and its star's  never-fail charm seep into the mix.
The hard-to-classify final result -  you try putting it in the appropriate genre - is dangerously uneven but  still a decent game of double-crossing and one-upmanship.. . 
