Directed by: Peter Lord, Nick Park Written by: Peter Lord, Nick Park, Karey Kirkpatrick. The chickens of Tweedy's farm are plotting an escape.
They're tired of lives  filled with nothing but laying as many eggs as possible or being sent to the  chopping block.
One courageous chicken, Ginger (Julia Sawalha), leads the  group against the evil Mrs. Tweedy (The excellent Miranda Richardson) and  the clueless Mr. Tweedy (Tony Haygarth).
What Ginger lacks in brilliant  escape plans she makes up for in sheer determination.
Unfortunately, Mrs.  Tweedy has grown tired of the low income from selling eggs and has bought a  massive pie making machine ("look at the size of that thing!
" one character  says in a nice little "Star Wars" homage).
As Mrs. Tweedy says, "Chickens go  in, pies come out.
" The chickens grow more and more desperate to escape, but  all their plans seem to lead to Ginger being tossed in "the hole".
Things  are looking bleak until Rocky, the flying rooster (Mel Gibson), shows up.
Ginger offers him sanctuary in return for him teaching all the chickens how  to fly, so they can escape over the fence to freedom.
Of course the one  major problem with this plan is that chickens (and roosters) can't fly.
This  doesn't stop the group from trying, and what follows is a great claymation  chicken version of "The Great Escape" (how's that for different?).
Okay, I know what everyone's thinking - how good can a goofy looking movie  about claymation chickens possibly be?
That's exactly what I was thinking  walking into the theater.
To say I was shocked by how much I enjoyed  "Chicken Run" would be an understatement.
I was completely bowled over by  how much I loved this movie - with everything from the eccentric characters  to the great soundtrack and voice-overs.
The one and only complaint I had,  and the only thing that kept the film from a full five star rating, was that  Lord and Park (of "Wallace and Gromit" fame) allow the film to get a bit too  cutesy at times.
However, this is a minor complaint about an otherwise great  movie.
"Chicken Run" is the kind of movie Disney used to be able to make: a  film with a perfect blend of childish humor and subtle jokes for the adults.
These days Disney grants us movies like "Dinosaur" which look amazing but  are aimed entirely at little ones.
"Chicken Run" may not look amazing, since  we've all seen claymation a thousand times over, but it's far more endearing  than "Dinosaur" could ever have hoped to be.
The movie's strongest point is the host of delightfully bizarre characters  (this was the strong point in "The Big Lebowski" too, and look what a great  movie that was).
Rocky could have been your typical heroic seeming phony,  but those characters are usually all show on the outside and nothing on the  inside.
Rocky, on the other hand, is very little on the outside (he still  acts like a chicken) and a lot on the inside.
Gibson's voice-over is  pleasant, but he doesn't add as much to his character as the English actors  do to theirs.
Julia Sawalha turns Ginger into a hilariously manic character,  who always has a smile plastered to her face (actually, most of the chickens  are always smiling) and spouts lines like, "We'll die free chickens, or  we'll die trying!
" The real standout performances (so to speak) come from  two of the supporting cast members: Miranda Richardson ("Sleepy Hollow") as  the evil Mrs. Tweedy, and Jane Horrocks ("Memphis Belle") as the hysterical  chicken, Babs.
Miranda Richardson, who I've always found to be a wonderful  actress since I first saw her as Queen Elizabeth in the "Blackadder" British  comedy series, isn't used as much as I would have liked in "Chicken Run",  but she's delightful when present.
Jane Horrocks' character, the overweight,  flighty (pardon the pun), slightly neurotic Babs is uproariously funny.
She  has a grin constantly plastered to her face and a sewing kit stuck in her  hands.
She also gets some of the film's best lines like: "Me life flashed  before me eyes... that was really boring.
". I think one of the things I found so endearing about "Chicken Run" was that  the characters may have acted like typical heroes at times, but they were  still chickens at heart.
Rocky may be all bravado in front of the chickens,  but whenever a human comes close to him he starts screaming for Ginger to  hide him.
Another great scene like this is where one of the lead chickens  tries to give her flock courage by saying, "The important thing is not to  panic.
" The chickens immediately react by screeching and running around in  circles.
The film's other high points include a great, if slightly underused  soundtrack; some delightfully over-the-top action sequences (watch for  Ginger and Rocky's run in with the pie making machine); and more movie  references than I could count ("Star Wars", "Raiders of the Lost Ark", "The  Great Escape" just to name a few).
To top all this off, the movie runs only  84 minutes in a time when movies running less than 120 are becoming scarce.
I'd recommend "Chicken Run" to anyone who likes slightly childish comedies  and give it a well earned four and a half out of five stars.
Comments?
Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net. Past reviews can be found at: http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/JohnBeachem.htm,. http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or  http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem. * * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.. . 
