THE MATRIX (Warner Bros. - 1999) Cast: Keanu Reeves, Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss,       Hugo Weaving, Gloria Foster, Joe Pantoliano Screenplay by the Wachowski Brothers Produced by Joel Silver Directed by the Wachowski Brothers Running time: 136 minutes . Note: Some may consider portions of the following text to be spoilers.
Be forewarned.
-------------------------------------------------------------.    If one only considers their excellent previous film, the taut,    intensely-plotted lesbians-versus-the-mob caper picture BOUND, there    would appear to be little to connect the Wachowski Brothers with the    dazzling futuristic thriller THE MATRIX, but when taking into account    their background as Chicago-based comic book writers, the picture    quickly clears.
Wildly imaginative and visually frenetic, THE MATRIX    is essentially a sensational live-action comic book put to celluloid,    and reaches spectacular new heights for this film genre.
Already filmmakers of particular distinction on the basis of their    attention-grabbing debut picture, THE MATRIX cements the reputation    of Larry and Andy Wachowski as first-rate visual stylists who know    how to make every shot count.
Thanks to the bravura work by    cinematographer Bill Pope, who shoots the dark picture with an    appealing glossy sheen, this is a fabulous-looking movie, rich in    fantastic art design and employing groundbreaking visual technology    which, in the hands of visual effects director John Gaeta, result in    some truly stunning visceral sequences which overload the cool    quotient.
As incredible as the film is simply to look at, it's bolstered by an    elaborately-constructed story spanning time and reality, with    elements as disparate as mythology and Lewis Carroll factoring    prominently into the tale in surprisingly cohesive fashion.
(The    Wachowskis are so thorough in regards to the latter that not only are    there overt "Alice In Wonderland" and "Through The Looking Glass"    references, in one scene they even playfully threw footage of    scampering rabbits on a background TV set.
)  Given that one of the    joys of the picture is to unweave its unusually well-developed    storyline (and that promotional teasers are intentionally vague),    suffice it to say that THE MATRIX initially tantalizes through    deliberately-oblique scenes which intrigue, leaving gaping holes    without trying our patience, and eventually reveals itself to be a    futuristic Things Are Not What They Seem To Be variant, with a ragtag    group of survivors including the zen-like Morpheus (Lawrence    Fishburne) and Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss) recruiting computer hacker    Neo (Keanu Reeves) to help save the world.
It's comic book mentality    run amok, more ambitious than it perhaps ought to be, but it's far    more consistent and better realised than the similarly-styled THE    FIFTH ELEMENT.
Aside from the flashy, hyperkinetic camerawork, the film    distinguishes itself through its arresting action sequences.
The    Wachowskis were clearly influenced by John "More Bullets" Woo, and    the picture's gunfire battles, especially one involving Neo and    Trinity pinned down in the lobby of an office building by the    sinister Agents, are spectacular -- the best in any American action    picture since, not coincidentally, Woo's own FACE/OFF.
As the    steaming spent shell cases rain down in slow motion and marble    pillars are pulverized in the frenzy of ammunition, it's an    adrenaline thrill to watch the heroic characters performing    impossibly evasive gymnastic stuntwork amidst the cheerfully wanton    violence.
The martial arts fight sequences are similarly jaw-dropping    and almost certainly the best to ever come from a North American    film.
Impressively choreographed by Hong Kong stunt master Yuen Wo    Ping and vastly energetic, the wired hand-to-hand combat in    conjunction with the energized camerawork produce such eye-popping    results that they appear to be straight out of video games and    Japanese anime, showcasing limitless flexibility of the combatants in    terms of speed and fluid airborne motion.
Through it all, the actors    are imbued with a glamorous cool chic, adorning ultra-hip    black-dominated apparel with the requisite sunglasses; this is a    picture which not only looks great, but where it's also crucial to    look great.
The film also sounds terrific due to stellar sound work by David    Lee, who captures each squib with precision, and through the    fierce score by Don Davis (who's assisted by a top-notch rock    soundtrack featuring the likes of Rage Against The Machine and    Prodigy).
From top to bottom, THE MATRIX is a technically superb    accomplishment.
With the riveting imagery on display in the picture, the best that    the actors can hope to fare is to avoid being overwhelmed by the    visuals, and they're largely up to the challenge.
While Reeves and    Fishburne acquit themselves admirable in the physical aspects of    their roles, the actors who leave the greatest impression are Moss,    whose commanding presence as a leather-clad warrior reminded me of    Michelle Pfeiffer's Catwoman in BATMAN RETURNS and Famke Janssen's    lethal Xenia Onatopp from GOLDENEYE and who tackles her intense    action sequences with a ferocious vigor, and veteran Australian    actor Hugo Weaving as the menacing Agent Smith, who has a wonderfully    flat, dispassionate delivery, speaking his lines without really    moving his lips.
While THE MATRIX has its share of flaws -- its coda is far less    inventive than the rest of the picture, the laboured love story plays    as if it was tossed in as a concession, the zen dialogue often feels    like third-rate Yodaisms, and the Cypher character (Wachowski regular    Joe Pantoliano) tips his hand far too early -- it's still a wild ride    with much more interesting writing than per the norm.
The film isn't    as provocative as it's likely meant to be, but it ably takes the    audience into a memorable world with unprecedented dazzling visuals.
"Whoa," whispers an amazed Neo during one scene; it's also the effect    which THE MATRIX leaves.
-- Alex Fung (aw220@freenet.carleton.ca) | http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/~aw220/ "X-FILES fans come up to me in malls expecting me to be able to fill them  in on the whole conspiracy.
Half the time I have no idea what they're  talking about.
" - Martin Landau. . 
