Seen on 17 October 1997 with Lynne and Sandy for $7.75 at the Port Washington Cinemas.
There is something compelling about *Kiss the Girls* that transcends its inherent misogyny and depiction of depraved behavior.
You want to find out how they catch the man who is kidnapping beautiful and talented women and who kills the ones who break the rules--his rules.
Along the way, though, you are imbued with a certain uncomfortable feeling that also transcends the movie.
Unless you're a serial killer yourself, there is nothing entertaining about women being held captive and forced to do things against their will, despite the porn industry's images that counter that idea.
The movie is very carefully set up to make you want to care about finding the killer.
Alex Cross (Morgan Freeman) is a police psychologist whose niece is kidnapped in the Research Triangle in North Carolina.
Kate McTiernan (Ashley Judd) is an doctor who is passionate about her work and very gutsy and forthright.
This, according to the movie's epistemology, makes her ripe for being the next victim.
But she manages to get away, and insists on helping Alex find the culprit.
This is where the movie takes a few unbelievable turns--why on Earth would these characters not *once* think of calling for backup?
In New York City, if a cop is even thought to be shot, 40 officers arrive on the scene in a variety of vehicles.
Why wouldn't an experienced detective call for back up?
Because making sense and making suspense do not always mix... . Ashley Judd really stands out at Kate.
One aspect that I really enjoyed was that when she escapes, runs through the woods, falls off a cliff and suffers hypothermia -- it looks real.
It's not like other filems where heronines do all of it without scratching a nail.
Her run through the woods is full trips and falls and a lot of bruises; you are there with her every step of the way, and that really makes the audience empathize.
What is disturbing throughout the film is the idea that somehow these women made themselves victims simply because they were smart and therefore visible.
There is probably a good reason why there are so few female serial killers, and this movie shows why, in so many ways.
It's offensive in that it is implied that compliant women are safe and the victim is to blame.
Along the way, a few red herrings are tossed our way to "enhance" the mystery, but formulaic movies defy these efforts.
Also starring were Cary Elwes, Tony Goldwyn, Bill Nunn, and Gina Ravera.
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html. . 
