There is nothing more compelling then watching a think about it film; and its obvious that director John Genry wanted to give us something distinguished to contemplate in his latest epic The Ice Storm.
Set in the mutable period of the 1970s, sexual and sociable change takes place between adults and children who dont realize the full repercussions of their actions.
Thus a storm brews, but this films focus is definitely not on the harsh weather that adds to (but does not make) the icy cold feel from start to end.
Ben Hood (Kevin Kline) is having an affair with Janey Carver (Sigourney Weaver) behind the back of wife Elena (Joan Allen), who is trying not to notice the obvious signs that their marriage is falling apart.
Meanwhile their 14-year-old daughter Wendy (Christina Ricci) is testing the limits of adolescents by sexually experimenting with both Janeys sons Mike (Elijah Wood) and Sandy (Adam Hann-Byrd).
Wendys older brother Paul (Toby Maguire) narrates the story, and at the same time pursues his own sexual interests and desire to lose his virginity; chasing a local girl with no idea how to achieve, well, what he is after.
When Ben and Elenas relationship begins to fall about, and they attend a partner swapping party, many issues about a changing society are raised.
Sometimes the shepherd needs the comfort of the sheep, the town reverend states to Janey.
I'm going to try hard not to understand the implications of that, she replies.
A chain of events occur to all the main characters where they desire something, yet their selfish cravings hurt others around them and cause breakdowns in people  and situations (and very occasionally, the film).
Whilst these character relationships can be crowned as The Ice Storms greatest asset, many would also argue them to be its most obvious weakness.
This is due to the shallow and emotionless feelings that the characters portray - its almost as if John Genry wants us not to care for them.
If only he had taken the risk of veering the plot off the straight and narrow path that The Ice Storm continuously follows - perhaps then we would truly have a classic to be remembered.
With the exceptions of Ben Hoods only outburst of emotion and relationship problems between the married couples, the films unique style is often to avoid direct conflicts between characters yet at the same time make the scenes feel tense and neurotic.
Please dont get me wrong - The Ice Storm is a rare experience and its excellence will appeal to many audiences, but if you are not interested in what youve heard from me so far there is little chance that the film will please you.
As to the amount of fulfillment the icy cold characters can give is purely a matter of opinion.
I would, however, go as far to say that they appear to be so emotionless that when the film rears its frosty behind into tragic and climatic situations, we are left staring blankly at the screen, hoping that its next move would be a show of emotion that lasts more than 30 seconds.
Thankfully, The Ice Storm never makes the same fatal mistake featured in films such as Her Majesty Mrs Brown, where the films main focus is an attempt at a loving relationship that ends up looking detestable and off putting.
No  this film is put together carefully and sharply, where the main message is definitely something intended to make you think.
Although the film ends up splintering itself by the very foundations that makes it unique, The Ice Storm is an intriguing story of change and transformation inside a world of harsh realities and consequences.. . . 
