I am constantly talking about hype.
You know, the stuff that Hollywood sends out to all of the people who see a movie.
It's called marketing, it's called milking the heck out of everything the critics say, and it's about aiming towards an audience and offering them something (supposedly) new.
So any film that might break away from the Hollywood formula (and there are so few of them) it is immediately loved and cherished...at least it's supposed to be.
Three Kings is a film that made me think, what's wrong with me?
They is a majorly critically acclaimed film and is said to be one of the early Oscar contenders...but I didn't really like it that much.
For all of the gloss and glamour I was left to wonder what this movie would have done without so much critical hype.
It's the end of the Gulf War.
Treaties have been signed, and troops sent back.
There's an air of celebration in the air.
But when Troy Barlow (Wahlberg) finds a map in a guy's butt that leads to a place that has millions in Kuwait gold, and he shows the map to Archie Gates (Clooney) who wants to retire in style, the war isn't over for any of them.
Teamed up with Chief Elgin (Ice Cube) and dim-witted Conrad Vig (Spike Jonze) they set out to recover the gold and use it for their own purposes.
But when they break into a bunker where the gold is, their consciences catch up with them.
Iraqi troops come in and slaughter most of the people, they also begin to attack the Americans.
The group decides to help all of the people they can, get then out of Iraq, and help them cross the Iranian border so that they can be free of Sadaam.
But getting there won't be easy.
Another movie (American Beauty being the other) that is a depressing Oscar contender.
I think that the cinematography and art direction both deserve Oscars.
But as for the rest of this edgy film, (perhaps a screenplay nod) I didn't see any other big wins.
Sure the way the film was shot was awesome and totally cool (OK, I know those aren't the best descriptive words) but no one stood out to me as being Academy material.
The film does however paint a portrait of what is wrong with war, and why we shouldn't have any more wars because of all the pain and suffering people endure.
While some people may say that this film is too violent, I think that almost every scene of violence was there for a reason.
If we could just get to the root of hate, the world would be a better place.
So if your looking for an interesting look into the Gulf War (I recomend you refresh yourself on what happened by looking it up on the Internet before you go) Three Kings is the one, but for me, it only gets ** 1/2 stars.
The Young-Uns: The film is probably too violent for most people, it is a war movie after all.
Language and a sex scene also appear.
You should also have an understanding of the Gulf War.
Good Age 15 & Up. A Review by Frankie Paiva The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com Visit my website at http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic . . 
