A mysterious big alien thingie is found at the bottom of the ocean.
The inevitable team of experts are taken down to it, left alone and get on each others nerves before dying one by one.
"Sphere" may not be the worst Michael Crichton novel ever written, but  then I haven't read "Binary" or "Rising Sun".
They'd have to try hard  to beat the monosyllabic, shaggy-dog story-telling of "Sphere" the  novel.
So, while a film of "Sphere" shouldn't be good, it can't be  worse than its source.
But it is, yessiree.
Unfortunately, it's not bad enough to be an  enjoyable Bad Movie, just bad enough to be tedious.
The setup is this: a mile-long (aerodynamically streamlined!
)   starship is found on the ocean floor with a large golden disco-ball  within.
Obviously this is a case for an elite alien contact team.
Alas, they have to make do with one headed by the narcolepsy inducing  Dustin Hoffman.
Inevitably, a storm traps them in their seafloor base  for the (also inevitable) monster attack.
That setup is hardly promising, but things get worse.
A military  sidekick to the team (Queen Latifah) gets smothered by a large swarm  of jellyfish.
As Sharon Stone (wittilly cast against type as a genius  marine biologist / medico / biochemist / drug-addict) extracts  tendrils from the dead Latifah's nostrils, Hoffman honks insincerely:  "It must have been terrible.
I can't imagine the pain.
"  Even more  ludicrously, we are asked to believe that the prelapsarian Hoffman and  wonderbuff Stone were lovers.
(Stone's faux-dyke cropped hair and  bulging eyes makes her looks positively hydrocephalic.
)  Samuel L  Jackson pops up as a brilliant mathematician with attitude who gets  knocked out before he can do his badass shtick.
Later, the whiny  astrophysicist (who is not a big-name actor) gets capped because he  is not a big-name actor, and his colleagues activate the station defence  system which starts electrical fires every time it is used.
Stone  decides that the best way to get everyone's attention is to plant  explosives everywhere.
Slap in the fact they never explain what the  sphere actually is or what it's doing on board the starship, the lazy  performances, ho-hum direction, plot inanities ...
There is one good moment, where a plausible explanation for  assembling such a disparate team is revealed.
But this is one dull  ember in a black hole of a movie.
Barry Levison has done much better  than this.
[*/misfire] and extracting wisdom teeth on the Sid and  Nancy scale.
-- paul-michael agapow (agapow@computer.org), La Trobe Uni, Infocalypse "There is no adventure, there is no romance, there is only trouble and desire.
". . 
