 What Planet Are You From?
Reviewed by Christian Pyle Directed by Mike Nichols   Written by Garry Shandling, Michael Leeson, Ed Solomon, and Peter Tolan Starring Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, John Goodman, Greg Kinnear, and Ben Kingsley Official Site: http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/whatplanet/ Grade:  C+. Somewhere way out there is a planet with a society that has advanced beyond the need for reproduction.
However, they haven't gotten past the desire for conquest yet, so the planet's leader (Ben Kingsley) dispatches H1449-6 (Garry Shandling) to Earth to impregnate a human female.
(If this works, they'll send lots more guys to knock up our women, and the offspring will eventually take over the planet).
The alien operative comes to Earth with the human name Harold Anderson and a job at a Phoenix bank.
His slimy co-worker Perry (Greg Kinnear) takes Harold to an AA meeting to pick up chicks.
There they meet Susan Hart (Annette Bening), who's just given up a life of debauchery in favor of sobriety.
The aliens have an unusual mode of travel between planets:  they beam themselves into the restrooms of airplanes in flight.
So, while Harold seeks a receptive womb, FAA investigator Roland Jones (John Goodman) is looking into the bright lights and turbulence that accompanied Harold's arrival on Earth.
Although skeptical after twenty years on the job, Roland soon deduces the truth about Harold.
On their first date, Susan tells Harold that she's not going to have sex again until she's married.
The next time he sees her, Harold proposes.
After some deliberation, Susan accepts, and they're off to Vegas.
Even as he moves closer to completing his mission, Harold begins to have feelings for Susan that weren't covered in his training.
Will he be able to leave her when the baby is born?
>From "The Graduate" to "The Birdcage," Mike Nichols has directed fresher, funnier movies than this one.
The laughs in "What Planet Are You From?
" come in clumps separated by slow and predictable sequences.
The script by Shandling and company could have used another rewrite or two.
It benefits from the fact that sex is always funny, but it doesn't find any new approaches to familiar gags.
Several of the funniest bits are beaten to death with repetition.
For example, Harold's artificial penis hums when he gets an erection.
The first time around, the joke is really funny; by the fifteenth time, it's just annoying.
In the varied ensemble cast, Annette Bening stands out.
She plays her part of the recovering alcoholic seeking meaning and stability with the earnestness of drama.
As a result, Susan is a well-developed, three-dimensional character.
Although the men get higher billing, the supporting actresses provide many of the funniest moments.
Caroline Aaron is hilarious as Roland's suspicious wife Nadine who believes that his sudden interest in work must mean he's having an affair.
Linda Fiorentino plays Perry's wife who tries to seduce Harold to get even with her husband (who actually is having an affair).
Nobody can play a seduction scene as well as she can.
Despite having starred in two ground-breaking television series, Garry Shandling remains a comedian, not an actor.
He can deliver funny lines with skillful timing, but he can't bring a character to life.
This flaw doesn't bode well for his career as a movie star, and I predict he'll find his way back to the small screen or be content with supporting roles.
Speaking of supporting actors .
.
.
Greg Kinnear and Ben Kingsley CAN act but this movie doesn't give them much to work with.
They both try hard but their characters are standard stock figures we've seen a dozen times before.
I especially hope to see Kinnear in a meatier role soon.
He proved his talent with his Oscar-nominated performance in "As Good as It Gets" but hasn't challenged himself since.
Bottom Line:  A handful of hilarious scenes separated by genial but stale plot development. Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review:  http://www.madreview.com/main.html. . 
