AUSTIN POWERS: THE SPY WHO SHAGGED ME Cast: Mike Myers, Heather Graham, Michael York, Seth Green, Robert Wagner, Rob Lowe, Mindy Sterling, Tim Robbins, Elizabeth Hurley Director: Jay Roach Producers: Suzanne Todd, Jennifer Todd, Demi Moore, Eric McLeod, John Lyons, Mike Myers Screenplay: Mike Myers & Michael McCullers Cinematography: Ueli Steiger Music: George S. Clinton Australia distributor: Village Roadshow Australian theatrical release: June 17, 1999 Reviewed by Luke Buckmaster. On the Buckmaster scale of 0 stars (bomb), to 5 stars (a masterpiece): 3 and a half stars. Recently some of my readers have expressed their belief that I look for depth and meaning in films even when I shouldn't be; that is, I look for a profound message when I should be enjoying the ride for what it is worth.
Whilst there is probably some truth behind this argument, in my defense is this review of Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me, a movie that is as deep as a blonde joke and half as meaningful.
Yet there is something entirely satisfying with Mike Myers' comedic formula that makes this film a delightful romp from start to finish.
Occasionally overworked and very occasionally problematic but never boring or unfunny, The Spy Who Shagged Me has been accused of all sorts of cinematic sins, but none that make it any less enjoyable for the viewer.
Thanks to an even livelier atmosphere than the first film, this piece of lavish cinema is better than its predecessor in terms of wit, energy and fun.
Which, I suppose, is what Austin Powers is all about - celebrating life with a warped sense of humor and an acute sense of the absurd.
Or perhaps, Mike Myers is just having fun.
Agent Kensington (Elizabeth Hurley, sexy star of the original) is quickly and effectively disposed of in the opening scene of The Spy Who Shagged Me, paving the way for Austin Powers' (Mike Myers) new partner, Felicity Shagwell (Heather Graham) who he meets in 1969.
You see, Austin's archenemy Dr Evil (Mike Myers) has traveled back in time and stolen his "mojo", the thing that gives him his super shagedelic powers.
Austin must not only regain his mojo but also save the world from destruction, as Dr Evil has built what he calls a "death star" on the moon (Evil's son, Scott, played by Seth Green, is well aware of his lack of ability to choose an original name).
The film movies smoothly along, introducing a spectrum of quirky characters.
Fat Bastard (Mike Myers again) is an obese evil spy; Mini-Me (Verne Troyer) is Dr Evil's one-eighth replica; and Frau Farbissina (Mindy Sterling) is Dr Evil's peculiar love interest (well, sort of).
Memorable moments include cameos from Jerry Springer (who is fortunate to star in one of the film's best scenes), Woody Harrelson and Willie Nelson; a hilarious rendition of 'What if God Was One of Us'; and a clever scene that utilizes silhouettes on the side of a tent.
Everything is directed with a good sense of bad taste by filmmaker Jay Roach, who succeeds on both commercial and artistic levels.
The Spy Who Shagged Me has a colorful and engaging visual feel that captures the lively spirit of the swinging sixties perfectly, thanks to its costume design and cinematography by Ueli Steiger (Godzilla).
This film is one of the better sequels of late, and definitely one of the funniest comedies I've seen for awhile.
It's a refreshing picture that reminds you of how good it is to laugh, and laugh loudly.
How would I feel about another sequel?
Groovy, baby.. . . 
