Loki (Damon) and Bartleby (Affleck) are angels who have been  expelled from heaven and sent to Wisconsin.
All they want to  do is go home.
They find a loophole in the divine punishment.
Cardinal Glick (Carlin) is offering absolution to the first  people to walk through the rededicated St. Michael's church  in New Jersey.
Loki and Bartleby forsake the cheese state for  the garden state and a chance to reenter heaven.
Only if God is proven wrong, then the very fabric of creation  is destroyed.
So, to prevent them, Bethany (Fiorentino as a  Catholic abortion clinic worker suffering a crisis of faith)  is given the mission of stopping them by Metatron (Rickman as  the angelic voice of God).
Helping her are the prophets Jay  (Mewes) and Silent Bob (Smith) who functioned as Greek chorus  in Smith's first film Clerks.
Along the way, she encounters the  13th apostle Rufus (Rock) and Serendipity a muse now working as  a stripper (Hayek).
Meanwhile, a demon from Hell and three  rollerblading, hockey stick wielding demonic thugs try to stop  her and her motley crew from completing their divine mission.
This film has been the victim of a boycott campaign launched by  people who feel it mocks the Catholic faith.
I'm not a Catholic,  but I know a fair bit about Catholic theology.
I also saw this  film with a fairly devout Catholic.
Neither of us saw anything  objectionable in this movie.
Some characters say and do things  which the Church might disapprove of.
But the characters who  are presented as angelic or saints always stay within established  Catholic doctrine.
In fact, this is one of the few movies I have  seen which correctly identifies angels as a separate order of  creation (as opposed to the It's a Wonderful Life belief that  dead people become angels).
It comes down firmly on the side of  the virgin birth, the miracle of the incarnation, the absolute  power of God, and the authority of the Church.
In fact, I can't  think of a movie made this half of the century which so strongly  affirmed the power and authority of the Church.
Having said all that, I understand why people feel the need to  complain about this film.
It suggests one can be a good Catholic  and yet disagree with Church policy (Bethany is prochoice but is  found to be righteous by Loki).
The prophets (who are genuinely  good at heart and clearly instruments of God) are drug dealers.
But the key issue is that God is depicted as having a sense of  humour.
And religion, as we all know, is a very serious  business.
I think those people are wrong.
I like the idea that one can be  a good person but sometimes do bad things.
That suggests we all  have some chance at being good.
I like the argument that God is  about redemption, salvation, and hope (all happy things) but all  we focus on is sin, damnation, and punishment.
And if Smith's  God acts in incomprehensible and bizarre ways, well what do you  expect of a divine being so awesomely powerful that humans cannot  even hear Him talk without being killed by the force of His voice.
I think Smith takes religion pretty seriously and incorporates it  into his everyday life.
And I think he took that view with this  movie, trying to bring out the spiritual aspects of mundane  activities and mundane people.
I think he has some interesting  things to say about religion and he's gathered some interesting  actors to say it.
Rickman is great as the voice of God.
Damon  and Affleck have a great time as the two desperately unhappy  angels yearning to return home.
Rock is superb as the apostle  with a mission, playing his part perfectly.
And Smith may be  the world's only genuinely funny mime as the brilliant and  insightful Silent Bob.
The rest of the cast never sink below  good, although they rarely achieve excellence.
The problem in this movie lies not in the cast nor the idea, but  in the general lack of jokes.
I did laugh.
I enjoyed the  Catholicism Wow movement and the not so subtle attack on the  Disney corporation.
Everybody in the theatre laughed at times.
But there was no hysterical laughter, no uproarious moments.
There were moments with decent laughs and no more.
As comedy,  this film is average at best.
As a movie to make you think,  it score a little above average.
It's worth catching at matinee  prices but I don't think I could recommend full price for it.. . 
