rated R 116 minutes 20th Century Fox starring Jim Carrey, Renee Zellweger, Chris Cooper, and Robert Forster written by Mike Cerrone, Bobby Farrelly, and Peter Farrelly directed by Bobby Farrelly and Peter Farrelly. Perfect casting has never been a problem for Jim Carrey.
Who else could have  made The Mask believable and fun?
What type of person would Truman Burbank  have been without him?
He has approached all of his latest roles with energy,  and there is no exception here.
Whatever material the Farrelly brothers hand  him, whether itâ^Ŕ^Ůs golden laugh-out-loud comedy or gross-out trash, he  delivers it with vigor.
Perhaps he is a little too full of energy for his  own, and this movie's good.
This is the role Carrey seemed born to play and  he fits it perfectly.
He is so good itâ^Ŕ^Ůs scary.
The script, however, is  frightening for other reasons.
Charlie Baileygates (Jim Carrey) is a peaceable Rhode Island state trooper  that's constantly taken advantage of by everyone around him.
His wife sleeps  with an African American midget on their wedding day, and later produces  three large, black genius sons.
He doesnâ^Ŕ^Ůt seem to care the whole town is  laughing at him behind his back.
After a day of unusually tough verbal abuse,  Charlie cracks revealing Hank.
Hank is the complete opposite of Charlie.
Hank  likes to fight, is less than a gentleman to women, and wreaks havoc wherever  he goes.
Doctors determine that Charlie has schizophrenia, and give him  medication to control the problem.
Irene (Renee Zellweger), a golf course  manager, is a young woman that gets sent to jail unawares of her boyfriendâ^Ŕ^Ůs  illegal conduct he has involved her in.
Charlie must escort her to a New York  jail.
Before leaving, Charlie forgets to grab his medication.
As both of his  personalities begin to fall for Irene, Charlie must win the battle between  Hank and himself before he loses Irene for good.
The Farrelly brothers are famous for their work on Dumb and Dumber and  Thereâ^Ŕ^Ůs Something About Mary.
In interviews they have tried to evaporate  their title of the gross-out kings of comedy by saying things like, â^Ŕ^ÜWhat is  gross?
We do everything only to be funny.â^Ŕ^Ý Not to be too graphic, but I do  not find a thirty second shot of a chicken shoved up a manâ^Ŕ^Ůs behind at all  humorous.
This type of shocking humor is copious.
As the film continues, it  becomes so abundant that it just isn't funny anymore.
An early scene  involving a cow that just will not die will have animal activists screaming,  and will have everyone else screaming with laughter.
Charlieâ^Ŕ^Ůs three black  sons (flawlessly performed by Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee, and Jerod  Mixon) are the only things regularly funny in this movie.
The rest crosses  the line of good taste too often.
The Farrelly brothers have the wrong  approach to making people laugh.
When they did the hair-raising hair gel  scene in Mary, it was outrageous because it came out of nowhere.
With this  movie, we expect the gross humor.
Therefore, it isnâ^Ŕ^Ůt nearly as hilarious or  shocking when performed.
The romance fails too.
Perhaps the offscreen chemistry between Carrey and  Zellweger is good, but their onscreen work is horrible.
Irene doesnâ^Ŕ^Ůt match  the Charlie/Hank character, and the screenplay robs Zellweger of any comic  opportunities.
She tries to be her usual exuberant and shining female  character, but the script works against her.
Supporting performances from  Robert Forster and American Beautyâ^Ŕ^Ůs Chris Cooper do nothing to help the  film.
Me, Myself & Irene is about a half hour too long for all of the above  reasons.
The romance moves along at an unhurried pace, while the comedy wants  to move faster.
Even if the Farrellyâ^Ŕ^Ůs borrow much from their two previous films, they do one  thing here that is genuinely interesting and original.
Stay for the credits,  and youâ^Ŕ^Ůll see the name of every single extra that worked on the film, as  well as a picture of the place they appeared in the movie.
This is certainly  an intriguing concept, one that is far more interesting than this shocking,  yet bland movie.. . 
