  Adam Sandler is the luckiest man on earth.
After leaving Saturday Night Live, he descended into the movie business.
Such movies as the exquisite Bulletproof with Damon Waynes, the classy Billy Madison, and, the sensationally dead Happy Gilmore.
In 1998, Sandler starred in The Wedding Singer, a clunker of a movie that was a surprise hit with pubescent teen boys.
Now, riding on the success of that movie, along comes The Waterboy, which isn't as annoying as Gilmore or Madison, but, not as refreshing and funny as it wants to be.
Sandler plays 31-year-old Bobby Boucher, a waterboy for a local football team in the swamps of Louisiana.
He lives with his mama (Kathy Bates, who saves the movie from complete boredom), and has never gone to school.
But, as the coach (Henry Winkler) for the football team finds out, Bobby has a gift.
When Bobby concentrates hard enough, he can see the faces of all the people who made fun of him through his life, and this sets him off, knocking down the opposite team mate so hard, the can't get up.
Think Forrest Gump on steroids.
The Waterboy, directed by Frank Coraci, is too lame-brained for most adults, yet, too filled with blue humor for kids, who will be the only ones to like this utter fiasco.
It will probably be the funniest thing for a 12-year-old, while, at the same time, the perfect spot to snooze for his parents.
Aside from Bates being a highlight, Winkler also makes for a couple of smiles here and there, especially when he shows Bobby a tatoo on his ass (just the look on Sandler's face is worth sitting through the soggy 30 minutes that proceed it).
I also liked the fact the Winkler's character turns out to be sort of gay.
Fairuza Bulk is also a plus, as Bobby's wannabe girlfriend.
She offers so much spunk and energy to a small, dead-weight role that her character is somewhat more interesting than Sandler's.
The DVD of Waterboy is nice.
The soundtrack is loud and crisp, while the special features are mediocre.
For the Sandler fan, it will be the ultimate gift.. . 
