If there is one universal rule in Hollywood, it is that all successful movies will have a horde of clones following close behind.
Such is the case with "I Know What You Did Last Summer".
A cheap, predictable, pathetic excuse for a slasher movie, it tries to follow in the footsteps of Wes Craven's highly entertaining "Scream" with disasterous results.
Four teenagers celebrate their graduation from high school in typical teen age fashion.
They drive to the beach, get drunk, and head back only to hit someone on the road.
They then choose to dump the body in the sea, make a pact never to mention it again, and go on with their happy little lives.
A year later, they begin receiving threats and are eventually attacked by someone who claims to know what they did the previous year.
I'm going to keep the rest of this review very short, because I don't want to go off on a two hour rant about how awful this movie was.
First, let me point out how completely devoid of anything resembling a scare this film was.
Second, if there is one thing I simply cannot stand it is long chase scenes which drag on for at least twenty minutes only to end in the exact way we knew they were going to before they started.
Third, and final, I'm not going to reveal who the killer is, but if I were to tell you, it would hardly be classified as a spoiler since the character is only introduced at that point.
The only reason I gave this piece of garbage an extra half star is because of the performances of the two female leads.
They both try valiantly to add something to this pitiful excuse for a horror movie, and I commend them for their effort.
Do yourself a favor and steer clear of this one.
I give it a measly star and a half.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick.
Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad.
See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever.
See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com. . 
