One reason I think Jackie Chan is such a hit with American audiences is  because his movies are so much fun.
Known internationally as a martial arts  master, he first appeared in the states with Operation Condor, First Strike,  and Rumble in the Bronx.
More recently, his first American film, Rush Hour,  grossed over $100 million at the box office.
This was mostly due to its  mixture of comedy and nonstop action.
Chan's latest, Shanghai Noon, does not  deviate from the humorous action setup that worked so well before.
This is  basically Rush Hour with spurs and ten gallon hats.
While this may seem like  a disappointing thing at first, it turns out not to be.
Shanghai Noon is the  continuation of a movie I never really wanted to end, and by the time the  film closed, I was asking for more.
Chon Wang (Jackie Chan) is an Imperial Guard who gets sent to America to  recover Princess Pei Pei (Ally McBeal's Lucy Liu) whom the Emperor believes  was kidnapped.
She actually went voluntarily, and gets tricked into working  with a large group of Chinese immigrants on a railroad in present day Nevada.
Roy O'Bannon (Owen Wilson) is the talkative leader of a group of bandits who  make the mistake of robbing the train that Wong is on.
About five thrilling  action scenes later, O'Bannon and Wong decide to team up together to rescue  the Princess, and return her to China.
Many adventures involving a variety  of villains and a variety of weapons ensue that will test the two friends'  trust for each other.
Shanghai Noon is probably the funniest movie released so far this year, and  is easily Chan's best.
The fish out of water and radically different buddy  plotline works magically again.
As the chatty and sensitive O'Bannon, Owen  Wilson shows much more potential than his previous efforts in Armageddon and  The Haunting.
He provides a nice alternative to the annoying Chris Tucker.
Much of the film's humor derives from racial differences.
When a Western  couple is debating why Wong is wearing a dress (it's actually his Imperial  uniform) they decide he must be one of those Jews.
Similar jokes involving  the Chinese, Native Americans, and African Americans are also present.
However, the film is lighthearted, and the jokes aren't nearly as shocking as  those of, say, Blazing Saddles.
In addition to some offensive humor, there  are a barrelful of clichés we've all seen before.
These too get effectively  covered up by the film's fast paced action and excitement.
Jackie Chan  retains his usual charm, and when you see Wong fighting a number of Crow  Indians or a saloon of men with his bare hands, you know you are watching  classic Chan.
Pei Pei gets to kick some butt too.
Lucy Liu, who will star in  the kung fu heavy Charlie's Angels, proves she's no damsel in distress.
It's  nice to see a female character tangle with the guys.
This movie has the  perfect balance of comedy and action, but one must wonder how long this  racial divide blockbuster action picture formula can last.
I'm not sure  exactly whose idea it was to open Noon the same week as Mission: Impossible  2, but it is a worthy competitor.
It is not only a better bang for your buck  action flick, it achieves humor that is impossible to find in M:I-2.
After  the film ends, watch for the usual outakes, a token, and often best part of a  Chan film.
This movie embodies what summer really should be, lots and lots of  fun.. 
