The Thomas Crown Affair cannot escape.
There will be a countless amount of people that will compare it to the old original and say, wow, that was so much better.
There will also be people that compare to it the recent Entrapment and say, wow, it's so much better than that stupid.
insepid piece of trash.
And that's where The Thomas Crown Affair falls, right about in the middle.
While much more plausible and slick than Entrapment, it fails to have that classic crime caper feel the original had.
The rich Thomas Crown (Brosnan who's character is basically Bond without the gunfire) enjoys the breathtaking thrill of stealing.
He steals a $100 million dollar Monet in a very slick and sophisticated way, using a method of distraction.
But Catherine, (Russo who can still strut her stuff) an insurance investigator, knows he did it.
She begins to investigate the case and finds herself falling in love.
So begins an erotic game of cat and mouse.
The bond between Catherine and Brosnan begins to form and her love for him goes beyond getting the back the painting.
While the chemistry is good, I really didn't think that most of this stuff could have happened, but this is a highly-styleized (I really hope that is an actual word and that I spelled it correctly) Hollywood film, so you won't notice anyway.
Add in some stunning clothing and you've got The Thomas Crown Affair.
Much like Entrapment, but with more sex (also, a wonderful thing, the two main characters are actually each other's age!
) and romance.
It's also a bit slow and features an annoying Denis Leary character, and topless scenes.
But it's still not as good as the original.
But I still think that you would like this fun crime/romance story that gets *** stars. The Young-Uns: This film contains two sex scenes and three scenes where Rene Russo appears topless.
While none of them are explicit, I'd say the good age is around 13 or 14.
A Review by Frankie Paiva The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer E-Mail Me at SwpStke@aol.com Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic. . 
