Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Manchester) Released in the UK by UIP on May 5, 2000; certificate 15; 119 minutes;  country of origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1. Directed by Miloš Forman; produced by Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey  Sher.
Written by Scott Alexander, Larry Kawaszewski.
Photographed by Anastas Michos; edited by Linzee Klingman, Christopher  Tellefsen.
The comedian Andy Kaufman was perpetually aware that a performance was not  just a piece of material, but an event, happening in a time and place.
He  wanted his audiences to have an experience; to know they were in the room,  watching somebody putting on a show.
People didn't always applaud his  outrageousness as they watched it, but he always got laughs somehow.
Maybe  they would laugh AT him.
Or chuckle afterward, in disbelief.
Or make their  friends crack up by telling them what he did.
The sheer lunacy and audacity  of his acts was hilarious; maybe not first-hand, but certainly in concept,  when you stopped to think about them.
After all, Kaufman is the guy who once went onstage, read "The Great Gatsby"  in its entirety, then walked off.
Whose act once consisted of standing in  silence through the "Mighty Mouse" theme song, except for the "Here I come to  save the day!
" line, which he'd mouth along to.
And who, to close a concert  in the gigantic Carnegie Hall, took all the spectators out for milk and  cookies.
Kaufman was always pulling gags you had to experience, even if that  required you to be the butt of them.
When he died of cancer in 1984, many  thought it was just another practical joke.
There are of course those who hail him as a genius.
His detractors find him  confounding.
Future generations can make up their minds by watching Miloš  Forman's "Man on the Moon", a film which some have described, unfairly, as a  sort of Greatest Hits compilation reel.
Yes, the film has a straightforward  structure in chronological order, and is mostly made up of its hero's onstage  appearances.
But it is therefore a faithful and successful presentation of a  very interesting character, leaving us to love or hate him at will.
The  surprising thing is that so many of Kaufman's antics are amusing in  themselves, and not just as ideas.
This is a very funny picture.
It's also a deeply moving screen biography, following years of success right  through to times of pain, and made by some of the masters of the bio-pic  genre.
Forman, the director, was also the helmsman on the Oscar-winning  Mozart epic "Amadeus" (1984), as well as "The People Vs. Larry Flynt" (1996),  a movie about the controversial publisher of "Hustler" magazine.
The  screenwriters, Scott Alexander and Larry Karszewski, wrote both "Flynt" and  "Ed Wood" (1994).
And Jim Carrey is a terrific choice for the starring role.
It's his second performance as a dramatic lead, and he proves that his turn  in "The Truman Show" was no flash in the pan, letting his eyes and voice  become possessed by his character.
His appearance always seems a little odd,  but that's kinda the point.
Anybody who knew Andy Kaufman will tell you that  he was always "on"; his mind was always pushing something new up his sleeve,  he made you keep your guard up.
"There is no real you," one of the characters  tells him.
That character is his wife.
Of course the essential problem with any film about this man is that it  explains somebody who refused to be explained.
Figuring out what Kaufman was  up to was part of the fun.
Then again, on his deathbed he did ask for a movie  to be made about his life.
Maybe he did think it was important to be  understood.
He just thought that speaking for himself would be a cop-out.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
