Well, when your husband's brutally murdered in front of you, what can you do  but drive halfway across the country in search of a soap opera character?
At  least that's the reaction of Betty Sizemore (Renée Zellweger) in "Nurse  Betty," the latest entry in the cinema of quirk.
Betty waits tables at the Tip Top Diner in a small town in Kansas and dreams  of being a nurse.
Del (Aaron Eckhart), her jerk of a husband, sells cars,  boffs his secretary, and deals stolen cocaine.
The last enterprise brings  hitmen Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris Rock) to his door.
They  murder Del but don't know that Betty is watching from the next room.
Betty  has a "dissociative reaction" that causes her to lapse into the fantasy that  Dr. David Ravell, a character that George McCord (Greg Kinnear) plays on the  soap "A Reason to Love," is her ex-fiance.
Betty packs up the car she'd  borrowed from her husband's lot and headed for LA unaware that ten kilos of  stolen dope are hidden in her trunk.
Since Charlie and Wesley need to find  the drugs and eliminate the witness, they follow Betty into the desert.
Along the way, Charlie begins to fall in love with Betty.
Charlie's love for Betty parallels Betty's love for Dr. Ravell in that both  fall in love with fantasy figures rather than real people.
That irony  produces most of the laughs in this movie that unashamedly mixes light comedy  and film noir tension, as if "Soapdish" collided with "Blood Simple.
"   However, the filmmakers never sacrifice the illusion of realism for cheap  laughs or overly contrived plot twists.
"Nurse Betty" is the least  predictable film I've seen in ages because it refuses to follow generic  conventions.
Despite its strengths, John Richards and James Flamberg's script is thin and  what makes "Betty" work is the excellent cast.
Zellweger gives Betty a  refreshing combination of starry-eyed innocence and steel-willed  determination.
A character who might otherwise have seemed pathetic becomes  instead a heroine.
Freeman offers us a disarmingly sensitive hitman, and the  angry sarcasm of Rock provides a hilarious counterpoint.
Kinnear is quite  good in "Betty" as well, but considering his amazing performance in "As Good  As It Gets" I wish he would take on more substantial roles.
The ghost of the Blair Witch continues to haunt internet marketing.
USA  Films has set up an official site for "A Reason to Love"  (http://www.areasontolove.com/) and a wonderfully tacky fan site for Dr.  Ravell (http://www.nurse-betty.com/drravell/).
Bottom line:  Quirky fun but not for the squeamish.
Read my reviews and others at the Mad Review:  http://www.madreview.com/main.html. . 
