Directed by: Wolfgang Petersen Written by: Sebastian Junger (book), William D. Wittliff. In the Fall of 1991, the Andrea Gail left Gloucester, Mass.
and headed for  the fishing grounds of the North Atlantic.
Two weeks later, an event took  place that had never occurred in recorded history.
That's the tagline for  Wolfgang Petersen's ("Air Force One") "The Perfect Storm", and it pretty  well sums up the film's entire plot.
All we really have are George Clooney  playing the Captain of the Andrea Gail, Billy Tyne; and Mark Whalberg  ("Three Kings") playing his second in command, Billy Shatford, sitting on a  boat getting tossed around by a hurricane.
This is generally all that  happens throughout the film.
Oh sure, there's a little side story about a  coast guard crew and a family trapped on a sail boat, and we get the  occasional glimpses of the crew of the Andrea Gail's families back home.
Yet  all the movie really involves is watching six men stumble around on the deck  of a small fishing ship.
When I first heard about this film I thought that  sounded like a ten minute movie stretched out to no more than an hour and a  half, right?
Wrong, Petersen and Wittliff ("Legends of the Fall") manage to  drag this bloody movie out for more than two excruciating hours!
I'll grant it, "The Perfect Storm" does succeed admirably on one level.
It  tests your abilities to both sustain disbelief and endure sappy melodrama  like few films have before.
As for the suspension of disbelief, that I could  handle (afterall, I watched "Battlefield: Earth", now nothing can compare).
This is despite the fact that we are required to believe a man could climb  up the side of a ship while in the middle of the worst hurricane in recorded  history.
Now I'll admit, I don't know much about boats.
In fact I despise  the things and wild horses couldn't drag me onto one.
However, I'm pretty  sure when the wind is strong enough to make waves two to three hundred feet  high it's going to knock you around a bit more than it does the Andrea  Gail's crew.
As for enduring the sappy melodrama, that I couldn't do.
I'm  sure when this really happened emotions ran high for some time both during  and after the event, but I doubt people were running around screaming cheesy  speeches while VERY dramatic music constantly played around them.
Of course  I could be wrong.
I can forgive a lot in a bad movie if the acting is exceptional, but it's  certainly sub-par in "The Perfect Storm".
George Clooney doesn't even act  like George Clooney (like he usually does).
He acts like a man doing a bad  impersonation of George Clooney.
As though his regular acting wasn't bad  enough, just wait till you see him get mad.
I've never actually seen him act  really angry in a movie before, and now I see why he's never been asked to;  it's hilarious.
Mark Whalberg, who "acted" alongside Clooney in the equally  terrible "Three Kings" last year, seems to have improved some since then,  but given some of the horrifying dialogue he's given it's sometimes hard to  tell.
The rest of the cast amounts to little more than cameos.
We get the  always good Michael Ironside ("Total Recall") as Clooney's evil, money  grubbing boss (is there another kind in Hollywood?
); and the usually  adequate Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio ("The Abyss") as Clooney's love  interest of sorts.
The only other person worth noting is William Fichtner  ("Drowning Mona"), that poor man's Christopher Walken himself, as the crew's  requisite slacker who redeems himself at some point in the story.
So, you're probably asking yourself, is there anything good about this  movie?
Sure, the special effects are quite good.
Anything else?
I'm afraid  not.
Fear not, because there's plenty more that's so laughably bad you might  almost enjoy the film as a result.
The dialogue is so painfully bad I  actually covered my ears at one point.
We get lines like: "One more trip out  there and the Andrea Gail will own you!
Like it owns Billy Tyne!".
Ouch, or  how about: "Fish will gather again for the Andrea Gail.
" If this was a  parody that would actually be funny.
I'm not sure who should be blamed for  the film's overly dramatic score, James Horner for composing it or Wolfgang  Petersen for using it in every scene, dramatic or not.
I think certain  scenes near the film's beginning were intended to show how joyous and fun  fishing for a living can be.
If that was the intent it failed, because  fishing for a living still looks dull and monotonous, just like the film.
I'd recommend "The Perfect Storm" to those with nautical minds, because  they'll probably get something more out of it than I did, and to those who  for some reason enjoy heart tugging, sentimental movies.
I give the movie  two out of five stars.
Oh, and did I mention the special effects?
They're  ever so impressive.
Comments?
Send to: johnbeachem@dependentfilms.net. Past reviews can be found at: http://www.all-reviews.com/reviewers/JohnBeachem.htm,. http://www.epinions.com/user-elerad?public=yes or  http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?John+Beachem. * * * * * - One of the best movies of the year.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad, see it at your own risk.
* - See this one only if you enjoy pain.. . 
