Cast: Harrison Ford, Anne Heche, David Schwimmer, Jacqueline Obradors, Temuera Morrison Director: Ivan Reitman Screenplay: Michael Browning. Australian theatrical release date: June 25. It would make my forehead cringe to think of a story more simple than this: the scruffy pilot Quinn (Harrison Ford) manages to crash a small airplane in the middle of nowhere with prissy women's magazine editor Robin (Anne Heche) as the only passenger.
The two then grumble and groan their way through 6 days and 7 nights; griping and whining at every problem they encounter (and boy, there are a few).
Meanwhile, Quinn's sluttish assistant (Jacqueline Obradors) tempts Robin's finance (David Schwimmer).
Did I mention that it's all based in tropical paradise?
Well, it is - and these exotic islands come fully equipped with wild pigs, fragile mountain floors and even their own set of pirates ("You mean Arrgh?").
With much controversy surrounding the film regarding lesbian Heche giving a "straight" performance, allow me to say this: she does a much, much better job conveying a straight woman than most straight women do.
The main problem with Six Days Seven Nights does not lie in her performance, and came to think of it, nor does it with anybody else's.
Ford, Heche, Obradors and Schwimmer all make passable if not pleasing appearances on the screen; giving a fun sense of improvisation to their roles.
What limits the film from being an inventive, rewarding feel-easy adventure is the far too loose script.
Perhaps if writer Michael Browning had been able to add more creativity to the action scenes, flesh out some of the characters and give the film a better climax, it may have been more convincing as both a romance and an adventure.
Like many poorly written mainstream films (Godzilla, Hard Rain and Independence Day come to mind), the script is awash with one liners - "I'd better not catch you smiling," Robin remarks when Quinn's hand is down her pants, trying to remove a snake.
Whilst often hilarious, these remarks serve as a quick joke, illustrating the fact that it's easier to create a witty remark than it is to build a genuinely funny scenario.
Perhaps director Ivan Reitman's greatest achievement with Six Days Seven Nights was taking us on a journey to practically no where, and having fun along the way.
Having said that, the film is nothing more than some fun - and although you may often find yourself laughing at it, the humor alone may just be enough to tide you over until you see a better, smarter film.
Email bucky@alphalink.com.au to subscribe to my newsletter (unless, of course, you already have) or lukebuckmaster@hotmail.com.au for any inquiries or feedback. Read more of my reviews at Movie Zone: http://moviezone.alphalink.com.au. . 
