Release Date: January 8, 1999 Starring: John Travolta, Robert Duvall, Tony Shalhoub, William H. Macy, Kathleen Quinlan, Bruce Norris, John Lithgow Directed by: Steve Zaillian Distributed by: Buena Vista Pictures MPAA Rating: PG-13 (some strong language)  URL: http://www.execpc.com/~kinnopio/reviews/1999/civilact.htm. Courtroom drama is an overrated genre.
Flashy images often come to mind at the mention of such a setting -- Tom Cruise grilling Jack Nicholson on the stand in A FEW GOOD MEN -- which are often followed by powerful, moving images -- Gregory Peck's majestic voice in TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD.
But after a true count, the courts have given reason for a number of shoddy products that lack substance and are filled with gimmick.
THE RAINMAKER, for example, featured the hotshot, know-it-all character played by Danny De Vito: it was fresh, but unoriginal.
Perhaps this history, then, is the reason that Steve Zaillian's latest film, A CIVIL ACTION, is a rewarding experience.
There's nothing gimmicky about Zaillian's sophomore effort (his debut film was 1993's SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER).
Everything is a cold reality, from the cutting-block calculus of personal injury law (John Travolta explains in a series of voice-overs the relative worth of different clients and concludes that a child is worth the least of all) to the admitted lack of justice in the court system.
Gone is the Perry Mason-style grandeur, and with it the delivery of great orations.
Instead, a large percentage of the movie's running time does *not* take place in a courtroom but in the real world of depositions and field work.
Travolta is our star, playing real-life lawyer Jan Schlichtmann.
(Indeed, all of Zaillian's script is based on a true story, as told in Jonathan Harr's book.
) Jan is well-dressed and successful, named in a magazine as one of Boston's ten most eligible bachelors.
Perhaps unfortunately for Jan, he happens upon the Woburn drinking water case, brought to his attention by Woburn resident Anne Anderson (Kathleen Quinlan).
As it happens there's a large number of leukemia deaths in Woburn, which Anderson and other town parents believe is related to the drinking water.
Jan traces the water back to its source, where he finds -- mostly by serendipity -- a tannery which has been illicitly draining waterproofing chemicals into the town's water supply.
Now all Jan has to do is prove it in court.
Seemingly against his own advice, Jan becomes emotionally entrenched in his own case.
He carries on his crusade longer than his partners advise, to the delight of his auspicious adversary, Jerome Facher (Robert Duvall).
It's here that the actors shine: Travolta and Duvall, in the leading roles, carry on a solid competition; Travolta in particular is much recovered from previously bland outings like PRIMARY COLORS and MAD CITY.
The supports are also sturdy as well -- William Macy as Jan's financial advisor is the best.
Kathleen Quinlan's performance is a bit of a disappointment, but aside from that it's hard to find fault with this picture.
Some might find it a bit slow or a bit long, but overall A CIVIL ACTION is a well-written, well-directed product that has hit its mark.. . 
