When Porter (Mel Gibson) and his partner Val Resnick (Gregg Henry) rob a  bunch of Chinese mobsters, the last thing Porter expects is to be left  for dead, having been double-crossed by Val and shot in the back by his  wife, Lynn (Deborah Unger).
He survives and decides to hunt the two  down,and get his money back.
His task is complicated by the fact that  there are a lot of other parties interested in the money, not least the  Chinese, but also a couple of bent cops and a whole syndicate of bad  guys.
Director Brian Helgeland's career so far has ranged from the excellent L.A.
Confidential to the God-awful Assassins.
He has worked with Gibson  before (on Conspiracy Theory).
The film is intended to be a darkly  humorous and slick thriller, along the lines of Get Shorty, but with  more violence (The tagline is " Get ready to root for the Bad  Guy").There are a few problems with this approach.
The first is that  this movie is rather violent, with plenty of killing.
Since some of the  film's punchlines involve somebody dying violently, it makes the average  viewer a little uncomfortable about laughing at such moments.
A subplot  involving a female sadomasochist offers the audience the opportunity to  laugh at her taking a beating; a dubious pleasure.
To say that most of the film's characters are not very smart is an  understatement - some of the most stupid bad guys ever committed to  celluloid reside within Payback.
Porter wants revenge and his share of  the money from the Chinese heist.
Unfortunately (both for him and almost  everyone else he meets), Resnick has used to money to pay off a crime  syndicate which is led by a smooth talking mobster called Carter (played  as an oily smoothie by William Devane).
Carter decides to have Porter  killed to avoid any problems for his organisation.
Porter also attracts  the attention of a couple of crooked detectives, Hicks and Leary (played  unsuccessfully for laughs by Bill Dukes and Jack Conly)who want the  money, and the Chinese mobsters themselves are also hunting Porter  (whose depiction would be racist except that everyone gets a raw deal in  this movie).
Porter's various efforts to get his money back are both clever and  stupid, sometimes both within the same scene.
The film also relies  too much on coincidence (never a good sign in a movie).
Raymond Chandler  (who scripted classics such as The Big Sleep and Double Indemnity) used  to claim that, whenever he got stuck on a plot detail, he would 'invent  a body', figuring that he could explain it away later in his story.
Helgeland seems to have the same approach, but his script lacks the dry  wit or style of Chandler.
The film lacks the courage of its own convictions, too.
Porter's wife  is his first target but he doesn't get to kill her (she dies  accidentally, from a drug overdose).
Even his encounter with his former  partner, Resnick, is more self-defence than cold-blooded revenge.
Sure,  Porter gets to kill a few defenceless people later in the film, but  since they were really bad guys, the audience doesn't mind so much.
Gibson seems unsure whether his character is supposed to be sympathetic  or scary.
The result is that he is neither.
I never though I would ever write this sentence but what this movie  needs is Bruce Willis.
Mel Gibson is just not convincing as a ruthless  gangster obsessed with murder and revenge, and his ability to take  constant beatings, gunshot wounds and torture recall his adventures as  Detective Martin Riggs.
Willis, for all his flaws, could have played  this with more tongue-in-cheek.
If Helgeland has taken Point Blank (John Boorman's 1967 classic, with  Lee Marvin) as his inspiration, the result is, unfortunately, Lethal  Weapon 5.
Not much of a tribute.
Get Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com. . 
