What is pornography?
Is it the showing of forbidden areas on a human  body?
Do they need to be shown in a sexual fashion to constitute  pornography?
Does the goal of the exploitation have to be sexual  gratification for the viewer?
The Supreme Court of the United States of  America once spoke of pornography, and gave the explanation "You know it  when you see it.
" After seeing 8MM, the latest film from director Joel  Schumacher, I am convinced that the Supreme Court was absolutely  correct.
A multi-millionaire widow discovers an 8mm film in her husband's safe,  in which a young girl appears to raped and murdered in a most violent  fashion.
So, her and her attorney hire private detective Tom Welles  (Nicholas Cage) to look into the authenticity of the film, and determine  whether or not this could be a real snuff film, or if the murder is  faked.
Welles assures her that the film must be fake, saying that snuff  films are "basically an urban legend--makeup, special effects"  However, nonetheless, he agrees to look into it.
He decides that the  most effective way would be to treat the girl in the film like a missing  person, and see what turns up.
He soon finds the girl and discovers that she is, indeed missing, and  had run away to Los Angeles, where she found a home in the underground  porn industry.
So Welles makes his way into this dark, sick, and  disgusting underground world with the help of Max California (Joaquin  Phoenix), a clerk at a porn store.
And that is what this film deals  with, the underground porn world, and the people involved with it.
It  introduces characters that star in and make these various S/M films  which feature everything from the mild beatings and whippings, to lewd  images of children in those acts, to bestiality.
His goal is to find the  people that dealt with this girl, and what happened to her.
He also finds the girl's mother, which becomes an interesting side  plot to the story.
The film deals with her coping with the loss of her  only child for no apparent explanation.
She becomes one of the films  most intriguing characters, because her and Welles are the only people  in this movie that average persons can relate to.
And they are opposites  of each other.
She is dealing with the loss of a child and husband that  has left her.
He is a new father with a wife that is just starting to  detect marriage problems due to his work.
At one point, Max California tells Welles that he will "see things you  can't unsee.
" That is a drastic understatement, as Schumacher chose to  allow the audience to view almost everything that Welles does.
And some  of the images are absolutely haunting.
You, the audience member, ask  yourself the questions that Welles is asking the people behind these  films, namely "why?
" It is incomprehensible to me how some of these  people could exist in the real world, or how some of them could be sick  enough to engage in these behaviors, and yet that is the most  frightening element of this film, that people like those doe really  exist.
With that said, my largest gripe with this film is it's rating.
Probably due to the big names behind it, 8MM was issued an R rating by  the MPAA.
The first realization that I came to is that 8MM is not  pornography in any way shape or form.
It contains scenes and images that  would, without question, constitute pornography, but it itself is not.
What it is is a frighteningly real and intense film that audiences  won't enjoy as much as be shocked by.
And, as it is warned, you cannot  unsee some of the things in this film, they just don't go away.
For  that reason, 8MM is more than deserving of an NC-17 rating, as films  like Showgirls, Orgazmo, and Kids look like a humorous family films when  in comparison.
Nicholas Cage is absolutely phenomenal in his role.
He acts like your  tour guide through this deep, dark underground world, and is masterful  in doing so.
At one point he holds a sick, twisted, murderer at his  mercy, but cannot come to execute him.
So he calls the victim's family  and requests permission to do so.
That is one of his moments of pure  humanity.
At other times he comes closer to insanity.
Another scene  features him with a different murderer, just muttering the question  "why?
" over and over.
The response is chilling as he snaps "The things  I do - I do them because I like them.
Because I want to.
" That is what  this film is about.
Director Joel Schumacher has once again created a dark film that is  truly dark.
Literally, less than 10 minutes of this film are in well-lit  areas.
That adds a creepy and intense feel to the film, which is backed  up by a frightening score throughout the film, which is only substituted  for an eerie silence.
Quite literally, from the first scene, you find  yourself on the edge of your seat, not because you don't know what  will happen next, but rather because you are too scared to sit back.
When all is said and done, 8MM is a frightening, dark, intense movie  that will stay with you for a long time.
It has it's flaws in that  some of the acting is less than ideal, and there may just be such a  thing as too much darkness for one movie.
But it is good in principal,  and features a wonderful performance by Nicholas Cage, and one of the  most amazing character studies since Hannibal Lector in The Silence of  the Lambs.
I only warn that "you see things you can't unsee.
". . 
