Martin Scorsese's Bringing out the Dead, staring Nicholas Cage, is an  edgy and unusual, yet solid, film.
The movie, despite the absence of a  material plot, has strong themes and character development that serve as  a guide through a two-hour span.
Those seeking deep and meaningful  content similar to the director's Taxi Driver and Goodfellas or  Cage's Leaving Las Vegas will not be disappointed.
But those looking  for a film that hops on the emergency room bandwagon in wake of hit  television shows like ER, Chicago Hope and the new Third Watch may find  this film to be too much of an intellectual challenge and are advised to  seek their thrills in the popcorn hit Double Jeopardy.
"This film takes place in New York City in the early 90's" read the  first words across the screen.
Those 13 words and the ambulance that  appears soon after create the film's most important character: the  city.
The audience can gather that the Big Apple is still a crime  polluted mess in the pre-Giuliani era and that hospitals are an equally  large issue.
Just in case any doubt lingers, the film quickly shows us  streets lined with prostitutes and hospital hallways lined with  stretchers.
From there emerges the hero, Frank Peirce (Nicholas Cage),  an ambulance driver who has seen it all.
For the next 58 hours (three  nights, two days) Peirce will experience a variety of extreme measures,  and the audience looks on in an almost voyeuristic fashion.
Peirce fringes on insanity throughout the film due to the numerous  people who come into his ambulance pronounced insane and leave it  pronounced dead.
He gets them all, from the drug addicts to the suicidal  to the "just plain nuts.
" This makes for an interesting juxtaposition:  society's insane vs. society's insane workers.
And then there are  the corpses that he sees regularly, making him witness to more last  moments than the average person's tolerance could possibly allow.
Like  all the other drivers, hebuilds an immunity, but, during these 58 hours,  that shield is dropped.
Bringing out the Dead is sprinkled with the type of deranged and  desperately dark humor that you only find amusing somewhere around 3:00  AM when you are out of caffeine but forced to stay awake.
Scorsese  creates that setting so well that the jokes not only work, but you come  to rely on their comic relief as a means of surviving the film.
Highlights include the assorted calls that come through the ambulance  radio (elderly woman abducted by her cat, etc..) and one scene where  Peirce and eccentric fellow driver (Ving Rhames) find a supposedly dead  victim, but stage a dramatically overdone revival for his stoned  friends.
This summer, another legendary director gave us his look at New York  City by following a character over a period of a few days.
In Eyes Wide  Shut, Stanley Kubrick portrayed an upper-class, secretive and perverse  society that seemed to function completely on its own.
Scorsese's look  into paramedics is very similar.
The men we meet run the night shift and  find themselves isolated from society.
They know each other, recognize  their peers' ins and outs and are even accustomed to some of the same  drug and alcohol calls from people who never learn their lesson and  revolve in and out of the hospital doors.
Another summer film set in New York City showed the power of using  contrasting music and scenes.
Throughout Summer of Sam, as people would  be brutally murdered on the streets, bright and uplifting music would  dominate the moment.
In Bringing out the Dead a whole panoply of tracks  come into play.
Stretchers, crying families and bloody scenes are  accompanied by Van Morrison, R. E. M., The Who, UB40, Martha Reeves &  The Vandellas and Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue (famous in part for  another New York film, the Woody Allen classic Manhattan).
Bringing out the Dead is a thought-provoking and powerful film.
Like the  other cerebral movie at a theatre near you, American Beauty, this  production can look for a prolonged box office run with no leading  numbers but a positive buzz to give it stable positioning.
Early on,  Peirce tells us "I am good at my job.
" So is Martin Scorsese.. . 
