There are many different types of Hollywood productions.
Some are loud and noisy, filling the screen with images of violence and heroes saving big breasted women.
Others show comedies that have to do mainly with all of the character's (possibly) budding sexuality and how it's related with the real world.
These are simply the type of movies that studios like to make.
So when a modest film like Mumford comes around, it should be a great oppurtunity to spread the word about a quiet, no flashly effects, funny, Hollywood film.
A psychiatrist named Mumford (Dean) moves to a town called Mumford where he is instantly greeted with plenty of patients with lots of interesting problems.
He enjoys listening to people and hearing what they have to say.
Now it just so happens (like in most movies) that the people in this small town are very eccentric and very strange.
Mumford is called on various outings to try and help people all of the little city.
But the two resident doctors of the town begin not to take a liking of him and think it's interesting that everyone who could confirm his graduation from school have tragically died.
Then he meets Sofie (Davis, playing somewhat of an extension of her character in Next Stop, Wonderland) in one second, he instantly falls in love.
Now falling in love with a patient is a bad thing, especially if her mother is a bitchy Jane Adams, but there is another twist.
It turns out Mumford isn't even a psychiatrist at all.
He just thought it would be a good way to get away from his former life.
I won't give you the full story, but basically he used to be on drugs and was sent to a rehab center run by monks.
When they think that he has magically disappeared they run a segment looking for him on Unsolved Mysteries.
So what should he do?
Face what he has done?
Or go into hiding once again?
And so Hollywood once again regains my trust that they can produce a quality feature film.
Mumford is very modest, very quiet, and nothing really seems to happen but I still found myself enjoying it immensely.
The ensemble cast (Ted Danson, Jane Adams, Jason Lee, Alfre Woodard, and others) are great.
Especially Ted Danson whose six minute scene has him as a cigar smoking jerk whose concerned about his wife.
Dean has an interesting smile, which could possibly become a trademark if he becomes a big star.
Of course I have to congratulate Hope Davis, has she ever been bad in a movie?
While not outstandingly great, Mumford is fun, and it gets *** stars.
The Young-Uns: Three views of breasts and naked female androids, plus medium language make up the film's bad content.
Good Age 13 & Up. . 
