Rated on a 4-star scale; Screening venue - Odeon (Liverpool City Centre);  Released in the UK by Buena Vista International on 14 January, 1999;  certificate 18; 136 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1. Directed by Spike Lee; produced by Jon Kilik, Spike Lee.
Written by Victor Colicchio, Michael Imperioli, Spike Lee.
Photographed by Ellen Kuras; edited by Barry Alexander Brown.
It's exciting to own a camera; you can look through your viewfinder and  comfortably mould life into perfect little rectangular artworks.
Click on a  button, and you've preserved a moment of reality.
Cine cameras are even  better; you've got the means to capture situations in more depth, and hey,  you're making movies!
The filmmaker Spike Lee got his first cine camera in the Summer of 1977, and  the imagination of the gifted young New Yorker must have been running wild.
He must have done a lot of dreaming at that time, a lot of playing with his  camera, and a lot of important thinking.
I'll bet he remembers it well.
Lee's new film "Summer of Sam" is about that summer in his city, and takes a  lot of time to illustrate the atmosphere.
This was the strange, short time  when disco and punk music were concurrently successful.
When the Yankees had  Reggie Jackson, and were winning the World Series.
And when a serial killer  dubbed 'Son of Sam' was terrorising the Bronx.
'Sam', eventually identified as a crazy mailman named David Berkowitz,  stalked brunette women, or however they were with, and blew their heads off  with a .44-caliber pistol.
He sent creepy letters about his motives to the  police, and to newspaper columnist Jimmy Breslin; his case made front-page  news every day; and he was as hot a topic of conversation as the sun, music  or baseball.
Among those discussing 'Sam' are Lee's main characters, a bunch of  Italian-American guys who hang out on a street corner all day, letting  boredom and poverty lead them into talking a lot of crap.
Vinny (John  Leguizamo) is a chain-smoking, disco-dancing hairdresser who can't help but  cheat on his wife Dionna (Mira Sorvino).
His best friend Ritchie (Adrien  Brody) is losing popularity in the neighbourhood, because of his punk  hairstyle and his romance with Ruby (Jennifer Esposito), the local slut.
Joey  T (Michael Rispoli), a drug dealer, and his goon Bobby (Brian Tarantino),  slouch back and watch everything through arrogant eyes, convinced that  they're better than all the scum out there, and that they'd kick the crap out  of anyone who wants to try them.
Lee plunges into this community and lingers around to see if any themes  emerge.
"Summer of Sam" is partly recollection, and partly a daydream about  how elements of summer '77 could have driven people crazy.
We get chilling  glimpses into the apartment of Berkowitz himself, witness the tension and  ignorance of our guys lead to the feeling that someone in their neighbourhood  MUST be 'Son of Sam', and watch the lynch mob find its justifications for  singling out an innocent culprit because he is different from the crowd.
"Summer of Sam" displays much fast cutting, grainy nostalgic footage and  fancy tricks with lighting and loud music; like most of Lee's work, it's a  visually and aurally engulfing film.
As emotions get tenser, the temperature  gets hotter, Sam takes more victims and people take too many ludes, Lee ups  the film's pace, volume and reliance on close-ups, leading us into some  frightening scenes of vigilante scapegoating.
The film is so involving because it seems to be a dance around Lee's memory  and imagination.
Yes, it falls far short of greatness because it's not really  about all the themes that it brings up.
But Lee has already made one strongly  plotted examination of the way a community can be pushed over the edge in  summertime, with his 1989 masterpiece "Do the Right Thing".
Here he's trying  something new.
Good on him.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani. Please visit, and encourage others to visit, The UK Critic's website, located  at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
