This story about the Bard and his love for a woman named Viola is witty, dramatic and very very enjoyable.
The plot centres around William Shakespeare (Fiennes) who is stuck for ideas for his next play.
He soon hashes one together, and gets a cast together, featuring the likes of Ned Alleyn (Ben Affleck), but the one cast member who strikes him is a young 'boy' played by Paltrow.
They soon start a relationship, but she is already set to be married to the slimy Lord Wessex (Colin Firth) who wants nothing but her money.
Will Will (pun kinda intended) both keep Viola and get his play finished in time?
Despite a simple story conceived by Tom Stoppard and Marc Norman, Shakespeare in Love is undeniably charming.
Wit and drama is dished out in equal amounts, and there's a fair bit of sentimentally in there aswell.
The cast give all their worth to the well realised script.
Fiennes is a standout as the young William, giving an energetic and well rounded performance.
Ben Affleck is fun as the 'Bruce Willis' of the Elizabethan age, offering a change of pace for him since the hectic Armageddon.
Colin Firth doesn't have much to work with what is a very two dimensional character, but he gives a suitably slimy performance even if he is nothing but a plot device.
Also popping up are British comedians  Martin Clunes and Mark Williams giving two likeable performances, Geoffrey Rush as a flustered theatre manager, and Dame Judi Dench makes an appearance as Queen Elizabeth, who gets a very funny scene at the end of the film.
The cast list goes on, and each individual performance is a delight.
But it's Paltrow who has to carry the film, and while she's a competent actress, she's never experienced a role as challenging as this one.
Thankfully, she's really rather good, delivering Shakespeare lines with ease and brings a lot of charm and warmth to her character.
I find it hard to believe, however, that Shakespeare mistook her for a boy, and even with a moustache she still looks as beautiful as ever (make of that what you will.
) And, the chemistry between Fiennes and Paltrow is intense, although with boyfriend Affleck on set it may have been a bit embarrassing for her acting slushy with another man right in front of her own man!
While the story is wafer thin, it's well handled by Mrs. Brown director John Madden, who grabs the audience attention and keeps a strong hold on them.
I found it very hard not to be entranced by the film, with it's rich, vibrant colours and costumes and entertaining interpretation of the screenplay.
There's also lots of contemporary references to look out for, the long 'credit's list on Will's new play being one of them.
The soundtrack is nice, and the entire production is very enchanting.
Knowledge of Shakespeare and his plays aren't really needed, although it may help to get some of the jokes.
The film is based around one of the Bards better known plays, 'Romeo & Juliet,' which thanks to Leonardo DiCaprio has been opened up to a whole new generation of teenage girls.
In summary, it's very hard not to like Shakespeare in Love.
It truly is a lovely film, and would be an excellent use of two hours.. . 
