Peruse through Ron Howard's legacy and you'll find few smudges.
From the  titillating Ransom, to the awe-inspiring Apollo 13 and Cocoon, he's  brought us quality yet unpretentious entertainment through his years as  a director, a producer and a writer (and who could forget his stint as  Richie Cunningham on Happy Days?).
But everyone of his followers knew  that, like every great director, he wouldn't be able to keep his lucky  streak alive forever (remember Steven Spielberg's 1941?
Francis Ford  Coppola's Jack?).
As luck would have it, the place where Howard's train  derails is the moronic new comedy EDtv.
Not only does this film have the  dubious distinction of beating a great concept straight into the ground,  but it also does it with no dignity whatsoever.20 How does Matthew McConaughey's career continue?
He's been universally  panned, he can't act, and he has single-handedly spoiled (or at least  reduced the quality of) almost every film I've seen him in.
But continue  his career does, and everyone who sees EDtv will wish that it didn't.
He  stars as Ed, a video store clerk selected by a struggling cable network  to be on tv 24 hours a day, with his whole life in continuous live  broadcast.
This, of course, involves cameramen following him around  everywhere he goes, which, understandably, presents some problems for  him and the people around him.20. At first, Ed jumps at the chance to become famous and wealthy.
And for a  few months he wallows in being begged for autographs, being nationally  recognized and getting huge bonus payments.
He has fun with the  cameraman who have the unenviable task of staying with him all day and  all night.
But then, things start to get out of whack.
His girlfriend  (Jenna Elfman) dumps him because of lack of privacy.
His brother writes  a book entitled "My Brother Pissed on Me.
" His family becomes alienated.
He wants to quit, but will the network let him?20. Of course, this is a great opportunity to present some anti-media social  commentary.
And you know what?
This whole thing sounds a bit like that  little movie that we all saw last year called The Truman Show, doesn't  it?
Yes, comparisons to that masterpiece are inevitable.
While Truman  presents its themes with maturity, subtlety and hilarity, EDtv is  childish, in-your-face and dull.
Truman did not scream "Mass-media is  bad" at its audience.
EDtv pummels the audience with images of people  shielding their faces from cameras while dramatic music plays.
When you  compare the two films, the latter is almost insulting.20. All of this wouldn't be so bad if the characters were compelling or if  the film was funny.
No such luck.
Ed is not even a character but a  nebulous representation of your everyday, happy-go-lucky guy.
Unfortunately he is also a total and complete loser.
He has no life and  few friends.
He talks like he's drunk and he's not funny or interesting  in any conceivable way.
This makes the already very weak film completely  collapse.
Think of a 2-hour film centered around one person who you'd  rather not spend 2 hours with, and you'll be thinking of EDtv.20. The failure of Ed the character and EDtv the movie can be at least  partly blamed on the failure of McConaughey in the lead (what do you  mean, "What else is new"?).
Certainly anyone else (Jim Carrey, for one,  ridiculous as the suggestion is) could have done at least a slightly  better job portraying the protagonist of this lame picture, or at least  as good a job as the god-awful script would permit.
The supporting  actors fare slightly better.
Woody Harrelson as the brother whom Ed  pissed on is equally horrible, but Ellen DeGeneres and Rob Reiner as  studio executives are occasionally funny.20. This is a very, very bad film.
But somehow I feel that there is more at  stake here than millions of people wasting two hours of their lives.
The  problem is that thanks to EDtv, in the future, any filmmaker that  attempts a film about a person trapped in a tv world will likely be  beating a dead horse.
The Truman Show presented the concept.
Pleasantville reinforced it.
EDtv grabbed it by the throat and pounded  it's metaphorical head against the ground. . 
