  Their little, smart, and hard working.
They have many of the characteristics of humans.
They're...Ugly!
I watched this movie expecting cute, wide-eyed Disney-esque ants on the screen.
Instead, I got vomit-colored, big-mouthed, dwarf-mutant ants running amoke.
Not only that, they happened to have the same voices as major Hollywood stars, including Woody Allen and Sharon Stone.
Someone save me from a sequel!
The film begins with Z (Allen) tired of being a worker all his life for the colony he lives at.
The colony is run by a King and Queen, and their princess daughter, Bala (Stone).
The first 10 minutes or so of Antz is Z moaning and groaning over how pathetic he is and that he was never able to lift more than ten times his own body weight.
Oh brother.
If I wanted to listen to Woody Allen complain, I would have rented Hannah and Her Sisters (one of Allen's lesser films).
Z learns of a place in the outside world known as Insectopia, a land where all insects can run free.
Z wants to go, but not before trading places with his buddy (voice supplie by Sly Stallone), who is a cadat in an military-type army, ready to go to war with a bunch of alien-looking termits.
One day, Z and Bala are accidentally brought to the outside world, where Z insists they search for Insectopia, but Bala wants to go home.
This is a perfect setup for the Hollywood man-and-women trapped on a desert island, fighting all the time senario.
You know what I mean.
We just saw it with Harrison Ford and Anne Heche in Six Days, Seven Nights.
Except, this time, it features to talking ants with the voices of Allen and Stone.
I was very disappointed with Antz.
I heard some good words of the movie, but, sadly, I don't think I'll be passing any of those said words along to my friends.
DreamWorks' turn into the all computer animation territory dominated by the superior Toy Story is a second-rate voiced, written episode worthy of a slot in the WB Saturday morning kid scetch.
The DVD of Antz is very nice.
The picture is lush and brimming with beautiful colors.
Special features are a trailer.  . . 
