Neo (Keanu Reeves) is a computer hacker.
He is talented, but he has a general disrespect for authority.
He is contacted by Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss), a mysterious fugitive who is connected to the infamous subversive, Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne).
It seems that Morpheus wants Neo to join his movement.
At the same time he is being tracked by the authorities who want his help in capturing Morpheus.
It is no surprise that he chooses to join the outlaws, and in doing so, he begins a surreal adventure, very similar to "Alice in Wonderland".
At the core of the story is the distinction between perception and reality.
This is a very profound subject, and although it is not plumbed very deeply, it is a much more intelligent foundation than can usually be expected from a large-budget, special effects based action film.
What the human mind perceives as "reality" is the result of the signals that the human brain receives from the eyes, ears, etc.
However, it is well known that during dreaming and with no sensory input, the mind constructs a very real world, complete in all detail, which is obviously not part of the physical universe.
It would have been nice to see an engaging exploration of this profound subject, but much more than what is attempted would probably detract from the film's appeal to the mass market.
The narrative of the story is quite engaging.
From the opening scene, it is unclear what exactly is going on.
This is very effective because it places the audience in the same frame of reference as Neo, and only when Neo understands the true "reality", does it become understandable.
The film mostly attempts to be intelligent and is usually successful, but sometimes it cannot construct a seamless premise.
The situation in which the humans are placed is explained but does not fully make sense.
There are often inconsistencies in the powers accorded to different characters.
There is also the serious question of why an entity that defines the rules would not be thus omnipotent and impenetrable.
However, these weaknesses are mitigated by the fast pace of the film and the unravelling of the mysteries.
The film is not meant to be a serious exploration of its philosophical elements, but rather it is intended as a thrill ride, and it is quite successful in that regard.
The acting performance are mostly unremarkable, but that is due mainly to the writing and is not the fault of the performers.
Considerable effort is given in creating the story, but the drawback is that the main characters are not fully developed, and the side characters are mere stereotypes.
Although Reeves is competent in the lead role, his performance is mostly wooden, sometimes comically so.
When Morpheus uses the term "AI" in discussion with Neo, Reeves blankly asks "You mean Artificial Intelligence?
" in such a dry, moribund way that one cannot believe he is trying to portray a computer hacker.
To his credit, he performs well in the action sequences, even paying homage to Bruce Lee in a Kung Fu fight.
The film cannot claim to be completely original.
It borrows generously from "2001: A Space Odyssey", the "Planet of the Apes" series, and it even has many similarities to the recent "Dark City.
" It uses stock antagonists, and other standard characters.
However, the success of the film is that it combines its sources into a balanced and cohesive result.
It shows remarkable restraint by not relying exclusively on special effects or action to dazzle the audience at the expense of the story.
Recommended.
It is definitely not a great film, but it is rather enjoyable.
It has an appealing mix of science fiction, Hong Kong style action, and special effects that will appeal to a large audience.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==---------- http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    . . 
