Just in time for students out of school for the summer, Jackie Chan appears  in another American movie.
The Hong Kong action master is developing a  trademark: as he did in RUSH HOUR with Chris Tucker, Chan teams up in  SHANGHAI NOON with comic talent Owen Wilson for a lot of laughs.
The two  cover the gamut of humor, Chan with his over-the-top physicality, Wilson  with his quirky, incongruous, New Age-y cowboy.
It's lots of fun.
Although the plot is a creaky mix of clichés, director Tom Dey paces the  story well, most scenes leading into action sequences that would keep any  viewer watching.
What Dey and Chan treat us to once again is a series of  absurd situations, the heroes (Chan as Chon Wang – do you get the  sound-alike?
And Owen Wilson as Roy O'Bannon) slipping into all kinds or  peril only to survive by their wits or, in O'Bannon's case, by stupid luck.
Starting out in the Forbidden City, the story introduces us to the Chinese  princess Pei Pei, played by Lucy Lui.
Because she is unhappy in her  homeland, she gives in easily to the plot proposed by her American tutor –  to leave the country for the States.
Naturally, this private teacher turns  out to be just another smooth-talking bad guy, as it's a kidnapping plot  disguised as a defection.
Once the princess is away, the emperor and his  entourage  receive a ransom note, and proceed to dispatch three members of  the Imperial guard,  three of the bravest men in the country.
Chon Wang  tags along because of his fondness and loyalty to the princess, and he  quickly finds trouble on the train on the dusty plains of the American West.
Though the two begin as antagonists, Chon and Roy fall together and even  become friends.
Their goal is to rescue the beautiful Pei Pei and return  her to China, and O'Bannon wouldn't mind if mines full of gold came his way  in the process.
Another rub is that Pei Pei left her homeland under her own  volition in the first place.
The main conflict that adds interest, beside the ongoing feud between Wang  and O'Bannon, is the egregious kidnapper, Lo Fong, played by Roger Yuan.
Head shaved, this young Asian actor easily plays a despicable master of  martial arts and crime.
Among the adventures that entangle the heroes, a  Native American woman (Brandon Merrill) – ostensibly Wang's wife – saves the  day a few different times.
On the whole, not a very original premise, but a  competent collection of fights and assorted witticisms.
Jackie Chan is unbeatable when it comes to mixing creativity and violence.
If he were only around when Peter Sellers was fighting his manservant in the  Pink Panther series!
Chan has been doing this business for so long that his  effort here is seamless, the self-done stunts pieces of stunning  choreography.
In one bar fight scene, Chon Wang grabs moose antlers off the  wall, a perfect weapon with which to fend off a saloon full of belligerent  cowpokes.
Jackie's English is improving, and he continues to display  wonderful timing in virtually any scene he's in.
Wilson is the perfect choice for O'Bannon.
In some ways Wilson is a young  Steve Martin, playing off incongruities with clever but subtle jokes.
His  character is not quite the nebbish Woody Allen would make him, but there's  this underlying, rather subtle hilarity that surrounds his performance.
O'Bannon is good at heart, yes, but he can't avoid the temptation to pick up  some money however he can.
Lucy Liu plays her part well enough, without having many lines.
The  modernization of Eastern relationships is one of the more unbelievable  facets bought to light by the narrative.
Chon Wang goes from obsequious  bowing to familiar address at a rapid rate.
Working closely with Lo Fong, Marshal Van Cleef fills the role of another  formidable baddie.
Xander Berkeley plays the role with a nice, sometimes  almost cartoonish menace, keeping in tone with the exaggeration essential in  a film of this genre.
The fight scenes in SHANGHAI NOON are very slick, humorous and engaging.
To  fulfill his hallmark of brilliance within violence, Chan employs the  antlers, a spinning sheriff's badge, even springy evergreens as weapons.
His acrobatics are unmatched, his comic sense very natural.
He's certainly  famous for doing his own stunt work, and the well-known out-takes running  atop the closing credits make the watching of SHANGHAI NOON even more  enjoyable.
Perhaps the film is not as fall-down funny as RUSH HOUR; some of the  ridiculous business in that film cause belly laughs of the kind experienced  on cool, fast amusement rides.
But neither is NOON as heavy in its  subplots.
For fans of fights and buddy movies, this flick is a must-see.
And for viewers unfamiliar with Jackie Chan, this piece would serve as a  solid introduction.. . . 
