OCTOBER SKY Reviewed by Jamie Peck. Talk about a movie having its cake and eating it, too.
Said hype had  "October Sky" pegged as "inspirational" and "uplifting," and it turns  out that neither adjective is a misnomer.
This is probably because the  tale's factual roots - taken straight from Homer Hickam's autobiography  "Rocket Boys" - have been unexpectedly maintained in a genre fond of  pounding narratives into predictable, cliche-littered schmaltz.
That's  not to say every story development is unexpected and every character is  a complete original, but the magic in "October Sky" stems from how these  seemingly straight-from-stock situations and supporting roles are  treated: humanely.
The year is 1957 and high school-aged Homer (played by Jake Gyllenhaal)  is pretty much stuck on an adamantly preordained path in the footsteps  of his mine superintendent dad ("Lone Star"'s Chris Cooper), a  stone-faced type with a soot-stained legacy he feels Homer must  continue.
But when Homer spies the Soviet satellite Sputnik passing  overhead on its historical orbit, a passion for science is awakened - a  passion that puts him at odds with his direly disappointed pop.
Nevertheless, Homer recruits two pals (William Lee Scott and Chad  Lindberg) and the class nerd (Chris Owen) to help him in his own  rocket-building missions.
This father figure is where "October Sky" begins to depart from the  expected route of coming-of-age stereotypes.
In such films, the  authoritative parent usually exists only to provide resistance to the  protagonist's aspirations, but Cooper and screenwriter Lewis Colick  essay a distinct individual whose reluctance to accept his son's chosen  path is entirely believable.
Gyllenhaal is just as vital to "Sky"'s  success, so full of unactorly charm and candor that he makes Homer's  wonder and eventual heartbreak immediately palpable.
And as Homer's  sweet mama, newcomer Natalie Canerday is so natural in her scenes that  it's hard to believe she's not the real thing.
Speaking of authenticity, "October Sky"'s final reel gets a little  crowded with several extraneous subplots - like the illness of Homer's  encouraging teacher (effective Laura Dern) - but atoning for the  quick-to-shift focus is that each actually had a hand in shaping an  array of lives.
Even furthering the impact is a concluding montage of  grainy home movies from the '50s, providing glimpses of the cast's  in-the-flesh counterparts and updates on where they are now.
Some are  sad and some are surprising, but none is more fitting than the road  traveled by Homer Hickam.
No fair spoiling it if you already don't know,  but here's a hint: The sky's the limit. . . 
