In the tradition of Toy Story 2, Chicken Run is an animated movie for anyone  and everyone.
Not only do sharp wit, droll one-liners, and hidden inside  jokes get marvelously packaged into one, Chicken Run is also a remarkable  looking film.
This is one of the few films made with stop motion animation,  more commonly known as claymation.
Veteran animation studio Aardman  Animations, who created all three of the Wallace and Gromit shorts as well as  the Academy Award winning short Creature Comforts is behind this movie.
Director and Aardman head Nick Park (director of the three Wallace and Gromit  shorts) brings the animals to life.
The screenplay by Karey Kirkpatrick does  borrow heavily from several claymation and computer animated movies, but is  full of brilliant humor.
There is a perfect balance of jokes for adults and  kids, and it's likely to please both audiences.
Ginger is the ambitious leader of a group of hens.
She focuses on getting the  entire group out of Mrs. Tweedy's egg farm.
Mrs. Tweedy is an evil individual  with a dim-witted husband who always believes the chickens are organizing an  escape.
She ignores her spouse, and often gets angry with him and the  minuscule profits she's making on the farm.
Seeking more money, she orders a  chicken pie machine and begins to fatten up the chickens.
There may be hope  for the chickens in their time of need though.
Rocky the Rooster is a flying  chicken from the circus.
Through several misunderstandings and lies the hens  believe he can teach them how to fly the coop, so to speak.
In actuality,  Rocky flies because he gets shot out of a cannon.
However, he soon has the  hens doing flying exercises and tries to get them to take off in the air.
How  much longer can he keep up the charade without the others finding out, before  they all end up as pies?
The comic actions of these chickens as they deploy their genius escape plans  are ineffable.
Chicken Run is really a wonder to behold, a movie you really  have to see for yourself.
The jokes are that funny and unexpected.
One of my  favorite lines occurs when Rocky first meets the hens and tells them he's  from America, the land of the free.
This prompts Mac, the scientific and  brainy chicken to say, "You mean Scotland!
" Another highlight is a  half-witted hen who views laying several eggs a day only to get killed later  as a living.
There's also two hilarious rats that try to sell a variety of  small items (like a set of thimbles as a tea set or a shuttlecock as a  two-way hat) to the flock.
All the voices are excellent.
Mel Gibson plays the  perfect womanizing rooster, and Julia Sawalha and Lynn Ferguson are energetic  and exciting in their roles.
For all of the little touches in Chicken Run, the main plot is rather  derivative.
Elements from all three Wallace and Gromit shorts appear.
Another  large chunk of this movie seems to be from the 1998 computer animated feature  A Bug's Life.
Many movies get spoofed, but just as many movies get copied  from.
The familiarity felt with scenes like Rocky and Ginger getting caught  in the chicken pie machine (similar to Wallace and Gromit getting caught in a  dog food machine) hurt my overall enjoyment of the movie.
It felt like I'd  seen this material before.
A feeling not felt throughout the rest of the  movie.
Every chicken in this movie acts like a human, that's one of its many charms.
You will find people you know resembling these characters.
Despite the human  resemblance, the chickens are never stereotypes of human characters seen in  other movies.
This is a movie intended to get taken lightly.
Never before has  any animated movie kept me needing more like this one has.
Chicken Run is  pure fun that will delight all ages.
The crazy antics are unparalleled from  any other comedy this year.
Will we be seeing a Chicken Run 2 in the near future?
I sure hope so.. . 
