Year: 2000.
Starring the voices of D.B.
Sweeney, Julianna Margulies,  Joan Plowright, Ossie Davis, Max Casella, Alfre Woodard, Samuel E.  Wright, Peter Siragusa, Della Reese.
Story by Thom Enriquez, John  Harrison, Robert Nelson Jacobs, Ralph Zondag.
Screenplay by Walon Green  (original), John Harrison, and Robert Nelson Jacobs.
Directed by Eric  Leighton and Ralph Zondag.
Rated PG.
"Dinosaur" is a great technical accomplishment.
It's one of the  best-looking movies I've ever seen.
Every prehistoric creature is  rendered in astonishingly convincing fashion, the backgrounds are lush  and detailed (sometimes real-life locations into which the animated  characters are placed), and the whole thing filled with crisp, colorful  visuals.
The first 15 minutes feature a breathtaking sequence in which a  mother Iguanadon nests her eggs, only to lose them when a giant predator  attacks.
The egg is picked up by a Pterodactyl and deposited on a nearby  island.
All of "Dinosaur's" brilliance as a sensory experience is on  display during this opening sequence.
Then all potential for an  original, innovative work gets tossed out the window when a little  lemur-like creature opens its mouth and starts talking, in English, to  its little lemur children, who also speak in English.
Oh well.
It would be more honest, however, to say that the primary failure of  "Dinosaur" is not, as some critics have suggested, that the dinosaurs  talk.
Nor is it that the film's plot is formulaic, though such an  observation would certainly be true: The plot deals with an orphaned  dinosaur named Aladar (voice of D.B.
Sweeney), who is raised in the care  of small mammals on a solitary island.
A firestorm destroys Aladar's  home, and after he and his adoptive lemur family narrowly escape the  ordeal, they are forced to hook up with a group of migrating dinosaurs  searching for the fabled "mating grounds," presumably an oasis in the  hostile terrain.
The dinosaurs are lead by Kron (Samuel E. Wright), a  gruff Darwinist bent on following the "survival of the fittest" mantra  to the death: He leaves all old or injured animals to fare for  themselves, pushing only the able-bodied ones endlessly onward.
Aladar,  already having rubbed Kron the wrong way by sticking up for some older  dinosaurs, runs afoul of the troop's gruff leader even more by taking a  liking to his younger sister Neera (Julianna Margulies).
Sounds like many a Disney plot, doesn't it?
In fact, the setup of the  outcast looking for acceptance from his peers sounds alarmingly similar  to that of "Tarzan," Disney's last animated feature.
But previous Disney  films have been enjoyable despite their predictability, so complaints  about a formulaic plot seem somewhat wrong-headed.
Likewise complaints  about talking animals don't really get to the heart of "Dinosaur's"  problem.
The enjoyability of a Disney film stems not from its daring,  ground-breaking originality, but from the "little things.
" You enjoy  them because they tell a recognizable story in pleasing fashion, with  amusing elements to spice up the proceedings.
They have catchy songs  ("Beauty and the Beast", "The Little Mermaid"), exuberant voice work  (Robin Williams in "Aladdin", James Woods in "Hercules"), or  breathtaking action sequences ("The Lion King", "Tarzan").
"Dinosaur,"  unfortunately, is severely lacking in the little things.
There are no  catchy songs (not necessarily a bad thing, as the quality of songwriting  had gradually declined as the years passed -- the songs in "Mulan"  weren't memorable at all).
None of the celebrity voices provide much  distinction: You don't say, "Omigod!
Julianna Margulies did such  wonderful voice work!
" You say, "Oh!
That was Julianna Margulies?
" The  characters just come off as old Disney archetypes thrown into reptilian  forms, and none of the humor is fresh or witty, unless one finds the  term "jerkasaurus" absolutely hilarious.
Some of the action sequences  are exciting: A battle sequence between Aladar and some Carnataurs (a  species invented for the film for reasons I've yet to discover) in a  cave provides some excitement, and the aforementioned opening egg  journey is quite breathtaking.
But none of the scenes come as a natural  continuation of what's occurred before them, and as a result, the story  simply doesn't flow.
And that's the other big problem with "Dinosaur": It's okay in bits, but  it doesn't cohere, doesn't involve the viewer.
Most discoveries come out  of nowhere.
There is no catharsis when Aladar inevitably takes his place  at the head of the herd, or when the nesting grounds are found.
There is  no urgency to the story.
The herd marches towards something that they  want to find tomorrow, but it doesn't make much difference if they don't  find it until next week.
Character arc is zero: The principle characters  -- Aladar, Neera, Kron, and the lemurs -- don't much change at all from  beginning to end.
But the film's worst sin, again, is its complete and  utter lack of flow.
"Dinosaur's" structure is a strict cut-and-paste  job, with pieces borrowed from earlier Disney films that worked their  formulas to more pleasing effect.
So the story has no punch, the characters are bland, and the film  contains almost no lively musical numbers, witty comic relief, or  standout vocal characterization.
What then can the audience enjoy but  the visuals?
And, to be fair, "Dinosaur" almost gets by solely on those  merits.
It's easy to conceive someone liking the film as nothing more  than a sheer sensory experience (as I almost did).
As a technical  achievement, "Dinosaur" is stunning.
As a movie, it's dull.
For all its  impressive wizardry, Disney's latest effort mostly comes off as a  visually spectacular lesson in how not to tell a story.
For more reviews, go to http://www.geocities.com/sycasey/movies.html. . 
