An announcement to the world, I have finally seen The Sixth Sense.
At first I didn't want to go, it just didn't sound like that appealing of a movie.
Then one of my friend's told me to go see it, but they like Adam Sandler, so I dismissed their comment at first.
Then my parent's friend went to go see it, and they loved it.
Then my dad's boss said that he and his wife loved it, so naturally we had to go.
And boy was I surprised.
Anyone that does not want to see this movie because it promises to be and scary, and really isn't (there are only so many Lake Placid's, Deep Blue Sea's, and Blair Witch Project's that you can see) should suspend all disbelief and go and see this film now.
Anyone that can make up another stupid excuse such as, but I'd rather go to Hooters, or let's rent a movie instead, should come to their senses (the seventh sense perhaps?
) and see this film immediately.
Malcolm Crowe (Willis, excellent in a non-action film role) is a child psychologist who is shot by one of his former patients that still believes he is a freak.
A year after he recovers from the shooting, he is assigned his first new case.
Cole Sear (Joel Osment, who I'll be rooting for at the Oscars) is a disturbed child that is constantly plagued by these horrific visions and receives multiple stab wounds without ever really getting hurt.
Malcom is frightened as he finds this child to be more and more like the person that shot him.
So when Cole tells him that he can see dead people (OK, I realize that I am giving away a major plot point, but all of the ads include those words so I might as well anyway) he doesn't believe him at first, but as time goes by, be begins to believe in the supernatural.
Great performances from the entire cast, especially Haley Joel Osment (all you people that say young people today can't act or win Oscars have been proven wrong!
Heck, if a guy who doesn't speak English can win for being in a truly magical film, a kid can win for acting in a hella spooky one) and Toni Collette as his mother.
Bruce Willis also belongs on the nomination list, (but will probably be forgotten with other should be nominees like director Tom Tykwer and Dan Hedaya in "Dick.
" If my first paragraph hasn't convinced you to see the film yet, there are also wild sex scenes that show graphic nudity from all members of the Dawson's Creek cast, (heck, why not use false statements and fake advertising to promote a product, it's been done before) and the film is scarier than Blair Witch (true.
) What are you waiting for?
Go, now, to the theater and see The Sixth Sense, which gets *** 1/2 stars.
ADDITIONAL NOTE: If the surprise twist at the end doesn't give you a heart attack, I think that only the nachos they serve at the refreshment counter will.
The Young-Uns: The film contains some very chilling scenes of dead people, vomiting, and poisioning.
Good Age: 12-13 & Up. A Review by Frankie Paiva The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic. ANOTHER ADDITIONAL NOTE: If you are reading this, you are wasting precious time to drive to the movie theater to see this movie!. . 
