American popular music may have changed in style as time has gone by, but has remained constant in theme.
The topics of romance and heartbreak remain characteristic of the genre, reflecting the obsessions of its youthful audience.
This film uses popular music to metaphorically represent the turbulent romantic life of its characters.
The story begins as Rob Gordon (John Cusack) and his current girlfriend Laura (Iben Hjejle) are breaking up their relationship.
Rob is the main character, a young record store owner who has classified and cataloged his romantic failures as obsessively as his record collection.
He recounts his most troubling breakups and analyzes where in the pantheon this latest one should be placed.
Rob decides (aided by an apparition of Bruce Springsteen) that in order to understand his bad luck with romance, he must revisit and dissect each of his worst breakups and understand the problems in the relationships that caused them.
The most enjoyable part of the film is the depth to which Rob goes in exploring all aspects of his old relationships.
It is an intelligent approach that is not often seen in popular film.
In contrast to its serious side, Rob's connection to popular music also anchors its humorous part.
The record store he owns specialized in rare and collectible vinyl records, and the two clerks who work for him are indeed odd characters.
There is the neurotic and meek Dick (Todd Louiso), and unrestrained Barry (Jack Black).
The elitist trio sneer at all people, even customers, who have "lesser" tastes in music.
It is a construction that does not necessarily make them likeable, but makes them entertaining.
Barry in particular is often overboard, but also causticly funny.
Although it is common to use voice over narration at the beginning of a film to set context, or at the end of the film to provide an epilogue, it is not often used by good films as prominent part of its storytelling.
This film uses soliloquy (having Rob talk directly to the audience) to distracting excess.
It is far too easy to have the character intravenously feed the audience his inner thoughts.
Good craftsmanship could have expressed these feelings in a more indirect manner, such as inter-character dialog and expressive performance.
It is surprising that veteran director Stephen Frears chose this route.
The other major complaint is the use of an overly melodramatic plot device to develop Rob and Laura's relationship.
The suddenness and force of this occurrence feels manipulative.
The weaknesses of this film are surprising considering the body of work compiled by Stephen Frears, whose films are generally more oblique and engaging.
Recommended.
The film attempts to intelligently and realistically examine the issue of relationships in modern life, and it is mostly successful in this dimension.
It also uses character based humor that is frenetic, but still enjoyable.
The film has definite weaknesses which keep it from reaching its full potential, but it remains a more thought-provoking exploration of romance than what is typically produced.. . 
