Starring Warren Beatty, Halle Berry and Oliver Platt. Written by Warren Beatty and Jeremy Pikser. Watching BULWORTH was an educational experience.
I learned a new slang  term: nappy dugout.
If you don't know what a nappy dugout is, then  I'm not going to tell you - I try to keep FILMGEEK a family site,  more or less, and I sure don't want to be responsible for some  6th-grader running around telling his friends what a nappy dugout is.
But I hadn't heard it before, and I thought it was pretty funny.
BULWORTH is full of such surprising moments - surprising because you  don't necessarily expect this level of energy in a film written and  directed by a sixty-something actor like Beatty.
Check out the recent  films of Beatty contemporaries Clint Eastwood and Paul Newman, and  you'll see what I mean; you could show some of these pictures in the  Geriatric ward and you wouldn't even roust the old folks from their  checkers games.
But BULWORTH moves.
It's far from a perfect film, but  it's sharp, witty and has something to say - three elements that most  of the pictures released this year have been sorely lacking.
Here's the story.
California Senator Jay Bulworth (Beatty) is at the  end of his rope.
A career politician, he finds himself in the middle of  his latest re-election campaign without hope or moral compass.
He's a  slave to the big insurance companies who finance his campaigns.
His  liberal idealism has long since succumbed to the choking rhetoric of  Washington which he is forced to spout ad nauseam to keep his place at  the Federal feed trough.
Even his marriage is a sham.
Despondent,  Bulworth makes one last, desperate attempt to break free: he takes out a  contract on his own life.
Beats going to work in the private sector, one  supposes.
But then something odd happens.
Bulworth finds his self-imposed death  sentence strangely liberating.
Fueled by delirium brought on by a lack  of sleep, he spends his next few campaign stops saying exactly what's  on his mind.
To a congregation of black churchgoers: "If you don't put  down the malt liquor and the chicken wings and get behind somebody other  than a running back who stabs his wife, you'll never get rid of  somebody like me.
" To a gathering of big-money Hollywood Jews: "Your  pictures really aren't very good, are they?
" And so it goes, until  Bulworth has drawn the attention of the national media and sent his  campaign manager Dennis (Oliver Platt) into a cocaine-induced panic.
He  picks up three young black women at the church, including Nina (Halle  Berry), who seems to take a special interest in him.
He parties with  them at an underground nightclub, where he discovers rap music.
The next  day, he starts rapping his message instead of giving speeches.
Suddenly  he's a hip-hopping, straight-talking sensation, and life is fun again.
But that pesky hit man is still out there somewhere.
BULWORTH's first act is nothing short of sensational.
As actor, writer  and director, Beatty is in full command; the dialogue is crisp and  arresting, the story moves swiftly and the performances by Beatty, Berry  and Platt are right on the money.
Those of you who thought WAG THE DOG  was a good satire should put it up against the first thirty minutes of  this picture and admit the error of your ways.
For a short time, it  looks as if Beatty is really going to break through with an important  film.
It takes a lot of guts to use studio money to convey the awful  truth about American politics: that because the same five or six  multi-national corporations who funnel all the money into political  campaigns control not only the means of production in this country, but  also the media outlets which purport to give us an impartial  dissemination of the facts, American democracy has become simply another  mindless diversion designed to give us the illusion of freedom.
Makes  you proud to be alive, doesn't it?
Unfortunately, BULWORTH doesn't sustain the same level of brilliance  throughout.
The story literally gets sidetracked in Watts.
On the lam  from the hit man, Bulworth hides out with Nina in her family's home,  where he gets a good dose of quality black family life.
He befriends  some grade-school drug dealers and confronts their supplier L.D., played  by BOOGIE NIGHTS alumnus Don Cheadle.
Suddenly it seems as if Beatty has  wandered into another film entirely.
By the time the press finds him and  the political theme gets going again, it's too late; the picture's  over, and we're left with some fuzzy notions about the inherent good  of the inner city versus the unrepentant evil of big business.
Yadda  yadda yadda, we've all seen this before.
But for a while, at least, BULWORTH is daring and brilliant.
I wish  Beatty had honed in on his message, had hammered on it until audiences  left the theater screaming for blood.
Film has that power.
It's true  that if a politician who spoke the truth like Bulworth ever actually  came along, he'd most likely be ignored.
These are boom times, after  all, and as long as there are SUVs to lease and mutual funds to dabble  in, we're not likely to pay much attention to what goes on over our  heads.
But the good times won't last forever.
HMO's, banks, media  companies, even manufacturers are gobbling up one another in an orgy of  unbridled capitalism.
Every day we have a little less control over our  lives than we did the day before.
BULWORTH could have been a warning  sign, a harbinger of doom or a prophetic look at the abyss of the 21st  century.
It settled for being just a decent little film which, while  enjoyable, will ultimately have no impact.
Oh well - at least I can  amuse my friends at parties with my new vulgar slang terms.
visit the FILM GEEK Web Site at: http://www.filmgeek.com. . 
