Wesley Snipes both stars and produces in this silly action flick.
Snipes plays 'Blade,' a half man, half vampire who's goal in life is to avenge the death of his mothers by blowing the hell out of the blood suckers.
In the opening scenes, we can see he does this with particular gusto.
Blade somehow gets involved with rebel vampire Deacon Frost (Dorff) who feels that vampire should take over the world.
Blade tries to stop this, with help from scientist friend Abraham Whistler (Kris Kristofferson) and female co-star Karen (N'Bushe Wright.
Yes, that is her name.
) Blood, guts and explosions in follow, all wrapped up in a big MTV type package.
The main problem with Blade is the fact that it's too tied up in it's own stupid mythology, and this bogs down the whole film.
While the audience is waiting for the next mass homicide by Blade, we're instead 'treated' to Frost and co. babbling on about some mystic vampire chronicle, and how the blood beast (or something) will take over the world.
I suppose this is all fine if you're a fan of the Marvel comic, but the average audience member may want some more bang for his/her buck.
When the action comes, it's pretty good, directed in a hyper kinetic, 'music video' way.
Unlike some other movies, where hyper kinetic means 'unwatchable,' the British director Norrington handles it all pretty well.
This film is not really for the faint of heart: there's a lot of blood spurting, and in a homage to Scanners (1981) there's a few heads blowing up in particularly graphic (yet obviously fake) way.
The performers are O.K, with Snipes seemingly having a good time as the larger than life hero.
However, he's a bit too serious for his own good in this movie, and comes across as a bit boring.
Dorff is much more fun as the bad guy, even if he is a bit one note.
He's suitably evil, however.
Kristofferson delivers a 2D performance, and Wright is pretty good in the action babe role.
Overall, the cast is slightly weak.
While in other action movies this wouldn't be so bad, because there's so much script in Blade, the character flaws show up more.
And in some cases, characters appear without being explained at all!
The film also suffers from a overlong running time, and the fact that the action is too far and few between.
It's a shame, because when the action does come up, it's well handled and pretty exciting.
Had the film been less concerned with the story, and more with the action, Blade could of been a far more enjoyable movie.
Sadly, though, Blade gets too bog down in plot, and is nothing more than an average film.
DAVID WILCOCK david.wilcock@btinternet.com Visit the Wilcock Movie Page!
http://wilcockmovie.home.ml.org -OR- http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/9061 Recieve Wilcock Movie Page Reviews via E-MAIL Send a blank E-MAIL to wmp-reviews-subscribe@makelist.com to join the mailing list!
"You know, for kids"- Norville Barnes. . 
