20th Century Fox / 1:48 / 1997 / R (language, gore, semi-nudity, creepy images) Cast: Sigourney Weaver; Winona Ryder; Ron Rerlman; Dominique Pinon; Gary Dourdan;  Michael Wincott; Leland Orser; Kim Flowers; Dan Hedaya; J.E.
Freeman; Brad  Dourif; Raymond Cruz  Director: Jean-Pierre Jeunet  Screenplay: Joss Whedon . There's nothing more satisfying than a film series that keeps each installment  fresh and unique, and the movies in the "Alien" franchise are a great example of  the innovation required in order to maintain interest.
Ridley Scott's 1979  "Alien" was an ominously chilling homage/remake of old-time creature features  that set the stage for countless copycats and arguably redefined the contemporary  monster movie.
In 1986, James Cameron's crowd-pleaser sequel "Aliens" hit  screens, and is still considered a classic combination of action and  science-fiction sensibilities today.
Five years ago, David Fincher's "Alien3" met  with troubling box office performance due to a downbeat tone and depressing  send-off, but love it or hate it, it's definitely a strong exercise in grim  atmosphere.
Now, there's "Alien Resurrection," which I'm pleased to say is  *spectacular.
* You'll have to excuse the gushing (I'm an enormous fan of the  series and must consider this film as *the* one movie of 97 I've been looking  forward to the most -- everyone else can subtract a half-star or so from my  rating), but "Alien Resurrection" is an exhilarating experience, easily one of  the most exciting motion pictures of the year.
When we last left Lieutenant Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver) in "Alien3," she had  taken her own life in order to prevent the alien queen growing inside her from  falling into the hands of a selfish, aloof bio-weapons division that wanted to  create and tame a beastly army of their own.
"Alien Resurrection" picks up about  200 years later.
On the space station Auriga, similar-minded scientists have used  blood samples (taken soon before her death) to clone a Ripley with extremely  discouraging results on seven separate occasions.
But it appears the eighth  time's the charm: the operation is a success, the queen is removed and Ripley,  scarred but still beautiful, is cast aside while the project's supervisors can  figure out how they're going to rid of her.
Everything seems to be running like clockwork until the small space pirate crew  of the Betty docks on the Auriga.
Their mysterious cargo -- about a dozen live  bodies in states of suspended animation -- is quickly used to breed a new brood  of the otherworldly monsters, which, of course, end up escaping.
As the bloodbath  begins, Ripley reveals to Betty shipmate Analee Call (Winona Ryder), a  seemingly-passive young grunt who may or may not have questionable motives for  being on the Auriga, that things are not what they seem -- the cloning process  has resulted in a DNA exchange between human and creature.
As a result, Ripley is  given alien intuition and a few other assorted bonus surprises.
Because alien movies are such an overworked sci-fi genre, they're also one of the  most tired.
In the past two years alone, we've had entries that range from  silly-but-enjoyable ("Starship Troopers") to plainly mediocre ("Event Horizon")  to downright awful (yes, "Independence Day").
Most, if not all, of these films  are completely shallow when it comes to anything other than blood, guts and the  requisite jump scene -- there's little intrigue outside of wondering how much the  special effects cost.
Leave it up to "Alien Resurrection" to throw a lot of  emotion and character into the mix.
Thankfully, it's about more than monsters on  a kill-quest.
That's not to say that there's a lack of chest-bursting, face-hugging or the use  of people as in-between meal snacks -- enthusiasts of such violence will find  much about "Alien Resurrection" to relish, particularly some icky business I  heard an Internet rumor panel refer to as the "human toothpaste scene" and one  bit where a general realizes he's a goner by examining a piece of his own head.
But aside from the gore, there are actual ideas about biological-tampering,  genetics and loyalty that aren't just confined to a setup or back-story.
In one  particularly thought-provoking sequence, Ripley meets the seven mutated clones  she very well could have been.
The way this quasi-family reunion plays out is  eerie, stunning and even moving.
"Alien Resurrection" draws much of its suspense from where Ripley's final  allegiance will lie -- which of the two species will she end up devoting herself  to?
Weaver obviously relishes the new-fangled spin on her best role ever.
Her  tricky, sly acting is done with the deliciously devious twist that Ripley is a  savior no longer -- she's actually quite a nasty predator.
Weaver's choreography,  costuming and makeup even add to her neo-alien look.
Ryder sports a surprisingly  strong action presence, proving that she can conquer pretty much any type of  film.
Call makes a great foil for Ripley; their eventually-warm relationship is  reminiscent of Ripley's bond with the little girl she saved in "Aliens.
" Other  cast members register even if their sole purpose is to act as a food source.
"The  Crow"'s Michael Wincott is noteworthy as a semi-good guy (for once) but exits the  film far too early.
Leland Orser is "Resurrection"'s likely scene-stealer,  playing a jittery traveler who's reluctantly carrying an alien in his own chest.
Even the aliens themselves are given more character this time around.
Behind-the-scenes credits are stellar.
Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet ("The City of  Lost Children") frames each and every shot as a visual showstopper, particularly  a dizzying underwater chase that culminates in a tense vertical climb.
Screenwriter Joss Whedon gives "Alien Resurrection" the same clever humor that  crowded his script for "Toy Story.
" Herve Schneid's editing is taut, John  Frizzell's original score is eclectic.
All of the prowess both on- and off-screen  carries "Alien Resurrection" to a supremely rousing climax, the aftermath of  which ever-so-slightly hints at an "Alien 5.
" And I, for one, am already in line.
Š 1997 Jamie Peck  E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/. . 
