The number 4 does not seem to be very lucky when it comes to movie sequels.
After the atrocity Batman and Robin, I think that theory has been more than justified.
The Batman movie franchise has had it's ups and downs.
The series started out with a bang in 1989, as the caped crusader was revived to fight crime in a darker, moodier Gotham City as envisioned by director Tim Burton.
The box office receipts ensured room for a sequel.
And so in 1992, Warner Bros. released the much anticipated Batman Returns, in which Michael Keaton returned as the title character to fend off two new super villains.
Unfortunately, Burton had gone too far with the darkly disturbing atmosphere that had inhabited the original, and the sequel was dismissed by critics and audiences alike for being too dark and heartless.
A change of pace was taken for the third installment, Batman Forever, including a new capped crusader and a fresh visionary behind the camera.
This Gotham City was more exciting, livelier, and in turn more entertaining for the younger audiences that Batman had always been intended for.
But as the fourth comic book chapter rolls around, a painful realization has occurred: just as Burton had let his second outing with the Bat slip inexcusably through his fingers, Schumacher has repeated the tradition with a botched sophomore outing.
As the third actor to portray our black-clad superhero, George Clooney manages fine.
He looks entirely comfortable suited up in the Batman attire, whether acting as the debonair millionaire Bruce Wayne by day or the elusive crime stopper by night.
The performances are not the problem.
I didn't even seem to mind the villains: the chilly Mr.
Freeze (Arnold Schwarzenegger), a deranged former scientist bent on turning Gotham into a giant icebox, and Poison Ivy (Uma Thurman), a seductive plant women and the result of a bizarre experiment.
The general grievances that I had were based on the preposterous plot, the slow-moving story, and the wasted production designs.
Just as Batman Forever succeeded with presenting us dazzling visual effects and elaborate sets, this fourth installment goes totally overkill.
There is so much expensive production at hand that we are nearly lulled to sleep with the continuing, boring repetitiveness.
The script is also incredibly cheesy.
Early on, the Dynamic Duo (with Chris O'Donnell returning as Robin) have a half-baked hockey game with Freeze's henchman, using a priceless diamond as the `puck' as they skate on an icy museum floor.
Who would write such mindless crap?
There are so many hard-to-swallow coincidences engraved in the action, which makes it extremely difficult to enjoy.
And then there are a handful of corny one liners from Schwarzenegger, as he taunts Batman and fellow police with such quips as `You're not sending me to the cooler!
' and `Chill!
' I found Arnie's delivery unintentionally hilarious, although I knew he was doing his best with the preposterous material.
Batman and Robin is a case of frequent missed opportunities.
Alicia Silverstone makes an appearance at Wayne Manor, playing butler Alfred's daredevil niece.
Silverstone soon becomes Batgirl, but her performance is devoid of the perkiness or charisma that it takes to be a superhero.
Elle MacPherson has a thankless role as Bruce's current love interest, with one or two pointless scenes that register as more of a cameo.
A single sub-plot I somewhat enjoyed was the sudden illness that comes over Alfred (nicely played, once again, by Michael Gough).
But so much of Batman and Robin has been carelessly buried in excessive cheesiness, making it difficult to enjoy hardly anything without distractions.
Is Batman 5 around the corner?
If so, I think the series could use a severe makeover, starting (vitally) with an abrupt change of director.
While the future of Batman is questionable, it could be salvaged - if sequels like this one are carefully avoided.
Contact Jamey at:  movieviews@hotmail.com. . 
