Studio 54 looks like a really crazy place, from what I have seen in a ton of documentaries on 54, on such "informative" channels like VH1 and E!.
These programs depict lots of sex and extreme amounts of drug use, it doesn't appear to be dull.
Then why would a movie about a wild exclusive night club be so ordinary?
Maybe its because, in his first major film writer/director Mark Christopher didn't want to upset any studio executives.
The film never dares to take any risks, it follows the path you would expect and doesn't challenge you to anything.
You would think a director like Mark Christopher would be more risqué.
He has made a few independent films, The Dead Boys' Club (1992) and Alkali, Iowa (1995).
Both of these films deal with young homosexuals, and their coming out stories.
Therefor, Christopher has taken risks with his films before, and instead of making a movie like 54 that tried he to make mainstream while also trying to tell a story that isn't mainstream just doesn't work.
The story is told though the eyes of Shane O'Shea (Ryan Phillippe), a young guy with dreams to get out of his lame life in New Jersey, and go into the city where things are really hot.
Shane coerces some of his Jersey friends to go to New York City one night, to party at 54.
They reluctantly agree and when they arrive Shane is the only one admitted in to the club, by the owner of 54, Steve Rubell (Mike Myers) himself.
Needless to say Shane loves it and shortly after gets a job as a busboy at 54.
He makes friends with Greg (Breckin Meyer), another busboy, and Anita (Salma Hayek), a amateur  Latin singer.
Things go well for Shane as he works his way up to bartender at 54 and he meets and "connects" with Julie Black (Neve Campbell).
But it can't be this good forever you know it has to come crumbling down.
People have described this movie as 1998's "Boogie Nights".
It isn't, so don't expect it.
"Boogie Nights" was raw and told it like it was.
54 is a watered-down version of it, shorter and far less entertaining.
Plus he doesn 't show all that went on at 54, it barely touches on all the sex and drug abuse that went on there.
The directing and writing were mediocre at best.
The dialog just didn't pop like it should have, and they actually use the line, "Its not the size of the boat, but the motion of the Ocean.
". As far as acting goes, it was surprisingly good on all counts.
I was thoroughly impressed with Mike Myers who took his one dimensional character and really worked with it.
Kudos to Mike for his excellent freshman dramatic role.
It was also nice to see Heather Matarazzo from "Welcome To The Dollhouse" again, she has a small role as Shane's sister.
But the acting doesn't cover up all the flaws.. Next time Christopher make a movie with some energy and don't be afraid to take risk,  if you are dealing with a topic as outlandish  as Studio 54.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==----- http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum. . 
