UNIVERSAL PICTURES AND COLUMBIA PICTURES PRESENT A BREGMAN PRODUCTION DENZEL WASHINGTON  ANGELICA JOLIE  "THE BONE COLLECTOR"  QUEEN LATIFA * MICHAEL ROOKER * MIKE McGLONE * LUIS GUZMAN * LELAND ORSER  AND  ED O'NEIL   ORIGINAL MUSIC BY CRAIG ARMSTRONG   EDITED BY WILLIAM HOY PRODUCTION DESIGN BY NIGEL PHILLIPS   DIRECTOR OF PHOTOGRAPHY  DEAN SEMLER  A.C.S   A.S.C.
BASED ON THE NOVEL BY JEFFREY DEAVER PRODUCED BY MARTIN BERGMAN * LOUIS A. STROLLER  * MICHEAL BERGMAN SCREENPLAY BY JEREMY IACONE   DIRECTED BY PHILLIP NOYCE. Imagine a story about a master sleuth, cut down in his prime left in a state of immobility.
He is called upon to help in the investigation of a series of murders so vicious that the even the police are baffled.
Now add to that mix a young rookie cop, called upon by the paralyzed investigator to assist him on the case.
That simple little plot line sounds like an intriguing idea for a thriller.
Don't be fooled.
'The Bone Collector' is one of the most maddeningly intelligence stifling films since 1998's 'Lost In Space'.
What makes the film even more aggravating is the utter waste of a talented cast and crew.
Denzel Washington stars as Lincoln Rhyme, a quadriplegic former Forensics specialist.
Unable to move other than his eyes, his mouth and one finger (no ventilators or catheters here?!
), he wants to end his life.
His injury also causes seizures which may result in brain death.
His character is shown laying in his deluxe apartment (which could house a small business, I didn't know cops were paid that much in NYC), watching a peregrine falcon roosting on his window sill.
The bird seems to be an ally, watching over the detective; giving him the strength to carry on.
When a powerful New York City businessman is found murdered, rookie officer Amelia Donaghy (Angelina Jolie) is first to arrive on the scene.
Using a disposable camera she, documents the crime scene before evidence is washed away by the rain.
She discovers additional evidence one the train tracks and single handedly stops the on-coming train before it can destroy the clues.
This exercise in examination and care brings her to the attention of Rhyme, who has been called back into service by his friends on the force, to the chagrin of Capt.
Howard Cheney (Michael Rooker).
Urging Officer Donaghy to be his eyes on the crime scene, an unusual partnership is started.
We are introduced to the killer almost immediately in the form of a shadowy cab driver who has a toy monkey hanging from his rear view mirror.
One of the clues left at the murder scene (and at each murder scene) is a small bone fragment, always in the most preposterously difficult location, but always found.
All of the clues are discovered, including a series of small pieces of paper no bigger than a corner of a postage stamp.
All of these clues lead Officer Donaghy to the discovery of a true crime book published in the early 1920's called "The Bone Collector".
The crimes being committed are exact duplicates of the crimes detailed in the book, but no motive can be deduced.
That is until the maddeningly contrived and ridiculous ending, where Ryhme is confronted by the serial killer who goes to great lengths to explain his reasoning for the murders and why Ryhme was his primary victim all along.
Now, to be certain; 'The Bone Collector' does have a grand amount of atmosphere.
The Cinematography by Dean Semler creates a New York so seedy and forbidding as to possibly kill that states tourist industry for the next decade.
But the plotting of the film and the entire set up is so convoluted and contrived that it plays like an accident.
A fine example is when searching an old bookstore, Officer Donaghy finds the "Bone Collector" novel in the first place she looks, on the top shelve four feet above her, in the second row, buried under several other books.
Now while the character's deductive powers are supposed to be brilliant, this is taking it too far.
Also.. and this is a spoiler (so do not read this if you do intend to see the film).
When the killer finally attacks Rhyme in his apartment, he takes so long to explain his motives that Rhyme is able to finally regain movement in his hand, enough so that he can operate his hospital bed to collapse onto the villains hand.
At that point, Rhyme is also able to move his neck enough to deliver the final blow (which does not yet end the attack).
And of course, this just prolongs the climax long enough for Officer Donaghy to save the day.
The film is so maddening, in that here you have some of the best talent in film making working on a project so by the numbers, that it becomes almost absurd.
The clues are all pointless, they are set ups that lead the police in the opposite direction of where they should be looking.
If this were a real example of NYPD investigative resources, that the crime rates would be astronomical.
Mayor Gulliani  should sue Universal for defamation of local.
Director Philip Noyce (whose credits include the marvelously deft "Dead Calm" and amusing Zatoichi remake "Blind Fury"), works with a sure hand.
He manages to draw such earnest performances from his actors, that one could almost (almost), forget the plot contrivances here.
Unfortunately, the script by Jeremy Iocone is loaded with every possible variation of the serial killer genre, that the film becomes a template of scenes that never really coalesce into a whole film.
The performances are all very earnest.
Angelina Jolie shines as Officer Donaghy.
Her growing maturity and revulsion at her work is both honest and believable.
Ditto Denzel Washington, who manages to make us accept his physical condition as well as his desire for death.
The chemistry between these two stars is palpable, but unfortunately even that is dissipated by the inclusion of a scene wherein Officer Donaghy strokes Rhymes one good finger.
That scene is so riff with unsubtle sexual overtones that it's juvenile.
"The Bone Collector" is one film that should have been better.
It tries hard to be a variation of the film "Se7en", but only succeeds in being a morbid and grotesque remake of a Umberto Lenzi giallo film.
A disappointing and ultimately disastrous film.
Š2000 Areles Delphian Dungeon/ R.L.
Strong. . 
