Steve Kong at the Hard Boiled movie page gave me your address.
I'm  hoping to get reviews indexed through rec.
arts.
and IMDb.
Could you tell me the requirements (format, etc)?
Don't know if background is necessary, but I teach high school English  and (as an adjunct) freshman English at Miami of Ohio.
I've been  publishing stories, poems and essays in lit mags since 1981.
Went to  Glassboro State College (in NJ) and Miami University.
I'm enclosing a review for your review.
Look forward to hearing from  you.
Thanks very much for reading!
Hope it's OK I sent this to you at  two addresses.
Although the first shots of THE X FILES are corny (c'mon, a location  title that reads "North Texas, 35,000 B.C."?
), director Rob Bowman shows  solid work in most other aspects of the film.
One likable side of the film is acting.
Perhaps because I have seen  probably half a season's worth of shows throughout the run of the  series, I was not used to David Duchovny's deadpan looks.
I enjoyed his  character's own reference to this stoicism,  and soon got used to Fox  Mulder's tendency to display emotion through actions rather than facial  expressions.
Conversely, Gillian Anderson's Dana Scully -- though  governed by cold logic -- often seems more emotionally reactive.
A  certain glossiness about her looks in the film bothered me, the gloss  extending to her eyes, as though she experienced discomfort with  contacts or with tears of frustration about to spill at any second.
Applause to the director and make-up people, who give Scully's cheeks  broken blood vessels late in the film, after an ordeal that surely would  have caused them.
On the whole, Mulder and Scully exploit well their  level of comfort, after several years of interacting.
Layers of conspiracy lie at the center of the plot, and the aging white  males cast as the conspirators turn in believable if humorless  performances.
Armin Mueller-Stahl, apparently the highest-ranking  conspirator (operating beyond the ken and control of the FBI), does not  get a great deal of screen time.
But he is very good at using his scowl  and his accent to portray a sinister secrecy.
Martin Landau plays Dr.  Alvin Kurtzweil, who is himself the victim of conspiracies - attempts to  frame him and, no doubt, discredit his way-out-there writings.
Kurtzweil has to scramble to convince even Mulder of his credibility.
To me, the most incredible side of Landau's character is his wandering  the dark alleys, unarmed, wanted by at least the local police, behind  the bar in which he meets Mulder.
The "cigarette-smoking man" plays the  main heavy here -- besides the aliens themselves.
What confuses me  about his motivation is that, despite countless reasons to rub out  Mulder, he and his secret agency keep letting the tireless G-man get  away.
The sets and special effects are grand in THE X FILES.
"Grand" in the  old meaning of the word -- full of wonder and modesty, like the behavior  of an honorable person.
I did find the bomb-sheared office building  tacky -- too close to a re-enactment of Oklahoma City.
But other  catastrophes, afflictions and icky creatures find their ways seamlessly  into the narrative.
The implosion of the tundra -given away too much in  trailers - is a superb computer creation that is edited with both  patience and skill.
Remarkable illusions are created with the large  sets and their gruesome inhabitants in subterranean Antarctica.
Mark Snow's music frequently lends suspense at the right places, though  it seems a red-herring when the notes cut in as Mulder  glances behind a  soda machine that has cheated him out of his change.
Some fast-paced  pieces seem too densely New Age, layered as thickly as suspicions in  viewers' minds.
The script, by Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz, nicely sets alarms that  go off later in the film at crucial times, including a joke from Scully  just after she is resuscitated by Mulder.
In a way that I don't believe  would insult  die-hard fans of the series, we are informed about the  backgrounds, quirks and quests of the main characters.
Just from the  hype surrounding the movie I learned enough -- Scully's return to faith,  for instance - to help me chip away at plot twists.
I would rate THE X FILES as a satisfying and intelligent story, though  it should not be mistaken for an important film.
A question I have for  SEQUEL?. . . 
