All of my film reviews are archived at  http://us.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Justin+Felix. This review has been submitted to The Shrubbery   http://www.theshrubbery.com. Any comments about this review?
E-mail me at justinfelix@yahoo.com. Story by John Lasseter, Peter Docter, Ash Brannon, and Andrew Stanton.
Screenplay by Andrew Stanton, Rita Hsiao, Doug Chamberlain, and Chris  Webb.
Directed by Colin Brady, Ash Brannon, John Lasseter, and Lee Unkrich.
Featuring the voice talents of Tom Hanks, Tim Allen, Don Rickles, Jim  Varney, John Ratzenberger, Annie Potts, and Kelsey Grammer.
Rated G (suitable for all audiences; a few surprising sexual jokes will  fly over young children).
Synopsis: Space toy Buzz Lightyear leads "the boys" -- Mr.
Potato Head,  Slinky Dog, Rex, and Hamm -- into the big city to save fellow toy Woody  from a rare toy dealer.
During their adventure, Buzz Lightyear  inadvertantly frees another Buzz Lightyear toy and his archnemesis  Emperor Zurg, while the rest of the boys face temptation from Barbie  dolls.
Comments: I'm not sure what impressed me more when I saw TOY STORY 2 on  Thanksgiving Day.
I saw it at the new "Cobblestone Square 20", a 20  screen multiplex with "stadium seating".
It was not the first time I  had seen a film in a setting like this, but it was still a very nice  experience.
TOY STORY 2, easily the best animated feature for all  audiences in recent memory, made for very entertaining holiday fare for  young and old, but the movie was almost overshadowed by a lengthy  trailer for another computer-animated flick called DINOSAURS slated for  a May 2000 release.
The trailer featured stunning images of dinasaurs  roaming a prehistoric landscape, and judging the packed theater's  reactions to it, this film is going to have a lot of pre-release  interest.
The movie at hand, however, is TOY STORY 2, and it is very, very good.
This is a sequel to the 1995 hit TOY STORY, and, unlike many sequels,  this is an equal to (and in terms of animation, the superior of) the  original.
Releasing this gem during the holiday season was a very good  idea.
The entire family can enjoy this film.
The children at the  theater seemed to get a kick out of watching toys come to life when no  human is looking at them, and they laughed at their visual gags and  slapstick antics.
Adults seemed to appreciate the humor that was  addressed to them.
This included quips about car manuals and traffic  cones, and a blatant sexual arousal joke at the end of the film.
Science fiction fans, like myself, absolutely loved the opening  sequence.
In it, Rex plays a Buz Lightyear video game, and the game  parodies several old SF movies, including STAR TREK 2 and 2001.
The animation, produced by Pixar Animation Studios and Disney, is  absolutely top-notch.
It is very rich and catches the audience's eyes  from start to finish.
A huge pool of comic talent provide the voices of  the toys.
These include multiple Academy Award winner Tom Hanks, HOME  IMPROVEMENT's Tim Allen, CHEERS' John Ratzenberger, FRASIER's Kelsey  Grammer, SEINFELD's Estelle Harris, and Don Rickles.
The cast is solid  and entertaining.
Some films, like comedies, transfer to the small screen without any  significant loss.
A movie like TOY STORY 2, however, should be seen on  the big screen.
One gets a better sense of the superior animation of a  film like this only if he sees it at a theater.
Definately check this  one out! . . 
