A bunch of good ol' boys are sent into space to bicker and eventually  destroy yet another asteroid on an Earth-bound course.
There is much  shouting and explosions.
Starting late last year, we were subjected to teaser ads that declared  "1998 is closer than you think!".
By June and the release of "Deep  Impact", with teasers still coming thick and fast, I was beginning to  wonder if that line was intended as a reminder to the filmmakers.
But  "Armageddon" has arrived at last and proves to be much like other  Bruckheimer productions (e.g.
"Con Air", "The Rock"), only more so.
And this is how it is:. As you all know, cosmic objects can't help but attack the North  American continent and well known landmarks.
All it takes is a quick  meteor shower on New York, the destruction of the Chrysler building  (again) and NASA realises that it's in the middle of a disaster film.
An asteroid "the size of Texas" is headed straight for Earth.
Terrified by the idea of there being two Texases (or Texii), NASA  honcho Billy Bob Thornton panics.
He's surrounded by a bunch of geeks  and the only people who can solve problems like this are men, real men  like .... ... restaurateur and sometime actor Bruce Willis, here playing a  psychotic gun-nut.
When he's not threatening employees with a shotgun  or being Oedipal with his daughter (Liv Tyler, rigid and with pupils  the size of theoretical nuclear particles), Bruce is the best oil well  driller on the planet .
So when Bruce is shown NASA's plan (as is  traditional, land on asteroid, drill a hole and blow it up with a  couple of nukes left over from the Cold War), he scoffs at the idea of  sending astronauts to do a man's job.
What you really need is a group  of psychotic gun-nuts.
The Michigan Militia aren't available, so  Bruce's drillcrew are on the job.
As the crew contains Clear Eyed  Singlet Hero (Ben Affleck), Mr Pink (Steve Buscemi), Big Black Dude,  Cowboy and Retard, you realise you are about to descend into Character  Actor Hell.
The oil crew kid around a lot while Ben Affleck and Liv Tyler make a  bid for Most Annoying Screen Couple of All Time.
Realising that this  quest is doomed (Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor having a lock on  that title), they blast off for the asteroid, stopping only for some  brief racism on a Russian space station.
Later the gravitational pull  exerted by Bruce's ego causes one of the shuttles to crash, killing a  lot of nameless astronauts and Ben Affleck.
In response the audience  goes wild and Liv Tyler goes catatonic.
In fact the shock is so great  that it reaches back in time and renders her catatonic from the  beginning of the film.
But back on Earth, we can see people following  the tribulations of our heroes.
Curiously enough, from these segments  we can see that the population of the United States consists of (a)  New York, and (b) some bucolic never-never-land, filmed through a  foggy lens, populated by hayseeds who peer anxiously at the TV between  holding soapbox derbys and mopping the cows.
Did they just splice in  clips from "The Waltons"?
But things are going too well, and there's an hour of film and six  gadzillion dollars of special effects to use up.
So, in short order  (a) the military try and stab our boys in the back, (b) Mr Pink grabs  a gun and starts shooting things, and (c) the asteroid attacks the  crew.
Really.
All those hayseeds back in Ray-Bradbury-land look  anxious and squint at their TVs.
Will our heroes make it before the  precisely plotted deadline?
"Armageddon" is raucous, noisy, bigoted and dumb by turns.
It goes on  for far too long, piles on the pathos and setbacks to the point of  absurdity and is so intent on setting up its ragtag team as rebels  and the only ones who can do the job, that everyone else looks  incompetent.
Consider the basic absurdity of scenes like where the  team hard bargains for its rewards.
(Think about it - cancel my  parking tickets and give me a tax free income or the planet dies.
)   But "Armageddon" is the only BDP (Big Dumb Picture) of recent times to  even partially succeed, with the sound and fury distracting you from  plot idiocies.
There are even some good things about "Armageddon".
At least it realises that there is a world outside of North America  (unlike "Deep Impact") and deals with the disaster as a global event,  complete with nice if cliched images of Parisian cafes, church  services in Italy, prayer meetings in India.
A few of the supporting  characters are well drawn too, and shine past the competitive  overacting of the leads.
(Or underacting in Liv Tyler's case.
). All in all, one should not think too closely about this picture.
Place your critical judgement aside and accept it as a disposable  piece of entertainment that will quickly fade as you leave the cinema,  leaving not even a bad taste behind.
[**/ok] and boutique  beer on the Sid and Nancy scale.
-- Paul-Michael Agapow (p.agapow@ic.ac.uk), Dept.
Biology, Imperial College "We were too young, lived too fast and had too much technology ...". . 
