So much has been written about 'The English Patient' - about its twelve  Oscar nominations and about the interest that it has generated in  America and about its relationship with Michael Ondaatje's novel, that  it's hard to see it without huge expectations.
It is a film on a grand  scale: its length, and the music, and the huge desert landscapes remind  us of that, and the principal performances which are grand in their own  right.
More importantly, the story is strong enough to support such a grand  interpretation.
There are two intertwined stories, one in Italy during  the second world war and one in North Africa a few years earlier.
They  are linked by the English patient - Ralph Fiennes - who in the later  story has suffered horrific injuries and apparently total amnesia.
In fact the patient isn't English at all - and we much later discover  that he has every reason to feel bitterness at the English.
But this  blurring of national identities is important to the film.
Both he and  the French-Canadian nurse - Juliette Binoche - who cares for him in the  wartime scenes, are individuals, nomadic and stateless, and are somehow  united by their individuality.
It's a powerful portrayal of people who  don't fit into conventional categories, and the characters in the film  are stronger for their individuality.
The pre-war scenes centre around an affair between the patient and a  young, recently-married, British woman - Kristin Scott Thomas.
There  is a poignant remark about leaving different nations behind and trying  to build something finer - just as the impending war makes this  impossible.
In some ways that remark seems like a metaphor for  twentieth century history.
Certainly the film has a lot to say about  how the characters' patterns of friendship and trust shift as history  passes.
Exceptional performances include both the principal actresses: Juliette  Binoche conveys the most extraordinary range of emotions, and Kristin  Scott Thomas shifts perfectly from the colonial wife to the flirtatious  mistress.
But Naveen Andrews' performance as the Sikh bomb disposal  expert, Kip, also deserves mention, especially in a particularly tense  scene where he tries to defuse a bomb just as tanks are about to pass  to celebrate the allied victory.
This is cinema for grown-ups, cinema which really works because it  leaves points for the audience to interpret, and because it works at  many levels.
Superficially it is an old-fashioned film, with much  flying in biplanes and many heroic deeds by dashing men in uniform.
But this is really a mere allusion to such films, and the way that 'The  English Patient' addresses colonialism is very contemporary.
Look on it purely as a romance and you might be disappointed.
But look  more deeply at the portrayal of the people, and their dependence on one  another, and of the cruelty that's sometimes inflicted in the cause of  patriotism, and this is one of the most memorable and moving films that  I have seen.
--  Martin Rich  Phone(0171) 477 8627  Fax(0171) 477 8628 Lecturer in Information Management, City University Business School      Frobisher Crescent, Barbican Centre, London EC2Y 8HB, UK  M.G.Rich@city.ac.uk. http://www.city.ac.uk/martin. . 
