Rated R: violence, sexuality, nudity.
Starring: Anne Heche, Vince Vaughn, Viggo Mortenson, Julianne Moore, William  H. Macy, Robert Forester, Phillip Baker Hall, Rita Wilson and Mother.
When the word first came out that Hitch's masterpiece "Psycho" was going to  be remade, everyone put the thoughts in their head that this was the worst  thing anyone could ever do, how could you fix something that wasn't broken?
The movie opened in December of '99 to a $10 million dollar opening weekend,  and soon died out with only $22 million to it's name.
A huge flop to a lot of  peoples minds, and 75% of the people who saw it despised it, 20% of the  people who saw it, thought it was OK, and the other 5% loved it.
It's a  scene-for-scene pointless remake that is enjoyable in it's own way of a  homage to the original.
The story we all know, has Marion Crane (played quite well by Anne Heche) who  is a very well-liked banker, on the run after stealing $400,000 from a  trusting customer, she ends up at a hotel lost on the side of the highway run  by an eccentric young man named Norman Bates (Vince Vaughn who is good in his  role, but over the top at times).
Norman invites the girl to stay at the  hotel, and even invites her to dinner in his din.
Norman's mother however  does not like the fact of a girl in her din with her son, and Marion goes to  her room for the night, only to be surprised in the shower, getting stabbed  to death.
Now her sister and her boyfriend must investigate her murder and  find out who killed this young woman with (and if you don't know the twist  your crazy) a great little twist at the end.
"Psycho" has alot going for it, it has some great performances especially by  Julianne Moore who plays Lila Crane, Marion's sister.
I have always loved  Julianne Moore's performances and her best so far being in 1997's "Boogie  Nights" or 1999's "Magnolia".
Viggo Mortenson plays the boyfriend but he  seems quite pulled back and not really giving all he can, which to me I don't  even think he is a great actor.
William H. Macy I will say right now gives  the best performance as usual, as Detective Arbagast, he is easy going in his  role and seems to be having a ball playing his character.
The other  performances are very well brought out with some great cameos.
Gus Van Sant's direction is another story, he is a very good director and it  shows here, the shower scene is quite exquisite and almost seems more intense  than the original.
The biggest flaw in this film is the fact that its scene  for scene, and nothing has been changed, its like watching a colorized  version of the original, and at times seems out of place.
I do agree with  people who say it is a pointless movie, because why remake a classic if  nothing is wrong with it?
The original stands out as being one of the best  horror films ever, and this remake to me tributes to the original, rather  than trying to top the original.
In now way did I ever feel this movie was  trying to be better than the original, and I went into the theatre thinking  of a homage rather than a remake.
For all you despisers of this movie, try watching it again and just think  that Gus Van Sant was trying to make a homage rather than a remake, or top  the original type movie, because as well all know it will never top the  original.
With some terrific performances, great directing, and some  suspenseful scenes, "Psycho" is a remake that even though not as good as the  original, still an enjoyable tribute to the man himself.
Reviewed by Brandon Herring 12-20-98. . 
