Starring Cameron Diaz; Matt Dillon; Ben Stiller; Lee Evans & Chris Elliott. There's Something About Mary is, by far, the funniest movie that I have seen this year.
It is also one of the funniest films that I have ever seen, period.
A fair warning to all of you out there who are easily offended -- stay far away from this movie.
Some of the scenes in this baby would make a sailor blush, although that same sailor would probably be falling off his seat laughing as he was watching.
Mary centers on a one-time high school geek played by Ben Stiller who wants to be reunited with the girl of his high school dreams, Mary (Cameron Diaz).
He enlists a sleazy investigator (Matt Dillon) to find her.
This is the story of his adventures trying to woo the girl of his dream.
That is a major simplification but if I told you any more, I'd have to kill you.
All right, maybe just a little more.
Stiller sends Dillon down to Florida where Mary is now living to find out what her life is like.
(I.e., whether she is still single or not.
) When Dillon's character gets down there he falls hopelessly in love with Mary too.
So it then becomes a contest between Stiller and Dillon as to who will win Mary's heart.
(My guess is that they are going after that body too.
). The jokes are nonstop in this film, and much of the comedy is on the slapstick side.
I guarantee you that if you wait to watch this movie on network television, you will miss the best scenes in the movie.
They will surely edit out possibly the 2 funniest scenes ever put to film (namely Ben Stiller having a problem with his zipper and Cameron Diaz's hair gel).
Every performance in this film was a great one.
I've always though Diaz was great, but I've never been a huge fan of either Stiller or Dillon (all though his stock rose considerably after Wild Things).
I have to say that after this film, I'm a fan of both actors.
The physical comedy was choreographed perfectly and I really don't think that the writers could have fit one more funny moment into this film.
It was simply great from start to finish.
My advice -- There's Something About Mary should only be seen in it's original uncut version.
Any other way would ruin one of the funniest films you are likely to see in a long time.. . 
