My form of "rating": After watching NATURAL BORN KILLERS, I felt sort      of soiled; I wasn't sure what I'd been in contact with, but I was      upset that it was contaminating the world.
Was that because      NATURAL BORN KILLERS brought me in contact with the spirit of the      "real" America?
Or was it because NATURAL BORN KILLERS brought me      in contact with the mind of its director/co-writer Oliver Stone?
I leave that up to you to decide.
[A version of this review previously appeared in the December 1994      issue of The Curmudgeon (4505 University Way, N.E., Box 555,      Seattle WA 98105).
].      The story opens with Mickey and Mallory Knox (Woody Harrelson and Juliette Lewis) at a roadside bar out in the great American desert someplace.
Mallory puts a record on the jukebox and starts dancing (well, writhing) to it.
A yokel joins in, and gets fresh.
So Mallory starts beating him senseless as a prelude to killing him; she and Mickey kill everyone in and around the bar, leaving only one alive to tell the tale--and make sure their names are known.
Nice kids, huh?
We then learn a little about them.
Mallory is the daughter of a sleazo (Rodney Dangerfield) who used her for sex since who knows when.
Mickey apparently also has a history of molestation.
But the big thing is that they love each other and kill everyone they meet.
So, of course, they're big in the media, particularly with "American Maniacs"--a tabloid TV show hosted by Wayne Gale (Robert Downey, Jr.).
And they have zillions of fans world-wide.
As one observes, no one wants to endorse mass murder--but if that's what you *are*, then you'd certainly want to be Mickey and Mallory.
When they're eventually captured, the media circus heats up even more.
And after they're convicted, Gale will bring his show right to the prison to interview them.
I usually like to think in terms of the story, the characters, the acting--who does what, when, and so forth, how much I liked this character or that.
But NATURAL BORN KILLERS is one flick that practically screams that those things are trivial.
The *story* is subordinate to the *film*, and so is everything else.
Take where we learn about about Mallory's Happy Home Life.
We get it presented as a TV sitcom, with its own opening title, background music, and laff track!
We get a family presided over by a real sicko with an ineffectual wife (Edie McClurg), and the characters skate a line between what might happen in reality and how it might be presented by a sitcom as sick as Mallory's pop.
And that, brothers and sisters, is a relatively *realistic* element of NATURAL BORN KILLERS!
Throughout, we get every film-school trick imaginable, every possible dredging of symbolism.
When Mickey and Mallory are in a motel room, say, there'll be rear-projection images showing film clips from World War II, from Westerns, from perhaps Mickey's childhood, from sitcoms.
Periodically during the film, a character will flash on the screen drenched in blood, or banners will be projected onto the characters, labeling them demons or whatnot.
The film will switch from color to grainy video black and white, to shots at any angle that strikes the director's fancy.
When we see the TV news following Mickey and Mallory's travels, it may be sort of documentary style.
Or it may be inserted into a 50s advertizement of a family dressed up, surrounding the TV--all black and white except for the news story on the little screen in color.
NATURAL BORN KILLERS is a film that insists, that screams, that "*Every* frame is *filled* with *meaning*!
(You have to say that right -- intensely, showing your commitment, your *sensitivity*--dwell on each word: "*filled* with *meaning*".
Practice it.
).      OK.
So what's the meaning?
That people who grow up watching "Leave It to Beaver" are going (if male) to rape their kids?
Or (if female) to do nothing while hubby does so?
OK, so let's ignore the surreal stuff for a moment.
How's about "satire"?
OK, I guess I can call it satire.
We're assured by the press kit, and a sermonette from Stone, that this is a "satire on violence and the American media".
Mickey and Mallory are clearly presented as creeps, but at least we get some idea why.
Other than them (with one quasi-exception), there is no one (repeat: no one) for whom the film gives us any substantial reason to be sympathetic.
The people killed on screen are all either: 1) ciphers, complete unknowns, just momentary faces; 2) dorks and yokels; or 3) creeps and sickos of various varieties.
The one quasi-exception is an Indian (Russell Means).
He may be a sympathetic character, but he's hardly part of the ordinary world.
He speaks no English, has visions, and rattlesnakes don't bite him.
(He has a grandson, who also speaks no English, to ask him questions, so that the subtitled conversation can fill us in on mystical details.
) Means projects a nice, stable, laid-back character--but one who is clearly meant not to be part of 1990s America.
America is the hordes yearning for Mickey and Mallory to off more nobodies.
(Ollie Stone's not anti-American, though.
The whole *world* joins in the fascination--particularly those silly, air-headed Japanese.
).      Lined up against Mickey and Mallory, the forces of Law and Order are not exactly Marshall Dillon.
Jack Scagnetti (Tom Sizemore), who's tracking them, is a self-promoting hack.
He has, let's say, a certain desire to dominate women.
Warden Dwight McCluskey (Tommy Lee Jones) must go to the same hair stylist that does Ace Ventura, Pet Detective.
(McCluskey might not be realistic enough for that flick, however.
).      Well, if this is satire, it's about the level one would expect from a high-school or freshman writing class.
Except that high-school kids might actually have fun making everyone look like total jerks.
Oliver Stone does not appear to be having fun.
This is serious business.
The promos make it all too clear that NATURAL BORN KILLERS is a Statement, a Warning to America.
All right, let's give Stone his Statement.
He has obviously absorbed pop culture, and turned it on its head.
Time after time, Mickey and Mallory are in situations much like those in teen flicks and sitcoms.
But in those flicks, the hero or heroine might sock or slap somebody, or just throw back a snappy one-liner.
In NATURAL BORN KILLERS, they kill somebody.
But because of our complete lack of identification with the victims, the killings are "distant"--without any impact except as devices to move the action along.
So, it certainly looks like Stone wants us to enjoy this on a superficial level.
Then, presumably, when we look back, we'll see that we, too, have been sucked into the whole pop culture of death and slaughter.
And we'll repent.
Doesn't this sound vaguely familiar?
Particularly on film, wasn't a lot of soft-core porno written and marketed this way?
Filled with "oh the shame" and "warnings to youth"?
I think that NATURAL BORN KILLERS has been misrepresented as a satire of the media.
As I said, *everybody* in the film is a creep; the media types are merely *celebrity* creeps--just like Mickey and Mallory.
But it would be fun to analyze NATURAL BORN KILLERS as a critique of the media, since the film is so self-referential.
The old soft-core marketing schtick is merely one aspect to look at.
Don't the tabloid-TV types tell us how opposed they are to what they're hyping?
I think it would be interesting to examine NATURAL BORN KILLERS to see to what extent it can be criticized as being what Stone claims to satirize and condemn.
Unfortunately, though, after reading Stone my thoughts turned to something darker than the usual media incompetence and self-righteousness.
Throughout NATURAL BORN KILLERS, one explanation of Mickey and Mallory is "fate".
We are bombarded with the past as backdrop to the present.
Mickey himself states it expressly: He and Mallory are just Natural Born Killers.
Their unremitting violence is fated.
Virtually all those who were killed surely had something dark enough in their past that they deserved to be butchered.
Maybe Stone is just giving Mickey some slimy self-justification.
But those ideas are almost nowhere contradicted and sometimes explicitly affirmed by the film.
To the extent the film offers us an out, it is that "Love beats the demon".
Stone himself cites this line, saying that "I do believe there is love at the end.
".      *But what about the killings?
*  For at least a hundred years, certain voices have announced a fascination with violence--that violence alone can cleanse us of the things that drag us down.
That humanity can rise above its grubby little present only by passing through a river of blood, a wall of fire.
Those who kill--joyously and without restraint--will rise purer and stronger than any before them.
They will be triumphant--purged, redeemed, the truly innocent and free, truly capable of love and exultation.
Stone, immediately after citing the "love beats the demon" line, closes his sermon with:. . 
