Did you ever see that short Disney cartoon when you were a kid, the one  about the Headless Horseman?
Do you remember the wild finale, a mixture of  scary slapstick, which had Ichabod Crane galloping for dear life towards the  bridge that marked that essential piece of childhood myth, the Line Of  Safety.
Tim Burton remembers, and I find it perfectly suitable that the  former (though briefly-tenured) Disney animator should produce a live-action  elaboration of that short piece.
Here's another gem from the Burton  repertoire, and one which few others would have attempted in this day and  age: a good old-fashioned horror film.
Set firmly in the 18th century and occupying a universe all of its own  (although strongly derived from the Hammer films of the late 60s and early  70s), SLEEPY HOLLOW succeeds because it refuses the self-deprecating  concessions film-makers almost seem obliged to put in their films nowadays.
No one-liners.
No provision for a sequel.
Its only nudge to the audience  is a well-timed millennium reference (and, intentionally or not, a couple of  images from THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS and PEE-WEE'S BIG ADVENTURE, the  visages of Jack Skellington and Large Marge respectively) and  state-of-the-art FX notwithstanding, the end result could pass muster as  some sort of lost classic unearthed in the Hammer Studio vaults - it even  has that distinct indigo hue and those washed-out faces.
This movie is so  out-of-era that it's simply wonderful: not exactly a homage, not even a  revision - it's just a crackling good Gothic Yarn.
New York constable  Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp), is sent to the small agrarian township of  Sleepy Hollow to investigate a recent spate of decapitation murders.
The  townsfolk blame a local legend, which Depp airily dismisses - at first.
A  first-hand encounter with the Horseman quickly turns him into a believer.
Depp's transition from rational scientific enquiry to supernatural and  arcane lore works seamlessly into the story: it doesn't seem wrong to us  that he should 'switch sides' so easily, integrating a little of both into  his investigation.
The seeds have already been planted, after all, in the  skewed flashbacks to his childhood (although that haunted child reminded me  more of a young Burton than a young Depp), so the appearance of Crane as a  well-attired adult investigator poking around crime scenes in gloomy forests  is no more peculiar to us than it would be if we were watching an episode of  a protean X-FILES.
The concerns of the plot are duly interspersed with Horror intrusions (and  how Burton loves to see those severed heads roll!
) but by its finale SLEEPY  HOLLOW has let slip its full melodramatic glory.
The usual lightning  flashes and explosions of shattering glass easily become the type of genre  standards that are included only because they're expected, but by the time  you have sat through ninety minutes of SLEEPY HOLLOW, the clichés are no  longer clichés.
Every swirling mass of leaves and gout of blood conspires  to produce a cinematic, gothic opera: the Headless Horseman is brutal and  frightening; the sky is perpetually grey or stormy; the trees are black and  twisted; everything outside is muted with dampness; the scenes of the  countryside, the feasts, the cornshocks, the windmills and the kitchens are  reminiscent of Dutch and Flemish masters; similarly the striking faces of  the cast could also have been lifted from portraits (although I wish  Christina Ricci had been left with her raven tresses instead of those blonde  curls), indicating that Burton's visual sense of the film was inspired by  paintings.
Irrespective of its reference points, SLEEPY HOLLOW is its own  entity.
But if it's "supposed" to be a Hammer film, a recreation of  17th-century art, or post-Disney trauma, then I'll vote for the last on that  list - if only to tantalize myself with the possibility that Burton might  have something to say about the shooting of Old Yeller or the death of  Bambi's mom in his future projects.
sburridge@hotmail.comGet Your Private, Free Email at http://www.hotmail.com. . 
