    WHEW!
Summer blockbusters don't get much bigger than ARMAGEDDON, a  2 hour 30 minute ride through outer space.
You think Godzilla was big?
Or Deep Impact?
Forget a creature as big as the Empire State Building,  forget a comet the size of NYC, ARMAGEDDON's got a big asteroid the size  of Texas hurtling its way here within two weeks.
In that time, the US  government recruits, trains, and launches the world's best oil-rig  drillers to save the planet?
Farfetched?
ARMAGEDDON makes the THE X-FILES seem like a docudrama.
But that's not the point.
Michael Bay and Jerry Bruckheimer are in the  business of making classic popcorn movies, movies that are completely  enjoyable and forgettable.
In that sense, they succeed.
There isn't  much of a plot, simply because Tyler and Affleck don't carry the same  kind of chemistry needed to produce a decent subplot.
Willis is as  macho as ever as Harry Stamper, the leader of this rag-tag crew that's  going to save the planet.
The movie flows with testosterone, and is  filled with macho, big-bang explosions and meteors clobbering the earth.
While it's fun, and while the movie is rapid, there's one huge  problem: overkill.
Bay and Bruckheimer want to top everything.
Literally.
So they constructed a movie almost 3 hours long filled with  explosions.
The one problem is overkill.
Bay and Bruckheimer fail to  stop: they just keep on going, making the film one endless explosion  after another.
The plot's predictable, and the movie starts to lose  steam in the middle.
During the space sequences, bad lighting mixed  with Bay's frenetic editing makes about a good 30 minutes of the movie  almost incoherent, with running cameras on blurred images.
Explosion  after explosion rock the movie, as nothing goes right for our fearless  warriors.
Bay and Bruckheimer failed to ease up on the craziness,  expecting the audience to get emotionally attached, so that they would  feel the highs and lows.
That's not easy to do with the poor characterization.
The only fun  from this crew comes from Affleck and Buscemi, who have the best lines  in the movie.
Still, there's no denying ARMAGEDDON isn't fun.
It has  its moments, and there's a lot to like in this film.
It's not smart  entertainment, it relies on sheer overpowering to carry its viewers, and  there are a lot of really neat sequences.
You just leave with a feeling  of disappointment, because there's TOO much to like.
The action is  brain-numbing, so that the last hour goes by in a blur.
It's an  enjoyable ride, but Bay, who tames his frenetic touch in the beginning,  restarts it again at the end, causing the film to be a big collage of  fast-paced images.
The film is just too long, and too big for its own  good.
It's a fun ride, but in the end, it's just too big.
There's too  much in this film to be truly effective.
If about a half-hour was cut  from this film, it would be a lot easier to take.
Overall, although an enjoyable blockbuster that's ten times better  than Godzilla, ARMAGEDDON just isn't good enough.
THE X-FILES and THE  TRUMAN SHOW were better films, and more enjoyable.
Maybe it's because  they were shorter?. . 
