More than once the title of this movie is misspelled as Bullworth.
Now, there has to be a reason that people think it's Bull!
The movie itself certainly isn't.
It's right on!
I guess it's because it has to do with politics and that's what most of us have come to associate with politics....Bull!
Warren Beatty has written, produced and directed another unusual film.
It begins with  Beatty as  J.Billington Bulworth,  running for re-election  and showing signs of being a man on the edge.
He's had enough!
He doesn't want to go on.
So, he makes a deal with an insurance company executive [Paul Sorvino] to block a bill that is detrimental to Sorvino's company.
In exchange, he will insure Bulworth's life for $10 million dollars, payable to his daughter, not his wife.
Why, you wonder?
Next, Bulworth makes arrangements, through his friend, Jack Warden,  for a "hit" to be made, on himself.
He is not to know the identity of the assassin.
Once everything is set, he goes to a church in the ghetto to deliver that dull speech that we heard repeated over and over at the film's beginning.
Suddenly he seems to realize that  he has nothing to lose so he says exactly what's on his mind.
This starts the chain of events that make up the plot.
Unlike Jim Carrey in "Liar, Liar", Bulworth doesn't have to tell the truth.
He simply says whatever comes to mind, and as time passes, he says it in rap!
His change of behavior [and wardrobe] affects many lives.
His campaign manager begins to change before our eyes.
Halle Berry's character is the one that disappoints us.
She has too many sides to her personality.
I couldn't believe her actions.
Of course, she had to be there for the love interest.
Hey, when you're going for way out, why not put a 26 year old black female opposite a 60 year old male?
What do we think about Bulworth's interest in Halle?
His wife, portrayed by Christine Baranski,  is shown as a shallow, class-conscious female who is having an affair.
Of course that means that we should approve his desire for Halle.
Christine is perfect for the part, but she's wasted in the film.
I would have liked to have seen more of her and her reactions to Bulworth's antics.
This is not a film that is going to go down in film history.
It doesn't have the oomph of "Wag The Dog", although it wants to be.
I did find that the mixed ethnic audience viewing the screening all seemed to laugh at the same places.
Maybe films like this are bringing us closer together.. . 
