Rated on a 4-star scale Screening venue: Odeon (Manchester City Centre) Released in the UK by Entertainment Distribution on May 5, 2000; certificate  15; 119 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1. Directed by Ben Younger; produced by Jennifer Todd, Suzanne Todd.
Written by Ben Younger.
Photographed by Enrique Chediak; edited by Chris Peppe.
It's only two weeks since I reviewed "American Psycho", but here already is a  more powerful movie dealing with similar themes, without the dumb gags or  vicious streak.
"Boiler Room" is often a comedy, because it lets us spend  time with some of the most risible people alive -- stockbrokers.
It's also a  very serious thriller, because the protagonist gets seduced by their  money-grubbing lifestyle and ends up in over his head.
His name is Seth (Giovanni Ribisi), a 19-year old New Yorker who dropped out  of college and supports himself by running an illegal casino out of his  apartment.
When his father, a federal court judge, discovers this, he hits  the roof, and tells him to get a proper job.
Seth can't handle dad's disgust.
He determines to find an occupation that requires him to wear a suit.
Then one of his friends sets him up at the firm of J.T.
Marlin -- a  telemarketing 'chop shop' that sells people stock for companies that don't  exist, then charges them huge commission rates to dump it on the open market.
This is more dishonest than the casino, but hey, it looks respectable enough.
And it pays better.
That's made clear in a pep talk by the recruiter, Jim  (Ben Affleck), who seems to have used Alec Baldwin's chilling monologue in  "Glengarry Glen Ross" as a self-help tape.
"Work here," he tells the men in  front of him, "And within three years you'll be a millionaire.
Anybody who  says money is the root of all evil doesn't have any.
". The guys know Oliver Stone's "Wall Street" off by heart, too.
They proudly  recite the villain's speeches; oblivious to the message, and getting a kick  out of the lingo.
When they're all on the phone, screaming stock pitches to  potential victims, the obsession and aggression in the office is palpable,  and so very evil and illegal that we know something disastrous is bound to  happen.
Since we are so engaged by Seth, we watch this with more tension than  disgust.
He is a well-written hero for the piece because he's an essentially  good kid; we can sympathise with his desire to make money, and though he does  dishonest things, he doesn't realise it, because he hasn't evaluated the  situation in that way.
The climate in J.T.
Marlin teaches him to consider  only money, and if there's nothing wrong with the pay check, what could be  wrong at all?
Seth has to be suckered in before he can realise what a sham  this is, and "Boiler Room" is fascinating because it lets us see the whole  process unfold.
All of the movie's dialogue is impressive.
Brokers' conversations sound like  a cross between financial jargon and military planning.
And Seth's scenes  with his father (Ron Rifkin) and the film's love interest (Nia Long) are  staged like clichés but played with humour, emotion, presence and  personality.
The characters talk about their backgrounds, hopes and needs in  convincing ways.
"Boiler Room" works as a morality play by presenting us with  people whose moral compasses it's actually possible to care about.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which  is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic. . 
