Bob the Happy Bastard's Quickie Review. An honest politician?
Could it be?
That's the case with Bulworth, the latest film from actor/director Warren Beatty, who does a complete flipside of the ego he created in the flashy comic book caper Dick Tracy.
This time around, he's a politician who's become so depressed with his image and life, he chooses to hire a hitman to kill him to get insurance money to his daughter.
Then, by a stroke of genius, he chooses to be absolutely honest.
After all, what's the worse thing the public can do- kill him?
The movie unfolds over a final weekend of desperate campaigning, with Bulworth making several stops with his campaign advisor (a hilarious Oliver Platt) and a particular female (Halle Berry) who has caught his eye.
Soon, his honesty, as abruptious as it is with particular power players, becomes a hot item, and Bulworth scrambles to cancel the assassination he so dearly ordered for himself.
It's hard to label Bulworth as a straight comedy.
It's absolutely hilarious in some parts, but it's also a fascinating political piece of sorts, with a little bit of drama thrown in.
I guess you could officially call it a political dramedy, if such a thing exists.
Beatty is great as the beguiled Senator, presenting some surprisingly good antics that involve "rhyming" (rapping, but on his terms) and mixmastering sexual references on the DJ table.
He also presents a very believable role of a man who's been taken to the breaking point with the fake world he's created around him, and it's like he's picked up a hammer and begun shattering at its flacid shell.
Platt, again, is very funny as the advisor who just plain loses it as he can't figure out just what his Senator is doing.
Halle Berry also supplies ample work as a girl from South Central who's smarter than she looks.
Beatty directs with a good amount of energy, matching the efforts presented in an earlier political comedy, Bob Roberts.
It's not a relaxed pace, but one that you can certainly feel comfortable with.
Some parts of the movie did sag a bit slightly, but, fortunately, the whole is an important piece that talks about how much honesty has been lost in politics while, at the same time, giving you something to laugh and think about at the same time.
Will it change the world?
No.
Is it one of Beatty's finest works to date?
Yep.
It's just a riot to see him in a get-up that's reminiscent of one of the Fat Albert kids.... . 
