  Seen on 20 September 1997 at the Cineplex Baronet Coronet for free.
What has an ensemble cast, pointless flashbacks, a love of policemen,    90 minutes to bore an audience to death, has only two funny moments,    one overblown dramatic moment, and stinks?
No, it's not Mayor    Giuliani's campaign.
It's Cop Land.
A lot of people were leaving the    theatre within the first half hour.
Of course, it was free to anyone    who was there for the preview.
I would have left, but I rarely leave a    theatre, and besides, I had to see if this would be the worst movie I    have seen since Excess Baggage.
Cop Land would probably read better than it films.
The high-concept    premise here is that Garrison, NJ (not it's real name) is a town of    1280 people, mostly police (all of whom are white) and their families    and embroiled in a deep cover up.
Already, the prospect of watching    corrupt straight white men is unappealing; I could just watch the news    every night and review that.
Sheriff Freddy Heflin (Sylvester Stallone) is the "law" in    Garrison, and he has a childlike trust in those who have empowered him    to guard the American Dream.
The worst thing that happens to him is    bumping his nose on the steering wheel while swerving to miss a deer    caught in his headlights.
But the American Dream, in this case, is    built an a lie.
Oooooo.
How shocking.
Corrupt cops (Harvey Keitel, Ray    Liotta, Peter Berg, etc.
) work in New York City, which they hate, and    come home to be above the law to a town across the George Washington    Bridge, which, oh so ironically, overlooks New York.
The plot thickens when hero cop "Superboy" (Michael Rappoport) screws    up and is forced fake his own death after killing two delinquent,    reckless, but ultimately harmless black youth.
Lots of subplots and    "buddy boy" nonsense ensues.
The film takes its sweet time and when    Freddy finally figures out he is living in a gangster movie, it is too    late to care.
That he is deaf in one ear, the result of saving the    love of his teen years, who married some other putz, keeps him off the    NYPD he reveres, and out of our sympathies.
Ultimately, Cop Land is something that would have been a great book,    but is in fact, a dreadful movie.
There are simply too many characters    and subplots to keep track of or care about.
I watch soap operas and    read 19th Century Russian novels, but this was too much of a    challenge.
There are so many other ways to watch stories like these,    and one springs to mind.
NYPD Blue.
Tuesday nights on ABC, 10 Eastern,    9 Central.
Slow and steady builds audience interest.
Throwing dressed    up pigs (no pun intended) in the form of an All-Star cast into this    mishmash was a real waste.
The only actor missing from this mix was    Steve Buscemi.
One of Three Woman Shown in the Cast: Cathy Moriarity, who is often    seen holding a drink or looking like she ought to be.
Most Annoyed Actor with a Bad Haircut: Robert De Niro as the very    exasperated Internal Affairs officer with a very very very bad    haircut.
Smartest Actor: Janeane Garofolo, as the Sheriff's Deputy who does the    only logical thing in the movie; she leaves town.
Best Ironic Line: Ray Liotta tells Stallone that there are two kinds    of people in this world: Video game players and pinball players.
I    guess those were the intended audience members.
More movie reviews by Seth Bookey, with graphics, can be found at http://www.geocities.com/Athens/2679/kino.html. 
