YOUR FRIENDS & NEIGHBORS Reviewed by Jamie Peck. This "modern immorality tale," as the ads go, finds drama coach Jerry  (Ben Stiller) growing sexually distant from his girlfriend Terri  (Catherine Keener).
Jerry decides to initiate an affair with Mary (Amy  Brenneman), the wife of his best friend Barry (Company alum Aaron  Eckhart), and when Terri finds out, she has a fling of her own with  Cheri (Nastassja Kinski), a sexy art gallery employee who also catches  the eye of Cary (Jason Patric), a buddy of Jerry and Barry's.
The long  100 minutes it takes for these people to out-nasty each other feels like  group therapy with a bunch of self-centered whiners or, worse, an  episode of "Jerry Springer" sans schlock value.
All of the bed-hopping, put-downs and duplicitous characters, and "Your  Friends & Neighbors" isn't even amusing in a "Melrose Place" sort of  way.
The blame may be in the repetitious screenplay, but it's certainly  not in the acting - this ensemble is so excruciatingly believable that  you'd just like to give everyone a good smack.
Particularly whup-worthy  is Patric's Cary, a repugnant lothario who owns both the funniest (when  his occupation is revealed) and the creepiest (when he tells about his  "best lay") scenes of this so-called black comedy.
Stiller and Eckhart  are close behind as creeps with different horniness outlets, but neither  matches Patric's vile ferocity.
The women's roles aren't much nicer, save for Kinski, who stays on the  underdeveloped side of things.
Keener and Brenneman are fine as  respectively curt and "sensitive" gals, but what's missing here is a  reason to care about all of this depraved behavior.
In "In the Company  of Men," that sympathy generated from a deaf secretary who was the  victim in a shocking scheme hatched by to cruel co-workers.
The  antagonists' behavior in that film sucked you into an uncommonly  discomforting story, while here it sends these five irritating folks  through terribly misguided motions over and over and over again.
Save a  seat for me, Fred.
I'm coming with you.. 
