New Line / 1:35 / 1998 / PG-13 (sex humor, language, Adam Sandler) Cast: Adam Sandler; Drew Barrymore; Christine Taylor; Allen Covert; Angela  Featherstone; Matthew Glave; Alexis Arquette; Frank Sivero; Christina Pickles  Director: Frank Coraci  Screenplay: Tim Herlihy . After the not-so-fashionable '70s were affectionately captured on screen with  "Boogie Nights" and "The Ice Storm," it was inevitable that someone would  splash theaters with a loving tribute to the Me Decade.
It's finally here --  only a few months after "Boogie" and "Ice" -- in the form of the 1985-set "The  Wedding Singer," part pop culture nostalgia flick and part starring-vehicle  for Adam Sandler, one of the more successful "Saturday Night Live" cast  members to hit movie pay-dirt.
As an Aqua Net-heavy flashback, "The Wedding  Singer" is quite amusing, especially its Culture Club-laced soundtrack.
But as  a romantic comedy, what it really wants to be, the movie is pretty inept.
Sandler plays Robbie Hart, the wedding singer of the title.
Robbie's got quite  a charismatic knack for turning the worst occasions -- like the scathing toast  of a liquored-up groom's brother (Steve Buscemi, in a great bit of novelty  casting) in the film's opening segment -- into a good time for all.
But his  personal life crashes when he's left at the altar by his fiancee (Angela  Featherstone), and the humiliation and melancholia turn him into every  reception-goer's worst nightmare.
The sole bright spot in his world appears to  be pretty, perky waitress Julia (Drew Barrymore), but she's on her way to  weding a cheating Don Johnson-wannabe named Glenn (Matthew Glave).
Connect the  dots to see what happens.
Some of what's wrong with "The Wedding Singer" can be summed up in two words:  Adam Sandler.
Sandler, whose 1994 "comedy" "Billy Madison" is still one of the  decade's worst, just doesn't feel at home as the male lead in this type of  film.
In the recent "Happy Gilmore" (what, they didn't want to call this movie  Robbie Hart?
), he scored by playing a character with a raucous edge.
It's  fitting, then, that "The Wedding Singer" comes alive when it lets Sandler be  his bawdy self, but when he waxes sentimental with Barrymore (which is most of  the time), he oozes false earnestness -- it's as though he's secretly smirking  at the material.
Barrymore, though, is impossible to resist.
She and Sandler  do exhibit chemistry, and it's just enough to make you wish that he didn't  seem so out of his element.
What's even worse is how calculated the movie is at getting Robbie and Julia  together.
Glenn is shown to be such an arrogant, pompous jerk that it's never  clear what exactly drew Julia to him in the first place.
In one scene, Glenn  spills the beans to Robbie about his cavorting ways and how he'll continue  them into his marriage.
That's not the best idea, considering how Glenn later  confesses that he was aware Robbie had his eye on Julia the whole time.
What  did he hope to accomplish there?
Perhaps "The Wedding Singer" would have been  more effective in its romantic storyline had it taken a cue from "My Best  Friend's Wedding," a film where Julia Roberts wanted to break up her pal's  impending nuptials, but found it increasingly hard because her competition was  a really sweet person, deserving of his love in every way possible.
No such  luck here.
Yet while "The Wedding Singer" is wobbly and manipulative, it is consistently  watchable.
A handful of worthwhile elements standout among the haze, most  notably Jon Lovitz's cameo as a flailing, vulgar stage performer ("Thank you  ... and that ain't no sock in my crotch!
") and the running plethora of '80s  memorabilia (a Rubick's Cube, a DeLorean and some pretty big hair make  appearances).
There's also Alexis Arquette's underused but dazzling supporting  work as a member of Robbie's entourage who fancies himself a Boy George clone  -- "Do You Really Want to Hurt Me?
" is the only song he knows, and lemme tell  you, it doesn't go over very well at Bar Mitzvahs.
For a truly good  retro-comedy, rent "Romy and Michele's High School Reunion," because, while  survivable and even funny in patches, this "Wedding" is something old and not  much new.
Š 1998 Jamie Peck E-mail: jpeck1@gl.umbc.edu Visit the Reel Deal Online: http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~jpeck1/. . 
