Visit Online Film Critics Society at http://www.ofcs.org. Q:  I've heard that "Toy Story 2" is better than the original.
Is this  true?
A:  "Better" is relative.
The first edition did the work of establishing  the characters, and the score was more solid.
"2" takes risks like adding  new characters and sending nearly the whole cast on the road to rescue  Woody.
The sequel has more action scenes, probably because Hollywood  believes we viewers will surely be satisfied by more action.
On the whole,  it's a very impressive film, and I wouldn't think an Oscar nomination would  be far-fetched.
Q:  What was your favorite part?
A:  The animation never fails to amaze me.
I think the pioneers of cartoons  would be fascinated by this technology.
Sometimes it's like seeing an  exhibit of photorealist paintings:  you have to keep reminding yourself  these images have been created!
I also like all the material put in for  Boomers.
My wife was particularly impressed by the detail given to the old  "Woody's Roundup" show - lunchboxes and record players and novelty toys,  everything resembling kid stuff from 40 years ago.
So hype is not new.
My  11 year-old daughter liked Woody's sidekick Jessie, the strong-willed  cowgirl voiced by Joan Cusack.
And both my children liked the "Star Wars"  and "Jurassic Park" allusions.
(When Mr.
Potato Head - voiced by Don  Rickles - threw his hat, I wasn't the only one to think "Oddjob.
"). Q:  So what's the plot, basically?
A:  While he's rescuing a rubber penguin named "Wheezy" from a yard sale,  Woody (Tom Hanks) accidentally ends up in the hands of a toy collector and  dealer.
This slimy character, Al (voiced ably by Wayne Knight), actually  steals Woody, after Andy's mom pulls the sheriff doll from the sale.
To sum  up, the main plot consists of the main characters Buzz Lightyear (Tim  Allen), Hamm (John Ratzenberger), Rex (Wallace Shawn) and Rickles as the  potato, trying to locate and retrieve Woody.
The complications include  Woody's discovery that he's a classic doll from the Howdy Doody era, worth  much money to a toy museum in Japan, which is willing to pay the wily Al  generously.
His reunion with Jessie, a sister-like pal, Bullseye the loyal  and fleet horse, and Stinky Pete the Prospector (Kelsey Grammer) is  intriguing, especially the grainy segments of the television show featuring  the marionette-like dolls doing routines as simple as the ones Andy does  with his dolls.
At one point Woody can't decide whether 'tis nobler to wear  out in the hands of a loving child, or be preserved with his old-time  buddies behind museum glass.
Q:  How about the non-animation aspects of the movie?
A:  The script is better written than many live-action movie scripts.
The  dialogue is snappy and quirky, developing the characters easily.
It's a  very kid-friendly film, a fact welcome in these days when most offerings in  a mutiplex are R ratings.
There are probably fewer jokes per minute in this  film, but as I've said, a little more action.
The music is still strong,  but the two reprises of "You've Got a Friend" (one by Robert Goulet as  Wheezy!
) suggest the original movie has the edge in score.
Camera - or  computer - angles are inventive and consistently clever, using the best  options of the medium.
Q:  Tom Hanks or Tim Allen?
A:  Again, relative.
Whoever you like.
They are both so well cast!
Hanks'  Woody seems natural with virtually any character he encounters;  there's a  charming scene in which he puts Andy's real puppy through a series of  tricks, and rubs the dog's belly until its leg waves in scratching.
Tim  Allen is expert at Buzz's bravado;  the spaceman realizes he's a toy, and  it's hilarious when he meets another Buzz doll, with the same voice, who has  not been informed of the truth.
Q:  Here's an important question.
Will you buy the video?
A:  A sure thing.
It will be a great one to watch again and again,  especially if you have kids.
It's as good as any Disney except, perhaps,  "Beauty and the Beast.
"  John Lasseter and his co-directors have put scads  of care and work into this production, and the jokes and cultural references  alone are enough to qualify it as a classic.
Recommended for all ages, this  movie is a sure bet to entertain parents and kids out for a nice afternoon,  teens on a group date, or seniors, who will love a cameo by Geri of the  chess cartoon "Geri's Game.
". . . 
