Steven Phillips (Brooks) is sitting in a posh restaurant with a young studio executive that says he's lost his edge.
"What can I do to fix it?
" Brooks asks, but he says it's beyond fixing.
"But I just got the Humanitarian Award!
" he fires back, "Oh come on, everyone gets that.
" The Muse is a perfect example of the way that young Hollywood stars and executives are shaping what type of movies that we see in the next millennium.
It also shows what this young movement does to the aging workers who've been there awhile.
When Steven sees a mysterious woman getting into a cab when he comes to ask his friend Jack Warrick (Jeff Bridges) for advice he at first begins to think that he is having an affair.
But in his desperation, Jack feels sorry for him and tells him that she is a muse.
A muse is a child of Zeus and is supposed to inspire all creativity.
(Just a little update for those of us who didn't pay attention in history.
) Steven decides to consult the muse, (Stone) who turns to want more than anybody in Hollywood are paying for their services.
Decked out in a Four Seasons suite, she makes him be at her beck and call, in exchange he's starting to form an idea about a Jim Carrey comedy in a water park.
She also helps inspire Steven's wife Laura (Andie McDowell) to become the next Mrs. Fields.
She two investigators of a local mentor hospital show up at the front door looking for her...they begin to wonder.
The film turns in a great performance by Stone.
Her wackiness reminded me of some of her craziness scenes in Casino.
Albert Brooks also turns in a fine screenplay that constantly moving and funny.
But the film also raises the idea of what will happen when the Sarah Michelle Gellar's of today turn 30?
What will happen to the industry then?
If your looking for a fun film to see, go out and see The Muse which gets *** stars.
The Young-Uns: The film contains a brief view of Sharon Stone's butt.
Good Age 7 & Up. A Review by Frankie Paiva The 12 Year-Old Movie Reviewer E-Mail me at SwpStke@aol.com Visit my website at: http://expage.com/page/teenagemoviecritic. . 
