David Cronenberg's latest biotechnical carny show aims its sights squarely  at Internet addicts and video-game junkies.
While the idea of people so  dissociated from reality that they spend all their 'quality time' within an  artificial environment has rapidly become overworked, Cronenberg still  manages to come up with something that looks new.
Jennifer Jason Leigh  plays a designer of ultra-sophisiticated virtual reality games (virtual  actuality??
), worshiped by players everywhere as if she were Lana Croft  incarnate.
But you can't be this good at something and not expect to draw  attention, so Leigh finds herself fleeing industrial assassins and 'reality  activists' intent on sabotaging her latest multi-million dollar project.
She and fellow fugitive Jude Law hardwire  themselves into the alternate  universe of this game - 'eXistenZ' - as part of a routine diagnostic.
Soon  they find more than they bargained for:  they discover  another new and  sophisticated game within eXistenZ which, as players, they must once again  plug themselves into, and....you get the picture.
By this time, walls of  reality have truly dissolved.
The opening of eXistenZ indicates a computer-game version of Cronenberg's  VIDEODROME - as a director he is well-known for his provocative recurring  themes (mutation, the bonding of flesh and technology, surgery, hospitals,  bodies in revolt) and it initially appears that we're about to get a more  considered reworking of his earlier films.
It's the same, but different:  firstly, the cyberspace setting is new territory for Cronenberg, but  secondly (and more noticeably) his approach is considerably lighter.
eXistenZ is the funniest thing he has ever put on screen - I would have  never expected to see an audience having such an openly good time with a one  of his films until now!
Of course, the humor of eXistenZ is pretty skewed -  those familiar with the director's work will realize that they're laughing  at the same gooey, organic gross-outs that he used to unsettle everyone with  in his other movies.
One man buys a copy of a you-be-the-victim car  accident game and we're instantly reminded of the director's previous CRASH,  and the furore about the violent automobile games released in its wake.
Even the cry "Death to enemies of reality" seems to be a lampoon of previous  rantings about 'the new flesh' .
And if the line "Trust no one!
", delivered  in all seriousness, isn't a poke at the X-FILES, I don't know what is.
Even  Leigh and Law try to loosen up and enjoy the game, even though Law figures  there is something sick and wrong about it all (for this is Cronenberg  country, after all, and cyberspace is not a spotless, computer-generated  playing platform but a decayed, visceral fug).
And then of course there's all that sex, even though the characters never  actually get down to having any.
eXistenZ oozes sex continuously, with one  hilarious metaphor after another thrown up on screen with abandon.
Given  Cronenberg's past history of equating sex with disease and death, this film  must surely be seen as a kind of personal liberation.. . . 
