     When you're already laughing before the picture starts, it's a good omen.
Kevin Smith, whose tilt at church dogma has already riled Catholic legions and caused Disney to bail, has prefaced his movie with a disclaimer suggesting that passing judgment is God's province and the rest of us (critics included) should cut him some slack.
Most critics have, and I want in.
This is a hilarious movie, delicious enough in its best moments to forgive occasional lapses in concentration and (dare I say it) taste.
One cringes at even typing the word taste in a review of a Smith movie ("Clerks", "Chasing Amy"); still, even amid this riotous avalanche of obscenity and raunchy, merciless barbs at organized religion, there are some tediously sophomoric gags -- the most obvious of these a drawn-out poop monster scene that should have been flushed.
But it's a small price to pay for the deceptive depth and originality of "Dogma".
Cardinal Glick (George Carlin) is reconsecrating his Red Bank, NJ church as part of an effort to revitalize the image of Catholicism.
He's replacing the depressing crucifix with a winking, grinning, thumbs-up "Buddy Christ".
On the day of the rededication, everyone passing through the Plenary Arch will, according to dogma, receive absolution and get automatic entry to Heaven.
Two fallen angels (Ben Affleck and Matt Damon), banished by God for all eternity to Wisconsin, spot a loophole: pass through that arch and He will have to take them back.
The downside?
This will prove God fallible, and the universe will be obliterated.
Space and good sense prevent any further plot synopsis.
The actors have fun: Affleck and Damon, Carlin, Linda Fiorentino as a disillusioned Catholic who tithes her income from an abortion clinic to the Church, Chris Rock as a Black apostle left out of scripture by a White conspiracy, Jason Lee as a devil, Salma Hayek as a stripper/muse who inspired the 20 all-time top-grossing movies except "Home Alone", Alan Rickman as God's mouthpiece and Alanis Morissette as God Herself, plus Smith regulars Jay and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith).
At two hours plus, the pace doesn't always sustain, and it's certainly not for everybody.
But "Dogma" is far from anti-religion.
It's very devout, and if anything has a weakness for preachiness, but its heart is in the right place.
"I have issues with anyone who makes faith a burden," says Rock. . . 
