Authors
svihla@evax0.eng.fsu.edu
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Hamlet (1990)
     I saw HAMLET this weekend and was favorably impressed.  It looks
wonderful -- the costumes, sets, and scenery elicited oohs and ahs from
the audience.  The performances are adequate -- Mel Gibson is much better
than I would have expected and Glenn Close is quite good as well.  My
caveats have to do with a certain lack of subtlety and the irritation I
felt at the director's cutting, rearrangement, and truncation of
certain scenes.  Hamlet's "Get thee to a nunnery" scene with Ophelia is
set *before* his "To be or not to be" soliloquy, except that the actual
"Get thee to a nunnery" dialogue is grafted onto the "Murder of Gonzago"
sequence.  I liked the original sequence better.  Hamlet's speech to the
players is cut inexplicably as is the actual leaping into graves which
punches up Ophelia's funeral.  Gibson is adequate when he is charging
around ranting and having swordfights, but he is less believable in more
restrained moments.  The "to be or not to be" soliloquy is
atmospherically set, but Gibson's delivery struck me as that of someone
who is delivering a pretty speech, and not considering matters of life
and death.  The director chose to develop a couple of scenes directly
rather than by exposition through a character, and let me say that the
scene where a disheveled Hamlet has a wordless encounter with a
bewildered Ophelia does not play well.  It elicited hoots of derisive
laughter in the theater, which was probably not the desired effect.
Maybe Shakespeare left it out for a reason -- maybe it didn't play well
in the Sixteenth Century either.  I couldn't detect any real chemistry
between  Gibson and Helen Bonham-Carter who plays Ophelia.
Ms. Bonham-Carter may have one of the prettiest faces on the planet, but I
was not overly impressed with her portrayal of Ophelia.  The friendship
between Hamlet and Horatio is also given rather short shrift.
     In summary, a credible effort, beautifully photographed and
exceedingly  atmospheric.  Well worth seeing, but neither deep or subtle
enough to qualify as a definitive version.  I hope some people who see
it will be tempted to rent Olivier's version or make an effort to see
the entire play somewhere.  ***
