Authors
Frederick Weber
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
     I have read some and printed out all the reviews listed here.  I am
not a movie critic.  I do not have the eloquence that most of you have.
Hell, the 14 year old reviewer writes a lot better than I do.  So please
excuse my ignorance, any mispelling that I do not catch or my point of
view.
I came out of this afternoon's matinee, drained.  I sat in my hot
automobile for 5 minutes with the engine on before I noticed that I
hadn't turned the air conditioner on.  I can not believe that I didn't
walk out afer the first ten minutes of the 25 minute opening battle in
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN.  If you are weak of heart or of stomach, do not see
this movie.  If this movie would have been made in the 60's, when I grew
up, I would have had nightmares for years.  This is not a movie for
children and many adolescents.  Wait until they've learned a little bit
about the war in the vanilla coated history texts in school.
I'm not going to critique the movie but I will, with your patience,
the audience in attendance with me. Besides the slob sitting behind me
belching and flatulating during the movie, there were 3 patrons who
stood out.
The first was a gentlemen who continually talked throughout the
entire movie, which irritates me to death.  I will assume that he was
there in France on D-Day because by the time I got really engrossed in
the movie, I found myself waiting to hear what he had to say about what
he saw.  I don't think he cried during the movie, at all.
The second was a little boy whom his father had taken to see this
movie.  He had been running up and down the aisles several times, whch
again irritates me.
After the movie was over, the boy and his father were outside the
theater.  The boy was crying on his father's shoulder.  The father was a
Viet-Nam veteran.  You could tell by the tattoos and the light vest with
patches that he wore.  With all the movies about Viet-Nam that this
child probably had seen, I was stunned by this child's reaction.  I
applaud the veteran for handling the situation because it turns out the
kid had upchucked several times in the men's room, in reaction to some
of the graphic scenes.
The third was an older woman who was sitting in front of me and to
my left. She, too, talked throughout the movie; ditto on the irritation.
It turns out that she lost her husband on Omaha Beach.  She had not shed
one tear during the entire movie.  Her voice never cracked once.
Then there was me.  An overweight 45 year old handicapped acounting
clerk on medical leave from my job.  I cried a lot,, shuttered at many
scenes, closed my eyes on many occassions, laughed once and then
realized what had just happened.  I cried because I wasn't there,
neither was the boy.  But the elders in the crowd did not seem to be
bothered as much as some of the younger people, excluding the Viet-Nam
vet who calmly tried to quiet his son.  I probably would have yelled at
him for running up and down the aisles.
This is by far the first movie that I've seen that had just
physically weakened me.  I've seen movies that I've applauded at  that
I've walked out on, and that I was highly exhilirated after seeing but
none was as emotionally charged as SAVING PRIVATE RYAN.
I hope a lot of the Generation Xers see this movie.  They have
never gone through a war like the baby boomers did with Viet-Nam or
Korea or the older generation who had to endure a lot of hardships
during the 2 World Wars. I hope they stop and appreciate what those men
on Normandy did and what they stood for.  In this day of think only for
yourself, it might change a few attitudes about responsibility and pride
for tradition that this country stands for.  On major national holidays,
I no longer see the American flag as frequently as I did when I was
younger.
Sorry. I tend to ramble and go off on tangents, sometimes.  Thank
you for allowing me to do this.  Comments appreciated.  
P.S.-I did see the squad with 8 soldiers walking down the road, after
the first soldier died and the way the rifles were covered.  I was under
the impression that they used condoms, like in THE BIG RED ONE.  I rate
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN, 4 out of 4 and 10 out of 10..          
