Authors
Chris Klecker
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for True Lies (1994)
     Well summer is finally over and can I say that it didn't go out
without a few bangs.  The summer of '94 for movies was in fact a gold
mine for theaters all over the world,(at least the ones smart enough to
buy JURASSIC PARK) moreover made last summer look like ISHTAR.  Let's
start with the surprise hit of the season:
1)  SPEED - Starring Keanu Reeves
{rated R for some violence, (a decapitation here and there) and some mild
language}  
     Whoa! Let's start off with a little known fact that this movie
wasn't to be released until July.  So why the early rush?  Watch and
find out.  Keanu Reeves turns out to be cast perfectly in this riveting
installment of the popular terrorist movie brigade.  Keanu Reeves plays
a bomb squad boy scout who is up against a mad bomber; who else but
Dennis Hopper, who is forced to stop a bomb from exploding on the bus.
The trick is, the bomb activates once its speed limit is over 50, then
will detonate if it dips below this speed.  Past the very simple plot,
the movie turns out to be the most totally implausible piece of
Hollywood hardware to hit the screen since T-2.  Do you care?  You
shouldn't.  Even though things happen that can only be possible via
theater, it really doesn't take away from the spirit of the movie.
Just be prepared to be on the edge of your seat for about an hour and a
half.
                                        grade:  A-
     Let's keep this short since I'm almost sure everyone out there is
just sick about hearing the death for Brandon Lee during a take in this
movie.  THE CROW is in fact a very symbolic, gory, and extremely
Gothic.  Mr. Lee plays a slain guitarist who comes back to life to
avenge the death of himself and his wife.  There is in fact only one
scene that takes place in the daylight, after that, you're in the dark,
watching Brandon get shot up about a couple quadrillion times.  Surely
not for all tastes, but if you were into Tim Burton's "Batman" movies
and A NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS, you'll feel right at home with this
cozy birthday treat.
                                        grade:  B+
     Is this it?  Hope so, cause I just about had enough of Axel Foley
and that sicking synth music thing on every soundtrack.  Oh well!
Eddie Murphy returns once again to reprise the role of Detroit police
officer Axel Foley whom I think gets lost while chasing after drug
offenders and ends up knocking on the office door of our Beverly Hills
regular Judge Rhinehold.  I sort of feel sorry for Judge having to come
back and make yet another fool of himself, but hey, I'm not concerned
with Judge.  Okay Eddie, it's your turn.  First off, we see Eddie bust
a drug ring in a chop shop.  Then we see his captain die, yet to be
followed by watching him walk all over the state of California as
though he owned it.  Okay, so was it funny? Yes.  It was funnier than
BHC II, yet it was pitiful and not real original.  Axel has to stop a
Security chief of an amusement park where he counterfeits money in a
secret room.  (Yawwwwwwn.)  Well, Eddie, see you in GOLDEN CHILD II
(heh heh).
                                        grade:  C+
4) MAVERICK - starring Mel Gibson, Jodie Foster     
{I can't remember the rating.  Do you care anymore?}
     One lousy half-hour too long.  Aside from that not a bad movie.
Mel Gibson plays a card-dealing, mule riding sharp-shooter who deems it
a necessity to play in the huge poker tournament with a enrollment fee
of $25,000.  (That's right $25,000.)  Well, Mel has only $22,000; drat,
a few bucks short, and we follow him on his journey to collect the
other $3,000, plus make sure that his lady friend (Jodie) doesn't run
off with the other $22,000.  It ends up being a very silly, yet
entertaining movie to bring your grandparents too, after making the
mistake of telling them THE CROW wasn't that bad.  I can only recommend
this movie if you enjoy Gibson and his wittiness.
                                        grade:  B
     I laughed myself senseless watching this movie.  Don't get the
wrong idea.  It's not that it's stupid, well okay maybe a little out of
its league, but THE SHADOW come on differently than many other movies
you may have seen.  The key it its success was its wit.  Alec Baldwin
is the Shadow.  A man who appears invisible only because he feels like
it.  He clouds the minds of his victims so that all they see is his
shadow.  However, the movie seems to base itself on the Shadow's past,
with the slogan ("Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men?") and
billboard header.  Catchy!
                                        grade:  B+
     Another notch on the James Cameron wall of success.  However, this
time he bounced his checkbook.  This $127 million movie was worth the
price, with effects so spell-binding and exciting that you actually
think the director deemed it necessary to destroy the connecting bridge
from the Florida Keys to Miami.  However, if you saw this movie, you
didn't leave happy to see Arnold.  That's Tom Arnold all right, playing
Arnold's partner in the CIA.  It was good to see Tom playing a role
that doesn't make him look like a fool.  Even better, his part was
HUGE!  Arnold plays a working father for the CIA special branch, with a
cover so deep, his wife thinks he works with computers (ditto for the
kid).  Eventually, though he breaks the news to his wife after we have
to bear a somewhat funny subplot where Arnold thinks his wife is having
an affair.  After Jamie Lee Curtis discovers the truth, she forgives
him the instant she nailed 10 Cubans with a machine gun.
                                        grade: B+
7) FORREST GUMP - Starring Tom Hanks
{PG}
     The tear-jerker movie of the movie of the summer that happens to
be the best movie of the summer.  Tom Hanks gives us one of his best
performances as a southern idiot who teaches Elvis to Dance, plays
football for Alabama, fight in the Vietnam war, is given the
Congressional Medal of Honor, starts a shrimping boat, and run over the
United States until his legs eventually got tired.  It was a long movie
but after it's over you won't leave mad.
P.S. Right now I recommend you see ANDRE, for I hear it's very good and
I smash THE CLIENT because I found it totally uninteresting..

Title
Review for Clear and Present Danger (1994)
Starring   Harrison Ford and William Dafoe
     "How dare you, sir!" Harrison Ford yells near the end of the film,
that has us all screaming, "Yes! Yes! Yes!"  After enduring about two
hours of watching Jack Ryan getting pushed around like some shopping
cart we get to witness Ford's irresistible anger as he lays it all down
on the President.  Amidst the amount of political garble and CIA
research, CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER delivers yet other tally for the Tom
Clancy chalkboard.
     CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is about a successful drug dealer who
orders the death of two senators, one being the President's friend.  So
now in a fit of rage the President announces that there in a fact a
clear and present danger in Columbia and against all drug dealers from
Columbia.  The book was in fact based in Mexico instead of South
America, however it really makes no difference in this movie.  After
the President makes his speech, he takes $650 million that was issued to
them to help stop the drug cartel in Columbia with strict orders not to
use any military or troops to fight the war on drugs.  Ryan answers
back with, "No troops."
     So now it gets interesting.  With Ryan's word, the President break
the promise and uses the money to finance a small army that is under
strict cover from any outside sources.  William Dafoe's character is an
ex-marine and heads the mission personally from Columbia.  Dafoe's army
conquers a few planes and factories when suddenly a hit on a house
become futile.  Ryan hears the news and immediately becomes suspicious.
Suddenly the army is cut off and now Ryan has to choose what's more
important: The elimination of drugs or the truth.
     CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is far better than PATRIOT GAMES, but not
as cunning and resourceful as THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.  Nonetheless,
Danger gives Ford another notch in his almost perfect movie record.
Not only is CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER interesting, but automatically
assumes that the audience is in fact smart enough to know what's going
on.  Moreover, watching Ford down the President like it was his job was
well worth the $6.50.
