Authors
Bill Hatfield
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Spy Who Loved Me, The (1977)
Starring Roger Moore, Barbara Bach, Curt Jurgens, Richard Kiel, 
Caroline Munro.
Featuring Bernard Lee, Desmond Llewelyn, Lois Maxwell, and Geoffrey 
Keen.
Directed by Lewis Gilbert
Written by Richard Maibaum and Christopher Wood
EON Productions/United Artists, 1977
        Released in 1977, at a time when the once-prolfic James Bond series 
was sinking deeper and deeper into oblivion, THE SPY WHO LOVED ME 
turned out to be the turning point in the series. Agent 007 was 
rescued from a cinematic grave with this tenth installment in the 
continuing Bond saga. (I won't even mention THE MAN WITH THE GOLDEN 
GUN.)
        On my list of Bond films, this has got to be one of the best ever 
made. Why? Simply, it takes all the fantastic elements from previous 
Bond films that we know and enjoy and turns it into something 
completely different and even more enjoyable. Recycled might be an 
acceptable word, but I disagree- the right word is *adapted*.
        The plot isn't as complex as some of the later Bonds, thankfully. It 
involves a madman shipping magnate by the name of Karl Stromberg, 
who's portrayed by German actor Curt Jurgens; and Stromberg is 
secretly snatching U.S. and Soviet nuclear submarines right out of the 
water with his gigantic tanker, the "Liparus". 
        When British Intelligence investigates, they send James Bond, who's 
played by Roger Moore (in his best performance as the suave spy). Bond 
gets to do some kick-ass stunts, like seducing a Austrian babe who's 
actually a KGB agent. Then he skis off a gigantic cliff. How awesome 
can you get? And that's just the opening. We're treated to the 
seductive Barbara Bach as Major Anya Amasova of the Russian Army and 
the KGB. We see Richard Kiel in his first and best appearance as the 
seven-foot-one killer with the steel teeth, Jaws. We also get sexy 
Caroline Munro as Naomi, a dastardly villainess. Bond puts an end to 
her with a sub-surface to air missile from his well-equipped Lotus 
Esprit.
        Any low points? Not many, actually. Jaws' invincibility gets a little 
tiresome, but it's better than seeing him fall in love with that 
blonde bimbo in MOONRAKER, a far inferior sequel. Barbara Bach doesn't 
seem like an established actress (read: line delivery), she still is 
great to see on screen and handles the role better than most Bond 
girls.
        All in all, this movie is certainly one of the best of the series. 
While many diehard Bond fans from the Connery school will disagree 
with me, it's really true. While it's a fact that GOLDFINGER is 
probably tops, THE SPY WHO LOVED ME has been the best film ever since 
to emulate the standard Bond formula. The more serious ones like FROM 
RUSSIA WITH LOVE, DR. NO, and FOR YOUR EYES ONLY are in a Bondian 
league of their own (read: serious spying), but no Bond film since THE 
SPY WHO LOVED ME has really been able to emulate the glitzy, lavish 
atmosphere of this movie. Sure, it's nineteen years later, but it's 
true. As Carly Simon's title tune goes, "Nobody Does It Better!"
Bill's Rating, on a scale of 000 (poor) to 007 (excellent): 006
Coming Soon: A Retrospective of ON HER MAJESTY'S SECRET SERVICE
