Authors
Lawrence Mixson
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Juliet Winslet, Billy Zane, Danny Nuccie,
Kathy Bates, and Bill Paxton
        Titanic is, without a doubt, the best movie I've seen all
year.  And believe me, I'm not an easy critic to impress: The English
Patient was too long, Men in Black was over-hyped, and several of the
"big summer releases" were dead in the water. Thank God this film got
delayed until December. It's my Christmas present.
        Titanic is in the tradition of the old Hollywood epics of
years-gone-by, and it is truly a stunning film. While watching this
picture you are completely mesmerized, never taking your eyes off the
screen, nor checking your watch to see how much longer it's gonna
last, despite its 3 hour plus running time. As a friend of mine,who's
a true Titanic-buff, said "If someone doesn't like this film, it's
because they didn't want to." Truer words are hard to come by.
        Of course, it doesn't hurt that this film comes from one of my
favorite directors, James Cameron, who is unarguably the greatest
action director of all time. If you wish to argue that point with me,
look at his list of credits: The Terminator, Aliens, The Abyss,
Terminator 2, True Lies, etc. Still care to disagree? Not only has
Cameron helmed the directorial duties of this film, he also wrote,
produced, and edited it.  And to show his true faith for the project,
he renenged all directing fees and percentage points to ease the
budget costs. It's obvious he truly loves Titanic.
        The film opens with footage, both real and fake, of an
underwater excursion by special submarines to the bottom of the
Atlantic, where a team of explorers lead by Bill Paxton are searcing
for a diamond called the "Heart of the Ocean", which, according to
Bill Paxton's character, would be worth more than the Hope Diamond
today. Their search turns up, dissapointly, no diamond, but instead a
drawing of a young woman wearing the diamond.  This picture is
broadcast on CNN and is seen by a 101 year old woman named Rose, who
claims to be the girl in the picture. She is flown out to sea to meet
Bill Paxton and to tell them about the diamond. Almost all of the rest
of the movie is her narration of the past.
        Rose's narration shows us how she was an unhappy young girl,
engaged to a rich man named Cal Hockley(Billy Zane) that she didn't
want to marry.  Her mother is pushy and obnoxious, and Cal Hockley is
arrogant. They are boarding the Titanic, which is sailing to America,
and this is where she is to marry Cal.
        Meanwhile, a young man named Jack Dawson(Leonardo DiCaprio)
and his Italian friend(Danny Nucci) win two 3rd class tickets aboard
the Titanic in a poker game. They are overjoyed, and rush aboard just
as the boat is leaving.  For them, this is their ticket to America, to
a better life. For Rose, she is sailing to her doom.
        The first hour and a half or so of Titanic tells the story of
how Rose DeWitt(Kate Winslet) and Jack Dawson fall in love. It's the
classic wrong-side-of-the-tracks story, and does sometimes resort to a
few cliches.  But as I said above, the love portion isn't sappy and
doesn't "weigh the film down", as some critics have said. It's sweet,
and it didn't make me restless at all, despite the fact that I usually
hate love stories.
        Of course, it might help that Cameron introduces some pretty
interesting characters to help keep our eyes glued to the screen. Most
of these people actually were passengers on the Titanic back in 1912,
including the enigmatic Molly Brown(played by the talented Kathy
Bates), the Captain of Titanic(Bernard Hill), and so on. All of these
characters add an extra depth to the film, and make it that easier to
watch.
        Of course, things really start to get going after the hour and
a half mark, where the Titanic strikes the iceberg and begins a slow
sink to the bottom. The sinking is depicted realisticly, and the
effects are truly amazing. It is not told in a heroic fashion sense
either, as people are portrayed as panicking, pushing others aside to
get on the limited lifeboats, and drowning and dying horrible deaths.
        The best part of the movie, in my opinion, comes at the very
end, when we flash back to the future. The crew, who at first had been
skeptical of Rose's story, now are totally aborbed by her. Rose goes
out onto the ship's ledge, and we then learn a secret about her that
catches us off guard.  We then see a dream of Rose's, in which she
returns to the Titanic and is dancing with Jack Dawson. Most people I
talked with after the movie saw this as only a dream. However, I think
it symbolized more; I think it meant that Rose had died, and is going
to a sort of heaven, which would be the happiest part of her life: her
and her one true love, Jack. If anyone has seen the movie and would
like to voice an opinion about this, e-mail me at venom8@hotmail.com.

http://www.geocities.com/~fullyloaded

Title
Review for Ed Wood (1994)
Review by Laurence Mixson (venom8@hotmail.com)
Starring Johnny Depp, Martin Landau, Sarah Jessica Parker, Bill Murray,
and Lisa Marie
        Ed Wood is the most infamous(note I didn't say "famous") director of
all time: his movies are generally regarded as some of the worst schlock
ever filmed. He used measly budgets, stock footage, poor actors, and bad
dialogue to bring together some of the most hideous pictures of all
time. Yet Ed Wood did not see it that way: he was in love with the
complete process of cinema, and believed that no shot of film, however
flawed or illogical, was bad. To him, it was all great.
        Tim Burton's biopic of Wood is regarded by most critics as his
best film yet, and it certainly is one of the better movies of 1995.
While not relying on megastars or a large budget, it manages to create a
eerily realistic atmoshpere of sleazy Hollywood, early 1950's. It
captures this feeling not only with its black and white photography but
also with its set design and, most importantly, actors. 
        Ed Wood, the man, was interesting even by himself: he was a
transvestite, who had a particular weakness for his girlfriend's
anghorra sweater. Although completely heterosexual, he revels in
dressing up in women's clothes, and eventually places a large distance
between himself and his girlfriend(Dolores Fuller, an unnotable actress,
who is played by Sarah Jessica Parker)because of his strange urges.
Johnny Depp plays Ed Wood perfectly: his portrayal is that of a nervous
yet kind man, who loves what he does and tries to help everyone through
it. The movie follows Ed through the productions of three of his worst
movies, from Glen or Glenda? to Bride of the Monster and finally to Plan
9 From Outer Space, which has been recognized internationally as the
worst movie ever made.
        Along the way, Wood encounters what he perceives to be a huge
star: Bela Lugosi(Landau, who won an Academy Award for Best Supporting
Actor for his role), star of 20's and 30's horror films, and most
notable for bringind Dracula to America. But despite what Wood perceives
of him, Lugosi is now a washed-up has been who is also a
morphine-addict. Wood, however, with his typical blind eye to reason and
glee for anything movie-related, still views Lugosi as a great horror
actor, and is amazed when none of the studio heads see it that way(as a
matter of fact, their usual response is "Isn't he dead?")
        Glen or Glenda, Wood's first major films which was produced by a
grade-z schlock studio, tells the story of a young man engaged to his
beautiful wife, who loves her deeply but hides his cross-dressing and
anghorra-weakness from her. If this sounds familiar of Wood, you're
right: not only did he direct it, but he also wrote and starred in it.
        The movie tries to take itself seriously, telling the story of
Glen(played by Wood) in a documentary style. It fails at this, however,
as Wood uses stock footage liberally and spices it up with Lugosi. In
what could be called simultaneously both the most hilarious and worst
scene ever captured on film, Lugosi shouts "Pull the strings! Pull the
strings!" as the film fades into a herd of buffaloe stampeding. Of
course, this has absolutely nothing to do with the subject matter, but
as told in "Ed Wood", Wood never met a piece of film he didn't like, and
thought it would be a waste not to include Lugosi or the buffalo
stampede. *Sigh*. The film is so bad, that when shown to a Studio mogul,
he believes it is a practical joke by a friend.
        The actors and crew members of Wood's films were horribly
pathetic themselves: We already know the story of drug-addicted Lugosi,
but Wood also featured such favorites as Butterfly, a gay queen played
unexpectedly well by Murray, Dolores Fuller, Wood's real-life
girlfriend, Vampira(Lisa Marie), a local horror-host, a la Elvira or
Rhonda-Up-All-Night, Tor, a huge wrestler, and various grips and gaffers
who obtain special-effects, like a non-working rubber octopus, by
breaking into studio storage houses and stealing them.
        Tim Burton was the perfect choice to direct Ed Wood: not only is
he known for bringing outsiders to the screen with gusto(Jack
Skellington, Batman, Edward Scissorhands, etc.), but he himself is an
eccentric, odd director, who  likely understands Wood more than any of
us can. And although this film has it's faults(it stretches a little
long with its second act, and it doesn't go in-depth enough into Wood's
filmmaking career), it's a most enjoyable flick, and certainly one of
the oddest of the year. Exactly like all of Burton's other films.
