Authors
Neil Pollner
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Puppetoon Movie, The (1987)
     These are the sacrifices that I make to see new animation.  Well, I guess
you can't call George Pal's Puppetoons "new" animation, but I had never seen
them before so they were new to me.  I wasn't sure what to expect even after
seeing the previews but am I glad that I went.
     Puppetoons were a form of animation where George Pal took various puppets
and moved them, carved new ones, and otherwise manipulated them in the
annimation process.  There is a fluid movement to his Puppetoons which was
particularly fun to watch, especially during his dance sequences.  As with most
of the early animation these seem to revolve around presenting popular music
of the day.  The clips shown in the movie come primarily from the 1930's and
1940's.
     The movie starts with Gumby and friends (take me now, Lord) talking about
George Pal.  You get a series of useless discussions and then finally they get
down to showing the puppetoons.
     Most of the clips shown are just that, clips that are thrown together.  I
found that to be a little disconcerting, but I imagine that they wanted to show
us as much as possible.  There are a few Puppetoons shown in their entirety
and they are gems.  "Tulips Shall Grow," "In Stormy Weather" and especially
"Tubby the Tuba" are excellent stories, well-animated and just a joy to watch.
The movie got me interested in finding out more about Puppetoons.
     Overall I can't wholeheartedly recommend the movie.  The clips get
tiresome to watch and there is no connection between the different Puppetoons
shown.  Still, if you would like to learn about another form of animation and
see some wonderful 'toons, go see this movie when it comes to your town.

Title
Review for Ishtar (1987)
     Monday night while most of the world seemed to be on interstate roads, I
took time out to see ISHTAR at my local theater (where everyone that wasn't on
an interstate road was watching BEVERLY HILLS COP 2).  And yes, I do go to
movies that are younger then 10 years old in spite of comments made about the
quote of the week contest!  Be that as it may, I found ISHTAR to be an
extremely funny and enjoyable film.  The acting by Dustin Hoffman and Warren
Beatty was excellent and I found both of their characters to be believable.
The plot was consistent, funny and wonderfully stupid.  The supporting roles
were well-played, especially by Charles Grodin, who has replaced Fletcher
Daniels (of "Hill Street" fame) as my favorite sleaze.  Of course, the question
that everyone has been asking is, "Was it worth 50 million dollars?"  I don't
know.  I only had to pay $5.00.
     And my last little flip remarks bring me to the other point of my article
and that is what the critics (and here I mean the newspaper and TV critics, not
my fellow reviewers on the net) have been doing to this movie, which seems to
be disliking it for how it was made instead of what it contains.  To date, the
negative reviews that I have read complain about how much the movie cost and
how they felt that it was unbelieveable that Hoffman would be the lady's man
and Beatty would have such trouble with women.  Let me address these issues.
The cost of the making of the film is irrelevant to us watching it, unless they
try to recoup the money by charging us $17.38 to get in.  Seriously, do you
care if the movie you are watching cost $5 million to make or $50 million or
$500 million?  Do *you* sit there saying "I paid my $5.00, now show me 50
million dollars worth of entertainment?"  If so, then I'm sorry for you, for
you should like the movie for what it is, not what is cost.  If they cut
corners and the cheapness of a set or a costume gets in the way of your
enjoying a scene, fine, but I know I don't sit around thinking "boy for 50
million dollars, that camel should be bigger, or better then it is."
     Point 2 about the characters that Beatty and Hoffman play.  I
wonder if the critics saw the same movie that I saw.  Hoffman plays a man
from the Bronx that lived with his parents until he was 32.  He is very
insecure and tries to cover it up with bravado.  There is the scene where he
tells Lyle (Beatty's character) that he hopes he doesn't hate him since
everything about him is phoney, right down to his nickname (Hawk).
Hoffman plays Hawk as a cocky s.o.b. who really doesn't believe in himself,
but figures if he can get someone else to believe in him, then things will work
out.  He does an excellent job with the character.
     Beatty plays a tall, good-looking hick from Texas.  He is not used to the
big city, he is uncomfortable around it and he has never dated another woman
other then the one that he married when he was 17.  Of *course* he would be
uncomfortable around women given that history!  If you can get it out of your
mind that you are watching Warren Beatty up there, you can realize that he does
a very good job with the character of Lyle.  Lyle cannot acccept the fact that
he might be attractive, so he thinks of the things that Hawk is that he isn't
and sees them as virtues.  "I'm too big.  Girls go for little guys like you.
Did you ever see a big sports car?" (watch for that one--it may pop up in my
quiz contest someday!).  I don't know about the rest of you, but I have had a
number of friends who were fairly good-looking that just couldn't accept their
looks and you felt like shaking them to get them to listen.
    Okay, the long and short of it: I thought ISHTAR was a funny, well-acted
and totally enjoyable movie which I highly recommend.  If you like your comedy
on the chuckle and snicker side, it will appeal to you, although it does have
some good belly-laughs too.  Give it a chance for its own merits, and don't not
see it for things reasons that are not important.

Title
Review for Stunt Man, The (1980)
I have been enjoying reading about the various movies that people have been
posting to this discussion of "great unknown movies."  It must be obvious by
now that one man's great unknown is another mans "sure everyone knows that."
Be that as it may, here are my favorite "great unknown movies."
There are many others I could write about, but I will control myself somewhat.
So what other movies have I been missing?

Title
Review for Ishtar (1987)
     I went and saw a 40-million dollar movie today--but guess what: it only
cost me $4.50.  And I adored it!  I call that a deal.  What's scary is that I
almost didn't see this film because of all the negative reviews.  Most critics
branded ISHTAR a barely humorous, overly costly disaster.  Why should they care
what it cost to make--they were *paid* to see the movie!
     In the past, a consensus "thumbs down" may very well have kept me from a
new release--there are so many films popping up, even a religious movie-goer
like myself needs some screened input--but this is straw that breaks the
camel's back!  What are you guys, blind?!?  ISHTAR had me laughing hysterically;
not only were the performances genuine and the characterizations humanly
animated, but it created two characters that I could care about, which I am
finding to be a unique trait that usually evades films today.
     Yet one of the comments I have heard most frequently from critics, was
that they found ISHTAR to be poorly cast, therefore making the characters
unbelievable; there can not be a more inaccurate statement.  Beatty was
magnificently convincing as the stiff, southern klutz who has a hard time
attracting women--sure he is Warren Beatty, but HE'S AN ACTOR!  And in ISHTAR
he proved to me that he is a good one.  As far as Dustin Hoffman goes: I've
never *not* believed a performance of his--and here it applied threefold.
There were scene where he almost made me fall out of my seat.  The two of them
were spectacular together!  Not to mention that, whey they're not on the
screen, the supporting cast, led brilliantly (as usual) by Charles Grodin,
unerringly complements the shinning appeal of this always outrageous, sometimes
chaotic, and oftentimes sincerely human adventure/comedy.
     Well, even though I feel that I can't say enough about ISHTAR, I have said
my piece.  Also, in a way I must thank all the reviewers that blackballed the
film.  Thanks to your critiques coupled with the timely release of BEVERLY
HILLS COP 2 (which, incidentally, I loved too), I was able to view ISHTAR in a
relatively unpacked theatre free from all the annoying audience banter that
has been making weekend movie-going an unpleasant experience in my area
recently.  But that is another argument (and possibly another article).  See
ISHTAR for yourself--it's a very complete, good time.
