Authors
Brian Herring
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Timecode (2000)
In the 60s Andy Warhol was responsible for producing a number of experiments 
in cinema.  It wasn't so much the films themselves than the audiences that 
Warhol found interesting - by showing static, lengthy opuses he was actually 
encouraging his viewers to get bored and talk to their neighbors.  His 
experiments with simultaneous projection were pretty much cut of the same 
cloth: cinematic narrative is arbitrary and you watch what you want when it 
suits.  Bring on WOODSTOCK.   Bring on Brian De Palma.  Split-screen 
perspective was less about narrative deconstruction than it was of gimmickry 
- even Able Gance knew that when he made NAPOLEON in 1927.  End of story, 
you might think, but not quite.  Developments in digital technology have 
once again allowed us to throw a fresh coat of paint on the old split-screen 
wagon.  In TIMECODE, director Mike Figgis uses the new lightweight Sony 
DSR-I to synchronize not two, but four narrative divisions on the cinema 
screen.  You want more?  The separate narratives have all been filmed 
simultaneously on one Friday afternoon.  Improvised.  In unbroken 93-minute 
takes.
Let's put aside the storyline - or storylines - for a moment and address a 
more obvious issue: how do you watch something like this?  More pertinently, 
how do you watch four screens when one of them always focuses on Salma Hayek 
in a snug-fitting top?    Figgis knows ahead of time which screen his 
viewers are going to be drawn to, and this is the most impressive aspect of 
his film.  The fast-tracking digital countdowns in the title credits point 
the way to the logistical feat that he has accomplished.  Although his 
actors and camera operators improvise around a preset framework of 
circumstances, they are each given a 'timecode' to follow - a sort of time 
clock which must be punched at intervals throughout the film.  This most 
noticeably occurs during periodic earth tremors, but also effectively in 
moments where all frames are simultaneously filled with close-ups of faces, 
telephone conversations, characters in restrooms, or contemplative scenes 
that allow the musical soundtrack to engage with the action.
You would think the theme underlying Figgis' work would be one of 
unification, but he takes the opposite tack, and it works just as well.  
TIMECODE is set in and around a small-time film studio, where we see actors, 
producers, writers, and directors sifting through the bric-a-brac that 
passes for their daily management.  It seems an amusingly perfect setting 
for TIMECODE's sensibilities: the studio execs' juggling act is in symmetry 
with Figgis' own deployment of images on screen, but there the similarity 
ends.  Instead of harmony we find duplicity.  The multiple screens become 
testament to untruths, causing us to debunk one character's assertion that 
the tyranny of montage (as per Eisenstein) has resulted in 75 years of 
manipulation and lies.  If the implication is that the opposite must be 
true, then TIMECODE rejects that also: unedited footage does not prescribe 
integrity, as evidenced by the continual deceptions perpetrated in real-time 
before our eyes.  But that's okay.  Figgis has undertaken his project with 
humor, and tips us a self-referential wink every now and then without coming 
across as smug.  His orchestrated synchronicities are not designed to dazzle 
us into an oh-gosh appreciation of his technical skill, they are there to 
elicit grins.  You smile because it's cute, because it all seems made up 
even though you know it isn't.   TIMECODE is a confidence that we have been 
taken into, and we enjoy participating in the director's game.
It takes a confident film-maker to place his work so heavily in the hands of 
his actors and camera operators (essentially second and third unit 
directors), and it's heartening to see another contemporary talent trying to 
mess around in the mainstream.  See this in a theater if you can, otherwise 
make sure you've got a big screen TV if video is your only option (those 
four divisions could get mighty small).  And don't touch that pause button.  
You know Mike wouldn't want you to.

