Authors
Chase McCown
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Forces of Nature (1999)
Material may not be copied or used without the written consent of the author.
CAST: Ben Affleck (Ben), Sandra Bullock (Sarah), Maura Tierney (Bridget).
Rated PG-13 for language and one instance of drug use.
Ben Holmes has a wedding in Savannah to get to...his own. Getting from New York
to Georgia has never been so difficult. To start things off, his flight is
cancelled when a bird flies into the planes's propeller. Then, as plot
development would have it, there are absolutely no rental cars available.
Naturally, he hitches a ride with a complete stranger named Vic, and ends up in
jail as a result. He gets on the wrong train, has no money for a bus, etc, etc.
He begins to wonder if he is supposed to be married, given the disasters that
have occured in such a short time. Are forces of nature really trying to show
him that marriage is not his destiny? Do destiny and luck even exist? And why
does it seem that every married couple is really unhappy?
During this voyage, Ben is accompanied by fellow sojourner Sarah Lewis, who
just so happens to be heading towards Savannah to visit her family. The two
meet when they are coincidentally next to each other in the airport. Ben is
uptight, anal retentive, matter-of-fact, and strictly by the book, whereas
Sarah is free-spirited, spontaneous, daring, and care free. How do such
opposites attract? Could it be forces of nature? 
On his way to the wedding, Ben feels that certain signs are telling him not to
marry his longtime girlfriend Bridget. While Bridget waits for Ben back home,
she is tempted by an ex-boyfriend and frustrated by her constantly-feuding
parents. Will Ben and Bridget get married? Will Bridget stay with her
ex-boyfriend? Will Ben and Sarah fall in love? 
While I will not give away the ending, I will say that this movie is very
entertaining and quick moving. I am usually not a fan of Sandra Bullock's work,
but this movie certainly does redeem her. And I am also impressed with the
usually serious Ben Affleck in a much more light-hearted role.
I would recommend this movie not just as a date movie. There is a certain
Trains, Planes, and Automobiles feel to the flick, which provides constant
comic relief. Romance usually takes a back seat to plot development and amusing
situations in Forces of Nature, which makes the movie more appealing.
Before your theatre is struck down by lightning or blown away in a tornado, run
and see Forces of Nature. As Sarah said, "We guarantee you a really good show."
My rating (scale of 1-10, 1=awful, 10=flawless):
Forces of Nature receives an 8

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
THE MATRIX, 144 minutes, Rated R for language and sci-fi violence.
CAST:  Keanu Reeves (Neo), Laurence Fishburne (Morpheus), Carrie-Anne Moss
(Trinity), Hugo Weaving (Agent Smith) 
Have you ever wanted to walk out of a movie, but felt that you would be cheated
out of $6.00?  Have you ever laughed when no one else was laughing because the
acting was so insipid and the lines just as inane?  Have you ever been to a
movie that was...just that bad?
If the answer to any of these questions is "yes," then maybe you've seen THE
MATRIX, a movie that takes itself so seriously that it unintentionally comes
across as a comedy.
Then again, what can you expect from a movie that stars "Ted" ("Bill and Ted's
Excellent Adventure" star Keanu Reeves) and some girl from the ill-fated TV
series "Models Inc." (Carrie-Anne Moss)?  There were times when I just couldn't
help but laugh out loud...like, the time when Keanu Reeves' character
enlightens us with the revelation, "I know kung fu."  Such forced dialogue and
a humorously unrealistic plot make up THE MATRIX.
Sometime in the 21st century, Neo (a computer hacker) discovers that all life
on Earth is merely a complicated illusion created by evil cyber-based people so
that each human body can be used to provide energy for the Matrix's world
domination plot (the real world, that is...not the cyber-based facade where we
are all supposedly dwelling).  Neo is "chosen" by rebels Morpheus, Trinity, and
an array of other one-dimensional characters to defeat the Matrix.
I realize that I am in the minority when I say that I truly loathed this movie.
 I can't understand why in the world critics have given it such good reviews. 
Aside from the special effects (yes, they truly were amazing), I found nothing
redeeming in the acting, the plot, or the screenplay.  Hello Hollywood!  Some
of us DO look for those elements when we pay good money to go to the
multiplexes of America.
Writers and directors Andy and Larry Wachowski (whose previous credits include
the Jennifer Tilly nightmare BOUND) have certainly made some interesting
statements with MATRIX.  What I learned was:
1)  When making a movie, acting is a small sacrifice if there are "awesome"
special effects!
2)  If there should happen to be loopholes in the plot, no one will notice,
because there are some kickin' special effects!
3)  The Matrix has your money.
