Authors
Stephen Sills
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Wild Wild West (1999)
Rated PG-13 (violence, sexual themes, brief nudity, mild profanity)
I am continually amazed at movies like this.  That some producer would
waste an abundance of talent and money on a script as abysmal as this
one is mind-boggeling, but it seems to happen a lot nowadays.  "Wild
Wild West" is a beautifully filmed, well acted, and well directed
piece of garbage; and its insipid screenplay is completely at fault.
In short, this movie is a comedy without laughs.  So many jokes fall
flat that it borderlines surreal.  The high production values keep it
from being a total fiasco, but it's still pretty boring.   
Will Smith stars as Jim West, an old western, R&B variation of the
James Bond character.  West is teamed up with Artemus Gordon (Kevin
Kline), and they're pretty much polar oppisites: West prefers to solve
his problems with an array of bullets, Gordon traditionally favors a
more pacifistic approach.  Talk about deeply developed characters.  At
any rate, this leads to the inevitable conflicts between
methodologies, none of which are funny.
The year is 1869.  Several top scientists have been abducted, and the
suspected culprit is a disgruntled former Confederate General,
Bloodbath McGrath (Ted Levine).  President Grant sends West and Gordon
to investigate.  
There's evidence that McGrath is attending some sort of Confederate
reunion in Louisiana.  West and Gordon show up and learn that McGrath
is actually working for Dr. Arliss Loveless (Kenneth Branagh), another
disgruntled former Confederate.  As it turns out, Loveless plans to
use the combined knowledge of the scientests to create the ultimate
super weapon, which he will use to conquer the United States. 
I'd go further with the plot, but there isn't any point.  This film's
narrative is little more than a jumbled, unfunny mess.  I only laughed
at a couple of jokes, and then only lightly.  There isn't one truly
uprorously funny moment in this film, and that's pretty disasterous
when you consider that it's primarily a comedy.
As I said, the fault is totally that of the script.  When you consider
their respective roles, Will Smith and Kevil Kline do as good as they
could have possibly done.  The leads could've been played Samuel L.
Jackson and Robert De Niro and the film still would've been awful.  No
one, and I mean no one, can make a line like "Bye bye, Mr. Knife Guy!"
sound good.
Still, this film has a lot going for it visually.  The set design is
fantastic, maybe even Oscar worthy.  The cinematogrophy by Michael
Ballhaus (who was also behind camera in Martin Scorsese's brilliant
"Goodfellas") , is absolutely stunning.  He lends the film a much
needed exciting, comic bookish look.  I won't fault Barry Sonnenfeld
either.  He does a fine job of directing  the proceedings, but, like
the rest of the people involved with the film, there really isn't
anything that he can do to correct its one major flaw.  Despite being
beautifully made, "Wild Wild West" becomes quite boring after the
half-way point.  The appeal of the visuals ends long before the film
does. 
If "Wild Wild West" didn't look so good, it would be almost
insufferable.  As it is, it's somewhat tolerable, but not very
entertaining.  It hurts to give such a well made movie a score this
low, but there isn't anything much worse than an unfunny comedy.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If you want to read more of my reviews, visit my wet site at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Derby/3217.  I'm just getting the
site up so there are only a few reviews as of this writing, but I'm
trying to update it as frequently as possible.

Title
Review for Big Daddy (1999)
I was genuinely surprised by this film.  That almost all of the
attempted drama completely fails is no surprise.  Strangely enough, 
though, most of the humor fails too. Adam Sandler is by no means a
great actor, but at least he can normally be counted on to be
consistently funny.  Save for a few choice moments, his performance is
rather subdued here, and most of the one-liners and verbal humor fall
relatively flat.  This film lacks the charm of "The Wedding Singer"
and the stupid, albeit occasionally hilarious, humor of "The Water
Boy."  In short, it's a pretty drab experience.
Sandler plays Sonny Koufax, a law school graduate who has amassed an
obscenely large fortune from a frivolous lawsuit.  Having wisely
invested the money to the point where he can live off of it, he spends
his days lounging around his apartment, venturing out into the real
world once a week as a toll booth attendant.  Sonny's perfectly happy
with his existence, but his girlfriend, Vanessa (Kristy Swanson), is
fed up with his immaturity and wants to move on "to the next level" of
his life.
Sonny begins to see her point after she leaves him, and it is
reinforced when his roommate decides to move on to that next level and
successfully proposes to his girlfriend, Corinne (Leslie Mann), a
ditsy, airheaded former Hooters girl.  Getting married to a stupid, 
big-breasted bimbo doesn't really strike me as a sign of maturity, but
it does to Sonny, who finally realizes that he has to do something 
to prove his worth to Vanessa.
That thing comes in the form of Julian (Cole and Dylan Sprouse), a
young boy who is literally dropped off at his doorstep.  Julian is 
Sonny's roommate's illegitimate son.  His roommate, conveniently
enough, is out of town, so Sonny decides to take responsibility for
Julian while he is away.  He does this for a while, enjoys it, and
decides that he'd like the situation to be permanent.  Masquerading as
his roommate, he officially gains guardianship of Julian and attempts
to use his newfound responsibility as proof to Vanessa that he's
ready to proceed with his life.  Unfortunately for Sonny, she has
already found someone else, thus leaving him to care for Julian alone.
The romanticism of the situation quickly fades when the kid starts
having normal kid problems (bed-wetting, a need for continuous 
attention, and a lust for sweets to name a few).  Needless to say,
Sonny doesn't handle the situation very well.
"Big Daddy" is occasionally funny, but it lacks the big laughs
necessary to make a truly successful comedy.  Sandler's comedy works
when it's totally silly and stupid, a fact that was fully realized in
"The Water Boy."  The bonding scenes between Sonny and Julian are 
somewhat amusing, but Sandler simply isn't a good enough actor to pull
something like this off very well.  This might seem strange, but
Tom Hanks would probably be far better suited for this role.
The film is also bogged down by some embarrassingly smarmy moments
that further dull it's already not-too-sharp comedic edge.  While I
can appreciate some occasional gratuitous sentiment (I was actually
somewhat affected by the silly emotional scenes in "Armageddon,"
for Pete's sake), this film goes, way, way too far.  The creators seem
to think that they have a credible drama on their hands when they
simply do not.
"Big Daddy" features one of the strangest product placements that I've
ever seen.  The product in question is the Hooters restaurant
chain, but the film is certainly not complementary of their
waitresses.  The bimboish nature of Corinne's job is continually
brought up and joked at, but this is done so frequently that it gets
incredibly old, and is obviously a product placement when viewed with
the fact that the movie ends in a Hooters restaurant.  I've never seen
a product placement that ridicules the product that it is advertising.
In the end, "Big Daddy" is occasionally amusing, but not enough so to
get a recommendation from me.  Granted, it's not nearly as disgusting
as "Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me," but it's also not as
funny.  As such, they both even out to the same score.

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me 
A review by Stephen Sills
Rated PG-13 (sickeningly gross humor, mild language)
I will not deny the fact that Mike Meyers is a gifted, perhaps even brilliant
comedian. Nor will I deny the fact that "The Spy Who Shagged Me" is a
frequently humorous, occasionally hilarious film. Yes, this is a funny movie,
but it's also a very sick, demented one. There are some images in this film
that you'd have to pay me to see again.
According to the "Star Wars"-ish crawl that starts the movie off, Austin (Mike
Meyers) has defeated his arch nemesis, Dr. Evil (also played by Meyers) and has
since married his love interest, Vanessa (Elizabeth Hurley). 
We cut to the couple's honeymoon sweet. Vanessa turns out to be a robotic agent
of Dr. Evil and nearly kills Austin with her breast-mounted machine guns.
Austin barely escapes, lamenting the loss of his wife until he realizes that
he's a bachelor again. His pain is further alleviated by an assignment that
involves lingerie photo shoot. True to form, he winds up in bed with one of the
models.
In the meantime, Dr. Evil resurfaces and hatches a truly nefarious scheme.
Utilizing a time machine, he plans to travel to the 60s and steal Austin's mojo
(his libido) from his still-frozen persona. Evil successfully completes the
time travel procedure and sends Fat Bastard (also played by Meyers), a
gargantuan Scotsman, to do the job. Unfortunately for our hero and his sexual
partner, Fat Bastard succeeds, thus rendering Austin infertile right in the
middle of his sexual encounter.
Fortunately, the British Government has also developed a time travel device,
and so they send Austin back in time to save his mojo. 
Once there, Austin meets up with Felicity Shagwell (Heather Graham), a sexy
American spy. Together, they discover an even worse scheme: Evil, with the
accompaniment of Fat Bastard and a pint-sized version of himself, Mini-Me
(Verne Troyer), has placed a powerful laser gun on the moon, and will decimate
Washington unless he is paid one hundred billion dollars by the U.S.
Government. Austin and Felicity must travel to the moon to thwart Evil and
recover Austin's mojo.
Like I said earlier, this movie is truly hilarious at times. A scene that takes
place on "Jerry Springer," for example, is one of the funniest things that I've
seen in a long time. Dr. Evil is great, and Mini-Me is surprisingly likable in
a weird sort of way.
The Austin Powers character is also a wonderful invention and is played to
perfection by Meyers. He's a James Bond type with a tenth of the charisma and
twice the sex drive, and yet he comes over with childlike innocence. It's
hilarious to see Austin, with his frazzled hair, horrid teeth, unseemly
features, and over-the-top accent make women swoon with lines like "Do I make
you horny, baby? Do I?" 
Fat Bastard didn't do much for me, though. Like so many other things in this
movie, he was little more than obscenely gross. The same can be said for about
half of this movie's attempts at humor. Joke after joke elicited an almost
vomiturition reaction from me. The most notable is a scene where Austin
mistakes Fat Bastards feces for coffee. It was so gross that I came close to
leaving the theater.
In the end, your enjoyment of "Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me" will
depend exclusively on your tolerance level for sick humor. Personally, I have a
finely drawn line for such things, and this movie passed it frequently. If you
can stand a lot of the stuff, you'll love it. If not, you'd be best advised to
stay away.

Title
Review for Tarzan (1999)
Disney's recent animated efforts have become nearly identical in plot
and indistinguishable in theme.  They all follow the same basic
formula: rich, gun-toting white guys = bad; cute animals,
strong-willed women, and weird freaks = good.  Let it be known that
the company's most recent foray into the animated market, "Tarzan," is
no exception.  It's certianly a typical Disney movie, although it's
probably one of their better efforts in recent years.  Despite its
problems (and they are certianly legion), "Tarzan" manages,
ultimately, to be a passably entertaining time at the movies.
The film opens with a brief sequence that sets up the backstory.  With
the accompaniment of a mind-numbingly annoying, quasi-African song
blaring over the soundtrack, we see Tarzan's parents barely escape a
harrowing shipwreck with their newborn son and make their way to a
tropical island.  Once there, they build a "Swiss Family
Robinson"-esque hut.  The parts of the sequence dealing with Tarzan's
parents are intercut with shots of Tarzan's future family, the
gorillas, leading their daily life.  During one of the gorilla-related
moments, we see a baby gorilla get killed and his mother's reaction.
By the end of the sequence, Tarzan's parents are also dead, having
been killed by an evil tiger that looks suspiciously like Kahn from
"The Jungle Book."
The mother gorilla, Kala (voice of Glenn Close), discovers the hut.
While scouring through it, she finds baby Tarzan hidden under a
blanket.  Still grief-stricken over the loss of her child, she views
Tarzan as a potential replacement.  
The leader of her Tribe, Kerchak (voice of Lance Henriksen), thinks
otherwise.  He views Tarzan as a threat, and orders Kala to leave him
in the jungle to let him fend for himself.  Kala's strong maternal
instincts ultimately prevail, however, and Kerchak reluctantly decides
to let Tarzan stay.
We are then "treated" to yet another annoying musical sequence, scored
with what sounds like the same song from earlier in the movie.  The
sequence culminates with baby Tarzan growing into boyhood.  The movie
lingers in that stage of Tarzan's life for a while, showing us the
inevitable conflicts that a boy child would have when raised among
gorillas.  Tarzan is viewed as different and strange by his playmates
(a clumsy, obvious stab at racism that is typical of Disney).  Kerchak
still views Tarzan as an outsider, and is suspicious of his every
move.  His status isn't helped any by a botched attempt to impress his
friends by stealing a hair from an elephant.  The plan backfires when
he causes a stampede that nearly wipes out the entire tribe.  
Finally, after another sequence scored with what sounds like the same
song, Tarzan grows into adulthood.  He is generally accepted now,
although Kerchak still doesn't like him much.  His relatively
care-free existence is challenged when he discovers a small group of
humans trudging through the jungle.  The group consists of Professor
Porter (voice of Nigel Howthorne), a kindly old gentleman who only
wants to study the gorillas, his beautiful daughter, Jane (voice of
Minnie Driver), who wants to do the same, and their guide, Clayton
(voice of Brian Blessed), this movie's obligatory gun-toting, and
hence evil, white male.  Having never seen the female of his species,
Tarzan obviously finds himself attracted to Jane.
Tarzan studies them from a distance until Jane finds herself being
chased through the jungle by a band of monkeys.  Tarzan swoops down
via a vine and rescues her, taking her on a wild ride though the
trees.  Shaken up by the experience, Jane returns to the small group's
camp and tells her companions about her adventure.  Inevitably, they
dismisss her experience, citing Tarzan as merely a fantasy.  They
change their respective minds, however, when Tarzan shows up at their
camp.
As Tarzan spends more and more time with his fellow humans, he finds
himself to be increasingly attracted to Jane, and the human lifestyle
in general.  He must decide between his love for Jane and the only
family that he has known throughout his entire life up to that point. 
The themes in "Tarzan" are certianly not new to Disney movies.  As
aforementioned, all of the politically correct stereotypes are there,
and Tarzan's delimma is reminiscent of "The Jungle Book" and
"Pocahontas."  These movies have become continual repititions of the
same themes under different contexts.  Furthermore, the film's climax
seems incredibly contrived and serves merly to satisfy a Disney
convention.  
I was also a bit disturbed by the erotic overtones in this movie.
There are some unavoidable, implied, sexual themes when you have a
half-naked ape man running around in the jungle; themes, I think, that
are a bit too mature for the target audience.  The attraction between
Tarzan and Jane was very erotic, far more so than most Disney movies.
One scene in particular, where Tarzan studies Jane, went a bit too far
in my opinioin.  Since Tarzan can barely communicate with Jane, the
only possible attraction is physical.  Tarzan is even referred to as
Jane's "fantasy" at one point.  
Still, "Tarzan" has a couple of very good points, the most notable of
which is the knock-out animation.  Much like "A Bug's Life," this
movie looks so good that it's worth watching along those lines (I was
actually more visually entrhalled during "Tarzan" than I was during
"The Phantom Menace").  The story, while contrived and inherintly
politically correct, works and is entertaining when looked at within
the light of a children's movie.  Despite my mostly negative sounding
review, I have to admit that "Tarzan" is leaps and bounds ahead of
Disney's last animated effort, "Mulan."  It's certianly not up to par
with the likes or "Peter Pan" or "Robin Hood," but it's still mildly
entertaining, enough so to garner a limited recommendation from me.

Title
Review for Double Jeopardy (1999)
"Double Jeopardy" is terminally dumb -- it's probably the most insultingly lazy
and contrived screenplay of the year. Its relatively decent performances saved
it from my own personal sub-two-star hell, but just barely.
The film -- as you no doubt have learned from its trailer, which gives away too
much of the plot -- is about a woman (Ashley Judd) who is wrongly convicted of
her husband's murder. While in prison, she learns that he is alive, and had in
fact framed her for the murder. According to the movie, she has every right in
the world to kill her husband once she is released because of the double
jeopardy law, which states that you cannot be convicted twice for the same
crime. As such, she plans to do just that if he won't give her their son.
Once released, she is sent to a half-way house for women, and placed under the
authority of a strict parole officer (Tommy Lee Jones). She escapes in attempt
to carry out her plans, and he goes after her; of course they end up forming a
sort of alliance near the end.
If it sounds like a blatant and shameless rip-off of "The Fugitive," it is --
it's just not nearly as good. For one thing, the underlying premise is absurd.
I'm no legal expert, but wouldn't the murder that she was framed for and any
subsequent murders be counted as different crimes, even if they involved the
same victim? If you spent time in jail for robbing a house, would you then be
able to, once released, rob that house again without fear of prosecution
because you had already done so? Of course not, but it makes about as much
sense as this film's plot. And anyway, even if that isn't the case, I doubt she
could explain the situation and get an "Oh... okay" reaction from a judge.
Other major problems pepper the narrative. Her husband changes his name several
times, but the state officially declares him to be dead. Wouldn't the fact that
he is supposed dead pose a few problems during a name change procedure? 
In one of the most ludicrously contrived scenes that I've ever seen, her
husband shuts her in a coffin and leaves her for dead, even though she
mentioned earlier that she had a gun on her. Of course she uses the gun to
shoot off the coffin's hinges and escape. Why didn't he just kill her? Or at
least take the gun away from her before shutting her in?
The direction, by Bruce Beresford ("Driving Miss Daisy"), is almost
distractingly generic, if that makes sense. He shoots the film like a
Lifetime-movie-of-the-week, and the sad thing is that I've actually seen better
movies than this on Lifetime. 
The performances are pretty good, though, and they make the film watchable.
Although he isn't given much to do, Tommy Lee Jones is excellent as usual --
even if he is playing essentially the same character that he did in "The
Fugitive." Ashley Judd is also great; she gives her character's plight a sense
of pathos that is totally of her own doing; I doubt it's anywhere to be found
in the script. 
All-in-all, and despite the good acting, this movie is a loser. If you're
really in the mood for a brainless thriller, this may fit the bill, but you
could probably do better by randomly picking up any other cassette on the
shelf. It's disgusting that a piece of by-the-numbers, uninspired rubbish like
this can rake in more money than "American Beauty," while a masterpiece like
"Boiler Room" can come and go in two weeks.
If you liked this review and want more, check out my web site at
http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/derby/3217  Comments are greatly
appreciated!

Title
Review for Toy Story 2 (1999)
"Toy Story 2" is a masterpiece on every level - on its own terms, it is one of
the finest films I have ever seen. Crafted with tender care by Disney
subsidiary Pixar (who also brought us the original "Toy Story" and last year's
"A Bug's Life"), the film personifies great family entertainment, appealing to
kids, teens, and adults alike. Unlike so many lesser films that try to throw in
mild double entendres and in-jokes to keep the over thirteen set in the crowd
awake, however, "Toy Story 2" communicates exclusively to children, all of
them, including the one locked up in even the most hardened adult. It fits the
old "It's great for kids from ages one to one hundred" cliché' like a glove. I
loved this movie - it's so clean, so beautiful, so full of heart and child-like
wonder. There is something simultaneously cute, funny, haunting, and sad about
seeing the world through the eyes of a toy - and the angle is exploited
beautifully. 
The film was a lot different than I expected. It's been quite a while since
I've seen the original "Toy Story," and I remember little about it beyond that
I liked it quite a bit. After almost literal universal acclaim (it is one of
the few films to get a 100% on Rotten Tomatoes' tatometer), I expected quite a
bit from its sequel, thinking it would simultaneously juggle humor and themes
for kids and adults respectively. It ended up being even better than I thought
it would be, although in a very different way. Instead of appealing to me as an
adult (or, in my case, a teenager), it brought me down to the level of a child.
I rarely see such strong feelings of joy, wonder, and sweet innocence projected
on the screen, and I couldn't help but get caught up in it. For ninety brief
but wonderful minutes, my age changed from fifteen to five.
The story is something of a retread of the original, but it doesn't really
matter. Woody (voice of Tom Hanks) is stolen by evil toy store owner Al
McWhiggin (voice of Wayne Night) while trying to save a comrade from being
purchased during a family garage sale. He is brought back to Al's apartment,
and finds himself as the centerpiece of a "Woody's Roundup" memorabilia
collection. "Woody's Roundup," as it turns out, was an old black and white
television series in which Woody's persona was the star. Al is planning to sell
his collection to a Japanese toy museum, but they won't take it without a Woody
doll. Now that he has one, he plans to proceed and make a killing.
Woody doesn't like the idea, of course, and immediately makes plans to escape.
He is hindered, however, by Jessie (voice of Joan Cusack) and Stinky Pete
(voice of Kelsey Grammer), two other members of the collection that have stayed
in storage for years waiting for Woody. They don't want to spend any longer
packed up in a box, and do everything in their power to convince him to stay.
In the meantime, Buzz Lightyear (voice of Tim Allen), with the help of Mr.
Potato Head (voice of Don Rickles), Rex (voice of Wallace Shawn), Hamm (voice
of John Ratzenberger), and Slinky Dog (voice of Jim Varney) launches a rescue
mission. 
Woody does his best to explain to his new friends why he has to leave; his
owner, Andy (voice of John Morris) needs him. They're always together, and
Woody couldn't live with himself if seperated from his best friend. In one of
the most beautiful and powerful sequences that I have ever seen, Jessie tells
the story of her owner growing up and letting her go for big-girl things like
makeup and boys. The story is told in a (for once seamlessly integrated) song
that details their special relationship. Jessie's owner took her everywhere,
did everything with her - she was the girl's constant companion, her confidant.
As the girl grows older, she stars to lose interest and ultimately sticks
Jessie under her bed. After years of waiting, Jessie, thinking that their
constant companionship is about to resume, is retrieved by her owner, driven by
a tire swing that they used to play on years ago, and given to Good Will. The
sequence is brilliant, executed with genuineness, subtlety, and grace. It
almost moved me to tears.
This brings Woody to the realization that Andy will soon grow old and give him
up ("Do you actually think that Andy will take you to college, on his
honeymoon?!" asks Jessie). Woody is infuriated at first, and initially refuses
to return home when Buzz and company come for him. After much soul-searching,
he changes his mind, deciding that, even though he won't be with Andy after he
grows up, he wouldn't miss the experience of watching him for anything in the
world. What a sweet, wonderful, powerful film.
**** out of **** _________________________________________________________
If you liked this review and want more, check out my web site at
http://www.geocities.com/hollywood/derby/3217

Title
Review for Thin Red Line, The (1998)
Rated R (war violence, strong language, some nudity and sexual themes)
I have to admit that I disliked this film initially. It certianly isn't for
every taste, and it's sheer torture to sit through if you're in a restless
mood. That said, if you ARE in the right mood, it's absolutely incredible. This
was my second favorite movie of 1998, and would have been a shoo-in for first
in almost any other year.
Perhaps the big turn-off for many was this film's unconventionality. I'd be
hard-pressed to compare it to any other film that I've seen - it is very, very
artsy, incredibly slow - and amazingly, it works beautifully. 
On my second viewing, I realized that the film follows the Three Act structure
(I didn't think it had any sort of structure at all when I first saw it). The
first act serves to set up the characters - sort of. It exists even moreso to
set a mood of tension and restlesness, and perhaps even feelings of boredom.
And then it is shattered by the intense violence of the second (which
encompasses most of the movie). The majority of the film is one extended battle
scene, intercut with brief flashbacks and voice-overs. The artsier elements do
not detract from the action, but add to it - they succeed in briefly letting
the viewer peek into the minds of the soldiers, only to be suddenly yanked back
into reality when the battle resumes.
The battle scenes are amazing (second only to "Saving Private Ryan" in my
opinion). They're brutal, horrifying, and at times beautiful due to the amazing
cinematography. The second act is as immersive, brilliant, and haunting as any
film that I have ever seen.
The only problems come during the first and third acts. Malick takes a little
too long to get the film started. Although the initial scenes - which consist
of two soldiers' experiencing a near-eden-like paradise while going AWOL, and
the preperations for battle - are effective and necessary, hints of
pretentiousness sink in. The film is just a tad too artsy near the beginning,
and a lot of people that disliked the movie probably gave up on it because of
this.
The final act is effective at winding the film down, but the problems from the
first persist - it's a bit too long, and comes over as pretentious at times.
That said, there are two sequences (one where a soldier gets a devastating note
from his wife, and another where one of the main characters is killed) that are
nothing short of incredible. 
The performances are phenominal all around. The two standouts are Nick Nolte
and newcomer Jim Caviezel, both of whom should have been nominated for Oscars.
Nolte is riveting and intense as the colonel in charge of the operation. His
character is hard, mean, and somewhat reckless with the lives of his men, and
yet Nolte somehow manages to evoke sympathy for him. Caviezel is forever
questioning the nature of war, his place in it, and if there's any deeper
meaning to the hell that he's going through. He is absolutely perfect -
genuine, sympathetic, sincere, and yet strong when he needs to be. Although
restricted to a relatively small role, Sean Penn is also very good as the
company's pessimistic seargent.
As to how it stacks up to "Saving Private Ryan" - it was my second favorite
movie of 1998, "Ryan" was my first. It's really hard to compare the two - they
are so, so different - so I won't, beyond saying that Spielberg's film had more
of an impact on me. However, the two are comparable from the standpoint of
quality (I can easily see why someone would "The Thin Red Line" above "Ryan). I
highly recommend both of them, and consider them to be the two best war movies
ever made.
All in all, "The Thin Red Line" is filmmaking of an incredibly high order. It's
slight faults are easily offset by the sheer brilliance of what is done right.
It's a real shame that it tanked at the box office - films this unconventional,
powerful, and thought-provoking don't come along very often.
