Authors
Ian Waldron Mantgani
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Limbo (1999)
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Cornerhouse (Manchester)
Released in the UK by Columbia TriStar on January 21, 2000; certificate 15; 
126 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by John Sayles; produced by Maggie Renzi.
Written by John Sayles.
Photographed by Haskell Wexler; edited by John Sayles.
"The nights aren't that long this time of year," a man named Joe says, which 
suggests that it is summertime. But the surroundings are dull and damp, as 
they would be in autumn, and Joe and his companions are shivering and 
worrying about pneumonia, as they would be in winter. This sense of confusion 
persists throughout John Sayles's "Limbo", in which nothing ever really seems 
definite. How intentional the mood is, I'm not sure. I do know that it makes 
for depressing cinema.
"Limbo" takes place around a small Alaskan fishing community, where big 
businessman have begun to exploit the landscape as a sort of giant theme park 
for elderly tourists, who want to see the wilderness, but want it tame. One 
tour guide even takes vacationers into a nondescript local tavern, to talk of 
its "local significance". They click their cameras, muttering and pointing, 
as if they are in a museum, and the locals are exhibits.
Those locals have come to the bar to drown their sorrows. There is no longer 
any great demand for the fish their area produces, so its cannery has been 
shut down, and all its workers laid off. The workers react with neither anger 
nor attempts at positive thinking; they just seem to hang around, confused, 
not knowing what to do.
Sayles, the writer and director, spends time exploring the politics and 
hierarchy of this locale, then selects three main characters and uses them to 
veer off into another direction. The underlying sense of uncertainty is even 
present in the characterisations of these people: Joe (David Strathairn) was 
once a bright and successful chap, who lost a lot of his nerve in an accident 
at sea, and may or may not have recovered.  Donna (Mary Elizabeth 
Mastrantonio), his girlfriend, is a low-rent singer who can't decide whether 
to be a mouthy bitch or a sweet and caring lady. Her daughter, Noelle 
(Vanessa Martinez), is going through a bout of depression that may be typical 
teenage angst, or may be something more sinister.
As the result of plot happenings that are not really relevant here, this trio 
find themselves stranded on a miserable, freezing little island, possibly 
pursued by murderous gangsters. After some initial terror, and worries about 
starving to death, Joe, Donna and Noelle simply gather edible matter, and 
firewood, and do what they can to survive. There's no high drama; everything 
keeps unfolding as vague inactivity.
I suspect this is the intention, judging by the film's title and its cryptic 
ending. Or perhaps the film was loaded with symbolism that I just didn't pick 
up on. "Limbo" is certainly not engaging on a straight dramatic level -- if 
Sayles wanted the material to be taken that way, he would have depicted the 
situation with more raw, menacing detail. Instead, no event seems as 
important in itself than as in terms of some bigger picture; the story is 
constantly moving on, as if to some grand thematic payoff. The payoff never 
comes, and that's the point. We're left in limbo.
This is very watchable: Strathairn, Mastrantonio and Martinez are intense 
performers, and the cinematographer, Haskell Wexler, is a fascinating mixer 
of realistic brightness and rich colours. But "Limbo" is pretty much 
impossible to like, as it deliberately sets out to leave the audience 
unsatisfied.
Next week I'll be reviewing "American Beauty", the current front-runner to 
win the Oscar as best picture of the year. I'll be recommending that film 
because it carefully studies isolation, loneliness and alienation; "Limbo", 
on the other hand, creates such feelings. One character says she knows she's 
in limbo because "it sure ain't heaven and it's too cold to be hell". Not a 
worthwhile experience, then. Sayles should have remembered that before making 
this movie.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic
