Authors
Mike Brown
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Quiz Show (1994)
Produced by Robert Redford, Michael Jacobs, Julian Krainin and Michael 
Nozik
John Turturro.................Herbert Stempel
Rob Morrow....................Dick Goodwin
Ralph Fiennes.................Charles Van Doren
Paul Scofield.................Mark Van Doren
David Paymer..................Dan Enright
Hank Azaria...................Albert Freedman
Christopher McDonald .........Jack Barry
Johann Carlo..................Toby Stempel
Elizabeth Wilson..............Dorothy Van Doren
Allan Rich....................Robert Kintner
Mira Sorvino..................Sandra Goodwin
"It's not like we're hardened criminals here. We're in show business." 
Albert Freedman from Quiz Show.
When I first saw Quiz Show I was reminded of such films like All the 
President's Men or The Paper. Although this film does not have anything 
to do with journalism it does involve a man on a quest in search for the 
truth. But in all three cases the reason to bring out the truth is 
questioned. Who is really the one who will get hurt and is it worth it? 
This is the question that is raised, among others, in this highly 
entertaining film about the true story of the much publicized game show 
scandal in the late 1950's. But what makes Quiz Show a great film is 
that it examines a time in the history of America that has been seen as 
innocent but is actually the end of an era where intelligence was looked 
upon as an asset. Now people become famous as a result of their actions 
no matter how idiotic.
Quiz show is set in a time that I only knew about from reading about or 
watching other films set in that era. It came across not only as a 
pleasant time but also one where issues like racism did not exist and 
people respected one another. But we can see that very little has 
changed since then even though we would like to think that we have come 
a long way. Human nature is still the same with greed and materialism 
present in all of us.
The story begins with an obnoxious working class Jew named Herbert 
Stempel (John Turturro) who has made a name for himself with his 
remarkable winning streak on a popular game show called "Twenty-One". 
Through his success he has gained fame and fortune but the producers 
find that ratings are declining and they believe it is because of him. 
Due to the declining ratings, the producers, Dan Enright (David Paymer) 
and Albert Freedman (Hank Azaria), set out to find a new "money maker". 
They find it in Charles Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes) a handsome university 
professor from one of America's most prominent intellectual families. 
With the producers convinced that they have found their new "golden 
boy", they persuade Herbert Stempel to take a dive only because they put 
it in his mind that he has a future in television. In one of the films 
most dramatic and tense scenes, we begin to see the extreme pressure the 
contestants as well as the producers are under. (There is a great shot 
where you actually feel like your are in the small claustrophobic booth 
where each contestant is contained.) But Herbert soon realizes that 
television will never be a part of his future and thus jealous of the 
fame and wealth acquired by Van Doren, the same fame and wealth he once 
had, Herbert begins to loosen his tongue about the real truth behind 
"Twenty-One". This attracts the attention of a young lawyer from 
Washington named Dick Goodwin (Rob Morrow) who begins to investigate the 
rigged game show and eventually takes on television, a battle we find 
out, he can not possibly win.
Quiz Show has many strong points but a particular one are the strong 
performances that can all be described in one word, perfect. However, 
John Turturro and Ralph Fiennes are the particular standouts among this 
great cast. We view both characters as society did with Herbert Stempel 
(John Turturro) being the nerdy working-class Jew and Charles Van Doren 
(Ralph Fiennes) being the successful good-looking young intellectual. 
Superficially, both characters are the exact opposite of one another but 
in actuality they are both morally weak and strive to be something they 
aren't. But in reality they both chose the same path of living a lie, a 
lie no one thought was hurting anyone. Both need to be something greater 
than what they were and being contestants on "Twenty-One" gave them that 
chance. Yet, these characters are not evil which is exactly how the 
media presented them. The true villains in this film are the Networks 
and the sponsors, specifically NBC and Geritol. But both, though making 
huge profits from contestants like Charles Van Doren, were seen as 
victims all the time knowing exactly what was going on. There is an 
interesting cameo from Martin Scorcese who plays the president of 
Geritol who knows exactly how everything will turn out. He has the 
answers Dick Goodwin is looking for but he also knows he doesn't have to 
tell him anything because like he said "the networks will go on and so 
will Geritol". It is they who profited from people like Charles Van 
Doren but they were not the ones who were labeled criminals. They simply 
offered them fame and fortune and the contestants accepted.
Also, much of my admiration goes toward Robert Redford as well. Ever 
since Ordinary People he has time and time again proven himself one of 
the best directors working today. He, unlike many other directors, gives 
us something to watch that is entertaining as well as interesting. He 
brings us back to a time in America that most people had forgotten. The 
questions he raises throughout the course of the film keep us involved 
in the story as we try our hardest to answer them. Through his direction 
we get an extremely interesting look at society's values at the time and 
how much they have changed. In what could have turned out to be an 
embarrassment actually became the best film of 1994 as well as one of my 
favourites.
Most importantly though, "Quiz show" is not simply about rigged quiz 
shows it is about a time in history when America lost its innocence. It 
portrays a time in America when greed took over and knowledge was no 
longer something to strive for. Some people may even think that greed 
has always existed and will continue to exist. It is a very cynical view 
about our society and where it is heading but if modern society bares 
any proof there has been a dramatic change and whether that change is 
for the better or the worse is up for the viewer to decide.
http://expage.com/page/mikesfilmguide

Title
Review for Network (1976)
Faye Dunaway............Diana Christenson
William Holden..........Max Schumacher
Peter Finch..................Howard Beale
Robert Duvall..............Frank Hackett
Wesley Addy...............Nelson Chaney
Ned Beatty...................Arthur Jensen
"TV is showbiz" says Diana Christenson, a self-absorbed network
executive, played by Faye Dunaway, this is the underlying message seen
throughout "Network" one of the most intelligent satires I have ever
seen.  The story focuses on a news anchor man named Howard Beale
(Peter Finch) who we learn that for the past several years life has
not been going very well for him as his news program declines in
ratings for the fourth consecutive year, he is a struggling alcoholic
and that his wife has just left him.  These factors all add up to his
dismissal from UBC, the number four network behind NBC, CBS and ABC.
Losing all faith in life, Howard decides to announce to the world that
he is going to blow his brains out on his live telecast on his last
day.  This immediately causes and uproar from the public who are
offended yet at the same time interested as seen through the high
ratings which the show achieves after his announcement.  As a result,
Howard Beale gets a brand new television show named after him where he
gets to speak his mind on any topic he chooses.  This is where
"Network" really gets clever with its witty and intelligent script,
its energetic acting and hard-nosed directing all combining together
to set it in the same league as Dr.  Strangelove and Wag the Dog.
However, most of the credit should go to the script which was written
by Paddy Chayefsky who actually worked for a large network before
turning to screen writing.  He has captured the behaviour of the
network executives perfectly.  He knows that ratings are everything to
networks and if they don 't have them then they'll do anything to get
them even if it means exploiting a human being.  Throughout the course
of the film, I found myself was always interested in what Howard Beale
was about to say next because the dialogue was so fresh and inventive.
Chayefsky writes the dialogue in a way, that to a point, actually
becomes scary that people actually think and talk like this.  In fact,
if there was only one weakness in the entire movie it would be that in
some scenes the dialogue is so unbelievably cruel that we can't
believe that people actually talk like this.
Another strong point in "Network" would have to be the incredible
acting which can only be described in one word, perfect.  Each
performance, no matter how minor, is excellent with particular
standouts being Peter Finch and Faye Dunaway.  You can tell that the
actors really got involved in their characters to the point where
Peter Finch is no longer himself but actually Howard Beale and the
same goes with Faye Dunaway.  An excellent script is always an actor's
best friend and it really shows here.
If we can learn one thing from "Network" it is that television is
extremely powerful and is capable of shaping people's opinions and
views.  Howard Beale knew this and in his own words he was "Mad as
hell and wasn't going to take it anymore."  As a result, the power of
television destroyed him as a human being.  At the same time he was
propheting his ideas and opinions to the public he was using the very
tool he was against, television.  Whether or not he was crazy or
actually spiritual, Howard Beale did in his own words become a
"humanoid" because after years as a news anchor reporting about the
death and destruction we see every day in the world he was finally fed
up with it all and stopped caring.  I came away from "Network" with
the sense that if you have an opinion you should say it, if you don't
like something you should say so, don't let life go by without being
involved in the things that you care about.  Care is the key word I
came away with from this movie, Howard Beale stopped caring about
people and about himself and he became unhappy and deeply depressed as
a result of it.  You could say that this movie is depressing and
cynical in a sense that some people actually view the world as the one
portrayed in this movie where money is everything.  Whether you accept
this view or not, I'm sure most people will agree that is an important
film that has something to say about the world and where it is
heading.
