Authors
Kevin Cogliano
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for King of Comedy, The (1983)
Movies To Watch So You Won't Be So Stupid #1
Hi, kids. This will (hopefully) be the first in a series of essays - NOT 
reviews - of films that I call Hidden Treasures: movies that have slipped 
through the cracks of the mainstream and are currently languishing on the 
shelves of your local video retailer.
Keep in mind that these essays are 1) entirely my own opinion and 2) right.

De Niro and Scorscese are the Tag Team Champions of the filmic world. For 
my money, these two artists are the greatest director/actor collaborators 
in the history of the medium. But while Travis Bickle and Jake LaMotta 
have spawned a million undergraduate film essays, little has been said 
about their creepiest creation - Rupert Pupkin.
Rupert is one of the greatest losers of all time, a whining, desperate 
and pathetic man who carries only one insane conviction: that he has the 
makings to be a legendary stand-up comedian. De Niro plays him like the 
buffoon that he is, wandering the streets of New York in badly-tailored 
suits and a cheesy moustache. Pupkin physically resembles a cross between 
Sean Penn circa FALCON AND THE SNOWMAN and Pee-Wee Herman.
Like most obsessed people, Pupkin eschews the whole notion of paying your 
dues in the show-biz world. He wants to start at the top. He wants a shot 
at the Tonight Show.
Of course, it's not REALLY the Tonight Show, but it might as well be. The 
alternate-reality Carson show in this movie is hosted by Jerry Lewis - a 
television personality so oily that you expect him to slide off the 
screen leaving only a thin film of grease behind.
Lewis is so shockingly brilliant in this film that it continues to amaze 
me. God knows I can't stand Jerry Lewis. His success as a popular 
comedian is one of the Great Mysteries Of The Universe, like the fact 
that, against all odds, Dennis Hopper isn't dead yet. Lewis is so perfect 
as the slimeball T.V. star that you are forced to wonder if he's actually 
acting at all. Perhaps he really IS a slimeball.
Rounding out this unholy trinity is Sandra Bernhard, who De Niro enlists 
to help with the kidnapping of Lewis. She plays a rich Jewish princess 
who is madly in love with Lewis, which means she's obviously a few bricks 
short of an outhouse. The best comic scene in the film is between her and 
Lewis when she tries to seduce him as he's tied to a chair with duct 
tape, utterly immobile. "Let's do it right here on the table, Jer," she 
breathes, and Lewis just stares, transfixed by terror.
Scorscese's direction in KING OF COMEDY is miles away from the 
baroqueness of CAPE FEAR and CASINO. His camera is a detached and 
impartial recorder of this New York madness. Scorscese has a reputation 
for being over-the-top visually, but he proves in KING that he can just 
as easily be restrained and subdued if the story demands it.
Along with AFTER HOURS, KING is my favourite Scorscese movie. There's not 
a wasted frame or missed comic moment - but, like all great comedy, 
there's a real sense of menace and incipent danger beneath the 
proceedings. KING OF COMEDY is a movie where you laugh because you're too 
nervous to do anything else.
