Authors
David Yang
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Trzy kolory: Bialy (1994)
     WHITE, or TROIS COULEURS: BLANC, is the second film in Krzysztof
Kieslowski's trilogy, though it is an independent story which happens
to be taking place at the same time.  (The first, BLUE, not to be
confused with the Derek Jarman film, came out last year, and RED has
already been shown at the Cannes Film Festival and is due in the US
around December.)  Off the top, I should say that WHITE is quite
different from BLUE, and liking one may have little to do with liking
the other, though I personally enjoyed both.  So even if you thought
BLUE was pretentious tripe, you shouldn't necessarily dismiss WHITE.
     WHITE is ostensibly a black comedy about Karol Karol, a Polish
hairdresser (Zamachowski) who has been divorced (because of
post-wedding impotence) and left penniless and wanted (by the police)
by Dominique (Delpy), his French wife.  The plot revolves around his
return to Poland and his efforts to revive his fortunes there and win
her back.  This is not simple, as even the trip back is complicated
(and funny), but the new Poland provides opportunities for the
entrepreneurial.  As the characters note several times, "you can now
buy anything"--though the film makes you feel ambivalent about the
transition.  Along the way, He gets helped by Mikolaj (Gajos), a
bridge-playing Pole whom he meets in Paris and helps him return to
Poland, and his brother Jurek (Stuhr).
     Zamachowski does a good job of contrasting his helpless self in
France and his gradually more confident self in Poland.  Delpy does not
have much screen time, but there's a nice contrast between her blushing
bride look in a flashback and her colder current self.  I found Gajos
quite appealing as the sad-eyed Mikolaj.  The script and plot are
clever, witty and observant, humor mixed with pathos--the scenes of the
return to Poland and the underground tunnel meeting stand out.  The
pacing tends to the slow side, especially at the beginning.  The music
is pleasant, light and playful.  The cinematography is pretty
straightforward, without too much flash.
     As BLUE was about liberty, WHITE is about equality, which shows up
in both the treatment of Karol's relationship with Dominique and the
idea of equality of economic opportunity in Poland.  The tone is quite
different from BLUE, but I felt that seeing WHITE helped me appreciate
BLUE more.  In particular, WHITE's depiction of post-Berlin Wall Poland
helped me see a political side of BLUE that I hadn't noticed before.
     There is some sex (though no nudity) and some violence.  WHITE
being a black comedy, there's also a nasty touch to some of the humor
and plot.
     I'd recommend this film for those who enjoy black comedy and
political satire--I think people who liked DELICATESSEN would like
WHITE, for example, though I'm not sure about those who liked HEATHERS
or HAROLD AND MAUDE (I liked all three).  For others, it might be worth
a video rental--in particular, it seems like it will be nice to see all
three films in the trilogy within a couple days of each other.
