Authors
Jeff Inman
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Indian Runner, The (1991)
Written and Directed by Sean Penn
Starring: David Morse, Viggo Mortensen, Valeria Golino, Patricia Arquette,
          Jordan Rhodes, Charles Bronson, Dennis Hopper.
     An Indian runner was more than a courier.  He *became* the message
he was carrying.  What danger is a bear, to a message?
     I used to think Sean Penn was an immature, arrogant, photographer-
punching, Madonna-marrying, loudmouth.  But all that has changed now.
The guy has grown up.  And that's not all.  It seems that Sean Penn has
talents both as a writer and a director, if this film is any indication.
     One might imagine a movie with plenty of ruthless rage and showy
machismo, given Penn in charge of Bronson and and Hopper.  But, no.
This film is about a real struggle, and the victories and defeats are
not simple.  Penn lets the story unfold at a pace dictated by the lives
of the characters, without unnecessary rush or flash.  The focus of the
story is two brothers.  David Morse is the brother who has grown up in
the small midwestern town in which they were raised, tending a failing
farm and finally becoming a police officer.  Viggo Mortensen is the wild
brother, whose wild behavior seems to be a reaction to some ancient pain
that he can't name, much less resolve.
     The film picks the story up on the day when Mortensen returns from
Vietnam, and Morse coincidentally encounters an armed youth fleeing for
the state line.  It becomes clear that some kind of conflict threatens
the link that the brothers once shared.  The film is unobtrusive,
simple, direct, plain, and sincere.  It isn't exactly perfect, but its
sincerity is well invested in the struggle of the two brothers to
identify the sickness before it destroys them.  Life seems to move
forward a little faster than they can get a handle on their problems.
     This is a good film without big budget sets, or big name stars
pushed into your face.  In fact, I'm reviewing it because I suspect that
it may not get much marketing.  There were perhaps 10 others at the
showing I saw.  I thought the structure was clean and not
oversimplified, though there are a few free-form sections which also
work very well.  The obligatory 1960s music seemed a little cliche, but
what are you going to do--this movie *does* take place in the 1960s
after all.  In my opinion, it is worth full-price admission.

Title
Review for Hong faan kui (1995)
Okay, this isn't really a review of RUMBLE IN THE BRONX.  I mean, it's
about that, but I'm more interested in reflecting for a moment on what
Jackie Chan has done to the concept of "stunts".
RUMBLE IN THE BRONX is the latest from the world's most popular action
movie star.  And he deserves to be the most popular.  Not only is he a
phenomenal gymnast and athlete, he also seems to be a nice guy, and
his movies (the two I've seen) combine incredible stunts with a
self-deprecating type of ironic humor that gives them depth.
Okay, that was my review.  Go see the movie, you'll be glad you did.
And, while you're watching it, think about this: isn't it so much
better to know that the stunts you're seeing are done by a guy who is
really doing them?  For me, it really changes the meaning of the
action to know that what is shown on film is (in some way) something
that Jackie Chan is actually doing.  That they didn't cut to a guy in
a studio strapped onto the top of a hovercraft as it simulates
careening into a bus.  (I presume they must have used SOME studio
techniques, this being a technological art, after all.  My point is
that this is a revitalizing retake on the meaning of action on film.)
I'm reminded of Buster Keaton, who seems to me to have been a
predecessor of Jackie Chan's.  I think some professional reviewer
proposed this connection.  But I would've thought of it anyway.  I
just saw THE GENERAL a few weeks ago, and it was pointed out that one
particular scene (in which a steam locomotive driven by Keaton rumbles
past a watering tower which is gushing water, and it pours over Keaton
as he zooms past in his beloved engine, catching him by surprise,
drenching him completely ... he does the stone-faced blink of
astonishment ... looks up into the sunny sky ... holds his hand out as
though testing for rain) -- in that scene, Keaton is presumed to have
broken his neck.  Went through years of migraines, etc, etc.  One day
a doctor says to him (and of course this is verging on apocrypha as
far as my retelling of it goes) says: I think the problem is ya got ya
a fractured vertebra there.  And Buster knew that it had been that
scene that had done it.
The point is that there is a rare integrity and courage shown by these
bold physical actors who do their own stunts on film.  (Facade of a
building falls over Keaton, who happens to be standing exactly in the
place where a window in the wall makes a hole for him.)
That scene in GOLDENEYE with the motorcycle and the airplane -- you
know what I'm talking about -- that was way cool.  Way.  But it was
kind of marred by the obvious studio sequence towards the culmination
of the stunt.  Am I saying Pierce Brosnan should really ride a bike
off of a -- that he should really DO that stunt?  Well.  It'd sure
impress the hell out of me.  But, no.  Anyhow, the precursor to that
stunt, which occurs in the movie POINT BREAK (excellent action movie,
btw, I'll review it for ya some time) was a lot more convincing.
The thing is that a Jackie Chan stunt can be less visually dramatic
than something from a studio-intensive James Bond movie, and yet can
end up being more impressive.  It's because you don't have separate
camera angles showing (1) Chan jumping from the top of a building, and
(2) landing on a balcony across the way, making you think of stunt men
leaping into an airbag in the first half, and leaping off a platform
on the second take.  The guy actually does it.
[NOTE: You can't really jump through a window holding onto a firehose,
free fall for 50 feet while the hose comes taught, and swing back in
through another window, three stories down.  You can't even do it for
a window one story down.  Trust me.]
Don't take any of this as a disparagement of stunt men (and women).  I
think they're the real heros of most action movies, and I often try to
pick out the reality that the stuntmen (stuntpersons) are dealing
with, which must certainly be extremely intense, in many cases.  I'm
just saying that it is really refreshing to see someone making movies
in which a single human being shows off his truly amazing athletic
talents.  One real Jackie Chan stunt is worth a hundred guys falling
from heights with perfect rotation so to land unharmed on an
off-camera air bag.
What we're seeing, for the first time in a long time, is what real
physicality looks like.  How bodies actually move.  In a way, they
look kind of awkward, compared with the smooth motions of synthetic
action.  But that makes them MORE believable, strangely enough.  When
you jump from mast to mast, across some sailboats, tipping the last
one down to land on a bridge abutment, you're probably not going to
look too graceful.  Doing it at all is the feat.  Chan brings the
human body back to action movies, where it was supposed to be all
along.
Check out the clips at the end, which show some of the stunts that
went awry, (and sometimes with serious consequences).

Title
Review for Desperado (1995)
     Here's the deal with reviewers today.  They're all still ticked
off about WATERWORLD and how it didn't really turn out to be as bad as
they were hoping.  But for all those millions they wanted more.
Naturally!  Hey!  Where's my sensurround-character-development-slackjaw-
scintillating-plotline?  But, it was an okay movie.  At least the
Kostner character didn't fawn all over the babe, ya know what I'm
saying?
     So, now they're still mad.  They're out for blood.  And here comes
DESPERADO, made, quite obviously, by that guy who made El MARIACHI for
a measly seven thousand bucks.  Let's see if he's got The Hollywood
Disease.  Well, sure enough, all the doctors are telling you that the
patient has a bad case.  Oh, they chortled along for the beginning
part, but soon as they finished their popcorn, whaddaya know?  "This
movie has lost all its steam!" The director got caught in the "typical"
problem of action pictures.  All dressed up and nowhere to go.
     This movie is full of the kind of life that Hollywood has been
needing for years.  Violent?  Yeah, it's violent.  So?  So, it's
violent.  Is the violence "realistic"?  Get outta my face with your
"realistic"!  No.  Not exactly.  But guns run out of ammo at
inopportune moments, and the good guy, or bad guy, whatever the hell he
is ... he kicks some butt and has a good time doing it, and I had a
good time watching.  I'll wager that real live guys don't comb back
their ponytails just 30 minutes after having knives inserted into their
shoulder muscles.  But who asked ya?  And the babe is lovely.  Or did I
say that already?  She's a winner.  I'd like to thank her, sometime.
     So, we got your basic plot elements: guns (we're talking twin
Ruger .45s, MAC-10s, M-16s, etc, and of course, the eminently
respectable Desert Eagle .44), gorgeous women, plenty of bad guys, and
this special new element that you weren't expecting: humor.  No
fooling.  I know you're probably imagining the typical lame Hollywood
excuse for a joke where the smoke clears and the Good Guy mouths some
ironic one-liner that you've already heard ten times.  But that ain't
it.  I better not describe it.  Trust me.  There's humor here.
     Is it an all-time classic like THE SEVEN SAMURAI?  No.  Okay?  It
is not a 10, like THE SEVEN SAMURAI.  But only 3 or 4 movies have ever
been made that could compare with THE SEVEN SAMURAI, so get away from
me with your little numbering system.  It isn't a 10.  Maybe 7.5.  But
I run a tough scale.  I don't go giving out 10's every day.  Not even
9's.  You ask: what about LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE?  6.5!  Ha!  So, now
you're asking, okay wise-guy, I suppose you loved TERMINATOR.  Well,
okay.  Yeah.  TERMINATOR's an 8.  We could go on like this, but if you
aren't convinced to go see DESPERADO yet, then forget it.  And if you
are convinced, then okay.  No need to argue.  They should make more
movies with this kind of quirkyness, originality, and style.

Title
Review for Slacker (1991)
     SUMMARY:  SLACKER is a new, professional-looking, low-budget
     film in which the camera rides piggyback, from character to
     character, across the fringes of Austin, Texas.  We take brief
     snapshots of character and then move on, like some intelligent
     interstellar virus, transmitted through air, gathering
     information on humanity before the big invasion.  The people we
     meet are mostly going nowhere, but they are interestingly human.
     If you've seen Juzo Itami's TAMPOPO, you must remember the
startling but effective detours, in which the camera suddenly follows a
seemingly irrelevant background character, veering off into a brief
tangential story.  These deviations are a little confusing at first, but
one soon appreciates the suggestion that there are many other stories
lying just to the left or right of the one Itami is concerned with.  He
seems to be casting his eye around, noticing how deeply interconnected
things are, even if individuals remain unaware of much of the larger
pattern.
     New director Richard Linklater carries the tangential-story
technique to its logical conclusion in SLACKER.  There is no central
story to return to.  His "story" is just a thread in the vast
interconnected web of interactions among friends and strangers in the
outskirts of Austin, Texas.  Have you ever been sitting on the train, or
been walking on the street and thought about how the people around you
are all involved in their own movies for which *you* are one of the
"extras"?  Here are five strangers walking past each other, all at
(roughly) the same place and time, but each moving off into a different
story.  Which one shall we follow?
     In SLACKER, we are constantly making this decision.  We follow an
unending chain of interactions; a young woman wearing a fishbone T-shirt
throws a coin into the open guitar-case of a street musician (whom we've
just been following).  She continues down the street into a cafe.
Inside we overhear a conversation and the camera discovers the people
involved.  [paraphrasing] "What happened to Mark, anyhow?  Anybody seen
him recently?"  "Hmmm, he just hasn't been around."  We listen for a
while and then follow one of the guys who leaves.  As he walks, a
stranger from the cafe catches up with him.  The stranger says,
[paraphrasing, again] "I heard one of your friends is missing", and
proceeds to provide a cogent, if whacked, story of how the USA and
Soviet Union have been colonizing the moon and Mars since 1952, funded
through the Medellin cartel.  "I just hope your friend isn't ... well,
nevermind."  We ride piggyback from character to character, following
them to their houses, in their cars, to the bars, cafes and junkyards.
Instead of following one story, we ride through a cross-section of
humanity, wonderfully crazed, creative, and mostly-unemployed humanity.
     The production values are not up to Itami's standard (anyhow,
Linklater is following his own genius), but at $23,000 this movie is a
f*cking miracle.  It is simple and straight, but looks surprisingly
professional.  I noticed only one goof (and I wasn't wearing blinders),
in the next-to-last scene, in which a reflection of the cameraperson can
be seen in the back window of a car.  I would think, I would strongly
hope, that repeated viewings might turn up glimpses of characters from
earlier scenes in the background of later scenes, rather than goofs.
     What to say about the title?  Before seeing the movie, I had gotten
various indications that the title is a label for a type of person who
is, well, not too ambitious.  Most of the characters are drifting,
marginally employed dreamers in their mid-twenties, but they've got
character and the movie doesn't laugh at them.  We've seen enough
predictable middle-americans, or alienated loners, in the movies.  It's
about time we got a chance to see the unrecognized-but-unrepentant,
day-to-day weirdness that is usually filtered out or wrapped in
cellophane by the commercial media.  These are people, as Linklater
says, with "... an Active mind and too much time.  You've worked your
life out to not have to make payments on a car ... and you don't need as
much money to get by, so it equals active mind, time, and no outlets.
... Anything can happen -- revolution, terrorism, subversion."  [Boston
Phoenix, 10-4-91]
     CAST:  The credits roll by too damned quickly.  I am not usually a
credit-hound, but after this film, I wanted a chance to read each of the
roles (or monikers describing people we've met in the movie), like "Guy
who should've stayed at the bus station", (Linklater himself) or
"Madonna PAP smear salesperson."  Presumably, the actors are friends,
and friends-of-friends of Linklater, as he couldn't have afforded to pay
actors much, given his budget.  Thus, it is all the more incredible that
he gets some authenticity in just about every character.
     POTENTIAL TO OFFEND:  Gimme a break.  Some language.  Violence
described, advocated, etc, but not exactly shown.  No nudity.  A great
pick-up scene in which not a word is spoken.
     RECOMMENDATION:  If you need Plot, Moral, and/or Special Effects,
this is not your film.  However, if you (like me) are constantly looking
for new vision and feeling in film, then this is a movie that may stay
with you for a long time.  My rating: 7.5/10.
