Authors
John Bauer
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Hamlet (1990)
[Note:  After claiming otherwise, my appetite was indeed whetted by Kenneth
Branagh's HAMLET to search out other attempts to translate Shakespeare to
film in hopes of finding a better mousetrap.  As it happens, it didn't take
long.]
Is there a more romantic director than Franco Zeffirelli?  Known mainly to
American audiences as the man behind 1968's ROMEO AND JULIET (required
viewing for many high schoolers, and as much as most ever learn of
Shakespeare), he is also a favorite at the Metropolitan Opera, where his
achingly beautiful designs further the already lush emotion of many a Puccini
aria.  Last year he gave us his beautifully realized version of JANE EYRE,
one of the twin peaks (with WUTHERING HEIGHTS) of romantic literature.
It might seem peculiar, then, that Zeffirelli ever had an interest in
translating HAMLET for the screen.  At first blush, HAMLET is far removed
from romance.  The hero, though a prince, is depressed, conflicted and
confused.  The ostensible love interest gets little screen time, and her
scenes with her prince are usually as an object of mockery.  The plot is full
of political intrigue and the players are as cursed as the House of Atreus.
It is Zeffirelli's genius, however, that he is able to expose the romantic
core of HAMLET and give the sometimes dry tale an emotional embrace.  In this
Italian master's hands, romance is everywhere -- in a son's worship of his
father, in the bonds of deepest friendship, in the private thoughts of young
lovers, even in the mystery of castles by the sea.  After all, the story
hinges on a ghost, and what could be more romantic than that?
What seemed like a cheap way to sell tickets at the time turned out to be one
of the most romantic gestures of all, namely, hiring then-reigning Hollywood
hunk Mel Gibson to play the lead.  Who could believe that the man who made
his mark playing Mad Max and a "lethal weapon" (in the series of the same
name) would have the skill to succeed in the most famous role in the English
language?  Franco Zeffirelli, that's who.  And it is apparent in every frame
that his instinct was right on the money.
What Gibson brings to the role is a naturalness and ease which makes the
whole story meaningful, not to mention comprehensible.  His line readings
sound spontaneous rather than rehearsed.  His movements and gestures
(excepting his sometimes too active eyes) are totally in keeping with the
character.  This is a Hamlet whose pain we feel, whose struggle we empathize
with, and whose death we mourn as sincerely as Horatio at film's end.
Glenn Close, the other big name in the production, also does well by the
script and satisfies as Hamlet's mother, Gertrude -- though I must confess
I'm still trying to understand the character as written.  (Zeffirelli's
incestuous interpretation of Hamlet's relationship with his mother doesn't
help.)  Alan Bates makes a believably evil Claudius without resorting to the
mannerisms of a Hollywood heavy.  By and large the rest of the cast performs
admirably and comfortably.
Of special note are the cinematography by David Watkin and the score by Ennio
Morricone.  Both support the realistic mood marvelously (as do the sets and
costumes), without any overstated effects that declare "this is important;
this is Shakespeare!"  I particularly appreciate that the words are often
spoken without any music at all:  the melody of a wonderfully wrought phrase
is given its due.
Perhaps it is difficult to call edited Shakespeare "definitive."  And there
are certainly quite a few other filmed versions of HAMLET that I have not
seen.  But if you've ever felt the urge to overcome your fear of the Bard,
this HAMLET is an excellent place to start.

Title
Review for Secrets & Lies (1996)
Not since attending an Ingmar Bergman retrospective a few years ago
have I seen a film as uncompromising in its portrayal of emotional
truth as SECRETS & LIES.  Like Bergman, director Mike Leigh is
interested in probing his characters' inner depths through
hypernaturally blunt confrontations.  Also like Bergman, Leigh engages
in frequent closeups of his characters' ravished and wracked faces.
And the prominent mournfulness of a cello on the soundtrack recalls
Bergman's own use of a Bach cello suite in an earlier film.  All that
is missing is a discussion of God.
Which is not to say that SECRETS & LIES is nothing more than an homage
to the Swedish master.  In fact, it is quite possible Leigh had no such
intentions in mind.  Nonetheless, what we get is so far removed from
the average moviegoing experience -- even from the reason we go to the
movies in the first place -- that it takes some effort to adjust to the
film's rhythms.  Once the adjustment is made, however, there are great
rewards.
One such is the chance to see life on the screen as it really is.
Though Leigh may have adopted some of Bergman's stylistic touches, most
obviously in an early scene of terse cross-cutting during a married
couple's strained conversation, as well as in that somewhat obtrusive
score, the overall feeling of the film is that it eschews any "style"
at all.  Whereas Bergman uses artifice as a tool to expose reality,
Leigh makes the camera a mere observer, almost as in a PBS
documentary.
The effect of this is to focus all of your attention on the actors.  It
is a tribute to everyone involved that, despite such scrutiny, only
infrequently are we aware that anyone *is* acting.  Much has been made
of Brenda Blethyn's performance, and rightly so, but it is only when
you remind yourself that you are watching a fiction that you realize
how good she is.
There are a few missteps.  For one, except for one scene (tragicomic,
as it happens), there is scant humor in the film.  This leads to a
certain monotonous tone throughout.  And occasionally (as with Bergman)
the bluntness of the situations can seem forced.  For all that, this
longish film manages to keep hold of your attention.
It is unfortunate that the audience for SECRETS & LIES will most likely
be limited to an intellectual elite, for there is nothing inherently
intellectual about this film.  In fact, it might easily resonate more
strongly for millions of working class filmgoers who will likely never
see it.  There is even a sweet but significant irony in the film's
unspoken take on race relations, something an American audience at
least would do well to observe.
Nonetheless, SECRETS & LIES is not for the faint of heart.  Though
there is nothing physically horrific to make one squeamish, the
exploration of common human frailty can be so raw and unsparing that it
is tempting to turn from the screen.  Needless to say, it is also very
depressing at times.  But for many of us, of course, so is life.  And
though the film is too honest to tack on a phony happy ending, that
same honesty allows it to admit that things can also get better.
April 25, 1997  

Title
Review for Hamlet (1996)
After many years of watching movies I should have seen quite a few
adaptations of Shakespeare by this time, but the fact of the matter is that
those few I have seen (e.g., Zeffirelli's THE TAMING OF THE SHREW, Olivier's
HENRY V) irritate as much as they impress.  It's true that Shakespeare's work
is something I more often admire than enjoy.  Who is not awed by the
incredible beauty and poetry of his language?  Yet the stories themselves can
seem long-winded and overly complex.
Which is not to say that no play of Will's can succeed today.  I have been
fortunate to have seen several stunning theatrical productions of Shakespeare
that have managed to breathe incredible life into English literature's most
sacred texts.  I have even witnessed such success onscreen in Kenneth
Branagh's MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING.  But if all of the components are not
perfectly in tune, I fear I find the Bard tedious.
Branagh is making something of a career out of filming Shakespeare, this
HAMLET being his third attempt.  He is to be admired not only for trying to
bring such classics to modern audiences, but also for not pandering to same
in the process.  This is not WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO + JULIET, complete
with MTV enhancements of sound and vision.  Rather, in a rare show of faith
in the material, we are presented with Shakespeare's original text, complete
and unabridged.
While the effort may be noble, however, the result is somewhat less so.  As
in MUCH ADO, the cast is a mix of British and American actors.  In fact,
HAMLET's large ensemble is packed with recognizable faces, so much so that it
reminded me a bit of old-fashioned Hollywood epics.  Even Charlton Heston, an
icon of those epics, makes an appearance -- and a damn good one it is, though
not all the familiars fare so well.
But the most profound fault in this version of HAMLET lies not in the use of
stars, but in Branagh himself.  Far from striking me as troubled, indecisive,
or bordering on madness, Branagh's Prince seems more like a highly composed
actor displaying his range.  His dashing blond coif and smashing black attire
only emphasize the point.  That he is also a highly talented actor is not in
doubt; some of his scenes are quite moving, including the famous soliloquy.
 But without a Hamlet who can give some cohesion to the sprawling story, the
tale loses its meaning.
It does not help that for all the preserved dialogue, much of it is spoken to
an annoying and inappropriate underscore.  I'd prefer to let the words speak
for themselves.  Likewise the camera and editing are rather hyperactive,
particularly in the first half -- seemingly a desperate concession that a
four-hour movie may not hold our interest after all.  (Although the idea of
showing an edited version for Peoria strikes me as ludicrous, I am now
curious as to how it turned out.)  And though the indoor scenes in the
central court are reasonably well lit, much of the outdoor cinematography is
washed out and lacking in mystery.  At one point, the appearance of the Ghost
almost recalls the tacky artistry of ED WOOD(!).
I wish I could say better of this film.  I *want* to like Shakespeare.  And I
want Branagh to keep trying to show me why Will is so great.  Alas, this
HAMLET has not made me all that eager to see more.

Title
Review for Hamlet (1948)
Undoubtedly among the most famous film adaptations of Shakespeare -- and the
only one to win a Best Picture Oscar -- Laurence Olivier's black-and-white
HAMLET of 1948 would seem to be one for the ages.  And in many ways it is.
 Any chance to see as legendary an actor as Olivier in an important dramatic
role is to be cherished as a piece of theatrical history.  It is likewise of
interest to view any interpretation of a classic work through the eyes of a
different time and culture.  Of course, time is not always kind.
Opening shots of swirling fog over an ancient castle set the mood:  this
HAMLET is of a tradition almost forgotten in our post-modern need to outfit
pre-modern texts in more contemporary trappings.  The score by William Walton
rises portentously.  And the omniscient director intones that we are about to
see the story of "a man who could not make up his mind."
In one of the unintentional ironies of this production, the famous soliloquy
which delineates the protagonist's ambivalence so clearly and eloquently is
also one of the most overwrought and ineffective scenes in the film.  When
Hamlet counsels the Players on the proper reading of their lines, he warns
them not to offend nature with declamation that is unnatural.  Would that
this film always heeded that advice.  There are moments when the conventions
of the cinema of its time threaten to overtake the story:  revelatory plot
points accompanied by loud musical flourishes and tight closeups of tortured,
scandalized faces.
Fortunately these moments are few.  The awkward soliloquy, for example, is
preceded by a wonderful scene between Hamlet and Ophelia and followed by a
well-turned entrance for the Players.  It is the preponderance of the good
over the occasional misfire that keeps the overall quality of the production
high.
Olivier's performance, while sometimes stagebound, has an appropriately
brooding intensity that draws you in (though it does seem a bit at war with
his costume:  he's been done up to look like a pixie).  The rest of the cast
is uniformly good, Basil Sydney's Claudius being unusually strong.  He
emerges as a more complex mixture of villainy and remorse than is commonly
seen.  Standouts in minor roles include Stanley Holloway as the wryly
enigmatic Gravedigger and Peter Cushing's amusingly obsequious Osric.  Jean
Simmons is not as effective an Ophelia as some of her cinematic followers
(e.g., Kate Winslet), but like the rest of the troupe, she does well enough.
In the end, what makes this HAMLET noteworthy is its cumulative strength.
 Whatever awkward moments there are mostly occur early on, so the tale is
played out with minimal distraction.  And despite some staginess in the film,
Olivier must be credited with making Shakespeare come alive on the screen to
the point where you forget you're watching "art" and simply become absorbed
in the story.  When Hamlet is finally carried out of the castle, you feel
like you've witnessed something momentous.

Title
Review for English Patient, The (1996)
Accepting his Oscar as producer of this year's Best Picture winner, Saul
Zaentz remarked that his cup runneth over.  One could almost say the same
about his much-prized film.  Rarely is the screen so overflowing with potent
imagery, symbolism, ideas and metaphors, complex and literate storytelling,
all possessed of an intelligence that invites -- even demands -- constant
scrutiny, an acuity of perception and observation that must somehow yield the
truth.  In short, the antithesis of all things Hollywood.  Yet this surfeit
of signals is made to serve a rather pale and thinly realized love story
whose emotional impact is as dry as a desert wind.
Ralph Fiennes is the title character, an amnesiac burn victim whose gradual
return to memory, and particularly the memory of love, is the ostensible
focus of the film.  But despite the use of numerous flashbacks to help put
the pieces of this personal puzzle together, we never learn enough about the
man to feel much empathy for him.  His emotional life before the story begins
is an essential clue that remains withheld.  The same can easily be said for
every other character in the film, of which there are too many.
Juliette Binoche's nurse comes as close as this film gets to an emotional
heart.  At least we learn early on that she is scarred by the deaths of those
close to her, and so we understand why she is eager to escape the company of
her comrades in order to seek refuge in the convalescence of a mysterious,
disfigured, dying stranger.  Even this information is imparted so quickly and
in such cursory fashion, however, that it verges on the comical.
With so many characters enjoying so little screen time, the film's 160
minutes can be taxing.  Yet there is something so captivating about the
sensibility behind the camera that I couldn't help but feel that greatness
was in the air.  Hints of it were everywhere -- in a man who hates ownership
but wants desperately to possess his lover; in ancient cave paintings of
swimmers copied casually by a modern-day swimmer in the Sahara; in the way
the shifting sands of time obliterate everything more completely than a world
war.  There is enough latent meaning to supply college film students with
paper topics for years.  But ultimately the emotional truths writer-director
Anthony Minghella was grasping for were never revealed.
In the end, I was left with the impression that I had witnessed quite an
oxymoron:  a haunting bore.  Bore is perhaps too strong a word.  But after
drinking in the rich production values, the cup remains only slightly over
half-full.
April 22, 1997 

Title
Review for Hercules (1997)
I've been spoiled by THE LION KING.  With that film, Disney proved that they
could make an animated feature that was as multi-layered as any film --
witty, moving, at times breathtaking to look at, and with a song score that
at its best enhanced the emotional mood.  ...Oh yeah, and kids liked it, too.
 No wonder it's the most popular film in the studio's history.  It also set a
standard that more and more seems unlikely to be matched.  For as much as I
appreciated the special merits and envelope-pushing spirit of POCAHONTAS and
THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, neither came anywhere near the same level of
achievement -- in part because the studio lost sight of its target audience
of children in its quest for LION-sized grosses.
Perhaps realizing that their reach was exceeding their grasp, Disney has
crafted their latest opus, HERCULES, with more modest goals in mind.  Rather
than try to turn an adult literary classic like HUNCHBACK into kiddie fare,
its subject is one children have been enthralled with for generations.
 Instead of using revisionist history to teach lessons in respect for other
cultures and the environment, as in POCAHONTAS, the moral of HERCULES is a
more straightforward (though still timely) message about the true nature of
heroism.  By retrenching from the outer reaches of ambition and maintaining a
fairly light-hearted tone throughout, however, this latest contender for a
place in every child's video collection feels a tad too safe.
The suspicion that HERCULES may not be a giant-killer among movies is planted
early on.  The opening 15 minutes or so are the most uninvolving of any
Disney animated film in recent memory.  After a brief but mildly amusing
setup by the 5-woman Greek chorus-cum-girl group, the scene shifts to
Olympus, where Zeus is showing off his newborn son.  What might have been an
amusing look at life among the gods turns out to be a tedious exercise in
story exposition.  This is more akin to how Disney's imitators behave, those
that haven't quite figured out that animated success lies less in how the
film is drawn than in how the tale is told.  It is disconcerting to see the
standard-bearer doing this.  Maybe they should've watched the opening of THE
LION KING a few times for inspiration.
Things improve as Herc becomes a teen, but are derailed again as he sings a
trite song about finding his place in the world.  Didn't Belle in BEAUTY AND
THE BEAST sing one of those?  Doesn't every Disney protagonist feel alone in
the world?  How about a song about being a hero instead?  (Doesn't Hercules
have any idols?)  Once Hercules reaches heroic proportions (with the only
intermittently amusing help of Phil, a satyr voiced by Danny DeVito), the
film finally gets in gear, though it takes another uninspired transition
("Let's go to Thebes.") to get us there.
As Hercules begins in earnest to prove himself by battling the forces of
Hades, the film assumes a higher level of interest more customary for Disney.
 The songs are fresher (including a funny if all-too-brief take on fame by
the chorus), the animation more intriguing (as when the screen fills with the
menace of a multi-headed monster), the humor more pointed (sometimes
literally).  And we are introduced to a Disney female like no other, the
sarcastic and jaded Meg, marvelously voiced by Susan Egan.  Though others may
prefer the devilish work of James Woods as Hades, for my money the tough but
vulnerable Meg steals the show.
By the time the final credits roll, HERCULES has managed to overcome its
plodding beginning and occasional lapses to make you feel warm all over.
 Disney's admirable record for maintaining a level of quality that is never
less than good is upheld.  But unlike THE LION KING, it's easy to spot ways
in which this film could have been a whole lot better.  ...Oh yeah, the
kids'll like it.

Title
Review for Sling Blade (1996)
Sometimes it is difficult to *not* resist the hype surrounding a movie.  We
are so saturated with media pronouncements of greatness that it seems nothing
could ever fulfill our heightened expectations.  So it is with pleasure that
I can say that the subtle charms of SLING BLADE were able to overcome the
burden of lavish praise.
For such a low-key film, this is no mean feat.  There are no sumptuous
landscapes to sweep you away, no grand acting gestures to amuse and
entertain, not really much in the way of high drama to rivet your attention.
 What we get instead is a small tale with big implications, just as a brief
shot of a man on a railroad bridge imparts nothing directly but conveys much
through the image.
The reason the story carries so much weight lies mainly in the performance of
writer-director Billy Bob Thornton.  Like a less fantastical Forrest Gump,
his character Karl Childers is earnest but somewhat dim.  Unlike the former's
humorous intersections with American history, however, Karl's earnestness
leads him to real trouble.  And when Karl finally concludes near the end of
the film that in his little piece of Arkansas "the world is too large," we
readily sympathize.
The heart of the film is about Karl's relationship with a fatherless boy,
well-played by Lucas Black.  But its soul is about Karl's struggle for
redemption and a place in the world.  Karl counts among his few possessions a
Bible which he claims to have read, though he doesn't understand much of it.
 On the surface, as another character suggests, that makes sense:  the Bible
is incomprehensible to most of us.  But for Karl the things we most readily
accept -- such as the sinfulness of murder -- assume a complexity that forces
him into tragic paradoxes.  In part this is because he is incapable of
understanding the complications of ordinary life that we take for granted;
but he is also a victim of our need for order, for justice in black and
white.
There are some holes in the script, the biggest being the all-too-easy
acceptance of Karl by the small town society he encounters.  I would think
that his crimes would make him infamous and something of a bogeyman around
town; rather, he is practically greeted with open arms wherever he goes.
 There are other, lesser tugs at credibility as well.
But in the end these do not matter.  The essentials of the story are strong
enough to hold our attention and meaningful enough to penetrate our
consciousness.  In crafting a small-town morality play that speaks to us all,
Billy Bob Thornton has made his world large indeed.

Title
Review for Liar Liar (1997)
It feels a tad awkward giving a Jim Carrey movie a higher rating than a
near-universally praised epic like THE ENGLISH PATIENT.  Antithesis
indeed!  I don't think I even like Jim Carrey; other than BATMAN
FOREVER (hardly representative), I have studiously avoided his films.
(I've seen previews.) But there it is.  And somehow it must be dealt
with.
Let's start with the premise:  a stereotypically conniving lawyer must
tell the truth for 24 hours.  This "high concept" actually has the
makings of a wonderfully clever, witty examination of the role of truth
in our lives and society.  LIAR LIAR isn't it.  So does its appeal lie
in the emotional underpinnings of a career-obsessed father confronting
his sordid, vapid life and effecting real change?  Only if you think
JERRY MAGUIRE was a groundbreaking film.
Then why did I enjoy this movie so much?  For better or worse, the
answer is ... Jim Carrey!  Somehow this man who can't go 30 seconds
without breaking into his schtick has come up with a tour de force of
meaningful slapstick.  The scene that illustrates this best is when his
character (whose name escapes me, but does it matter?  it's just JC
doing a bit) tries to prove to himself that he can lie:  he stares
intently at a blue pen and tries to insist that it is red.  The ensuing
battle between man and Bic is from a lineage that goes all the way to
Chaplin.
It helps that the supporting cast is good and that the film is brief
(87 minutes).  And though it's not as biting as it could be, there's a
nice subtle commentary on the way we all lie to grease the wheels of
civilization.  That the attempts at familial reconciliation strain
credibility hardly matters; Carrey's genuine rapport with his screen
son supplies a gentle sweetness on which the story can glide.  All in
all, a pleasant breeze of a movie.
If you stay for the credits you will also get a show of outtakes which
some think rival the main event for comic invention.  I found it
interesting in another way:  not only do you get to witness Carrey's
spontaneous virtuosity in action, you also get a glimpse of how it must
be working with him.  In a courtroom take with Swoosie Kurtz, she plays
a prank on the star by reciting an unexpected line.  Afterward she
keeps insisting that others put her up to it.  Is she afraid of
upstaging the genius?  Or maybe that's just how it is when you're
playing opposite a $20 million man.
April 25, 1997  
