Authors
Tim Chandler
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for Black and White (1999)
A group of high school kids mix up with a group of hip-hop artists as a
documentarian strives to discover why today's youth seem attracted to
black culture.
    If Black & White, the new film from writer/director James Toback, is
eventually remembered for only one thing, it will be the revelation that
Brooke Shields, Claudia Schiffer, Marla Maples and Mike Tyson can act.
However, this partly improvised gem will be remembered for more than
that. Black & White is a fascinating film; it makes a statement about
America's youth and hip-hop culture without getting heavy-handed overly
serious. Featuring a cast of known commodities (Ben Stiller, Robert
Downey Jr.) and hot newcomers (singers Bijou Phillips), Toback's is a
complex film worth seeing.
    Black & White has multiple storylines that are all related to each
other, a la Robert Altman. There is Dean the basketball player (Allan
Houston) who is asked to rig games for money by Mark Clear (Stiller) in
exchange for fifty grand a game. This eventually spills over into the
life of Dean's long-time friend Rich (Power), a gangsta who controls 20
city blocks of Harlem. Rich has to deal with the imminent opening of a
white-owned club on his turf. Meanwhile, the young white girls who like
to hang around with Rich and his homies get talked into being in a
documentary by Sam Donager (Shields) and her gay husband Terry (Downey
Jr.). Others who make appearances are William Lee Scott as the young
white punk Will, Joe Pantoliano as his District Attorney father, Jared
Leto as a high school teacher, Marla Maples as the mother of one of
hip-hop crazed teens, Claudia Schiffer as Dean's girlfriend, and Mike
Tyson as... Mike Tyson. The stories ebb and flow through the film,
losing and gaining prominence over time. Friendships are lost, lovers
are gained, and there is an occasional burst of violence.
    Originally rated NC-17 in the United States, Black & White features
a lot of sex between black gangstas and young white girls. While the
film was trimmed down to a tamer R rating, viewers will wonder what
could be more explicit than what they are seeing. The three-way sexual
beginning of the film nicely warns viewers of what they are in for, and
several audience members got up and left at that point. The frequent sex
is one of the film's few flaws as the titillation is overdone and at
times completely unrelated to anything else going on in the film.
    To Toback's credit, the level of violence in Black & White is almost
nil. These gangstas and hip-hop artists are given real problems and
concerns, and only become gun-toting crazies when it benefits them to
appear that way. Whenever a character finds himself on Donager's
handheld digital camera, he starts spouting off righteous tirades on
America and proclaims his independence, but not everyone has fully
bought into the idea. Charlie (Phillips) is full of bluster about why
she loves hip-hop, but admits that "in ten years time, I'll be way over
this." These youth know they are going through a phase, and are simply
enjoying it. Toback fills the spaces between these tirades with scenes
that are lightweight and funny. Most of the humour comes from Mike
Tyson, who provides the film's comic relief without really trying. He is
given big words like vernacular to say, and as Rich tries to discuss a
particular street problem with Tyson, he frequently has to ask him to
use smaller words and explain himself better, playing on Tyson's image
as a dimwit. But Tyson also gets the film's scariest moment. As he is
mercilessly hit upon by the very gay Terry, Tyson is a marvel to watch
as he fights to remain calm. The scene is entirely improvised, with
Downey Jr. being told to just keep at Tyson until he gets a reaction.
The reaction he gets, being slapped and then choked is astonishing, as
Downey Jr's face turns a frightening shade of purple.
    Black & White is a film about hip-hop culture, and the film's
omnipresent hip-hop soundtrack strongly supports this. But Toback keeps
things from becoming too serious; by moving from story to story as
quickly as he does, Toback keeps us from becoming attached to any one
character's struggle. Thus Black & White's message about hip-hop becomes
secondary to the film itself. Toback just wants us to have fun and maybe
learn a little about hip-hop along the way. And we do.
e-mail the author: timbit@geocities.com
Adventures in Cinema - http://www.geocities.com/almigtypooba/

Title
Review for World Is Not Enough, The (1999)
Directed by: Michael Apted
Written by: Bruce Feirstein, Michael France, Neal Purvis, Dana Stevens,
Robert Wade
Starring: Pierce Brosnan, Sophie Marceau, Denise Richards, Robert
Carlyle, Judi Dench, Robbie Coltrane
Produced by: Barbara Broccoli, Michael G. Wilson
James Bond is back in yet another mission to save the world from evil.
    There aren't many film series that make it past the third sequel or
so. And of the handful that come to mind (Police Academy, Hallowe'en,
Friday The 13th), only James Bond has managed to stay interesting and
successful. While the other series suffer from a lack of star power,
repetitive situational comedy or poor efforts, Bond has never failed.
The lead actor switches help; when Roger Moore's run was starting to
sag, even Timothy Dalton's presence helped, though not for long. A
strong reliance on testosterone-fuelled explosions and sex has given the
series a large set of fans which shows no sign of abandoning ship. The
only problem with Bond is the fact that this, the 19th film in the
series, suffers from an obvious lack of originality. Basically,
everything has been done. Boat scenes? Check. Ski scenes? Check. Outer
space scenes? Check. You name it and Bond has done it. This gives The
World Is Not Enough a been there, done that feel, and makes for a
forgettable cinematic experience.
    Does this sound familiar? A bald, facially-scarred villain wants to
re-shape the globe using a nuclear weapon. It should, because not only
did classic Bond baddie Ernst Bloefeld try this, so did Dr. Evil from
the Bond-parody Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery. With
nothing new left to try, director Michael Apted is forced to take Bond's
adventures from the past, and make them better; he does not succeed.
    The story, involving a nuclear bomb, some oil pipelines, and several
beautiful women is as pointless as it is poorly written. The point of
Bond is to remind us once again that he is "the gentleman spy" and that
he can get out of any situation. Yet there is a sense of desperation
about the film, as if the pantheon of writers involved in the project
were worried that there wasn't enough "Bond-ness" to go around. So
instead of a ski chase where he is pursued by other skiers, he is chased
by ultra-cool para-choppers. Instead of a thrilling boat chase, we get a
thrilling boat chase followed by a short trip through city streets and
cafes, where in the real world he would kill easily five to ten people
with his actions. Instead of simply being debonair with the ladies, he
beds not one, not two, but three of them, including Denise Richards, who
is 27 to Brosnan's 46. Some of the action sequences are undeniably
interesting, but it has all been done.
    The acting is what you would expect from a Bond film. Sophie Marceau
does a better job as Elektra than she did previously opposite David
Spade in Lost & Found, though this does not say much. Marceau has a
monotone way of speaking that gets irritating after a short while, and
does not fit the part very well. As Dr. Christmas Jones, Richards plays
a nuclear physicist (the concept of which is laughable) and you just
know her unorthodox name garners a few lame jokes in the film. Richards
is a dreadful actress in my opinion and (I never thought I would say
this of anyone in a Bond film) her lack of acting ability hampers the
film greatly. Brosnan is in usual form, as are Judi Dench and Desmond
Llewelyn in their returning roles as M and Q (John Cleese makes a cameo
as R). Robbie Coltrane is amusing a Russian caviar gangster, while
Robert Carlyle (of Ravenous and The Full Monty) joins a long list of
over the top Bond villains as Renard, a terrorist who has a bullet
lodged in his brain with gives him super-strength and pain tolerance.
    About the only things that impressed me about this film were the
opening credits sequence and the music. After the traditional shot of
Bond centred in a gunman's sights, the title appears and we are treated
to an appealing mosaic of flowing oil droplets which form female
silhouettes while a song by rock band Garbage plays. While in no way
revolutionary, the special effects display is intriguing and one of the
few things about the film that didn't remind me of something else. The
score by David Arnold takes the classic Bond theme song and gives it an
electronica-laced overhaul, giving several scenes a musical boost.
    The bottom line with this film is simple; if you are a devoted Bond
fan, go see the film, you will probably like it. If you have hated every
Bond film you have ever seen, then do not go see this one, it is more of
the same. This is an old series which is in need of another boost
(luckily Pierce Brosnan has declared this his final Bond, opening the
door to another new face and some new ideas). One can hope that that
boost will come soon, before Bond starts to sink, the way Batman did
after his first film.
The Bottom Line front page - Max'd On Movies - The O.F.C.S.

Title
Review for Bowfinger (1999)
Directed by: Frank Oz
Written by: Steve Martin
Starring: Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham, Christine
Baranski, Terence Stamp, Jamie Kennedy
Produced by: Brian Grazer
An unknown producer makes a movie with action star Kit Ramsey, only
Kit doesn't know he is in the film.
    Bowfinger, the new comedy written by and starring Steve Martin and
directed by Frank Oz takes on several Hollywood institutions, and has
a whole lot of fun along the way. An incredibly clever concept coupled
with the best acting the leads have done in years make this one of the
smartest comedies of 1999; this is saying quite a bit in the year of
Election, Drop Dead Gorgeous, American Pie and South Park: Bigger,
Longer & Uncut. The cast has a lot of fun and their energy is
transplanted on to us, the audience.
    Steve Martin is Bobby Bowfinger, a broke jobless producer who
wants desperately to one day make it big. His accountant and part time
receptionist Afrim hands him a screenplay for an alien action film
titled Chubby Rain (chubby because the aliens hide in the rain
drops). He loves it, assembles his team of usual two-bit actors and
hatches a plan to lure in bigtime director Jerry Renfro (Robert Downey
Jr.), which promptly fails. Once action star Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy)
also turns him down, he comes up wit the plan on which Bowfinger
hinges; shoot Kit Ramsey in the film without him knowing it.
    There is a parallel that can likely be made between Bobby
Bowfinger's excitement at coming up with his brilliant if implausible
idea, and Steve Martin's deciding to write the story. You can almost
see the glint that must surely have shone in Mr. Martin's eye when the
concept struck him. What if someone covertly filmed a big star, threw
actors at him to film spontaneous scenes and made a movie without the
actor ever knowing he or she was in it? The same glint strikes
Bowfinger as his assistant stalks Ramsey, tracking his every
move. This is Steve Martin's ode to Hollywood and all of its flaws,
hitting star power, Scientology (with a corporation called MindHead
run by Terrence Stamp) and even his former flame Anne Heche and her
coming out with Ellen DeGeneres.
    The humour moves between slapstick physical gags and biting
satire, mostly working. Innumerable scenes caused the audience to
laugh uproariously at my screening, often blocking out parts of the
dialogue. Scenes involving Bowfinger's dog Betsy, a busy highway,
cheap special effects gags and a movie star who is absolutely clueless
from start to finish combine to make a damn funny movie. Eddie Murphy
is the perfect choice to play Kit Ramsey (though originally the part
was written for a white star, it was largely revamped for Murphy, with
great results). Much as Julia Roberts had no problem acting the part
of a spoiled Hollywood star in Notting Hill, Murphy slips into
Ramsey's flamboyant world with ease.  It is his best role in years,
and continues his tradition of playing multiple characters as he also
plays Kit's brother Jiff. Jiff is the most un-Eddie Murphy-ish
character he has ever played, and Murphy gets almost too silly with
it. Heather Graham is funnier than in Austin Powers 2, her previous
comedic effort, yet still seems wooden at times. Christine Baranski is
more relaxed as Carol, Bowfinger's regular actress and Jamie Kennedy
is solid as Bowfinger's assistant.
    To appreciate this film, you have to lose yourself in the
possibilities of the concept. Forget for the duration that it is
highly implausible that such a scam could ever be pulled off. Forget
the fact that you've seen Eddie Murphy play multiple characters
before, and forget the fact that some of the physical humour that
Frank Oz stages doesn't quite work. Just lose yourself in the fun, in
the glee with which Bowfinger stalks Kit Ramsey and films him in a
lame sci-fi alien movie. Think about how silly Scientology seems when
it is parodied by MindHead, about the hilarious way in which Bowfinger
hires a film crew, and about how well-trained Betsy the dog is. This
is a highly intelligent comedy and a bit of a comeback for both Steve
Martin and Eddie Murphy. You'll feel good and giddy after seeing
Bowfinger. Trust me.
check out more reviews at The Bottom Line
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/bwfng.html
or e-mail me at timbit@canada.com

Title
Review for Eight Days a Week (1997)
Rating: [Image][Image][Image][Image]
Directed by: Michael Davis
Written by: Michael Davis
Starring: Joshua Schaefer, Keri Russell, R.D. Robb
Produced by: Martin Cutler, Michael Davis, Gary Preisler
A young man decides to spend an entire summer camped out on the lawn of
the girl with whom he is in love.
    The lengths that people will go for love are well-documented in
film. The most recent example is Life Is Beautiful, the Roberto Benigni
cryfest that won the hearts of millions of people last year. In it,
Benigni goes to outrageous lengths to hide the horrors of the Holocaust
from his young son. In Eight Days A Week, Peter (Schaefer) decides to
show his love for Erica (Russell), the girl across the street, by
spending an entire summer camped out on her lawn (the idea is passed
onto him by his grandfather). As the weeks pass by, Josh reads several
books about sex, watches the neighbours movements, and ponders how best
to stand up to Erica's bully boyfriend Nick.
    This is not a great film. It is painfully obvious to any viewer with
a brain that Josh will win over Erica in the end. He is simply too
perfect and nice of a character not to. It is also obvious that Erica's
wooing won't happen overnight, and that the filmmakers are going to make
Josh and his buddy Matt have a lot of silly conversations about sex,
masturbation and any pop reference they can think of. The script's style
could be called Clerks-lite. Matt is so similar in style, looks and
demeanour that he could easily be the brother of Jay from Clerks; I kept
expecting Jay's partner Silent Bob to show up.
    This film likely would never have made it to the video store were it
not for the current success of its star Keri Russell in her teen angst
TV hit Felicity. Russell really has little to do here except look good
(if slightly anorexic) in a wet T-shirt and hold the occasionally
moonlit chat with Josh about random things such as the best James Bond
actor (Brosnan in my book). Her part, like every other part in the film,
is poorly written and undeveloped. Josh may observe many things from his
grassy vantage point, but he is the same nerdy, chatty guy by the end
that he is in the beginning.
    Writer/director Michael Davis has chosen a very hard film style to
make here: a talky film where the scene never changes. The example that
cones instantly to mind is My Dinner With Andre. The entire film is set
at a table during dinner, essentially one long conversation. The film,
for filmgoers who don't require explosions and ka-booms every second
scene, is an intelligent, witty delight. Eight Days A Week, however, is
a bore. The camera almost never leaves Josh's side as he either sits,
lays down on, or stands on Erica's lawn. Since the dialogue is dull and
unfunny, you get very tired of hearing Josh speak. Frankly, by the time
josh and Erica finally kissed (as you know they eventually do) I was
relieved, since it meant the film was probably over. Only die-hard Keri
Russell fans should attempt to watch this amateur piece of work.
email me at timbit@canada.com
and check out my other reviews at The Bottom Line
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html

Title
Review for Besieged (1998)
Directed by: Bernardo Bertolucci
Written by: James Lasdun, Bernardo Bertolucci, Clare Peploe
Starring: Thandie Newton, David Thewlis
Produced by: Massimo Cortesi
The story of a young woman caught between unwanted love from her
employer and a husband jailed in Africa.
    When you strip a love story down to its bare essentials, what do you
have? Funny sing-a-long scenes like in My Best
Friend's Wedding? No. A dorm room filled with pink balloons like in
Patch Adams? Nuh-uh. How about a grotesquely funny
Welsh flatmate like in Notting Hill? Not even close. When you look at
the heart behind a true love story, you are left with two
things; love, either wanted or unwanted, between two people, and the
circumstances that bring them together. While many
supposed romantic films are just chances for big stars to look cute
(think Meg Ryan in Addicted To Love), Besieged is a hard
look at doomed love; no silly sub-plots, no big stars to distract us.
Bernardo Bertolucci's new film is obviously different from
the rest of the pack, but perhaps it is too different.
    The story is simple to tell, but filled with deep emotions.
Shandurai's (Newton) husband gets imprisoned in an unnamed
African nation, and some time later she leaves for Rome to get an
education and a good job. She works as a housecleaner for
Mr. Kinsky (Thewlis), an eccentric pianist, while doing to night school.
Mr. Kinsky rather painfully loves her, something
Shandurai takes in stride, not wanting to leave a well-paying job.
Normally, this is about as much of the plot a critic will tell,
leaving all of the sub-plots and other bits to the viewer to discover.
However, the story of Besieged is so sparsely told that this
is almost all there is to tell; it is left to us, the audience, to
figure out what is going on. Once the film leaves Africa for Rome, the
narrative jumps forward to a point where Shandurai has worked for Mr.
Kinsky for some time. We know this for he is already
deeply in love with her, sending her flowers down the laundry-chute at
one point. The viewer's first conscious thought is "Wait,
when did he fall for her? Who is he and why is she working for him?
Wait, we aren't in Africa any more?".
    This method of story-telling can be useful. Many films explain
everything to you, diluting their story and distracting you from
the action; perhaps the only flaw in Hitchcock's Psycho is the
psychiatrist's lengthy explanation of what is wrong with Norman
Bates in the film's denouement. Other films leave out key pieces of
information, to provide a surprise climax. Several films this
year have used this trick, one to great financial success. Besieged
however leaves gaps in its narrative solely to concentrate on
the important parts. Thus, we have to deduce for ourselves what the
relationship is between Shandurai and Mr. Kinsky.
Making your audience think is not in itself a bad thing, but with a film
as layered and deep as Besieged is, so much time is spent
trying to put together what's happening that many subtleties go
unnoticed.
    Besieged is sparse not only in its narrative, but also in its
dialogue. Whole scenes go by where neither character speaks,
engaging instead in meaningful looks and glances. Had two lesser actors
been chosen for the roles, this lack of speech would
have buried the film. David Thewlis and Thandie Newton are both more
than capable at emoting through facial expressions,
however, creating an electrical tension between them. We hardly know
what Mr. Kinsky's motivations are, yet we are drawn
into the helplessness of his love anyway. The love story itself is a
raw, powerful one that is uncommon in the majority of films
today. Kinsky seems unable to do anything but love Shandurai. He knows
of her past, and of her husband back in Africa, yet
can't stop himself. He makes great sacrifices for her, very noble
sacrifices that threaten to ruin his own life, such is the power of
the emotions running through him.
    Bertolucci uses a filming style that, with the deliberate plot
holes, further serves to distract the viewer. He has chopped
frames out of certain scenes, so that one second out of every third or
so is missing. The result is a jerky, confusing movement
that seems more like art for art's sake than useful. The final effect is
one of consternation with the film. When discussing the film
afterwards, more viewers will be irately discussing the way characters
twitched around the scene than about how well-written
the story was. While no film can please everyone, Besieged could have
earned a lot more fans had Bertolucci laid off on the
flourishes a little. It is a real shame for this is one of the better
love stories I've seen in years.
The Bottom Line -
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html
email: timbit@canada.com

Title
Review for Tycus (1998)
Directed by: John Putch
Written by: Kevin Goetz, Michael Goetz
Starring: Dennis Hopper, Peter Onorati, Finola Hughes
Produced by: Ashok Amritraj, Elie Samaha, Andrew Stevens
When a physicist's discovery of a comet hurtling towards Earth is
ignored, he builds an underground city with which to save a portion of
humanity.
    Tycus is the fourth film about the end of the planet due to an
interstellar collision to be released in the last two
years. Armageddon, the most financially successful of the four
disaster films, was silly, but with a suspension of reason made for an
enjoyable film. Deep Impact was written like a soap opera, but
contained enough special effects to make it passable. Last Night, the
little-seen effort by Canadian Don McKellar, contained virtually no
effects, focusing more on the subtle relationships between family and
friends during Earth's last night. While intelligently written, it is
perhaps a bit too calm and sensible. There is a very obvious reason as
to why Tycus was the only one of the four never to make it to
theatres. The Goetzes have written a cliché-ridden, implausible
script which when combined with John Putch's boring direction makes
Tycus a must-miss, even for fans of outer space/disaster films.
    The crisis is very similar to those of the other aforementioned
films. A giant object (in this case a comet) is on a collision course
with the moon, threatening the safety of every living thing on
Earth. The main difference in storyline is that in Armageddon and Deep
Impact, the American government knew about it ahead of time, and took
steps to counter the threat. In Tycus, a physicist, Dr. Peter Crawford
(Hopper), discovers the comet and its lethal trajectory, and alerts
the scientific community. Alas, no one agrees with his calculations,
and the threat is forgotten. Instead of continuing to try to convince
the world that he is right (and he is of course), Crawford goes off
and builds himself an underground city that will house a small portion
of the human population until the above-ground problems have passed. A
former combat photog turned tabloid newsman, Jake Lowe, gets a strange
scoop on the city and the comet from a friend on the inside, and goes
undercover to investigate. The film's inevitable climax is neither
thrilling nor horrific; the film's special effects are so poor that
any attempt at excitement is lost on an audience used to
state-of-the-art pyrotechnics.
    Countless clichés are found in the script for Tycus. There is
Jake's troubled marriage to wife Amy; Jake leaves her to start his
mission without a kiss goodbye. As he leaves, Amy starts to say "I
love you" but is to late. Jake has one particular monologue in which
he questions Crawford's decision to choose who gets to survive in his
city; it is almost painful to listen to, it is so cliched. There
should be a law that forbids phrases like "What gives you the right to
choose?" and "You are playing God!" from ever again appearing on
film. Everything about the film, from Dennis Hopper's "I've been doing
this stuff for decades, I'll get it on the first take" lack of emotion
in Crawford, to the cheap, obvious bloodpacks that pop whenever a
character gets shot, to the cheap, original-Star Trek-era computer
screens that are supposedly "so expensive that even the government
doesn't know what we know" make Tycus a failure.
for more revies, check out The Bottom Line at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html

Title
Review for Outside Providence (1999)
Directed by: Michael Corrente
Written by: Peter and Bobby Farrelly & Michael Corrente
Starring: Shawn Hatosy, Alec Baldwin, Amy Smart, George Wendt
Produced by: Michael Corrente, Peter and Bobby Farrelly, Randy Finch
A slacker from Pawtucket has to cope with being sent to a prep school by
his father.
    Outside Providence is a cross between Detroit Rock City and
countless fish-out-of-water films such as Crocodile Dundee. Peter
Farrelly, writer of There's Something About Mary and Dumb & Dumber, goes
for an intelligent, non-physical style of comedy here, but mars it with
misplaced, unneeded bits of drama. Many scenes make you laugh out loud,
occasionally even applaud, and with a better script and tighter
direction from Michael Corrente, Outside Providence could have been a
success.
    The story follows Tim Dunphy (Hatosy), "Dildo" to his blue-collar
father (Baldwin), as he is sent off to prep school in 1974. His slacker,
drugged-out friends (including one hilarious buddy named Drugs) are
sorry to see him go, but their lives really don't change much with his
departure. Once arrived at his new home, Tim manages to find a group of
students who enjoy the same pastimes as he does (drinking, smoking,
doing drugs etc.) and meets a love interest, Jane (Weston). He has many
misadventures, often involving getting in trouble with the dorm master.
Unfortunately, the Farrellys and director Corrente chose to add some
drama to their film, giving Tim a dead mother with a tragic past, a
girlfriend whose aspirations of going to Brown University become
uncertain, and a crippled younger brother.
    When the Farrellys go for laughs, they consistently hit their
target. They have perfectly caught the diction, attitude and humour
found in potheads from a small town. Tim and his friends spend every
night getting high and drunk, often with surprising results. Some of the
humour is typical of the gross-out humour permeating 1999 so far (a
student who has never done drugs before throws up on a classmate), but
the majority is intelligent and witty, concentrating on the lack of
schooling and vocabulary of the young men (one student declines a joint,
saying "no, I want to remember this moment, I want to saviour it.") The
awkwardness of youth  is expertly explored as well, with freshmen
getting "froshed" (vicious humiliating pranks played on them) and young
men mooning over the picture of their secret love.
    Director Michael Corrente needs to find his own vision for his
future endeavours. Outside Providence suffers from a bad case of
deja-vu. Whether it is the montage of romantic moments between Tim and
Jane that plays during a low period in their relationship, or Tim's
becoming a good student, numerous scenes are copies of past films. Even
the soundtrack of tunes that can be found in every film about the 70s is
familiar, with several songs having already appeared on a soundtrack in
1999 already. Alec Baldwin and his poker buddies are funny but unneeded.
Baldwin is particularly good at playing the ignorant blue-collar dad,
but unconvincing in his one dramatic scene. George Wendt gives the film
another familiar face, and a plot twist that has nothing to do with the
film. Shawn Hatosy and Amy Smart ably carry the film's major roles, with
Hatosy in particular doing a better job of being an unschooled 70s
stoner than any cast member from Detroit Rock City.
    Outside Providence will make you laugh quite a bit. It is unoriginal
and unnecessarily dramatic as well, but if you don't care about such
things, you will likely love this film. Everyone else will consider this
film an amusing distraction, but that's all.
email Tim Chandler at timbit@canada.com
or check out The Bottom Line at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html

Title
Review for Sixth Sense, The (1999)
Directed by: M. Night Shyamalan
Written by: M. Night Shyamalan
Starring: Bruce Willis, Haley Joel Osment, Toni Collette, Olivia
Williams, Donnie Wahlberg
Produced by: Kathleen Kennedy, Frank Marshall, Barry Mendel
A child psychologist has to help a young boy who sees the dead.
    Imagine you could see the dead; all around you, every day, right
there in front of you. What would you do? Would you go insane, or
would you try to help them. Could you ignore them? Most importantly,
how could you ever convince anyone else that they exist, and would you
even want to? This is the problem plaguing young Cole (Osment) in The
Sixth Sense. He sees the dead, and it is turning him into a bit of a
freak, as his classmates thoughtfully dub him. How could anyone live a
normal life when they see the hanged bodies of people executed decades
ago? Luckily, he gets help in the form of Dr. Malcolm Crowe
(Willis). Dr. Crowe is a noted child psychologist who sees in Cole a
shot at redemption after failing a former patient with similar
problems.
    The Sixth Sense could have been many different types of film. It
could have been a special effects bonanza with walking dead
everywhere; it could have been an action/drama with contrived car
chase sequences etc. Instead, relative newcomer writer/director
M. Night Shyamalan takes a dramatic, psychological approach that works
well. The film places much attention on the mental state of the
characters as the story unfolds. Haley Joel Osment (the young Forrest
Gump) in particular emotes his feelings well, whether terror, anger or
satisfaction. The walking dead do show up occasionally, often shocking
and horrifying the audience; they appear quite dead, but not like the
decomposed zombies of many lesser films.
    Bruce Willis has been trying to shed his image as an action-film
star with such low-budget films as Breakfast of Champions and Nobody's
Fool. He has never been a great actor in my opinion, but his subdued,
quiet approach as Dr. Crowe works nicely. You are able to forget that
he is Bruce Willis for the duration of the film, something people
often can't do. Olivia Williams (Rushmore) is completely wasted as
Malcolm's wife Anna. Toni Collette (Muriel's Wedding) creates a
sympathetic character as Cole's mother, while Cole is convincingly
creeped out and burdened by his 'gift'.
    The storyline flows quite slowly (the film's only weak point) but
is compensated for by a stunning ending. Sixth Sense's ending is my
favourite of the year so far, as stunning as the ends of The Usual
Suspects and The Spanish Prisoner. If only editor Andrew Mondshein had
been a bit more aggressive in his trimming, this could have been a
wonderful film. Unfortunately, despite the film's climax, the
sluggishness of the film makes you check your watch repeatedly.
    Sixth Sense's Cole finds answers to all of the questions asked
above, though they are not always answers he likes. Whether trying to
ignore them, or communicate with them, the dead simply can't leave him
alone. The path that Cole and Dr. Crowe follow is wrought with scares,
sadness (but luckily the occasional bit of levity as well) and in the
end, you will be moved.  Despite its slow pacing, this film is worth
seeing, if only for its climax.
check out more reviews at The Bottom Line
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html

Title
Review for Universal Soldier: The Return (1999)
Directed by: Mic Rodgers
Written by: William Malone & John Fasano
Starring: Jean-Claude Van Damme, Michael Jai White, Heidi Schanz, Bill
Goldberg
Produced by: Craig Baumgarten, Allen Shapiro, Jean-Claude Van Damme
Ex-Universal Soldier Luc has to battle a group of newer-model engineered
fighters gone bad.
    Jean-Claude Van Damme has a one-liner early on in Universal Soldier:
The Return, his latest attempt to remain relevant, that sums up this
entire movie; he says "Been there, done that." No film critic could
possibly sum up Van Damme's recent film choices any better. While other
ageing action stars have wisely moved into other film genres
(Schwarzenegger makes as many family comedies as he does action films),
Van Damme stubbornly persists in sticking with what used to work for
him: martial arts and guns. This unwillingness or perhaps inability to
move into new genres has caused Van Damme to enter the straight to video
world, with Legionnaire never seeing the inside of a multiplex. He joins
fellow martial artist/action star Steven Seagal as they watch their film
careers rapidly fizzle away.
    Universal Soldier: The Return is truly poor. The plot is a complete
copy of several action films from this decade, specifically Terminator
2: Judgement Day and the similarly named Soldier. Soldier's Kurt Russell
was an older model super-soldier sent off to retirement when
circumstances forced him to battle his successors, for the good of a
planet; Schwarzenegger's Terminator in T2 tried to save John Connor from
a newer model killing machine, the T-1000; and Jean-Claude, a former
Universal Soldier, has to save the planet from the rampage of a group
of, you guessed it, newer model Soldiers. Considering the poor box
office performance of Soldier, it's amazing that this project was ever
given the go-ahead.
    Luc Devereaux (Van Damme) was the sole remaining Universal Soldier
(or Unisol for short), until he was returned to a normal, if muscular,
human form. In this sequel (technically the fourth film in the series,
following two straight-to-video duds that were ignored here plot-wise),
Luc is now a human trainer/consultant of sorts for the UNISOL program.
Working with Dylan Cotner (Xander Berkeley, who interestingly also
appeared in T2), the UNISOL program has engineered a tougher, fiercer
fighting force with the help of super-computer SETH. Unfortunately, upon
hearing that the program has been axed by the government, SETH takes
control of his soldiers, killing everyone in the building except for
Luc, his partner Maggie, his daughter Hillary and Erin, a reporter
trapped inside. The rest of the film involves Luc trying to keep them
all alive, while beating up a group of near-indestructible soldiers,
most notably Romeo (popular wrestler Goldberg). There are lots of
fights, gun battles, lame plot developments and a noticeable lack of
plausibility.
    There are so many clichés in this film that it is almost painful to
watch. Luc gets saddled with the task of saving Erin the reporter early
on, and in the course of a single night, they go from bickering to
falling for each other, to kissing. Erin is a pathetically-written
character; people are getting brutally gunned down all around her, and
yet, not only does this not seem to frighten her, but she finds time to
remind Luc that she "isn't leaving without her story". Whatever. Other
laughable moments include a) Luc going to a strip club to get internet
access (what?) and b) a group of Rangers, who after having been given
good advice (Luc tells them that their weapons are useless, and shows
them a specific gun which should work better), choose to go into battle
with their useless weapons anyway (guess who wins the battle?). Not one
single scene in Universal Soldier: The Return has any originality to it.
    When fuelled by Don Davis' loud, driving music score, the film's
many fights become almost passable, but mostly are full of the same ol'
Jean-Claude moves. Director Mic Rodgers (a former stunt co-ordinator)
keeps the action coming at a rapid pace, with only a few token serious
moments to be found. His past work is evident in the many moments when
characters are thrown through windows, tossed off of buildings or sent
flying through the air thanks to an explosion. If only Jean-Claude
weren't getting so old and slow compared to younger martial arts film
actors like Jet Li, Rodgers could probably have made a decent action
film.
    To place the blame squarely at Van Damme's feet, however, is an
injustice. I'm not sure that anyone, not even Robert DeNiro or Edward
Norton, could make writers William Malone and John Fasano's script sound
good. One particularly painful scene is when Erin asks Luc how he is so
sure that the aforementioned strip club will have internet access. He
cringes, looks down and mutters "uh...uhm... they all do, I saw it on 60
Minutes. eh he he he" The script's and indeed the entire film's only
saving grace is Goldberg. He chews up every scene he is in, obviously
enjoying his role immensely. He even gives the film a few laughs, as he
mutters things like "I really don't like that guy" every time he fails
to kill Luc. Sadly, his presence is not enough to turn Universal
Soldier: The Return into anything better than a below-average action
film that truly deserves to have joined its fellow sequels by going
straight-to-video.
email Tim Chandler at timbit@canada.com
and check out my other reviews at The Bottom Line
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
Directed by: Spike Jonze
Written by: Charlie Kaufman
Starring: John Cusack, Cameron Diaz, Catherine Keener, John Malkovich
Produced by: Steve Golin, Vincent Landay, Sandy Stern, Michael Stipe
A puppeteer discovers a portal into the head of John Malkovich.
    Have you ever been to the supermarket and seen a tabloid headline
screaming `Julia Roberts to have Richard Simmons
lovechild!'? Me neither, thank God, but you've probably seen one just as
ludicrous, haven't you? Most of us see such headlines
and laugh, knowing that tabloids are trash with no basis in fact. A day
or two later, if someone mentions Julia Roberts (to use
my example), you find yourself joking `Hey, yeah, I read that she is
having Simmons' baby!' and you all share a chuckle.
However, underneath such light banter there is an undercurrent of true
curiosity. Secretly, many of us wonder just what Julia
Roberts was REALLY doing in that fuzzy photograph. Our Western culture
is fascinated by the minutiae of our celebrities'
daily lives. Sure, you can dismiss those tabloid headlines, but if
people didn't believe them, those papers wouldn't exist. In fact,
the size of the subscription lists of The Enquirer and The Star prove
it; we can't leave these people alone, because they aren't
people... they are celebrities!
    Being John Malkovich, the remarkable new film by Spike Jonze,
examines this fascination with celebrity and takes us to its
inevitable end: a portal that actually takes you inside of a celebrity,
allowing you to be that star, for fifteen minutes. As the title
suggests, the star in question is John Malkovich, a perfect choice for
the film due to the smaller stature of his star compared to
Robin Williams or Brad Pitt. By casting a star whose filmography isn't
as well-known to the average American, Jonze can
reveal another side to the celebrity issue, the fact that in some cases,
we aren't even aware of why celebrities are celebrities.
    As we watch Malkovich's life from behind his own eyes, we are shown
a world where people can't resist greeting the star,
quickly revealing that they actually have little knowledge of his work.
One cab driver compliments John by saying `Hey, weren't
you in that film? You know, the one where you played a jewel thief? I
loved that movie, Mr. Malkovich.' When Malkovich
mentions that he has never played a jewel thief, the cab driver doesn't
really care. Such is the problem with celebrity; it is your
status as a star that is what the public drools over, not you.
    The portal into Malkovich's brain is discovered by Craig, a nerdy
puppeteer (Cusack) working for a bizarre filing company.
The portal is hidden in deep storage, and upon entering it, he finds
himself seeing through John Malkovich's eyes. However,
after fifteen minutes he gets dumped onto the side of the New Jersey
Turnpike (an unfortunate side effect of the portal). This
discovery changes his life, along with the lives of his
animal-infatuated wife Lotte (Diaz) and his co-worker Maxine (Keener).
The three of them discover a kind of erotic thrill in both a) being John
Malkovich, and b) actually meeting and talking to the real
thing, knowing that one of the others is inside his head watching.
    The three actors (Cusack, Diaz and Keener) were given free reign
with their characters, and it shows. Cusack's Craig goes
from being a pathetic-but-cute loser, to a disturbing and slightly scary
man, to an unlikable bastard. Diaz switches back and
forth from quiet victim to sexual thrill-rider, to gun-wielding
madwoman. Keener's Maxine remains fairly consistent as a cold
stand-offish woman from start to near-finish, only enjoying life when
she is in control. Only Malkovich is fully convincing as he
lampoons his image and has a lot of fun with the role.
    The story, written by Charlie Kaufman is original and fun. No one
aspect of the film is `normal' per se. The office Craig
works in is on the 7 and a half floor. To reach it involves stopping an
elevator midway between floors, and to move around
involves stooping. Craig's boss Dr. Lector is a 105 year old with a
penchant for talking of his sexual desires. Craig's street
puppet shows are often lewd, inspiring parents to become violent.
Lotte's pet chimp even gets his own flashback, to a time
before he was taken out of the jungle. Many films have unexpected scenes
of this calibre (a scene from Go comes to mind in
which a stoned young man have a telepathic conversation with a cat), but
seldom to films come this close to being 100%
strange.
    The film has only one real problem, and that is with the final third
of the story. Once the novelty of the idea begins to wear
off, Being John Malkovich gets a little boring. Too much time is spent
on Lotte's quest to find out the origins of the portal,
Craig's attempts to stay in Malkovich for longer lengths of time, and
the result once he finds out how. By the time the film ends,
in a chilling and dark manner, the audience is glad, for really, its
attention was mostly lost half an hour earlier.
    In the end, Being John Malkovich makes a strong point. Once the
veneer of celebrity aloofness is taken away from a star,
they are no longer any different than the rest of us. Once Maxine gets
too used to being around Malkovich, she tires of him. It
reminds us that these are people, people who merely appear different
because we choose to see them as different. While its
story lags in the end, Being John Malkovich is one of the year's most
interesting and appealing films. Anyone tired of the
formulaic, familiar mediocrity that represents most of Hollywood these
days should run to see this film. It is like none other I
have ever seen, and the same will hold for you.
The Bottom Line -
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html
email: timbit@canada.com

Title
Review for Mystery Men (1999)
Directed by: Kinka Usher
Written by: Neil Cuthbert (comic by Bob Burden)
Starring: Hank Azaria, Janeane Garofalo, William H. Macy, Kel Mitchell,
Paul Reubens, Ben Stiller, Wes Studi, Greg Kinnear, Geoffrey Rush,
Tom Waits
Produced by: Lawrence Gordon, Lloyd Levin, Mike Richardson
A group of wannabe superheroes have to save Champion City's one true
hero, Captain Amazing, from the clutches of the evil Casanova
Frankenstein.
    Superheroes have had an easy ride in motion pictures. While other
popular film topics such as the Mafia (Analyze This) and the military
(Hot Shots) have been spoofed to death, relatively few parodies have
been made about superheroes; Meteor Man immediately comes to mind.
The Superman series, while light, always kept Supe himself
serious. Within this year of parodies and dark, biting comedies, you
would think that the time for Mystery Men had come. Unfortunately it
has such a large cast that there isn't enough screen time available
for any of them to shine, making this an uneven film with lots of
unused potential.
    Mr. Furious (Stiller) leads his comrades The Shoveller (Macy) and
The Blue Raja (Azaria) in a constant fight against crime. The problem
is that they have no real superpowers. Mr. Furious just gets mad, The
Shoveller swings a shovel and The Blue Raja, most pathetically of all,
throws forks. They are unnoticed and unneeded in Champion City, where
Captain Amazing (Kinnear) routinely keeps the streets clean of
crime. It's only when the Capt. gets kidnapped by the evil Casanova
Frankenstein (Rush) that they become the city's saviours. To save him,
they enlist the help of The Bowler (Garofalo), who throws a magical
bowling ball which has her father's skull embedded in it, The Spleen
(Reubens), a disgusting man whose projectile flatulence is his weapon,
The Sphinx (Studi), who can occasionally break guns with his mind but
mostly stands around saying lame affirmations ("You must control your
rage, before your rage controls you."), and finally Invisible Boy
(Mitchell) who is only invisible when no one is looking.  With the
added bonus of some strange non lethal weapons by inventor Dr.  Heller
(Waits), they battle Casanova Frankenstein and his henchmen, and in
the end become a team.
    Mystery Men tries to do to Superman what Austin Powers does to
James Bond. The film looks at the silliness that traditionally
accompanies superhero stories and lampoons it. A discussion about
whether Captain Amazing is really a billionaire named Lance hinges on
the fact that Lance wears glasses while Captain Amazing doesn't. When
Mr. Furious mentions that Lance simply takes them off, The Shoveller
counters "but then he wouldn't be able to see!" Dr. Heller's gadgets
could easily be lamer replicas of the plethora of things on Batman's
utility belt. With a combination of Stiller, Garofalo and Reubens, you
can expect a lot of laughs. Each provides many chuckles, but the more
straight-laced cast members tend to hinder them a bit. A lot of the
humour is too intellectual, not really making you laugh, but making
you nod thinking "that's quite clever". A good example would be when
The Blue Raja explains the meaning of his name to someone; he goes on
about how the British government ran India way back when, with a
government called the Raj, and since he has a British accent, and was
born in India, voila, he is The Blue Raja. The film contains too much
of this style of humour; when Mr.  Furious says "I'm gonna go Pompeii
on your butt" a large portion of the audience really doesn't get it.
It's a bit like a Dennis Miller comedy monologue, you've got to think
to appreciate it.
    The large cast hinders things a bit, with some of the wannabe
superheroes (Invisible Boy) getting no good material at all. Tom Waits
is given nothing funny to do as Dr.  Heller. He just sits around
saying things like "my god, that's a positronic modulating
psychoblaster!"  Claire Forlani is thrown in as a pathetically
unneeded love interest for Mr. Furious. I would have liked to see more
screen time go to Casanova Frankenstein. Geoffrey Rush is hilarious as
the film's disco dancing/ German accented baddie.  He naturally plans
to destroy the entire city with a dastardly deed, in this case some
kind of giant laser weapon. He truly captures the film's irreverent
tone and provides some of the best laughs, its only too bad that his
accent is at times indecipherable. To writer Neil Cuthbert's credit,
there is one hilarious and unexpected plot twist in the film, and a
couple scenes that are magical.  When the superheroes encounter
Casanova in his limo and proceed to enjoy a brief, minor victory, the
laughs were so constant that my stomach hurt.
    This is a good way to kill a couple bucks on cheap night, but many
people who pay full price will consider their money wasted. I have a
feeling that Mystery Men will become a hit on video, becoming funnier
with each repeated viewing. Hopefully there will be a sequel, as the
potential of this cast and concept is huge.
check out more reviews at The Bottom Line
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Heights/8000/index.html
