Authors
Michel Hafner
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Little Buddha (1993)
     LITTLE BUDDHA is Bernardo Bertolucci's new movie (following THE
SHELTERING SKY and THE LAST EMPEROR).  The story is rather simple.  The
spiritual master of Tibetan Lama Norbu (Ying Ruocheng), Lama Dorje, has
died and ever since Lama Norbu is looking for his reincarnation.  Kenpo
Tensing, a Tibetan monk living in Seattle contacts him.  In dreams the
late Lama Dorje revealed him where he has been reborn.  It's in the
house of the Konrad's, Seattle, USA!  So a few days later the Konrads,
Lisa (Bridget Fonda) a math teacher, Dean (Chris Issak), an architect,
and their son Jesse (Alex Wiesendanger) get a visit from Lama Norbu,
his companions and Kenpo Tensing.  The idea that Jesse might be a
reincarnation of a late Lama is first hard to swallow for the sober
scientific minds of the parents.  Yet they allow the monks to introduce
Jesse with the help of an illustrated book for children to the story of
prince Siddhartha, who became known to the world as Buddha.  To be sure
the monks want to take Jesse back to their convent, but this is only
possible after Dean Konrad has an experience he wasn't prepared for.
He, Jesse and the monks leave for Bhutan....
     LITTLE BUDDHA consists of two "universes."  There is Seattle
standing for the western world, dominated by technology and presented
in sterile looking blueish shades.  And there is the world of prince
Siddhartha, 2500 years ago and today, colorful and juicy, a paradise,
but also a place of suffering, decrepitude and death.  The gorgeous
images by Vittorio Storaro, telling us the story of Siddhartha every
time Jesse looks into his book, are the main attraction of LITTLE
BUDDHA.  They have to be appreciated on a big cinema screen.  Don't
wait for the LD or tape.  Especially the scenes with Siddhartha leaving
his palace for the first time and Siddhartha fighting the demon Mara
before enlightenment are breathtaking.
     Keanu Reeves as Siddhartha gives an acceptable performance.
Physically he fits the role quite well with his exotic looks, enhanced
by suitable make up.  For the ascetic scenes he went on a strict diet
to become skinny enough.  Ying Ruocheng as Lama Norbu is the emotional
center of the story.  His fine performance helps the movie a great
deal.  Bridget Fonda is competent in her role, but there is really not
much she can sink her teeth into.  Chris Isaak's role offers more
possibilities, but the actor turned singer keeps his facial and other
expressions to a minimum.  Little Alex Wiesendanger looks a bit
uncomfortable at times, yet he pulls it off quite successfully at the
end.
     Bertolucci gave up the idea of a realistic and detailed Buddha
biography in favour of a more fairy tale like approach with "pretty"
pictures providing a crash course in Buddhism.  The movie is supposed
to be accessible to children and capture the attention of grown ups at
the same time.  I'd say it does, but at the cost of simplifying things
and, sometimes, even provoke laughter where laughter is not appropriate
(especially in the scene of Siddhartha's birth).
     Ryuichi Sakamoto's music is an asset to the movie.  There are two
main themes, one for Siddhartha (majesticly descending 12-note motive)
and one general theme standing for the movie as a whole (I guess, but
it's also related to Jesse).  Strings, Indian instruments and
synthesizer are the main ingredients.  Musical highlights are (again)
the scene of Siddhartha meeting "the world" and Siddhartha achieving
enlightenment.  The final scene features a soprano singing in a style
very reminding of Gorecki's third symphony.
     Bertolucci doesn't shy away from (ultra-modern) special effects
(morphing and other digital tricks ).  With varying success, going from
embarrassing (lotus flowers growing in baby Buddha's footsteps) to near
perfect (Siddhartha fighting Mara in the form of Siddhartha ).
     LITTLE BUDDHA is all in all a bit disappointing.  From Bertolucci
more can be expected.  This movie is no LAST EMPEROR and all it can
hope for at Oscar time is a nomination for best cinematography and
costumes/production design.  And for these a trip to the nearest big
screen cinema is worth its costs.

Title
Review for Shadows and Fog (1992)
     SHADOWS AND FOG is the new film by Woody Allen.  After being
presented at the Berlin festival in February, coming from the shelves of
Orion, that put it there some time because they couldn't afford the
release, it starts now hitting the screens all over the world.  Spoilers
following...
     SHADOWS AND FOG is not one of Woody's best films.  His predecessor
ALICE, for example, is better.  But it's still a fine film with good
moments in it.
     Basically it's Allen's homage to German expressionist films of the
20s and Franz Kafka ( and ??? ).  He plays a kafkaesque employee named
"Kleinmann" ( ~ "unimportant person") who lives in small town of which
we only see foggy streets at night, some rooms in houses, the police
station, the church, a circus and the brothel.  He is awakened in the
middle of the night by some citizens who order him to join their posse,
that is hunting a mysterious killer on the loose, the "strangler."  He
obeys, but only to find himself alone in the fog, stumbling through the
town in futile search for his purpose as member of the posse.  
     While wandering around and uttering monologues a la Woody he meets
half of Hollywood in cameos and more substantial parts.  
     - Mia Farrow: Swordswallower in the circus, disappointed girlfriend
       of
     - John Malkovich: Clown in the circus, lusting after
     - Madonna: Trapeze-artist of the circus, and a slut, who would be
       better off with
     - Jodie Foster, Kathy Bates, Lily Thomlin: hookers in the brothel,
       receiving guests like
     - John Cusack: the philosopher-student, whose "blood" tells him to
       "live", and whose "brains" ask: "What's the point of it all?"
       Meanwhile
     - Donald Pleasence: as the scientist, cuts open the victims of the 
       strangler and hopes to localize "pure evil" somewhere under his
       microscope, maybe between the liver and the heart, but he is just
       as helpless as almost everybody else, when
     - ??: the strangler, visits him to perform his choking business.
       Maybe God can help, but
     - Josef Sommer: the priest, is busy with maintaining some kind of
       (hit?) list from which you can ge crossed off when your donations
       exceed some limit.
     Confusing?  This is only the beginning.  The whole concept is
rather interesting, but it fails to satisfy, since Allen, basically,
only changes the surroundings for his cast, but the dialogues and
monologues center around the same stuff that was chewed over and over
again in almost every Allen film the last ?? years.  Unfortunately it's
all quiet on the Allen front.  And since the film lacks the elegance of
the script and direction of ALICE, it's not quite up to our
expectations.  Well, instead you can go reference-hunting ("Wasn't that
an allusion to NOSFERATU??  Is he citing FREAKS here?"  ...  )
