Authors
James Davis Nicoll
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Philadelphia Story, The (1940)
     I checked out the local video store last night, hoping to pick up
a good action flick.  Some jerkwad had already rented I COME IN PEACE
and MARKED FOR DEATH, but next to the recent releases shelf, was a shelf
labeled "classics" (old films).  I *like* old stuff; I must have seen
RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK and ALIEN a dozen times, so I figured "what the
hell?" and started looking through the old stuff.
     What I picked was this movie called THE PHILADELPHIA STORY.  I
remembered hearing something about a sci-fi flick about a teleporting
battleship, and I *like* sci-fi stuff, but that's not all this movie
has.  The back of the box mentions a character named "Tracy Lord," who
was a porn-star back in the 80s.  I think this is great.  I get to
watch the scum who make porn flicks get their heads kicked in and lots
of tits, too.  Hey, I understand the seamy side of the porn industry!
I've seen LETHAL WEAPON three times.
     I get home and pop the movie in the VCR.  Okay: First problem is
the damn film is in black and white.  It isn't my machine, because when
I take it out and put in ROBOCOP II, the colour works okay.  Fine, the
movie's probably made in Taiwan, or Canada or some other third world 
country that makes cheap films.  I put it back in and settle back for 
righteous bloodshed.  Third-worlders really know how to make good eye-
gougers.
     Next problem: the love story.  Now, I understand why you need a
love story in a film; it gives the squeeze something to watch while you
grope her, and you can get good sex stuff in the film, too.  So, okay, 
there has to be a love story (oh, and you can kill the woman, so the guy
has a reason to get mad and kill people).  The thing is, the damn love
story just kept going and going, and we don't even get to see any skin.
They even have this pool scene that would have been perfect for a skinny-
dipping scene, and they blow it by having the woman wear clothes.
Actually, she was pretty flat, so maybe they had a good reason.  Anyway,
most of the movie is about this woman, and her boyfriends, I think.
They never say *anything* about her porn career, and anyway, the woman
playing Tracy Lord is way too old for the part.
     The really big problem is that there's *no* action!  I mean, these
guys are coal miners, porn stars, and newspaper reporters (There's this 
really cute girl who plays a photographer, but even though she's
obviously a libber, she never takes her clothes off).  These guys wear
fedoras and *everything*, but no one gets shot.  You'd figure that with
two husbands of Lords and a boyfriend too, they'd at least have a ten-
minute fight scene, but the weenie playing the boyfriend goes down with
the first punch!  Geez!  The guy in RENEGADES was gutshot and he did
more!  All the good stuff is missing: no car chases, no gun fights, no
martial arts.  All these people do is talk, talk, talk.  At least I had
time to nuzzle the babe.  It's not like the movie had anything going
on.  
     They drink a lot, more than me and the guys do, even, and they
didn't throw up as much, either.
     Anyway, THE PHILADELPHIA STORY is a lousy action sci-fi film, 
and I'm sorry I wasted the $2.00 to rent it.  
Now, if the first three weren't serious, is it likely this one is?

Title
Review for Guilty by Suspicion (1991)
     Rarely in these days of socialist Big Government, does one get to
see a movie that is daring enough to support true American values.
GUILTY BY SUSPICION is such a movie.
     The plot is based on the well-known (but oft distorted) patriotic
actions of HUAC (The House Un-American Affairs Committee) in the 1950s,
when a Hollywood rotten with Communists and Liberal Fellow Travellers
was purged of its socialist toxins.  Robert De Niro plays one such commie
writer, who returns from a European trip (The Soviet Union, I need not
point out, is in Europe) and is asked by his employers to cooperate with
HUAC in its crusade against the corrupters of America.  De Niro's
character refuses this very reasonable request, and over the next two
hours, is smashed like the communist filth he is.
     I particularly enjoyed the careful and thorough case HUAC assembles
against De Niro.  We are shown he has friends like:
     An alcoholic woman judged *unfit* to raise her child, who kills
herself (a mortal sin!) after a pathetic binge.  I need not point out
that a woman who can't raise her own offspring is a crime against human
nature.  The family is (no matter what the perfumed homosexuals of
Hollywood might claim) the basis of all human civilisation!
     An obese "comedy" writer who can neither control his craving for
food not his craving for approval from his socialist friends, who
*refuses* to testify to a *Congressional Committee of the United States
of America*!
     De Niro's wife, a communist *teacher*, whose access to the pure
minds of American Youth is rightly taken away.  She is shown undermining
the USA's defenses in one telling scene.  She and De Niro are *divorced*
(The usual Hollywood serial polygamy, no doubt!) but later in the
movie, he is shown *living* with her.  What kind of an example must they
set for their child; two single adults living together outside the
bounds of matrimony!
     De Niro's character is shown to be paranoid when he attacks a man
and his wife while they are out enjoying American Free Enterprise!
Clearly, the anticipation of the Stalinistic purges that *would* have
swept the USA if not for HUAC eroded his mind!  
     These are just *some* of the examples of moral corruption HUAC has
to deal with in this film.  They succeed in sniffing out communism in
cases a normal untrained observer would have mistaken as perfectly
harmless or even as *Pro-American*!
     What, you think I'd post this without a disclaimer?  Tee Hee.  Just
a joke, folks; apologies to those who took it seriously.  Inspired by a
comment by a friend, and a conversation I eavesdropped on.

Title
Review for Thelma & Louise (1991)
     THELMA AND LOUISE is the most recent attempt by Hollywood to cash
in on sci-fi.  The film is set 35 years in the future and the director
chose to avoid the cliches of other B films (Giant insects, Atomic war,
Alien invasions) and try for a more 'realistic' feel by looking at the
future from the point of view of two women.  I suppose it is the same
reason UNCLE TOM'S CABIN used a coloured man as the main character; you
get a different perspective from underneath.  I'm a big fan of sci-fi,
and I had high hopes for this film, but unfortunately, what Ridley Scott
has produced is a smutty dystopia, whose technology is scarcely more
advanced than our own.
     Scott chose to set THELMA AND LOUISE in a backwater state.  While
this means he didn't have to pay for the expensive sets portraying a
futuristic city, which his accountant no doubt thanked him for, it also
means that the two characters spend most of their time driving around
scenery that seems not to have changed in any major way in the next
three and a half decades (well, once or twice, you do get to see what
seems to be the Interstate and National Defense road system, but that's
just something we're working on *now*, scarcely futuristic).  Now, while
it makes sense that the two women would want to keep to the backroads,
surely in 35 years, we'd have better backroads than dirt and the
occasional hardtop.
     THELMA AND LOUISE is at best described as pornographic.  Sex scenes
abound, and the subject of sex seems to be a major theme in the movie.
Now, there's nothing wrong with the occasional kiss or whatever, if it
is handled with taste, but this movie goes far beyond good taste.
Worse, it is inconsistent.  On one hand, Scott presents a future where
women apparently have relations with men on a fairly casual basis (One
of the women claims not to have "had" any one but her husband, but falls
into bed with a hitchhiker the women pick up and the other woman acts
pleased that this happened), but women also seem to be the target of
continual unwanted advances, and if the comments of the older woman are
correct, women who are raped can't hope to be believed (although given
the easy nature of the two women in this film, it is easy to see why).
Is sex good or bad?  Don't ask Mr. Scott, because he doesn't seem to
have made up his mind.
     To put it mildly, Ridley Scott's 1991 is not very advanced, given
the 35 years that have supposedly gone by.  The cars don't have fins.
Ovens have gotten smaller.  There are no videophones, though, and
although I looked hard, there didn't seem to be very many pieces of
technology that we couldn't built today.  They have "microwave ovens,"
which makes sense (radar can cook things *fast*!), they have
radio-controlled TV (same programs as we have, judging by the sound
track in the scene where the FBI is watching TV).  Because Scott tries
hard to look at the future from the perspective of someone living in
that future, what new technology is shown isn't explained.  Why do
people have radar dishes in their back yards?  What is that TV-like
screen one FBI man is studying?  We never find out.  It would have
worked better as a sci-fi film if Scott had figured out a way to put the
technolgy more in the spot-light.
     The police do seem to have advanced slightly.  They have flocks of
helicopters, and the police cars have megaphones on them (again, nothing
we couldn't do).  On the other hand, the cops seem to have softened in
35  years; one policeman seems to care more about the two murderers he
is chasing than he does the man they killed, and another is shown crying
as soon as he is threatened.  Are men supposed to be all soft crybabies
or drooling apes in 1991?  
     Even weapons don't seem to have changed much.  No blasters or ray
guns for Mr. Scott.  The women have a revolver and an automatic and the
police have rifles.  The rifles looked unfamiliar, but were never used,
so I couldn't tell if they were any better than the rifles the army uses
now.  Again, there didn't seem to be any radical changes, just a lot
more of what we have now.
     THELMA AND LOUISE is a sci-fi film that suffers from a terrible
lack of vision on Ridley Scott's part.  His future is not much different
from our present, except that it has more sex, funny looking cars, and a
lot of helicopters.  I had to agree with the despairing note the movie
ends on; THELMA AND LOUISE is just a bleak, pornographic version of our
present, with the slight advances in technology more than made up for by
social decay.  This is not a future I would want to live in.
What, you think people posted reviews to USENET in 1956? 
