Authors
Piaw Na
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Heaven & Earth (1993)
A review of HEAVEN AND EARTH from a crazy perspective
     "Have you heard of HEAVEN AND EARTH?" said my Vietnamese friend
(I'll call her "Jane")
     "It's a story about Vietnam, told from the perspective of a
Vietnamese woman.  I've yet to see an American film about Vietnam told
from the point of view of a Vietnamese woman, so I want to see it."
     "Yeah.  The actress isn't a professional actress--I met her once.
She's from UC Davies and she dropped out of school for a year to do
it."
     "Hmm ....  It says here that Oliver Stone made the movie--he also
made PLATOON, didn't he?"
     And so I went and saw the movie with "Jane."  I won't describe the
movie for you, since others have and will do so.  I won't dissect the
plot, or talk about the symbolism.
     The first thing we agreed on as we left the movie theatre was that
the film should have been in Vietnamese with English subtitles.  I'm
not Vietnamese, and in spite of having a close Vietnamese friend, am
not about to learn Vietnamese, but even though I'm used to listening to
English being spoken with a Vietnamese accent, much of the impact of
the film was lost as I had to decipher the Vietnamese/English.  (I
speak English with an accent, too, so this is not and should not be
taken as an indictment of the Vietnamese accent.)  The inconsistency of
the language spoken by the lead actress, for instance, varied according
to whether the director wanted her to be "authentic", or
"understandable."  (As she got angrier, her English got better.)  This
made it tough, since I missed enough dialog in the film for me to get
irritated.
     The main problem with the film was that it was telling Le Ly's
story.  As a memoir, it is well done.  But as a story, it felt quite
raw, since there was too much to handle.  You can't tell a life's story
in 3 hours and do it justice.  "Jane" said, "it feels raw for you
because you don't connect it with reality.  You want to see it as a
movie--but it's somebody's life story, and it's a pretty common story
for Vietnamese.  If I were to meet her outside a supermarket, I would
have to assume that that was her background, but Americans are too
detached from the Vietnamese experience to deal with this as anything
other than a movie."  I replied, claiming that the movie didn't do her
memoir justice, and should have been cut perhaps just before she left
Vietnam to lend the story more power.  "But that wouldn't tell you the
point of the story, which was that she truly was in-between, like the
Vietnamese.  We didn't know, even after the war, whether siding with
the Americans was right or siding with the Viet-Cong was right.  We
were just fighting for our lives."  It would have been just another
"lived happily ever after" movie instead, I guess, so it wasn't a good
thing, either.
     We agreed that because of the format, the narration varied between
lyrical and prosaic, and that lent an unreal feeling to the movie.
     And so we came to the conclusion that the movie couldn't have been
improved except by extending it to maybe five hours or making a
mini-series on TV instead.  But it's still worth seeing on the big
screen, as many of the shots would lose their impact on videotape.  We
paid matinee prices for it, but that wasn't a deliberate act, and I
would have gotten my money's worth even at full price.
