Authors
Wayne Citrin
Number of Reviews
12

Title
Review for Mortal Thoughts (1991)
Micro-summary: Alan Rudolph does a murder mystery.
Summary:  A young woman (Demi Moore) gets inadvertently involved in
          a murder committed by her best friend (Glenne Headley).
          The facts come out at the police interrogation.
     I'll just start by saying that Alan Rudolph is one of my favorite
filmmakers, and that he's done some of my favorite films (THE MODERNS,
and TROUBLE IN MIND).  He always tries something unusual, and it's
usually interesting.  When the film started, though, I was surprised.
Where was the surreal or hyperreal story line and physical setting?
Where is Rudolph's production company (Geraldine Chaplin, Keith
Carradine, Genevieve Bujold)?  Something unusual was going on.
     As I learned later, this isn't entirely an Alan Rudolph film.
Rudolph joined the production a week into the shooting, when the
producers (Demi Moore and Taylor Hackford) fired the original director
and brought in Rudolph.  Rudolph was able to bring long-time
collaborator Mark Isham to do the music, but he had no hand in the
story.  Still, he was able to put his stamp on the film.
     Cynthia Kellogg (Demi Moore) and Joyce Urbansky (Glenne Headley)
are best friends.  Cynthia also works in Joyce's beauty parlor.  Joyce
is married to James, a dangerous and violent lout (played by Bruce
Willis, Moore's real-life husband).  Joyce keeps talking about killing
James, and, well, one day it happens.  Cynthia is there, and she ends
up helping her friend conceal the evidence and gets involved more and
more deeply.  The strain affects both women, and the friendship
unravels.  Cynthia isn't helped by the fact that her own husband isn't
any great shakes (although he's a step above James).
     All of this is revealed as flashbacks during Cynthia's
interrogation.  But the senior detective (Harvey Keitel) has some doubts
about Cynthia's story....
     The film is nicely paced, and the screenplay gives us good reason
to understand why James is killed when it happens.  We understand how
and why a law-abiding friend can be drawn into a crime, and then find it
hard to extricate herself.  The friendship between the two women is
believable.  Their acting is good, as is that of Willis, who makes a
convincing and hateful villain.  The supporting characters particularly
Keitel's detective and Cynthia's husband (John Pankow) are well-drawn
and well-acted.  The ending is good.  (Won't say anything more than
that.)  This is a superior murder mystery.
     Rudolph's contribution lies in the pacing, which is slow enough to
raise the tension, along with appropriate use of slow motion and sound,
vivid colors, and shiny lights reflected in wet nighttime streets.
Isham's music contributes to the atmosphere.  The main problem is that
he's constrained by the realism of the script, which just doesn't allow
many of the strange Rudolph touches (like the alternate reality of 'Rain
City'/Seattle in TROUBLE IN MIND or the modern-art painted backdrops to
many of the scenes in THE MODERNS).  This is definitely Bayonne, NJ in
the late 1980's, and there's nothing Rudolph can do to change that.
     As I said before, this is a superior murder mystery, and it also
shows that Rudolph is capable of handling conventional genre filmmaking
if he has to.  So it's worth seeing in itself.  However, there are any
number of directors who could have made this film.  I'd rather wait for
a film that only Alan Rudolph could make.

Title
Review for Queens Logic (1991)
     The summary I posted above, "DINER goes to Queens," is not
necessarily dismissive.  DINER was a great film, and we need more films
like DINER.  I used to call these films "coming-of-age films," thinking
of such examples as AMERICAN GRAFFITI, but as I wrote this review, it
occurred to me that most of the most interesting examples of this genre
involve post-adolescents, although the central event is one that finally
forces the group to grow up.  These films involve a group of long-time
friends who are either reunited, or one of them, who has been away for a
long time, finally returns.  The cause for their reunion is usually an
event like a wedding or a funeral, although it may sometimes simply be a
regular reunion.  The films are usually comedies.  Some of the best
films in this genre, in my opinion, are the aforementioned DINER, THE
RETURN OF THE SECAUCUS SEVEN, THE BIG CHILL, FIVE CORNERS, and THE
WANDERERS (the only example in the group that is about adolescents).
The worst film in this genre that I can think of is ST. ELMO'S FIRE.
QUEENS LOGIC falls somewhere in the middle, although on the
better-than-average side.
     The plot is easily summarized.  One of the gang is about to get
married.  They all hang out together and are joined by one friend who
returns from California for the wedding.  They hang out, talk about
life, get drunk.  Each has a problem.  Al's wife has just walked out on
him.  Ray, the one about to get married, is getting cold feet.  Denny
was never the success in Hollywood that he claims to be.  Vince is
looking for love (or maybe just a good lay, it's not clear which).
Elliot is a homosexual, which (according to Hollywood rules) is supposed
to make him unhappy.  Everything comes to a head at the big bachelor's
party, which is more like a regular great party than a traditional
bachelor's party.
     Let's talk about what's wrong with the movie first.  Most of the
characters are simply labels.  Ray is an Artist.  Denny is a California
Musician.  Vince is a Lover.  Elliot is a Tormented Homosexual.  A
little more depth in the characterizations would have been appreciated.
     Also, the women's roles are generally peripheral.  In a film where
relations with women are central (Al's wife, Ray's wedding), the women
are good, long-suffering, and eventually forgiving.  Jamie Lee Curtis
shows up in a cameo that's somewhat inexplicable.
     The screenplay could have been a little more carefully written.
There are two incidents involving a gun near the end of the film that
are almost replays of each other.  The first one worked, the second
could have been taken out.  Also, some of the set-piece speeches just
don't work.
     The film trades on a Queens mystique.  But the problem is, there is
no Queens mystique.  It's just a place, and not a very interesting one,
either.  (At least not in the white working-class ethnic areas they
concentrate on; there are some very interesting ethnic neighborhoods in
Queens.)  I have some limited experience in this:  I was born in
Flushing, spent a year in Forest Hills, and my mother's family comes
from Queens.  It's just not such an interesting place.
     So, what's good about the film?  The main thing that's good about
it is Joe Mantegna as Al.  His performance holds the film together, just
as Al holds the group of friends together.  This is the first thing I've
ever seen Mantegna do that I've really liked.  (The other things I've
seen him in were HOUSE OF GAMES, THINGS CHANGE, and THE GODFATHER PART
III.)  John Malkovich is good as Elliot, but he's been good in
everything I've seen him in.  Tom Waits has an excellent small part as a
wonderfully strange shady character named Monty.
     The best thing about the movie is the friendship between the
characters.  It's believable that these guys have been together for a
long time, and that the genuinely like each other.  Since the friendship
is what's on screen most of the time, the film worked for me.

Title
Review for Jean de Florette (1986)
     I'm surprised that nobody has posted a review of this excellent film,
which won the major award at Cannes this year.  [Actually, there was one by
Jeff Meyer, available as r.a.m.r./89.  -ecl]  JEAN DE FLORETTE is a vivid
adaptation of the Marcel Pagnol novel about peasant life in southern France
between the wars.  Papet (Yves Montand) wishes to acquire a neighbor's land in
order to establish his nephew Ugolin (Daniel Auteuil).  However, the neighbor
dies and his heir, Jean (Gerard Depardieu), a city dweller, arrives intending
to settle down and farm the land according to the systems described in his
books.  Papet and Ugolin conceal the spring on Jean's land (which is what makes
the land valuable in this dry landscape) and sit back to watch Jean fail.  They
hope that he will give up and sell them the land.
     This description does not do justice to this extraordinarily rich film.
Papet and Ugolin are not standard cardboard villains, but sympathetic
characters with understandable (though not necessarily admirable) reasons for
doing the things they do.  Jean is a sympathetic character, but also rather
pompous and ludicrous in his faith in his "manuals."  The film shows how
closed to outsiders village life can be, and how primitive life there was
before the war.
     All the performances in the film are excellent, and the photography is 
beautiful.  The script is intelligent, with many subtle motivations and 
connections between characters hinted at but not explained.
     JEAN DE FLORETTE is the first part of a two-part film.  The second part,
MANON DES EAUX (MANON OF THE SPRINGS) was released in France at the same  time
as JEAN DE FLORETTE, but I have heard that MANON DES EAUX will be released in
the United States around Christmas.  Although MANON DES EAUX is the natural
sequel (see the first film and you'll see what I mean), JEAN DE FLORETTE is
itself a self contained film and filmgoers should not go expecting an
incomplete, open-ended story.  I give JEAN DE FLORETTE 3-1/2 stars out of 4,
and eagerly await MANON DES EAUX.

Title
Review for Who Framed Roger Rabbit (1988)
     Hefty German woman (Marianne Saegebrecht) finds herself stranded at a
motel in the middle of the California desert with a bunch of American oddballs.
She finds friendship, and brings some happiness into their lives.  Film seems
somewhat remote and uninvolving during the viewing, but grows on you
afterwards.  Two and a half stars.
     The best film I've seen so far this year.  Several interlocking stories
about young people in the Bronx in 1964, centered around the homecoming of a
psychopath just out of prison.  Offbeat story and dialogue written by the writer
of MOONSTRUCK.  Reminiscent of THE WANDERERS and DINER.  Three and a half stars.
     A romantic farce set in a village on the Greek island of Rhodes during the
tourist season.  The set of interlocking stories concerning romance,
entrepreneurialism, espionage, and art theft, is coherent and funny.  The
scenery is incomparable, and Jacqueline Bisset, although looking her age, is
still beautiful.  Only problem in the film is the romance between Bisset and
her ex-husband, played by Edward Fox, which is completely lacking in chemistry.
There's enough in this film to make up for that, though.  Three stars.
     In the Kenya of the Fifties, a young African boy whose father has been
killed by the Mau-Mau, is forced to take a job as a "kitchen toto" (or helper)
in the house of the British chief of police.  He becomes caught up in the
revolution and is divided in his loyalties between the Africans and his British
employers.  The film presents a well-rounded and even-handed treatment of the
British colonials and their African servants, but I felt that the treatment of
the Mau-Mau as evil thugs was too shallow and took away from whatever points
the film made on behalf of the British.  Two and a half stars.
     I read the novel last year and have been looking for the film (on video or
in a theatre) ever since.  The film, by Visconti, is a meticulous recreation of
the classic novel about a Sicilian prince (Burt Lancaster) and his adjustment
to Italian unification and the rise of the bourgeois society.  Visconti decided
to leave out the last few chapters (for time reasons, probably, although the
film still lasts almost three hours), which unfortunately tends to blunt the
point that the novel tries to make.  There's still enough here, though, to make
the film worthwhile, even if you haven't read the book.  Three stars.
     I finally got around to seeing this after reading some negative reviews
and was pleasantly surprised.  Something of a romantic fantasy, but with
intelligent, well-rounded characters and witty dialogue.  Cher and Nicolas Cage
put in excellent performances, and I can't even look at Vincent Gardenia's face
with out breaking up.  Three stars.
     Nothing I say will keep anyone from going to see it, but I thought it was
a low-grade "Chinatown" with a "Howard the Duck" ending.  Yes, the technical
virtuosity was admirable, but that's only enough to give it two stars out of
four.

Title
Review for Wu kui (1994)
     I just came back from Labor Day weekend at Telluride and thought
I'd mention what showed there, what was good, and what was popular.
Maybe it was the excitement last year of being there for the first
time, or maybe I was paying more attention at the time to films that
were playing festivals abroad, but the selection here didn't seem quite
as exciting this year.  Last year we had the US premieres of such
widely heralded films as FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE, THE PIANO, and FAR AWAY
SO CLOSE, as well as such discoveries (for me, at least) as RAINING
STONES (and other Ken Loach films), NAKED (and other Mike Leigh films),
BLUE, and THE JOY LUCK CLUB.  For those who liked big premieres,
though, the festival did have the world premieres of Michael Tolkin's
THE NEW AGE, Woody Allen's BULLETS OVER BROADWAY, and Tim Burton's ED
WOOD, as well as the premiere of the first Roadrunner/Coyote film
produced by Chuck Jones and Warner Brothers in over thirty years.
     We arrived in town at 10PM after a long drive (8 hours), checked
into our room, and went and picked up a program.  (Programs are kept
secret until the start of the festival.)  We decided to catch the
premiere of THE NEW AGE, a new film by Michael Tolkin (dir. THE
RAPTURE, scr. THE PLAYER).  It was showing as part of a tribute to Judy
Davis.  THE NEW AGE stars Davis and Peter Weller (who both starred in
THE NAKED LUNCH) as an upscale Los Angeles couple who see the bottom
drop out of their lives as they both lose their jobs.  They try various
economic solutions and begin to examine their spiritual foundations,
but can't find any solutions.  The acting and production were flawless,
but I simply couldn't connect with the characters.  I simply could not
believe that such successful people could be so clueless about how to
keep their head above water.  I also found it hard to believe that
these people could be so spiritually bankrupt that their lives had been
completely unexamined up to that point.  It seemed that Tolkin spent
over two hours saying what might have been comfortably said in 20
minutes.  This film will probably get mainstream release, and it'll
probably (and rightly) be savaged by the critics.
MURIEL'S WEDDING (Australia, 1994, 105m)
     We slept in on Saturday after the late night before.  This was
something of a mistake, since we missed the morning programs and made
it harder to see some of the things we wanted to see later.  The first
film we saw that day had been shown at the outdoor theater during an
open showing the night before, and we had heard people raving about
it.  (Word of mouth is the best way to get information in this festival
where approximately 30 programs show repeatedly over the course of four
days in five theaters in this small mountain resort.)  We had heard
that the film got a 15 minute standing ovation at Cannes this year.
Sometimes films are overhyped (THE PIANO, which I saw last year at
Telluride, didn't live up to the Cannes hype), but this time the film
was as good as the advance notices.  Muriel, a young woman from an
improbably dysfunctional family in an Australian seaside resort (with
the equally improbable name of "Porpoise Spit"), and a big ABBA fan,
learns to find her self-respect in a story that takes her to live on
her own in Sydney.  She originally believes that marriage will make her
somebody, but learns in the end what she really needs.  This is a
delightful comedy, a real crowd pleaser.  The ending was plausible and
not overly saccharine, despite the fact that some people said that,
although they liked it, they thought the film was a bit too "sweet."  I
believe that this will be a big hit in the US in the fall.  And, as the
director P. J. Hogan said before the showing, "if you don't know who
ABBA is, you'll certainly know after the movie is over."
     Before MURIEL'S WEDDING, Chuck Jones got up to introduce CHARIOTS
OF FUR (USA, 1994, 6m).  Jones, who looks great at 81 years old, said
that Warner had decided to revive their old movie animation operation
after 30 years, and asked Jones to come on board and teach a new
generation of cartoonists.  Jones made a few remarks about how, when he
had started as a young animator in his 20's, his producers were old men
of 40 and 50, and now "young men of 40 and 50 are running the studio."
He also said in the old days that you could tell how much Jack Warner
liked a film by how many times he had to leave the screening to pee.
Jones said he was fortunate that even Warner couldn't pee more than
once in the 6 minutes that it took to run a cartoon.  He also said that
they had decided to do a Roadrunner/Coyote cartoon because the
characters were simpler than, say, Bugs Bunny.  The film was good fun,
the typical Roadrunner stuff, although Jones said that he had
embellished the Roadrunner's character and made him a bit more "Harpo
Marxish."  The film will play in theaters this fall with WB releases.
STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE (Cuba, 1993, 111m)
     Our passes included admission to an Opera House program "Writing
for Hitch," which would include live interviews with screenwriters
Charles Bennett (BLACKMAIL and THE 39 STEPS) and John Michael Hayes
(REAR WINDOW).  However interesting this sounded, Deborah and I had
decided that with our limited time we wanted to see films, particularly
new foreign and independent US films that were unlikely to make it to
local theaters.  Consequently we skipped the retrospectives and
tributes, and the Hollywood premieres.  We chose the Cuban film
STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE, the showing of which at last year's Havana
Film Festival resulted in the exile of the festival's director.  How
the director avoided the same fate, I don't know.  STRAWBERRY AND
CHOCOLATE details the relationship of Diego, a cultured gay man, and
David, a university student, heterosexual, and committed Communist.
Diego attempts to pick up David on a dare, and after some difficulties
the two become friends, despite the government's anti-homosexual
policies.  This causes some tension between David and his comrades, and
the relationship eventually endangers both David's and Diego's
positions in society.  The film is well-acted and I enjoyed this
insight into everyday Cuban life--something quite alien to most
Americans, and all the more relevant now.
LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD (England, 1994, 102m)
     English director Ken Loach and his film RAINING STONES was one of
the big discoveries for me at last year's festival, and when I saw he
had a new film, I had to see it.  The new film tells the story of
Maggie, a woman who is judged as unfit to be a mother by the British
social welfare services and loses her children, then later has new
children taken away by the authorities despite dramatic improvements in
her life.  It's based on a true story, and treats issues very much in
the news these days.  Loach, the film maker of the British working
class, takes a very complex view of Maggie and her situation, and of
the  eminently reasonable policies of the bureaucracy and their
brutalizing effect on people.  Both of us were in tears by the end,
although Deborah, having never heard of Loach before, was even more
strongly affected than I was.  An extremely powerful, moving film, and
an amazing performance by Chrissy Rock as Maggie.  See this one, and
see any of Loach's other films that you can get your hands on.
     LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD was preceded by an English short called "Fever,"
about the problems of a young woman in an English city.  The woman was
played by Katrin Cartledge, who had a major role in Mike Leigh's NAKED
last year.  She played the same kind of character here, and although
she did a reasonable job, the film seemed to lack a point.
     After the film let out, the only thing we could make was a showing
of PLAN NINE FROM OUTER SPACE, as part of an Ed Wood retrospective, but
Deborah decided that we weren't that desperate to see another movie and
we called it a night.
THE WOODEN MAN'S BRIDE (Taiwan, 1994, 105m)
     Having enjoyed FAREWELL MY CONCUBINE at last year's festival, and
being a fan of Zhang Yimou's films, I was curious to see this new film
by Taiwanese director Huang Jianxin.  The film, set in the 1920s, tells
the story of a young woman being brought to be a bride in another
house.  She's abducted by bandits but is recovered by the man who was
accompanying her.  In the meantime, the groom dies in an accident
during preparations for her rescue, and the family decides to continue
the wedding, marrying her to a wooden effigy of the young groom.  This
is a problem, since she feels oppressed by the arrangements and falls
in love with the man who brought her back from the bandits.  The film
was definitely inspired by the work of Zhang Yimou, particularly the
photography, but the story wasn't nearly as engaging, and the ending
was abrupt and implausible.  The film was ok, but not outstanding.
     Before the film, we were shown a short nature film by Swedish
director Stefan Jarl, "Land of the Lapps" (Sweden, 1994, 12m), who had
a retrospective at last year's festival.  The film attempted to show
the pressures on the traditional Sami people by modern Swedish society,
and although the photography was excellent, the presentation seemed
rather heavy-handed and uncompelling.
BAB EL-OUED CITY (Algeria/France, 1994, 93m)
     BAB EL-OUED CITY is a story of clash between modern life and
Muslim fundamentalism.  In Algiers, fundamentalists install
loudspeakers on roofs of buildings, playing sermons and readings from
scriptures both day and night.  One day a young baker, who can't sleep
because of the noise, tears out one of the speakers and throws it into
the sea.  The film tells the story of how the fundamentalists try to
find the person who did it, and the troubles the baker's act bring on
himself.  The film takes the position that the fundamentalists are
being manipulated by the Algerian secret police as a mechanism of
social control.  I felt that the film kept up a decent amount of
tension, and like STRAWBERRY AND CHOCOLATE lent insight into societies
and issues relatively unfamiliar to me, yet more and more important in
today's news.  Not one of the top films at the festival, but
interesting.
     Life begins to imitate art in that the director could not be
present at the screening because two of his friends had recently been
shot by fundamentalists.  The implication was that he was hiding
somewhere in Algiers.
     Before the film, we were shown a rather boring animated short
called "Etude" (USA, 1994, 5m), with abstract designs choreographed to
music.
FAMILY (England/Ireland, 1994, 115m)
     FAMILY, as shown at the festival, is a two-hour condensation of a
four-hour television series shown on British and Irish television this
year.  It is the first original screenplay by Roddy Doyle, the author
of the novels on which THE COMMITMENTS and THE SNAPPER were based, and
the author of this year's Booker Prize-winning novel "Paddy Clark ha ha
ha." FAMILY was a sensation in Ireland--the most talked-about TV
series in years.  No previous series had the graphic and realistic
language, sex, and violence of this series, and it provoked a
discussion of whether this was a typical North Dublin family.  Well, I
don't think this was the point--the point was that problems like this
exist and should be discussed.  The film has four segments, each on
various members of the Spenser family:  Charlo the husband, a
small-time thief and ne'er-do-well; John Paul, the oldest son who is
having trouble in school and is taking to drinking; Nicola, the oldest
daughter, who is in the process of escaping the home and fear possible
molestation by her father; and Paula, Charlo's alcoholic wife who is
trying to hold the family together.  The director, Michael
Winterbottom, reported that FAMILY may have a major influence on an
upcoming Irish referendum on the legalization of divorce.  You won't
see FAMILY in this form outside a festival, but the hope is that the
entire series will be picked up for television.  It was definitely
involving, and I suggest you look for it if it comes to television.
     After dinner, we had about an hour to kill before the next film we
wanted to see, so we caught some of this presentation on pornography.
Two professors from the University of California lectured and showed
excerpts from various genres of pornography.  I have to admit that I
fell asleep, which astonished Deborah.  The lecture confirmed my
impression from the little pornography I'd previously seen: pornography
is boring.  I thought that the lecturers were completely off the mark
in neglecting the difference between pornography and erotica.  Erotica
uses the entire array of psychological stimuli to arouse--this may
include showing sex, or it may not.  In fact, some of the most erotic
scenes I can think of have no sex: the flamenco dances in Carlos
Saura's CARMEN, the eating scene in TOM JONES, and the scene where
Michelle Pfeiffer sings "Makin' Whoopie" and flirts with Jeff Bridges
while lying on Bridges' piano in THE FABULOUS BAKER BOYS.  Pornography,
on the other hand, seems to rely entirely on portraying sex.  It seemed
that pornography is nothing more than an attempt at erotica by very
unimaginative people.  The two silent pornographic films from 1915
(FREE RIDE and ON THE BEACH) were kind of cute and innocent, though.
ONCE WERE WARRIORS (New Zealand, 1994, 99m)
     If I had to pick one thing that I would pronounce the best thing
at the festival, I would say that it was this film.  ONCE WERE WARRIORS
describes the lives of an urban Maori family, including the domestic
violence, the alcoholism, the unemployment, and the cultural
displacement.  The film is beautifully acted and photographed, and
there is a great soundtrack.  I think, though, that what's most
outstanding about this film is the writing and the characterizations.
There is a depth to these characters--even the worst ones are complex
and are attractive at times.  There's also a realization that not
everything is bleak--the good times are really good, and there can be
a great deal of real warmth in these lives.  The story of this film is
very similar to that of FAMILY, what with the ne'er-do-well husband,
the alcoholic wife, the domestic abuse, the son in trouble with the
law, and the daughter fearing sexual advances, but despite the fact
that FAMILY was written by a Booker Prize winner, the characters and
situations in ONCE WERE WARRIORS have a lot more depth.  I don't know
if this film will see mainstream distribution (I suspect not, but it
may well play in art houses), but I enthusiastically recommend that you
see it.  This is a debut film for the director, Lee Tamahori.  I hope
it's the beginning of a successful career.
     Before ONCE WERE WARRIORS, we were shown another New Zealand
short, "Avondale Dogs" (New Zealand, 1994, 15m).  The New Zealand Film
Commission seemed to have high hopes for this film and its director, as
it was distributing fliers for it, including sales and contact
information.  I thought it was a very lyrical and dreamy piece about a
young boy growing up in a suburban town in 1965, remembering one or two
events in his life that were very important but that he didn't quite
understand at the time.  I felt it had the qualities of a very good
short story, creating the characters and story in a fairly minimal
way.  I enjoyed it, and I hope that the director, Gregor Nicholas, goes
on to other things.

Title
Review for Un été inoubliable (1994)
AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER (Romania/France, 1994, 80m)
     Although the festival went all the way through Monday evening, and
was an opportunity to catch some of the films we has missed, we really
only had time for one film since Deborah had work the next day and we
wanted to get home at a decent hour.  We chose the film AN
UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER, which was described by one of the festival staff
as "one of the jewels of the festival."  He was also enthusiastic about
the short, which I'll describe later.  AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER is an
historical piece about a Romanian army captain and his wife in the
1920s. In order to protect his wife from the advances of his commanding
officer, the captain, a staff officer at the time, requests a transfer,
and is transferred to a bleak border post in the Romanian east.  He and
his wife adapt, but they eventually find themselves in a situation
where the moral solution is the one that will destroy them.  The film
shows how two decent, honest people can find themselves in a no-win
situation.  The film is presented on a small scale and, ironically, is
told through the eyes of the young son, who simply remembers this as
"an unforgettable summer," possibly the best summer he ever had.  I'd
say that this is one of the four best things we saw: ONCE WERE WARRIORS
was the best, then LADYBIRD, LADYBIRD, and then a toss-up between this
and MURIEL'S WEDDING.
     Before AN UNFORGETTABLE SUMMER, we were shown the hilarious and
wonderfully strange English short "Franz Kafka's IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE"
(England, 1994, 25m).  In the film, we see Kafka, in his room at the
top of a castle, attempting to write "Metamorphosis" on Christmas Eve,
while dealing with disturbances by his various neighbors.  Kafka
wrestles with the decision of exactly what Gregor Samsa is transformed
into ("a banana?"), and eventually learns that he has friends who love
him.  I chuckle just thinking about it.
     Here's a quick list of the other things that played at Telluride
this year.
     This included a showing of THE NEW AGE (described in part 1), plus
a compilation of Davis clips.  I heard that Davis seemed quite shy, and
was relieved to get her medallion and disappear.  Apparently she
doesn't like a lot of her early work.
THEY SHOOT HORSES, DON'T THEY (USA, 1969, 125m)
     A new print of the Sydney Pollack film.  Selected by John Simon,
the 1994 Guest Director of the festival.
     Apparently the most requested film of the festival, although I
didn't speak to anyone who had seen it.  A silent movie, and a love
story.
     Live conversations with two screenwriters who worked for
Hitchcock, along with excerpts.
     A tribute to Ken Burns, director of the PBS documentary THE CIVIL
WAR, and the new 18-hour documentary BASEBALL.  Everyone who saw him
said how wonderful he was.  The tribute included the fifth part of the
nine-part series (it concentrates on the Negro leagues and is apparently
the part he's most proud of) and the rest of the documentary premiered
on local Telluride cable TV in 4-hour segments over the course of the
festival.  I caught the fourth part (on Babe Ruth and the 1920s) and it
was pretty good.  This will appear on PBS later this month.
VANYA ON 42ND STREET (USA, 1994, 115m)
     A new film by Louis Malle, with Andre Gregory and Wally Shawn.  A
sequel to MY DINNER WITH ANDRE?  Not quite - it's a film about the
rehearsals of a production of Uncle Vanya on Broadway.  It sounded
intriguing, but I couldn't work it in.  One person told me it was
"talky" (what would you expect?) and said that it made her husband
realize that he didn't like Chekhov.
     Another choice of John Simon.  Didn't see it, and didn't speak to
anyone who did.
     A tribute to the Swedish actress who worked with Ingmar Bergman.
Included a compilation and a "rare screening of the uncut, uncensored
MONIKA."  Didn't hear anything about it.
     A retrospective of the work of the 1950s Cuban musical star and
sex goddess Ninon Sevilla.  Included a showing of the film AVENTURERA
(1949, 95m).  Didn't hear anything about it.
SILENCES OF THE PALACE (Tunisia/France. 1994, 127m)
     A film about the lives of female servants in a privileged Tunisian
family.  I wanted to see it but couldn't fit it in.  Heard it was
good.
"Black Daisies for the Bride" (England, 1993, 50m)
     TV film by British poet Tony Harrison.  Shown with another short
film "A Maybe Day in Kazakhstan" (England, 1994, 26m).  Didn't hear
anything about it.
     A forum for films by aspiring directors - in the former case, film
students, and in the later case, people from other positions.  People
seemed to like the program.
"Music for the Movies: Toru Takemitsu" (USA/France/Japan, 1994, 58m)
     A documentary about the film music composer.
     Mini-retrospective of Ed Wood films, in conjunction with the
showing of Tim Burton's ED WOOD.  Films shown were GLEN OR GLENDA (USA,
1953, 61m) and PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE (USA, 1959, 79m).
THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE WORLD INTO MUSIC (Germany 1994, 90m)
     A new documentary by Werner Herzog on the Wagner festival in
Bayreuth, Germany.
     Film about a young neglected girl who kidnaps another girl in
order to be the mother she never had.  Heard good thing about it.
     New film by director Errol Morris (THE THIN BLUE LINE) about a
parrot that may have witnessed a murder.  Shown with CROWS.  Supposed
to be good.  Morris also demonstrated his INTERROTRON system, a new
system to improve interviews by projecting the interviewer's image on
the camera lens, thus causing the subjects to look directly into the
camera rather than off-camera.
     A comedy about a film grad who becomes an assistant to a studio
executive.  I wanted to see it but couldn't fit it in.  People liked
it, and were impressed by the fact that it was shot in 18 days, but
some said that it was too much like THE PLAYER.  I hope it gets
theatrical release, so I can see it.
MEMORIES AND DREAMS (Australia, 1994, 58m)
     Animated reflection on the life of a Czech journalist who
emigrates to Australia.
     Shown with MEMORIES AND DREAMS, about Arthur Stace, a drunken hobo
who found Jesus in his 40th year and spent the next 40 years writing
the word "Eternity" across the streets of Sydney.  For a long time,
nobody knew who was writing the word, which became a cultural icon.  It
sounded interesting.
     A story about Amerasian orphans in Vietnam, by Rachid Bouchareb
(dir.  BATON ROUGE and CHEB).  I heard good things about it, and wanted
to see it, but couldn't fit it in.
WE, CHILDREN OF THE 20TH CENTURY (Russia, 1994, 85m)
     A documentary on marginal children in St. Petersburg by Vitali
Kanevski, director of FREEZE DIE COME TO LIFE.  Sounded interesting but
I couldn't fit it in.
"Zinky Boys Go Underground" (England, 1994, 25m)
     Another selection by John Simon.  More interesting was the short
that showed with it:
     "Ingmar Bergman directed these TV soap commercials, never before
seen in the US."
ARIZONA DREAM (France/USA, 1993, 120m)
     Supposedly a big hit in Europe, this is the first American film by
Yugoslavian director Emir Kusturica (WHEN FATHER WAS AWAY ON BUSINESS,
TIME OF THE GYPSIES).  People liked it, but said that it was very
strange.  What would you expect with a cast that includes Johnny Depp,
Jerry Lewis, Faye Dunaway, and Lili Taylor?  I wanted to see it, but
couldn't fit it in.  It'll probably play in art theaters, so I'll get a
chance to see it.
     Shown with ARIZONA DREAMS.  Treat Williams' directorial debut.
     Another Signoret film.  I heard that the new print looked great.
Popular enough to merit a repeat showing.
     Signoret won a Best Actress Oscar for her English-speaking role in
this film.
     The world premiere of Woody Allen's new film; a surprise entry not
in the original program.  I didn't see it since I figured I'd have the
chance to see it shortly.  I heard mixed things about it.  Some people
thought it was very funny, while other people thought that the joke was
kind of thin for a full-length movie.  About the Mafia financing a
Broadway musical in the 1920s.
     Another surprise entry, the world premiere of Tim Burton's new
film on the cult director, starring Johnny Depp.  Again, I didn't
bother to see it, since it will be playing theaters shortly, and since
it showed fairly late in the festival, I didn't get a chance to talk to
anybody who had seen it.
-- 
Wayne Citrin     citrin@soglio.colorado.edu citrin@cs.colorado.edu

Title
Review for Whistle Blower, The (1986)
     Britain seems to be a hotbed of spy scandal these days and the interest
seems to have made its way into art.  There's the uproar over SPYCATHCHER, new
biographies of Anthony Blount, and several books on the British Secret Service.
In the movies, we have last spring's DEFENSE OF THE REALM, and this summer's
THE FOURTH PROTOCOL, and THE WHISTLE BLOWER.  I haven't seen THE FOURTH
PROTOCOL, but THE WHISTLE BLOWER is far inferior to DEFENSE OF THE REALM,
although they both cover similar ground.  In DEFENSE OF THE REALM, a 
newspaperman who breaks a sex/spy scandal involving an MP discovers that this
is merely a smokescreen for something far more disturbing (even to a jaded
moviegoer like me).  In THE WHISTLE BLOWER a Russian mole in a British
electronic intelligence organization, and the death of a number of people in
suspicious circumstances, draws the interest of one of the organization's
Russian linguists, and then of his father, played by Michael Caine (who also
appears in THE FOURTH PROTOCOL).  Unfortunately, unlike DEFENSE OF THE REALM,
which offers us something new in the way of political thriller, THE WHISTLE
BLOWER offers us little beyond conventional spy stuff that is done much more
inventively by John LeCarre.  Caine seems to do little in the film except
listen to people of the right and the left make speeches defending their
actions.  The ending is both a letdown and not entirely comprehensible.
     I think that the premise of THE WHISTLE BLOWER would have been more
effective if the story had been told differently.  Film is a visual medium and
story- telling in film is most effective then this visual aspect is exploited,
and verbal exposition is kept to a minimum.  DEFENSE OF THE REALM used the
visual possibilities of film admirably, although it was far from polished.  THE
WHISTLE BLOWER resorts to tired cliches and boring speeches we've heard before.
For comparison, in an earlier review I gave DEFENSE OF THE REALM 3 stars out 
of 4, although I might give it 3-1/2 stars now.  I would only give THE WHISTLE
BLOWER 2 stars.  It's not awful, only disappointing.

Title
Review for Iron & Silk (1990)
     I was very much looking forward to this filmed version of Mark
Salzman's book on his experiences as an English teacher in China.  I
must admit that I've never read the book (although a friend of mine who
had was enthusiastic about it), but I did once see him read from the
book in person at the Black Oak Bookstore in Berkeley (where he also did
some of his kung fu routines), and I knew a woman who knew Salzman and
had been in China on the same Yale program as Salzman and was a witness
to some of the events described in the book (although she, and Salzman's
other American colleagues, had generally been written out of the book
and the film).  Salzman, who is an engaging personality in person,
insisted on starring as himself in the film version (he also seems to be
something of a self-promoter), and I was curious to see what he would do
with it.
     The result, in my brother's words (he also saw the film), was
"insipid."  Salzman comes off engagingly.  Some of the reviews called
him a bad actor, but I think he was just fine.  The problem is in the
story.  There's no conflict, no tension.  (At least, none that seems to
matter.)  There's no sense of any real failures that he experiences, no
feeling for the difficulties he must have had teaching English to a
class of middle-aged Chinese teachers who had been told to forget their
Russian and learn English, not even any feeling for the efforts he must
have gone through to become the kung fu expert that he became (although
he must have worked very hard).  We have no idea of how, or even
whether, Salzman has grown at all over his two years in China.  He comes
into the country fully well-adjusted, and we never feel that he ever had
occasion to call any of his beliefs into question.
     What's good about the film?  Well, Salzman himself isn't bad, and
the man who plays the head Chinese teacher is a rather interesting and
ambiguous characher of whom I would have liked to see more.  Salzman's
kung fu teacher, who was also his kung fu teacher in real life (he plays
himself), has a fun part, although he's played as a crusty guy with a
heart of gold - it would have been interesting to get into his head a
little more.  The kung fu practice scenes are interleaved with scenes
from the old kung fu movies that Salzman thrived on as a kid; it's a
witty touch.  The photography is also good, and there's one sequence
where Salzman visits a boat-dwelling family that's breathtaking.  I wish
there were more scenes like that in the film.

Title
Review for Tall Guy, The (1989)
     THE TALL GUY is a 1990 film that never made it to Boulder.  I
recently had the chance to see it on video.  I don't remember having so
much fun watching a movie (on video or on the big screen) in a long
time.  See it.
     Jeff Goldblum is Dexter King, an unhappy American actor in London
who has spent the last six years as the straight man in a comedy revue.
In short order, Goldblum falls in love, loses his job in the revue, and
gets the lead role in "Elephant!," a musical version of "The Elephant
Man."
     There's so much to like in this film, it's hard to know where to
start.  There's Goldblum trying to work up the nerve to ask out the
no-nonsense nurse (Emma Thompson) with whom he's fallen in love.
There's his lovable nymphomaniac landlady and her parade of weird
boyfriends.  There's the great sex scene (and I mean it in both senses:
it's a great scene, and it suggests great sex), and there's the scene
where Goldblum and a friend are lectured by a blind man on the nature of
love.  And best of all, there's "Elephant!," a musical even funnier than
the classic "Springtime for Hitler" in THE PRODUCERS.  Listen hard for
the wonderfully awful lyrics.  What makes this even funnier than
"Springtime for Hitler" is that one can really see someone producing a
show like this, or like "Elephant!"'s director's other project: a
musical version of "Richard III," with such songs as "I've Got a Hunch
I'm Gonna Be King."  The scenes from "Elephant!" had me rolling on the 
floor, and I can't remember the last time that happened.  And there's
lots more that I haven't mentioned.
     THE TALL GUY is shot in a refreshingly different style, reminiscent
of Richard Lester's 1960's comedies.  This film has definitely been
inspired by A HARD DAY'S NIGHT and HELP!  I don't know who Mel Smith is,
or what else he's directed, but I'll certainly try to find out.
     In addition to all this, the backstage scenes (particularly the
rehearsals and opening night of "Elephant!") are done with a
verisimilitude that makes them particularly exciting.  Note that I say
"verisimilitude" and not "authenticity," since I have no idea how
authentic they really are.  They just *feel* right.  You get the tension
and excitement of rehearsal and opening night, even as you see how bad
this play really is.  But, unlike "Springtime for Hitler," you really
want it to succeed.
     It's a pity that this film never got the widespread release that it
deserved.  Fortunately it's on video, so it'll never entirely disappear.
Rent it, see it at a revival theatre, but definitely go see it.  You'll
have a great time.

Title
Review for Comfort of Strangers, The (1990)
     THE COMFORT OF STRANGERS is a new film by Paul Schraeder (dir.
PATTY HEARST, screenwriter TAXI DRIVER, among others).  Schraeder's
films are usually descents into a world where the viewer's moral and
social assumptions are constantly called into question.  They're
explorations of the nature of hell.
     THE COMFORT OF STRANGERS unfolds similarly.  A nice young English
couple (Natasha Richardson and an English actor whose name I can't
recall who plays her boyfriend), visit a decadent Venice, trying to
determine the future course of their relationship.  They've been seeing
each other for a number of years, and she wants to get married; he's not
sure.  One evening, lost while looking for a late-night meal, they
encounter Robert (Christopher Walken), a very refined upper-class
Italian gentleman, the son of a diplomat.  Robert is somewhat slimy, but
the couple is hungry, it's late, and the force of Robert's personality
is such that they have no choice but to follow him to a local bar  where
Robert spends most of the time talking about himself.  This 
not-so-pleasant evening ends, but the English couple is not yet through
with Robert or his Canadian wife (Helen Mirren).  The older couple has
plans for them, and you just know if's going to end badly for somebody,
but there seems to be no choice for the English couple (a common problem
for Schraeder protagonists).  
     The problem with the story is that the entanglement of the English
couple with Robert and his wife doesn't seem so much predetermined or
inevitable as forced on them by the filmmaker.  There seem to be plenty
of opportunities to distance themselves from the unpleasant Robert (even
for such a determinedly "nice" and polite couple as the English).  When
Travis Bickle shoots up the whorehouse in TAXI DRIVER, you just know it
had to happen; everything led up to that point.  Here, however, we have
more questions than answers.  Why doesn't the young couple avoid Robert?
Why does their contact with Robert supercharge their lovemaking?  Why
does Robert hold the views and tastes that he does, and why does his
wife help him?  I felt unsatisfied at the end.
     Some of the fault must lie with Harold Pinter, the screenwriter,
who adapted the screenplay from a novel, although someone with as strong
screenwriting talent as Schraeder must be held responsible, too.  The
production itself is fine.  Schraeder films Venice in beautiful, rich
colors (most of the outside scenes take place in the evening or at
twilight), and Venice looks entirely and appropriately menacing, an
accomplice in what follows.  The English couple is inoffensive but
sympathetic, Walken is loathsome in a way that's hard to put one's
finger on (but it's very well done), and Mirren is good as his wife,
with her own menace, but her part is less weighty than it might  have
been.  If the screenplay were more motivated, I could recommend this
film, as it is, it seemed overlong and was disappointing.

Title
Review for Spartacus (1960)
     As most of you know by now, SPARTACUS is a three-and-a-half hour
restoration of a 1960 film directed by Stanley Kubrick.  It concerns one
Spartacus (Kirk Douglas), a gladiator-slave who leads a rebellion in the
ancient Rome of 72 BC.  There's romance (with Jean Simmons), and
friendship (with Tony "I also taught da classics to da children of my
mastuh" Curtis).  All this is played out against a backdrop of intrigue
between two powerful Romans, played by Laurence Olivier and Charles
Laughton.  Peter Ustinov, John Gavin, and Herbert Lom also play major
roles as powerful Romans.
     There are numerous problems with SPARTACUS, one of them moral, the
rest or them dramatic.  I'll get the moral one out of the way first.
Big Hollywood epics, it seems to me, are the Roman circuses of our time.
I felt very funny watching such an entertainment and, at the same time,
disapproving of those decadent Romans.  Perhaps the filmmakers actually
intended to put the viewer in such a dilemma.  Probably not.
     The dramatic flaws are more easily addressed.  There's nothing
really special about SPARTACUS.  As Stanley Kauffman put it in his New
Republic review, it's "Product."  This somehow isn't an accusation that
could be made about LAWRENCE OF ARABIA (the film with which this
restoration invites comparison).  The romance, the sentiments, and even
the grating background music, are all pure Hollywood, and the larger
scale doesn't seem to make things any better.  Even the big battle
scene, which could have benefited from the larger scale, is surprisingly
feeble.
     SPARTACUS has two giants in it: Olivier and Laughton.  But the
words that the script puts in their mouths are so small and trivial that
the actors shrink into insignificance.  Laughton fares slightly better,
due to his distinctive physiognomy, but Olivier is almost unrecognizable
(and the part could have been played by anyone).  Great actors really do
need to speak great words, especially great actors playing great Roman
patricians.
     In its defense, one can say that SPARTACUS moved quickly.  The
three and a half hours passed lightly, and I rarely felt that the action
dragged.  However, if Hollywood executives feel that the heritage of
Hollywood should be restored and brought to the attention of a new
generation of moviegoers, I wish they would spend the effort on
something not so overblown and yet banal as this film.
     What films would I rather see revived and restored?  Well, to test
an idea of mine, I went and rented a film last night.  It was also
directed by Stanley Kubrick.  It also stars Kirk Douglas.  It's about
half as long as SPARTACUS.  The film is called PATHS OF GLORY, and
watching it confirmed my feeling that it's the most perfect film ever
made.  At an hour and a half, it doesn't have a single unnecessary
scene, and it's full of perfect film moments.  Unfortunately, I know
many people who have never heard of the film.  MGM/UA would do the
public a great service by striking a new print and re-releasing it,
instead of forcing people to catch it on video or late-night TV.  One
PATHS OF GLORY would be worth three SPARTACUSes.

Title
Review for Manon des sources (1986)
     Just caught a local sneak preview yesterday of MANON OF THE SPRING, the 
second part of JEAN DE FLORETTE.  I gave JEAN DE FLORETTE a favorable (3 stars
out 4) review about a month ago, and reported that it seemed to stand on its
own even though it was the first part of a two-part work.  In this it differs
from MANON OF THE SPRING, which I believe cannot be properly appreciated
without having seen the first part.  I don't want to give away too much of the
plot, since it may spoil it for those who haven't seen JEAN DE FLORETTE, but it
is safe to report that MANON OF THE SPRING is the story of the revenge taken by
the daughter of Jean on Papet and Ugolin, which is to be expected by those who
saw the first film.  The way in which this revenge unfolded was somewhat of a
surprise (at least to me), although what was not a surprise was the way in
which the second film clarifies the personal relationships that were only
hinted at in the first film.
     MANON OF THE SPRING moves more quickly than JEAN DE FLORETTE, due to the
larger number of locations and characters and the broader sweep of the plot,
which takes in the whole town, unlike the first film which concentrated on the
struggle over a single farm.  The acting and production are up to the high
standards of the first film and, if anything, the portrayal of the dynamics of
provincial village life in southern France between the wars is even better.
Again, the characters are well-rounded and well-motivated, even the nominal
villains.  
     Ideally, the best way to see this film is as a double feature with an 
intermission, as I did last night.  Seeing MANON OF THE SPRING alone is less
satisfying, particularly if one has not seen JEAN DE FLORETTE.  For those who
have seen JEAN DE FLORETTE, however, I give MANON OF THE SPRING the same three
stars out of four.
