Authors
George McAdams
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
                              AIR FORCE ONE
                     A film review by George McAdams
                      Copyright 1997 George McAdams
Return to your (movie) seats!  Fasten your seatbelts and restore your
seat backs to their full upright position because the summer's best
action/drama movie is here, and its title is "Air Force One." Harrison
Ford stars in this must-see movie as James Marshall, the President of
the United States whose "The United States doesn't negotiate with
terrorists" philosophy is challenged when Air Force One is hijacked
while in route from Moscow to the U.S. Ford, playing the president in a
manner that probably has President Clinton dreaming with a smile on his
face, has the situation further complicated when his wife and daughter
are part of the hostages.
Yes, you can put behind you painful memories of "Batman and Robin," and
you can just forget all the other weak plots devices of other
presidential dramas, such as "Murder at 1600" because Harrison Ford
gives the best performance as a president since Ronald Reagan's.
And while other performers fill the screen, none rises to the top like
Air Force One the plane. In the proud tradition of
mechanical devices having greater fortitude over man, the plane shows
that it can take a licking a keep on ticking, right to the
very end. Gary Oldman neither disappoints or overplays the part as the
lead hijacker sympathetic to a splinter-group of Russians who want to
reverse the results of an open market economy: gangsters, prostitutes,
and poverty.
One cannot help but feel that Director Wolfgang Peterson has pulled
together his memories of two other previous directorial
efforts, "Das Boot" and "In the Line of Fire," to give the viewers a
movie that flies through two hours of turbulence with such a rush that
viewers will want to take a return flight.
One interesting note about the film was the interesting way that two
dramatic situations were handled. In the first, President
Marshall has faxed to the White House Conference Room instructions to
have Air Force One reduce its speed and lower its
altitude while refueling. As the viewers watch the faxed document rest
at the White House unbeknownst to everyone around it, the hostages
prepare to parachute from Air Force One, hoping that the message will
have gotten through. On one hand, this
gives the appearance that the producers wanted to cut some time from the
movie; however, thinking about this some more, I
find that I liked it because its about time a movie doesn't show me
everything. In a second sequence near the end of the movie,
the release of a militant general is imminent and viewers are left
wondering if his release will be stopped.
"Air Force One" gets three and one-half stars out of four from me. I'd
recommend it to others and wouldn't hesitate to see it
again.
Air Force One's web site is at
http://www.spe.sony.com/Pictures/SonyMovies/movies/AFO/

Title
Review for My Best Friend's Wedding (1997)
If you are a student of THE BIBLE, you know that every seven years or so a
plague, famine, drought or other disaster is guaranteed to come along to
break-up the monotony of early biblical bliss.  While those who have
watched from a distance the often winding career of Julia Roberts may have
often wondered just when she was going to return from wandering through the
wilderness, "My Best Friend's Wedding" is proof that she has the ability to
act, if not the ability to choose the best vehicles for showing off her
talents.
In this case, it is director P.J. Hogan, "Muriel's Wedding," who is
delivering the message from the mount.  As in "Muriel," he has chosen a
focal point of many wandering soul's lives, a wedding, to cause the
characters to examine whether their own happiness is dependent on another.
Let me make no false prophesy here, this is Julia Roberts' movie, and while
other disaster turns in her career the past seven years could have been
explained away on dubious personal choices, with this film she reminds us
that she still is the actress that made the audience cry in "Steel
Magnolias" and half of an audience dream of a Prince Charming in "Pretty
Woman."  
In "My Best Friend's Wedding, Julia, playing food critic Julianne, hears
from her best friend, an ex-lover played unremarkably by Demot Mulroney as
Michael O'Neal, that he is getting married in four days and wants her at
his wedding. Complicating this simple story line is Julianne's realization
that she has grown to love Michael over the nine years since they broke-up.
While the choice of Mulroney as Robert's love interest may cause several
movie viewers to scratch their heads, he neither makes, nor does he break,
the movie, as he underplays his role.  But, isn't that the point of this
movie?  After all, it's Julia acting happy and delightful that will fill
the theaters.
Further complications arise when Julianne meets his fiance, played by
Cameron Diaz, and finds her to be sweet, lovely, open and honest:  the four
qualities that Julianne has decided to avoid as she tries to put a wedge
between the happy couple. Not since the openhanded conniving attempts by
Katherine Hepburn in "Bringing up Baby," has there been such welcomed
chicanery.
Topping-off the performance by Ms. Roberts is the scene-stealing
performance by Rupert Everett as George, her gay editor, who masquerades as
Julianne's fianc. The Ronald Bass screenplay correctly adds George to the
mix every so often, like a hot tea drinker who continues to dunk the tea
bag in the hot water: you aren't quite sure if the tea is getting much out
of your effort, but it sure looks darker, and everyone knows that darker
tea is never weak.
"My Best Friend's Wedding" receives three stars as a welcome picture amidst
all of the action grabbing super hero flicks out there. I would see it
again and recommend it to everyone. 
The Web site for this picture is rated 3 out of four, nothing fancy, and
can be found at:
http://www.spe.sony.com/Pictures/SonyMovies/features/bestfriend.html. 
Additional insight into the background of the movie can be found at
http://www.spe.cony.com/Pictures/SonyMovies/movies/Bestfriend/plannercontent
s2.html.
Be Sure to Check-out Movies-in-the-Net at:
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Lot/7862

Title
Review for Ransom (1996)
Moviegoers have reasons to begin celebrating the early arrival of the
holiday season with the pre-Thanksgiving release of "Ransom (
http://www.movies.com/rn/shock.html ), Ron Howard's latest film,
starring Mel Gibson, Rene Russo, Delroy Lindo, and Gary Sinise. With the
expected glut of sugar-coated holiday films just around the corner, this
is one you'll be able to return to for repeated viewings; however, don't
get out your magnifying glass too much, or you'll find some scenes will
leave you with questions.
This emotional action/drama that centers around the kidnapping of the
son of an airline mogul, Tom Mullen, played by Gibson, delivers the
wrenching conflicts of parents faced with the dilemma of how to get back
their son from an abductor, played by Sinise, whose systematic plan to
obtain a ransom is second only in his desire to get plebe's justice from
the rich Gibson, which adds more psychological weight to the
teeter-tottering the protagonist and antagonist give each other with
each downward thrust of their human character. While most kidnappings
envolve around the waiting and wondering about whether the person
kidnapped will be released, Gibson takes control of the situation by
using the ransom as a $2,000,000 reward for the person who turns-in the
kidnappers.
The righteous indignation displayed by Gibson is similar to others in
films, Harrison Ford in "Patriot Games," and even Charlie Sheen in "Wall
Street," come to mind; but, Gibson transcends this one-level response by
his physical reaction to the dramatic landmind that explodes when he
collapses soon after he realizes his proactive actions may have led to
his son being shot by the kidnappers.
Ransom is a movie that fully delivers, with none of the actors giving a
weak, or even lukewarm, performance. Even young Brawley Nolte, Nick
Nolte's son, deliver's out-of-the-gate. The small twists of illogic that
crop-up from time to time, only serve as reminders of just how complex
movies are, but given that Howard has worked dramas before, "Backdraft,"
et.al., it is disappointing that they are there.
As for the Ransom ( http://www.movies.com/rn/mainmenu.html ) Web site,
there are:
 Background notes on Director Ron Howard ( http://www.movies.com/rn/ronhoward/ronhoward.html ),
 An interview with Howard (
http://www.movies.com/rn/ronhoward/interview.html ),
 Details about the premiere (
http://www.movies.com/rn/premiere/premiere.html ),
 Cast Interviews ( http://www.movies.com/rn/cast/cast.html ),
 The obligatory Shockwave trailer (
http://www.movies.com/rn/trailer/trailer.html ),
 An "ask the stars section (
http://www.movies.com/rn/askthestars/askthestars.html ), and
 AVI and Quicktime scenes with Howard discussing the story (
http://www.movies.com/rn/story/story.html ), the audience, and even the
Internet ( http://.www.movies.com/cpk/ron5.mov).
The Web Site gets a 4 out of 4 rating, but be warned, the amount of
information here is not fluff.  Give yourself at least an hour to just
read everything.
For other links to movie sites, be sure to check out the
Movies-in-the-Net site at
( http://www.primenet.com/~george )

Title
Review for Long Kiss Goodnight, The (1996)
        Thirty years ago, if you were told that women would become beat
policemen, serial killers, or spies, chances are you seriously doubted
the first two suggestions, but not the third, after all the exploits  of
Mata Hari had been indoctrinated into the beliefs of the American male.
While the last thirty years has seen women become an integral part of
police departments everywhere and an occasional woman serial killer has
surfaced, the female spy has only taken a supplementary role in the
cinema. 
        In The Long Kiss Goodnight ( http://www.longkiss.com/ ), Geena Davis,
under the direction of her husband Renny Harlin, has broken, not only
the screen image "sweetness" that she has been saddled with since her
television days on "Buffalo Bill," and continued with "A League of Their
Own" and "Speechless," but she has given us a credible female spy/action
figure with her characterization of "Charly Baltimore, a former CIA
agent, who everyone thought had been killed, but who was really living
the life of her undercover character, Samantha Caine.
        Of course, she's not the first female to play a spy or an action
figure, Cynthia Rothrock tried, and Anne Parilla, in La Femme Nikita,
succeeded, but while it's one thing to succeed in France, one's not
really successful until the movie's made in Hollywood--and please don't
even think about Bridget Fonda's remake of Nikita, Point of No Return,
being successful because it lacked Parilla's conviction, however
misguided.
        As Geena Davis morph's into the character of Charly Baltimore, she
takes on a toughness that comes from living on the edge with glee.  As
her past creeps upon her, and her lurid past becomes an exciting
present, a spark returns to her life that Samantha Caine, schoolteacher,
had unknowingly suppressed.  For me the image of Charly, rolling a shot
glass of booze over her cheek until it's wrapped around her lips, speaks
more of her character than the hundreds of bullets she shoots from the
guns that abound every other frame of this action packed adventure.
        The web pages for The Long Kiss Goodnight are exceptional in their
delivery of behind the screens interviews from not only Geena Davis (
http://www.longkiss.com/Geena/gnacontnt.html ), but also Samuel L.
Jackson ( http://www.longkiss.com/Sam/samcontnt.html ).  Whole scenes of
dialogue are also available, with even storyboards of crucial ones such
as the scene where Charly is being tortured by being immersed underwater
( http://www.longkiss.com/Wheel.sc/wheelscript.html )
        If you long for a credible action movie and can accept that the lead
actor is a woman, then The Long Kiss Goodnight is just the movie for
you. 
        For web links to other movie sites, check-out the Movies-in-the-Net
web page at http://www.primenet.com/~george

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
In life's greater scheme, movies sometime take on a life of their own,
often overshadowing their actual value to society, which seems especially
true for summer blockbusters and action movies. With MEN IN BLACK, also
known to those in the know as MIB, the hype-machine practically guaranteed
that the movie would fall short. And clocking in at barely over one hour
and thirty minutes, it's shorter in more ways than one.
As a buddy movie it lacks buddy-ism. It tries to have the Tommy Lee Jones,
as K, and Will Smith, as J, banter about in manners reminiscent of the Mel
Gibson and Danny Glover in the "Lethal Weapon" movies, but it doesn't have
any "heart" between the two. If anything, MIB is more of an update of
"Dragnet" (1987) if it had been produced and directed by the Cohen
brothers, with a couple of slimy aliens thrown in. Additionally, there's a
moment where we see Jones zero-in, via satellite, a woman working in her
garden, but this "touching" twenty seconds is more like the movie hitting a
speed bump, rather than a detour down a lane to a heartfelt moment.
On the plus side, the movie does have a great premise: that aliens live on
Earth, disguised as humans and other animals, and that Earth is sort of a
neutral zone. "Sort of Casablanca, without the Nazi's," as K explains to J,
which when you think about it explains the behavior of certain basketball
coaches, boxers, and that cousin of yours that doesn't really resemble
anyone in your family's tree.
The concept reminds me of an early comic routine used by David Letterman,
in which Letterman reasoned that the appearance of aliens on earth is that
earth is sort of a "Stuckey's" way stop for the galaxy. And while none of
Letterman's jokes were used in MIB, the sharply written dialogue was
another of the redeeming qualities of MIB.
While MIB offers a good solid performance by Tommy Lee Jones, a smooth
performance by Will Smith, good action sequences, and imaginative set
designs, it does not live-up to the hype this movie has promised, and we
the viewer has had to endure during the past several months. Had it taken
the potential that was there to have more human emotions present, I feel it
would have been a better movie. 
On a scale of one to four, I give this movie a two. I enjoyed it, and would
recommend it to those who want to see a mindless action movie that has some
snappy dialogue. However, don't expect to see me standing in line again.
The web site for MIB is http://www.meninblack.com.  It looks great, but
lacks some of the pizzazz of some of the other movie sites have.  
