Authors
Michael Turton
Number of Reviews
13

Title
Review for Anastasia (1956)
This film is wonderful!  Superb acting by Helen Hayes and Ingrid Bergman (who
won an Oscar in a comeback role) brings out the best of a clever and powerful
script.
The story centers around the efforts of a con man, Bounine (Yul Brynner),
once a Russian prince, to pass off a lovely refugee (Ingrid Bergman) as the
Princess Anastasia, last of the Romanovs.  As the story progresses, however,
an interesting twist emerges: she may actually be the real Anastasia. As the
pair head to Denmark to meet the Dowager Empress (Helen Hayes) in hope of
obtaining recognition for Anastasia, a furtive, unacknowledged love affair
blossoms between the brooding, imperious Prince and the confused yet
vivacious Princess.
Three pillars of strength hold this story up: strongly-drawn characters, a
restrained, witty script and exceptional acting. Despite its dependence on
universal themes of love, family and identity, the film never lurches into
the vulgar or obvious. Yul Brynner, always a treat, does a sterling job
portraying a man caught in an emotional undertow. Helen Hayes is especially
delightful as the crusty, suffer-no-fools Dowager Empress. There are some
truly exquisite scenes. The recognition scene between Bergman and Hayes is
tremendous, two fine actors at the top of their game. The scene in which the
Prince informs the Dowager Empress of his feelings is also quite moving. The
ending, which could have been incredibly mawkish and sentimental, is handled
with such grace and understatement that it leaves the viewer completely
satisfied without feeling stuffed.  I'd give this one 5 out of 5, good
offbeat fare for those nights when you're pacing the aisles at Blockbuster
and nothing looks very interesting.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
Starship Troopers
Reviewed by Michael A. Turton (turton@cc.fy.edu.tw)
_Starship Troopers_ proves once again that nothing debases good sci-fi faster
than contact with a Hollywood director. The merest glance at this
multimillion-dollar clunker shows that the reasons for Hollywood's inability
to do science fiction are not technical.  Rather, they lie in the
impoverished vision and formulaic storytelling that have come to dominate
filmmaking in Southern California.
Inspired by Robert Heinlein's classic adolescent sci-fi novel, _Starship
Troopers_ tells the story of a group of young men and women who volunteer to
fight the Bugs, aliens who have taken to launching meteors full of their
spores into human space to colonize human worlds.  On this absurd premise
(not Heinlein's; he had a much richer storytelling gift) is hung a
predictable storyline and buckets of expensive but unimaginative special
effects, as well as some gratuitous breasts.
There's no denying that the combat scenes are graphic, with people ripped in
half, limbs chopped off and blood everywhere, yet one cannot help but feel
that the gore is there to shock, and not out of some commitment to artistic
integrity, however hollow.  This is because the combat itself is so
unbelievable.  Although the humans have warp drive, they have no artillery. 
In fact, they appear to have forgotten a couple of thousand years of military
tactics and technology, for they have no area weapons, indirect fire weapons,
small arms larger than an automatic rifle, guided missiles, flamethrowers,
delayed action bombs or tactical air support, never mind biological and
chemical weapons.  Tactical communications are limited to a shouted voice. 
Yet during training they practice with energy weapons that are capable of
blowing off heads.  Why aren't they used in combat? Instead, the soldiers of
the future face their enemies with grenades, automatic rifles, and miniature
nuclear weapons (from which they are not shielded), as well as some
gratuitous breasts.
There are numerous other problems as well.  Ships in space in formation are
much too close and it is clear from the positions of ships in the fleet and
the controls of individual ships that the designers never learned to think in
three dimensions (contrast the level flight of the ships with the far more
realistic space combat scenes in _Babylon 5_).        All planets have blue skies
and ecologies which consist of only two species, humans and bugs, both
colonizers from elsewhere.  A meteor launched from the other side of the
galaxy zeroes in on a city on earth.  In reality, any such object would have
had to have been launched when our ancestors had not yet become Homo Sapiens.
The human political situation is vague at best.  How many colonies are there?
Where are they?  We are told only that democracy failed and the military took
over to stabilize society. There are some glimpses of the government,
particular of savage punishments, but Heinlein's vision of a society based on
individual responsibility is recast as a quasifacist police state. The
violence sadly remains true to its Hollywood roots, with guns that never jam
or need ammunition, main characters who have a superhuman ability to function
regardless of injury. and acting that would shame the homecoming play at high
school. Fortunately there is a varied collection of gratuitous breasts.
The Bugs themselves are visually interesting, but they suffer from the same
kinds of inconsistencies which plague the movie in general.  Although we are
told that they are not individuals as we are, they bicker and snarl amongst
themselves like mammalian predators jockeying for position in the pride.  The
"Brain" bug eats human brains by sucking them from the skull, presumably to
find out what we think.  How it gets any information from crushed and mangled
alien proteins is a mystery.  Perhaps it should have tried the gratuitous
breasts.
The storyline, which tracks the volunteers from high school to through
training into combat, eliminates the sentimental masculine melodrama that
makes the original novel such a favorite of young males.  It too lives in the
eternal Now.  One recruit says he joined to go career and become and officer;
later he turns down a leadership position on the grounds that he just wants
to fight; later still he shows up as an NCO.  The characters are almost
totally inhuman in their response to the death around them.  They seem to
feel neither sadness, relief nor anger.  Rico is never shown having any
serious emotional reaction to the death of his parents.  Heinlein's original
story is underpinned by a complex web of relationships among the military
officers who dominate Rico's career, but these are gone from the film, as is
his vision of an ethnically-mixed society, for everyone in _Starship
Troopers_ is either white or black (this being Hollywood, the hero is a
blue-eyed blond). The boy-has-girl, boy-loses-girl, boy-finds-girl plot that
stitches the story together is advanced by the too-convenient death of
romantic distractions, as well as some gratuitous breasts.
New faces give the movie whatever appeal it may have.   The actress playing
Carmen Ibanez has the loveliest smile to grace the big screen in ages.  And of
course  Disi twice bares a pair of fine gratuitous breasts.
Both as a movie and as an SF story, _Starship Troopers_ is an offensive
failure.  I give it 1 star out of 5.  Not worth renting, even for the
gratuitous breasts.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Babylon 5: Thirdspace (1998) (TV)
Reviewed by Michael Turton (turton@cc.fy.edu.tw)
The marked superiority of B5 to every other current SF TV show is not
reflected in this made-for-TV film that suffers from major defects of
scripting, continuity, and story.  Only B5's traditionally on-the-cheap but
excellent special effects are up to snuff in _Thirdspace_.
_Thirdspace_ is the story of the discovery of an alien artifact which, when
activated, brings forth a race from another dimension bent on eliminating all
life in this galaxy. The B5 team races to destroy the artifact as it takes
over the minds of station denizens, draws the power from the station and
transits a fleet into B5 local space.  The story takes place during the
period after the space station has declared independence from Earth under the
leadership of Captain John Sheridan, and after he led the Alliance against
the Shadows to victory.
To begin with, the story is an old SF cliche.  All this money spent, and
that's the best idea the writers could come up with?  After the artifact is
hauled over to B5, Interplanetary Expeditions (IPX), a corporation which
makes a living excavating for ancient artifacts, shows up demanding access to
the artifact. IPX's connections to the Shadows and the facist dictatorship on
Earth (both Sheridan's enemies), are well-known, yet they are not even
mentioned in the story.  Instead a deal is struck.
Predictably, the artifact wakes up and wreaks the inevitable havoc.  Yawn. 
It controls minds inside the station and many come to worship it (can anybody
say "_Berserker_ series?").  Alliance weapons are almost useless against it,
so Sheridan suits up and jets over through raging battle between the Alliance
fleet and the artifact fleet, carrying a nuclear weapon.  He sneaks into the
artifact and plants the bomb, then slips out past the bloodthirsty aliens
grabbing for him like Barry Sanders darting through the Chicago Bears'
secondary.  The bomb sits for five minutes inside the artifact, but the
aliens remain unaware of it. The idea that Sheridan must hand-deliver a
nuclear weapon (or can get out of range in time) is absurd.  Are there no
missiles or robots handy to carry the weapon in?  The concept of a "power
drain" is also iffy.  How and in what form is the energy converted and
transmitted through a vacuum from the station to the artifact?
Then there are the usual problems of B5.  Measurements are in "feet" and
"miles."  Apparently the UN government has converted the world from metric to
English.  Speeches are overly long and have an unrealistic flavor.  Nobody
speaks in monosyllables or grunts in the B5 universe.  Zack, the security
chief in Garibaldi's absence, takes on some of his mannerisms and
expressions. Like his mentor, he even falls in love with a telepath, pouring
out his feelings while the two are trapped in a busted elevator.  The speech
is long and hideously embarrassing; moreover, he doesn't even notice that
Lyta, the object of his affection, is staring into space and muttering to
herself in a bout of temporary psychosis triggered by the artifact. 
Impossible.  B5 has been conscientious (for TV) in depicting the awful price
of combat, but no mention is made of the losses in the fighting around the
artifact.
At least some of the elements that make B5 so popular are present.  There are
recurring characters from previous episodes in _Thirdspace_.  The special
effects are magnificent. Delenn, as always, is a delight.
Still, with so much blood and treasure expended, _Thirdspace_ is a massive
disappointment.  Why wasn't a competent and imaginative outside sci-fi writer
hired to give the show a gritty SF feel?  Why was such a hackneyed storyline
chosen, with so many to chose from?  B5 has made its repution by setting new
directions for SF on TV.  It's a shame it had to take a step back toward
Hollywood with _Thirdspace_.  I give it 1.5 stars out of 5.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Death Machine (1995)
Death Machine (1994)
Sci-Fi. 120 minutes. (R) for violence, sex
Written and Directed by Stephen Norrington.  Starring: Brad Dourif, Ely 
Pouget, William Hootkins, John Sharian
Reviewed By Michael A. Turton
You know how it is. You're drifting around the video store in which, 
despite a selection which dwarfs the Library of Congress, you can't find 
anything. You're tired of Gong Li.  Some slimeball has rented _Diva_.  
You've seen _The Seven Samurai_ umpteen times.  The pickings in the Western 
selection are slim. So you mosey on over to the sci-fi and lo and behold!  
There is _Death Machine_!  Your interest piqued by the photos on the box, 
you pick it up........
Watching _Death Machine_ is rather like being in a car accident.  
Everything happens so fast, the only way you can be sure that something did 
indeed occur is by the wreckage strewn everywhere.  The plot of this movie 
is incredibly simple.  A mad scientist, Jack Dante (played by the 
increasing typecast Brad Dourif) working on a supercombat part-human 
machine feels betrayed by his superiors when they fire him for killing some 
corporate officers with his pet, so he turns his invention on them. This 
machine, called the "Warbeast," looks like a skeletal cross between a 
Tyrannosaurus rex and Freddy Krueger, and has an appetite which outstrips 
either.  It is indestructible and unstoppable, its miles of exposed wiring 
and delicate computer systems impervious to massive explosions in confined 
spaces. When it really gets fired up, the creature clicks its claws and 
spins its head back and forth, creating moments of unintentional humor in 
the middle of some rather touch-and-go scenes for the characters.
The film takes place inside the labrynthine complex where Dante works among 
his machines and computers. Bet you can't name ten other movies in which 
people in claustrophobic spaces are hunted by psychotic monsters!  The sets 
were so full of odd corners, piping, wires, sealed doors and thick metal 
walls that they looked like leftovers from the _The Poseidon Adventure_, 
gussied up with shiny metal-and-plastic fittings to make them appear 
appropriately futuristic. The producers obviously could not afford 
expensive effects, so models were opted for in certain scenes.  In my view, 
they should have waited until they had saved the money to cover the gap.  
I'll skip the obligatory gripe about Hollywood's inability to make a decent 
sci-fi film with so many wonderful books to choose from. 
This film went by in a blur and it is hard to say what happened or why. Not 
that it matters much. At some point one of the men who went in with Dante's 
boss, Cale (Ely Pouget) puts on a fighting suit and becomes a robotic 
superman who fights with the Warbeast by punching it on its metal snout 
(no, I'm not kidding). Why not just pull the wiring out or poke a thick 
hydraulic finger into an on-board computer? It has all the usual flaws of 
action movies: actors who check their talents at the door, guns which never 
need reloading, injured people performing acts of superhuman strength and 
plot holes big enough to float the Seventh Fleet, complete with a psycho 
muttering the required cliched nonsense as self-justification. It really 
should come with a disclaimer: SOME SUSPENSION OF DISBELIEF REQUIRED.  
Despite its gaping flaws there is a certain compelling power to the film's 
furious pace, weird sets and comic book action.  In more subtle directing 
hands and with a better script it might even have attained the minor cult 
film status it is so desperately yearning for.  This movie isn't quite good 
enough to rent, but if it ever comes on late night TV and you're a little 
too tired to search for the remote, then it's worth a look.

Title
Review for Lawrence of Arabia (1962)
Retrospective:  Lawrence of Arabia (1962)
Directed by:  David Lean
Starring:  Peter O'Toole (T.E. Lawrence), Alec Guinness (Prince Feisal)
Anthony Quinn (Auda abu Tayi), Jack Hawkins (General Allenby)
Omar Sharif (Sherif Ali ibn el Kharish), José Ferrer (Bey of Deraa)
Anthony Quayle (Colonel Harry Brighton), Claude Rains (Mr. Dryden)
Arthur Kennedy ( Jackson Bentley).  
Running Time: 216 minutes.
Reviewed by Michael A. Turton
This awesome epic, recently re-released in letterbox format after a loving 
restoration, is simply one of the most greatest movies ever made.  Not 
merely a great epic, this is a painting whose tremendous canvas hides a 
universe of hidden detail and subtle symbolism that give the film its oddly 
uncommunicable emotional power.
_Lawrence of Arabia_ is a rather strange epic; indeed, one might 
profitably ask whether it is a heroic epic at all and not simply a very 
long movie about Lawrence of Arabia. There are no redemptive moments in 
_Lawrence of Arabia_, because almost everything Lawrence tries his hand at 
flops.   His dream of Arab freedom is betrayed by his superiors and by his 
disciples.  His death -- a failed attempt to avoid a bicycle while riding a 
motorcycle -- redeems nothing and no one.  His followers melt away as time 
goes on.  His close friends cannot comprehend him, his supporters are using 
him and in the end those around him admire him without understanding him. 
An assurance from Lawrence ("There's enough time.  Go and get another 
one.") is like a death sentence from anyone else.  He is even forced to 
shoot the man he saved from the desert.  And unlike the heroes of _Dr. 
Zhivago_ or _Spartacus_, Lawrence is neither caught up in or the mover of 
great events, he is merely the leader of "a sideshow of a sideshow." 
Much of the critical commentary on _Lawrence of Arabia_ has focused on the 
fierce, obsessive acting of Peter O'Toole in the starring role, the 
homosexual overtones of the film's womanless universe and sadomasochism and 
the wondrous directing skill of David Lean in using the desert as the 
backdrop for his story.  But many of the critics have missed the deft hints 
that stitch together what otherwise might be a canvas too big for the 
viewer to take in.  For though the pace of the story is slow, it never 
stops; a great many changes in the characters take place; but none seem 
absurd or unheralded; we empathize with that impossible creature, T. E. 
Lawrence, yet he has not a single monologue.  How can this be?  
The story is not about T. E. Lawrence, and critics who complain that it is 
some kind of (failed) psychological exploration of Lawrence's life a la 
_Citizen Kane_ have missed the boat. The film tells the story of another 
person, half-legend, half-autochthonic creation of a godlike will, Lawrence 
of Arabia.  Lawrence of Arabia does not even have a first name; his 
parentage is uncertain and we are told again and again that he is a man who 
may create himself.  Regardless of who is doing the talking, he is 
invariably addressed as "Lawrence." Further, we are never permitted to see 
him alone. Whenever Lawrence is on the screen, he is with someone, and we 
know him only through the eyes of his disciples, as if Lean were some 
modern-day Luke who had decided to film his gospel rather than jot it down 
in Amharic.  Thus, the commentary at his funeral is not some announcement 
to the moviegoer that we are about to go on a journey into the psyche of a 
hero, but rather, it is a clue to the way in which we will come to know 
Lawrence of Arabia, as much a creation of those around him as he is the 
realization of his own flawed genius.  Lawrence has no past (his dossier 
gives no hint of his extraordinary gifts) and, as we know from the 
beginning, no future.  He wanders through an eternal present made manifest 
both in the vastness of the desert wastes and in the utter lack of 
references to time in the film.  This is compounded by the weird 
rootlessness of Lawrence's universe, whose turbulence is an illusion hiding 
an eternal and unbreakable stability which rests on the pillars of mutual 
hatred and mistrust between Arab and Arab and Turk, and its absence of a 
future, with the British moving in and nary a woman in sight.  
So Lawrence is to become a hero, a prophet even.  And when do we see 
Lawrence awaken as a prophet?  He is ushered into the tent of Feisal and 
there, suddenly begins speaking from the Koran and urging his plans on 
Feisal.  And what are King Feisal's plans?  Why, he dreams of going to 
Damascus!  The Arab revolt is set on the road to Damascus.  Wasn't there 
another man too who became a prophet on his way to Damascus?  Thus we are 
forewarned, in an allusion that is more like an echo than a statement, of 
the fate of Lawrence. At one point Feisal remarks that with Lawrence, 
"mercy is a passion, with me, it is merely good manners.  You may judge 
which is the more reliable." Not just a sample of his suave wit, it 
foreshadows the changes which will take place in Lawrence after his 
experiences in Deraa.  Yet another reason we unquestioningly accept 
Lawrence's transition to sainthood is the allusions to the biblical 
travails of Jesus, as when Lawrence is tormented in the desert by Sherif 
Ali ibn el Kharish (Omar Sharif), then left alone, just as Jesus was, or 
when he brings back a man from the dead, just as Jesus did. And of course, 
the film takes place in the Holy Land, with its powerful associations for 
Westerners, with the Turks for latter-day Romans and the Arabs 
incongruously cast as Jews.  
_Lawrence of Arabia_ is layered with such understated allusions.  As 
Lawrence enters Cairo, whose deafening cacophony and crowds contrast 
harshly with the stillness and solitude of the desert, he is followed by an 
officer on a motorcycle, an officer whose voice we hear but whose face we 
never see.  As he leaves Damascus another man on a motorcycle passes him, 
leaving Lawrence in his dust.  We see him fading away, in the distance.  
Both are linked to the motorcycle which kills Lawrence, and both are 
harbingers of his ultimate doom.  The motorcycles relate to another theme 
whose recurrence helps bind the film together, that of the constant and 
jarring juxtaposition of the world of machines and the world of the desert, 
which almost always results in chaos and death, as when the Turkish planes 
attack Feisal's camp as Lawrence arrives, or the absurd horror of the 
broken trains spilling their mechanical guts across the pristine 
cleanliness of the desert, or the slaughter of the Arabs before the Turkish 
guns at Medina.  Another interesting touch is the strong use of color: the 
Arabs in blue, the British in Khaki, Dryden the diplomat (it goes without 
saying) in gray,  Lawrence always in unearthly white (which gets 
symbolically dirtier as he approaches Cairo after taking Aqaba).  Even when 
Lawrence wears a uniform as he attempts to become an ordinary man after 
Deraa, we can rest assured: the uniform belongs to *another man.* 
Another way Lean keeps the movie from sprawling from his grasp is his use 
of the small.  Details provide moments of transcendent clarity, like the 
clanking of kitchen utensils in the Turkish column moments before it is 
wiped out by Lawrence's cutthroats, or Lawrence's goggles hanging from the 
bush after his death.  Muscular personalities, brilliant acting, an 
unforgettable score and an often underappreciated script complete a movie 
of staggering emotional power.  
_Lawrence of Arabia_ is the finest work of an artist of almost terrifying 
skill.  No greater homage can be paid to Lean than to say that he made a 
sweeping film which is almost too subtle to understand, yet so powerful 
that it does not need to be understood.

Title
Review for Citizen X (1995) (TV)
Citizen X (1995)(Color) (TV)
Directed by: Chris Gerolmo.  Starring:Stephen Rea (Burakov), Donald 
Sutherland (Fetisov), Max Von Sydow (Bukhanovsky) and Jeffrey DeMunn 
(Chikatilo).
Rated "R" for violence and violent themes
Reviewed by Michael A. Turton
Reviewer's Rating: 4.5/5
        A cache of corpses is discovered in a forest. An inexperienced 
forensic pathologist suddenly finds himself in charge of the pursuit and 
capture of one of the century's most prolific serial killers.  So opens 
_Citizen X_, another fine offering from HBO.
        _Citizen X_ tells the story of the pursuit and capture of Andrei 
Chikatilo, who murdered at least 52 people during a decade-long killing 
spree in Russia.  Working train stations in his area, Chikatilo picked up 
drifters, targeting young people under 17, and took them to secluded places 
to kill them and dispose of the bodies.  
        The emotional force of this movie lies not in its depiction of yet 
another dull manhunt for a serial killer winding down to its foregone 
conclusion, but in its portrayal of the evolution of the relationship 
between the dedicated but bureacratically inept pathologist Burakov 
(Stephen Rea) and the urbane, influential Fetisov (Donald Sutherland), a 
colonel in the State Militia, each of whom elects to fight the cruel 
indifference of the Soviet system in his own way.   Both actors push the 
envelopes of their limited acting range, culminating in the emotional 
climax of the film, a deeply moving scene in which Fetisov, after nine 
years of guiding and protecting Burakov, tells the latter how much he and 
others have come to admire him.  Complementing the fine work of these two 
is Von Sydow, who has a small but highly significant role as the 
eccentric psychologist who finally gets the killer to confess.  Jeffrey 
DeMunn contributes a strong performance as Chikatilo, a killer whose banal, 
working-class life is almost impossible to reconcile with the outre 
savagery of his crimes.
        The film, shot in Hungary, has a grimy, realistic atmosphere which 
conveys the brutality and pathos of life in Soviet Russia through the 
appalling austerity of its sets and the references to deprivation and 
suffering, such as when Burakov appeals for a bigger apartment ("we've been 
waiting seven years") or when he expresses wonder that Fetisov was able to 
drop off a ham at their home.  "A whole ham?" he asks in disbelief.  For 
the real villain of the piece is not Chikatilo, who is as much as force of 
nature as a tornado or an earthquake, but the indifference of the system 
which Burakov must fight every step of the way in order to cope with this 
calamity which has been dropped in his lap.
        If the film has any weaknesses, they are at the end, where we learn 
the fate of Chikatilo, but not of the main characters Burakov and Fetisov. 
The pace is steady and the directing and camera work competent.  Although 
we see the killer at work again and again, and watch as Burakov becomes 
more and consumed by the case, the movie is never allowed to degenerate 
into a mere face-off between two men whose obsessions bring them into 
conflict with one another.  The understated script (Rea's character often 
says nothing during major events in the film) is excellent, leavened with 
the kind of sardonic humor that men develop when they beat their heads 
against the wall for a decade. 

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
Saving Private Ryan Produced by Mutual Film Company / Mark Gordon Productions
/ DreamWorks SKG / Amblin Entertainment / Paramount Pictures. Directed by
Steven Spielberg. Starring Tom Hanks (Captain Miller), Edward Burns (Private
Reiben), Tom Sizemore Sergeant Horvath),  Barry Pepper (Private Jackson) Vin
Diesel (Private Caparzo), Adam Goldberg (Private Mellish), Giovanni Ribisi
(Private Jackson), Jeremy Davies (Corporal Upham), and Matt Damon (Private
Ryan).        Runtime: 170.  Reviewed by Michael Turton.  ** out of *****.
Weighed down by tired plot lines and Spielberg's reliance on formulas,
_Saving Private Ryan_ is  a mediocre film which nods in the direction of
realism before descending into an abyss of cliches.
There ought to be a law against Steven Spielberg making movies about truly
serious topics.  Spielberg's greatest strength as a director is the polished,
formulaic way in which every aspect of the film falls carefully into place to
make a perfect story.  But for a topic of such weight as combat in the second
world war (or the Holocaust) this technique backfires, for it creates
coherent, comprehensible and redemptive narratives out of events whose size,
complexity and evil are utterly beyond the reach of human ken.        In this way
Spielberg trivializes the awesome evil of the stories he films.
_Saving Private Ryan_ tells the story of eight men who have been detailed on
a "PR mission" to pull a young man, Ryan (whose three other brothers were
just killed in fighting elsewhere) out of combat on the Normandy front just
after D-Day.  Ryan is a paratrooper who dropped behind enemy lines the night
before the landings and became separated from his fellow soldiers.  The
search for him takes the eight soldiers across the hellish terrain of World
War II combat in France.
There's no denying Spielberg came within shouting distance of making a great
war movie.  The equipment, uniforms and weapons are superbly done.  The
opening sequence, in which Captain Miller (Tom Hanks) leads his men onto
Omaha Beach, is quite possibly the closest anyone has come to actually
capturing the unendurably savage intensity of modern infantry combat. 
Another pleasing aspect of the film is Spielberg's brave depiction of scenes
largely unknown to American audiences, such as the shooting of prisoners by
Allied soldiers, the banality of death in combat, the routine foul-ups in the
execution of the war, and the cynicism of the troops.  The technical side of
the film is peerless, as always.  The camera work is magnificent, the pacing
perfect, the sets convincing, the directing without flaw.  Hanks will no
doubt be nominated for an Oscar for his performance, which was utterly
convincing, and the supporting cast was excellent, though Ted Danson seems a
mite out of place as a paratroop colonel.
Yet the attempt at a realistic depiction of combat falls flat on its face
because realism is not something which can be represented  by single
instances or events.  It has to thoroughly permeate the context at every
level of the film, or the story fails to convince. Throughout the movie
Spielberg repeatedly showed only single examples of the grotesque wounds
produced by modern mechanized devices (exception: men are shown burning to
death with relative frequency).  For example, we see only one man with guts
spilled out on the ground.  Here and there men lose limbs; in one scene
Miller is pulling a man to safety, there's an explosion, and Miller looks
back to see he is only pulling half a man.  But the rest of the corpses are
remarkably intact.  There are no shoes with only feet in them, no limbs
scattered everywhere, no torsos without limbs, no charred corpses, and most
importantly, all corpses have heads (in fairness there are a smattering of
wicked head wounds).  The relentless dehumanization of the war, in which even
corpses failed to retain any indentity, is soft-pedaled in the film. 
Ultimately, _Saving Private Ryan_ bows to both Hollywood convention and the
unwritten rules of wartime photography in its portrayal of wounds and death
in war.  Rather than saying _Saving Private Ryan_ is "realistic," it would be
better to describe it as "having realistic moments."
Another aspect of the "Hollywoodization" of the war is the lack of realistic
dialogue and in particular, the lack of swearing.  Anyone familiar with the
literature on the behavior of the men during the war, such as Fussell's
superb _Wartime: Understanding and Behavior in the Second World War_ (which
has an extensive discussion on swearing), knows that the troops swore
fluently and without letup.  "Who is this Private Ryan that we have to die
for him?" asks one infantrymen in the group of eight.  Rendered in wartime
demotic, that should have been expressed as "Who is this little pecker that
we have to get our dicks shot off for him?" or some variant thereof. 
Conversations should have been literally sprinkled with the "F" word, and
largely about (the search for) food and sex.  This is all the more
inexplicable because the movie already had an "R" rating due to violence, so
swearing could not possibly have been eliminated to make it a family film.
However, the most troubling aspect of the film is the Spielbergization of the
topic.        The most intense hell humans have ever created for themselves is not
emotionally wrenching enough for Steven Spielberg.  He cannot just cede
control to the material; he has to be bigger than it.  As if afraid to let
the viewer find their own (perhaps unsettled and not entirely clear)
emotional foothold in the material, Spielberg has to package it in Hallmark
moments to give the war a meaning and coherence it never had: the opening and
closing scenes of Ryan and his family in the war cemetary (reminscent of the
closing scene from _Schindler's List), the saccharine exchange between Ryan
and his wife at the close (every bit as bad as Schindler's monologue about
how his car, tiepin or ring could have saved another Jew), quotes from
Abraham Lincoln and Emerson, Captain Miller's last words to Private Ryan, and
an unbelievable storyline in which a prisoner whom they free earlier in the
movie comes back to kill the Captain.  That particular subplot is so hokey,
so predictable, it nigh on ruins the film.
Nowhere in the film is there a resolute depiction of the meaninglessness,
stupidity and  waste which characterized the experience of war to the men who
actually fought in combat (imagine if Miller had been killed by friendly fire
or collateral damage).        Because of its failure to mine deeply into the
terrible realities of World War II, _Saving Private Ryan_ can only pan for
small truths in the shallows.  2 stars out of 5.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/rg_mkgrp.xp   Create Your Own Free Member Forum

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
_The Fifth Element_
Directed by Luc Besson. Starring Bruce Willis, Gary Oldman and Mila Jovovich.
Reviewed by Michael Turton.  Three Stars.
_The Fifth Element_ is a sci-fi spectacular combining action, epic and low
humor to create a rich but ultimately flawed tapestry of the future.  It is a
perfect example of the tremendous potential of science fiction, especially
given modern technology, and the continuing inability of mainstream film
directors to grasp this potential.
TFE tells the story of 300 years in the future, when an unlimited evil
awakens and threatens the universe.  A perfect being, the fifth element, is
necessary to combine with earth, air, fire and water to construct a weapon
against this evil.  After a brief and unnecessary prologue, the story opens
with the discovery of the evil being.  Although we are not shown it, it has
already contacted a powerful man named Zorg (Oldman) who is attempting
through his agents to acquire the four stones which represent earth, air,
fire and water and without which the weapon cannot be made.  An alien ship
presumably carrying the stones enters earth space and is destroyed by other
alien mercenaries in the pay of Zorg. Only Lilu (Jovovich), the perfect
being, survives.  Reconstituted at Federation HQ, she escapes and meets
Corbin Dallas (Willis).  Together the two retrieve the stones and save the
world.
The most basic question I have about TFE is "why?"  With so many awesome
stories, an entire century of science fiction for the most part still untold
on the big screen, why would anyone waste their time and money cobbling
together a second-rate heap of cliches into an epic space opera story? 
Underneath the beautiful sets, striking costumes, vast scope, frenetic pace
and first-rate directing is a story that was not exactly begging to be told,
for TFE has all the faults of mainstream handling of science fiction: there
is no character development, aliens exist only to carry out the
destruction/salvation of the world, the social order of earth is pretty much
the same as the one we know now, all aliens are bilaterally-symmetrical
bipeds, the science and technology are completely inconsistent or impossible
, and action is more important than idea.  Compare TFE to any sci-fi work
similar in scope and topic, such as Vernor Vinge's awesome epic _A Fire Upon
the Deep_ or the recently completed _Babylon 5_ TV series, and TFE comes off
badly.
It cannot be argued that TFE is somehow "not sci-fi."  Through numerous nods
to other famous sci-fi flicks, Besson attempted to place TFE squarely in the
sci-fi universe.  For example, Dallas eats at an asian noodle place just
before he gets the news of his mission, just as Deckard did in _Blade
Runner_.  The sequence of shots of the space liner entering Phloston Paradise
mimics the famous scenes of the Pan Am clipper entering the space station in
_2001_.  Leia Organa from Star Wars is neatly skewered in the "cinnamon buns"
hairdo of the battleaxe who was originally intended to go with Corbin Dallas
on his mission to save the universe.  The veteran sci-fi fan will notice
others as well, with _Blade Runner_ the predominant source.
As a movie, TFE is a mixed bag.  The directing is flawless and the pace
furious.  But there is entirely too much sly, self-conscious humor which all
too often disengages the viewer from his or her attempt to believe in the
movie's premise that the universe is desperately in need of saving.  An
entire character, Ruby Rod (Chris Tucker), was added only supply comic
relief.  Besson did not learn the lesson that George Lucas taught, namely:
that in addition to being fast and furious, epics must be completely innocent
and deadly serious.  Besson also forgot that the gods require a sacrifice:
the universe can be redeemed only through the death of the hero.
On the other hand, the costumes, sets and backgrounds are excellent.  The
editing is wonderful and the interposition of three or more separate pieces
of action in a single sequence, done in several places, is extremely
effective. Willis doeshis usual workmanlike job, but sometimes gives the
impression that he is condescending to appear in this role.  Gary Oldman as
the baddie Zorg is (as always) great -- no other actor combines wussiness
with intensity the way he does.
Ultimately, TFE must be regarded as a failure, albeit an entertaining one. 
Next time, I hope Besson decides to tackle a story more worthy of his
powerful talent, such as _The Stars My Destination_ or Niven and Pournelle's
_Inferno_, rather than serve up stale childhood fantasies dressed in the
science fiction equivalent of Sunday clothes.  Until then, TFE will remain a
good rental choice.  I give it *** out of *****.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Long Kiss Goodnight, The (1996)
The Long Kiss Goodnight
Directed by Geena Davis' husband.  Starring Geena Davis and Samuel L. Jackson.
Cameo by Larry King. Reviewed by Michael A. Turton.  Dissed by everybody.
In the tradition of _Attack of the Killer Tomatoes_, sailing the course set
by _Cutthroat Island_, comes _The Long Kiss Goodnight_, a movie so bad it is
absolutely enjoyable. Laugh yourself silly over this disaster which scores a
perfect "0" in every category -- plot, acting, directing, editing, you name
it, all bad.  Of course, if you take movies at all seriously, you may not
like this bomb.
The idea (I won't use the word 'story') behind TLKG is that a plain
schoolteacher and single mother named Samantha Caine, who is suffering from
amnesia, is really a government assassin who is suffering an episode of
madness, hiding inside a fake identity, apparently to escape the burdens of
killing.  A (hugely predictable) car accident and a smack on the head bring
forth the old identity.  As Samantha Caine goes in search of her past in the
company of a private detective she has employed, Mitch (Samuel L. Jackson)
she happens to resurface just when her (unnamed) old agency is staging a fake
terrorist attack on the town of Niagara Falls (code named Operation
Honeymoon) to drum up support for funding in Congress.        The result is a
blizzard of ever more impossible and incredible events until the mind reaches
a state wherein the critical faculty ceases to operate in a serious mode and
laughter is the only possible response.
How to sum up TLKG in a single sentence? Suffice to say: in what other flick
can you hear the phrase "blithering idiot" uttered with complete earnestness?
I can't say when the last time was I enjoyed a movie so much.  There were
places where I laughed myself to tears.
Foremost among the movie's galaxy of failure is the acting.  Except for a
strong performance from the newcomer playing the urbanely psychotic Timothy
and Samuel L. Jackson, whose emotional outbursts seem like the flailing of a
man drowning in quicksand, everyone in TLKG has clearly studied at the Wooden
Indian Academy of Self-Expression.  The smirking, leaden delivery of Geena
Davis would drive Trek's Data mad with envy.  The professor who trained her
is a gem of bad acting working with an awful script, a cornucopia of pompous
nonsense poured out at lightspeed.
Plot and script meanwhile are a miracle of self-conscious silliness.  Bad
line follows bad line in orderly procession as though saved up for the
occasion (although here and there a good line pops out like a struggling hand
poking through the surface of a swamp).  The plot is a crystalline derivative
of everything that is objectionable about Hollywood, including the obligatory
self-sacrificing former jailbird who sustains serious injury in saving Our
Hero, the daughter who begs mom not to give up, the urbane psycho, the
nervous government officials in a rogue agency, the nice but stupid boyfriend
as well as the mandatory guns with endless ammo and characters who perform
superhuman feats of strength with various parts of the body out of
commission. Of course, it takes place at Christmas.  Of course nobody dies at
the end and all families are reconstituted.  Of course there is only one
black man, who is of course a former jailbird and divorced.  Being a
Minority, he of course is endowed with Primitive Wisdom which enables
Samantha to recognize her True self.
As if cliches weren't bad enough, implausibilities and continuity failures
abound.  How does a woman with no past get hired as a schoolteacher? What
happened to the man who was trapped in the burning car when Samantha has her
accident? Why do the government agents choose to make a hit on Samantha by
using automatic weapons in the middle of a crowded train station?  How did
Samantha and Mitch get out of the phone company after taking everyone there
hostage? Where are they at the end?  I could go on in this vein, but I'm sure
the reader gets the picture.
The directing and editing are in no way inferior to the acting, plot and
script.  Characters constantly undergo dimensional shift as they reposition
themselves in badly-edited shots.  Some shots are visually incomprehensible,
especially the scene of Samantha lying in the snow with the dead deer.        The
action in this movie must be seen to not be believed. My personal favorite:
while sitting in a chair, Mitch is blown out of a second-story window in an
explosion, blown through a neon sign, lands in a tree, falls into a snowbank,
and gets up immediately to throw a knife through an attacker's throat.        All
in a day's work for our hero.
There's no question that this could have been a great movie.  Under another
director's tutelage Davis might actually have been able to pull off an action
hero, but she lacks real bite.        Her sluttishness is an obvious act, her
menace comes off as mere irritation.  The potentially compelling conflict
between her submerged identity and her assumed one could have been
interesting, but comes off as cliched.        The fake terrorist attack was a
tactic contemplated to undermine Castro in the '60s, but there is no link
here to real government policies, so the government agents are purely stick
figures.  One yearns for the energy and dark genius of a Tim Burton.
The most fascinating question is: what idiot funded this clunker?  I suppose
"profound lack of judgement" must have become a job requirement for suits
these days.  0 out of 5: don't see, don't rent, don't even watch the trailer.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Thirteenth Floor, The (1999)
The 1990s produced two brilliant science fiction films.  One was
_Gattaca_.  The other was
_The Thirteenth Floor_.  Just as _Gattaca_ was overshadowed by the
mighty _Titanic_, _The Thirteenth Floor_ was relegated to obscurity by
_The Matrix_.  However, _The Thirteeth Floor_, though it deals with
similar themes, is a much better movie than the frenetic, childish and
improbable _Matrix_.
A cutting edge computer scientist, Hannon Fuller (played by the charming
Armin Mueller-Stahl), is murdered.  His associate, Douglas Hall, (Craig
Bierko) apparently framed and suspected by the police, enters into the
simulated world they have created in order to unravel the mystery.
Along the way a beautiful blonde (Gretchen Mol), more bodies, and a
deepening mystery about simulated worlds complicate the picture.
_The Thirteenth Floor_ unfolds slowly and telegraphs its punches,
choosing to elicit the more complex emotional response of empathy and
anticipation rather than the cheap one of mere surprise.  The result is
a movie that is a failure from two conventional points of view.  First,
its plot revelations can be foreseen if one has carefully followed its
complex storyline.  Second and more seriously, it demands that its
audience think and feel. No wonder it fell through the cracks.
Done in film noir style as a murder mystery, this is a relatively deep
movie that functions on several levels. Many audiences will simply be
bewildered by it, rather than engaged, which is a shame, because this
movie amply repays a little emotional and intellectual investment.  I
recommend a second viewing simply to get the flavor of the frequent
ironic foreshadowing in the opening parts of the movie.
Despite its philosophical challenges, _The Thirteenth Floor_ derives its
emotional force from the love story between Jane Fuller (Mol) and
Douglas Hall (Bierko), as well as the close friendship between Douglas
Hall and Hannon Fuller. In that sense it is more akin to _Gattaca_ than
_The Matrix_, which, for all of its cute philosophical byplay, is an
adolescent movie with no emotional depth whatsoever. The moment when
Jane Fuller confesses her love for Douglas Hall is at once satisfying,
wrenching and intellectually challenging.  In its final moments the film
even takes on itself, when David, Jane's husband, who has come to enjoy
killing, accuses her of being the sick one.  Although there is a victory
for the leading characters, this resolution suggests a disturbing
element of fantasy in Jane, and thus a deep-seated character flaw.  In
fact, Hannon Fuller's activities in the simulated world, the behavior of
Jane's husband, and the effects of entering the simulation on Douglas
Hall all hint at similar issues with those characters.  This is not a
film of good people beset from without by great evil.  The tragedy is
not in their stars, but in themselves.
The major actors, all of whom are required to play two or even three
roles, perform extremely well.  Bierko, who will be familiar as the
psycho from _The Long Kiss Goodnight_, is outstanding. D'Onofrio as
Whitney, who plays a pivotal role in support, also turns in a good
performance. The lovely Gretchen Mol, whose elegance, integrity, and
determination suggest Bergman in _Casablanca_, does a wonderful job. Her
voice, however, lacks the necessary weight at times.  This could be
because she was given the worst lines in a movie whose major weakness is
the script.
Some minor flaws, hairline cracks in fine porcelain, appear in places.
There are one or two instances of jerky editing.  The script takes the
edge off the film's climaxes.  The atmosphere becomes too claustrophobic
at times (yet, there is a clue there too).  One wonders if even after
two decades, _Blade Runner_ is still casting its long shadow over sci-fi
films.  One can see a group of suits in their suite, waving their hands
imperiously at directors like the Emperor in _Amadeus_: "make it more
like_Blade Runner_, you know, dark and rainy."
_The Thirteen Floor_ is that rare exception among Hollywood movies: a,
rich, emotionally satisfying, intelligent sci-fi movie.  And yet,
ultimately, it proves the suits right.  For when good sci-fi is made,
where is the SF community turning out in droves to see it? If we don't
support great SF, who will?

Title
Review for Thing, The (1982)
The Thing (1982) (a.k.a John Carpenter's The Thing)
Directed by John Carpenter.  Starring Kurt Russell.
Reviewed by Michael A. Turton (turton@cc.fy.edu.tw)
Director John Carpenter once noted in an interview that he was puzzled by the
the indifference of audiences to _The Thing_. In view of the cult status of so
many of his films, the failure of _The Thing_ to find popularity is a bit of a
mystery, all the more so since it features the same pairing of director and
actor (Kurt Russell) that helped make _Escape from New York_ a cult classic.
_The Thing_ is taken from one of the best SF short novels ever written, a
Golden Age work by John Campbell entitled "Who Goes There?." There are some
changes which in my view strengthen the storyline (surprising for a Hollywood
script). The film is also a remake of an old (and now hokey) horror movie.
The story takes place in an isolated antarctic research station.  As the film
begins, a dog shows up chased by a seeming madman in a helicopter.  When the
man accidently shoots one of the station personnel in an attempt to kill the
dog, he is shot to death by one of the researchers.  The dog wanders around
the station for a few hours before being put in the kennel with the other
dogs.  When he is, strange things begin to happen.
Meanwhile MacReady (Kurt Russell), the taciturn helicopter pilot, hops over
to the madman's point of origin, a Norwegian research station.        There he
discovers that everyone is dead.  Some of the bodies are bizarrely changed,
others the result of bloodily painful suicide.        Slowly, as the evidence comes
in, MacReady learns that the Norwegians found an ancient spacecraft beneath
the ice that contained an alien capable of assimilating and becoming any
species, from dog to human.  As the story unfolds, it becomes apparent that
not everyone at the research station is human anymore.......
The story moves at a more leisurely pace than some of Carpenter's other
tales, since the viewer needs more information to understand what is going
on. Characters are boldly-drawn, just this side of being stereotypes, but
MacReady, whose character screams Vietnam vet, is given an introspective side
which doesn't quite save him from becoming the cliched hard-edged, gruff
hero.
The special effects are excellent and have held up well, although there are
some fairly silly inconsistencies that are probably necessary to increase the
horror factor.        For example, people's bodies split open and the alien pops
out a la the film _Alien_.  Why?  The alien is not _inside_ the person, the
alien _is_ the person.        The sound effects are wonderful, especially in the
scene where one of the station personnel, fleeing the station during his
"change," suddenly reveals he is an alien.  Tiresomely, as in too many other
movies, the horrifying aliens look like insects.  Is there no other form they
can take?
Carpenter's direction is competent and the tension builds well, following the
original story more or less faithfully in general right up to the end, where
there is a radical departure.  Unlike Campbell's original, in which the good
guys win out by a nose, Carpenter's version is both bloodier and more
ambiguous, requiring much more sacrifice.  In that sense, the movie is more
realistic than the original story.  In my judgement, the changes Carpenter
made in the plot make it a much stronger story.  Additionally, the
understated score by a veteran movie composer is a winner.
Carpenter resists well the urge to Hollywoodize this classic. There is no love
story here (no female characters), no redemptive ending and no blond-haired,
blue-eyed people save the world.  Instead, a bunch of relatively real people
muddle their way through, fouling up right and left, led by a hero who is
constantly off balance.
_The Thing_ is one of my personal favorites.  I give it 4 out of 5 stars.
Always a solid rental choice.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Jurassic Park (1993)
Jurassic Park Directed by Steven Spielberg.  Starring Sam Neill, Jeff
Glodblum, Laura Dern and Richard Attenborough.        Reviewed by Michael A. Turton
(turton@cc.fy.edu.tw)
I swore I would never review this movie, but here I am.... 
_Jurassic Park_ is a film so towering that it has managed to maintain its
emotional power over the years, despite being forced to overcome one of the
most intense commercialization campaigns in film history, as well as the
worst sequel since _Return of the Jedi_.  The tremendous worldwide success of
_Jurassic Park_ represents the pinnacle of Steven Spielberg's achievements as
a director, the film showcasing every one of his strengths and weaknesses.
Based on the best-seller by Michael Crichton, _Jurassic Park_ at first
appears to be part-thriller, part-morality play about the strength of life
and the failed promise of technological magic, or as a sort of updated
_Sorcerer's Apprentice_ of naive humans playing with forces beyond their ken.
It is easy to fall into the trap of seeing the dinosaurs as representing the
primal vigor of Life, as Spielberg invites us to do.  The first time we see
the dinosaurs (a moment which made tears of joy roll down this reviewer's
cheeks the first time he saw it) they are gloriously virginal in a lush
natural setting: not an artifact in sight.  The first dinosaur we are in
intimate contact with is sick, for Pete's sake!  What could be more natural?
Yet, in the end, this movie is not about life or dinosaurs.  Instead, it asks
the question: how can human beings live in the technological nightmare worlds
they have constructed for themselves?  There are many moments of exploration
of attitudes toward technology in the film, as when one character chortles
upon opening the amazing can of shaving foam which is really a secret storage
container for smuggling embryos (a debased version of Jurassic Park's owner's
pride in his creation), or when the leading characters argue about the import
of Jurassic Park.  Many of Ian Malcolm's criticisms of the cloning project
represent critiques of technology and science which can be found in the
writings of sociologists and philosophers of technology. The movie opens with
Grant's grousing about how he can't get along with technology.        We're all
struggling to catch up with the modern world, he observes later, with real
anguish
Or consider. Far more time is spent on the hazards of technology than on
pursuit by dinosaurs.  The threats to the children -- the car falling out of
the tree, the perimeter fence being turned on -- are technological threats.
Spielberg alludes to this at the beginning.  As the movie opens, we hear a
roaring and a crushing.  Expecting a dinosaur, what do we see?        A machine. A
little joke, to be sure, but a revealing one nonetheless.  The wrenching
twist from the roar of the T. Rex to Samuel L. Jackson's "Keystroke. Check."
is a marvelous clue to the nature of the world Spielberg has built. 
Educated, intelligent people are helpless before baffling or failed tech
(What!        No phones?  Help!), as helpless as when faced with a T. Rex. The plot
may be unified and fulfilled when the T. Rex nails the velociraptor as it is
about to disembowel our blue-eyed heroes, but the film's premise is shown in
the brilliant shot during the pursuit when a velociraptor, bathed in the
light of a computer monitor, suddenly appears as a collection of computer
data constructions.  The real meaning is this: the dinosaurs are a technology
too.  The film's attempt to portray them as "Life finding a way" is a shallow
distortion: they are not even real animals but biotechnological amalgamations
of frogs and dinosaurs, grotesqueries born in incubators under hot lights.
Of course, with Spielberg at the helm, the film follows the Hollywood formula
which Spielberg, applying in varying degree to all his movies, has brought to
its ultimate refinement: the healing of a family, the trivialization of
minorities, a lush score, technical and directorial brilliance, first-rate
acting, a redemptive ending, the focus on the obvious meaning and leadership
by the blue-eyed.  In his real-world films such as _Schindler's List_ and
_Saving Private Ryan_, this cookie-cutter perfectionism has led to great
films which are greater failures, but The Formula is well-suited to a fantasy
like _Jurassic Park_.
That said, _Jurassic Park_ remains a brilliant movie with moments of
delicious humor, a fast pace and excellent acting.  The reflection of the T.
Rex in the rearview mirror is a wickedly funny satire.        Laura Dern and the
young actor who plays the granddaughter both deliver especially noteworthy
performances.  The effects are magnificent. The irresistable splendor of the
dinosaurs overcomes even the predictable chase scenes and the predictable
ending. It is a film filled with wonderful shots: the birds viewed from the
window of the chopper at the end, a reminder of how dinosaurs are still with
us; Laura Dern attempting to stare down a velociraptor, every muscle in her
body straining; the moment when we first see the Brachiaosaur feeding, the
chase of the jeep (think they'll have that on the tour?) and of course, the
T. Rex emerging from the enclosure in the midst of a terrible storm, the
ultimate realization of the Frankenstein complex.
If there are any flaws in the film, they lie in two areas.  First, the
dinosaurs themselves do not reflect the current state of paleontonological
thinking.  The public may have accepted Bob Bakker's suspect arguments for
dinosaurs as warm-blooded, but hardly any scientists think the matter is so
cut-and-dried. Second, the "white middle-classness" of the film in which only
blacks, lawyers, fat people and other undesirables die while the blue-eyed
triumph is also highly objectionable (I live in Taiwan, where Hollywood has
successfully inculcated the belief that only blue-eyed people are real
Americans.  As a brown-eyed scion of Italian and Polish immigrants, this
infuriates me.).  There are a few minor flaws (a T. Rex can't knock over a
jeep one-twentieth of its weight?) but none really interfere with the
suspension of disbelief.
Not just a rental from time to time, _Jurassic Park_ is a first-rate keeper, a
classic for the ages.  This reviewer gives it 5 out of 5 and would love to see
it on the big screen again.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Cleopatra (1963)
Cleopatra (1963)
Starring Richard Burton, Elizabeth Taylor and Rex Harrison.
Reviewed by Michael A. Turton (turton@cc.fy.edu.tw)
Despite its inclusion in a decade of heroic epics that offered such classics
as _Ben Hur_, _Spartacus_, and _Lawrence of Arabia_, _Cleopatra_ has failed
to find the enduring popularity of those staples.  Yet it has many of the
elements that made those stories such hits: famous actors, a big budget,
spectacle, an timeless story.
_Cleopatra_ tells the story of the queen of Egypt, played by an overwrought
Elizabeth Taylor, and her love affairs with Julius Caesar (Rex Harrison in a
performance any mannikin could have done just as well) and Mark Anthony
(Richard Burton, magnificently).  Roddy McDowell is wonderful as the
ambitious and unscrupulous Octavian.  Martin Landau has a secondary role.
Cleopatra was shot at the tail end of the frenzy of epics that marked the
1950s and early 1960s, yet its as if its filmakers were still struggling to
get a handle on the epic as an art form. It is full of problems: a script
full of long, lifeless, speeches without a single memorable line; actors who
move like claymation figures, and a pace more suited to that of geological
change rather than entertainment. There are no moments of awe and glory to
match the chariot race in _Ben Hur_ the parting of the Red Sea in _The Ten
Commandments_ or the "I am Spartacus" scene at the end of _Spartacus_.
_Cleopatra_ is *staged* rather than *shot*; one half expects to see the crew
clearing the sets for the next scene when a sequence finally finishes.        The
music is foul.
The fundamental weakness, however, is the story itself. Cleopatra offs
herself and the other main characters, Caesar and Antony, die ignobly. Their
heroic story is without redemption. David Lean, faced with the same problem
of meaningless death, chose to move T. E. Lawrence's motorcycle accident to
the beginning in _Lawrence of Arabia_, to make it the story of heroic
failure.  This is not possible in _Cleopatra, because there are TWO heroes
and TWO love stories centering around one woman. Thus there must be two
resolutions in one film. Ouch. _Cleopatra_ would have been much better had it
started with Caesar's death or been divided into two films.
Despite its suitably gargantuan flaws the film remains a compelling story of
tremendous spectacle and power, with much that is worth seeing.  There are
few spectacles in film to match Cleopatra's entry into Rome and the battle at
the end is extremely well done. In a day and age when too many models look
like poster children for famine relief organizations, Taylor's lush, petite
figure is a welcome throwback. The complex love affair between Cleopatra and
Antony, overshadowed and enabled by their mutual admiration of Caesar, is
underpinned by the first-rate acting of Richard Burton, who takes over the
second half of the movie. With the exception of Burton (and McDowell) the
acting in _Cleopatra_ is strictly B movie. At the beginning Taylor is so
exaggerated it is hard to buy into her character, but either she got into her
role as the shooting went on, or (more likely) two hours of her beats down
even the most hardened viewer's skepticism. Rex Harrison as Caesar is even
worse, delivering his lines like a college professor spouting off bon mots at
a cocktail party.  Fortunately Caesar dies halfway through.
Even today the story of Cleopatra is one to conjure with, constantly inspiring
new generations of filmakers around the world.  Here is a film begging for a
remake.  Mel Gibson, are you listening?  2 1/2 out of 5.
Copyright 1998.  Michael A. Turton (turton@cc.fy.edu.tw)
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    
