Authors
Lewis Stiller
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Die Hard: With a Vengeance (1995)
     The title sequence of DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE introduces the
film's many misdirections with an unexpected and uncentered explosion.
Cut to the police department where Chief of Detectives Walter Cobb is
framed partly out-of frame while talking on the phone:  we only see a
quadrant of his face.  The widescreen image seems almost unable to hold
all the action, an impression augmented by the frequent whip pans.  The
cinematography (Menzies) throughout uses a lot of whip pans,
out-of-frame compositions, and shorter length lenses than would be
common, giving the scenes a sense of dynamism, immediacy and at times
surrealism.  The effect is increased in the notorious Harlem scene when
whip pans, aggressive rack focus, Dutch angles, and a brief dolly zoom
disorient the viewer.  Throughout the film, interesting crane shots
abound, and the camera moves very fast.
     A highly elliptical editing (J. Wright, M. Miller) technique is
used, relying on the viewer's familiarity with genre action films to
elide pleonastic narrative; cuts are always straight cuts or whip pans
with neglible lapping.
     Portions of the soundtrack are interesting, particularly during a
long and directorially virtuoso sequence of the breaching of the
Federal Reserve set to "When Johny Comes Marching Home" (or "The Ants Go
Marching In," as I learned it at camp).  The drums in the melody
actually begin well before the actual melody, though this would not be
noticed by the casual viewer.
     Foley and sound engineering is good, with the Dolby Digital
Surround lending considerable subwoofer and surround oomph to some
scenes.  Relatively few theaters, of course, have B-chains remotely
capable of reproducing accurately these effects, whether they have
digital A-chains or not.
     Inspired use of regional and international accents provide an
undercurrent of humor and verisimilitude; I especially enjoyed the
hapless manglings of Gruber's Dutch alias--Gruber's commentary on
U.S.  parochialism, perhaps?--and the New York accents.
     The plot is both more original, more ambitious, and less
consistent than standard for the genre.  It begins to meander back to
triteness in the last quarter of the film, however, and some of the
obligatory car chases and gun battles are gratuitous.  The acting and
dialogue are quite good, except that the ambiguous portrayal of the
cops again resolves into cliches during a school scene.  Nonetheless
there's a refreshing lambency in spots.
     The film was well-directed, enjoyable, fun-to-watch.
