Authors
Geoff Gloster
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Donnie Brasco (1997)
    There's no reason to doubt that DONNIE BRASCO is based, as its opening
credits proclaim, on a True Story. But if it's an accurate picture of life
on America's mean streets, than cinematic depictions of organised crime have
had a much stronger basis in reality than I would have previously thought.
For from the film's outset, when a group of hoods jocularly trade differing
opinions on the merits of various automobiles (not unlike a number of movie
lowlifes who recently gave a Madonna song a close reading) DONNIE BRASCO
resembles more than passingly a few gangster flicks once believed to be
works of fiction.
    Our eponymous hero (Johnny Depp) is not the cheap crook he first appears
to be. Brasco is Joseph Pistone, an undercover FBI agent who has the task of
chumming-up to Lefty (Al Pacino), a seasoned hood who tutors Pistone in the
art of being a "wiseguy". Regrettably, Pistone learns his lessons all too
well. His concern for Lefty, who is burdened with a heroin addicted son,
exacerbates his own family troubles: his children resent his lengthy
absences and his wife fears that her husband's gangster persona is becoming
a little too convincing.
    True, the focus on Pistone's family life does deviate from the typical
gangster-flick formula, but this subplot never rises above its television
drama origins. The unhappy couple trade predictable lines and engage in
drawn-out domestic squabbles – including an ill-advised marriage guidance
routine – that slow the film down unnecessarily. The biggest problem with
DONNIE BRASCO , however, is that its wiseguy attitude and style lacks the
flair of its many predecessors. The awkward use of an occasional disco tune
momentarily reminds us its the 70's, but not with the consistent and
blindingly tacky style – I loved those fluoro coloured suits – of Scorces'
costume drama CASINO. More importantly, Pacino's presence triggers memories
of his earlier movie triumphs in which similar territory was covered far
more effectively. DONNIE BRASCO's take on American values, for instance, is
feeble and obvious. Lefty rambles out dreams of material betterment to the
accompaniment of grating inspirational music. Inexplicably, Lefty's Horatio
Alger inspired gush is supposed to move us. It doesn't any more than his
family troubles do, which are dealt in the same saccharine and obvious
manner as Pistone's. Just think a minute on how these themes were explored
in the GODFATHER movies and SCARFACE. In these pictures Pacino's dedication
to a peculiar and bloody hyper-capitalism was twisted and confronting, while
his dogged application of macho wiseguy procedure meant that his relations
to friends and family was intriguingly dark – neither were spared bloody
retribution for breaching wiseguy regulations. DONNIE BRASCO's tawdry little
crime, therefore isn't so much its repetition of familiar gangster themes,
but the shameless way in which it sanitises them.
    (Oh and by the way, I forgot to mention that the script also sports a
startling subplot: Pipstone's superiors are obstructive incompetents who are
infuriated by his constant insubordination – is that a "Damn you McBain!" I
hear from Springfield way?)
    So the movie is cliched. Big deal, what do you expect from a
gangster-flick? Well you expect quality action sequences and bravado
performances in abundance if its going to be a decent example of the genre.
DONNIE BRASCO  fails on both counts. The action scenes never rise above the
ordinary and Depp's woeful performance tends to smother the good-work of his
comrades. Admittedly, Pacino does nothing new and Michael Madsen (Sonny)
simply smirks his way through the picture like a slightly subdued Mr. White,
but both possess an unmistakable sly charm. Depp usually exhibits a bit of
class himself, but regrettably, being in the presence of one of his betters
must have left him star-struck, for he is completely hell-bent on mimicking
Pacino's well-earned high style. The consequences are painful to watch. Its
no exaggeration to say that the film's credibility is seriously strained by
the sight of the Pistone family's uncanny ability to keep a straight face in
front of their breadwinner's phony Brooklyn accent.
    Perhaps we should take pity on the makers of DONNIE BRASCO . Maybe a
scrupulous adherence to pinpoint accuracy demanded tiered dialogue and
scenarios weakly reminiscent of classic gangster flicks. If this is indeed
the case, surely the makers of DONNIE BRASCO could have explored the
fascinating possibility that America's underworld is committed to emulating,
albeit in heavily attenuated form, their movie namesakes. Depp could have
poignantly played a simple cop who becomes a hideous parody once he is
forced to mimic big-screen gangster greats. Who knows what insights into the
criminal psyche could have arisen? But then again, perhaps Donnie Brasco
isn't so true after all.

Title
Review for Thieves Quartet (1994)
    Only the bare technical essentials of "Thieve's Quartet" reside in the
Internet Movie Database. Its a forgotten film that probably owes its place
at my local video shop thanks to a sympathetic review from cult movie critic
Jim Bob Briggs: his insistence that "Thieve's Quartet" is "Better than
Reservoir Dogs" screams from the front cover. Jim Bob is lying through his
teeth, but that's O.K, because its only a white lie, and white lies are
forgivable when they rescue the likes of "Thieves Quartet" from oblivion.
    Written and directed by Joe Chappelle, "Thieves Quartet" traces the
fortunes of a group of criminals who embark on an audacious crime. Sure,
that's a tad imprecise, but I wouldn't want to undermine Chapelle's
intentions. "Thieves Quartet" unfolds slowly, unexpectedly. The gang's
enigmatic statements and intentions are not immediately decipherable. This
doesn't mean that Chapelle has crafted a headache-inducing labyrinth, "The
Big Sleep" for the 90's (thank God!). The tiny suggestive riddles he poses
are answered swiftly, as they successively appear, until a convincing and
thoroughly tawdry picture has emerged. The audience has no choice but to
become thoroughly engrossed in the workings of Chapelle's tantalisingly
clever film.
    Character and motivation is developed with a similar care to detail. The
unlikely brains of the operation is Artie. Artie speaks the hippy lingo of
his youth and exhibits a gentle eccentricity consistent with his resemblance
to a balding Spalding Grey. A barman, Artie is eager to change his pitiful
circumstances. His good friend Jimmy, a retired football player whose stuck
working a car wash, is equally embittered by the cards life has dealt him.
Chappelle opens his film with a subtle pre-credit sequence in which Jimmy
tends to the needs of an everyday, and moderately annoying, customer.
Nothing really happens, but the resentment and barely concealed fury is
palpable. Artie's other two accomplices are a lot more volatile. Mike is an
ex-cop eternally bitter about the money he lost on a football game Jimmy
threw. In truth, he's more riled about Jimmy being black. In contrast, Art's
girlfriend Jessie is perhaps a little too friendly towards Art's friends.
She describes their relationship as a mutually respectful "arrangement".
Art's take on this "arrangement" is less genteel, more direct. Her
provocative behaviour encourages the advice "Just coz you ball half the
civilised world don't mean you have to advertise it!". Internal conflict,
wouldn't you know, soon threatens to scuttle the venture.
    Chappelle adds an interesting dimension to his film by imbuing his main
characters with social consciences. Jimmy and Art share an activist past and
have outspoken views on society's injustices. They consider their criminal
plans to be an extension of their political selves; to break the law is to
strike out against a society that is criminaly unjust itself. But it isn't
long before their reasonable musings on society's power-networks simply
become a means to deny that they have any responsibility for their own fate
or that of the people they encounter. Their activism degenerates into
expedient nihilism. When the bodies of the innocent start piling up Art
expresses scant regret and forsakes all blame: "I'm not God, man".
Ultimately, Art is no more principled than Mike, who coolly states "I didn't
make the world" after he "pops" a victim.
    Apart from an impressive script with well-rounded characters, Chapelle's
film is aided by its consistent style and edgy mood. As the title of the
film suggests, music is integral to the feel of "Thieve's Quartet". Jazz, in
particularly Miles Davis, fills Arts colourful conversation. This homage to
jazz is an essential component of the film's mood and pace, not an airy
pretension intended to telegraph the movie's sophistication. The music of
Frank Zorn is expertly paced to the rhythm and emotion of a film that veers
from careful reflection to feverish action.
    "Thieve's Quartet" is not perfect. Its conclusion, for instance, doesn't
really deliver the impact expected. But it is a sharp, original and stylish
directorial debut with the grim integrity of a Jim Thompson novel. Go see
it. You wouldn't want Jim Bob to look like a liar.
