Authors
Peter Schouten
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Blind Date (1996/II) (V)
Director Theo van Gogh is a character by himself. He presents a strange
talkshow on a local tv-network in Amsterdam en makes movies only he wants
to put money in. Although his last movie, 06, was distributed overseas,
in the Netherlands the public and critics alike had a field trip with it.
The movie was thrashed and ridiculed, and not without reason. In 06 Van Gogh
had his actors think up their own scenes, based on one idea: two individuals
have a phone sex relation.
This time around he has learned, but not much. Again he had only one idea:
two divorced individuals arrange blind dates, pretend they don't know each
other and try to get in touch with their feelings, since their daughter died
in a car crash they survived.
Instead of improvising everything there was actually a screenplay this time,
but the dialogues were written by a child actress with one movie to her credit.
Over and over we see the same 'blind' date. Character backgrounds are clear
within 5 minutes, and half-way through you'll know the ending.
The best part in the movie is the voice of the dead child. She has wonderful
lines, but as a whole, this could have been a nice 25 minute short, instead
of a feature length movie. On the positive side, the movie doesn't drag, for
there are many comic elements to lighten the drama.
After "Vals Licht" and "06", Van Goghs movies are definitely improving. Maybe,
just maybe, he'll make a good movie someday.
Peter Schouten
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/7574  ---> Visit Celluloid Comics Today!

Title
Review for Jurk, De (1996)
The Netherlands 1996
Written and Directed by Alex van Warmerdam
With: Alex van Warmerdam, Henri Garcin, Olga Zuiderhoek, Rijk de Gooyer,
      Rudolph Lucieer, Ariane Schluter, Jack Wouterse, Leny Breederveld,
      Carol van Herwijnen
Music: Vincent van Warmerdam
Produced: Marc van Warmerdam, Vincent van Warmerdam
          GRANIET/ORKATER/VARA
Let's face it. The starring part in this motion picture is given to a
dress, and not a pretty one. A bright blue cotton summer dress, with red
and yellow leaves printed on it. The movie follows the production of the
dress, and after that the people who wear one of the dresses. All those
people are in for a disaster, because the dress is a jinx.
"De Jurk" is the third outing for actor-director-writer-producer-and guy
who-thought-off-the-movie's-single-sheet-poster Alex van Warmerdam. The
first two movies were Abel, about a young man still living at home, and
De Noorderlingen (The Northerners) about minding other people's business
in the suburbs. Social Comedy is his trade, and this movie is no exception.
Since the dress moves around a lot, and only one woman (Olga Zuiderhoek, who
also played a major part in Abel, just like Henri Garcin) is able to hold on
to the dress for more than a few days, before being horny, harassed, killed
or several of those destinies, the movie feels like a cameo party, but when
the movie is distributed abroad, viewers probably won't recognize many.
One of the bigger parts is reserved for Alex van Warmerdam himself. He plays
a train conductor who develops a crush on women who wear the dress. Throughout
the movie he claims sanity, but he isn't believable for a moment. The woman
he spends the larger amount of time pursuing is Ariane Schluter, who in the
movie "06" (also with Jack Wouterse) talks a lot about sex but remains
relatively dressed, but in this movie she sleeps in the nude and apparently
wouldn't need forementioned dress that much, for she walks around naked most
of the time.
At the movie's funny finale scenes, the question remains "What was this movie
really about?". If a lesson is to be learned from it, it should be "Do not, I
repeat Do Not buy this dress" but if you saw the design, you would allready
understand that as a matter of taste. Alex van Warmerdam said the movie was
about a dress, because dresses are worn by women. Next month "The Birdcage"
is showing here, so we'll see about that! :-)
