Authors
Mike Borzumate
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for My Best Friend's Wedding (1997)

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
    Never before have I seen stereotypes so perfectly played as in this
horridly worthless drivel of a film.  I bet you can see where this review
is going.
    You've got the naive girl falling in love with the handsome,
dominating man.  But look out, the chicken "friend" who wouldn't fess up
to being in love with the hunky stud for years is out to get him!  And, of
course, she's an independent and lonely career woman.  But who's the
chicken's *real* friend?  A studly and witty gay man, of course!  But she
feels no attraction to him at all, because...  he's gay!  How convenient! 
And everyone has perfect teeth and perfect hair, even when bolted out of a
sound sleep.  Ladies and gentlemen, the stereotypes of yuppiedom!
    Frankly, I didn't care WHO ended up with the guy in the end.  I kept
hoping that meteorites would fall from the sky and squash and smolder each
of them individually.  Except maybe Cameron Diaz's character; I kept
hoping she'd find a man as equally naive and blindingly faithful as her,
and that they'd run off into another movie together.  Maybe I'd actually
watch that movie and enjoy it for its honest romance.  The only thing that
kept me watching this one for the second agonizing half was the cat
sleeping on my chest, firmly pinning me down out of reach of my VCR.
    The only reasons this movie would be worth seeing at all are for the
stereotypically funny gay man (played by Rupert Everett), Cameron Diaz's
incredible smile, and M. Emmet Walsh (the proctologist from _Fletch_) as
the singing, dancing, pigging out Uncle Joe.

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.

Title
Review for Nothing to Lose (1997)

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
    Although very funny in some parts, Nothing to Lose often drags through
the filler.  Luckily, the scenes that work (mostly) make up for the ones
that don't. 
    I think the main gripe I had directly with the acting was how forced
it seemed.  It often seemed that Martin Lawrence was straining to be
believable instead of just being his funny self, and that Tim Robbins was
reacting in the way he figured was expected by the audience, instead of
going with his comedic instinct.
    Much of the plot is farcical, but then this isn't a serious movie, so
the plot weaknesses can be overlooked for the most part.  The problems
arise, however, during the long gaps between the very funny scenes where
the movie drags on and on through poorly-delivered filler comedy. 
    Don't let the occasional yawn discourage you, however!  The movie gets
better as it goes along.  All scenes with T. (Lawrence)'s family work
wonderfully, and the section of the movie with Henry (Patrick Cranshaw)
is roll-on-the-floor funny.
    So, if you can be patient, Nothing to Lose is a worthwhile matinee or
video experience. 

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
    AFO held my attention consistently throughout.  In fact, several times
I found myself gasping for air as I got caught up in the action.  This is
a (perhaps surprisingly) solid action flick during a fairly sluggish
summer. 
    Harrison Ford is great.  You believe, for every second, that he really
is the President.  He not only displays bravery and courage, but also a
human side we sometimes forget our leaders have.  Almost completely absent
from this movie, unlike certain others in his past, were the moments when
he would try to pretend that he was frightened, but instead just looked
confused and lost.  In AFO, you actually believe he is scared turdless.
    Gary Oldman is a very convincing terrorist.  The radicalism he
conveyed made me, in some instances, so scared I was nervous and fidgety. 
His character is the kind of guy you are afraid could be a real terrorist: 
nutty, but intelligent and focused. 
    Now come the parts where I complain.  Glenn Close is a horrible
Vice-President.  Through the whole movie she looked old and tired, like
she couldn't wait to run off the set and jump into the jacuzzi.  I was
very, very glad when her short bits were over and we could get back to the
crisis at hand. 
    Liesel Matthews was similarly a horrible First Brat.  She displayed
very limited acting capabilities.  During every scene where she was called
upon to display a serious emotion, it always seemed like she was reading
the lines from a paper and grinning.  I didn't believe she was scared.  I
believed, instead, that she was excited by the terrorists threatening to
kill her.  Either that or she was too airheaded to understand what was
happening around her.  (A replacement that immediately comes to mind would
have been Hillary Wolf, but I guess she's a little old now to play a 12
year old.)
    Ignoring these two lame performances, this film is thoroughly
enjoyable and suspenseful, so you should see it.

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.

Title
Review for Conspiracy Theory (1997)

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
Rating: 6.0 and $5.50
Plot teaser: Jerry Fletcher (Mel Gibson) analyzes various government
conspiracies.
    This movie kept reminding me of the style of A Clockwork Orange,
without the perversions.
    The two principal actors, Mel Gibson and Julia Roberts, performed very
well in their roles.  The other players gave spotty portrayals, but none
that were lacking enough to be considered outright bad.
    My big gripe is with the soundtrack.  Everytime I heard the music, I
wondered how it was supposed to fit into the movie.  It sounded like the
soundtrack of a cartoon.  Am I supposed to take Fletcher as a serious
portrayal of a bizarre man?  Or am I supposed to just dismiss him
out-of-hand as an overacted stereotype of a fruitcake, as the music
suggests?  I tried to ignore the background music and concentrate on the
story.  It was a decidedly uphill battle.
    And speaking of the story...  I wouldn't say it was unbelievable, just
that the choice of topics for the movie was too "quaint" and didn't flow
in an even pattern.  The plot tosses the audience hither and yon, and
often causes a viewer to lose focus.  But I'm bordering on spoilers, and I
hate spoilers in reviews. 
    Go see it on a matinee.  It's worth watching, even if it just dazes
you with its oddity.

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
    What an incredible waste of 130 valuable minutes of my life.  I
absolutely cannot believe how devoid of entertainment value this "film"
proved to be.  Sure, Batman is derived from a comic book, so one should
expect a comic book-like movie.  But this was senseless drivel. 
    George Clooney was almost a competant Batman.  He had the poise and
roughness one expects from a Batman.  I was completely nausiated by his
sad attempts to be boyish and cute, however.  And he seemed unable to
resist doing his little "I can't understand what you just said to me
because I am an airhead" head twist at every plot turn. 
    All other characters (with one exception noted below) were sad, sorry
attempts at believability.  Uma Thurman dragged every line out like her
lips were stuck in slow motion.  Apparently she thought this made her
somehow sexy.  She didn't do a thing for me.  Chris O'Donnell played an
immature, whiney, idiotic Robin who would fall for every painfully obvious
ambush and not learn a thing from it.  "Ahnold" was terrible.  At one
point his dialogue broke down to him babbling something similar to "kill
them, yes yes, kill them!  I want you to crush them!  Kill them!  Haha! 
Kill them, yes yes!"  on and on.  The rest of his performance wasn't much
better.
    I had hoped for so much from Alicia Silverstone.  Every movie in which
I see her, I hope it will finally be the one to make me attracted to her. 
Once again, however, she played an irresponsible, bratty baby.  Moreover,
she was auxilliary and unneeded in this already bloated film. 
    The only character that entertained me (and why this movie didn't get
an even lower rating) was Bane, played by Jeep Swenson.  He portrayed an
excellent big dumb grunt.  He made me show my only emotional reaction
during the whole film (which happened to be laughter). 
    As far as the movie itself goes, the plot is weak, there are too many
major characters, and the script is painfully dumb.
    At least once during this movie I found myself drifting off to sleep.
That isn't entirely abnormal.  The part that surprised me was when I
realized that, had I gone to the cinema alone, I wouldn't have cared if I
slept through the rest.  I would now like to publicly thank my friend(?)
who convinced me to shell out $7.50 for this grand turd of celluloid.
    Do not see this movie unless it is playing on the in-store screens
when you are looking for another video to rent.  Certainly do not see it
in a theatre.

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
    FINALLY.  That was my reaction 1/3 of the way into MIB.  Finally a
movie this summer that I could enjoy!
    This movie is everything _Batman & Robin_ failed to be.  It held my
attention start to finish, and I enjoyed every minute of it.
    Everyone in the movie gave excellent performances.  Mr. Jones and Mr.
Smith were outstanding.  Jones's dead-pan humor and seriousness clicked
wonderfully.  Smith's quick wit and slick style were a perfect fit.
    But, surprisingly, the most impressive performance for me was Vincent
D'Onofrio as the major evil character.  His performance was so unstressed
and dynamic that it was completely believable.  Furthermore, it looked
like he threw himself wholeheartedly into the part.  He should win an
Oscar.
    The effects were special, but not overbearing.  Their subtlety
helped to leave me feeling like the movie _just might_ be true.
   My only criticisms are that the film seems to end much too soon and
hurriedly, and Linda Fiorentino's part is far too minor.  Not only is she
gorgeous (even moreso now that we have seen her as a coroner), but she is
also a very talented actress.  It is too bad this movie didn't offer her
much of an opportunity to show that off.
    You want to see this movie at least once at a theatre.  I'd recommend
you see it at least three times.  I wouldn't recommend it for the littlest
members of the family, but bring everyone else.  Make an event of it.  Do
not miss this movie.

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.

Title
Review for Trading Places (1983)

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
Rating: 7.5 and $8.00
Plot teaser: Louis Winthorpe III (Dan Aykroyd) is rich and Billy Ray
Valentine (Eddie Murphy) is poor.  For now.
    I think I first saw this movie on TV so many years ago I can't recall
exactly when.  It's great.  I liked it so much I bought it from a video
store that was going out of business around here.
    The strength of this movie is its plot, as strange as that might sound
these days.  Some very important issues are tackled, but in an enjoyable
and entertaining fashion.
    All the acting is superb.  I can't think of anyone who gave even a
mediocre performance.  You can tell everyone had fun making this movie and
yet took their roles seriously.
    The big players are fine.  Aykroyd, Murphy, and Jamie Lee Curtis play
their characters well.  Their transformations are believable and
convincing.  Why don't actors always take their jobs this seriously
anymore?
    Even the secondary characters are excellent.  The butler Coleman
(Denholm Elliott) is dryly humorous.  The dude who says "yeah" (James D.
Taylor?) cracks me up. 
    A lot of the filming was done "on location" in the streets of
Philadelphia.  That gives the movie much more believability and depth.
    The plot covers lots of the classic issues: racism, poverty, class
conflict... yet it doesn't take itself too seriously.
    Rent this thoroughly enjoyable film.  You can even rent it from
Blockbu$ter.  It's worth it!

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.

Title
Review for Good Burger (1997)

For details of my reviewing style, please see the note at the end of
the review.
    I accidentally saw Good Burger when I was trying to go to Nothing to
Lose.  Hint:  The "Camillus Mall -- Route 5" is neither in Camillus nor on
Route 5.  It would take you at least a half hour to figure that out on
your own, and you would miss Nothing to Lose and be forced to see Good
Burger too.
    As for the movie, it is overall fairly enjoyable.  It does suffer from
several weak performances and weak filler, but there are much worse movies
this summer (Batman & Robin!  Wee!  What a waste of $7.50!!!).
    I can't point to any one actor as having a performance that really
"worked".  They were all fairly competent, but none really excited me.  I
was especially disappointed by Abe Vigoda, who looked very old, very
tired, and very bored.  I did like Shaq, who does a great job just being
himself.
    The movie starts out strong, with strong action and comedy bits, but
then falls flat and drags through the middle to a nearly-believable
ending.
    The target audience for this film appears to be 13-15 year olds.  So
take one of them with you and laugh when they do.  Otherwise, wait until
it moves to the cheap section of your video store.

I give two ratings: An arbitrary scale of enjoyability (1 to 10) and
a maximum price I would pay to see the movie.
