Authors
Billy Newsom
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Darkman (1990)
This is absolutely, without a doubt, the worst movie that I've ever
seen.  If you want to see a proper review, then you're in the wrong
place.  This is how vividly this movie stuck to me as the most horrible
excuse for entertainment I've ever encountered:
I can remember the reason I saw this movie, where, when, and I can
especially remembering having thoughts about walking out of the
theater.  You must know that if I had had anything better to do, I would
have left.  (In fact, I've never walked out on a movie.)
Darkman truly delivers in every single bad category.  It lacks any sense
of purpose, plot, or entertainment value.  There are dozens of movies
which I could name that I'd gladly watch before I'd watch this movie
again.  Movies which people consistently rate 1/2 stars.
The major thing that mystifies me about this, uh (shall I say it?) movie
is that there was a sequel.  (Okay, only on video.  But there were two
sequels.)  It makes me sad to think that there was any interest in this
trash enough to let it linger.  I have heard a rumor that either Siskel
or Ebert gave it a good rating.  If so, rest assured that either they
were given a large sum of money to do so or they truly are the most
inept of critics.  Any critic that would have a positive 
If all of my words have made you want to see it for the sake of
adventure, then no doubt you have the same idea I had when I failed to
leave the theater.  I knew that this movie was insidious and yet I kept
watching.  Let's just say that curiosity will kill you on this one.
Note that Sam Raimi directed - a pseudonym used by permission of the
Director's Guild if I'm not mistaken.  I would be most interested to
know the true culprit.  I would like to ask him, "What were you
thinking?"
It might be Bradford May - the guy who directed the two Darkman sequels
and a director of foreign TV movies.  I've never seen any of his other
stuff.
He also directed "The Amy Fisher Story" and "Madonna: Innocence Lost." 
I have a feeling that this guy's stuff isn't quite what I'd call
"quality."
One final note: I have not seen either Darkman II or III.  I can imagine
that these movies must be just as terrible as the original.  Don't
bother warning me about them, I will never see them.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
This movie gave me a headache!  The photography, I must tell you, is unique. 
The camera is never still during battle scenes.  It made me nauseous watching a
70' screen shake as the cameraman follows soldiers around a battle scene. 
Spielberg purposelessly made the camera vibrate rather than damping it, a la
Shaky Cam.  If Spielberg likes this effect, I don't.  Not for every single shot
in every single battle.
Besides poor camera work, the plot was somewhat thin.  It was a complex plot for
a war movie, but it was still lacking.  I would give the screenwriting a "C"
only because there was some good comic relief.  But the entire movie was so
predictable, that the length (over two hours) made the movie languish.  Toward
the end, all I wanted was for the men to find Ryan, finish their little war
game, and send him home -- so I could go home.
The characters, well, what can I say.  They are stereotypes, what the movie
script writers call "composite" characters.  The guy who freezes up.  The guy
whose every other line is a half-audible prayer.  The intellectual.  The guy
who's the gung-ho no-frills ground-pounder.  The guy everyone looks up to.
I could almost see the script as I watched the film.  It was because the
characters, even though they are well-developed, are still one dimensional. 
They are almost completely static, too.
Outstanding directing, average screenwriting, excellent realism and effects,
average music, and superb sound make this movie one of the best of 1998.  But I
watched this movie the same day as I saw Gone With the Wind, and I'm sorry,
there's just no comparison.  7 out of 10.  Go see Vivien Leigh again.
This movie is going to be awesome on DVD.  I hope that I can get used to the
shaky camera tricks on a 4' screen.  But I'm really looking forward to those
booming artillery shells -- I want to make my neighbors think that a war is
going on in my house!  But to be honest, this movie must be seen and heard in a
movie theater to get the full effect.  Just bring some Dramamine or Tylenol.
People seem to think that the gore in this movie can make up for its weak
storyline.  Sorry, it just can't.  The gore didn't keep me interested like a
plot would have.  A bad trade-off, in my opinion.
