Authors
Allan Woodward
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Soldier (1998)
Literally blink, and you'll miss _Soldier_'s lone flash of wit: a fleeting
glimpse of a computer screen listing futuristic supersoldier Todd's (Kurt
Russell) numerous war commendations, among them the "Plissken
Patch"--referring, of course, to Russell's character in John Carpenter's
_Escape_from..._ movies.  The rest of this sci-fi actioner is brainless
junk though writer David Webb Peoples and director Paul Anderson serve up
an interesting basic premise.  In the future, a select few males are chosen
at birth to be trained their whole life as soldiers, nothing more; veteran
soldier Todd is among the best, if not _the_ best.  But when a new
genetically engineered brand of soldier is developed, Todd and his ilk are
rendered obsolete.
>From here, the story takes a most uninspired turn.  Presumed dead, Todd is
dumped onto a trash dump planet, where he meets up with a peaceful
community of people who look and act like extras from _The_Postman_.  For
reasons that are never clear, the new soldiers attack this trash planet,
and the film becomes an outer space _Rambo_, boldly declaring, "I'm gonna
kill 'em all, sir!"  Thus ensues much machine gun action and laughable
"emotional" content where Todd finds the humanity within his tough
exterior.  It plays even worse than it sounds.
Michael Dequina
mrbrown@iname.com   |  michael_jordan@geocities.com
Mr. Brown's Movie Site: http://welcome.to/mrbrown
CompuServe Hollywood Hotline: http://www.HollywoodHotline.com

Title
Review for Vampires (1998)
 I want to say this at the outset: I think John Carpenter is a genius.
Anyone who could almost single-handedly create the modern horror film
(Halloween), entertain with an action movie while, at the same time,
infusing that action with a decidedly un-'80s liberalism (Escape from New
York) and, of course, presciently incorporate Hong Kong filmic traditions in
an American movie years before anyone else thought to (Big Trouble in Little
China) has to know something the rest of us don't.  Put simply: I always
look forward to John Carpenter's movies.  I want them to be good.
 Unfortunately, Carpenter's doing his best to tear down his rep and burn the
rubble.  His sequel to Escape, the pathetic Escape from LA, was as cheap and
exploitative as sequels get without having the name Charles Band attached to
it.  And now John Carpenter's Vampires, while not being that bad, isn't
great, either.
 Based on the novel by John Steakley (no pun intended - I hope), Vampires is
another attempt by Carpenter to mold the sensibilities of the classic
western to the skeleton of another genre.  Jack Crow, played with typical
flair by James Woods, is the head of a Vatican-sponsored vampire-hunting
squad.  The squad's a tough bunch of hombres, travelling from town to town
doing what needs to be done.  They're a modern Wild Bunch, living more or
less outside the law, boozing and whoring and being real men.  To an extent,
this works.
 Vampires opens with Team Crow busting open a vampire nest in some New
Mexican jerkwater.  Crow and his boys work with brutal efficiency, flushing
and killing.  It's a solid piece of work, juxtaposing the violence inside
the nest with the presence of a priest outside, blessing the charred remains
of the undead.  The entire sequence has a nasty bestiality that displays the
skill Carpenter has when he really has something solid to work with.
 After this, however, the movie begins to decay.  Following the raid, the
master of this vampire pack (and, apparently, all vampires - played by an
almost unrecognizable Thomas Ian Griffith) takes out Team Crow.  Crow is put
on the run with the last member of his team, Montoya (Daniel Baldwin) and a
hooker (Sheryl Lee) "infected" by the master and linked to him
telepathically, a la Mina Harker in Bram Stoker's Dracula.
 Bizarrely, since the movie runs 107 minutes, not much else happens in
Vampires.  Jack Crow makes contact with the Church and learns the origin of
Griffith's super-vampire, gets a fresh new priest in the person of Tim
Guinee and wanders around doing this and that.  Meanwhile, a sort-of romance
blooms between Montoya and Lee's Katrina, even as Katrina comes closer and
closer to full vampirism.  It's... it's boring.
 Only at the very end, in the last ten or so minutes, does Carpenter's film
regain the momentum it started with, though even this is inexpertly handled.
Large parts of the massive "slayers versus the vampires" climax are done in
an abstract, montage fashion.  Very disappointing.
 This is even more of a letdown when taken in the context of Carpenter's
carefully-staged camera work and the sharp performances from the cast.  Even
Daniel Baldwin, the oft-overlooked Baldwin brother, puts together some good
moments.  But where's the script?  Where's the good stuff?  Where's the John
Carpenter genius that turns an ordinary story into something special?
Vampires is simply parts looking for a whole.

Title
Review for Practical Magic (1998)
    It's difficult to adequately review a film like Practical Magic, an
adaptation of author Alice Hoffman's bestselling novel.  Not because of its
excesses of brilliance or lack thereof, but because it's so many things at
once, both good and bad, that it's almost impossible to give justice to the
film without separating each portion of it into distinct areas of critique.
    Billed as a romantic comedy, or perhaps a late-'90s version of The
Witches of Eastwick, this film is neither.  While it has elements of
romantic comedy, Practical Magic, which stars Sandra Bullock and Nicole
Kidman as sisters who are also real witches, is also fairly equal parts
drama, tearjerker and horror film.  It begins with a near-hanging and a
voice-over which provides the set-up for what follows: the Owens clan of
women (witches all) are cursed never to love.  Ever.  The men they love will
always die.
    Sandra Bullock is the undisputed star of this picture and it's nice to
see a return to the sort of work she did before she became America's
sweetheart in movies like While You Were Sleeping.  Her character, Sally
Owens, is the reluctant one in a close-knit family unit of witches which
includes Stockard Channing and Dianne Wiest (in great supporting roles - you
know these women from the weird parts of your own family tree), yearning for
a normal life with a husband and a family.  She is more closed than cute,
more wounded than spunky.  When the seemingly inevitable tragedy strikes,
she plays it well.  As the film progresses, she brings weight to her role
and sometimes real emotion, even when events turn increasingly disjointed.
    And they do become pretty strange.  Nicole Kidman is the wild-one
sister, passing from man to man in order to avoid the curse of never having
love by never seeking love.  As usual, Kidman does a pro's job sinking into
the character, but it's disappointing that she didn't get a chance to take
on the stronger role of Sally, since she more than has the skills to play
women who reach down inside themselves to find an iron will when the need
arises.  Just watch Dead Calm to see what I mean.
    Anyway, Kidman gets mixed up with a hard-drinking Romanian Louis L'Amour
fan that she both desires and fears.  It's here that Practical Magic detours
into a fairly harrowing depiction of abuse and, ultimately, murder.  What
spins out from there is a bizarre, unbalanced mix of The Exorcist, Jack the
Bear and, lastly, Sleepless in Seattle (in the form of Aidan Quinn, who's
becoming better-looking and a better actor as he ages).
    Ultimately there are too many threads to deal with adequately.  The
aforementioned Aidan Quinn is a policeman from Arizona, who may also be The
One for Sally, investigating the Romanian cowboy, an evil spirit threatens
to tear the family apart and maybe kill Gillian and, if that's not enough,
Sally has a hard time with her relationship with her two daughters.  All of
this, jostling for screen time.  Sometimes the transitions aren't pretty.
    Despite all of its problems, Practical Magic isn't bad.  Director
Griffin Dunne (Addicted to Love) delivers a visually lush and
solidly-managed piece of work.  His cast is excellent and they work each
scene with verve.  Alice Hoffman, who also wrote the first draft of the
script, brings across her theme of women's empowerment through blood- and
symbolic-sisterhood.  However, this same script is unable to maintain a
consistent mood due to the proliferation of subplots.
    See the film if you like.  It's a nice way to spend a couple hours.  And
the worst that can be said of Practical Magic is that it's a noble failure
for having tried to do too much.
    Just Rent It This Week:  The Replacement Killers, Starring Chow Yun-Fat
and Mira Sorvino.  Grade: A.

Title
Review for Pleasantville (1998)
 A true sleeper doesn't come along very often.  Films that aren't much more
than a tiny blip on the radar screen of our collective
Hollywood-consciousness, suddenly appearing at your local multiplex,
inspiring a lot of "what movie is that?" from people standing in front of
the box office, trying to choose a picture.  Pleasantville, the new film
from Gary Ross (co-creator of Dave and Big), is the genuine article: a
sleeper hit.
 Starring Tobey Maguire, recently seen in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas,
and Reese Witherspoon (Fear, Twilight) as high-school twins, Pleasantville
tells the story of how these two are transported into the '50s-perfect world
of the titular television program.
Pleasantville the show enjoys immortal life on the TV Time! cable channel
and David (Maguire) is its biggest fan.  David's sister, Jennifer
(Witherspoon) is decidedly not a fan, more concerned with in-school
popularity and personal trampiness.  Through a bizarre twist involving a
mysterious TV repairman (Don Knotts), David and Jennifer get their big
chance to really get into their TV.  They take the places of Pleasantville's
regulars and assume the roles of Bud and Mary-Sue Parker, the perfect kids
of the perfect Pleasantville couple, George and Betty (expertly played with
a variety of layers by William H. Macy and Joan Allen).
Like The Wizard of Oz, which gets a splashy re-release on Friday, November
6th, Pleasantville uses color and monochrome to great effect.  David and
Jennifer's world is as colorful as our own, but Pleasantville is in
"glorious black-and-white," heightening the unreality of this depiction of a
'50s that never was.  In Pleasantville, everyone is pleasant, the Fire
Department only rescues cats out of trees (there are no fires) and the
regularity of existence is accepted by everyone.
The inclusion of these two is like introducing a virus into a petri dish.
Just by being there, they begin a sequence of changing events that have the
potential to shatter the apparently idyllic existence of Pleasantville.
This is a town where everyone has a role to play, no matter how monotonous.
Given a taste of irregularity, what would these people do?
The transformation is played out in the slow revelation of color.  First a
rose, then a taillight, splashes of iridescent red in the midst of a
grayscale environment.  Surroundings that bear witness to a shift in the
immortal regularity of Pleasantville are given tones and shades that never
existed before.  They are freed from within themselves and display this
outwardly.
As David and Jennifer, acting as not-quite-right Bud and Mary-Sue, continue
life within Pleasantville, carrying with them the concepts of free thought
(and free love), the change spreads to the inhabitants.  Soon the screen is
dotted with rich colors.  Books, once blank on the inside, now have words,
manifesting themselves as the classic elements of social change, delivering
ideas and philosophies to the ever-growing ranks of colorized Pleasantville
denizens.
Pleasantville is powerful allegory, presented in a format that Everyman can
enjoy. Seeded with humor and self-reference, the film molds potent thought
into entertainment.  Art, education, youth and sex are all rightly shown to
be universal vehicles of change.  The profound influence of artistic masters
such as Titian and van Gogh is introduced in a skillful scene involving a
newly-filled art book taken from the suddenly-relevant library.  Without
words, the deeply-moving experience of art as transcendence is given, like a
beautiful gift, to the audience.
Script, direction and eye-popping visual effects (this is the most gorgeous
movie this year, bar none) tie into first-rate performances from every cast
member, no matter how small the role.  J.T. Walsh makes his final film
appearance as Pleasantville's mayor, and is perfectly cast.  He is the
physical embodiment - soft middle and buzz cut - of the iconic, successful
'50s man.  Jeff Daniels, as Mr. Johnson, the Soda Shop owner, submits a
performance so skillfully-crafted and nuanced that it's like a living
Faberge egg that opens to reveal detail upon detail.
In fact, I could go on at length about the incredible acting work done in
Pleasantville.  When I say that the film has the best ensemble of the year,
I'm not exaggerating; it's impossible to find one performance that lacks.
Randy Newman's score is richly-textured, peppered with well-chosen '50s
standards, capped off by an excellent cover of The Beatles' Across the
Universe by Fiona Apple.
See Pleasantville.  This is the kind of film, packed with genuine resonance,
that puts saccharine, artificial pictures like Forrest Gump in their place,
inspiring and affirming even as it educates.
Just Rent It This Week: The English Patient; Starring Ralph Fiennes and
Kristin Scott Thomas.  Grade: A
