Authors
Rogers Cadenhead
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Miami Blues (1990)
     Alec Baldwin, the actor whose performance in THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER has
catapulted him into the rank of leading men, does his level best to sink back
down in the odd character roles with his performance in MIAMI BLUES.  In a
riveting, comic style that combines the lunacy of Jack Nicholson's Joker with a
cold intelligence, Baldwin plays a rotten SOB in a way that's fun -- at times
hysterical -- to watch.  This film, co-produced by the mind behind SOMETHING
WILD and MARRIED TO THE MOB, has a lot of good-spirited eccentricity in
common with those two pictures.  But there's a core of violent meanness to
MIAMI BLUES that can't be denied.  Senses of sex and killing are kept on-screen
too long for the dark comedy to be much of a lark at times.
     But it is the relationships, and not the plot, that make MIAMI BLUES one
of the best spring releases.  Alec Baldwin's psycho, his former hooker
girlfriend (Jennifer Jason Leigh) and the poor cop (Fred Ward) are such fully
realized characters that their interaction is, on its own, fun to watch even if
nothing is happening.  A scene between Ward and Leigh in a supermarket, and
Baldwin and Leigh at a dinner date, are both truly captivating moments.  Even
minor supporting parts, such as a female cop who has disdain for Ward because
he loses his gun, badge and false teeth to Baldwin, have fire in them -- the
female cop and Ward have this unspoken sexual dynamic motivating their
treatment of each other.  The script never addresses it, but in a scene where
the female cop arrives at Ward's door, dressed in an evening gown for her
impending date, and Ward answers in his boxer shorts and underwear, there's a
weird game going on between them.  That's an example of why this film is so
good.
     But there are also a few examples of why it can be so bad.  Two shockingly
violent episodes occur in the film -- not ferocious but still unnerving to the
point that entire rows of audience members were cringing and speaking to the
screen (when most folks don't ever do that sort of thing) -- and the entire
film has a level of violence akin to the MIAMI VICE show and many action films,
though MIAMI BLUES is not an action film, per se.  If an orgy of violence
wasn't such a regular occurrence in movies, MIAMI BLUES would be regarded as
one of the year's most inspired films.  But because we Americans are fed so
much violence, the novelty -- and the amount of relevance -- of MIAMI BLUES'
fable of crime and consequence is a little thin.  But for the performances of
the three principal performers, and some unusual film techniques, it's
definitely worth seeing.

Title
Review for Thin Blue Line, The (1988)
     Though I'm probably the last person on Earth to see it, I had to comment
on what a remarkable documentary THE THIN BLUE LINE is.  This Errol Morris film
about the Randall Dale Adams capital murder case actually prompted a man's
release from a life sentence.  If there's any more tangible evidence of film's
power to influence change, I have yet to find it.
     For those who don't know about Adams, he was convicted in the late '70s on
the charge of killing a Dallas police officer.  Robert Wood was shot five times
at close range as he approached a car for a routine traffic stop because its
lights were off.  By all indications, he was going to let the driver off with a
warning, but he never got the chance.  The driver sped off as Wood bled to
death on a busy West Dallas street.
     This event alone is tragic: Wood was a young officer with a wife, and
though it was November, his Christmas present was already bought and hidden at
home -- a bulletproof vest to keep him safe.
     But the tragedy involves more than Wood, because a look at the evidence of
the case (and the dubious credibility of key witnesses for the prosecution)
shows that the crime had another victim: Randall Dale Adams.
     Adams, a drifter from Ohio, had only recently stopped in Dallas and taken
a job in the weeks before the killing.  He was still living at a motel in a
low-rent part of Dallas County.  On Thanksgiving Weekend, on his way home from
work early because his bosses had decided not to open for business, Adams ran
out of gas and was walking with a gas can in hand when a man stopped his car
and offered him a ride.  That was David Harris, a 16-year-old West Texas teen.
     The two men spent a shiftless day together, grabbing a burger, drinking
beers, going to a B-movie at a drive-in and, according to Harris, smoking
marijuana.  That night at 12:30 a.m., someone in Harris' car shot Wood to
death.  Because of that fact, the stories of the two men are dramatically
different about the last few hours of that day.
     Adams said he was tired of hanging out with Harris -- mainly because the
teen carried several guns in his car and had even fired one into the air during
the day.  So Adams said he got a lift to his motel and Harris drove off at
about 9 or 9:30 p.m.
     Harris said after the shooting that he and Adams were still together at
midnight, and Adams was the driver who fired the shots as Harris cringed in the
front seat.  After Adams was first arrested, three witnesses appeared who
placed him in the driver's seat moments before the shootings.
     On its face, this may seem like an open-and-shut case against Adams, and
to renowned Dallas County prosecutor Doug Mulder it was just that.
     However, Adams was a man without a criminal record who had gotten a ride
from Harris, while Harris was driving a car he had stolen which contained guns
he had stolen.  Who had more to lose when Robert Wood approached the car?
After the crime, Harris went back to his native Vidor and bragged about killing
a cop, a story he changed after meeting with police.
     In THE THIN BLUE LINE, Morris brings out these details and other damning
evidence against the legal system in Dallas County.  As a native of Dallas, I
think I'm justified to be frightened and repulsed by the actions of public
officials against Adams.  The presumption of innocence and the idea of justice
were completely disregarded in this case.  Adams calls Dallas "a hell on
Earth," and after his treatment, the Linnell Geter case and another two that
surfaced this past year, I think he's probably right.  There has been little
justice here.
     If you want to see true, rent Morris' THE THIN BLUE LINE.  The legal
systems we take for granted and expect to perform without failure are often
corrupted to appease the public, without regard to the rights of innocent
people.
     Forget FRIDAY THE 13TH or NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET.  The real horror
stories are occurring in courtrooms and prisons.

Title
Review for Driving Miss Daisy (1989)
     I just saw DRIVING MISS DAISY this week, and I enjoyed the film because it
was made by people who know how to keep quiet.  The American cinema today is
filled with brash, boisterous films where shootouts are common and
confrontations are as dramatic and polarized as the hero-villain relationship
in LETHAL WEAPON II: The black cop faced South African stooges and the stooges
also just happened to be the guys who killed the white cop's beloved wife.  Can
there be a more cut-and-dried (black-and-white) case of justifiable provocation
than that?  Blow 'em up real good, Murtaugh!  Riggs!  Hooray!
     In DAISY, the biggest confrontations of the whole film involve a can of
salmon and an insidiously phrased sentence by a cop.  The salmon was supposed
to be Daisy's evidence that Hoke, her black chauffeur, was a thief.  The
sentence, "What kind of name is Werthan?"  showed the true face of racism and
anti-Semitism.  It isn't -- at least not for the vast majority -- bovine men in
hoods with burning torches and rope.  It is people in power who use their hate
to oppress people in seemingly negligible ways because they know they can get
away with it.  The cops saw a "nigger and an old Jew woman" and decided they
were suspicious.  And they have a right to check out suspicious people.
     That scene with the two policeman sunk into my gut, and that sinking was a
surprise to me.  Nothing in MISSISSIPPI BURNING was quite as painful, even
though it was a painful film about a painful time.  But DAISY hurt more because
it was more real.
     When filmmakers (and excellent performers) can strip away the excesses of
drama and show bits of unmasked reality like that, it is an achievement.
Jessica Tandy (Daisy) and the film deserved their accolades.  (On a
not-entirely-unrelated note, DO THE RIGHT THING was unjustly snubbed -- Spike
Lee is the most real filmmaker to  come along in years.  He has more to say
about black America as a segment and part of the whole than any legion of
sensitive white liberals in the entertainment business).
