Authors
Josh Schirmer
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
A movie that's been as highly built up as the Truman Show, with reviews
boasting, "The film of the decade!" and "A breakthrough!" can only be
leading up to letdown. That's no doubt -- it seems any movie with
critical acclaim makes you think you're going in for the ride of your
life, that you'll end up changed on the other side, and you come out of
the theater going, "Eh... *that's* what all the fuss was about?"
So, naturally, The Truman Show was building up to what was going to be a
dissapointment. And I convinced myself, as I nestled into my
uncomfortable movie theater chair, actually to TRY not to enjoy it.
Let me tell you, that is an impossibilty.
The Truman Show is truly "the film of the decade" and "a breakthrough"
and MORE. And you will come out changed on the other side. Such a movie
comes around only once in a lifetime, where you find yourself feeling
everything that the character is feeling, and this, friends, is IT. Jim
Carrey shows that he doesn't need to talk out of his butt to entertain
us; that he can be as dramatic as any of Hollywood's leading men.
The film has a difficult premise to tackle, trying to set us up thirty
years into the "Truman Show's" run, but tackle it it does, and
perfectly. With flashbacks actually being flashbacks on the television
show, you get the sense that you are viewing a *real* prime-time hit.
And the way the camera constantly takes the forms it would in the "real"
Truman Show is clever and well-done.
People, rejoice! This is the FIRST Oscar-worthy film of not only this
year, but of the last five years. Not since "Schindler's List" has a
movie captured human spirit and true despair so well. This is a classic
in the making, and (to borrow a line from Esquire's review) it stars Jim
Carrey. Nothing in his career to date and nothing he can do in the
future will ever be able to top his role as Truman Burbank; mark my
word. For, as I said, this is the movie of a lifetime and the role is of
the same calibre.
Forget special-effect ladden summer fodder. Drop your romantic comedies
in the trash. Toss your thrillers and teen flicks on the pile. You need
nothing more than "The Truman Show" to carry you through the summer, or
for that matter, the year.
Oh! And in case I don't see you, good afternoon, good evening, and
goodnight.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
"Schindler's List", arguably the greatest movie in film history, knew what
it was doing when it told the story of one man who valued life as it
should be valued, saving hundreds of innocent Jewish men, women and
children for certain doom from the German Nazis that lurked around every
corner. It touched every aspect of our emotions; it made us smile and cry
at the same moment, and made you not sure why you felt the way you did,
only knowing that the way you felt was right. It made you turn your head
in disgust as, in cold blood, the non-threatening Jews were shot down. It
made you, above all things, question why. It hit the nerve it was meant to
hit, designed not to be a movie, but rather, an experience. And this, a
World War II movie of some aspect, never even touched the subject of the
war.
Steven Spielberg is a master filmmaker, the one who Hollywood turns to if
they want the job done right. "Schindler's List" instantly became his
masterpiece, showing the world that his lighthearted, family-enjoyable
romps (such as the "Indiana Jones" trilogy, "Hook", and the unforgettable
"E.T.: The Extra- Terrestrial") were a mere understatement of the work he
was capable of doing. The work before "Schindler's List" was undeniably
fantastic, an impossibilty for any other director to improve upon. But
Spielberg did it. Flawlessly.
"Schindler's List" should be shown in every school, every last History
class spanning the whole world around; EVERYONE must see it, to learn, to
understand, and most of all, to assure that we do not bury the horrible
past that this world has seen. It is, and will remain, the primary teacher
of what the Holocaust was really about.
This time, he takes us away from the Nazi prison camps, away from the
downright horror that millions faced, away from Oscar Schindler's heroics,
and puts us in the middle of the war zone. And from the moment the film
begins, you will not be able to look away, for it grips you like nothing
else and pulls you into the carnage.
This movie, like "Schindler's List", is not meant to be a movie, but an
experience. "Schindler" gave us a black-and-white film to bring us deeper
into the story, with only minor color (most notably, the parka of a
wandering Jewish girl, who journey's aimlessly through the massacre
surrounding her). And now, with "Saving Private Ryan", Speilberg uses his
expertiece to show us what we have been afraid to picture.
The battles are long, in real time, filmed with handheld cameras chasing
soldiers through their suicide runs. It shows what other war movies have
been afraid to show: a soldier lays on the ground, his entrails scattering
along the beach; a man desperately searching for his arm that he lost in
battle; a dying young man whimpering, pleading to go home, to see his
"mommy". True emotions of panic and hatred grace the screen, and you will
be swept up in all of it, and be angered you are futile to try to stop it,
much as the soldiers must have felt during the endless massacre.
I am a fourteen year old child, grandson of a survivor of World War II,
nephew to a man who went through Viet Nam. They have only been words to
me, places in a history book that happened forever ago, that might as well
have been works of fiction. Until now. As "Schindler's List" heightened my
awareness of the true horror of the Holocaust, made me sick to think
anyone could be so inhumane and cruel, "Ryan" has shown me, truly, that
war is Hell. Never again will I think of my grandfather or uncle in the
same manner.
"Schindler" was a teacher, one that everyone listened to. And "Ryan" is
it's counterpart, to show everyone that WWII, the last "Good War", had
nothing good to show. That you can live your life, and try to make a
difference, and you end up dead on a beach, screaming for your mother.
Tears flow unstoppable during the film; even the laugh lines do not bring
too much a smile.
Bring the children, in spite of the rating. Show them what they need to
see. To learn. That's what this film is; a teacher. And it give
"Schindler's List" a run for it's money. Not an easy task to accomplish.

Title
Review for Can't Hardly Wait (1998)
Maybe my review is unfair, me being a teenager and this being a teen
movie. It's a well known fact that every teen movie that comes down the
pike is hailed by our generation as, "Like, the most kick-a** movie
ever!" (For those of you unfamiliar with the way teenagers talk, that's
like giving it 'a very enthusiastic thumbs up' -- eat your out, Gene and
Roger.) And that review holds it's ground until the next one comes
along. We started with Empire Records, then Scream, I Know What You Did
Last Summer, Scream 2, Titanic and so on. And now that summer is in full
swing and reruns have set it, we need something new to keep us
entertained. How about another "most kick-a**" teen movie?
Now, I'll be honest. Out of the movies listed above, the only one I
REALLY enjoyed was Titanic. Parents and teachers always tell me I'm
mature for my age, and that makes me proud. They have their reasons, too
-- I'm the kind of kid that actually focuses during class, keeps myself
busy with sports and other extra-curricular activities, and lists my
favorite movie as "As Good As It Gets". And teen movies rarely excite
me. Nevertheless, I joined a group of my friends and headed off to see
"Can't Hardly Wait".
And to tell the truth, I actually had fun.
At first glance, Can't Hardly Wait is a simple pageant of "boy is in
love with girl that doesn't know he exists". But a viewing proves that
the movie is more than that -- rather, it's a simple pageant of growing
up and reaching your peak. And it approaches it humorously, barraged
with heaping honesty.
Many critics have pointed out that the characters have no depth -- if
you ask me, this was the story's intention. I think to truly enjoy the
movie, you have to look at the characters for who they most resemble in
your own little group of high-school friends. From there, you yourself
can determine their back stories and what they're feeling.
And (coming as a REAL shocker in a teen movie), there is a lesson in
diguise. The movie simply states live for the moment, because the moment
is all that should matter. That, and (to borrow a line from the film),
"Fate works in some f---ed up ways."
There have been better movies this summer (Truman Show comes to mind),
but there have been worse -- like Godzilla. Give this one a shot. Your
kids are guarateed to think that it's the "most kick-a**" film ever (or
until the next one), but you might actually find something in it you
enjoy.

Title
Review for Almost Heroes (1998)
I had been looking forward to this film since I heard about it early
last year, when Matthew Perry had just signed on. I'm big fan of Perry's
subtle sense of humor, and in addition, I think Chris Farley's on-edge,
extreme acting was a riot. So naturally, when the trailer for "Almost
Heroes" hit theaters, I almost jumped up and down.
A soda in hand, the lights dimming, I was ready to be blown away by
Farley's final starring role and what was supposed to be Matthew Perry's
big breakthrough. I was ready to be just amazed; for this to be among
Farley's best, in spite of David Spade's absence. I was ready to be
laughing my head off the minute the credits ran.
The humor is spotty at best, with good moments and laughable one-liners
few and far between. Perry and Farley have no chemistry; the role that
Perry was cast in seems obviously written for Spade, for it's his type
of humor, and not at all what Perry is associated with. And the movie
tries to be smart, a subject best left alone when it's a Farley flick.
The movie is a major dissapointment, with only a few scenes worth a
first look, let alone a second. Perry delivers not one humorous line the
whole movie, and not surprisingly; the only reason the movie made the
Top Ten grossing list opening week was because it was advertised with
Farley. And Farley's classic humor is widespread, too. Almost heroes
almost works, but misses the wagon-train by quite a longshot. Guys,
let's leave the exploring to Lewis and Clark, huh? Stick to "Tommy Boy",
and we'll all be "Friends".

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
Ugh. That about sums this movie up. Just, ugh.
The original Godzilla movies are somewhat of a cult classic, and when
reviewing the previous films, each film had a certain degree of
intelligence. And that was the reason they found such an enviable cult
following; in spite of bad special effects, horrible dubbing, and a man
in a lizard suit, they maintained a certain degree of... how to put
this?... dignity? Not quite the word I'm looking for. You understand,
right? And in 50 years, Godzilla has maintained that degree of
'whatever'.
Leave it to America to screw the whole thing up.
>From the 'geniuses' that brought us "Independece Day", arguably the
WORST sci-fi movie of all time, to ruin whatever reputation Godzilla
had. While they do bring us eye-popping special effects that will amaze
you, they lost what was at the center of all the original Godzilla
movies -- a storyline. Summing up the movie is simple. Heck, I can do it
in one sentence: Giant lizard attacks a giant city and a bunch of
nobodies stop it. Simple as that.
Matthew Broderick stumbles over his lines, and it's hard to picture Hank
Azaria in any role besides his classic dog-walking character on the
television show "Mad About You". The dialogue seems to be improvized,
almost as if there was no rehearsel done at all. I can see the scene on
the set right now. "All right! We spent all of this money making big
special effects, and we've gotta get this movie out by summer or it's
going to bomb in our faces. So, you actors just say what ever comes to
the top of your head, all right? Make up something, m'kay? Good. ROLL
FILM!!"
The special effects are enough to keep you interested through one
viewing, and some of the cinemtography is well-done (the scene with the
black umbrellas comes to mind). Still, an hour into it, you will become
antsy, wondering how long they can drag it out. And drag it out they
do!!
I have to laugh. The slogan for the film is, "Size does matter". I think
they cut this too short. It SHOULD read, "Size does matter. Acting does
not."

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
My feelings about this summer (in the movie department) are quite mixed.
There are a variety of movies in theaters right now, which is always a
plus, but most of them are so awful it's ridiculous to charge $7.00 to
see them. (Isn't that always the case?) But to balance the trash, there
have been some PHENOMENAL films, such as "The X-Files", "Mulan", or the
amazing "Truman Show".
It seems to me anything tagged as a blockbuster this summer has not
lived up to it's expectations, some not even coming close. "Deep Impact"
felt like it was missing something. "Godzilla" doesn't deserve ANY
attention, not even the negative stuff it's been getting. And next up on
the list for blockbuster expectation would have to be "Armageddon".
Hyped to the point of breaking, "Armageddon" looks like the typical crap
we've been dealt already. The previews make it out to be a shallow,
stupid-looking film with only special effects to draw us in. And who
really wants to see another meteor movie already? After all, doesn't bad
publicity generally mean bad movie?
"Armageddon" brings a "Titanic"-esque feelings, where human spirit and
hope seems to swell in every scene, where the emotion portrayed pulls at
the ol' heartstrings, where you feel everything the characters do. It's
a knockout a movie, something the whole family will be able to enjoy.
Bruce Willis is perfectly cast in his role, the dry wit and toughness
delivered with genuine feeling. Ben Affleck, although not able to beat
his performance in "Good Will Hunting", is believable and enjoyable (and
an easy way to draw legions of teenage girls). Billy Bob Thorton is
always a treat. And who doesn't love Steve Buschemi? Alas, Liv Tyler's
character is a tad one-dimentional, with a part that could have easily
been played by anyone. Nevertheless, she's always delightful, and her
smile brings a certain degree of shine to the screen. And the supporting
cast is well put-together, too.
The special effects are wonderful, and the cinematography is not unlike
"The Rock", with it's twisting angles and 'cool' panning. Can anyone
else smell an Oscar nomination...?
Like I said, summer's had it's ups and downs. "Armageddon" is definitly
an "up". It's nice to see that in today's modern age, where summer films
are built on special effects and nothing but, someone took the time to
put in the one thing other movies are missing: heart.
Take the whole family. There's something for everyone. You, too, deserve
"front row tickets to the end of the world".
