Authors
Evan S. Beach
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Palmetto (1998)
    I was really looking forward to seeing "Palmetto".  I grew up in 
Bradenton, across the Manatee River from the real Palmetto, and was there 
until I came to Pittsburgh, and I remember them filming bits of the movie 
around town while I was there.  Palmetto is an utterly boring, ugly town, 
so I didn't really think any movie set there would amount to much, but 
figured that with talent like Volker Schlondorff, Woody Harrelson, and 
Elisabeth Shue, Hollywood might be able to do something decent.  If not, I 
thought I might still enjoy seeing some familiar scenery.  I was wrong.  
It was a waste of $6.50.
    I actually enjoyed the humor in the first half of the movie; it made 
Harrelson's character a lot more human and realistic.   Scenes like the 
one where goes down the wrong way in the hallway of the courthouse, or the 
one where he has trouble getting rid of the typewriter make his character 
more believable.  I think the movie would have worked much better if it 
had stuck to comedy instead of bogging down in trying to squeeze film noir 
out of a noir-less setting.  Florida in places like Palmetto is more 
laughable than it is mysterious.  It's full of old people on tricycles, 
everything's tacky and garish, there are condos all over the place, and IQ 
is painfully low.  Suspense?  No way.
    Most of the movie's problems lie in its screenplay.  Not only is the 
setting unbelievable, but the plot is so contrived that it becomes 
increasingly disappointing as it unfolds, finally reaching its nadir at 
the completely unsatisfying conclusion.  As the plot sinks, so does the 
dialogue and characterization.  The characters become increasingly 
cartoonish.  One, in what I thought was the most confusing sequence in the 
movie, is shot by a police officer while running along a beach.  In the 
next scene he's still running, through something like a swamp (how the 
hell he got from the beach to a swamp, I don't know), then he's driven to 
the courthouse, then somehow makes his way out to someone's estate, where 
he gets the crap beat out of him, but keeps bouncing up, ready for more.  
It was like something out of a Wile E. Coyote cartoon.  Reviewers' 
comparisons to Who Framed Roger Rabbit? are well-founded.  There are also 
numerous things that didn't make sense, for example, how did whoever 
dragged the typewriter out of the river know where it was?  Why was there 
seaweed in it?  Why didn't Harrelson's character just tell the cop that 
there wasn't a spare tire?  Why didn't he copy the tapes?  Why did he let 
his girlfriend listen to the sex on them? and so on...  I can believe that 
an investigative reporter can have trouble lighting a match, but some of 
his blunders are just too much- things that anyone with common sense 
wouldn't do.
    Finally, I didn't enjoy seeing the footage shot in my town- it 
bothered me too much that Hollywood was just making stuff up.  I'm sure 
most people don't care, but I at least have to point out that there aren't 
any beaches in Palmetto.  Just lots of marsh.  What was totally believable 
is that Harrelson's character took so many risks in order to get money to 
leave town.  I know exactly how he felt.
