Authors
W Waffle
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Six Degrees of Separation (1993)
If you like this review, check out WaffleMovies.com where I review independent
films and big studio pictures that deserve a second chance on video.
Six Degrees of Separation
Starring Will Smith, Stockard Channing, Donald Sutherland and Heather Graham
Before he tamed the Wild, Wild West and she became the world's most shagadelic
superspy, Will Smith and Heather Graham starred in this true story of a young
man living on the hospitality of rich New Yorkers while claiming to be the son
of Sydney Pottier. This tale of vanity and the phoniness of the upper crust of
society is a wonderful rental for those who need their Will Smith fix, but
can't get into the Wild, Wild West. 
The movie opens with a business dinner between Geoffrey (Ian McKlellan),
Flanders (Donald Sutherland) and Ouisa (Stockard Channing). Flanders is an
ethically challenged art dealer who desperately needs to complete a deal and
must have a $2 million investment from Geoffrey to succeed. The evening takes
an unexpected turn when young Paul (Smith) shows up at the door claiming to be
a friend of his children and suffering a knife wound from a mugging. Paul
claims he is the son of famous actor Sydney Pottier and needs a place to stay
until he meets his father the next morning. Paul charms the group with his
intelligent conversation, masterful cooking and stories of his father. The
evening is perfect, until Ouisa catches Paul with another man in their
apartment. 
The next day, Flanders and Ouisa must hurry to a wedding and are excited about
the chance to tell the magnificent story to their snooty friends. However,
Ouisa and Flanders soon run into Larkin (Bruce Davison) and Kitty (Mary Beth
Hurt) who the same remarkable story. The group goes on a mission to find out if
this mysterious stranger really is the son of Sydney Pottier. Along the way,
they must confront their own strained familial relations and the emptiness of
their own lives. 
This is a true story that occurred on New York's East Side in the eighties. It
was soon turned into a play starring Stockard Channing, who justifiably had the
opportunity to star in the movie version. She is joined by a stellar ensemble. 
Will Smith shows that he is a wonderful actor. While his most famous parts are
in action/adventure movies, he has great range, which is on display in this
movie. Smith is able to glide gracefully between scenes where is character is
charming and amiable to other scenes where he shows his steely dark side. 
Another actor who surprises is eighties teen movie idol Anthony Michael Hall.
Hall plays a crucial role to the plot, so I won't give too much away. However,
I will tell you that you won't recognize the same Hall you are accustomed to in
movies like The Breakfast Club. He transforms himself into this darker role.
Along with his recent performance in TNT's Pirates of Silicon Valley, Hall has
a strong resume to shop around Hollywood as he looks to revive his career. 
Sutherland and Channing put in the type of solid performances you would expect
from these venerable veterans. Their characters exemplify the phoniness of the
East Siders who are so wrapped up in dinner parties that they don't notice
their families and life passing by. In a strange way, they are excited that
this event has taken place because it is great fodder for cocktail conversation
and it has brought some life into their dull, empty existence. 
Of course, I must mention Heather Graham, who you might not even recognize as
young, midwesterner Elizabeth. She puts in a great performance as the naďve,
but quickly maturing victim of a scam. Along with her performance as Roller
Girl in Boogie Nights, she also shows an acting ability that should be nurtured
even as she becomes the latest "it" girl. Hopefully, she will wisely choose her
next few projects as she becomes Hollywood's hottest starlet. 
Director Fred Schlepisi does make some costly mistakes. Early in the movie, he
includes strange dream sequences and quick shots that don't make any sense.
Thankfully, he quickly drops them, and the movie becomes stronger until the
ending sequence, which seems a little too drawn out. He does wisely put
together the movie as a serious of flashbacks as each character tells their
story of involvement with Paul. It is a strong job that he can be proud of. 
Like the famous Kevin Bacon game (where I am a mere 3 degrees from Kevin
Bacon), the movie tries to make the point that we are all just six degrees of
separation from anyone else, so we should try to treat each other in a more
civil and caring way. While the overall theme is lost in the movie, it is a
great evening of entertainment and a chance to see some of the greatest actors
in Hollywood. 

Title
Review for Next Stop Wonderland (1998)
Everyweek at WaffleMovies.com, I review independent films and big studio
pictures that deserve a second chance on video.  If you like this review, check
out this week's WaffleMovies.com selection, Ulee's Gold.
As we enter our late twenties and early thirties, those who are unmarried start
to question the possibility of finding that special someone we have been
waiting for all of our lives. Next Stop Wonderland examines this search for
true happiness in the nineties. The movie also uses humor to tackle the weighty
issues of loneliness, self-image and our belief in fate, as well as the
differences between who we are, who we become to please others, and how others
perceive us. 
The movie stars Hope Davis as Erin, a 29 year old woman grieving over the loss
of her father, her unfulfilling love life and expectations of who she is and
what she should want out of life. Hope Davis is destined for Hollywood
greatness. She shows great acting ability by portraying an emotional spectrum
consisting of desperate, sad, tough, playful and vulnerable. She has had major
roles in three movies (Next Stop Wonderland, Daytrippers and The Myth of
Fingerprints), and is on the brink of a stellar career. Hopefully, she will be
able to continue to land roles that utilize her many talents. 
Erin is a night-shift nurse who, much to her mother's chagrin, dropped out of
Harvard medical school. She has chosen to drop out of life as well. Her fun,
vivacious personality has disappeared as she retreats into a state of
emptiness, plagued by a belief that there is no hope for true love, just
reliance on self. Two scenes early in the movie give us true insight into Erin.
The first is the opening scene, where her boyfriend Sean, played by Phillip
Seymour Hoffman, tries to dump her by videotape, but the plan is foiled when
she comes home early. Sean is an emotional activist who feels Erin is void of
passion and decides to leave Boston to pursue his latest cause.  The second
scene is a debate between Erin and her friend Cricket, played by Callie Thorne.
Cricket clings to the belief that fate is real and controls our destiny.
However, Erin disagrees. 
Alan Gelfant plays Alan, a 35-year old plumber who decides to chase his dream
of becoming a marine biologist. Although he tries to shed his image as a
plumber, he is typecast. His friends and family don't understand his dream and
his co-workers at the aquarium continue to take advantage of his plumbing
abilities instead of his love of marine biology. Much like Erin is trapped by
everyone's false expectation of her desire to find a man, Alan is trapped by
people's view that he is just a plumber. 
Alan and Erin and destined to be together, but will fate step in? Director and
co-writer Brad Anderson does a spectacular job of constantly placing Alan and
Erin near each other, only to have them experience a series of near misses.
After several close encounters, Anderson makes the audience root for a moment
of fate that will bring our two stars together. Anderson and writing partner
Lyn Vaus have written solid, witty dialogue that provides insight into our main
characters. Anderson complements the dialogue by filming scenes that reflect
what the characters are seeing and feeling. 
The movie's best scenes result when Erin's mother (Holland Taylor) places a
personal ad for her daughter in the Boston Herald. Erin decides to stop longing
for her boyfriend and weeds out potential suitors from the 64 who have
responded to her ad. Anderson puts together a hilarious compilation of losers,
liars and deadbeats who have responded to the ad. We watch Erin steadily come
to life by toying with the sorry group. Those who misrepresent themselves in an
attempt to impress the beautiful Erin are subject to her intellect and cutting
sense of humor. 
The personal ad is a bust, but Erin meets Andre de Silva (Jose Zuniga) a
patient who instantly falls for her. Andre persistently courts Erin until he
breaks through the wall she has built around herself. Erin is not quite sure
Andre is all he seems to be, but, like other characters, decides that being
with someone is better than being alone. 
While Erin is being romanced by Andre, Alan is chased by classmate Julie (Cara
Buono), a college co-ed who relies on him for notes and tutoring. Alan realizes
he is too old for Julie, but decides to invite her on a disastrous
whale-sighting trip. 
Will Erin dump Andre? Will Alan stop seeing Julie? Will Erin and Alan fall in
love? You'll have to see the movie to find out. Unfortunately, the movie would
be better if the answer to that question came much earlier in the plot, but it
well worth the rental price. Claudio Ragazzi provides a bossa nova driven score
that establishes a relaxed feel and Anderson tackles personal subject matter
with a touch of levity. 
Like many movies reviewed at www.wafflemovies.com, Next Stop Wonderland is an
independent film that didn't have a wide release or a big advertising push. It
was well-received when it premiered at the Sundance Film festival, but was lost
in a crowded field when it debuted late in August of 1998, never a great time
to release a romantic comedy. 
That is unfortunate because you will recognize close friends and yourself in
these characters. Hopefully, the movie will find a new audience in the rental
market. Take a chance and you will like what you see. 
Sean . Phillip Seymour Hoffman 

Title
Review for In Country (1989)
Every week at WAFFLEMOVIES.COM, I review a different independent film or big
studio picture that deserves a second chance on video.  If you like the review
below, I hope you will visit WAFFLEMOVIES.COM.
It's very easy to forget why we celebrate Memorial Day. We get so wrapped up in
the barbecues, fun at the beach and excitement of having a day off from work
that the real meaning of the holiday is lost. That's why it's a good idea to
watch In Country starring Bruce Willis and Emily Lloyd. 
Made in 1989, the movie addresses the war America wishes it could forget -
Vietnam. As someone who grew up in the eighties, I remember this period of soul
searching. The 80's brought a series of movies that addressed these forgotten
warriors, including Platoon, Born on the Fourth of July, Full Metal Jacket,
Missing in Action and Rambo. Before the Persian Gulf War, America suffered from
a "Vietnam Syndrome" where every military action was feared because we didn't
want "another Vietnam". We face that today when debating the use of ground
troops in the Yugoslavian bombing campaign. 
In Country stars Emily Lloyd as Sam, a young Kentucky high school graduate.
Like every new graduate, she is questioning where her life is going and faces a
number of very important decisions regarding her college education and a
marriage proposal she received from boyfriend, Lonnie. Sam also is questioning
her past. 
Her father died in Vietnam before she was born. Her mother (Joan Allen) has
left behind all memories of her life with Sam's father, remarried, had another
child and moved away to Lexington. She even leaves Sam behind. However, Sam has
always wondered what her father was like, why he died and what he died for. 
One day, she finds a series of letters written by her father when he was in
Vietnam; what veterans refer to as "in country". She reads these letters in an
attempt to learn about the father she never met. She also wants to learn about
her Uncle Emmett. 
Emmett, played by Bruce Willis, is a Vietnam veteran haunted by his
experiences. He still has flashbacks of different battles and suffers from
other unspecified physical ailments that he refuses to see a doctor about. Like
his group of Vietnam veteran buddies, he resents never being honored for
service to his country like veterans in wars before them. He lives a simple
life trying to deal with his pain. Sam persistently attempts to force him to
explain what happened in Vietnam, but he refuses because it brings up too many
memories that she could never understand. 
Sam's quest becomes complicated when she is given a series of diaries written
by her father. She is suddenly faced with the truth about Vietnam. Like
millions of Americans, can she face that truth and still respect her father,
Uncle Emmett and his buddies? 
See In Country for two reasons. First, you need to be reminded that Bruce
Willis can act. While most of us remember him for his TV sensation Moonlighting
and the Die Hard movies (and want to forget him for dreadful fare like Hudson
Hawk), he is a talented actor. Willis has always done a fantastic job of
balancing big blockbusters with smaller fare like In Country and future
WaffleMovies.com selection Nobody's Fool. It is refreshing to see the bluster
Willis shows as a leading man disappear when he takes smaller challenging roles
such as this. Someday, a role like this could lead to more recognition of his
immense acting ability. 
In this movie, Willis deftly portrays a man slightly on the edge, but sane
enough to realize that he is troubled. He shows the frustration his character
feels with his mental anguish and the sorrow he feels because he came back when
many of his friends did not. 
The second reason to rent In Country is the powerful closing scene at the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, DC. You must remember that the
memorial was in its infancy when this movie was made and many were only
starting to learn about it. Willis steals the show as Emmett finds the names of
his fallen comrades and finally faces his experiences in Vietnam. 
In Country is a short history in America's reaction to Vietnam and the veterans
of that war. All of the Vietnam veteran characters portray the attitude that
many held when they came back from Vietnam; no one cares what happened to us,
how we feel or what we faced. They feel abandoned. On the other hand, Joan
Allen's character portrays the attitude held by Americans who didn't go to war;
let's forget the past and move on. All of these beliefs are challenged by Sam
just like they were challenged by the film-makers of the eighties and many
people my age who always heard about Vietnam, but wanted to know what it was
all about. 
The movie does have some drawbacks. While other reviewers believe Lloyd was
fantastic, I find her annoying. Her character is played too naďve even for
1989. Another drawback is the use of "I'm on Fire", a brilliant song by Bruce
Springsteen. While I am a huge Springsteen fan, the song is not well utilized
in this movie. It is thrown in gratuitously when it should be used to shine new
light on a situation or provide a better understanding of the action taking
place on screen or in our character's mind. 
Overall, In Country is a good movie. Director Norman Jewison puts together a
wonderful opening sequence as well as a powerful closing. If you are a fan of
Bruce Willis or want a better understanding of the pain felt by Vietnam
veterans, rent it tonight. 
Based on the novel by: Bobbie Ann Mason 
Screenplay: Frank Pearson and Cynthia Cidre 

Title
Review for Buffalo '66 (1998)
For more reviews of independent films and movies that deserve a second chance
on video, check out my site, www.wafflemovies.com.
I really wanted to like this movie. Buffalo '66 stars one of my favorite
actresses, Christina Ricci. She plays Layla, a young tap dancer in Buffalo, NY
who is kidnapped by newly released ex-con Billy (Vincent Gallo). Billy spent
five years in prison for a crime he did not commit and lied to his parents by
telling them that he was working for the government instead of being sent to
jail. He even gets his friend to mail packages and letters to his family to
continue the charade. 
When Billy is released, he wants to see his parents, but has told them that he
is married, so Billy kidnaps Layla and forces her to "make him look good."
Slowly, we learn about the sad life Billy has led. His parents are fanatical
followers of the Buffalo Bills and the only game they ever missed was a
championship game on December 26, 1966, the day Billy was born. Instead of
celebrating the blessed day, his parents hold a grudge. 
His mother (Anjelica Huston) has no recollection of her child's medical
conditions, interests or life in general. His father (Ben Gazzara) barely
speaks to him, and Billy stills holds a torch for neighborhood girl Wendy
Balsam (Rosanna Arquette) who doesn't even remember him. The only happiness
Billy has in life is bowling. 
He turns to gambling and loses $10,000 when Buffalo Bills place-kicker Scott
Wood misses a key field goal in the Super Bowl. Billy can't pay the debt to his
bookie (Mickey Rourke), so he is forced to take the fall for a crime the
bookie's friend committed. For ruining his life, Billy pledges to kill Scott
Wood and begins to hatch his plan upon discharge from prison. 
All in all, that sounds like a good movie. Unfortunately, the movie suffers
from bad structure. The plot to kill Wood doesn't appear until half way through
the movie. The audience would have benefited from a prologue in the opening
scenes explaining Billy's gambling debt and why he went to jail. Then, the
movie could have moved five years in the future to his release. 
Billy lacks sympathy because we do not know about his supposed crime until late
in the movie. The character comes off as a raging lunatic hell-bent on no
particular goal. The audience is left to wonder why he wants to impress his
family after the horrible way he has been treated. It takes too long for us to
learn that he is saying good-bye for the final time. 
The other major problem with the movie is the tone. It starts on a very somber
and dramatic tone. The movie then becomes a comedy when Layla and Billy visit
his parents. It then, once again, becomes a drama when we learn about Billy's
plan. The movie even becomes a love story as Layla falls for this lunatic who
never shows any emotional attachment to her until the movie's final scenes. The
movie would have worked well as a farce or a serious drama, but it can't be
both. 
Buffalo '66 has some good elements. Writer/Director/Star Vincent Gallo performs
well as Billy. He commendably handles comedy when he is supposed to be funny,
and solidly portrays the desperation his character feels. Christina Ricci is
very good, but also suffers from the movie's inability to be a comedy or a
drama. Anjelica Huston is fabulous as the absent-minded Bills fanatic. She and
Gazarra provide hearty comic performances. 
Gallo also makes some very good choices as director and writer. We learn about
Billy's past through flashback sequences that zoom out from the screen and
superimpose over the action to give us the necessary background. There are some
very good shots such as an early scene where Gallo does an extreme close-up of
his character's eyes when he calls his mother to continue the lie about his job
and family. 
Another good choice is a scene where Billy's father sings for Layla. Gallo
shines a spotlight on Gazarra as if he was singing in the concert theater he
envisions in his own mind. The movie also has a gritty, edgy look and feel that
is very much like Buffalo. If you have ever been there, you know what I mean. 
Often, movies written by the star tend to lack sufficient development for other
characters.  However, Gallo creates several meaty parts for his ensemble. 
I wish Gallo could go back and fix the movie's shortcomings, but there are no
do-overs in the movie business. If you are a fan of Ricci or Gallo, you might
enjoy the movie, but I can't recommend running out and renting it. I would
suggest future WaffleMovies.com selection The Opposite of Sex for Ricci fans. 

Title
Review for Apostle, The (1997)
Everyweek, WaffleMovies.com reviews an independent film or big studio picture
that deserves a second chance on video.  If you like this review, check out
Wafflemovies.com!
Robert Duvall has been in some of the greatest movies of our time, but
never seems to get the kind of recognition afforded to Jack Nicholson
or Robert Redford. Duvall's resume contains some of the greatest
movies in history: To Kill a Mockingbird, M*A*S*H, The Godfather and
The Godfather II, Apocalypse Now, Network, Tender Mercies, The Natural
and Sling Blade. Normally, a list like that would make you a Hollywood
legend, but Duvall has never been a megastar. He is a consummate
professional, a workingman's actor.  Instead of playing Robert Duvall
in every movie, he becomes the character. He blends into the work, but
would be vitally missed if he were not there.
In stunning contrast to some of his most famous roles, Duvall explodes
off the screen in The Apostle. With great skill, Duvall serves as the
writer and director as well as playing a difficult character.  Duvall
portrays Sonny, a flawed southern preacher. Since he was a little boy,
Sonny had the gift of preaching the Lord's word.  Unfortunately, he is
also a deeply flawed man who has cheated on his wife and may have even
stolen some money from the church collection plate.
Finally, his wife (Farah Fawcett) tires of Sonny's problems. She takes
away everything he holds dear, his children and his church.  After
being removed as pastor of his small Texas church, Sonny is lost. He
turns to alcohol and begs for God to give him a sign telling him what
he should do. At his lowest point, Sonny confronts his wife, Jessie,
and her new boyfriend. This leads to a struggle where Sonny kills
Jessie's boyfriend in a fit of rage.
Sonny realizes what he has done and flees. After communing with the
Lord, Sonny realizes that he must right the wrongs he has committed in
life. He realizes that he must preach the word of the Lord without
straying and committing sin, so he heads to a small Louisiana town to
start a new church. Will Sonny be able to bring salvation to this
small town? Will he be able to leave his sinful past behind?
There are some great moments in this film. Duvall's performance is
legendary. His preaching ability could bring atheists to their
feet. He creates a montage of fantastic scenes showing Sonny preaching
to many different audiences. In one scene, Sonny and his fellow
preachers engage in a preach-off, trading the microphone and
compelling each other to new heights. Duvall effectively uses
flashbacks to show the life Sonny has led and the events that
influenced him. He also creates a beautiful scene with Sonny praying
at the crossroads after he has killed his wife's boyfriend and one
scene showing the re-birth and baptism of Sonny. We get a good sense
of the desperation his character feels after breaking one of the ten
commandments.
There are some problems with the movie. When Duvall was writing all
those fantastic scenes for himself, he forgot about the rest of his
cast.  He dominates every scene in the movie. The movie would have
benefited from more character development for the secondary
characters. These characters could have helped to explain more of
Sonny's past and the sins he has committed. Unfortunately, the
audience is left to theorize what he has done.
Specifically, two actors put in fine performances, but should have
been used more.  First, Duvall does not use Billy Bob Thornton in an
effective manner. Billy Bob is fantastic in this movie, but serves no
purpose. His character has no motivation and we don't know enough
about him to understand his anger. He just shows up from time to time
with no rhyme or reason.
Farrah Fawcett also does a fine job in the movie. She isn't given much
to do, but does a good job playing Sonny's frustrated and fed-up wife.
The Apostle is a great film for actors to study Duvall. He was
deservedly nominated for an Oscar and a Screen Actors Guild award. He
won best actor from the Independent Spirit Awards, the LA Film Critics
Association, and the National Society of Film Critics.  The
Independent Spirit Awards also rewarded Duvall by naming the film best
film of 1997 and picked him as the best director.
