Authors
bryon@garden.net
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Fantasia (1940)
Memo To: Website browsers, fans & clients
Author: Jude Wanniski http://www.polyconomics.com
Re: #8 "Fantasia"
Continuing with the "movie list," here is number eight of the 
ten films that most shaped my life. These are not my favorite 
films. They are the movies I've seen that have had the greatest 
influence on my thinking, my character, my life. Some are 
favorites that I enjoy watching over and over again, which you 
can tell as you read each entry. Try to think of your own 
experiences with films and how they influenced the course of 
your life. It makes life more interesting to be aware, as you 
live it, to know how things such as books and films and magazine
articles alter your path in significant ways. Sometime last 
year the Sunday NYTimes "Arts and Leisure" section had a piece 
on how difficult it is to think of a movie that may have changed 
history. The only movie they could think of was a silent film by
D.W. Griffith, Birth of a Nation, which had a scene about the 
KuKluxKlan that the author believes changed national thinking 
about the KKK. How silly. Each of the ten films listed here 
changed my history, and if I had not seen them, I would not 
have helped change history in the ways that I have. Films don't 
move masses. They move individuals who move masses.
8. "Fantasia" (1940) The first movie I ever saw was a "Buck 
Jones" western, at the "OperaHouse" on Sunbury Street in 
Minersville, Pa., where I was born four years earlier. The 
second film I remember was a Nelson Eddy, Jeannette McDonald 
warbler, New Moon, also 1940, at the Hollywood Theater in 
Pottsville, a few miles away. My parents took me to see Fantasia
about the same time, but I recall it was at the other Pottsville 
Theater, the Capitol. What an amazing movie, with cartoons set 
to classical music! It was my introduction to Beethoven's Sixth
Symphony, Stravinsky's Rite of Spring, Bach's Tacotta and Fugue
and Mickey Mouse as The Sorcerer's Apprentice. I've watched it 
countless times over the years and believe it was part of the 
foundation of my love of classical music. You can get it on 
videotape, but if it shows up on a big screen, take your kids. 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  Posted using Reference.COM                  http://WWW.Reference.COM 
  FREE Usenet and Mailing list archive, directory and clipping service 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------- 
