Authors
Ralph Beard
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for In Too Deep (1990)
    Directed by Colin South & John Tatoulis
    Written by Deborah Parsons
Cast - Hugo Race, Samantha Press, John Flaus, Dominic Sweeney and Rebecca
Elmaloglou.
Rating: 4 out of ten or ** out of five (You Decide)
PLOT OUTLINE - Wendy (Samantha Press), a jazz Singer, loves Mack (Hugo Race)
a criminal and wanna be rock singer who's planning a bank heist. Mack is
also being tailed by a couple of cops, one an inexperienced rookie (Dominic
Sweeney), the other (John Flaus) a worn out veteran who frequents Wendy's
jazz club. They're tailing Mack, because he has an audiotape that may show
evidence of governmental corruption. Meanwhile Wendy's sexually awakener,
fifteen year old sister (Rebecca Elmaloglou) has moved in with her, and is
secretly watching Mack and Wendy's late night love trysts… Much zaniness
ensues
THE REVIEW: Main problem first - About 2% of rood rock star to actor
conversions in filmdom ever really work. Unfortunately, trying to cast Hugo
Race as a violent, sexy criminal falls into the "what the hell where they
thinking" category that takes up 98% of the rest. But, hell, it's not as if
he's the only problem in this well-intentioned but ultimately below average
Aussie thriller.
Leads, Race and Samantha Press are wooden and dull, hampered by some
unfortunate attempts at sexy dialogue early on. Though they do manage some
heat later in their love scenes, helped, no doubt by them keeping their
mouths shut. The film suffers every time the story shifts back to these two.
Which is unfortunately, the other main story isn't any great shakes either.
The second part, concerning two cops, political corruption and that elusive
tape is incredibly muddled. At many points during the movie I had no idea
what was going on, a situation that didn't improve on repeated viewing.
There is no doubt that this film's Achilles heel is its script.
As for the rest of the cast, it's a mixed bag. John Flaus, one of
Australia's most criminally underused actors, is in top form as the
withering, alcoholic Jazz fan cop, who may or may not have sold out to the
highest bidder. Although he falters at one point, when the script calls for
him to get up on stage and deliver a drunken beat sermon, but believe me,
they way it was written, no one could have pulled it off. Dominic Sweeney is
fine, though he seems to be uneasy in front of the lens but he really isn't
given a whole lot to do. Pre Home and Away Elmaloglou is pretty good as the
inquisitive JoJo, but her character seems extraneous to the story, well, at
least until the final scenes.
I must admit, In Too Deep does have some impressive qualities, not the least
of which is it visual element. Cinematographers Mark Gilfedder & Peter
Zakharov have achieved the almost impossible by making Melbourne look like a
sweat drenched tropic city, which is akin to turning London into San Paolo.
The bar is an oppressive red, like all of it's patrons are being baked while
they drink, outside it hazy orange by day and cool blue by night. If only
Deborah Parson's script could have supported this idea better. Having two
director's (Colin South & John Tatoulis) doesn't help either, the most
glaring example of which is the final retribution/Fight scene, where for
some reason the camera pulls away from the onscreen action, and more
importantly it doesn't pull away to anything else. It just stays static as
the fight happens in the distance. It has no reason to it; it's just bad
direction.
And, ultimately, that is what sums up In Too Deep, it's tries to be good,
and you want it to work, but, it's just lacking the talent behind it, that
it needs to succeed.

Title
Review for Tetsuo (1988)
Rated  for Medium Level Violence (Not to mention gore, sex scenes etc.)
(1988)
Written and Directed by Shinya Tsukamoto
Black and white - Subtitled
Running time - 80 minutes.
**** out of five or 8 out of ten (You decide)
Short plot outline - Japanese business man runs over pedestrian, who
retaliates by turning him into walking metal scrap monster with a rotating
drill for a penis. Much zany-ness ensues.
More long-winded review -
        If you've seen the video clip for the Tool song "Stinkfist", then
you have a good guide as to the visual style of  Tetsuo. Now just make that
a little more gory and extend it  75 minutes longer and you've got this
movie.
        When you boil this movie down, it really is just your average
revenge film - an everyday guy (Taguchi )and his girlfriend (Fujiwara)
accidentally run over a pedestrian (Tsukamoto), and, rather than report it
they opt to get rid of the body. Of course the guy ain't dead and he exacts
his revenge on >said couple in a terrible way. So far, ho hum.
        Here comes the twist, the pedestrian turns out to be more than he
seems, slowly turning the everyday guy into a bizarre metallic monster,
killing his wife and sending the man mad. It all seems run of the mill,
doesn't it? Luckily Iron man is done with more imagination and flair than
any other film I've seen recently.
        Shot in striking black and white (It couldn't have been done in any
other way) and using a dizzying amount of stop motion filming, Tetsuo is a
bizarre ride that should only be watched late at night in a dark room, any
thing less would ruin the atmosphere. However it definitely not for all
tastes.
        Tetsuo is violent, disturbing and gory. Ranging from a man cutting
into his own leg and inserting a metal coil to a woman being drilled to
death as blood spurts and soaks everything nearby. Let me put it this way,
this is for people who thought Urosukidoji: Legend Of The Overfiend was
rollicking good fun. (i.e. me)
        Acting-wise there's not a whole lot to talk about, Tetsuo has less
dialogue than Arnie in Conan, Tomoroh Taguchi twitches and looks worried
enough to convey what's needed, the rest do their best to look deranged and
succeed. 
        Tsukamoto's direction is the key, actually I should say Tsukamoto's
scripting, art direction, lighting, editing, photography, special effects
and direction is the key. Yes, he did it all, I didn't say it looked like a
million dollar production, it's it look that is it's allure - imagine
Eraserhead era Lynch on speed. He creates a dirty metallic world that pulls
you in and repels you at the same time. The editing and camera work is fast
and grainy and the Einsturzende Neubauten-like score fits in perfectly.
Just remember however, that this kind of stuff is polarising, for every
person who likes it, like me, there's three who won't get past the opening
credits. I found it to be very unusual experience, bizarre repulsive and in
the end quite fun. I recommend it, just don't say I didn't warn you.
Ralph "Leechboy" Beard

Title
Review for Gong pu II (1995)
Or under the Cantonese title Gong Pu II
Michael 'Rambo' Chow as Michael 'Rambo' Chow
Danny Lee as Inspector Lee (Do you see a pattern here?)
Rating: 7.5 out of ten or ** 1/2 stars out of 5 (You decide)
PLOT SYNOPSIS: Two cops of contrasting ages and policing styles are 
partnered up to catch a ruthless Jewel heist gang. Much zaniness ensues
There's something strangely heart warming about finding out that cop 
movie cliches can apply anywhere, all over the world. Hotheaded cops are 
always teamed with by-the book veterans, they will grudgingly become 
friends and when a chase scene comes, some poor street vendor will 
always have his cart or boxes in the way. It's a given, and, let me 
point this out now, City Cop does not stray from this tried and true 
formula. Of course, there is the wonderful Hong Kong exception to the 
worldwide rules of action flicks, that allows us the uncertainty of 
whether our hero(s) will survive past the final scenes. And, without 
giving too much away, this does fall into that category too. Yet for 
some reason, I just don't feel like I'm doing this flick justice by 
calling it well made, but unexceptional.
Just about everyone does a better than average job, the exceptions? 
Well, Michael "Rambo" Chow doesn't live up to his nickname. He just 
doesn't have the kind of screen charisma to pull off the hotheaded cop. 
When his character does his life endangering stunts, it doesn't come 
across as something his character would do naturally. Ironically, the 
guy with the charisma to play that role is City Cop's villain, the 
ruthless and brazen jewellery store robber Brother Ng (Ben Ng). When Ng 
appears on screen, you take notice. When he interrupts his getaway from 
one heist so he can go back and shoot the guy calling for help, you know 
that's something he'd do. It's a dynamite performance, and I'm looking 
forward to watching Ng in some other flicks soon.
As for the others, Parkman Wong is fine as the by the book cop. But 
unsurprisingly it's Danny Lee (Who is also the producer) who's the 
scene-stealer. He and Wong's scenes together are far more interesting, 
and better written, than those between Wong and Chow.20
Technically, the film is okay, apart from a score that seems to be made 
up of production cd tracks, and, what at one point seems to be the music 
from Duke 3D. Director Herman Yow keeps things moving along nicely, 
(Though he does seem to be overly fond of doing a left to right tracking 
shot while two characters talk to each other) and the action scenes have 
a chaotic quality that is miles away from the vicious ballet of John 
Woo. Even when a main character dies, he spends little time focusing on 
it, and gets on with the action, good move. What Yow has working against 
him is the unremarkable plotline and paint by number characters, but 
hell, I'm not going to penalise anyone for unoriginality. I'd rather watch 
a well-made formula movie, than an original piece of crap any day.
The Verdict? City Cop is better than average Lethal Weapon-style flick 
that I would gladly pick up again.

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
Plot - Bugs threaten Earth. Men kill bugs. Much zaniness ensues
Rating ***/12 stars or 7.5 (You decide)
Review -
Before I start the review I must say this, I saw this with just about the
perfect film crowd - Enthusiastic, cheering, sci-fi movie lovers ready to
suspend disbelief. This is just what you need to really enjoy Starship
Troopers, and I must say I did.
 I was fully expecting Verhoeven to go all Speilberg and do a serious movie,
especially after the mess that was Showgirls. Fat chance, Verhoeven returned
back to the genre that got him into the A-list, violent tongue-in-cheek
sci-fi. Starship Troopers has all the hallmarks of Verhoeven's previous
forays Robocop and Total Recall dumb storyline interjected with sharp barbs
directed at the media and government.
 Based on 1950's thinly veiled anti-communist (Change `Bugs' for `Commies'
in the dialogue and you'll see) sci-fi novel by Robert A. Heinlein. Starship
Troopers is filled with macho characters spewing forth `Kill em all' style
phrases, and, if not for ads, this would have been the cheesiest pro-war
flick since Green Berets. ST's best scenes involve the army's Join Up
propaganda, hilarious 1-2 minute ads that serve to inform us about the story
while sending up the `War is good' theme that engulfs the rest of the film.
 I enjoyed Starship Troopers immensely, as did six of the seven people I saw
it with. The seventh, lets call him `The Fool', was less enthusiastic, and
when I asked him what he thought of the flick, it went something like this –
`The special effects were better than the cast'
True, the cast is not exactly As Good As It Gets; however this isn't exactly
Hamlet. This is a big bug movie; all it needs it some good looking people to
attack the bugs. It has them, Casper Van Dien, Dina Meyers, Denise Richards,
etc. are okay, they didn't annoy me, that's all I ask of them. There were
memorable performances however from Michael Ironside as the hard-as-nails
team leader, and very surprisingly from Clancy Brown in his first good role
since Highlander, as the tough drill instructor (Mind you, there's been a
hell of a lot of good parts for drill instructors, eg Lee Ermey in Full
Metal Jacket, Viggo Mortenson in GI Jane, Warren Oates in Stripes and Louis
Gosset Jr. in Officer and A Gentlemen).
The effects are what make the movie, and they are astounding to look at, the
bugs are awesome and the explosion fantastic. There is no doubt in my mind
that this would have been a considerably worse movie if Roland Emmerich had
directed, Verhoeven gives us what ID4 was distinctly lacking, death. For all
the big explosions and aliens, ID4 did not show us the outcome of war,
death, Starship Troopers is littered with dead bodies, decapitations and
dismemberments. Almost all the cast is impaled or injured in some way,
showing us without a doubt that this war is hell.
 So are there problems with Starship Troopers? Sure, it starts off slowly, I
would have deleted all the scenes with Van Dien's parents, some more
dramatic sequences don't work and the ending is a bit of a let down but
through all of this I just kept remembering that Starship Troopers is a big
dumb sci-fi flick. It's thoroughly enjoyable, yes, but I'm not going to be
holding my breath for the best script Oscar for it. The point is - I had FUN
watching it, something that hasn't happened for me at the movies in a long
time.
