Authors
Matthew Dalton
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Simple Plan, A (1998)
 It is a volcanic, unsettling, nerve-torturing picture that is one of the best
films I had the pleasures of watching last year.
 Adapted from the novel by Scott B. Smith (he also wrote the screenplay) and
directed by Sam Raimi, Simple Plan plays like a fox.  It stalks, it winds up,
it strikes.
 The story is fairly simple: Two brothers (Bill Paxton and Billy Bob Thornton)
stumble apon a downed plane in the woods near their hometown.  The plane is
filled with $4 million in cash.  They, along with Jacob's (Thornton) buddy,
decide to keep it and split it into three ways.  Hank (Paxton) says that he
will keep it until spring, when the snow melts and someone will find the plan.
If there is no word of the missing money,  they'll take their share and move
out of town.
 All of this seems quit nice. Sarah (Bridget Fonda), Hank's wife, especially
likes the plan.  This is her chance to get out of the library job she hates
and, possible, lead to other enjoyments.
 Hank is uneasy about the plan, especially after the simple plan goes awry.
 I will not tell anymore.  You will have to find out what happens to Hank,
Jacob and the rest.  
 The film reminded me of Fargo, but, without the Coen brothers' jokes.  A
Simple Plan is dead serious at its subject matter, and all the more effective.
 Plan is more effective than Fargo, yet, Fargo achieved such greatness with
its script and acting that I would rank it slightly higher than Plan.
 Both are about money and crimes and moral choices.  Yet Plan makes these
choices seem like the biggest in your life.  And they are, for Hank and
company.
 A Simple Plan is taut and riveting.  A film so intriguing, I sat, spellbound,
through it twice.

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
 Right in the midst of Deep Impact comes Armageddon: a clunker of a movie about
an asteroid the size of Texas on a collision course with earth.
 The first 10 minutes of this film are pretty entertaining, and, downright
spectacular. A comet shower (not detected by NASA) rains on an American
spaceship and blows the thing up good before it proceeds to New York City. 
 Of course, soon after, producer Jerry Bruckheimer digs into stupidity with
holes in the script big enough to drive a comet the size of Texas through.
 NASA wants to keep the disaster under wraps, and does so. How the hell can you
keep the news of NYC in ruins a matter of top-secret information? Easy. Get
director Michael Bay to scope out more digital effects than one can count, and
you lose all sight of reality.
 NASA, soon after the apocalyptic mess, finds out about said asteroid and hires
the world's best oil driller (Bruce Willis, in another Bruce Willis role) to
plant nuclear bombs on the surface of the asteroid in hopes of splitting the
thing in two.
 Willis and his wise-ass crew (including Ben Affleck and Steve Buscemi, doing
his Con Air role all over again) go into space, where, lo, more special effects
and over-the-top acting reached heights of me ripping out my eyeballs.
 Deep Impact was so real and scary that another comet flick the same year
seemed uncanny, like Volcano when it trailed Dante's Peak in 1997 (I prefered
Peak over Volcano). Impact had characters worth caring for. Armageddon has
zero. The script is so small and lame-brained, that, when in doubt, the
characters ask each other "Are we gonna make it?"
 Like Con Air, and The Rock, Armageddon is an FX-ridden, unfun, unfunny, flashy
film that is a true disaster. Don't forget to check your emergancy exits in the
theater before viewing this garbage.
-Matthew Dalton is a critic for the Cinemascope Limited Inc. Weekly-

Title
Review for Antz (1998)
I walked into the theater knowing what I was getting into.  A cartoon about
talking ants.  But, I was forced into it.  What else were you suppost to take
an 8-year old to?  I am sorry to say I ever joined forces with that 8-year old
on that unfaithful day.
I was right.  I hated every minute of Antz, a film from the animation
department of DreamWorks, a newly developed studio headed by Steven Spielberg, 
who have put out such wonderful films as Saving Private Ryan and Deep Impact. 
But, you can't win 'em all, right?
With the voices of Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Sly Stallon and Gene Hackman
completely wasted, a film like Antz must pay.
The story is a yawner, the voices, especially Stone, are dead, and the
production values (i.e. the drawings, whatever) are poorly executed.  Toy Story
(1996), a Disney film, did it much better.
Jaw-droppingly bad, Antz is now the No. 1 film, in my book, to be awarded zero
stars (on a scale of 1 to 5).  Its runner's up include the awful Tetsuo: The
Iron Man and Crater Lake Monster.
Please, spare humanity Antz II, for the love of God!
