Authors
Vijay Ramanujan
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Reality Bites (1994)
Cast: Winona Ryder (Lelaina); Janeane Garofalo (Vickie); Ethan Hawke
      (Troy); Ben Stiller (Mike).
     This movie can really be broken down into two parts.  The first
half was an humorous, intelligent story of one woman's job and man
troubles shortly after graduation.  The second half was a depressingly
realistic look at what makes these people tick.  I found myself
wondering whether my generation is really as f-ed up as we appear in
this movie.
     The first half tells the story, not only of Lelaina, but of the
people she lives with and the people she hangs out with.  There is her
roommate, and soon to be GAP manager, Vickie, who has slept with
sixty-six men, whose names she can't all remember.  But she does have
an knack for killer one-liners.  There is their gay "permanent
resident" who is an underwritten character.  He doesn't do much except
set up Vickie's jokes.  And then there is the obnoxious temporary
roommate, Troy, who does nothing but hang around the house and insult
everyone around him.  But he saves his meanest for Lelaina, and by that
we are supposed to conclude that he loves her.
     Before the "cliche" police come out in full force, it should be
said that this breaks the standard lines in more way than one.  First
of all, these two aren't enemies.  They have even slept together once,
although Lelaina claims she was drunk at the time.  Second, they
establish very early that they are attracted to each other.  The
question is not whether they are willing to admit it, as is normal, but
more of whether she can do better than him.
     Now, without going into detail, the second half of the movie was
almost too realistic.  It shows a group of people who have no sense of
direction, living one dimensional lives, if that.  They are not
searching for salvation, they are merely trying to survive.  There is
no feeling that the conclusion is final, or that the characters will be
happy for ever after.
     This movie does invite criticism, some warranted and some not.
First, the warranted.  It does seem unrealistic that a class
valedictorian would have difficulty with addition (as Lelaina
does--costing her a job opportunity) or would be unable to define
irony.  The movie would have been better had they let Lelaina be a
good, but not great student.  And the unwarranted intrusion of rich
parents really sapped some of her futility.  She should have been drawn
more generically.
     The unfair criticism, as I see it, is this.  There is the usual
backlash against happy endings, and complaints that Lelaina chooses the
wrong man.  It seems to me that the two complaints are contradictory.
As for the second, it is a double standard, that we want reality, but
we also want her to be happy.  Sometimes people do pick the wrong
partner.  Her decision is predictable because it is in keeping with her
character.  The other criticism, that the movie failed to be fresh
after a while, while true, is not as much a criticism as a comment of
the flow of the movie.  There were two jobless characters, one who
thought she was dying of AIDS and one who was kicked out of his house.
Fresh might have been the wrong mood for the movie to take.

Title
Review for Age of Innocence, The (1993)
Plot: Newland Archer is torn between a promise to marry Mary Welland,
and a love for her more worldly and passionate (but also married)
cousin, Countess Olenska.
     By now, I'm sure all have heard of the lush settings, beautiful
dinners, and of the directorial genius of Martin Scorsese.  It seems
that little praise is left to write, but here goes.
     This is not a ground-breaking film in the conventional sense.
Scorsese doesn't take large chances, nor many chances at all.  What he
has done is to perfect film-making.  He has raised the level of the art
instead of redefining its boundaries, the way Francis Ford Coppola or
Tim Burton try to do.  But his attention to detail and his feel for the
material make this one of the most seemless and timeless movies ever.
He is helped, in no small part, by a superlative cast.
     Miriam Margolyes is wonderfully eccentric as Welland's Grandmother
Mingot, a character oddly reminiscent of Brando in THE GODFATHER.
Stuart Wilson is equally engaging as the scandal prone businessman,
Julius Beauforte.  But the stage really belongs to the three main
actors.
     Daniel Day-Lewis is solid in his performance here.  He is in prime
form, playing the exact opposite of his character in THE UNBEARABLE
LIGHTNESS OF BEING.  Here he is torn by the love of two women, not
spurred on by it.  He is constrained by societal norms, not oblivious
to them.  It is hard not to feel the pain of his predicament.  However,
I still found myself feeling that Archer was a hopelessly, if
unknowingly, selfish individual, and Lewis came just short of convincing
me otherwise.
     Michelle Pfeiffer, on the other hand, was magnificent.  She
alternated pained selflessness with manipulative gamesmanship so easily
that they seemed one and the same.  She has a myriad of voiceds, from
engaging to pained, to hypnotic, and rotates swiftly between them,
bringing out every facet of Olenska's personality.  Her eyes showed a
vitality behind her broken spirit, letting us know that however
horrible the count might have been, he hadn't managed to crush her.
When she dismisses Archer's complaints of the pains he can't endure, by
calmly saying "I've endured it," you can see she has.  She is is total
control, not only of herself, but of Newland, her family, and the
entire movie.  This is as much her story as the story of Newland
Archer.
     And Ryder?  With May billed as a docile bore, nothing more than a
pretty mantelpiece, I was pleasantly surprised by the depth of her
performance.  "If looks could kill they probably will."  The look, as
she questions Archer's reason for postponing a business trip, shatters
the misconception of ignorace.  And she reveals a certain nobility and
insight when she questions why Archer wants to hasten their marriage,
and then warns him that she cannot find happiness as the cost of
another--the lover all were sure she was unaware of.  She effortlessly
lulls both characters and audience into a false confidence, then snaps
them awake with a subtle look or an unexpected insight.
     The only complaint I had was with the narration, provided by
Joanne Woodward.  She brings Wharton's words to the screen with a touch
of class and a good pace.  It was crucial at times, even humorous.  It
was at its best in a scene introducing guests at a dinner party, each
with their peculiarities and weaknesses.  But at other times, it
intruded on the characters, telling us what they were thinking and how
they had changed since we saw them last.  The actors in this movie were
good enough to convey such subtleties of spirit without the help of
narration.  It often seemed to interfere with the flow of the movie.
     Overall, a nearly perfect movie.  Humble in breadth, but deep
enough and strong enough to make it the must-see movie of the nineties
so far.

Title
Review for Getaway, The (1994)
     Well, actually it wasn't that bad.  The movie starts off quite
well, with the opening scenes of the prison break and the "delivery"
going quite well.  I maybe a fool, but I still think that Alec Baldwin
can deliver the goods.  For every horrible movie he's done (a la
MALICE) there is also a great performance (like his Jimmy Swaggart from
GREAT BALLS OF FIRE).  He is great, if consumed in small quantities.
These scenes work for him because he is secondary to the action.  For
about twenty minutes of this movie, I actually cared what was going to
happen to him.
     Then came Kim Basinger.  Our local paper said that this was the
movie in which Bassinger finally proved she could act.  WRONG!  There
was no such thing.  She walks, she talks, she looks like she is there
because she enjoys being on film with Alec.  There is no conviction in
her performance, and she is not helped by a screenplay that looks as if
it was cut and pasted from previous action thrillers.  "Do you trust
me?" she asks, ready to help him shave. (read--if she cuts him, sad
ending--if she doesn't, happy ending.)
     The relationship between the two of them had me thinking "Gosh,
they could have called this MARRYING MAN 2: THE GETAWAY!  They fight,
they make up, they have sex.  They fight, they love each other.  Then
why is she pulling a gun?  Because she loves him.  So they have sex.
They fight, while having sex.  They have sex while fighting.  But they
really do love each other.  You can tell, because they keep reminding
us.
     The middle of the movie was ... well there was too much of it.
James Woods is excellent as the "bad guy," although he is given almost
nothing to do.  Had he been given a little more screen time, the movie
might have moved at a little better pace, he seems more capable than
the rest of carrying a slow movie.  But instead, his character is,
surprise, cannon fodder for Baldwin and Basinger.
     Then there is the Freddie Kreuger character, in the form of
Michael Madsen.  That's right, he never dies.  You shoot him
repeatedly, he falls, bleeding, into a river, then he crawl back out.
You beat him senseless with a pipe, and he comes back, stronger.  And
somewhere along the line, he picks up our comic relief, the ultra horny
Jennifer Tilly.  Of course, I saw this coming from shortly after the
opening credits.  A little too obvious. (And not really funny either).
     And then the shoot-out at the end.  What can I say ... way too
long.  People jumping from windows and getting shot.  People standing
on stairs and getting shot.  People being held down and tortured.
Basically, lots of gore.  If this is what you want, save yourself $6
and watch some 12 year old playing Moral Kombat.  It's probably more
entertaining.
     If there was one saving grace for this movie, it was an absolutely
hysterical ending, involving some old geyser and a pick-up truck. (And
Yes, it was intended to be funny.) So, on the basis of the beginning
and the end--1.5*/4 (not as bad as MALICE, but not good either).

Title
Review for Carlito's Way (1993)
Cast: Al Pacino, Sean Penn, Penelope Ann Miller
     From the opening shot of Carlito Brigante (Al Pacino) being shot
in Grand Central Station, with his girlfriend Gail (Penelope Ann
Miller) by his side, you know there is going to be precious little
suspense in this movie.  Even the killer's identity is obvious halfway
through the movie (if it takes that long).  And in this case, that lack
of suspense is crucial to the success of the movie.  It doesn't allow
you to spend so much time guessing that you miss the real substance of
the movie, a character drama about a reformed mobster trying to detach
his survival instinct from his killer instinct.
     Brigante is released from prison on a technicality five years into
a thirty-year prison term, and takes this second chance as an
opportunity to go clean.  He gives an acceptance speech in the
courtroom, thanking his lawyer, his supporters, and even the
prosecutor, for obtaining evidence illegally.  His dream is to save
$75,000 to buy into a friend's car rental place in the Bahamas, and to
hook up with Gail, the girlfriend he dumped on the way into prison.
     Right from the start you know two important things. 1) Carlito
doesn't make it.  You've already seen his get shot. 2) There's
something not quite right with Kleinfeld (Sean Penn), Carlito's
lawyer.  Sean Penn turns in a great performance as the coke addicted,
unscrupulous attorney trying to become a player in the Hispanic/Italian
mob scene.  He brings Carlito into partnership with a mobster, as part
owner of a night club.  He steals a girl from Benny Blanco, an up and
coming leader in the drug trade.  He steals $1 million from a client,
bribe money intended to silence a witness.  Now the client is in jail,
and ready to kill Kleinfeld if he doesn't arrange a jail break.
     Carlito is not your typical mobster hero, in control of everything
and everyone.  In fact, there are strong indications that he is washed
up, unfit for the streets.  The first scene is an obvious tip-off.
Carlito doesn't realize that making his way out of the game is probably
harder than surviving within its confines.  He can't afford to take the
liberties with the law that his adversaries can.  Given a chance to
kill Benny Blanco, he tells his henchmen to let Blanco go, admitting
that it is probably a mistake.  But if he doesn't make that kind of
mistake, he is back in again.
     With those two characters in place, the movie is filled out with
the usual backups.  There's the suffering girlfriend who dreams of
becoming a Broadway dancer, but bides her time in a topless bar.
There's Benny, the street punk who thinks he deserves respect from the
legend, Carlito.  There's Carlito's cousin, who is making small cash
running drugs, and makes the mistake of trusting the people he deals
with.  There's the loyal sidekick, Pachango, and Sasso, the old
washed-up loser who Carlito goes into business with.  However, all of
them take on some personality of their own, with the possible exception
of Gail.
     As for the acting, the leading roles were exceptional.  On the way
out of the theater, one of the people I had seen it with complained
that Pacino no longer had the screen presence that he once had, that he
doesn't seem as intimidating and as for the acting, the leading roles
were exceptional.  On the way out of the theater, one of the people I
had seen it with complained that Pacino no longer had the screen
presence that he once had, that he doesn't seem as intimidating
anymore.  All of those things could be said of Carlito.  He not only
looks confused, but gives the feeling that this used to come
naturally.  And Penn, as I said earlier, was excellent in showing
Kleinfeld's descent, and eventual madness.
     The supporting roles were good, especially Blanco, but nothing
spectacular.  The direction was obviously well done, especially the
first and last scenes, in Grand Central Station.  Overall, the movie
rates a high three on a four-point scale.

Title
Review for Malice (1993)
Cast: Alec Baldwin; Nicole Kidman; Bill Pullman and appearances by
      George C. Scott and Anne Bancroft
Plot: There's a serial rapist/murderer running amok on campus, and Andy
Safien (Pullman) is the unfortunate Dean of Student Affairs who knows
all the victims.  Meanwhile, his wife has abdominal pains, and an
arrogant doctor he "knew" in high school moves into his house.  How does
it all tie in?
     Well, it doesn't.  Once in a while, you come across a movie so bad
that the writers should have their licenses revoked.  This is one of
those.  This movie was very well acted.  The individual scenes were well
scripted and directed, but the movie was incoherent.  For me to enjoy a
plot twist, I have to be grounded first, I have to have a frame of
reference with which to see the twists.  This movie was twisting so
often and so wildly that you never get a chance to see what it is
becoming or what it no longer is.  The basic problem with the movie
seems to have been this: The writers wrote half the movie, and then
decided, "Hey, what if ...?"  So they put some twist in.  They never
bothered to go back and see if it makes sense with the rest of the
movie.  Often times, it not only doesn't fit in, but it contradicts
things that have already been said and seen.  And the ending is so
predictable that it made me laugh.  In fact, there were at least three
high tension scenes in the movie during which the audience I saw it
with started laughing out loud. (One involving a big, climactic fight
between the hero and the villain.)  The highlight of the film was a man
in the third row screaming "Put that bitch in her place" when Baldwin
slapped Kidman.  Sad comment.
So, examples of those incoherencies that I said were so prevalent:
1) Tracy Safien has been seeing a doctor for two years about a serious
medical problem.  His husband has never even talked to the doctor, let
alone met with him.
2) Hill is willing to throw away a practice in Cardio-thorassic surgery
for five million dollars.  That is ridiculous when you consider how much
such surgeons make yearly.
3) The blind kid across the street definitely  makes an effort, early in
the movie, to stare out the window at the Safiens.  Why?
4) How did Tracy Safien know that the surgeon who would operate on her
would be Dr. Hill? Is there only one surgeon on duty? And why call a
Thorassic surgeon to do an operation on ovaries? Hardly his speciality.
5) Why spend thirty minutes on the serial rapist scenes when the only
apparent purpose of said scenes was to establish that Andy was sterile?
6) Jed and Tracy have to have been planning this from before Hill moved
in.  (I assume that's why she suggested taking in boarders.) So why does
she seem so nervous around Hill, as in the bathroom scene?
7) Lillianfield is a front for Hill, apparently.  At least, we are led to
believe so.  But how can Lillianfield practice? His speciality is not the
same as Hill's, and there is no way a doctor can "double major" without
anyone knowing.  And if Lillianfield doesn't have a legit practice, why
have an answering service?
1) Hill and others talk, in the bar, about how the starting tailback for
the team on the television is out after failing a drug test.  One person
asks why he can't stay off drugs for a million a year.  Unfortunately, the
team being shown is USC, and there are no million dollar college players
who undergo drug tests.

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
     The plot: Two psychos ride around killing people.  No one's chasing
them.  No one really seems to care that they exist.  Oh, yeah, I nearly
forgot.  They were both abused as children, but mostly in black and
white.  A newsman wants to interview them and a prison warden wanders
around looking confused and sounding threatening, but not really saying
much worth remembering.  Lots of people get shot, some people get
stabbed, and some people even get punched to death.  Hitler marches on
Poland.  Don't ask.
     For years I have wondered how reviewers can pan a movie and give
it ratings of 1.5/4 or 2/5.  NATURAL BORN KILLERS provides the answer.
You must leave room on the bottom end of the scale for movies this
bad.  When it comes to ratings, NATURAL BORN KILLERS pretty much
defines the 0.
     First the positive.  Juliette Lewis salvages a part clearly
written by either two different people or by a schizophrenic.  She is
bashful, wicked, pleasant, cruel, harmless and vulnerable.  Yet,
somehow, she pulls it off.  Robert Downey Junior is great as a pyshotic
telejournalist who plans to make a bundle off of this pair of maniacs
by manipulating their image and interviewing them live.  Soundtrack was
nice, and I saw it at a discount theater.  Not much else to say here.
     Where to start?  When Janet Maslin said that this movie relied on
sophistry more than poetry, she hit the nail on the head.  The main
goal of this movie seems to be to prove to us what a great artist
Oliver Stone is.  He seems to have deluded himself into thinking that
if he can throw a million visuals at us in two hours, he has proven
himself to be the greatest director alive.  Only the strong will
survive.  Unfortunately, in trying to meet this aim, he overlooked the
portion of the director's handbook which dealt with relevancy.  Why do
we see Hitler's army marching in the background while Micky and Mallory
have sex?  Why is it necessary for Micky to watch the Oliver Stone
penned (and offensively racist) MIDNIGHT EXPRESS?  Who came up with the
idea of showing Mallory's breasts while Micky talks about why he is a
killer?  And what do the damn Coca-Cola polar bears have to do with
anything?  A lack of visual coherency doomed this movie from the start.
The visual elements rarely coincided with the thematic elements in the
movie.  Truly adept directors can carry off the odd visuals (David
Lynch, Tim Burton, Barry Levinson in TOYS) by making them a part of the
movie.  Stone did not do this.
     The second major failing of the movie was its basic
pointlessness.  My first, second and third reactions after seeing this
movie were "Who cares?", "Why did I pay to see this?" and "Can I get my
money back?"  I am hoping, for Oliver Stone's sake, that this was not
a satire.  It did not have the wit, the sarcasm, the subtlety or the
bite of good satire.  In fact, there was nothing in the movie that I
could latch onto as satire at all, except by the loosened definition of
satire that Oliver Stone seems to have hinted at in his interviews and
articles surrounding this movie.
     If it is not satire, what is it?  A powerful drama?  No, then it
would have been KALIFORNIA, a much better movie with a similar plot
(but no media types involved).  What that movie achieved through stark
realism and tight story-telling this movie loses in a diarrhetic wash
of tasteless jokes and pointless violence.  It fails as an indictment
of the media through medium more than anything else.  He is fighting
fire with fire, trying to criticize the media's sensationalistic
commercialism and sensory overkill through sensationalistic
commercialism and sensory overkill.  History has taught us that if the
media is to blame, than Oliver Stone is the guiltiest of all.  He seems
to criticize the media for creating murderer celebrities.  Well, he has
just created two more.  Offensive would be a mild word to use here, but
isn't that half of what the goal was?  At least I'm talking about it,
right?
     Now, I shouldn't delude you into thinking that if those problems
had been cleared up that this would have been a good movie.  In truly
great movies of this kind, there is an element of suspense.  This
didn't have one.  The portion of the movie dealing with the killings
has all the suspense of the baseball negotiations.  We know what's
going to happen, and frankly, we aren't given much to care about either
way.  Only one victim is on screen long enough to become something more
than another body to be thrown at the front row patrons, and even he is
reduced to another stereotypical portrait of the wise old native.  The
only tension between our two leads surrounds the fruitless question "Do
you think I'm sexy?"  This of course leads to some wonderfully
amateurish dialogue that any twelve-year-old will get a kick out of.
There is no element of chase, as the lawmen only enter the movie
seconds before the Knoxs are captured.  Once the murderers are
captured, the movie only goes further downhill.  There is no sane
character to offset the insanity of the leads.  There is no conflict,
as no one seems to really be plotting towards any kind of an end. (Let
alone the screenwriter or director.)  There is no drama, because all
realism has been cast aside.  There is nothing much to hand onto, and
nothing much worth watching.  This is not a movie ruined by bad
decisions, but a movie that should never have been made, made worse by
all the stupidity displayed by director, editor et al.
     But this movie does one positive thing.  It has added one more
rule to the list of rules that govern action/adventure movies.
Policemen must count to ten and sing the national anthem silently
before firing on an armed and dangerous criminal who has just started a
killing spree.  Yes, that's right, with a half a dozen or more guns
pointed at his head, our unarmed "hero" ... well, I'll leave you to
guess.  Need a hint?
     So what was the point of this movie?  Abused children lose all
sense of right and wrong?  It's all because of Geraldo?  That with enough
hype you can people to see just about any crap that you throw onto the
big screen?  I myself am thinking that it is probably the last one.
     And just wondering.  Anyone else bothered that Stone used the clip
of O. J. before the man has even had a trial?  I guess that makes O. J. a
NATURAL BORN KILLER.  Trial by Oliver Stone?  Even the Puritans would
have flinched at the thought.

Title
Review for Murder in the First (1995)
Story: A prison inmate, originally jailed for petty theft, is abused
and tortured after a prison escape.  Three years in solitary confinement
leave him incapable of dealing with the world.  Immediately upon release
into the general prison population he kills the man who foiled his
escape.  The trial turns into a condemnation of Alcatraz and the prison
system.
Cast: Kevin Bacon (Henri Young--inmate), Christian Slater (James
Stamphill--lawyer), Gary Oldman (Glenn--warden).
     Opening in blackness with the sounds of a botched prison escape,
this movie starts out black and horrifying.  The first half hour of
this movie is powerful, well executed and, at times, hard to watch.
Gary Oldman is menacing, as usual, and has (necessarily) dispensed with
the wicked charm he has shown in previous movies such as Dracula and
The Professional.  The torture of the Henri Young is shown brutally,
with only occasional flashes of lighting, and a soundtrack of screaming
from Bacon and hushed talking from Oldman.  Taken out of solitary after
three years, Young is incapable of mixing with the prison population.
Every noise startles him, and he cringes, hiding from everyone and
everything.  When a fellow inmate points out the man who ratted on his
escape scheme, Young kills the man with a spoon in full view of the
prison population.
     These opening scenes are the most effective in the movie.  They
are grittier and more difficult than anything else the movie has to
provide.  Moving from the prison life to the scenes of interrogation of
Young by his young attorney, James Stamphill, the movie is occasionally
brilliant, mostly watchable and sometimes slow.
     Stamphill, in a series of alternatingly great and corny scenes
tries to get Young to say anything, managing only to get him to talk
about Joe Dimaggio and baseball.  As Young opens up to his new friend,
the news of brutality comes as a shock to Stamphill, who tries to turn
the impossible case into a name-making chance to indict the entire
prison system.
     As the trial progresses, the movie picks up some of its grit
again, shying away from the character study of James Stamphill and
Stamphill's interplay with his brother and his associate.  Instead, the
focus once again becomes the case, and the lengths to which the warden
and others are willing to go to surpress the case.  The trial scenes
are once again powerful, instead of simply interesting.  There is very
little in the way of brilliant courtroom tactics, and the courtroom
serves only as a forum in which Stamphill can confront the warden and
others in the name of Henri Young.
     The ending is neither too happy to be realistic nor too sad to be
watchable.  It stays in character with the rest of the film.
     The acting is probably the main draw in this film.  Kevin Bacon is
fantastic in his role, doing more with his body language and facial
expressions than his lines, which are often not-connected to the matter
at hand.  Slater is solid in a part which requires him, more than
anything else, to not take anything away from Bacon, and Oldman is his
usual self.  There really are few other characters worthy of note.
