Authors
palmer2@vaxr.sscl.uwo.ca (The Econoclast)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Hitlerjunge Salomon (1990)
     Benny's got this boss he used to work for, David, who thinks he's
the greatest thing since indoor plumbing.  He works in an office, so
he's the kind of guy who showers before he goes to work instead of
afterwards, like us regular guys out on the line.  Also, he blathers way
too much about all the boring cultural stuff he does.
     The other day, David was going on and on about this great foreign
"flick," as he called it, he had a video of and how we simply had to see
it.  To be honest, I hate foreign films: they're always filled with
misery and agony, and the subtitles are often hard to read.  I'd much
rather see movies that relax and entertain me, where I don't have to
think, and I don't feel bad at the end.
     Anyways, David kept insisting that we just had to see this movie,
and so finally we agreed to bring the wives over to his place to sip
some soda water and white wine, to gah-gah over his corkscrew
collection, and to watch the show.
     It really needed subtitles.  It was in German, Polish, Yiddish, and
Russian.  I guess with all them languages, it made sense it was called
Europa, Europa.  It was about Solomon, this young Jewish kid during
Hitler's time, who was afraid people'd see he'd been snipped and finger
him as Jewish.  He had a tough time hiding it, especially when he
started getting hot and heavy with this ultra-Nazi girl.  He really used
his smarts, though, and managed to get out of some pretty sticky
situations.  He was lucky, too.
     I thought lots of the stuff was made up.  I couldn't imagine anyone
would get by with all the stunts he pulled.  But it turns out Solomon
really existed and these things really happened to him.  They even had
the real guy in the movie at the end.
     Even though I don't usually like foreign films, I gotta say this
one was real good.  It gave us a new slant on the constant stress and
fears of being a Jew back then, and yet it had some light touches, too,
to ease the sheer horror of it all.  I'm not convinced they needed the
sex parts of the show, but I did notice this: it's one of the few films
I know of that shows men's "things" but not women's.
     Also, it gave me some new respect for Benny's former boss.  Not
only was David right about the film, but, you see, it turns out he and
his parents had gone through some of that stuff over in Poland back then
themselves.
-- 
John Palmer      London, Ontario     Voice: (519) 661-3533     FAX: 672-4976
reply to palmer2@vaxr.sscl.uwo.ca    The Economics Institute for Journalists
.

