Authors
Norm Schrager
Number of Reviews
24

Title
Review for Space Cowboys (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/358b2d18fee83172882569310002e41d?OpenDocument
The good news about Space Cowboys is that Clint Eastwood proves to be a
skilled comedic director.  The bad news is that only the first half of
the movie is a comedy - the second half is a sloppy attempt at a
heart-pounding, Apollo 13ish, mission-gone-haywire space drama that's
vague, oversimplified and unbelievable.  There's a gem of an
entertaining movie somewhere in there, but it's never fully realized.
The plot is solid high concept.  If you did a double-take when you first
heard that John Glenn would return to space, you'll love the basic
premise of Ken Kaufman's and Howard Klausner's script - four daring, old
Air Force codgers weasel their way back into NASA's space shuttle
program to attempt an equipment repair mission that only they know how
to perform.  Our movie visions of strapping, young astronauts (Dennis
Quaid, Bill Paxton, Ben Affleck, to name a few) are smashed once we see
an aging James Garner pull on an airtight suit.
The man behind the idea is Eastwood's Frank Corvin, a brilliant Top Gun
style troublemaker from the 50s who's bitter about his exclusion during
NASA's inception.  Once he pushes his unlikely proposal through the
space program, Corvin travels the South collecting his old flyboy
buddies - Tommy Lee Jones as the hard-headed Hawk, a widower who takes
unsuspecting thrill seekers on wild flights; Donald Sutherland as smooth
ladies' man Jerry, a roller coaster engineer completely unfazed by
negative Gs; and Garner as the humble Tank, an old navigator turned
pastor.  Meeting each of these guys in their natural habitat is a real
comedic treat, as Corvin's first mission of convincing them all to join
is a fun combination of Armageddon and The Blues Brothers.  And these
four actors are seasoned to the point of marinade, so they've got no
trouble digging in and getting the laughs.
When the movie stays light, dealing broad laughs and poking fun at
maturity and ageism, it's easy to suspend disbelief.  At times, when the
movie jumps ahead without much substance, or the characters seem a bit
too cookie-cutter, it's still passable and enjoyable.  But when the
quartet finally jump on the space shuttle, Space Cowboys dive bombs,
becoming just a tepid drama.
>From that point, Eastwood shoots for wide-eyed amazement from the
audience (hell, we've seen space walks since Kubrick did it more than 30
years ago), and all the forgivable weaknesses become glaring.  The
well-timed laughs of the first half become childish, predictable
dialogue.  William Devane, as a funny, wise-ass, gum-smacking flight
director, turns into a cheap imitation of Ed Harris' Apollo 13
character, bellowing lines into space like "Attaboy Frank!"  Cut to
worried, underdeveloped wife character.  Cut back to grimacing, troubled
Eastwood.  Oh boy.
There's no denying, though, that it is a roar seeing these guys get sent
through the ringer at NASA.  And it is refreshing to see a movie who's
youngest lead actor is 54.  But aside from the consistent laughs,
there's a lot missing.  There's a chance to see these men contemplate
the paths of their interesting lives.  There's the opportunity to learn
more about the families behind them.  And there's even more that
could've been done about respect of an older generation, and the fact
that mistakes and lessons can be learned at any age.  Instead, it's all
generally ignored as Space Cowboys opts for an easier, less demanding
path.
The brutal truth is that this movie was over for me once these guys hit
space.  The characters lose their energetic charm and begin to pale. 
The plot becomes wildly unbelievable but asks to be taken seriously. 
The longer the movie progressed, the lower my admiration.  There's a
better Space Cowboys than this two-part, 129-minute version - one where
an entire 90-minute film is just about four funny, respected men
reliving their former glory, blasting off to space in the finale, riding
into the sunset and out of sight.  
Director: Clint Eastwood
Producer: Clint Eastwood, Andrew Lazar
Screenwriters: Ken Kaufman, Howard Klausner
Stars: Clint Eastwood, Tommy Lee Jones, James Garner, James Cromwell,
Donald Sutherland, Loren Dean, Courtney B. Vance, Aleksandr Kuznetsov
MPAA Rating: PG-13
Official Web Site: www.spacecowboys.net
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Olive, the Other Reindeer (1999) (TV)
One of the best-ever names for a holiday special (sure as hell beats
Frosty Returns) hits home video a year after its TV premiere, in this
animated production from Simpsons creator Matt Groening.  Based on a
book by J. Otto Seibold and Vivian Walsh, Olive's a hip dash of
Christmas humor and fun amidst specials that have just made little kids
cry all these years.
See, Olive's not really a reindeer - she's a dog.  A strange dog. 
Voiced by Drew Barrymore, she speaks English to her owner Tim (Jay
Mohr), doesn't dig for bones, and won't chase cars.  While listening to
the radio on Christmas Eve, she hears that Santa may cancel his
delivery, as Blitzen is injured.  He announces (in a 90's soundbite),
that he'll just have to rely on "all of the other reindeer."
Olive is so caught up in the holidays, she thinks Santa is talking about
her.  Even her pet flea can't believe it.
Once it's set that she's really a lonely misfit -- a holiday story
staple -- she's off to the North Pole with a shifty penguin named
Martini (The Matrix's Joe Pantoliano).  They catch a "Mauvehound Bus"
driven by a weirdo named Richard Stands (SNL's Tim Meadows), who once
thought the Pledge of Allegiance was for him (say it out loud).  But
it's not just an easy bus trip that'll get Olive to Santaland.
Our villain is a demented mailman (Simpsons veteran Dan Castellaneta)
who just goes postal during the holiday season due to the weight of the
all his deliveries.  He'd love for Santa's cancellation to hold up, so
he's on his own quest to stop Olive and company.
As with any good Simpsons episode, Groening's writer -- Simpsons and
David Letterman staffer Steve Young -- fills the story and landscape
with bad puns and inside visuals that welcome the adults into the action
just as much as the kids.  The laughs don't have the stinging irony of
The Simpsons, but they are certainly playful enough to hold most
viewers' interest.
As is the animation, a freaky mix of multi-dimensional backgrounds and
flat characters.  It looks like a strange combination of a kid's video
game and a set of Colorforms, giving it a splashy, original look.
There are a few musical numbers that whiz by, most notably The Postman's
lament about delivering the mail (the best lyrics in the feature), and a
ditty headed by REM's Michael Stipe, singing as Schnitzel the Reindeer.
Just a few minutes into Olive, I wondered why Drew Barrymore was voicing
our hero.  She's not really a voice actor, and doesn't sound too
expressive.  Then I read that she and partner Nancy Juvonen are also
executive producers on this special.  Drew may want to audition a few
others next time.
But, like most of Olive, Drew's voice grew on me.  This is a special
that's hard not to enjoy, and it thankfully avoids any sappy finale.  It
may not enter the pantheon of holiday classics, but it's just too damn
cute not to watch once a year.  Especially when Olive wags that little
tail.  That's great.
Director: Oscar Moore
Producers: Keith Alcorn, Alex Johns, Michael Stipe
Writer: Steve Young
Starring:  Drew Barrymore, Dan Castellaneta, Joe Pantoliano, Edward
Asner, Peter MacNicol, Tim Meadows, Jay Mohr, Michael Stipe, Diedrich
Bader, David Herman
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Yards, The (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/1c63db281e5f3b128825695c00707057?OpenDocument
The Yards begins with a rebirth of sorts.  A subway train emerges from a
tunnel into daylight.  It is carrying Leo Handler (Mark Wahlberg) out of
the darkness and home, after spending time in prison.  He has taken the
rap for an auto theft circle, one including close buddy Willie (Joaquin
Phoenix), and is returning to a grateful homecoming.  But The Yards is a
dark crime drama, and Leo's future doesn't remain in the light for long
in James Gray's impressive, classically styled mini-saga.
Gray, recently appearing with The Yards at the Boston Film Festival,
based his tale of New York City subway vendor corruption on his own
father's experiences.  The filmmaker has given us a well-composed
script, deftly flowing through intertwining relations of families,
friends, enemies, and politicians.  He sustains a hopelessly dim design
throughout the film, even having the mind to steal wonderfully from a
few Godfather scenes (he claims by accident), and lifting Gordon Willis'
outstanding cinematography with his DP, Harris Savides (on purpose). 
Gray's direction gives us an overriding sense of doom that retains
suspense far beyond that of a second-time filmmaker (his first being
1994's grim Little Odessa).  But all that is nothing without Mark
Wahlberg.
The movie world is finally becoming convinced that Wahlberg can tackle
just about any role and carry an entire picture if need be.  Initially,
he had to sell himself to Gray, assuring him that having done jail time
himself, he "gets it" and could make Leo his own.
Instead of playing the streetwise punk that Gray may have first
envisioned, Wahlberg nails a more sympathetic Leo -- tough, proud,
loyal, uneducated -- all with a pinpoint conservation of emotion and
energy.  He walks through most of The Yards in a daze, not knowing how
to handle a larcenous offer but sliding into it anyway, slowly
contemplating his moves after one particularly disastrous jam.
When Wahlberg finally stages a fistfight with another actor, it has an
explosive feel, as if we've been tensing up for the entire movie right
along with him, staying quiet and pensive, and finally letting it out. 
Wahlberg knew well enough to keep the tone way down, and Gray was smart
enough to take advantage of it.
If Wahlberg is great casting, the company as a whole is inspired:  James
Caan as a crooked company boss (he finally gets to play the Don!), Ellen
Burstyn as Leo's ailing mother, Charlize Theron as Leo's cousin, Faye
Dunaway as Caan's well-to-do wife, the raw, talented Joaquin Phoenix as
the buddy, and the piece de resistance, crooner Steve Lawrence as the
Queens borough President.  (The first time Lawrence appears on screen,
Gray makes him look like a typical movie mobster, not only creating a
surprise in casting, but making a telling statement between crime and
politics.)  This cadre performs like a team.  They come together easily
to work the flow of cross-conversation and ad lib, and they make the
more structured scenes click like clockwork.
Moments of slick predictability aside, Gray uses that cast to create a
classic tragedy, taking eternal themes from some of history's great
storytelling.  While that always carries with it a sense of timelessness
and honor, Gray adds the kind of design and style that make The Yards
his own, and casts Mark Wahlberg in an increasingly more impressive
light.  Highly recommended.
Director: James Gray
Producers: Paul Webster, Nick Wechsler, Kerry Orent
Writers: James Gray, Matt Reeves
Starring:  Mark Wahlberg, Joaquin Phoenix, Charlize Theron, James Caan,
Ellen Burstyn, Faye Dunaway, Andrew Davoli, Steve Lawrence, Tony
Musante, Victor Argo, Tomas Milion, Robert Montano, Victor Arnold
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Contender, The (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/aa3c88368f877b5e8825695b00047bfd?OpenDocument
A day after The West Wing ruled the Emmy Awards, Rod Lurie's White House
drama The Contender screened at the Boston Film Festival.  With that
kind of timing, comparisons are unavoidable.  So with The Contender
boasting an intriguing storyline (woman nominated for the Vice
Presidency) and a top-line cast, how is it that I was pining for Martin
Sheen by movie's end?  I blame Lurie, for what I believe to be a true
dud of the fall season.
Lurie is an L.A. film critic-turned-filmmaker who made his debut with
last year's virtually unseen Deterrence, with Kevin Pollak as the
President.  Lurie's back to politics again, and this time it's Jeff
Bridges as Commander-In-Chief, and he'd like to appoint Senator Laine
Hanson (Joan Allen, in a role written especially for her) to the VP
vacancy.  Not so easy.  The Senator has enemies, like Gary Oldman's
Congressman Sheldon Runyon.  His team digs up dirty pictures from
Hanson's youth, and all hell breaks loose for the Senator.
It's not so much fun for us either.  The primary problem is that Lurie
just can't direct.  He rushes and bumps through his somewhat appealing
script in the first half, just so we can get to that naughty photo.  And
with predictable plot points, such as a clumsy, oh-so-secret rendezvous
to pass over the pictures, it seems that Lurie read some book about
moments needed to make a government conspiracy movie.  No wonder the
guy's favorite film is All the President's Men.
And I'm not sure he knows where to place the camera.  Not once do we get
a satisfying wide shot within the Oval Office, or anywhere in the White
House for that matter (don't have that trouble with The West Wing, do
you?).  At one point, he follows Oldman running down a set of stairs
with a jarring, useless Steadicam shot, borrowing from others' styles
with no narrative purpose.
Speaking of narrative, there are problems there too.  Lurie's subject
matter is admirable, but it takes way too long to get from setup to
dénouement.  Much of the screenplay smacks of a trying-too-hard
intensity, and scattered visuals (the Senator jogs through Arlington
National Cemetery -- I get it!) are as heavy-handed as Lurie's obvious
politics.  And although The President's been in office 6˝ years, he's
continually amazed by the variety of food at the White House, ordering a
snack at every opportunity.  Cute once, passable twice, stupid the fifth
time.
What's inexcusable, though, is the hypocrisy in this film.  While Lurie
chides the act of digging up the photo, he revels in its discovery,
showing us a gang-bang snapshot 5 or 6 times.  Later, after his
screenplay smartly supports a politician's right to privacy, and we're
sure Hanson's past is immaterial to her success, the President asks for
lurid details and she tells him!  In my eyes, that cheats the character,
and it's a huge, cowardly cop-out.
On the bright side, Joan Allen continues to be one of this country's
best actors, and she'll probably pull an Oscar nomination for this one. 
She brings such a stoic pride to Hanson that I'd vote for her in a
second.  Oldman, who has spent much of his career overacting, is subdued
and natural as Runyon, and the likable Bridges is just plain goofy.  How
did Lurie get such talent in this picture anyway!?  I figure either most
actors are thrilled to sink their teeth into political issues, or this
guy smooched a lot of butt while reviewing movies in L.A.
Either way, fall will arrive, you'll make your decision on the upcoming
election, and hopefully, you will vote.  And, if hungry for fictional
politics, you should stay home and see what ol' President Bartlett is up
to.
Director: Rod Lurie
Producers: Mark Frydman, Douglas Urbanski, Willi Baer, James Spies
Writer: Rod Lurie
Starring:  Joan Allen, Jeff Bridges, Gary Oldman, Sam Elliot, Christian
Slater, Robin Thomas, Mike Binder, William L. Petersen
http://www.thecontender-thefilm.com/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Osmosis Jones (2001)
Have you ever wondered what goes on in the back of your nose when you
sneeze?  The Farrelly Brothers have.  And in their traditional gross-out
fashion, they'd like to show you.
There you have Osmosis Jones, a combination of clunky live action and
cool, creative animation that tries too hard to please both adults and
kiddies while journeying inside one disgusting body.
That body belongs to Frank the zookeeper (Bill Murray), a greasy,
out-of-shape, wart of a single Dad.  He doesn't exercise, his hygiene
sucks, and he eats food that's fallen to the ground.  Once we're
introduced to his unpleasant exterior, we quickly meet his vile
interior.
In a few ingenious animated sequences, Frank's insides literally burst
to life as the "City of Frank," complete with its own infrastructure,
police department, and greedy, corrupt mayor (nicely overdone by none
other than the voice of William Shatner).  Frank's white blood cells,
led by super-slick upstart cop Osmosis (voiced by Chris Rock), fight a
constant, border patrol-style battle against invading germs and
diseases.
The central story is a gentle spoof of buddy cop movies:  Jones teams up
with a high-powered cold capsule named Drix (voiced by the steady,
deadpan David Hyde Pierce) in an attempt to shut down a renegade virus
(played with a mean funkiness by Laurence Fishburne).  This nasty
illness is looking to make history by offing Frank in just 48 hours, and
this unlikely duo must stop him.  Even if their "fantastic voyage" takes
them into a seedy nightclub in one of Frank's zits.
The animation, directed by former story artists Piet Kroon (The Iron
Giant) and Tom Sito (Antz), is wonderfully colorful and energetic,
looking like a spiffed-up Merrie Melodies cartoon.  In fact, some of the
more harmless germs look like those little aliens in another
half-animated Warner movie, Space Jam.
The biology puns, both visual and vocal, are there as is expected, with
plenty of requisite references to a litany of bodily functions including
peeing and puking (the rule seems to be: the more liquid and mucus, the
better).
But with all the endless opportunity to jam-pack both the frame and the
script, Osmosis Jones is surprisingly tame.  The Farrellys, and
first-time screenwriter Marc Hyman, almost appear to be holding back,
not wanting to give the smaller viewers (this is PG-rated) sensory
overload.  The filmmakers would rather devote their time to juicing up
the urban, radio-friendly soundtrack, which becomes so blatant it's
annoying.  So in peeling back some of the laughs, Osmosis Jones becomes
just a handful of chuckles by the film's end.
It does manage to hold interest until then, even if the live-action
sequences with Bill Murray and daughter Elena Franklin feel quickly
cobbled together and look dreadfully grainy and flat (I think all the
money was spent on the animated bits).  Molly Shannon, as the daughter's
teacher, is a riot, happily stealing both scenes in which she appears.
And, as in any movie aimed toward kids, and doubly so if directed by
guys named Farrelly, you'll find just about every yucky body release
imaginable.  But, what's this?  No fart jokes?  Oh, they save those for
the end.  No pun intended.
Director: Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly
Producer: Dennis Edwards, Bobby Farrelly, Peter Farrelly, Zak Penn,
Bradley Thomas
Writer: Marc Hyman
Starring: Chris Rock, Laurence Fishburne, David Hyde Pierce, Brandy
Norwood, William Shatner, Molly Shannon, Chris Elliott, Bill Murray,
Joel Silver, Elena Franklin
http://osmosisjones.warnerbros.com/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Blessed Art Thou (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/06577663ed95e8618825695d00660958?OpenDocument
I'm usually a sucker for a Disney movie.  Blessed Art Thou, screened at
the Boston Film Festival, is a Disney movie of sorts, but this ain't no
Little Mermaid.  The only Disney involved here is Tim Disney,
writer/director of this tale of theology, faith, and the sexes.  The
plot alone could make his great uncle Walt thaw out, and this
live-action film as a whole is appealing, gentle, and hopeful, despite
its weaknesses.
At a quiet monastery on a vineyard, Brother Anselm (M.E. Hackett) claims
to have witnessed a true miracle.  He purports to have seen the angel
Gabriel himself descend to Earth and initiate a sort of "connection"
with Anselm, one that Disney smartly keeps vague.  There's further
confusion in that Disney actually shows us the encounter, a strangely
homoerotic visual that might have worked well in a dream sequence in the
Village People's Can't Stop the Music.  Toss in the Brother's
androgynous look, and Blessed Art Thou is an exciting little mystery
right from act one.
The older, superior brothers (played by a crew of character actors led
by Bernard Hill, Captain Smith in Titanic) question Anselm's reports. 
But then Anselm's meeting with Gabriel seems to motivate another, well,
miracle.  Some reviewers have chosen to give this one away, but I do
believe the plot point to be a spoiler, so I won't.  It's enough to say
that it tests the faith of every member of the small order, in one way
or another, and creates infighting within the previously peaceful
monastery.
Disney, working from a story by Rachel Ingalls, does a fine job giving
the narrative its due time to evolve and develop, but the script peters
out where it counts the most -- at the end.  The big finale that we hope
we'll get doesn't have the passion and humility of the rest of the film,
and it wraps too abruptly.
But Disney's first effort (he is credited, by the way, as a contributing
writer to 1988's Oliver and Company) is filled with pleasing details --
that of a monk's life, of the workings of a vineyard, of the
conversations that emerge between two men who have different
interpretations of faith.  That kind of attention makes a small project
like this an entertaining endeavor.  (Perhaps the biggest kick I got out
of a film with such a sweet religious bent was that it was playing two
doors down from The Exorcist.)
The director also works in an editorial of his own, commenting on the
politics of such a place, where a person of free will may join for the
love of God, but is given commands by a higher ranking human.  Visually,
there is a strong connection through Disney's lens between the cell of a
monastery and a prison cell.
But for all the heavy commentary, it's surprising how light and easy
Blessed Art Thou feels.  Depending upon your point-of-view, that could
be a strength or a weakness, but at a minimum, I expected a bit more
punch at the finish.  The film doesn't necessarily demand your 90
minutes in a theater, but, for a thoughtful, eyebrow-raising story, it
works.  You may now return to associating the Disney name with plush
toys.
Director: Timothy J. Disney
Producers: William Haney
Writers: Timothy J. Disney
Starring: M.E. Hackett, Bernard Hill, Paul Guilfoyle, Daniel von Bargen,
Naveen Andrews, Joe Spano
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Haiku Tunnel (2001)
Josh Kornbluth is a funny guy.  He has a nervous, jittery way about him,
delivering his views on the world with gusto, while giving off a unique
combination of being both obsessed and lazy.  He looks odd, a pudgy
schlump with glasses, a balding head, long messy hair on the sides and
back, and an array of Hawaiian shirts.  Even his name is kind of funny.
But he has the guts to play a version of himself in this smart comedy,
one in which Kornbluth is in every single scene, riding the surprisingly
lively script into the world of office temp stardom.
And that screenplay is very close to Kornbluth's heart -- written by him
and his brother Jacob (they're co-directors and co-producers, as well),
it's based on a monologue of Josh's, chronicling his life as a temp in
San Francisco, and the horrors that can occur when permanent employee
status comes knocking at your formerly comfortable career door.
In fact, the story is so close to the real Josh that he opens the film
with a charming disclaimer, saying that actors were used in the film and
that no "real lawyers" were portrayed (much of the action takes place at
law firms).  To further state his point, he tries to convince us that
the setting is the beautiful, fictional town of "San Franclisco."
On paper, the comparisons to Woody Allen are easy -- a well-weaved
combination of both whip-smart comments and broad comedy -- but those
disappear once you see Haiku Tunnel.  It's got a more agreeable
simplicity than Allen's movies, both in its presentation and in its
characters.  Josh easily explains, with no apologies, that being a temp
gave him such a simple pride, and he was never late.  However, the
intricacies of being a permanent staffer (but having the same job
tasks!) make him late all the time.  It's got a certain sweetness.
And that succeeds through most of the film, even when the story gets a
bit surreal for the sake of fun.  Josh's minimal success, his sad,
fellow secretaries in the firm and the female lawyer that begins to fall
for him all have a real human side that the brothers/directors make sure
to bring out.  It injects a film that often looks like a first feature
with a cool dose of humor and maturity.
Comedies about the workplace have certainly been done before, and recent
movies like Office Space and Clockwatchers have collected loyal fans by
expressing the boredom and pain of today's 9-to-5 in a cube.  By
reducing the experiences to one man -- one, funny, neurotic, sloppy man
-- we get a different take, with a guy that can write, direct, produce,
and truly star in his own feature.  Sounds like a good job.
Director: Jacob Kornbluth, Josh Kornbluth
Producer: Brian Benson, Jacob Kornbluth, Josh Kornbluth
Writer: Josh Kornbluth, Jacob Kornbluth, John Bellucci
Starring: Josh Kornbluth, Warren Keith, Helen Shumaker, Amy Resnick,
Brian Thorstenson, June A. Lomena, Sarah Overman
http://www.spe.sony.com/classics/comingsoon.php?filmid=7
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for One Eyed King (2001)
Making your first feature film ain't easy.  Assemble a decent, if not,
strong cast, as writer/director Robert Moresco has done with One Eyed
King, and you're already ahead of the game.  But rehash old plot lines,
tired dialogue, and standard clichés, and a well-intentioned effort such
as this one could jeopardize your chance at a second feature film.
How many more movies do we need about a rough neighborhood full of
lifelong friends hopelessly turned to crime or worse?  The enormous
catalog of such movies might dissuade a filmmaker from making yet
another, but here we have it.  Again.  Five Irish kids in NYC's Hell's
Kitchen make an overemotional pact over some stolen rings on an
anonymous rooftop.  With teary music.  And slow motion.  In the film's
first scene.
The kids grow up to be fairly worthless adults, unable or unwilling to
make their way out of the heat of the Kitchen.  Leading the clueless
pack is William Baldwin as a good-hearted guy who watches out for his
buddies and is in tight with local mob head Armand Assante.  I'd like to
say that his character gets involved over his head in some sort of blah,
blah, blah, but all we seem to get are little tastes of possible plot
points.  He's concerned about buddy Jason Gedrick's heroin abuse.  He
sticks up for Jim Breuer after he impregnates Baldwin's character's
sister.  He looks into who might be pushing the most moronic-looking
counterfeit cash ever made (a genuinely funny touch).  But none of this
ever really amounts to anything. 
It seems that Moresco's greater concern is to provide that intangible
"slice of life", that flavor of the neighborhood that everyone's been
trying to evoke since Scorsese's early work.  So, we get the drunk guys,
hugging and singing together at the local bar, to prove to us that they
really love each other. (Do people actually do this!?)  We get a lot of
tough street talk -- usually mumbled for effect -- and a whole lot of
the F-word, whether it sounds like it fits or not. 
We also get a handful of good actors in small roles that seem to lack
purpose.  Bruno Kirby, Chazz Palminteri, you know, guys you've seen in
movies just like this one before.  Assante is intelligent casting as the
man that everyone fears, and Baldwin's performance is adequate, but most
of the rest of the cast jump into the tough guy persona so thoroughly
that it's almost funny.
Moresco, a theater guy and sometimes TV writer (including the series
Falcone), obviously labored over this one as anyone might a first child,
but the content is probably too personal.  As a result, the movie's
style is heavy-handed, in need of a considerable amount of toning down. 
Nearly every time an action by the grown up gang recalls something they
did as kids, Moresco reminds us -- boy does he remind us.  With slow
dissolves to the earlier scene, running in slow motion, complete with
dialogue from the present, just in case we don't comprehend the link to
the past.
Moresco needs to either trust his audience's intelligence, or have more
faith in his own presentation rather than beat us over the head with
it.  His next project should have a little more personal distance, and a
lot more subtlety.  If he actually gets that chance.
Reviewed as part of our 2001 Boston Film Festival coverage (feature
story coming soon).
Director: Robert Moresco
Producer: Peter Crane, Linda Curran Wexelblatt, Billy Deitrich, Luciano
Lisi, Christine Kavanagh, Julius R. Nasso
Writer: Robert Moresco
Starring: Armand Assante, William Baldwin, Jim Breuer, Connie Britton,
Jason Gedrick, Josh Hopkins, Bruno Kirby, Dash Mihok, Chazz Palminteri,
Leo Rossi, Ricky Aiello, Pat McGuinness, Amanda Moresco, Harry O'Reilly
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for See Spot Run (2001)
David Arquette gets to reinforce his status as the goofy doofus once
again in this below-average family comedy about a boy, a dog, and a
dumb, sloppy, immature mailman (that would be Arquette).  Peering
through this half-assed attempt at a funny movie, it's easy to see that
the laughs are few and the comic action is a bore -- even the dog looks
kind of fed up.
Arquette, however, through the muck of this movie, is actually good as
the hapless idiot.  Sure, he's played the part before, but in a film
like this, Arquette gets to be genuinely likable, especially in the face
of the W.C. Fields edict (never work with dogs or children).  Maybe it's
his childish demeanor or puppy dog face that makes him fit right in, but
he's one of the only bright spots of this film.
Otherwise, a dumb script (which wants to be a John Hughes movie so
badly) cheats both Arquette and a fairly sweet story.  In short,
Arquette's Gordon has to look after his young neighbor (a cute,
laid-back kid named Angus T. Jones) after the little guy's beautiful,
overbearing mother is stuck trying to return home from a trip (horribly
bad shades of Planes, Trains, & Automobiles).  While Gordon and the boy
get acquainted, they meet up with Agent 11, a sharp FBI dog on the run
from unhappy mobsters -- including a slumming, unfunny Paul Sorvino.
Mob guys chase dog.  Dog hangs with kid and even bigger kid.  Mayhem
ensues.
With such a thin, familiar plotline, you'd think the writers would get
to it.  Yet, it takes more than a half-hour for the two stories to
collide.  If this movie was made with kids in mind, director John
Whitesell (helming his first feature) and company sure do try the
youngsters' collective patience.
The action sequences play like Home Alone meets Baby's Day Out, as
directed by a guy with no experience handling things like slapstick and
moving cars.  The scenes look stagy and awkward, and in the long run all
the gags just seem kind of tame.  Of course, the more static laughs run
to flatulence and poop, but I guess that's pretty harmless (if not,
uncreative) when it comes to entertaining kids.
And speaking of harmless, I never really got the feeling that this dog
could cause too much trouble.  In fact, the plot provides a backstory
showing the serious pooch as a pup, being instructed to work and not
have fun.  So, as an adult, he doesn't fetch or play catch.  He just
sits there.  Like this movie.
David Arquette should continue to head for more all-family comedies as a
career angle, but as for this one -- you'll be longing for Turner and
Hooch.
Director: John Whitesell
Producers: Robert Simonds, Tracey Trench, Andrew Deane
Writers: Daniel Baron, Christopher Faber
Starring: David Arquette, Angus T. Jones, Anthony Anderson, Michael
Clarke Duncan, Leslie Bibb, Kim Hawthorne, Constance Marie, Steven R.
Schirripa, Paul Sorvino, Joe Viterelli
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Catfish in Black Bean Sauce (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/9b206d129b15a14d8825697200193239?OpenDocument
Now here's an unconventional family for the new decade: two Vietnamese
siblings are brought up in California by a black couple; sister Mai
marries an Asian, and brother Dwayne's getting engaged to an
African-American woman (Love and Basketball's Sanaa Lathan).  While this
is juicy enough, first time writer/director/actor Chi Moui Lo throws
some real spice into his comedy-drama mix: Mai (The Joy Luck Club's
Lauren Tom) has found her Vietnamese birth mother, and is bringing her
to the States.
Lo, who plays Dwayne, uses these circumstances to attempt an original
look at families and their identities, but his basic concepts are better
than their execution.  The effort is certainly worth noticing -- his
script is an impressive debut, trying to flesh out nine closely-knit
characters -- but some stale and predictable presentation drags down a
strong idea.
We're first introduced to Dwayne as he plays cards with his parents
(veteran actors Paul Winfield and Mary Alice) and shuns his mother's
pleas to adopt their newfound blind cat.  When they complain that the
cat thinks he's human, it's a subtle means of explanation -- that poor
cat is just the first of the cast to question his identity.
It all gets put into motion with the arrival of the mother, Thanh (actor
Kieu Chinh, known as "the Meryl Streep of Vietnam").  Mai is sure of her
desire to be with her birth mother, but Dwayne discards the idea.  While
the pair wrestle with their own reactions to this new woman in their
lives, it sends the rest of the family into turmoil.  Dolores, Mai's
American mother, immediately resents Thanh with a twist of pride and
jealousy that Mary Alice boldly brings to the movie.  While Papa Harold
tries to keep the peace (a role for which the tall, easygoing Paul
Winfield was practically born), Dwayne reconsiders his Americanization
and his impending marriage.
Lo tries to keep it all moving with a colorful mixture of joy and
conflict, even easing in the occasional flashback to bring a certain
pathos to the kids' development.  But along the way, there's rat-a-tat
comedy dialogue that's overwritten, some clunky dream sequences, and the
periodic montage that screams B-movie, or even worse, B-movie satire.
The director's strength seems to be in playing it for drama.  There's a
healthy honesty to his story, and he extracts strong emotional
performances out of his leads.  But even he is a far better dramatic
player than comedian.  One particular Abbott and Costello-esque exchange
with his roommate (Tyler Christopher) screams to be taken down a notch.
But that's the kind of basic problem revealing a beginner who's on to
something good, but is still just out of the gate.  After the
possibility of a strong conclusion, the film's final act unfortunately
heads for sitcom country.  This includes a sequence that gathers all the
players in one room, in a stilted attempt at wacky chaos.  Neither the
shots, editing, nor actors' timing was worth the trouble.
Nevertheless, Catfish in Black Bean Sauce takes a considerable dive into
its characters heads without telegraphing their every feeling.  And
although race certainly plays a part in the film's development, this
isn't a movie where race is an issue.  These positives reflect the
balance and smarts that Chi Moui Lo could really show off in his next
film.
Director: Chi Moui Lo
Producers: Chi Moui Lo
Writer: Chi Moui Lo
Starring: Chi Moui Lo, Sanaa Lathan, Paul Winfield, Mary Alice, Lauren
Tom, Kieu Chinh, Tyler Christopher, Tzi Ma, George Wallace, Wing Chen
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for What Women Want (2000)
If you looked like Mel Gibson, being able to read women's minds wouldn't
be too imperative.  Just give 'em those baby blues and flash those
pearly whites, and you're in, baby.  Or so you'd think.  In What Women
Want, directed by relationship comedy veteran Nancy Meyers, Gibson's
character gets the real scoop on what the fairer sex thinks about him,
and boy, is he in trouble.  But his problems are the viewer's fortune.
As all-star Chicago ad man Nick Marshall, Gibson is awash in the
stereotypical world of a man's man.  Ogling chicks, living high on the
hog, and being a major player is his life.  He has unending
self-confidence just because he can bed babes, but ho, what he doesn't
know....
See, Nick's not too receptive to women when they, well, speak, and he's
not beneath ordering them around either.  Enter Darcy Maguire (Helen
Hunt), a young hottie hired as Nick's boss, who gets the job that he's
been eyeing.  Fifteen years ago, that alone would've been good movie
fodder (as in Nine to Five and Working Girl), but here the idea's been
amped up.
While drunk and stupid, Nick tries on various women's products in order
to get into ladies' minds and maybe impress the boss with a new idea. 
One freaky electrical accident later, and Nick discovers he can actually
steal the boss' ideas -- straight from her own thoughts.  If women think
it, Nick hears it.
It's about as high concept as today's comedies get, and guided by
Meyers' fine-tuned hand, it really works (she wrote Protocol and Baby
Boom, and wrote/directed the satisfying update of The Parent Trap). 
Meyers, working from an impressive debut script by King of Queens
writers Josh Goldsmith and Cathy Yuspa, showcases the obvious advantages
and pitfalls of such an insane power, and lets Gibson show off the
superstar gloss that nearly defines him.  But the major plus is the
film's big-time, old-school Hollywood feel, from the directing to the
costumes to the set design. 
In throwback style, Nick's not just a sexist -- he's a stinkin' male
chauvinist pig.  And he's not wealthy -- he's filthy rich.  He moves
like a movie star, thinks on his feet, and calls women "babe."  With his
swagger and good looks, and Alan Silvestri's big-band-baby music behind
him, Gibson's Nick recalls a big businessman that may have been played
by Clark Gable.  And his goofy way with women once he obtains his powers
feels like an old Preston Sturges or Frank Capra movie.  (I'm guessing
Meyers was going for that; You Can't Take It With You is the play at
Nick's daughter's school.)
There are some scenes that Meyers really should've chopped -- such as an
inexcusable MTVesque montage of Nick helping his kid (Ashley Johnson)
pick out a prom dress -- but in all, the scenes stay funny and even pack
a few surprises.
Gibson hams it up a little too much for my taste, but the fun he has as
Nick is infectious.  Helen Hunt is, well, The Helen Hunt Character, but
she remains a competent actor that can make good things happen on
screen.  Alan Alda is a solid co-star as Nick and Darcy's boss, and
Marisa Tomei is excellent as a neurotic coffee slinger pining for
companionship.  With her range and abilities, I wish she had been given
the role of Darcy.
But when Darcy and Nick do connect (c'mon, of course they do!), Meyers
successfully holds on to that old-style feel.  One simple rendezvous
carries a sweet, romantic wistfulness within the perfect backdrop of a
small booth at an elegant jazz club.  Bogey would've loved it.  Meyers
has done more than just pay homage to the old Hollywood romantic comedy
-- it would appear that she has actually made one.
Director: Nancy Meyers
Producers: Nancy Meyers, Matt Williams, Susan Cartsonis, Bruce Davey,
Gina Matthews
Writers:  Josh Goldsmith, Cathy Yuspa
Starring:  Mel Gibson, Helen Hunt, Marisa Tomei, Lauren Holly, Mark
Feuerstein, Ashley Johnson, Delta Burke, Valerie Perrine, Alan Alda
http://www.whatwomenwantmovie.com
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Steal This Movie (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://a.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/44ee0afe56d911ba88256948007e88f5?OpenDocument
In case you were wondering, no, Steal This Movie! is not an adaptation
of activist Abbie Hoffman's Steal This Book, his 1971 how-to manifesto
about beating the system.  Now that would've been a creative film. 
Instead, it's a take on two other books, Hoffman's Letters from the
Underground and Marty Jezer's Abbie Hoffman: American Rebel, combining
to form the biography of America's most notorious and ego-driven
radical.  Unfortunately, Steal This Movie! is neither notorious nor
radical, and while showing off a talented cast in some lively sequences,
it tramples down some tired old trails.
As played by the ferocious Vincent D'Onofrio, Hoffman, in short, was a
lunatic.  A smart, ambitious, caring, vigilant lunatic.  (Actually, he
was eventually diagnosed as bipolar.)  His group of free thinkers and
anti-establishment yippies performed shockingly funny acts, some
resembling performance art, all in the name of rights and equality. 
Director Robert Greenwald takes us along into Hoffman's world:  the band
"holds up" a city bus, taking people's clothes and then giving them away
to those in need, and chucks dollar bills on the floor of a stock
exchange to watch everyone grovel.  Hoffman meets his wife-to-be Anita,
keeps up the anti-war cause, and realizes that he'll probably be a
lifelong organizer.
Greenwald is doing his best Oliver Stone impersonation.  He stands
firmly on the side of the yippies to the point of preachiness, he
intercuts actual protest footage with grainy, hand-held, tight shots of
the actors and atmosphere, and he plays with hokey cinematic tricks done
better on The X-Files, such as cutting to a black-and-white surveillance
shot of a scene, and superimposing a fake FBI file name on the screen. 
There is indeed someone out there, and Greenwald just never lets us
forget it.
To add insult, the framework of the movie actually mimics Citizen Kane! 
A writer is travelling to visit the people that knew Abbie, trying to
get to the bottom of the Abbie Hoffman story!  If this is the only way
that Greenwald and screenwriter Bruce Graham can think to tell the story
non-linearly, they should borrow from something a little less
ambitious.  There's even a shot of the writer peering down a long hall
at the FBI, with stacks and stacks of boxes bearing down upon him, the
secret to Abbie's paranoia hidden somewhere -- probably in a box marked
Rosebud. 
Steal This Movie! is eventually nothing more than a better-than-average
TV movie -- ironic since most of Greenwald's work has been TV --  but
with a great cast.  The players, led by the sometimes touching
D'Onofrio, are the pulse and reality that make the movie bearable and
even fun.  Independent mainstay Kevin Corrigan is Jerry Rubin, The Tao
of Steve's Donal Logue (in his 29th movie) is Stew Albert, and in an
underwritten and wasted role, Kevin Pollak is Abbie's lawyer, Gerry
Lefcourt.  All are believable and natural, in spite of the script, but
Janeane Garofalo makes it all worth watching, again.  She plays Anita
Hoffman as wide-eyed, resilient, pragmatic, emotional, and she nails it
all.  Garofalo has shown her chops with comic and romantic dialogue, but
this movie finally gives her the chance to put all her talents out
there.  She makes some daring choices that highlight Anita's love and
sympathy, and many times, this is Garofalo's movie.
This movie, with its added schlock of timely pop hits throughout,
ultimately feels like it should be on NBC during sweeps.  You'd think a
story about subversiveness and freedom would be a little more daring as
a film.  Go for the cool cast.  Then see if you can steal your seven
bucks back.
Director: Robert Greenwald
Producers: Robert Greenwald, Jacobus Rose
Writer: Bruce Graham
Starring: Vincent D'Onofrio, Janeane Garofalo, Jeanne Tripplehorn, Kevin
Pollak, Donal Logue, Kevin Corrigan, Alan Van Sprang, Troy Garity,
Ingrid Veninger, Stephen Marshall, Keith Jones
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Thomas and the Magic Railroad (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/332cc53728903c488825691e006d6bc1?OpenDocument
Bullies suck.  "Being useful" is good.  Magic is cool.  You just can't
argue with these irrefutable facts in the world of Thomas and the Magic
Railroad, a preschool adventure based on the successful television
series about the little tank engine that could.  The lessons may be
admirable, but creator/director/writer Britt Allcroft has created a
scattered children's tale that looks good, but feels messy.
She has done some things right: she's cast big stars, like Alec Baldwin
as the Lilliputian Mr. Conductor, and Peter Fonda as the sad grandpa,
Burnett Stone; her production designers have continued the show's happy
train colors, with bright blues and reds, and have added bonus design
touches to the live sets and wardrobe; her script applauds positive
thinking, creativity, and foiling the bad guy.  It's just that all of
this is mired in a clunky set of hole-filled plots, confusing enough to
make me want to interrogate the little guy sitting in front of me.
The story doesn't really revolve around one particular character or
plotline, but the simple gist is that young Thomas and the other shiny
steam engines are being pushed around by a mean, yucky diesel with a
scary set of pinchers.  At the same time, Mr. Conductor, played with a
childlike earnestness by Baldwin, has run out of magic gold dust, and
thus may be stuck on the wonderful island of Sodor, never to return to
the train station at Shining Time.  Meanwhile, Burnett lives in a kind
of tunnel/cave, lamenting his inability to revive the beautiful steam
engine Lady, with Fonda playing Burnett like a mopey actor waiting for
the next Ulee's Gold.  
Anyway, he's visited by his granddaughter from the big city, who gets
her own dose of gold dust, allowing her to shrink and ride the "magic
railroad" (Hello Alice!), joining the effort with Mr. Conductor and the
cute talking trains.   How do these kids follow all this?!
After a while, the film, with its awkward order of scenes, doesn't live
up to the promise of the sweet idyllic feel of the introduction, and is
a bit boring.  It's dragged down further by generally flat acting.  Mara
Wilson, the cute kid from Mrs. Doubtfire, is now a cute adolescent as
the granddaughter, but can't act a lick.  Her young friend, played by
Cody McMains, is worse, and the stiff dialogue doesn't help matters. 
And Fonda's sleepwalking sealed it for me that I wasn't the only
unexcited one. 
I picture this film existing years from now on cable, where college kids
will turn the stilted lines and occasional psychedelic trips and colors
into some kind of drinking or smoking game.  When one particular train
rides triumphantly through a magic palette of wispy, primary colors,
look out!  It'll be like the original Fantasia's 1963 re-release, but
for a new generation of stoners.  For now, though, I think the little
kids dig it for what it is.  
After the movie, I spoke with a 5-year old, a 3-year old, and their
moms.  I learned that the 3-year old was the one leading the cheering
section in the theater, and the 5-year old said the movie was
"awesome".  What the hell do I know?
Director: Britt Allcroft
Producer: Britt Allcroft
Writer: Britt Allcroft
Starring: Peter Fonda, Mara Wilson, Alec Baldwin, Didi Conn, Russell
Means, Michael Rodgers, Cody McMains, John Bellis 
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Along Came a Spider (2001)
When you think "movie franchise," you think Harrison Ford or maybe Eddie
Murphy... but Morgan Freeman?  Yet, with the middling $60 million take
of 1997's Kiss the Girls, the low-key, dependable actor returns as Dr.
Alex Cross, in another try at a psycho thriller.  Sadly, Freeman's the
only point of interest in this one.  Kiss the Girls was average at best
-- Along Came A Spider should aspire to such heights.
Both films are based on James Patterson novels, where the good Doctor
(detective, psychologist, author, hostage negotiator, model boat
builder... good Lord) chases down some scary guy who's either a
kidnapper, a murderer, or both.  Here, our culprit is a teacher (Michael
Wincott) at a D.C. prep school for kids that require Secret Service
detail.  He conducts his entire teaching career incognito, and then
snatches the young daughter of a generic U.S. Congressman (Michael
Moriarty).
One of the more vital secrets in a psychological mystery like this
should be: Why is the madman doing this?  By keeping this fact at bay,
and perhaps even creating an inviting puzzle, a filmmaker can heighten
tension and develop characters.  First-time screenwriter Marc Moss and
director Lee Tamahori (Once Were Warriors) decide that isn't really
necessary.  So, the result is a bad guy causing evil evidently because
his parents weren't there for him.  Now that's creative!
Moss' dialogue is no help.  It's strictly cookie-cutter formula, made
all the sillier by Jerry Goldsmith's overblown theme music.  Both the
script and the orchestra are supposed to make us raise our eyebrows in
confusion or fright, but both are so self-consciously heavy, they do
nothing but cause heavy sighing and snickering.
The screenplay does take on some requisite twists to be oh-so-surprising
(taken from the novel, I imagine), but it's flat and derivative for most
of the movie.  Especially funny is an attempt at a cat-and-mouse
scenario, where our criminal is making poor old Dr. Cross run from point
to point in D.C., picking stray phones out of trash cans to get his next
instruction.  It's a carbon copy of a sequence in Ransom (among other
films), and it leads to a loot drop-off clearly stolen from Kurosawa's
High and Low.  And Moss' idea of a scene transition is Dylan Baker
closing every phone contact with the kidnapper by bellowing to police,
"OK, people, let's move it!"
Freeman does the best he can with this stuff.  He has an excellent knack
for hitting a line in a unique way, maybe emphasizing a word that others
wouldn't.  He tries to seem interested, and keep the mood grave, but
this one's just too silly.
Taking over the cutie-pie female role from Ashley Judd is Monica Potter
as a dejected Secret Service agent that feels responsible for the
kidnapping.  She has a beautiful face but minimum acting chops, and
between this and the horrific Head Over Heels, she's averaging about one
bad movie per month.
So what's next for Dr. Alex Cross if this one takes off?  Well, there
are five other books, but the latest, First To Die, will become an NBC
miniseries.  Sounds more appropriate.
Director: Lee Tamahori
Producers: David Brown, Joe Wizan
Writers: Marc Moss
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Monica Potter, Michael Wincott, Jay O.
Sanders, Dylan Baker, Raoul Ganeev, Billy Burke, Penelope Ann Miller,
Mika Boorem, Anton Yelchin, Michael Moriarty
http://www.alongcameaspidermovie.com/movie.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Kingdom Come (2001/I)
When LL Cool J stars in a movie with a title like Kingdom Come, you
expect to see car chases, stuff getting blown up, that sort of thing. 
Instead, we get a fairly average, seen-it-before, family comedy that has
its moments as well as its problems -- just like the clan in the movie.
When the Slocumb family patriarch -- evidently an ornery sonofabitch --
keels over in front of wife Whoopi Goldberg, it sets off a Slocumb
pilgrimage back to the tiny town of Lula for a weekend of last
respects.  But, like most extended families, there is friction,
conflict, and the occasional secret.
Director Doug McHenry, working from a screenplay by David Dean Bottrell
and Jessie Jones (based on their play Dearly Departed), introduces the
Slocumbs by route of broad humor, some of it too uncomfortable for
laughs.  Son Junior (Anthony Anderson) goes ballistic during the drive
to Lula, his wife (Jada Pinkett Smith) and kids hollering in the car,
and pulls out a gun.  Nephew Royce (Darius McCrary) talks and acts like
a hood while toting his Bible-loving mother along, telling her he can't
wait to settle down and have kids so he can collect welfare.  These
settings are funny?
But once the family settles in, it's clear that the filmmakers were more
interested in the pain and hardship behind those humorous facades.  LL
Cool J's Ray is a recovering alcoholic, trying to keep it together for
others while hatred for his father boils up; Junior's infidelity and
bankruptcy come to the fore; and we learn that Royce's only brother is
in prison.
What keeps Kingdom Come from melding these storylines into a superior
film is a lack of execution -- the scenes played for comedy are not that
funny, and the dramatic sequences seem to lack a greater depth that they
deserve.
The acting quality runs the gamut.  LL Cool J is capable and
understated, Anderson is likeable, even when he's short-changed by the
dialogue, and Goldberg is appropriately subdued in the smaller role of
mother hen.  Pinkett Smith is this film's version of nails on a
chalkboard, playing every line, emotion, and movement at full throttle. 
She is needlessly annoying and the movie always feels better when she's
not on screen.
The final act is a heartfelt look at love and thankfulness, but it
ultimately smacks of sitcom resolution, right down to a poor pastor (the
excellent Cedric the Entertainer) with gas problems cracking up a
stern-faced congregation.  The movie's happiness does have a certain
satisfying feel, but it's never as honest or as entertaining as the
dramatic moments.  In the long run, however, Kingdom Come is saved by
its earnestness.  Barely.
Director: Doug McHenry
Producers: John Morrissey, Edward Bates
Writers: David Dean Bottrell, Jessie Jones
Starring: LL Cool J, Jada Pinkett Smith, Vivica A. Fox, Loretta Devine,
Anthony Anderson, Toni Braxton, Cedric the Entertainer, Darius McCrary,
Whoopi Goldberg
http://www.foxsearchlight.com/kingdomcomethemovie/index.htm
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Gift, The (2000)
Maybe Paramount held back on giving The Gift a wide release during the
Christmas season to avoid too many reviewers saying, "This Gift is a
holiday lump of coal..." or something like that.  If so, good call.
The latest from Sam Raimi (For Love of the Game) is a muddled thriller,
filled with tired clichés and some of the worst casting in years. 
Raimi, along with screenwriters Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson, try
so hard to create a "serious" psychic chiller that the film is
practically drained of any excitement.
The person "seeing dead people" in this one is Annie Wilson (Cate
Blanchett), a widowed mother of three in a small Southern town (where
else would Thornton set a story?).  She's a well-known seer, doling out
"fortune teller" information to the locals for a fee, and sometimes
giving them just good 'ol advice.
Exploiting every white trash stereotype, the filmmakers give Annie a
clientele that makes The Jerry Springer Show look like My Three Sons. 
Oscar winner Hilary Swank gets her ass beaten regularly by a hateful,
lunatic husband (Keanu Reeves!), and the local auto mechanic (Giovanni
Ribisi) looks for help within his abusive, bipolar world.  At times, the
depression is so one-dimensional and cartoonish, it's tough not to laugh
a little.
When a local rich girl (Katie Holmes) goes missing before her wedding,
Annie is asked to tell what she knows, whether it be from armchair
gossip or actual visions.  Of course, law enforcement is typically
skeptical, and Raimi and writers have thrown in enough thin characters
to make you think anyone could be responsible for the girl's
disappearance.
While that may be a good strategy to keep an audience guessing, the
dialogue and tension are so woefully thin that we don't give a damn in
the long run anyway.  Where are the Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson
that wrote the excellent One False Move?  This has none of that film's
creativity or development.
And although Raimi does provide some fuller, more introspective moments,
a la A Simple Plan, they come too little, too late.  The only real
reason to dig in to The Gift are Blanchett and Ribisi: She practically
disappears into her caring character, struggling with a slew of problems
both internal and external, and Ribisi's turn as Buddy Cole is a
guts-on-the-line performance of raw pain and terror.
Other than that, Reeves, Holmes, Greg Kinnear, and Gary Cole are either
misplaced, wasted, or overacting.  And do we really need to see Michael
Jeter as a smarmy defense attorney?!  Bad casting, a thin script, and a
scary movie with no fright: Another unfortunate slip in the curious
career of Sam Raimi.
Director: Sam Raimi 
Producers: James Jacks, Tom Rosenberg, Gary Lucchesi
Writers: Billy Bob Thornton, Tom Epperson
Starring: Cate Blanchett, Katie Holmes, Keanu Reeves, Giovanni Ribisi,
Greg Kinnear, Hilary Swank, Michael Jeter, J.K. Simmons, Gary Cole
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Vénus beauté (institut) (1999)
A movie that centers around the workplace can end up feeling like a
sitcom.  You have a couple of principal characters whose lives are
examined, and a small cast of others that are thrown in to add pizazz to
the storytelling.  This may work in a well-written 22-minute TV show,
but in Venus Beauty Institute it results in a film that eventually loses
its focus, trying to rely on passion that just ain't that passionate.
Pity poor Angčle (Nathalie Baye).  She toils away at the titular French
beauty salon during the day, and looks for quick sexual encounters at
night.  In her 40s, she feels too burned by the loves in her past to get
hurt again, and instead finds her happiness in hunting down men with
whom to have trysts.  Early in the film, she quickly approaches a
stranger in a cafeteria, tactlessly luring him away from dinner so they
can do it in his car.  We get the feeling that she wants more -- a funny
opening sequence where she gets dumped helps -- but she's too headstrong
for that.
Angčle won't commit, and neither does Venus Beauty Institute. 
Writer/director Tonie Marshall has the right idea for two-thirds of the
movie, putting nearly all her efforts to crafting Angčle, diving into
what could be a complex character.  We see her public side at the salon
as well as her private life, and Marshall surrounds her with a circle of
people in both, including an engaged, scruffy-looking guy who falls
instantly in love at the sight of her (what is it with the French and
leading men that look like Gerard Depardieu?!).  We get to see her new
relationship with him as well as her friends, acquaintances, and
customers at the salon.
But once Marshall starts spending more time with others, we lose
interest.  With the time invested in Angčle, we don't really care to see
the supporting characters from the salon outside of that setting.  With
its pink and peach color design in the midst of bustling Paris, the shop
provides a creative contrast to the rest of the movie, and some of the
film's best and quirkiest scenes are right there -- maybe the story
should've never left that set.  But when Marshall decides that we need
to know more about Angčle's buddies, the movie and the salon lose their
flavor.
As Angčle, veteran French actress Baye (The Man Who Loved Women) brings
out as much of this complex character as possible, and was nominated for
France's César Award (the movie won four, including Best French Film). 
Bearing a resemblance to Kathy Baker, she shows a life of weariness and
street smarts on her face, looking like she was once a stunning beauty
who now needs to remind herself of that.  Baye delivers Angčle's
aggressive come-ons and facial mannerisms with a matter-of-fact attitude
that shows off real natural talent.
But as lively as she makes Angčle, Baye can't hold up the finale of the
movie on her own.  The final act makes Venus Beauty Institute too long,
as Marshall stretches the story beyond a comfortable length, and throws
in some stupid, predictable plot points.  Thinking that this would be
great for say, a Sunday afternoon video rental, I was proven wrong by
the movie's finale.  And the final shot, meant to come off as magical
and romantic, is too contrived just like, well, many sitcoms.
Director: Tonie Marshall
Producer: Gilles Sandoz
Writer: Tonie Marshall
Starring:  Nathalie Baye, Bulle Ogier, Samuel Le Bihan, Jacques
Bonnaffé, Mathilde Seigner, Audrey Tatou, Robert Hossein, Edith Scob,
Marie Rivičre, Hélčne Filličres
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Boys and Girls (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Norm Schrager.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/5fe25a60236a47648825690000075b4e?OpenDocument
Boys and Girls plays like a college version of When Harry Met Sally,
with just as much fun and fewer contrivances.  Here, the key couple is
Ryan and Jennifer, who meet by chance on a plane as pre-teens, and
continually bump into one another until their lives bisect at
Cal-Berkeley.  Ryan, played by Flavor of the Moment Freddie Prinze, Jr.,
is a bright, sometimes awkward engineering student who loves planning
and order; Jennifer, Meet Joe Black's Claire Forlani, majors in Latin
for no particular reason and aims to travel.  Both wish they could apply
their positive personality traits to their floundering relationships,
but it just doesn't work.
The smart script for Boys and Girls, written by the humbly-credited
`Drews', succeeds in part because Ryan and Jennifer nurture their unique
friendship for nearly all of the film.  While the inevitable Hollywood
ending may be in viewers' minds from the get-go, The Drews and director
Robert Iscove keep us guessing if this pair might ever connect with each
other, and the sweet performances by Prinze and Forlani keep us
interested.. The couple's interplay, and the machinations of their
separate, frustrating lovelives, are satisfying enough that a sunshiny
ending is not required.
Iscove, a TV veteran and director of Prinze's She's All That, provides
so much screen time between the leads that there are times when
sequences seem almost too long  until we realize we're seeing Ryan and
Jennifer weeks or months later, and not the same night as the previous
scene.  It's one of the many subtle surprises in Boys & Girls, and it
keeps the film floating with an infectious energy.
When movies like these create supporting roles, it's usually to provide
basic comic relief or other plot motivation that minimizes the
characters  not the case here.  Jason Biggs, becoming famous and good
very quickly, is Hunter, Ryan's roommate who changes hair color every
semester and stories with every girl he meets; Amanda Detmer garners
sympathy as Jennifer's nervous, jealous roommate, desperately trying to
find her way while being overly reliant on her therapist.  This pair
become neatly woven into the story, rather than existing just on the
fringes.  It's more effort than you'd find in say, Nora Ephron's
standard Tom Hanks-Meg Ryan romances.
One of the best compliments that can be paid to Boys & Girls is that it
recalls Cameron Crowe's work.  Sure, there's the basic story of young
adults trying to get comfortable in their own skin, but there's more.
Iscove injects the film with the total atmosphere of college life,
Berkeley, and San Francisco, creating a fuller environment for his
characters and story.  Crowe showed similar skills with Singles and Say
Anything, and that kind of detail adds a real flavor and maturity to the
movie.
When John Hughes created The Breakfast Club in the mid-80s, he added
substance and humor to his characters, making a seemingly `teen' movie
appeal to a broad audience.  The makers of Boys and Girls were obviously
affected by Hughes (aside from Ryan and Jennifer going to a Hughes
double-feature): moving against the grain of recent films, Boys and
Girls glides by with no nudity, no gross-out humor, and minimal
stereotyping, and yet should still appeal to the high school and college
audience.   It avoids cheap laughs and respects its young characters,
and that's a welcome change.
Director: Robert Iscove
Producers: Jay Cohen, Lee Gottsegen and Murray Schisgal
Writer: The Drews (Andrew Lowery and Andrew Miller)
Starring: Freddie Prinze, Jr., Claire Forlani, Jason Biggs, Heather
Donahue, Amanda Detmer, Alyson Hannigan
">http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html">
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
To unsubscribe from filmcritic.com's Breaking Reviews mailing list,
reply to this e-mail with UNSUBSCRIBE as the subject.  E-mail address
changes via reply with both old and new addresses.

Title
Review for Session 9 (2001)
Director/writer Brad Anderson, who turned heads with the winning
romantic comedy Next Stop Wonderland, does a narrative about face with
Session 9, a creepy, psychological thriller more likely to twist heads
than turn them.  After displaying a knack for witty dialogue and strong
pacing with Wonderland, Anderson applies those skills to the difficult
horror genre, and delivers an exciting, low-key treat.
You can think of Session 9 as a kind of 5 Angry Men meets The Shining. 
A crew of asbestos removal workers -- played with solid force
throughout, with notable performances by David Caruso (Kiss of Death,
NYPD Blue) and Peter Mullan (The Claim) -- has the unenviable task of
spending a week in an enormous, abandoned insane asylum, gutting it at a
fever pitch pace in order to make it safe for renovation.  The hospital
once housed 2,300 "patients" at its peak, and very few of them were
happy.  Makes for an excellent haunted house story.
As the week progresses, the building, the job, and the lives of the men
begin to eat away at them.  As the floor and ceiling tiles get peeled
away, so too does the crew's psyche, and Anderson (with co-screenwriter
and actor Stephen Gevedon) does an outstanding job keeping both us and
his characters guessing.  Who's cracking?  Who's lying?  Who's trying to
make the job work well for all?  The script keeps just enough
information away from everyone, resulting in a film that gets tighter
and tighter as the days start slipping away.
Shot on digital video (with impressive cinematography by Uta Briesewetz
-- sometimes you forget it's video) at an actual empty asylum in
Danvers, MA, Session 9 works for all the reasons a thriller should. 
There's strong, ensemble acting, with Anderson allowing his talented
cast to talk over one another, giving the movie a conversational reality
and weight.  There's a spiraling pace, which deftly picks up speed as
the movie heads toward the final act.  And, of course, there are spooky
visuals -- simple family photographs that hide pain behind the smiling
faces, dilapidated "treatment" rooms, and long, dark, corridors.
Anderson's one downfall is in allowing the final act to unravel with a
lack of structure.  It ends up drawing out the resolution a little too
far, and doesn't feel as satisfyingly tight as the rest of the movie. 
It doesn't taint the total experience, but it does need some restraint. 
Also, his choice of scary imagery is effective, but he tends to use it
too much toward the finale, diluting the freaky feel just a bit.
Overall, though, Session 9 is a real summer winner, with a lot more
punch than that Blair Witch craziness from two summers ago.  You know
you're watching a good thriller when audience members start giggling
with excitement when they see something coming (wait, is the generator
losing power?).  Add in a solid dose of well-acted drama, and that's the
general feeling of Session 9.
Director: Brad Anderson
Producers: Dorothy Aufiero, David Collins, Michael Williams
Writer: Brad Anderson, Stephen Gevedon
Starring: David Caruso, Stephen Gevedon, Paul Guilfoyle, Josh Lucas,
Peter Mullan, Brendan Sexton III
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (2001)
The now-classic video game Tomb Raider is a geek boy's dream -- a hot
heroine with Barbie-like measurements goes on adventures and kicks ass. 
The film adaptation, starring the buxom and bored Angelina Jolie, is
nobody's dream.  It's billed as an action fantasy, but possesses no
physical excitement or wonder.  OK, maybe some wonder, as in, "I wonder
how Paramount actually feels about this film."
Even the teen hormones that live in all us guys are squashed by this
one.  Jolie, trying to play our heroine Lady Lara Croft as sexy and
supercool, just looks mildly amused by the goings-on.  I half expected
her to check her watch while on camera, searching for lunch or a better
project.  [Never underestimate crafty film editing. -Ed.]
And it wouldn't take much to find the latter.  Somewhere in Tomb Raider
exists a loose story about two parts of a single rune that, when joined
together, can cause major cosmic tragedies when the planets next align,
which is soon (this only happens every 5,000 years, so this is
important!)  Lady Lara needs to keep the pieces from the enemy, or hide
them, or something, but since the script is so painfully bad, we can't
really tell or care.
The screenplay, credited to six contributors including director Simon
West (Con Air), is not only uninteresting, it is devoid of any style. 
If the film is supposed to be tongue-in-cheek, where are the laughs?  If
it's got a heavy-duty comic-book slant, where is the camp?  Tomb Raider
takes itself almost too seriously, by a group of writers who reduce the
humor of this movie to Lara's sidekick whining because his ass muscles
fall asleep.  These guys even cast Jon Voight (Jolie's real-life father)
as Lara Croft's father... and then make absolutely no reference to the
in-joke.  Talk about a lost opportunity to add some fun and levity.
At least you'd figure the shoot-em-up sequences would make up for the
lack of an entertaining script.  Not so.  Save for a somewhat creative
showdown during the finale, this dud's got your standard running,
jumping, and gunplay, lifted from better movies you've already seen. 
The fight choreography is so tired that Lara appears to be rehearsing
for some off-screen gymnastics event.
And while you're watching the action, be careful!  The filmmakers
believe you might not be sure something cool is just about to happen. 
To help you along, West provides two hints: 1) The film is in slow
motion, and 2) There's something resembling techno music in the
soundtrack.  Of course, the slo-mo is more reminiscent of a Billy Joel
video than The Matrix, and the music sounds like your Mom's techno,
generic and palatable enough to be in a movie commercial or an elevator,
rather than in a feature film (funny, considering West began directing
commercials).
If it's action with zip and spice you're looking for, try the  at least
passable Mummy Returns.  If it's just a hot babe wearing a closet-full
of tight shirts, this movie just might do.  But if it's Tomb Raider you
really want, keep your Playstation plugged in.
Director: Simon West
Producer: Lawrence Gordon, Lloyd Levin, Colin Wilson
Writer: Patrick Massett, Simon West, John Zinman
Starring: Angelina Jolie, Daniel Craig, Leslie Phillips, Mark Collie,
Rachel Appleton, Chris Barrie, Iain Glen, Julian Rhind-Tutt, Noah
Taylor, Jon Voight
http://www.tombraidermovie.com/splash_frames.html
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Tape (2001)
While the film world awaits what sounds like a daring experiment from
director Richard Linklater -- the animated Waking Life, coming in
October -- the filmmaker attempts to hold us over with Tape, a failure
of a low-budget project if ever there was one.  The movie is shot on
video and confined to a single motel room, for the entirety of its
real-time, 84-minute length.  With such restrictive parameters
self-imposed on a feature, success really must lie in creative
direction, acting power, and a solid screenplay.  All three are
non-existent here.
Tape is based on a play by Stephen Belber, and the playwright
contributes the clunky script, full of obvious dialogue and silly
posturing.  With one strike already against them, the experienced, name
cast (Hawke, Leonard, and Thurman) then take the problem a step further,
apparently not realizing that performances need to be taken down a notch
on video, as the medium tends to overexpose every movement and moment. 
(While Thurman's performance is good, the trio need to watch Brad
Anderson's Session 9 for a good example of subtle acting on video.)
Hawke, Linklater's Before Sunrise star, is Vince, a manipulative,
possibly violent drug dealer who's reuniting with Leonard's Johnny, ten
years after their questionable friendship in high school.  Johnny is in
town to premiere his first film in a local festival, and they convene in
Vince's seedy, low-key motel room.
Through some poorly delivered dialogue -- although much of it can't be
saved from the page anyway -- we learn of Vince's problematic tendencies
and Johnny's existence as a self-proclaimed goody-two-shoes, high on
moral fiber and good intentions.  When Vince pushes Johnny's buttons in
just the right way, a revelation surfaces, steeped in jealousy and
revenge.  Fellow classmate Thurman is then thrown into the mix, as is,
unfortunately for her, the motel room.
It must be quite a challenge adapting a stage play to the screen, as
many plays can be painfully static in comparison to the cinematic
rhythms of a film.  One would think that camera movement and placement
could truly turn a "stagy" setup into a visually intriguing film
(Lumet's Deathtrap comes to mind, as do the warehouse scenes in
Tarantino's Reservoir Dogs).  So it's quite a disappointment to see
Linklater's direction of Tape alternate between being stale and cliché.
When he's not spending too much time sitting on one shot -- trying to be
kind of video "underground", I guess -- he's pulling off annoying swish
pans between Hawke and Leonard while they argue, trying way too hard to
force some urgency.
Hawke's performance reeks of exaggeration, and Leonard would appear to
be a plain-old bad actor.  He barely gets into the role, looking as if
he were auditioning for the school play.  The plaintive, wimpy,
holier-than-thou stance that he applies to Johnny comes off as being not
only annoying, but wholly stilted.  I kept hoping for Vince to sock John
in the face, but alas, it never happens.
Things perk up when Uma Thurman's Amy joins the fray, not only because
it highlights the smartest points of the script, but because Thurman's
performance is the richest of the three.  She plays it naďve,
mysterious, and collected, and it helps push through the finale -- a
finale which Linklater and Belber surely think is cooler than it
actually is.
Reviewed as part of our 2001 Boston Film Festival coverage (feature
story coming soon).
Director: Richard Linklater
Producer: Alexis Alexanian, Anne Walker-McBay, Gary Winick
Writer: Stephen Belber
Starring: Ethan Hawke, Robert Sean Leonard, Uma Thurman
http://www.lionsgate-ent.com/dnm/profile.html?pid=IN-L-00053
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for You Can Count on Me (2000)
You Can Count on Me is a film that, in true Sundance form, mixes the
familiar with the unexpected.  The Best Dramatic Film winner from this
year's festival has some actors we've seen before (including Matthew
Broderick) and some traditional storylines (single Mom's troubles, loner
returns to hometown), but first-time writer-director Ken Lonergan adds
just enough unpredictable dialogue and creativity to make this movie the
real deal.
The single Mom is Sammy (Laura Linney), an organized bank loan officer
living in her small-town childhood home.  The loner is her scraggly
brother Terry (Mark Ruffalo), a troubled wanderer coming back to ask
Sammy for cash.  And while this seems pretty basic from the outset,
Lonergan has some smart ideas up his sleeve.
Most notable is the way he uses the character Rudy, Sammy's 8-year old
son, a kid utilized by Lonergan as well as any writer has ever used a
child, avoiding action that seems cutesy or contrived.  Sammy would love
for Terry to be a strong male influence on Rudy while he's visiting, but
she isn't sure she trusts him.
Rudy (played by 11-year old Rory Culkin -- yes, another Culkin),
connects with Terry but is smart enough to know that his uncle's not the
brightest guy in the world.  Their dialogue is the highlight of the
movie; there hasn't been such straight talk between two guys in a film
in a long time.  In essence, Lonergan has written Rudy as a young boy
that has enough understanding to take people as they are.
Alas, Sammy should be so smart.  She tries to anchor Terry, give him
home, give him purpose -- but maybe she needs all of the above as well. 
The director never misses the opportunity to show the dichotomy and the
irony between the two siblings, but thankfully doesn't beat us over the
head with it.
Lonergan, who previously wrote The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle,
has put together a killer cast to take advantage of his fine script. 
Linney (The Truman Show) gets a once-in-a-career chance to shine, giving
Sammy the delicate balance between saint and whore.  Ruffalo and young
Culkin are just great -- both are as meaningful and natural as it gets
-- and the aforementioned Broderick admirably takes a lesser role as
Sammy's new boss, a man who's got troubles of his own.
You Can Count On Me is directed and edited with a refreshing efficiency,
with Lonergan preferring to simply move along to the next scene if you
already know how this one will end.  We don't need to see two people
stare at each other, start making out, and then jump into bed.  Lonergan
gives us the stare, and then cuts to the bed after the sex is over.  It
provides a nice dose of surprise and complexity throughout the movie.
The movie's dramatic flavor is occasionally peppered with some quality
laughs, in a healthy combination that also keeps the film moving, which
is good.  But in the most unorthodox move of all, You Can Count On Me
really doesn't have any dramatic climax, no grand moment of epiphany. 
It's just an intelligent look into a connected set of lives, in which a
neatly-tied ending isn't as important as the details that make up each
day.
Director: Ken Lonergan
Producers: Barbara De Fina, John N. Hart, Larry Meistrich, Jeffrey Sharp
Writer: Ken Lonergan
Starring:  Laura Linney, Mark Ruffalo, Rory Culkin, Matthew Broderick,
Jon Tenney, J. Smith-Cameron, Ken Lonergan
http://www.youcancountonmemovie.com/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Me & Isaac Newton (1999)
Michael Apted, master of the forward-thinking 7 Up series (42 Up has
just been released on video), now offers up a documentary about
ambitious people like himself.  Really ambitious people.
Apted's Me & Isaac Newton brings us inside seven groundbreaking
scientific minds.  We get to know their studies, and we also get to know
them.  But what begins as fascinating documentary greatness fizzles down
to a lengthy, anti-climactic ending.  Insert your own Big Bang joke
here.
The film starts off reflecting Apted's skill as a storyteller and
filmmaker, with an almost wondrous feel to the introduction.  The seven
masterminds explain why they are so eager -- practically desperate -- to
figure out the world.  Meanwhile, appropriate imagery slowly fills the
screen -- a cool, blue universe or a shaking collection of cells, ironic
combinations of the literal and abstract.
Since the scientists interviewed are so diverse in their work, they're
worth mentioning: a nuclear physicist searching for dimensions beyond
the third; a Nobel Prize-winning pharmaceutical chemist; a primatologist
who visited Madagascar and never left; a robotics expert; an Indian man
creating clean drinking water in third-world areas; a cognitive
scientist figuring out how and why we use verbal language; and a leading
authority in the study of cancer.  Man, you could get smart just
standing near these people.
In getting them to the big screen, Apted does a couple of things right:
first, he works within a strong formula, helpful due to the size of the
group (the same size as his 1997 companion film, Inspirations).  First
we learn of the participants' childhoods and early interests (some
stories are a hoot), and we then get a glimpse into their work and the
hopes that have sprung from them.  Second, Apted has really picked the
right people for us to meet.  At least three of them (the physicist,
primatologist, and water chemist) could easily have had substantial,
individual biographies made just about them.
But at a point late in the film, Me & Isaac Newton succumbs to that
liability of all documentaries: it has a filmmaker that appears too
close to the subject matter.  The result, as it seems here, is that
Apted doesn't know when to stop, forgetting that you can give too much
of a good thing.  In my opinion, the scientists provide nothing too
revealing after about 90 minutes, and the movie runs about 20 minutes
beyond that.
But that first hour-and-a-half makes for a classic documentary.  The
subject matter is vital, the people involved are smart, easy to listen
to, and full of energy, and the director carefully weaves the
first-person stories to highlight their variety, similarities, and
originality.  There were at least three times during the film where I
found a revelation or idea to be just incredible.
Why can't we break through to the 10th dimension?  How come we learn
language in a few years, and not thirty minutes?  What is the next
disease to be conquered?  Apted's subjects ask these questions, and
prepare to answer them like very few people in the world.  But why are
they doing so on the big screen?  The film's run is very limited, so one
can assume that the motive is Oscar-driven, and once the movie loses its
punch toward the end, that statue seems unlikely.
For all its meaningful, insightful knowledge, Me & Isaac Newton doesn't
have to be seen in a theater.  I would have been just as happy seeing it
on PBS or Discovery.
Director: Michael Apted
Producer: Jody Patton
Starring:  Gertrude Elion, Ashok Gadgil, Michio Kaku, Maja Mataric,
Steven Pinker, Karol Sikora, Patricia Wright
http://www.clearblueskyfilms.com/documentaries/main/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Life as a House (2001)
The good news for George, a middle-aged, washed up architect, is that an
enormous life change has motivated him to connect with his horrible
teenage son and build a house by the ocean.  The bad news is that the
change is terminal cancer.  The good news for moviegoers is that Irwin
Winkler's Life As A House is filled with sharp, solid acting, a decent,
sometimes harsh, script, and a few surprises.  The bad news is that
anything worth seeing here lives within an uneven sap of a film, unable
to break free from the traditional Hollywood devices.
But much of Life As A House is completely watchable.  Mark Andrus's
script (he's written As Good As It Gets and the underrated, rarely seen
Late For Dinner) appears cookie-cutter: he gives us the lazy, lonely,
eccentric nobody (Kevin Kline); his estranged family, including
beautiful ex-wife (Kristin Scott Thomas) and alienated teen (Hayden
Christensen); and his predictably uptight neighbors, pissed off that his
ramshackle of a house has stood in their beautiful oceanside
neighborhood for twenty years.
But Andrus gives the telling a hard edge from the get-go, which keeps
Life As A House interesting in the first act.  Kline, who we're used to
seeing as generally kind-hearted, blurts to neighbor Mary Steenburgen,
"How far did you just have to stick your head out the window in order to
see my dick?!" after he uses God's ocean as his own personal
receptacle.  In the same introduction, George's son Sam (Christensen,
soon appearing as a little-known character called Anakin Skywalker),
wearing heavy eye makeup, sniffs glue, applies a noose, and attempts to
pleasure himself.  This is stuff I'd expect from David O. Russell (Three
Kings), not Irwin Winkler (The Net).
Life As A House goes south, however, as soon as young Sam, softens for
his Dad. When George, upon getting the news of his impending demise,
decides to replace the old shack, he forces Sam to spend the summer with
him.  The fact that he's erecting a house at the same time he wants to
build a relationship with his son, and reconstruct his emotional
architecture as well, is painfully blatant.  At the very least, however,
Andrus's script is smart enough to make mention of the parallel: Sam, in
being asked to help knock down the house says to George, "You're just
trying to tear down your father."  George's reply: "You should try it." 
[See also the title of the film... -Ed.]
Andrus's reputation for good dialogue, and there is some above-average
stuff here, must have convinced some name actors to take wasted, bit
parts.  Steenburgen, Scott Bakula, Jamey Sheridan, and Sam Robards
could've probably taken meatier, more meaningful roles elsewhere (even
if Steenburgen does get to show off her finely-aged body).
And as competently good as Kline's and Christensen's performances are,
(and I believe Christensen is a real find), they're overrun by
poorly-timed, heart-tugging music, and choppy direction (will somebody
please stop the overuse of slow-motion!?).  Winkler alternates between
the standard camera setup you've seen before, and a feigned attempt at
Altmanesque, herky-jerky "verité."  It's messy.
There are a few sequences -- one in particular has a variety of
characters jumping into each other's beds -- that definitely raise
eyebrows and keep the proceedings interesting.  But for every leap into
exciting waves of edgier content, there are too many jumps into the
giant movie ocean of mediocrity.
Reviewed as part of our Boston Film Festival coverage (feature story
coming soon).
Director: Irwin Winkler
Producer: Rob Cowan, Irwin Winkler
Writer: Mark Andrus
Starring: Kevin Kline, Kristin Scott Thomas, Hayden Christensen, Mary
Steenburgen, Jamey Sheridan, Jena Malone, Sam Robards, Scott Bakula
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
