Authors
Mun Siong Yoong
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Leaving Las Vegas (1995)
Directed by: Mike Figgis
Written by: Mike Figgis, John O' Brien (novel)
Produced by: Initial productions / Lumiere Pictures / MGM-UA
Cast: Nicolas Cage (Ben), Elisabeth Shue (Sera), Julian Sands (Yuri).
Rating: ***1/2 out of *****
LOVE AND LIQUOR SWIRL IN A MADLY INTOXICATING CONCOCTION OF TRAGIC ROMANCE
This movie's a sure-fire hit for romantic maniac-depressives. It's
bleak, its leads do not philosophize from moralistic high stools and
its ending does not pander to the Disney crowds. Enjoying yourself
already, Bob?
Ben Sanderson (Nicolas Cage) is a previous human being who's present
existence is completely fuelled by alcohol. Alcohol to him is more
consuming than the air he breathes, more important than the family he
no longer has and more crucial than the Hollywood screenwriting job
from which he has just been fired. In a flash of insight while in one
of his rare sober moments, he recognises that there is no way out of
his longdrawn downward spiral. Hence, he burns all his belongings,
sells all his assets and then heads for the Las Vegas, capital of
self-loathing, with the specific intention of drinking himself to the
grave.
At Vegas, he almost runs down a streetwalker named Sera (Elisabeth
Shue), before promptly suggesting she keep him company for the night,
"no sex please I'm drunk", for a princely sum of $500. Henceforth, the
two social marginals hang on to each other with a poignantly warped
sense of acceptance for each other. She accepts the fact that there is
no recourse for the deathlock that alcohol has on him, while he
understands that prostitution is just a job.
After that night, she invites him to move in with her, vodka
and all, so that she might feed off whatever emotional morsels he has
to offer. In the meanwhile, she steers the both of them on the course
with as much semblence of a normal couple as she can possibly manage.
But as it is with any realtionship whose demands on both partners
increase with time, life for them is terrible difficult to steer under
the haze of alcohol on one hand and with the inconvenient working 
hours
on the other.
Much credit must go to director-screenwriter Mike Figgis (Stormy
Monday, Internal Affairs) for his screen adaptation of author John
O'Brian's (who killed himself a couple of weeks after clinching the
film deal) autobiography. Despite the melodramatic pote ntial of the
script, his cast never once wallows in the mires of self-pity but
instead, goes about trying to manage their damaged lives as best as
they can. Cage throws in much sincerity into his Oscar deserving role,
especially at the oddly endearing mom ents when his likable character
spews gems like "Looks like I'm with the right girl." when Shue
presents him with a silverflask as a gift.
Still, one suspects that the sentiments of the film are somewhat
exploited during the pervasive nights of quiet sobriety; with the
heavy cloak of nighttime jazz inspired blues courtesy of the ever cool
sounding Sting. That aside, it is also worthwhile not ing that the
gritty effects via Super 16 film stock on hand held cameras contribute
imensely to the film's sense of quiet, lean unsettledness.


Title
Review for Feng yue (1996)
LES LIASONS DANGEREUSES GOES EAST BY WAY OF CHEN KAIGE.
In his third outing as a scriptwriter, following LIFE ON A STRING
(Bian Zou Bian Chang, 1991) and the highly acclaimed YELLOW EARTH
(Huang Tudi, 1994), Chen returns to his favoured niche of painting the
microcosm of life at the dawn of the new Chinese Rep ublic.
It is the year 1911, and Zhongliang (Leslie Cheung) naively
comes under the roof of the feudal Pang household at the invitation of
his married sister Xiuyi (He Saifei) while the rest of China is
experiencing political turmoil . However, it is not long before he is
subjected to a terrifying period of psychological and near-incestuous
assault under the hands of his opium addicted brother-in-law.
He subsequently flees for the glitzy, cabaret world of Shanghai in the
Roaring 20s where he comes under the tutelage of a secret society
gangster (Xie Tian). Here, Zhongliang plys his trade as a thief of
hearts, offering amour on the cheap to lone ly tai tais before
accomplices step in and extort money at the appropriate moment.
Back at the Pang household where he had left a decade ago, an overdose
of opium has rendered Zhongliang's brother-in-law brain-dead, and the
family moves to encamp the latter's younger sister Ruyi (Gong Li) as
head of the household, with distant cousin Du anwu (Kevin Lin) as her
aide.
The trouble starts when Zhongliang's boss decides to use him to seduce
Ruyi so as to gain the Pang estate (a treasure-filled mansion artfully
placed in a large water lily encrusted lake in Suzhou).
>From whence the plots splits into a confusing dichotomy of emotional
revelations. Zhongliang returns to the house to carry out his
directives and exorcise personal demons but inevitably gets his
emotions mixed up with the job at hand. The besotted victim, Ruyi runs
into a conflict of emotions with having to shoulder the manly task of
running the household under the sexist glances of family elders on one
hand and discovering her sexual awakening after a lifetime of societal
isolation on the other.
Along the way, numerous subplots weave themselves into the main
storyline, with constant flashbacks into Zhongliang's tortured
childhood and his relationship with his scheming sister, now a Pang
dependant waiting for her ride into oblivion.
These nuggets of information, while courageous in their attempt to
flesh out the emotional capacities of the leads, has a tendency to go
into stylised, emotional overdrive and eventually serves only to
diffuse the focus of the film. All fingers point to t he fact Chen
seems rather guilty of participating in sentimental indulgence for the
sake of leaving his thumprint in the movie. Still, both leads Cheung
and Gong Li don't quite hedge up enough sincerity to convince as
emotionally manipulated victims.
While one cannot argue with the sumptousness of the sets and costumes
nor contest the cinematographical techniques of Du Kefung (from Wong
Kar Wai's FALLEN ANGEL), one cannot help but wonder if Chen
scripwriting abilities would be more easily swallowed if there was a
more determined effort on Chen's part to shoot the movie from a
realist's perspective.

