Authors
Fox Davidson
Number of Reviews
10

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
  From the moment I saw trailers for Lost in Space, I knew I would probably
like it. I am a junky when it comes to `90s science fiction, especially Star
Trek and The X-Files.  Now, after watching the DVD of Lost in Space, I can say
that none of my expectations for the film were bashed.  Okay, Space is not a
very good film, but it kept me entertained for two hours.
  This is the film that knocked Titanic off the top spot on the box office
charts earlier last year.  The movie adaptation of the schlocky `60s television
series.  The show was a cheesy bore.  The movie version is the same thing, but,
with lively visuals and a nice cast.
   It's amazing what special effects can do for a film; Space is a mighty
achievement in brain candy.  The story tells of the (space) family Robinson,
who's goal is to travel to a distant planet (I forget the name) to make sure it
can be colonized, for Earth will not last two more years, in the year 2043. 
This is the only movie to feature a whole family, even the 10-year old kid, as
scientists and astronauts.  When the Robinsons launch to space, a scientist
(Gary Oldman), who was hiding in the ship's bowels, takes over the controls,
while the family are in hibernation, and accidentally send the ship to a
different galaxy through some space-gate or whatnot.
  Lost in Space suffers from the usual Hollywood cliches and over the top
action scenes that completely destroyed films like Armageddon and Con Air. 
But, it does have a nice sense of adventure not found in many sci-fi movies
anymore.  But, I have seen a number of better sci-fi films within the past two
years, including The X-Files, Star Trek: Insurrection, Event Horizon, and
Sphere.  Plus, the movie kept switching from kid-friendly fluff to scary
monster flick.
  The DVD features a number of fascinating tidbits, including a music video
(for the annoying song that plays during the end credits), original cast
interviews, a director commentary, and special effects featurette.  However, I
was very disappointed with the soundtrack.  Low and unspectacular.

Title
Review for Butcher Boy, The (1997)
  Neil Jordan's The Butcher Boy is set in the early 1960s, Ireland.  It tells
the sad tale of a repressed young lad whose childhood was anything but sane. 
The lad is Francie Brady (played excellently by Eamonn Owens), and part of his
sanity that goes down with him throughout the film must be given in large
thanks to his alcoholic father, Da (the always electric, and Jordan regular,
Stephen Rea).
  The movie starts out with Francie narrating the movie.  In the a small town
in western Ireland, all of the world is feeling the affects of nuclear war, the
Cuban missle crisis, and the scary thought that soon all of live will parish. 
But, these things don't stop Francie from becoming what he becomes.  
  His father bashes the television set with his prised trumphet, his mother is
on the verge of suicide, and, eventually ends up in a mental hospital when she
has a "breakdown."  All this is soaked into Francie and he plays them out
double.  No wonder Mrs. Nugent (Fiona Shaw), his archenemy and mother of a
young boy he detests, dislikes the lad so much.  When her two brothers scare
Francie to leave their nephew alone, Francie doesn't take to kind of it and
breaks into the Nugent home and completely fouls it.
  Eventually, Francie is sent to a bording school for boys, where he is
befriended by the Virgin Mary (Sinaed O'Conner).  Is he one of the three
children picked by God as told to him by one of the priests (Milo O'Shea) who
work at the school?  The same priest who enjoys dressing Francie in girl's
clothes and masturbating during his private sessions with the lad.
  Francie is sent home after some time at the school, and gets a job at a
butcher shop, where they slaughter pigs.  Soon, at the climax, when all these
events cluster inside Francie, a hidious murder is commiteed.  
  Butcher Boy is a masterpiece of filmmaking, and Neil Jordan's finest moment. 
I can't think of another movie that was so dark, depressing, sad, yet funny all
at the same time.  Yes, this black comedy is sometimes hilarious.  13-year-old
Owens gives a wonderful performance as Francie, which got him a mention at the
Berlin Film Festival, and, won Jordan a best director Silver Bear award.
  I cared for a lot of the characters in Butcher Boy, even the mean Francie.  I
liked the way Mrs. Nugent refered to him as a pig, and, when Francie comes to
do the evil deed at the end, uses tools involved with pig slaughtering.  And I
liked the dream Francie had about a nuclear bomb destroying his town, with only
him and his best friend, Joe (Alan Boyle ) alive to see the aftermath.
  Butcher Boy has been refered to Stanley Kubrick's nasty A Clockwork Orange, a
film I could never get.  Jordon's film is notheing of the type.  Aside from its
grisliness, it has meaning and depth, and one hell of a cast.

Title
Review for Urban Legend (1998)
  Bing, bang boom!  Scream, whimper, cry!  Sudden noise, impending doom, turn
around, it's only your friend, the practical joker.  This could be the premises
for the new-to-video Urban Legend, a random Scream impersonator that is
strikingly nice to look at, but not very stimulating to talk about.
  The film, director by new comer Jamie Blanks, stars Alicia Witt (my pick for
the best leading female in a horror film since Neve Campbell) as the ominous
Scream Queen, ready to scream her lungs out, as she does quite often.  When a
young women is murdered not far from the college where she attends, she, along
with the snotty school paper reporter Jared Letto and her dumb-as-doornails
friends (one a predictable victim for the masked slasher, she is the host of a
college radio talk show dedicated to sex - what a surprise!), form the idea
that the killer is killing in the forms of urban legends.
  Urban Legend is so clearly a bluntant rip-off of Wes Craven, that I couldn't
help but think about Scream (and its superior sequel) while watching this film.
 Various shots in the new film almost copy the ones in Scream, that Legend's
major drawing point is, also, its draw back, lacking any sense of originality,
so even when the killer is identified, it is SO original, it was just silly.
  I did, however, like the way Blanks filmed the chase scenes.  One of these
sequences features a breathtaking fall and several close-calls with a swinging
ax.  We haven't seen an ax as the main weapon in a horror film since the Friday
the 13th movies.  There are also other choices of maiming, such as hanging with
a rope, and car smashing.
  Urban Legend is much better than Disturbing Behavior (the lackluster
anti-Stepford Wives with Dawson's Creek It Girl Katie Holmes), but, lacks the
recent Halloween: H2O's depth and frightning stalk-and-dice theme.  
  The DVD of Legend is very good.  It contains the original theatrical trailer,
cast bios, and an interesting Behind-the-Scenes featurette, which was more fun
than the actual movie.

Title
Review for Antz (1998)
  Their little, smart, and hard working.  They have many of the characteristics
of humans.  They're...Ugly!  I watched this movie expecting cute, wide-eyed
Disney-esque ants on the screen.  Instead, I got vomit-colored, big-mouthed,
dwarf-mutant ants running amoke.  Not only that, they happened to have the same
voices as major Hollywood stars, including Woody Allen and Sharon Stone. 
Someone save me from a sequel!
  The film begins with Z (Allen) tired of being a worker all his life for the
colony he lives at.  The colony is run by a King and Queen, and their princess
daughter, Bala (Stone).  The first 10 minutes or so of Antz is Z moaning and
groaning over how pathetic he is and that he was never able to lift more than
ten times his own body weight.  Oh brother.  If I wanted to listen to Woody
Allen complain, I would have rented Hannah and Her Sisters (one of Allen's
lesser films).
  Z learns of a place in the outside world known as Insectopia, a land where
all insects can run free.  Z wants to go, but not before trading places with
his buddy (voice supplie by Sly Stallone), who is a cadat in an military-type
army, ready to go to war with a bunch of alien-looking termits.
  One day, Z and Bala are accidentally brought to the outside world, where Z
insists they search for Insectopia, but Bala wants to go home.  This is a
perfect setup for the Hollywood man-and-women trapped on a desert island,
fighting all the time senario.  You know what I mean.  We just saw it with
Harrison Ford and Anne Heche in Six Days, Seven Nights.  Except, this time, it
features to talking ants with the voices of Allen and Stone.  
  I was very disappointed with Antz.  I heard some good words of the movie,
but, sadly, I don't think I'll be passing any of those said words along to my
friends. DreamWorks' turn into the all computer animation territory dominated
by the superior Toy Story is a second-rate voiced, written episode worthy of a
slot in the WB Saturday morning kid scetch.
  The DVD of Antz is very nice.  The picture is lush and brimming with
beautiful colors.  Special features are a trailer.  

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
  Space.  It is the unforeseen.  The vastness of time.  The whole of life.  It
is mysterious and wonderful.  No wonder such cult classics as Star Trek and V
were so popular when aired on television in the `60s and `80s.  Those shows
revolutionized the way we look at space,  then called 'Outer' space.  People
traveling at great speeds to the stars and distant planets.  Every young boy's
dream.  Of course, in 1977, Star Wars pretty much put the whole space thing
into overdrive.  A black-hole was created around science fiction films.  Every
one was sucked into cliche-ridden, unforgettable trash.  Star Wars and Star
Trek were both played out to the hilt with countless imitations.  Aside from a
few successful entries (Star Trek II, III, IV, VII, VIII, IX, the fantasticly
fun Return of the Jedi, and horrifyingly stylish Event Horizon), sci-fi films
have, well, sucked.  Until now.
  Chris Carter, writter and creater of The X-Files (and the now-classic TV
series) is responsible for the sheer brilliance that engulfs X-Files into a
dark, sexy, underworld of paranoia.  Agent Fox Mulder (David Duchovny), always
looking to the sky for answers unknown to science, and Agent Dana Scully
(Gillian Anderson), always looking to science for the answers while rolling her
eyes at the sky's unlimited possibilities, are two of the smartest characters
to grace the silver screen since Indiana Jones and his father.  These agents
work on mysterious cases known as X-files, dealing with the paranormal
(bigfoot, the Loch Ness monster, aliens).  This time, it is the cover-up of an
alien virus which has been dormant on our planet since the ice age that has
Mulder ticked.  Just why is the government hiding the fact that a little boy
(Lucas Black) was killed by some mysterious oil in North Texas?  Easy.  So
they, along with the aliens, can take over the world.  "These men have been
secretly negotiating a planned armageddon" says the shadowy Dr. Kurtsweil
(Martin Landau).
  When this information, along with the discovery that the bodies found in the
aftermath of the bombing of a Dallas building weren't killed by the explosion,
but by an unknown massive infection, including the intended suicide of a highly
ranked FBI agent (Terry O'Quinn), this sets Mulder and Scully to the truth, if
they can find it.  
  Okay, so X-Files doesn't really deal with space.  The action takes place on
Earth, and there are no ray guns or laser beams.  But, this movie is so smart
and fascinating, I totally forgot about all that nonsense, since the thought of
an unknown virus stalking this planet and everyone on it and the government
behind it is such a nifty idea, and scary.
  Mulder and Scully are likely to find the truth (I won't tell if they do, or
if they will have to wait for the sequel, do out in theathers in summer 2000,
after the show ends, appropriately titled Invasion), but, getting there is half
the fun, for us, the audience, anyways.  We movie lovers are use to the
mindless sci-fi mumbo jumbo I was refering to earlier.  But, with X-Files
aboard, space is finally becoming a clearer frontier, full of great things to
come.

Title
Review for Vampires (1998)
  Wow, the vampires in Vampires are some slick cats!  Not only do that dress
like they just got sucked by one of their mates during a fashion show, but they
can leap great lengths and rip apart a man's abdomen with one hand, in graphic,
gory manner.  Well, I guess if a man's chest is ripped open, it would be
bloody, but, showing it so gratuitously is so unlike John Carpenter.
  That is one of the problems with his new film, Vampires, based on the novel
Vampire$ by, um, some guy.  The new bite-and-suck film is so violent, it takes
away from the stylishness that Carpenter puts on the accent of the film.  
  James Woods stars as Jack Crow, a vampire slayer.  His buddy (played by
Daniel Baldwin) is a sleaze who takes the likings to a hooker who is bitten by
the master (Thomas Ian Griffith).  That hooker is played by Sheryl Lee, and she
is pretty unnecessary throughout the rest of the movie.  She's just there for
some nude scenes, another spot that is unlike Carpenter.
  Vampires is easy on cheap thrills and gore, but, tough on plot and
sensibility.  Too bad.  This could have been a great film.  Halloween is
probably the best horror film around.  I can't believe it is directed by the
same guy!
  Carpenter has made some good film in the `90s.  In The Mouth of Madness was a
scary, intelligent film that was as thought provoking as mind boggling.  
  The DVD of Vampires is very good.  The trailer is awesome (music supplied by
Marilyn Manson) and the sound is dynamic!  Add this to your collection, but,
only for the sound and spectacular picture quality.

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
  In one of the most hyped films of the past decade, Armageddon is a 
mega-bust.  A disaster flick that is a disaster on every level.  Not even 
Bruce Willis can save this expensive, incoherent, derivative mess.
  Following in the superior Deep Impact's heels, Armageddon tells the mudding 
tale of an asteroid the size of Texas on a collision course with Earth.  The 
film fails to mention how this particular hunk of space rock was detected by 
NASA, or even the inept script-hole that shows a U.S. spacecraft being 
obliterated in orbit by a comet shower, followed by the destruction of 
Manhattan. Oops.  NASA couldn't see that?  I guess when you are Billy Bob 
Thornton (playing a NASA official), you kinda wonder how such a wonderful 
actor as yourself is reduced to rubish like Armageddon.
  Willis plays Harry Stamper, "the world's best oil driller," who is called 
into action (just like it Die Hard, Mercury Rising, Die Hard 2!).  I have no 
idea why Harry, and his retarted group of drillers, are called for a job that 
if failed, would mean the end of life as we know it.  I guess it would seem 
cooler to have a bunch of dudes rescuing us from complete death and 
destruction than some smart, well-mannered scientist-cume-Amercian hero.
  The DVD of the movie is okay.  It contains a trailer, I believe a 
commentary (I was so looking forward to taking this disc out of my machine, I 
didn't notice), and some other mumbo jumbo.  The soundtrack is wide and good, 
but, like the cast, this disc is just worthless.

Title
Review for Waterboy, The (1998)
  Adam Sandler is the luckiest man on earth.  After leaving Saturday Night
Live, he descended into the movie business. Such movies as the exquisite
Bulletproof with Damon Waynes, the classy Billy Madison, and, the sensationally
dead Happy Gilmore.
  In 1998, Sandler starred in The Wedding Singer, a clunker of a movie that was
a surprise hit with pubescent teen boys.  Now, riding on the success of that
movie, along comes The Waterboy, which isn't as annoying as Gilmore or Madison,
but, not as refreshing and funny as it wants to be. 
  Sandler plays 31-year-old Bobby Boucher, a waterboy for a local football team
in the swamps of Louisiana.  He lives with his mama (Kathy Bates, who saves the
movie from complete boredom), and has never gone to school.  But, as the coach
(Henry Winkler) for the football team finds out, Bobby has a gift.  When Bobby
concentrates hard enough, he can see the faces of all the people who made fun
of him through his life, and this sets him off, knocking down the opposite team
mate so hard, the can't get up.  Think Forrest Gump on steroids.
  The Waterboy, directed by Frank Coraci, is too lame-brained for most adults,
yet, too filled with blue humor for kids, who will be the only ones to like
this utter fiasco.  It will probably be the funniest thing for a 12-year-old,
while, at the same time, the perfect spot to snooze for his parents.
  Aside from Bates being a highlight, Winkler also makes for a couple of smiles
here and there, especially when he shows Bobby a tatoo on his ass (just the
look on Sandler's face is worth sitting through the soggy 30 minutes that
proceed it). I also liked the fact the Winkler's character turns out to be sort
of gay.  Fairuza Bulk is also a plus, as Bobby's wannabe girlfriend.  She
offers so much spunk and energy to a small, dead-weight role that her character
is somewhat more interesting than Sandler's.
  The DVD of Waterboy is nice.  The soundtrack is loud and crisp, while the
special features are mediocre. For the Sandler fan, it will be the ultimate
gift.

Title
Review for Edtv (1999)
  I have heard numerous speculations of the new Ron Howard movie, EDtv, as a
copycat of last year's overrated The Truman Show.  Well, having seen EDtv, I
can safely say, it is in no way at all like Truman.  EDtv is funnier and more
fun to watch the cast of talents, including Matthew McConaughy, Jenna Elfman,
Martin Landau, and Ellen DeGeneres.
  McConaughy stars as 31-year-old Ed Pukerny, a video store clerk whose life is
suddenly shot into fame when he is "cast" in his own 24 hour, seven days a week
television show called "ED-TV."  This is the brain-child (I hate that word,
but, oh well) of a TV production company producer (DeGeneres), whose studio has
suffered from lackluster ratings.  "The all-Garden channel is beating us.
People would rather watch soil" she says.
  After a couple of days of ED-TV, Ed becomes a national star, somewhat of a
real star: Being trashed in the tabloids and savaged by media news critics (one
played by Michael Moore, as, himself I think).  But, ED-TV also becomes a
target for his friends who don't particularly like being filmed 24-7. 
Especially Ed's brother's (the always great Woody Harrelson) fiancee, Shari
(Elfman).  And things get really stinky when Ed and Shari fall in love,
unintentionally displaying this to their millions of fans, and Ed's family.
  EDtv is somewhat more believable than Truman Show.  Not that it is likely we
will be seeing a real life Ed Pekurny soon.  But, I can definitely see that
happening faster that Truman's elaborate premise.  Look at The Real World,
however bad it is, it is still basically the same thing.  Truman was a fairly
involving movie, but, not wholely satisfying.  EDtv is very satisfying and
hilarious.  I especially liked the part when Ray, Ed's brother, gets drunk and
spills the beans on his family, everything from his sister being an alcholic to
her husband being a bad lounge singer, all to get a laugh.
  Howard, who also directed the funny Splash, has made a very well-done comedy.
It could also be looked as a satire on TV producers.  Either way, it is a
surprisingly touching, always funny film.

Title
Review for Enemy of the State (1998)
  On the heels of the government conspiracy, Hollywood has been throwing out
thrillers involving one character who knows too much and is one the run left
and right.  In 1995, Sandra Bullock was that character in The Net.  1997, Mel
Gibson was the loon who published conspiracy newsletters in Conspiracy Theory. 
1998, The X-Files hit the big screen with its depiction of alien life being
hidden by evil an government group, The Sydnicate.  Now, Will Smith and madman
producer Jerry Bruckeimer bring their turn of the screw to theaters will Enemy
of the State.  I wish Hollywood would have stopped when the genre was still
good.
  Of course, the only real reason this film was made was because Smith has had
two huge hits in the past two years.  But, oddly, both Independece Day and Men
in Black were huge disappointments, Men in Black being no exception.  Now, in
State, Smith is again cast as the nice guy who saves the world, this time from
a nasty government baddies instead of aliens.
  When a computer hacker discovers a video feed of a high power political
figure assassinated, he is being tracked down by the same assassins.  He flees
his apartment, meets up with good guy lawyer Smith, slips the recorded image (a
disk) into his shopping back, and is killed when mowed down by a truck.  All
that for nothing.  Shame.
  So on, Smith is now on the run, with a former conspiractor (Gene Hackman)
helping him out.  Hackman, looking like a computer geek himself, saves this
film from utter ungliness, which throws in every cliche known to man.  
  And, it doesn't help that State doesn't contain one once of sustained
suspense throughout the film's two hour time length.  Incoherency does not
replace thrills by placing the lead in many situations involving exploding
buildings and roof-top chases.
  Since Enemy of the State is not available on DVD yet, I went and watched
Conspiracy Theory on disc.  I liked the film much better than State.  I also
rewatched The Net on disc.  Yes, I found The Net much more intense than State,
and Theory.  Sandra Bullock's character is so likable, I feared for her life
when in danger.  That never happened in State.
