Authors
Marcus Hsu Sgro
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Peacemaker, The (1997)
Overall evaluation: good enough way to spend a Friday evening
As you probably know, _The Peacemaker_ is about Nicole Kidman and George
Clooney running around the world trying to stop a nuclear terrorist from
blowing up the UN.   Much of the film, though well executed, is cliche
within its genre.  
For instance: many of the scences, espeically with the bad guys, are
filmed "darkly"; the Church in the beginning, the Russian missle storage
area, and the train ride are all filmed with only a minimal light in the
foreground, and dark shinyness in the background.  Of course this is
nothing really new; just the methods which the cinematographer does it in. 
Just like in _Face Off_. Just like in _The Rock_.  Just like in _Crimson
Tide_.  The sun shines brightly whenever the hero and heroine are around
trying to stop the baddies; and the camera picks it up beautifully. 
Audiowise, the bolt and slide action, as well as the safety fumbling of
the character's firearms are quite prominently recorded.  I suppose the
idea is that audieces get scared when they hear things like that they'll
instinctivley start to tremble.  (No, the producers are not trying to be
realistic.  No one can so perfectly manipulate firearms parts;  those
sounds should be pretty quiet; and the actual shot should be literally
deafening in a movie theater). 
The music sounds like a rehash of _Crimson Tide_.  Much of it uses the
same instruments with a similar progression of notes to the previous
picture (though it is much more authorative in the older movie).  _The
Peacemaker_ even uses a soupy men's chorus to create dramatic tension
(again, same as in the older picture, which uses a soupy playing of 
Navy's hymn "Eternal Father" to make a sub dive look impressive).  
Now it may seem that the things I've babbled about above are
supreficialities. But they really are not; the way the picture is filmed,
the way the audio mixed, the way the music put out, are all the primarly
means by which audience feelings and suchforth are manipulated.  Any good
film will play around with those elements well. 
more cliches:
The Russians call each other "tovarish" or comrade (AFAIK, that went out,
even in the Army, after the the Soviet Union fell).  
The bad guys have their own private "professional special forces/SWAT
team" (goons with night vision goggles, "tactical black BDUs", MP5SDs and
laser sights :P )  to commit important acts of terrorism with. 
Everywhere the main characters go, especially their command centers, are
crawling with people rushing saying all sorts of things frantically.
The scriptwriters use lots of fake CNN reports to explain what's going on.
However, despite the fact that I got a sensation of "deja vu" when I saw
the picture, it isn't really a _bad_ film.  The lead characters are OK;
they pretended they knew what they were talking about/doing reasonably
well.  The scenes were reasonably exciting.  All in all, a good popcorn
movie.  
