Authors
Ssg722@aol.com
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Jack Frost (1998)
Just when career-obsessed, hip blues musician Jack Frost
(Michael Keaton) is about to achieve his lifelong dream of success, he
dies in a car wreck, leaving a devastated wife (Kelly Preston) and
young son (Joseph Cross). On the first anniversary of his father's
death, the lonely, still-grieving 12 year-old builds a snowman, just
like he did with his dad, and tops it with his dad's old hat, red
scarf, and gloves. Then, before he falls asleep that night, he plays
the old harmonica his dad gave him, remembering his father's promise:
"If you play this, I will always hear you, no matter where I am."
Magically, father and son are reunited in a way neither thought
possible.  Although loosely based on the children's tune "Frosty the
Snowman," credit director Troy Miller for diluting the heavily
emotional dialogue by allowing the camera to tell the story. So, with
the exception of a few digital shots, the "special effects" are
achieved through an incredible animatron from Jim Henson's Creature
Shop, a snowm an who can win snowball fights, go sledding, and
snow-boarding. Michael Keaton brings a goofy appeal, muttering "It's
bad enough that my ticket got punch but to come back like this is
embarrassing!" While not typical holiday fare, it's a contemporary
fantasy with thoughts to contemplate. For workaholic fathers, "I was
so busy trying to make my mark on the world, I didn't understand you
are my mark on the world." And for kids: "Life is full of setbacks,"
"Everybody deserves a second chance," and "As long as you hold someone
in your heart, you can never lose 'em."  (And don't confuse this "Jack
Frost" with a direct-to-video horror clunker about a vicious killer
snowman.) On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Jack Frost" is a
cool 7, a sentimental story with an icy edge.

Title
Review for Elizabeth (1998)
If President Clinton watched this film, he might find a way out
of his current dilemma using historical precedent. He could simply
declare himself a virgin! That's what Queen Elizabeth I did when her
lover betrayed her. Not only did she repudiate all her previous romps
between the sheets but, according to screenwriter Michael Hirst, she
never indulged in pleasures of the flesh again! Directed by
Dehli-based Shekar Kapur ("Bandit Queen"), this Tudor tale begins with
three Protestants being burned at the stake. If you weren't a
Catholic, that was your fate under zealous Queen Mary I. Mercifully,
after Mary's death in November, 1558, her half-sister Elizabeth,
daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn, was proclaimed Queen of
England. This young girl (Cate Blanchett), returns from exile along
with her childhood sweetheart, Lord Robert Dudley (Joseph Fiennes) to
attend to matters of state - which include her country's bankruptcy,
lack of army, and serious threats from abroad. Her chief advisor
(Richard Attenborough) quickly warns her, "Until you marry and produce
an heir, you will find no security."  But she's not eager to do either
- in fact, she never does, despite proposals from both Spain and
France. Instead, she relies on her dour, enigmatic Master of Spies
(Geoffrey Rush) to guide her from sensual dalliances into developing
her supreme authority, which eventually includes chopping off her red
hair, painting her face dead white, and eschewing men. "How many
people have worshipped and died for this woman?" she muses, gazing at
her inspiration: the Virgin Mary. Filled with incessant intrigue and
boudoir betrayals, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Elizabeth"
is a powerful, pungent 7. Consider this: Queen Elizabeth I bathed only
once a year and even that was considered excessive.

Title
Review for You've Got Mail (1998)
This hip, contemporary remake of the Ernst Lubitsch comedy "The
Shop Around the Corner," which was based on Miklos Laszlo's
"Parfumerie," stars Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan as two booksellers who fall
in love in the age of e-mail. She runs a small children's bookstore on
New York City's Upper West Side, while he's the scion of a huge
superchain which is putting every independent bookstore out of
business. They both buy groceries at Zabars and pick up coffee at
Starbucks, passing each other on the street, but they've never met. He
lives with a hyperactive book editor (Parker Posey) and she lives with
an erudite newspaper columnist (Greg Kinnear). Yet, as they face off
against one another in their professional life, they unwittingly
romance each other, using pseudonyms as they pour out their hearts on
the web. Nora Ephron has cleverly updated the story for the electronic
age, giving the old-fashioned a fresh, new panache. "The Internet
looks infinite," she explains. "But, like a great big city, it's
really a series of villages, full of people who care about similar
things connecting with one another." While Tom Hanks is splendid, his
best bet in the Oscar derby is for "Saving Private Ryan," but isn't it
about time Meg Ryan got an Oscar nomination?  With a captivating
combination of fragility and ferocity, she makes romantic comedy look
so easy. In a supporting role, Jean Stapleton strikes a memory chord
as she sings and plays the piano.  Remember her as Edith Bunker in
TV's "All in the Family," warbling the theme in the opening credits?
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "You've Got Mail" delivers a
first-class, charming 10. What a sparkling, sweet treat! It's the most
romantic movie of the holiday season.
