Authors
Richard Barrett
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Misery (1990)
     Stephen King evidently dislikes writers a great deal.  In THE
SHINING, a playwright gets possessed by a maniacal mansion and tries to
kill his family.  In STAND BY ME, a young writer wanna-be finds a leech
sucking blood from his testicles.  And now, in MISERY, the latest movie
to be adapted from a book of his, a popular romance novelist gets in a
car wreck, and is brutalized by his "Number One Fan" until he agrees to
write the book that she wants him to write.
     The opening scene has Paul Sheldon (played by James Caan),
America's most popular author of dimestore romance books, finishing a
new book, which he has yet to title.  We see him sitting at his
typewriter in a cabin in the woods, typing the final sentence of this
new book.  He obviously is proud of himself for writing this novel.  We
can see a lone cigarette, a single kitchen match, and a bottle of
champagne sitting not 20 feet away from him, and he gladly partakes of
this after penciling "THE END" on the last page of his manuscript.  He
takes this manuscript, puts it in an old leather case, and drives off.
Unfortunately, it is snowing quite heavily, and his car goes off the
road.  Fortunately (or so it seems at the time), a rescuer comes and
pries him out of the wreckage.
     What follows is not a horror movie.  Not really.  What we have is
closer to a comedic treatment of a horror movie, rather like WHEN HARRY
MET SALLY meets THE SHINING.
     Sheldon's "Number One Fan," played by Kathy Bates, turns out to be
a nurse who loves his books - specifically, the only series that he has
written for the last 20 years, a series with a character named Misery
Chastain.  (Sheldon, sick of writing romance fiction, had decided to
kill of the character in the next book, which was about to be released.)
But she is also somewhat of an obsessive - when she finishes the book
containing Misery's death, she calls Sheldon a "murderer" and leaves,
obviously extremely angry.
     Calming down, she tells him that nobody knows that he's with her,
that everybody thinks that he's dead.  And with his legs burdened with
multiple fractures, he cannot walk.  So she forces him to write a new
Misery book - one that brings her back to life.  She forces him to burn
the manuscript of the book he had just finished, which was evidently his
attempt at writing serious fiction.
     In the process of forcing Sheldon to write a new Misery book, she
mutilates, cripples, and drugs him, all the while telling him "I feed
you, clean you, dress you - and still no appreciation for me!"
     Director Rob Reiner does an excellent job of accenting the humor
that was probably very scarce in the original book - a feat which he
also achieved with STAND BY ME.  There are few actual scenes of horror
throughout the movie, merely one or two quite painful scenes that make
you shudder with pain along with the characters.
     The acting is also excellent - Kathy Bates makes her character of
the maniacal nurse from hell quite believable, and also makes quite
evident the unstated fact in the movie that her character was a graduate
of Catholic school.  James Caan, while having a very thankless role, is
able to go from the usual big, tough guys with a soft spot that he
usually plays, to this quiet, superstitious, gentle writer who has to
get tough in order to survive with this woman.
     Complaints: Just how Caan's character gets out of his situation is
never made quite clear - we are shown one gut-wrenching scene, and then
see him far removed from it a minute later.  Frances Sternhagen, who
plays a deputy in the small town where this takes place, appears to be
nothing but a wasted role.
     But this is really nitpicking - the main hate/hate relationship
between Bates and Caan are what count here, and Reiner pulls it off very
smoothly.
