Authors
Frederick Vallaeys
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Twilight (1998)
--------------FABCCB9FB9A2AB93FE5DE43F
Twilight: a Crowd Pleaser, But Not For Young People
If the entire movie was more like its prologue, it would
have been a definite crowd-pleaser for college
audiences. The sexy, comical prologue takes place in
Mexico. There, a teenager named Mel Ames (Reese
Witherspoon), daughter of Hollywood actors Jack and
Catherine Ames (Gene Hackman and Susan
Sarandon), has eloped with her older boyfriend (Liev
Schreiber) to enjoy the pleasures of life. When private
investigator Harry Ross (Paul Newman) finds her and
tries to return her to her parents, he accidentally gets
shot in the leg by Mel.
After that, the movie shifts to the present. Harry has
retired and is in the permanent service of Jack and
Catherine. When he agrees to deliver a mysterious
package for Jack, he discovers what appears to be the
murder of an innocent man. An ex-cop, Harry hasn't
lost his desire to investigate, and he thinks the killing
might be connected to his employer. His only clue is
the fact that Catherine's ex-husband disappeared
under suspicious circumstances right before she
married Jack. From that point, the movie slowly
progresses to uncover some muddled clues. By the
end, the obvious has been exposed.
The members of the cast fit their roles perfectly.
Sarandon, Hackman and Newman are all aging actors
adept at portraying their characters' struggles. Only
Newman seems to have fun with his role as a
divorced, ex-alcoholic and former private investigator.
Newman charmingly portrays his character's revival
after having been thrown in the middle of a murder
mystery. The humor he inserts into his character is the
best part of the film. Sarandon and Hackman are fairly
uninspired, but then again, their characters basically do
nothing more interesting than vegetate.
"Twilight" may sound appealing from the way it is being
marketed, but it is not the type of film many young
people will enjoy. Unlike most of today's movies,
"Twilight" progresses very slowly, without any very
memorable scenes. The dialogue is contemplative and
filled with long moments of silence while Catherine is
playing the piano for Harry.
While this film likely has value for older people, I am
not in a position to appreciate that fact. As a college student,
I can't recommend this film.

Title
Review for Deep Rising (1998)
Imagine "Alien" invading "Titanic" . . . If you think this
might be a fun or interesting combination, "Deep
Rising" will be just your type of film. While it offers
nothing new plotwise, the visual effects are truly
stunning, and the action is nonstop.
There is really nothing to the story of "Deep Rising"
that hasn't been told before. Just like in "Alien," some
people are stuck in a remote location with a seemingly
invincible monster that's picking them off one by one.
As for comparing it to "Titanic," the only similarity is
that the events occur on a really big cruise-ship.
The story begins as the newest and most
state-of-the-art cruise ship sets sail on the South China
Sea. When a traitor from among the crew shuts off all
power, the ship loses its communication systems and
starts floating helplessly on the South China Sea.
Unfortunately for the passengers, the ship stalls right
above the location that is home to a bored sea monster
that needs a new toy.
Shortly after the attack by the sea monster, a band of
gunrunners with the intention of hijacking the ship
arrive on board to find that only three people have
survived the slaughter: the captain (Derrick O'Connor),
the ship's owner (Anthony Heald), and a con woman
named Trillian (Famke Janssen) who was locked up in
the galley because she had tried to rob the vault.
The antagonism between the stereotypical macho
males stranded on the cruise ship is fun to watch; not
only must they all try to survive the monster, but they
must also survive their trigger-happy companions. The
developing love story between tough guy Finnegan
(Treat Williams) and Trillian, the woman who tries to
act as tough as her male counterparts, is perhaps the
most tired part of the film.
Thanks to the spectacular visual effects, "Deep Rising"
rises far above mediocrity. The monster is elaborately
developed and its victims are portrayed in gory detail.
The director wasn't shy about showing the monster in
all its glory, another indication that this film relies on
strong visuals rather than suggestion to frighten its
audience.
In a superb scene, Trillian and Finnigan race a wave
runner through the ship's narrow passages, trying to
escape the clutches of the monster.
While "Deep Rising" relies on a somewhat tired
storyline, the visuals are so exciting that its few
shortcomings did not really matter.

Title
Review for Desperate Measures (1998)
"Desperate Measures," a new film by Barbet
Schroeder starring Andy Garcia and Michael Keaton,
is an action-packed production from start to finish.
While the screenplay is based on an unlikely sequence
of events, the events are coherent enough to form a
solid story that doesn't require desperate measures to
retain the audience's attention.
Frank Connor (Garcia) is a San Francisco police
officer who lives to uphold the law. However, when his
young son Matt (Joseph Cross) is diagnosed with
leukemia, his top priority becomes finding a bone
marrow donor who can save Matt's life.
As it turns out, the only person with DNA suitable for
the transplant is Peter McCabe, a sociopathic killer
who is serving a life sentence (Keaton).
While McCabe appears to consent to the surgery in
order to receive redemption for all his previous crimes,
he really has ulterior motives.
After an ingeniously orchestrated escape from the
operating room, McCabe starts ravaging the hospital,
which happens to be connected to a prison ward via a
pedestrian bridge. While the entire San Francisco
Police Department's goal is to eliminate McCabe as
soon as possible, Connor is actually trying to save him
because bone marrow from a dead man is worthless.
Connor figures that the only way McCabe will survive
is if he helps him escape the hospital. The unlikely
partnership between Connor and McCabe and the
interesting hospital / prison setting are the two elements
that make this film so much fun.
Naturally, these two elements alone do not make an
action movie and even though the scenes in the hospital
include everything ranging from gun-fights to hostage
situations, the movie would not have been complete
without a thrilling car chase.
In one particularly spectacular scene, Connor jumps
his police car over the median on Highway 101 and
has to drive backwards to avoid a collision with a
trailer that is sliding right at him.
The characters in this movie were well developed.
Both the antagonist and protagonist invoke strong
feelings of compassion because so much depends on
their success. Both men's actions are driven by
desperation, as each one is fighting for someone's life.
Both Garcia and Keaton play their respective parts
very convincingly.
"Desperate Measures" is a sensible movie pick if you
are looking for action that is nicely packaged with an
unusual story. Not too bad for a measly
