Authors
Reba M Bandyopadhyay
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Schindler's List (1993)
     I just have to put my two bits in about SCHINDLER'S LIST.  It
moved me so powerfully that I can't keep silent about my
opinions/comments.  I am not normally a profoundly religious person,
but I consider myself to be a good and reasonably observant Jew
(reconstructionist/conservative), but this film produced in me some
*strong* religious feelings.  Apologies to anyone who is in any way
offended by my references to people 'with or without faith', but I
couldn't express my feelings about this film without discussing faith.
Thanks in advance for indulging me.  Posted or emailed responses
welcomed.
     I saw SCHINDLER'S LIST last night and I have to see it again,
preferably several times in fact.  There are no words for this film.
All I can say is that if Spielberg doesn't get best director and the
film doesn't get best picture, it will be a travesty unparalleled in
the history of the Oscars, for then we will know that the Academy is
too petty to overcome its prejudices and give an award to a man and a
film that surpass all previous expectations.  It was astonishing.  This
is going to be added to the list of films like NIGHT AND FOG and SHOAH
that teachers inundate young Jewish children like me with in Sunday
school, only this is better, because while those are only about the
horror and plaintive cries of "if there is a God, how could he let this
happen," SCHINDLER'S LIST is about the restoration of faith in God
and/or in humanity in the midst of all that horror, as illustrated in
the oh-so-subtle transformation of Schindler.  Schindler is truly the
brightest flame of all the heroes of Spielberg's movies, beautifully
realized by Liam Neeson.  The rest of the acting is also phenomenal.
If you haven't seen it yet, run, don't walk to the theatre.  I cried
for about two hours *after* I got home, and found myself unable to do
anything the rest of the night except sleep, and even then Liam Neeson
and Ben Kingsley were dancing through my dreams.  Not entirely
disagreeable, that, to say the least.  If the Holocaust was cause for
the Jews (or any other person with faith) to doubt the existence of
God, the existence of Schindler shows us with faith that there is
indeed a God.  For all people, with or without religion, Schindler is a
case-in-point example of the inherent goodness possible in humanity,
and proof that no matter how many businesses Schindler failed in, he
was a success in life:  his magnum opus will be remembered by
generations of people, especially those who would not exist without
him.  All I could think of during the movie was that it could *so
easily* have been me that he saved ... like when at Passover we Jews
are told to remember that God saved each and every one of us alive
today by bringing us out of Egypt, so Schindler saved each of us
personally also.  "He who saves one life saves the whole world."  I
guess this is what it means to have a Jewish cultural/ethnic/ religious
heritage ....
