Authors
Berge Garabedian<joblo@joblo.com>
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Dude, Where's My Car? (2000)
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Dude, how come they didn't preview this movie for the critics? Dude, I think
it's cause most critics are over the age of 40 and barely remember how it
was to smoke weed and act stupid. Dude, but what kind of box-office can a
movie like this do anyway? Dude, it doesn't really matter, the studio is
obviously gonna make its money back cause it cost so little and films like
this rent out for years to come. Dude, since when did you get this smart?
Dude, uuuhmm...pass me the bong! Cough-cough!
CRITIQUE:
Dude, this movie is made specifically for one type of audience: 15 to
25-year old male horndogs who enjoy getting wasted or stoned every now and
again. Not many other people will "get" it. In fact, if you are not part of
that target audience, I doubt that you will either enjoy or appreciate this
movie's complete nuttiness. Mind you, I'm not part of that target group, but
since those days weren't that far off for me (or are they still around?),
the film's complete over-the-top goofiness worked for me just the same. This
movie combines elements from the CHEECH & CHONG flicks, BEAVIS & BUTTHEAD
and the obvious, BILL & TED'S. The movie doesn't take itself seriously, it
doesn't pretend to be about anything more than a couple of stoners running
around and getting into strange and funny adventures and it features plenty
of cleavage. Sound interesting to you? To many, it won't. To others, it
will.
Unfortunately, I was disappointed with one specific aspect of the movie. If
you're gonna have a movie about potheads and strip joints and big breasted
aliens, how'sabout showing us a little T&A every now and then? This movie
skips on most of the profanity and sexual gratuities and replaces it with
decent chunk o' humor, which was a little too PG-13 for my taste. I only
wish that someone would come around one day and make a nice, out of this
world trippy movie that features a deeper insight into these bumbling
idiots. But as it stands, this movie is still quite humorous all around,
definitely weird and unpredictable (the ostrich attack is a classic) and
frivolous enough to recommend to anyone who considers two goofs saying
"sweet!" and "dude!" over and over again...funny. I enjoyed it for the most
part, despite its unfunny patches and definitely enjoyed its giant sexy
alien woman at the end. Woo-hah! For those of you who enjoy the cheebah
every now and again, I say rent this puppy with some buds and some munchies
and have a blast! You could also follow it all up with FEAR AND LOATHING IN
LAS VEGAS, BREAKFAST OF CHAMPIONS and a late night copy of EVIL DEAD 2.
Whatever you do, enjoy this flick for what it is: stupid fun with a couple
of stupid guys.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Actor Ashton Kutcher recently admitted that he hasn't smoked up in the past
three years (on "The Craig Kilborn Show"). Apparently, his move from NY
(where he was a male model) to LA (where he stars in TV's "The 70s Show")
has obliterated his pot smoking habits. His full name is Christopher Ashton
Kutcher and he was born in Iowa. He majored in Biochemical Engineering at
the University of Iowa.
The guy who plays Tommy in this movie is named Charlie O'Connell. He is
actor Jerry O'Connell's brother.
