Authors
Steve Miller
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Roxanne (1987)
          Summary:  Steve Martin plays Cyrano to Daryl Hannah's Roxanne
     in a modernized version of Rostand's play.  This is mostly a
     vehicle for Martin, who plays a fire chief, rather than a swordsman.
     His physical acting ability is combined with some truly witty
     dialog, making for a very funny performance.
     Seeing this movie was a bit frightening to me, I have to admit.  I'm not
very fond of Daryl Hannah, and only grudgingly so of Steve Martin.  More
important was my affection for Edmond Rostand's "Cyrano," which has always been
a favorite of mine.  So-called "modernized" versions of classic stories often
need to be watched from between the fingers, in something of the manner of a
horror show.  But ROXANNE owes more to Rostand than I expected, with many lines
being taken directly from Brian Hooker's translation.
     Martin plays C. D. Bales, the chief of a volunteer fire department in a
modest British Columbia village.  Despite his preposterously large nose ("Here
we have a man who can please two women at the same time"), his wit and charm
have made him the town's favorite son.  Bales's sense of humor is admired by
all, and his extemporaneous gibes can be awesome.  However, just as with his
beplumed forebear, C. D. never jokes, nor allows others to joke, about his
nose.  In an early scene, when two athletic malcontents decide to taunt him,
C. D.'s wit is released simultaneously with his skill at unarmed combat, to
leave both jocks face down in the dust.  Personally, I found this bit deeply
gratifying.
     Hannah's role as Roxanne is perhaps the least faithful to the orignal.
She plays an astronomer, spending the summer in B. C., for no real reason.
C. D. takes an instant liking to her, but is too insecure about his looks to
let her know.  Along comes a strapping hulk of a fireman, Chris, to join Bales's
fumbling department.  He too is drawn to Roxanne, but is so awfully insecure
around women that he can't bring himself to speak to her.  His insecurities, to
the point of losing his lunch in anxiety, are the film's weakest point.
Seeking help from his chief, Chris talks C. D. into writing letters over
Chris's name.  Various other means are used to coach him when he actually meets
Roxanne face-to-face, and, as they say, "hilarity results."
     In addition to the jokes based upon Chris's ineptitude and C. D.'s nose,
the screenwriters have added a subplot not in the original.  This background
story is really a set of running jokes about the training of the volunteer
fireman, none of whom who should even be allowed a book of matches.  These are
mostly sight gags, and very funny ones.  It adds a great deal to the film, and
meshes nicely with the main story.
     It should be mentioned that the nose makeup, which is subjected to several
extreme close-ups, is superb.  A simple thing like a seam or poor skin tone
might have ruined some very funny scenes, and I'm glad the producers made sure
that this received the attention it was due.
     This was a terrifically funny movie, due almost entirely to Steve Martin's
talents.  His physical skills get their chance as well, though not to the
extent they did in ALL OF ME.  If I only grudgingly admired him before, I'm a
genuine Martin fan now.  Hannah's performance is about as dead-pan as all her
performances, but she has a small role, really, and one can ignore her.
     Certainly the funniest movie I've seen in years, and good family stuff, I
think.  +3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Title
Review for Black Rain (1989)
Capsule:  A streetwise superman from the NYPD loses a prisoner upon delivery in
Japan.  While tracking the prisoner down, he finds time to point out some basic
flaws in Japanese society, break a number of laws, witness the death of his
partner and reaffirm the fundamental superiority of western man.
     Michael Douglas is a great actor, capable of range and depth.
Unfortunately, he exhibits neither in Ridley Scott's deeply bigoted film,
BLACK RAIN.  Douglas and his detective partner from New York witness a killing
of and by a Japanese man.  They capture the killer, but are not allowed the
"collar" for themselves.  Instead, they are ordered to return him to Japan,
where he is a wanted man.
     Nick (Douglas) resents his orders, but complies, partly to avoid the
scrutiny of the "suits," who are investigating him for theft.  Upon arrival in
Japan, Nick loses his prisoner to members of Japan's organized crime, disguised
as local police.  Understandably upset, he offers to help in the prisoner's
recapture.  The local police are cool, but courteous, and drag Nick and partner
around as "observers."  Unhappy with that limiting role, Nick bends, breaks and
otherwise nullifies the rules under which his hosts expect him to behave.
     A local detective, whom Nick calls "Mass," since he apparently cannot say
(any more than I can spell) his real polysyllabic name, follows Nick, trying to
keep him out of trouble, while the Japanese police attempt to do their jobs.  
     Further summation of the story would be spoiling, so I won't go on.  The
point, of course, is that Nick is a stranger in a strange land.  As such he is
naturally open to some culture shock.  Being a headstrong cop, Nick responds by
clinging to his own culture, his own ways and by refusing to consider local
customs as options.  The film thereby sets Nick up for a catharsis; some point
must come when he confronts the inappropriateness of his New York bred methods
when they are transplanted to another country.  When Nick is forced to watch
the murder of his New York partner, that moment has clearly come.  Surely, he
must search his soul, finally to take the advice Mass has given him, that he is
"part of a group," and should "consider the Japanese way."  Surely.  Surely....
Nah...  .
     The Japanese way never gets a chance, even though this is Japan.  Nick
finally solves his problems (and some of those he creates for Mass) in a Rambo
fashion; very American.  When the climax came, and Nick refused to admit his
errors, the film changed from interesting to maddening.  He is never made to
confront his own biases, or his own shortcomings.  Instead, fate plays along
with him, granting either victory or good excuses for failure (i.e.  the local
police let the bad guys get away).
     Now, as anti-Japanese as this film is, it is nonetheless a stunning piece.
Scott's vision of Japan is a mirror of his future city in BLADERUNNER.  It is
atmospheric, high-tech and pays its bills by the megawatt.  Visually, this is
great stuff.  And, if one is fond of the street-smart-cop vs.  The Great Big
Machine kind of story, one might like BLACK RAIN.  Not this one.  If once, just
*once*, it had seemed that Nick gained something of value by trying the
Japanese way, I might feel different.  But it didn't, so I don't.
     BLACK RAIN is a brilliantly directed, visually gripping film, with a good
story and some terrific action.  Sad to say, those features will probably
make it one of the highest grossing works of self indulgence and bigotry
of the year.  4 out of 4 for execution, 2 out of 4 for artistic honesty.
-- 
Steve Miller, New York Law School '92 (NO! '91!  I go during the Summer now.)
Big Electric Cat Public UNIX
..!cmcl2!hombre!dasys1!srmiller
