Authors
Jeff Ignatius
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Psycho (1998)
Review by Jeff Ignatius (jsign@soltec.net)
In his story "Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote," Jorge Luis Borges
envisions Don Quixote rewritten by his title character: "The Cervantes
text and the Menard text are verbally identical, but the second is
almost infinitely richer," Borges writes. Given Menard's background
and philosophies, he argues, the new Quixote is a markedly better work
than Cervantes'. That they are the same in every textual way is
irrelevant.
Fifty-odd years after Borges published his absurdist fiction -- which
both mocks the concept of remakes and raises legitimate, interesting
questions about the implications of authorship -- Gus Van Sant makes
the late Argentinian author something of a prophet with what's being
touted as a shot-for-shot recast of Hitchcock's 1960 classic Psycho,
with Van Sant having the balls to take the sole director's credit in
the opening titles.
While not exactly a Menardian under-taking -- his choice of color over
black-and-white, the need to use different actors, sets, props, and
cinematography make a film equivalent of "verbally identical"
impossible -- Van Sant's Psycho is largely his Quixote. He has taken
care to reproduce whenever possible Hitch's angles, shots, shooting
schedule, and techniques. The script has been updated slightly to fit
the 1990s (Menard would disapprove), and Bernard Herrmann's score was
tweaked by Danny Elfman, but it's certainly the most literal use of
the term "remake" ever to hit the screen.
The new movie is still the simple story of Marion Crane, a secretary
who steals some cash from her employer one Friday afternoon and leaves
town. Crane is, of course, the world's worst embezzler. As she strikes
out of Phoenix, she wears her guilt like makeup, attracting the
suspicion of a cop and a car salesman. On a rainy night, she finds
shelter at a backroad motel with 12 cabins, 12 vacancies, and Norman
Bates, the only person in the world whose nervousness threatens to
eclipse Marion's. Norman has reason to be uptight, though. His
domineering but oddly quiet mother is stashed in the house behind the
motel.
The movie still kills off its most developed character within 50
minutes, cruelly spoiling her shower. It still celebrates the odd bond
between a son and his mother. It's pretty much the Psycho you
remember.
Those who argue that such a by-the-storyboard remake is a priori a
waste of money and time (both the studio's and the audience's) fall
back on conventional wisdom that seems to apply only to film among the
arts. Regularly in recording studios and on theatre and concert
stages, acclaimed directors, actors, musicians, and conductors perform
works that have been given their "definitive" treatments years,
decades, or even centuries before. Nobody complains, because nuances,
shades of meaning, and even wholly new interpretations can spring from
strictly-adhered-to texts.
I approached the new Psycho hoping that Van Sant had found something
new and different in the script and story. But he hasn't, and it's a
shame. The execution is solid, but I so wanted something more, new,
and different.
Anne Heche is Marion Crane and Vince Vaughn is Norman Bates in Van
Sant's version, and they try to take different angles on their
characters. Yes, they're somewhat fresh, but the self-aware
performances only make the characters less interesting. More
importantly, they relate to each other exactly as in Hitchcock's
original.
The movie's first mistake is its conception of Marion. Heche plays her
as a ditzy sprite who steals $400,000 seemingly on a lark, not even
considering the consequences until she's on the road. Janet Leigh's
oppressed, worn Marion anchored the first half of Hitchcock's movie
and gave the impression of a person burdened by a lot more than just
some pilfered bills. In Psycho's twisted idea of justice, we should be
punished harshly for our sins, however menial: Janet Leigh had an
unpleasant stay at the Bates Motel for a lifetime of bad choices, but
Heche gets the knife for being stupid.
Vaughn's turn is better than Heche's but still problematic. Anthony
Perkins played Norman with a stutter and awkward pauses, while Vaughn
is all fidgets and munching, ripping through his lines. Through most
of the movie, Vaughn's performance is convincing, but he hits the
wrong notes frequently enough -- his grin is more giddy than evasive
-- to undermine the character, and remind us how well Perkins played
the role. His confident, hulking mass (especially compared to the
slight Heche) is also distracting; Norman requires somebody with a
physical meekness.
Heche and Vaughn should be given credit, of course, for even trying to
recreate their characters after the pitch-perfect performances of
Leigh and Perkins, so cheers Anne and Vince. Do better next time.
The more seasoned actors offer some guidance, suggesting that redoing
Psycho well was not impossible. Julianne Moore brings a fierce
determination to the role of Marion's sister -- bent on finding what
happened to her sibling -- while William H. Macy is spectacular in the
small role of the private detective hired to discover the truth. Viggo
Mortensen is often unintelligible as Marion's boyfriend (shades of
Fenster in The Usual Suspects), but at least he has some fun, taking
his pretend union with Moore a bit too far for a grieving lover.
In some ways, though, discussing how Van Sant's Psycho works or fails
within Hitchcock's structure is irrelevant. However faithful Mr.
Drugstore Cowboy is to The Master's direction, he takes many other
liberties, usually for the worse. Van Sant treats the original script,
storyboards, music, and architecture largely as sacred texts, but
apparently felt no need to be true to any other part of the movie.
With just a few added sounds, in fact, the director subtracts from the
original. Hearing Norman Bates unbuckle his belt and masturbate as he
watches Marion Crane undress imposes a purely sexual reading that, in
the original, was simply one of many reasonable interpretations.
A more fundamental change, of course, is the choice of color
cinematography. Van Sant's palette and photography are usually
provocative and sometimes stunning, especially in the virtually
incandescent bathroom, glowing with surgical whiteness. But the color
Psycho dulls the sharp black-and-white compositions of the original,
which were so integral to the story's simple, extreme take on crime
and punishment.
I can understand Van Sant's decision, though, and maybe even agree
with it. His choices in costume design, on the other hand, defy
explanation. The entire cast wears some of the most hideous outfits
ever seen, and dying would be a welcome escape from gaudy clothes.
Every costume change is an occasion for laughs, and that's not a good
thing for a movie that needs to build tension and anxiety to succeed.
And, let's be honest, Van Sant cheats on the direction, too, tinkering
in some very minor ways. "Shot-for-shot" is a lie.
The shower scene, for instance, delivers on the director's promise to
make it more explicit in violence and nudity; this might well be, to
cite one example, the first mainstream movie with an anus shot. But
the effect is minimal.
Some of Van Sant's directorial changes actually enhance the picture.
The climactic attack in which Norman is unwigged is newly
choreographed and directed, making it less awkward and more exciting.
Whether they work or not, though, any change in Hitchcock's shot
selection destroys the idea behind the movie. If you're not going to
be 100-percent true to the original storyboards, what difference does
it make if you're 90-, 80-, or 70-percent faithful?
The two murder scenes of Psycho illustrate Van Sant's willingness to
add to Hitchcock's vision with contemporary film techniques. Gus takes
a page from Natural Born Killers by using quick cuts to unrelated
footage in the slashing sequences. Marion's shower scene flashes to
ominous, rolling clouds, while the detective's last moments offer a
brief glimpse of an animal.
These moments show how Van Sant might have brought Psycho to a
contemporary audience. Video, age, and reputation have already
corrupted the original, after all. A 1960 audience had no idea that
the person who appeared to be the main character would be killed off
within 50 minutes, no warning for the brutality of that death, and
probably no clue that Mother had been dead for a decade and her son
was a cross-dresser, among the least of his faults.
That's all part of the cultural conscious now. Nobody goes in blind.
As a result, Van Sant's Psycho is uniquely tame and quaint for a
contemporary horror film. The changes are so minor -- and generally so
insignificant -- that the casual viewer won't notice them at all. The
director doesn't up the ante by truly bringing the story to the
present, into a culture where violence, nudity, theft, transvestites,
voyeurism, and unhealthy mother-son relationships can be found on
dozens of television shows daily. If Van Sant wanted to truly
replicate the experience of Psycho, he would have tried to upset us,
not take us back to yesteryear.
By rewriting the story and acknowledging contemporary tolerances,
expectations, film techniques, and our familiarity with Psycho, Van
Sant could have done something special with the movie. By using, say,
70 percent of Hitchcock's shots. dialogue, and plot, and turning up
the intensity, he could have delivered a reverent reinterpretation
while trying to make moviegoers squirm, even in an age of Scream.
Van Sant chose the easy way out. In many ways, he has made a movie in
which the director is virtually blameless for anything that's wrong.
Don't like the direction? You're slandering a dead man. Don't like the
script? Not Van Sant's fault. Don't like the performances? The actors
take the fall.
Make no mistake, the new Psycho still works. There's also the fun of
searching for the differences, of comparing the performances, of
seeing Hitchcock's vision in vibrant colors and garish outfits.
But if Van Sant can't shoulder any blame, nor does he get any credit;
Joseph Stefano's script and Hitchcock's direction are still the forces
behind Psycho. As a result, Van Sant's product is empty and pretty
much pointless. It's fundamentally Psycho, and it's fundamentally
sound.
But it's also fundamentally a cop-out.
*This review was originally published in The Octopus, the alternative
weekly newspaper of Champaign-Urbana, Illinois, and can be found with
dozens of other movie reviews on the Flush Web site:

Title
Review for Snake Eyes (1998)
Cinema's biggest show-off has a grand time in Snake Eyes, a fairly
straightforward (and largely uninspired) political-thriller plot
enlivened (and cheapened) by its director's need to impress film
students the world over. 
Brian De Palma, whose work I generally abhor, takes a standard story
and pumps it up with a perspective-shifting treatment, only to hurt
the work by not knowing when to stop his gimmicks and, finally, not
having enough material to sustain the movie. 
At a high-profile fight in Atlantic City, the Secretary of Defense is
assassinated not three feet from corrupt cop Rick Santoro (Nicolas
Cage), who dives into the case blindly, not realizing how fully it
will entrap him. 
The single, extraordinary shot that sets up the film, running at least
ten minutes, descends into beautifully orchestrated chaos as the
camera follows Santoro through the arena, placing bets, shaking down
drug dealers, talking on his gold cell phone, and watching the main
event, ending with gunfire just after his fighter goes down. What sets
Santoro off is the boxer's reaction. He's just been knocked out, but
when shots ring out, his eyes snap open. Santoro thinks the hulk threw
the fight and approaches him. 
The boxer's narrative (shown literally through his eyes, a technique
that is fun, interesting, confusing, and irritating all at the same
time) sets the cop on the trail of his best  friend, Major Kevin Dunne
(Gary Sinise), who set up security for the bout. The case actually
involves little police work, though, as the boxer and a mysterious
woman (Carla Gugino) tell Santoro all he needs to know, and security
cameras back up their stories. The simplicity of the case affords De
Palma the opportunity to show the same ten minutes that opened the
movie from several characters' perspectives. Those sequences have a
nice kick to them, and make it easy to forget how pedestrian the 
story is. 
But De Palma achieves a strange goal of film direction here, in which
the means are not nearly as important as the end. The images of Snake
Eyes are themselves not terribly exciting or interesting. The artistry
comes from the pains the director took to capture them, and only
people who love the craft of making movies will properly 
appreciate the work involved. 
In its last half hour, too, the movie settles into a bland drama, with
Santoro and Dunne facing off. It seems that once De Palma has
dispensed with his tricks, he simply wants to tie up the plot and
theme loose ends. Will Santoro turn in his best friend? Or will he
take the money and turn his head, the way he always has? 
In another movie, these questions might have generated some interest.
But with all the style of Snake Eyes' first hour, the end is
disappointing and dull.
Review by Jeff Ignatius. jsign@fgi.net
This and more than seventy other reviews can be found at Flush:
http://www.fgi.net/~jsign/index.html
Flush is a free, personal site dedicated to the intelligent criticism
of film and also includes fiction and various essays.
