Authors
Vincent Merlaud
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Hamlet (1996)
Hamlet (USA, 1996, 237min59s), based on William Shakespeare's play,
adapted for the screen and directed by Kenneth Branagh, filmed in 65mm on
location at Blenheim Castle and at Shepperton Studios
with Kenneth Branagh, Julie Christie, Derek Jacobi, Richard Briers,
Michael Maloney, Nicholas Farrell, Kate Winslet, Charlton Heston, Billy
Crystal, Gerard Depardieu, Robin Williams, Jack Lemmon, John Mills and
John Gielgud.
A long time ago, in another movie era, Laurence Olivier directed his
version of the Bard's turn-of-the-seventeenth-century play, and the
critics then blamed him for being too old for the part and, most of all,
for restructuring (a polite word for "butchering") the play. What Branagh
presents in 1996 is -- for the first time ever -- the play uncut, albeit
transposed into Denmark's nineteenth century.
These four hours with Denmark's Royals are completely worthwhile. For the
third time this year, adapting a 400 year-old play has led to fascinating
results: Al Pacino's Looking For Richard was personnal and brilliant, and
Baz Luhrman's Romeo And Juliet colorful and deeply energetic. Respecting
the author (John Gielgud is part of the cast), Branagh gives this time a
more epic grandeur to the play (he even hired Charlton Heston!).
This is probably the most famous story in the English language, I'm sure
everyone has heard of it. It focuses on the young prince of Denmark, who,
mourning the death of his father, encounters his ghost, who informs him he
was poisoned by his brother Claudius, who's just married the widow Gertrude.
The film is technically breathtaking: Alex Thompson's cinematography
masterfully exploits the depth of the 65mm format, and the production
design is one of the most beautiful in years. Yet the strength of
Branagh's cinema resides in its actors: filming in long unbroken takes, he
gives them the opportunity to deliver great performances.
Lucky boy! Who could possibly dream of a more suitable cast? Mixing old
Shakespearian pros with relative newcomers and Hollywood stars provides a
terrific result. I was particularly impressed by Julie Christie (a natural
born actress) and Derek Jacobi (who directed a younger Branagh as Hamlet
on the stage). Her Gertrude rejects her premature remarriage, and his
Claudius is not the villain into which other adaptations turned him -- we
feel he might do as well as King as his predecessor. Branagh's performance
as Hamlet is very good, though monotonous. The long-awaited "To be or not
to be" monologue being filmed in a mirror, the character hesitating to
act: that's an easy trick to show the duality of the man!
This is however little, when compared with other manifestations of
Branagh's ego. In Much Ado About Nothing, he showed himself walking on
water; in the current film, the end has him being carried away after the
duel with his arms outstretched in a not oversubtle allusion to Jesus
being taken from the cross. I can think of only one person whose ego is
possibly as big as his: the other half of Britain's most celebrated
ex--movie-couple, Ms. Emma Thompson herself...(see Sense And Sensibility)

Title
Review for On connaît la chanson (1997)
Directed by Alain Resnais
Written by Jean-Pierre Bacri and Agnes Jaoui
With Pierre Arditi,  Sabine Azema, Jean-Pierre Bacri, Andre Dussolier,
Agnes Jaoui and Lambert Wilson
Let's put it this way: Alain Resnais's latest experimentation opens
with Wehrmacht officers discussing the fate of Paris. The year is
1944, and von Cholitz, officer in command at the time, explains why he
will not destroy Paris. A little music is heard, and the character
goes on singing with Josephine Baker's voice "J'ai deux amours, mon
pays et Paris". Then it goes forwards to 1997, with Camille's gloved
hand showing tourists in the Rue de Rivoli where the former scene took
place.
It's known to everyone that ever since his first shorts with
Chris. Marker, Alain Resnais has never got tired of movie-making
experimentations, from the structural bizarreness of L'annee derniere
a Marienbad to his precedent twin-films Smoking and No smoking, where
duality of life was fully explored (it should be noticed that although
Resnais seems open to any new idea in the film-making field, he has
been working with the same technical crew and actors for an
eternity). What surprised me on this occasion is how well received the
film is in his own country, where audiences usually madly laughs
whenever a character starts singing. On connait la chanson is however
not a musical, which might explain these overwhelming reactions - this
is so far Resnais' most profitable feature. In fact, dialogues are
often interrupted with verses, if not whole choruses, from popular
songs - I should accurately write chansons- taken in a wide scope
including Charles Aznavour, France Gall and Dalida. They are sung by
their original interpretes, while actors on the screen only articulate
lyrics. Afterthe acclimatation of the first sung lines, this strange
process stops being odd and one can get really convinced that for
instance Alain Delon becomes Jean Pierre Bacri - a proof of this
occurs later on with Jane Birkin, to whom it has been allowed to sing
her own "Quoi" with her own voice.
Used by any other filmaker, this implied distanciation would probably
kill any aspect of realism and turn the film into avant-garde
drama. Thanks to a clever script and a fine dialogue, On connait la
chanson is a major achievement. Most of the viewers will probably not
consider the film's characters as total strangers, the sung lines
actually building a kind of over- conversation revealing people's
weakness and fears: far from being an optimistic work of art - as were
Arthur Freed's musicals - On connait la chanson could indeed be
regarded as the ultimate film about depression.
Apparently: Camille (A.J.), the guide from the first comtemporary
scene, believes she'll be happy when her doctor-thesis is
finished. She helps her sister Odile (S.A.) looking for a new
appartement and fells in love with Marc (L.W.), from the real estate
agency - she saw him crying and thinks he is a very sensitive
man. Camille is secretely loved by Simon (A.D.), a radio- plays writer
who often attends her guided-tours and annoys her. Odile still loves
her husband Claude (P.A.) and saw his look-alike in a car kissing
another woman. Nicolas (J.-P. B.) does not love anybody and is seen by
Odile accompanied by numerous gorgeous women. Marc sells Odile a vast
appartement with a view on Montmartre.
But these men and women are suffering much but ignore what from.
Diseases, misunderstandings, lies contaminating lives. Claude lies to
his wife - he does not love her anymore. Marc lied to his client: a
new construction will hide the Sacre-Coeur. Simon lied to his beloved
- he works for the real-estate agency too and Marc is his
boss. Nicolas lies to himself: his londonian wife will not come back
to him. False interpretation of facts : Odile refuses to believe her
eyes when she caught her husband on the act with his mistress. Nicolas
is a limousine-chauffeur and therefore drives rich and beautiful
women. Marc had a cold and did not missed his ex-girlfriend. Marc is
indeed very arrogant, and particulry rude towards his employee
Simon. Camille, the youngest and the perhaps the most deceived of all,
fell in love with the wrong man and falls in a deep depression as soon
as her thesis is ended up. In the end, singing becomes a way of lying
as well, but characters may finally not only be invaded by the same
fatalism: what they have in common and sometimes sing together are
indentical human feelings. Same old song that we all know. As for Mon
oncle d'Amerique and La vie est un roman, On connait la chanson ends
in a joyous mood, an uncertain form of melancoly.

Title
Review for Voleurs, Les (1996)
directed by Andre Techine, written by Pascal Bonitzer and AT
with Catherine Deneuve, Daniel Auteuil, Laurence Cote, Didier Bezace,
Benoit Magimel, Fabienne Babe and Ivan Desny.
Back in 1994 the worldwide triumph of the autobiographical Les Roseaux
Sauvages (Wild Reeds) kept Andre Techine busy collecting awards, delaying
the production of his next feature, originally to be entitled L'Enfant De
La Nuit.
To make a long story short: a Lyons police lieutenant (DA) investigates
the murder of his crime-organizer--brother, which happens to be connected
to large-scale car thieves; in the process, he ends up having an affair
with his deceased brother's girlfriend, who herself sleeps with her
philosophy teacher (CD, definitely a woman). The story is told within
flash-backs, using different off-voices, which should please every admirer
of the cinema of Mankiewicz and Scorsese.
As usual, Techine deals with his favorite themes: fraternal hatred,
brother-sister relationships, rituals of provincial life, the opposition
of town and mountain. But this time the director leaves his beloved
Southwest -- the action taking place in the Lyons neighborhood --,
abandoning for a while his early story-telling technique, builds his most
complex and fascinating story yet, which however includes traditional
aspects of film noir and melodrama. The climax consists in a highly
efficient depiction of car-theft gone awry, which most of those currently
directing in Hollywood would do well to study.
The events portrayed in this film sometimes seem to be a mixture of
ancient tragedies, along with transsexual brotherly fights, seen with
psychological distanciation. Yet this is Techine's most vital film, thanks
to a magnificient cast. For many years now, the present reviewer has been
claiming that Daniel Auteuil is the best French actor of his generation,
and no one will deny the performance he delivers here is outstanding.
Working in harsh conditions -- "We close down at 6PM. After that it's Fort
Apache here." -- his character, the detective, has graphic sex with his
brother's girlfriend. I don't know many movie stars with the guts to shoot
a frontal sodomy scene; Auteuil's acting here is Actors' Studio worth. The
relative newcomer Laurence Cote, formerly known by Rivette fans only, is
also remarkable, tied between her sex affairs with both Deneuve and
Auteuil, and her love for her brother. Her bath scene with Deneuve has to
be included in every lesbian film anthology. And in a supporting part,
Deneuve gives her most human performance in years, which reminded me of
the character of Madame Juve in Truffaut's La Femme d'a Cote. To all
Deneuve fans: she's extravagantly breathtaking in Ruisz's forthcoming
Genealogies d'un Crime.
I'll be expecting Techine's next picture, which he currently shoots with
oscar-winner Juliette Binoche.
>From 1 to 10 on the scale of Techine's deconstructed eastside dramas: 8
vm

Title
Review for Afterglow (1997)
Written and directed by Alan Rudolph, produced by Robert Altman ,music by
Mark Isham
with Nick Nolte, Julie Christie, Lara Flynn Boyle and Johnny Lee Miller
110 minutes, 1:1.85
seen on the 9/18/1997 at the Astor, Berlin
        Afterglow is Alan Rudolph's first film since the ambitious Mrs Parker
and the Vicious Circle unfairly flopped in 1994. The American writer and 
director moves back to small-sized character-study, the genre he best
knows and which brought him wide recognition with Choose Me (1984) and
Trouble in Mind (1985).
        Marianne (Flynn Boyle), the estranged wife of Montreal yuppie
Jeffey Byron (Lee Miller), hires Lucky Fix-it Mann (Nolte) to make a 
baby's room - symbol! - in their modern but awful vast appartment. "Why a
baby's room? We don't need a baby" says the selfish Jeffrey. "I'm having
one, with or without you" argues Marianne. Oddly enough, this is where
Lucky appears, and he offers pretty much everything she needs.
        Lucky's wife, Phyllis (Christie), is an aging former Hollywoodian
actress, who keeps herself busy watching her own B-movies on TV, with her
glasses on and a glass at reach, blaming herself for the departure of
their twenty year old daughter. Guess what happens? While Lucky and   
Marianne are having good time, Jeffrey finds in Phyllis the motherly 
presence he ever waited for - the two of them meet at the Ritz hotel,  
which may or may not be owned by Mohammad Al-Fayed. They safely drive a  
Cadillac coupe, though I didn't see anyone wearing seatbelts.
        It's such an inane script that even the great Max Ophuls wouldn't
have saved it. A great disappointment, though Rudolph's style is still   
there and recognizable. Actors get the attention they deserve, but their 
parts are so thin that such first-class competitors can't produce
sparkles. Only Lara Flynn Boyle seems to have enjoyed herself playing such
a superficial person. I'm bully for Christie, but her return to the screen
in her second major performance this year since her portrayal of Gertrude
in Hamlet (1996) has this natural born actress in a freewheeling overdrive
a la Dunaway.
        As for Nolte, his physical appearance reminded me of the late Lee
Marvin - for the nose - and of Kriss Kritofferson, who was so impressing  
in Trouble in Mind. Nolte did not have the carreer we thought he might   
have deserved after seeing him in Who'll Stop the Rain (1974) and
Underfire (1983). Fifty years ago he would have matched with Howard Hawks'
characters. Now he's just wandering through Walter Hill's actioners and
Barbra Streisand's disastrous directorial efforts. Too bad. Jeffrey is
played by the talented British actor Johnny Lee Miller, and I'm sure all 
Trainspotting fans will witness that gaving up dying his hair in blond is 
not a great idea.
        I'll give Rudolph another chance, but since Altman's own films are
now taken away from him, I'm afraid he'll have to direct more Demi Moore     
vehicles.

Title
Review for Seven Years in Tibet (1997)
USA, 1997
directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud
written by Becky Johnson, based on Heinrich Harrer's autobiographical
novel, cinematography by Robert Fraisse, music by John Williams
with Brad Pitt, David Thewlis, B.D.Wong, Mako and Jamyang Jamtsho Wangchuk
130 min 40 sec, 1:2.35
seen at the Kurbel, Berlin
The key sequence in Seven Years In Tibet occurs halfway through the movie.
A Tibetan boy meets a blond young man in a colourfull room put in the darkness,
and asks him if he likes movies, what an elevator is and what the  identity of
Jack the ripper is.
Vienna 1939. The mountain climber Heinrich Harrer (Pitt) leaves a lousy
marriage and a pregnant wife (as well as a nazi Austria) to join an expedition
to the Nanga Parbat, one of the world's highests peaks, under the command of
Peter Aufschneider (Thewlis). WWII breaks out, they find themselves prisoners
in India, escape and eventually reach Tibet fives years later. At this point,
fans of Mr Thewlis (so good in Naked) can leave the theater, he vanishes
from the movie. Fans of the Dalai Lama (one of the global village's few
icons) can enter in silence.
I have always been puzzled by Jean-Jacque Annaud's career, a French
director whose first directorial efforts have absolutely nothing in common
with his latest epics (La Victoire En Chantant is about French colonists
lost in WWI's Africa, Coup De Tete about a soccer team in the provincial
town of Auxerre). Now that supporting Tibet against Red China has become
fashionable in Hollywood, he brings to the screen Harrer's book with
a major star in the lead. Considering the state of this industry today,
this story containing neither aliens nor natural disasters, it's unlikely
the film would have been made without Mr Pitt's commitment - though I
don't see Robert DeNiro among the cast of Martin Scorsese's own Tibetan
epic, who'll open later this year. So we'll have to be thankfull to Mr
Pitt, without whom this exemplary two-way ausbildung story would have
never been told.
The result is a technically superior film features gorgeous landscapes
(I kept wondering where was what shot, since the Chinese government is so
mean about whatever deals with Tibet), nice and sensitive music by John
Williams, a very handsome young actor and a talented one, who as I said
before disapears quickly. I must confess Mr Pitt is really convincing when
he throws himself on the barbed-wire fence of an Indian prisoners camp. Mr
Annaud's mise-en-scene is fluid and light and I'm happy to testify that
there are still some gifted men able to tell a classic tale without being
boring nor wasting their talent with superficious visual effects. Thanks
Heaven, the parallel between the young Dalai Lama and Harrer's abandonned
son is not overstressed.
This may however be badly received, hence the absence of romantic heroism,
like, say, becoming a nazi to recover a dead body.
Of course the film lacks the depth of the mythical Lost Horizon and Black
Narcissus, which were shot in Hollywood and in England respectively but
delivered a rich universal message - blame it on the fact that 1997
is a time to cynical (perhaps even to cynical to believe in its own
cynism) to enjoy such well-told and entertaining tales.
No nudity, but meany Chinese people and a dead horse being eaten.
Seven Years In Tibet opens on November 13 in Germany
