Authors
Michael Bendner
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Braveheart (1995)
     BRAVEHEART is based on the legendary true story of Sir William
Wallace, the 13th Century Scot who started a rebellion to drive the
English from his homeland after the Scottish throne was seized by the
ruthless King Edward I (Patrick McGoohan).
     The plot:  William Wallace (Mel Gibson) is a Scottish native whose
parents were killed by the English while he was still a child.  His
rich uncle adopts him and educates him well by taking him on some trips
around the world.  When William returns to his village as an adult, he
falls in love with a woman he knew as a child (Catherine McCormack),
and they get married in secret.
     When some English soldiers try to rape her, he defends her by
beating them into a bloody pulp. The English nobleman who has
commandeered that particular village ties her to a post and slashes her
neck in public as a means to get to William.  When William discovers
what has ensued during his absence, he returns with the intent to
kill.  After a few vicious blows of his sword, the other villagers are
inspired and start revolting.  Within minutes all the English soldiers
are dead.
     William is now determined to rid Scotland of its English
oppressors.  With the help of the leader of the Scottish nobles, Robert
the Earl of Bruce, William unites the clans and builds an army.  King
Edward I, now old and dying, sends English troops into Scotland to fight
them.  Through William's smart military tactics, his army manages to
defeat armies of English soldiers much larger than themselves.
     William and his men start taking cities back and dismembering the
English.  The King sends Princess Isabella (Sophie Marceau), wife of
Prince Edward his son, to negotiate with William.  The princess, being
the victim of a planned marriage knows that her side is the evil one
and helps William out as much as she can.
     BRAVEHEART was filmed on location in Ireland and Scotland.  It is
very authentic, thus very bloody.  This movie is not for the meek.
Intense battle scenes lasting several minutes feature death by hammer,
sword through head, arrow through head, sword through stomach, you name
it.  There are scenes of throats being slashed, dismembered body parts
being carried about, and people being hanged.  These wonderful things make
it all the more historically accurate, I suppose.
     The performances of all actors are excellent.  Quite a feat
considering up to 2000 extras were used at one time for some of the
battle scenes.  Gibson is very convincing to a point that one gets the
impression he really feels he is the character he is portraying.
BRAVEHEART is the second film Gibson has both directed and starred in,
and if he keeps it up at this level of excellence, we have a lot to
look forward to.
     The film runs about three hours, which may seem a tad long for
some.  While the first 45 minutes are vital to setting the scene, I
think they could have done it in 20.  The last-2 1/4 hours however,
more than make up for the first bit with non-stop, intense action and a
throroughly involving storyline.
