Authors
Matt Petras
Number of Reviews
20

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
 http://www.alien-resurrection.com
        Ellen Ripley died 200 years ago trying to wipe out a violent
species, she succeeded. Until now. Brought back to life by methods of
cloning. Brought back to life with the Queen still inside her. The
queen alien is removed from Ripley and raised for breeding. 'Special'
cargo is required for this breeding and science that is going on with
the queen and her young. But as luck would have it the aliens are a
bit on the smart side and they escape, and here begins the fun...
        Well you should now have an idea as to what this movie is
about, nothing spectacularly original on its own. But with enough
originality to be a good idea. The beginning of the movie is great,
really well thought out and really interesting. Then instead of
continuing along this line the movie degenerates into the predictable.
Its pretty well executed with some original scenes that provide some
interest. The plot itself needed a bit of work in my opinion, some
things seem to be taken for granted and somethings seem to happen for
no real reason whatsoever. I wont give examples for that might spoil
the movie for some people, but some of the scenes could be removed and
the plot furthered by other means. All in all the plot is fairly sound
and doesn't leave you wondering why things happen, but then again the
plot isn't very demanding so at least this job was accomplished with
some proficiency. The plot in this movie is by no means perfect
though, but its a good start for a movie. 
        The characters, being such an integral component of the plot
have to be proper. This is usually a given and it in most cases just
ignored.  But in the case of Alien: Resurrection I am brining it up,
because a few of the odd scenes that I found in the movie were caused
by a particular character, Call. I don't know what bothers me about
the character, but something does. I think that the character should
have been looked into with a bit more effort, maybe giving the
audience something more to grasp a hold of so to say. The character
didn't seem to fit too well, I am not too sure that Ms. Ryder was
perfect for the role either. But thinking about it I am not too sure I
could think of any actress that would have been able to do as good a
job. So I will have to concede that she was cast well for the part,
even thought the part is a bit on the odd side. The actual acting in
this movie was fairly convincing, especially Sigourney Weaver. She
plays her part with an interesting passion and wit, very good
performance from her. The rest of the cast performed well, and
convincingly in some cases much better than an action picture could
have hoped for. Although in the end the two things that I will most
remember about the acting and characters from this movie is the
character of Call, simply because something about the character
bothers me and Ripley's new found wit. 
        Having some thought about this movies there is something that
bothers me about it, I have tried putting my finger on it but with no
avail. The character of Call is one thing but that is not the only
thing that bothers me. Something seemed to be missing when I was
finished watching it, I don't get that sort of feeling from most
movies. I got the distinct impression that it was rushed and that the
director was a bit too liberal with his cut. I don't know if I would
recommend this movie to everyone, the special effects of this movie
were spectacular in some scenes and very appropriate but nothing so
revelation that everyone had to see it. SO if you are a fan of science
fiction flicks or horror flicks you should like this movie. Now those
of you who are not die hard fans of either genre, here's the question
you should ask yourself: Do you really want to see a decent action
flick that is a bit out of this world? if yes then you should like the
movie. Just don't come crying to me if you didn't like it. Its nothing
grand, its an action picture you wont get any grand revelations about
life from it. You should enjoy the ride. And If I ever figure out what
is bothering me about the movie I'll add a little PS at the end. Other
than bin a bit rushed with some oddities its an OK flick. You might
want to be able to stomach some gore though. This movie isn't for all
audiences, you should know if this movie is for you or not, please use
your discretion folks, its at most a decent action/sci-fi/horror
flick. 


Title
Review for Mortal Kombat: Annihilation (1997)
The world is saved in the Mortal Kombat tournament, but sore
losers will always be sore losers. So upon loosing the Outer world
decides to invade the mortal realm and invade earth. Our hero's from
the previous movie have to defend the realm. 
OK, the concept is simple, and I stated it above that is about
as simple as a plot can be. This plot even fails at that. I think that
this whole script was written in about 20 min. Nothing in the plot
seems to fit, all the scenes seem to lurch forward at an unsightly
gaint. A lot of the movie will be obviously be based on fighting, but
that does not mean that there can't be anything resembling a plot.
There seems to be a lot of rather random fight scenes that simply
occur out of thin air. Also as the simple fact that the forces of
darkness have ARMIES running around after the hero's and the all they
do is bump into the generals... *YAWN* Too much of this movie was
lumped together bits and pieces that would have suited other movies.
There is a fight scene where Sonya, and some female(unnamed rather
major character) have something of a mud wrestling match.. well at the
very least mud kickboxing. I'm sorry but its pretty bad when you have
to throw something like that into the movie to maintain attention.
There is no lead in into the movie what so ever, you are essentially
left off where the previous one ends. this is poor style because you
cant expect everyone to have seen the first movie.  The plot in this
movie doesn't seem to have much direction and it affects the rest of
the movie because of that.  
This movie is essentially a breeding ground for special
effects, well at least it has the potential to be that. This movie had
special effects, albeit quite bad ones. Most of the effects here are
vain attempts, the opening sequence and a few other isolated spots
have well placed well choreographed special effects. Most of the
effects in this movie are either over done and terribly misplaced or
underdone and again misplaced, this is due to the lack of a plot or
any semblance of one. Also the underground passageway, was not only
misplaced, in the wrong movie and badly done, I think it was a more
than vain attempt to throw something into the movie that totally
didn't belong there. Next time you see a mortal person turn into a
dragon in a movie and it looks bad... run, it might be another
installment of Mortal Kombat. Most of the fight scenes are also badly
choreographed, most people can't take a beating like that and then get
up, let alone take on more people. I know this is a movie based on a
video game. But seriously give the audience some credit. 
I won't comment on the acting, because there simply was none
in this movie. At least they had the foresight to cast attractive
females, that at least should keep some men in the theater.
(Personally I would have left it I wouldn't have had to wait for my
ride.) I wouldn't go see this movie if I were anyone. I think that the
video game upon which this whole movie is based is more exciting.
Please save your money, throw it out if you must spend it. But do not
see this movie under and circumstances. Go see Aliens if you want
action. The only good thins in the movie were the music(suited my
tastes) and the end... you know when the movie stops. I will not even
rate this movie, that is how bad I think it is. I personally have
never seen a movie this bad. I'm sure that most people could make a
better one. 

Title
Review for Bean (1997)
        Mr. Bean, a bumbling security guard from England is sent to LA
to help with the grandiose homecoming of a masterpiece American
painting. The first two words should have said enough to let you know
what occurs during Bean's trip to LA, but if they didn't look out
because you are in for a rather interesting if not odd ride. Heck
depending on your humor you might end up laughing through the whole
flick. Either way look out America Bean is coming. 
        Well, what can really be said about this movie, there is very
little discernible plot. That much is not hard to grapple with for it
is a slapstick comedy.  It achieves that goal rather admirably, but
because it is that, the plot is just screaming for help. The whole
premise that the movie is based on is to say the least flawed.  The
movie had its funny moments but there was no real story line other
than something that could be thought up on a whim and carried through
and in many causes ad-libbed as you went. Don't go into this movie
expecting and theatrical masterpiece. But if this form of humor floats
your boat then you will truly enjoy this movie, even if you don't like
slapstick style humor you will end up laughing because something's are
just so stupid. The movie goes out and accomplishes what it aims, or
so it seems. 
        Now when you look at the acting in this movie you have to
think about two things, first was there any real acting and how hard
is it to act in the slapstick manner. Well, there was no real acting
in this movie but some of the slapstick wasn't the easiest I am sure.
I have to concede that Mr. Atkinson's acting in this movie is well
done. Although the role isn't too demanding the slapstick is. I think
that the character could have had a bit more dialogue, it would have
added quite a bit to the overall effect of the movie. Now the rest of
the actors in the movie, bad acting and poor casting. I think that the
role opposite Bean could have been better, just seemed wrong for the
movie. A different actor might have done a better job of it but I wont
presume that wasn't what was trying to be achieved. 
        One thing that I must say, simply to get if off my chest is
that I think transferring a sitcom to TV usually produces rather
disastrous results. TV shows should do just that stay on TV, it will
probably save some producers from getting ulcers. I can only think of
a couple examples of TV going to the big screen effectively, the best
known of those would have to be Star Trek. Bean seriously fails to
accomplish anything close to what that series gone movie achieved. Now
another thing that I have to state again is this movie has narrowed
its target audience fairly tightly. The form of humor in this movie
will not be liked by most people, these people will think like I did
that this movie is stupid and pointless. But if you like the TV show
you might actually like this movie. But to be on the safe side I am
opting to recommend you save your money and not go to see this movie.
There are many movies that are truly worth seeing unlike this one. 


Title
Review for Jackal, The (1997)
        What do you do when you absolutely must have someone killed,
when you need the best. You hire the person that is least known, but
has all the necessary skills to do the job right. You hire the Jackal.
The man that the CIA can't even prove to exist. What do you do if you
are the target of this Jackal, well to put it in the bluntest of terms
you die, unless you get really lucky. If you're the FBI, you pray to
find some sort of clue as to who the Jackal is, former colleagues,
enemies, and if you are lucky you'll find one.
Now you have a bit of an idea what this movie is about. The
plot of this movie is well, weak to say the least. There are gaps left
right and center. On more than one occasion you find things out that
make the story sound well, less than fresh. For example the three main
assassins in this story just happen to know each other, that's still
OK. That two of them should be lovers, that's a bit unbelievable in
that profession but it still works. That the two main male characters
are mortal enemies, all I have to say is *yawn*. This is what happens
when Hollywood puts its spin on things. That plot line has been used
so many times its not countable. Although I am not 100% if its been
used in this fashion, never the less it shines through in all its
unoriginality. Also if you are going to make a movie that is based on
a movie, you might want to look at the original source. I do have to
say one thing about the plot. The build up was well done and flows
pretty well. The ending, well I'll leave that for you to decide but I
did not like it. Too predictable, and I may have just ruined the whole
movie by telling you those two words. Somethings just seem to happen
in this movie, if it was done well like it was done in the beginning
then yes this would have turned out to be a really good movie. 
The build up for this movie was good, that is about the only
real thing about the plot, that worked well. OK, it wasn't that great
either, it was a bit too long and too drawn out for a plot that needed
some more work. It raises the expectations of the viewer too much for
the ending that ensues. The style this movie follows at the begging is
really effective but this is not carried through unfortunately. The
characters for the story would have been more believable if they
didn't become so clique.
The acting for this movie is actually pretty decent for the
most part. I think that the casting for the parts was actually done
fairly well and personally I cannot find a better bad guy for this
movie. Bruce Willis played the bad guy in this movie admirable for the
most part and the build up and general beginning left nothing to be
desired, again shoddy plot ruined what seems to have been a good
performance. Richard Gere, also played his part decently, although his
heart doesn't seem to be in it as much. Some of his mannerisms just
don't come off as that of an assassin. Sorry Mr. Gere(if you ever see
this) I think that you could have done a better job with this, even
though the accent must have been hard to accomplish. 
All in all, I would not recommend this movie too much. It is
something of an action movie that tries to become a thriller. It is a
pretty fun watch and if you don't pay too much attention to the
details you might enjoy it. But then again, isn't that why you go to
see movies? I wouldn't recommend this movie all that much, mind you it
is an OK watch and you get what you paid for. Some suspense, some
action and two major names of the movie industry. The movie isn't
nearly as good as it could have been. I rate this movie *{1/2} / 4.
The potential was there.


Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
Rating: *** out of ****
Length: 98 min (1:38 hours)
Director: Barry Sonnenfeld
Producer(s): Laurie MacDonald, Steven R. Molen, Walter F. Parkes,
Graham Place, Steven Spielberg
Cast: Tommy Lee Jones, Will Smith, Linda Fiorentino, Vincent
D'Onofrio, Rip Torn, Tony Shalhoub
        Aliens!! Well, that is what this movie is about. Computer
generated aliens. OK, the movie is not just about computer generated
aliens. It's about computer generated aliens and a secret organization
known as MIB. If one wasn't green and running around the other would
not exist as it's known. The computer graphics in this movie are
spectacular, they make you want to believe that aliens like the ones
depicted exits. Since seeing this movie I have to agree concede that
Denis Rodman is an alien, he simply has to be. Well, in all
seriousness the aliens created here are not only of the monster
variety but are also of the soft, squishy and cuddly kind. Just adds
something of a lighter note to the movie where it could have become
very dark.  
        Along with aliens comes the humor and in a pretty decent way.
J, well soon to be J, a smart ass cop(played by Will Smith) runs down
what he thinks is a would-be villain and gets some attention from the
MIB and K in particular. K aims to recruit our poor J, but that is not
the whole point of this movie. The main duty of the MIB is to police
the extra terrestrials on earth who have chosen it as a home or a
refuge. That's also the main point of this movie: protect the earth
from the scum of the galaxy. Some of the scum from space is awfully
bad and just down right nasty. Color commentary abounds when forced to
deal with alien scum and none other than Will Smith and Tommy Lee
Jones are there to deliver the punch. The dialogue is witty to say the
least. This wittiness lets the movie flow well from scene to scene
developing the characters to the extent needed for this movie. 
        Tommy Lee Jones(as K) and Will Smith(as J) provide both the
action and the comedy beautifully. The characters they play don't seem
to be wrong in any way nor does their performance as them. I would
have to say that K is more amusing than J, but what's one without the
other. Both roles complemented each other very well and the script
seemed to be written for these two actors. The story also goes deep
enough to provide a proper background so the audience is not totally
clueless. Altogether good performances were put in by all the cast and
the director blended everything marvelously with the necessary special
effects to create a good movie. A movie well worth seeing if you are
up for some lighthearted and witty humor. 
        As most movies have their good things they also have their bad
things. The character development in this movie was not all that grand
because it didn't need to be. But if there was more character
development and if there was some development of the alien characters
that might have added quite considerable to the movie. Especially the
evil alien, he did need some work. Though this could have been worked
on, the movie was what it proposed to be a rather shallow and witty
comedy. That was achieved rather well, with some interesting
commentary and observations. A movie worth a view, but keep in mind
what the movie is and if you are not fond of Will Smith's form of
humor then I wouldn't go. 
Originally written after original release. 
Totally rewritten December 26, 1997


Title
Review for Flubber (1997)
Rating *1/2 out of ****
Length: 93 min (1:33 hours)
Director: Les Mayfield                  
Producer(s): John Hughes, Michael Polaire
Cast: Robin Williams, Marcia Gay Harden, Christopher McDonald, Raymond
J. Barry, Clancy Brown, Ted Levine, Wil Wheaton, Jodi Benson (voice)
        As forgetful as some people may be it is doubtful that anyone
could forget their wedding, especially three times. But, alas
professor Brainard somehow manages to accomplish this feat twice
before the momentous night that he actually creates Flubber. It's
amazing that he is able to remember any of the processes he uses to
make anything. The whole point here is how could a man be so blatantly
forgetful. This is not absent minded this is almost mindless and he is
a professor. Well, this is the case for about the first half of the
movie then things begin to settle into what might truly be considered
absent minded. 
        Along the way to becoming absent minded from absent of mind
the professor stumbles onto Flubber. Thankfully or there would be no
movie or any amusement for the audience. The Flubber is supposed to be
flying rubber, but it seems to have a life of its own. This is there
strictly for the kids. The properties of the Flubber provide some
antics for the audience when Flubber coated golfballs and bowling
balls assail two would be thugs. Although amusing this is not original
what so ever and brings back haunting memories of Home Alone. 
        The poor professor has to save the university where he teaches
at, get his fiancee back, finally stop the plotting of an evil
millionaire, and do all this in the funniest way possible. Admittedly
there are funny moments but the movie is rather shallow and does not
compare very well to the original(The Absent Minded Professor). The
whole scene with the basketball game was just atrocious and totally
unbelievable. The basketball players, stereotypically unqualified for
the sport, somehow manage to bounce, fly and dribble their way back to
being close to winning? This just sounds too bad to be true, the least
that could have been done was keep semi close to the original movie to
give this film a chance. 
        As for innovations and new ideas there is but two good ones in
this movie. Giving life to the Flubber, which is so poorly executed
that it's best forgotten, and Prof. Brainard's flying robot Weebo.
Giving life to the Flubber would have worked beautifully if it wasn't
for scenes of the sort where you have the Flubber dancing around on
tables and books for no real reason other than to put in a bit of
music and extend the length of the movie. The life of the Flubber had
brief and rather whimsical moments where it might have been used well,
but it wasn't and in the end might have done the movie more harm than
good. Now, Weebo is a totally different story. It's a robot that Prof.
Brainard created but forgot how and gave something of a life too. This
is a really original idea, well maybe not, but it is an idea that is
well executed and in the end makes the poor robot the most developed
and real character in the movie. Yes folks the little yellow robot has
more emotion and character than the characters. 
        The film lacks the emotional punch to pull the audience in at
all. The acting by Robin Williams(Prof. Brainard) seems to be half
hearted for most of the movie and in many cases quite forced. Most of
the acting in the movie was so convincing as to fool only the part of
the audience that had not quite yet reached the age to 12. People when
stood up at the altar, don't usually give third chances. Or for that
matter talk to the fiancee afterwards, but what can be expected this
is a children's movie. 
        Flubber, as a movie does little original and is nothing
special in any respect. With the best character in the movie being
something of a prop I doubt that many people will find it all that
great. It does have its amusing moments and it is a good story in the
end, but it does not wash up to the original. Kids should find this
movie amusing and fun and they'll probably enjoy the whole movie. As a
movie it's just a kids movie and not the best of ones at that. 


Title
Review for Contact (1997)
        This movie is one of the better ones that I have seen in a
long time, although I have not read the book by Carl Sagan I am fairly
sure that this movie does the book justice in every respect. The
acting in this movie is just superb and casting for the parts could
not have been done better I think. Although I think this movie is
something along the lines of perfect I did find a few small flaws...
There is a scene that kind of makes you think whoa this is not
happening this is too cheesy.. well that scene makes sense if you
think about it but it kind of struck me as being dumb at first. A few
other small things would be that I noticed that in one scene they were
panning in on a building and it was cloudy and foggy and really
rainy.. but when the scenes shifted to inside the building it was
already sunny through the windows.
        As mentioned above the acting in this movie is superb.. Jodie
Foster produces another stellar performance and in my opinion it is
her best to date. She shows emotion beautifully and fills the shoes of
a very demanding role as if the role had been made for her. Not one
moment in this movie did Jodie Foster seem like she was out of her
element. In my humble opinion her performance in this movie should at
least get her an Oscar nomination if not the prestigious award itself.
Matthew McConaughey also delivers a grand performance in the movie..
although the movie centers around Jodie and her character all the
other actors in the movie gave great performances. The sheer magnitude
of some of the scenes was spectacular.. to bring together such large
crowds for certain scenes and knowing when to use spectacular effects
shows a certain genius from the point of the director Robert Zemeckis.
        Although there are parts in this movie that are predictable
and the movie itself is rather lengthy neither of these things makes
much of a disturbance. Mind you if your bladder can't take a large
sized drink for more then 2.5 hours.. you might want to consider a
medium. hehe... I highly recommend this movie and it is one of the
better ones that have been released this year... it might not make the
millions of JP2 but I would have to say that this movie should be one
of the best of the year and maybe one of the better movies that have
been made recently. Go see it if you have the chance.

Title
Review for Virus (1999)
    A highly intelligent life form that is completely electronic in nature,
beams itself onto a Russian science vessel. Well, this is the point where
the movie strays from becoming a decent and original movie and simply
becomes a predictable sci-fi thriller. Anyhow, this life form takes control
of the computers on the Russian vessel then starts creating highly advanced
robots to help it in its gruesome task of exterminating the ‘virus' known as
man. The original crew of the Russian vessel is all but exterminated, and
then a hapless crew on a tug discovers the derelict ship and tries to
salvage it. No more needs to be said as to what happens and where the
conflict lies, the movie is that predictable.  The story is full of very
shallow characters that don't do much other than subsist. The captain of the
tug, played by Donald Sutherland, makes irrational choice after irrational
choice leaving the audience wondering as to how he has survived long enough
to reach his age (looks to be in his 60's). To add to this we're shown this
motley crew that at times seems to be highly skilled in specific fields, and
at others seems barely capable of basic tasks. Some of the supposed
capabilities of the characters leads one to wonder what they are doing on a
tug transporting cargo in the middle of the pacific, in a typhoon no less.
None of the characters seem to work together at all; they are always
bickering and vying for some form of control. This makes no sense what so
ever and only takes away from the story, a story that is full of holes and
is extremely predictable.
    All the flaws of the actual story are only helped along by the special
effects. The waves that are generated to be part of the typhoon make it look
like boat was is small model sitting in a tub and someone is simply creating
waves. It looks genuinely fake, granted trying to recreate a typhoon or
hurricane cannot be easy by any stretch of the imagination but having the
storm approach in a style similar to the huge wave of Deep Impact only ends
up looking corny and amateurish. Also on the topic of flaws, the robotics
that the advanced life form creates seem to move extremely slowly, why? If
this life form that is so advanced as to be able to create these robotics,
should it not be able to create them move faster? Regardless, the special
effects in this movie in many cases take away from the film rather than add
to it.
    As to the actual casting for the movie, finally there is nothing to
complain about. The actors were superb, but then again it is highly doubtful
that chimpanzees would have had difficulty acting the roles. Having the cast
that was present probably saved this movie from being an absolute
catastrophe. Watching these actors act this story out made it bearable, if
barely. The one saving grace of this movie is that it was highly action
packed and there always seemed to be something happening.  So if you are
going into this movie not expecting to see anything grand and are only going
to kill some time and watch a mediocre sci-fi thriller then you won't be too
disappointed. As the movie is but the latest in a genre that was originally
created by Aliens, it does little more than try to cash in on that aspect.
This movie would be best left for video and even then you might be advised
to simply wait for one of the major networks to air it on TV.

Title
Review for Tomorrow Never Dies (1997)
Rating: ** out of ****
Length: 125 min
Director: Roger Spottiswoode
Producer(s): Barbara Broccoli, Michael G. Wilson
Cast: Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher, Joe
Don Baker, Ricky Jay, Götz Otto.
        As time moves forward and more movies are filmed, certain
formulas become readily apparent and they are exploited. Also as
sequels are created franchise series' are found and exploited. This
being yet another movie in the enormous Bond series it is hard to tell
what we should expect from it. Since it is obvious the series is being
exploited, it's particularly obvious after the you find out that this
is the eighteenth official Bond movie. From the beginning Bond has
been somewhat formulaic, I cannot readily recall a movie in which Bond
DIDN'T save the world from peril or from some grand external force.
Since both the basic formula for a Bond movie seems to still be
popular and still be something that is in demand, then so be it. Let
there be Bond movies. Simply because the character of Bond is popular
doesn't mean that the story has to be terribly predictable. It is
obvious that Bond is going to win the moment the ticket is purchased,
that doesn't necessarily mean that you can predict everything that
happens in this movie. 
        For example: Enter,  Wai Lin something of a copy of Bond but
with a Chinese tone. This is a fairly original idea having a woman
that is just as capable as good old Mr. Bond, well at least it's
somewhat original for the series. This idea is not played out all that
well for more than once she seems to be this Damsel in distress with
our hero soon coming to the rescue. Wai Lin, played by Michelle Yeoh
is a character that should add flare and life to a Bond movie. But is
only there it seems to assist the hero of the hour, something of a
sidekick rather than the equal she is made out to be. Michelle Yeoh,
seems to be good for the role that the character is best suited for,
not the one that comes through, rather unfortunately. 
        As Bond, Pierce Brosnan fits the traditional formula almost to
the letter. He is everything he is supposed to be, he's even emotional
about his relationships or at least he tries to be. Yes, Bond actually
cares about some of the women he sleeps with. Just makes you teary
eyed thinking about it. Strangely enough that idea was tried with
rather limited success.  Pulled out of a love scene with a blonde
beauty, to go onto this mission, Bond encounters a former flame. Yeah,
so? He's not supposed to go mushy on us, that's not the Bond that is
expected, that's also not the Bond that works. It's also not something
that works very well in the movie. One liner's abound when this
subplot is visited, a rather forced way to bring us another love
scene. 
        Now no formula is complete without a bad guy unfortunately
there isn't much of one in this movie. The idea behind the bad guy is
great it's actually plausible. But the character is not developed
enough and assuming certain things is required. The bad guy is
sinister enough for the part, but you don't see enough of the evil,
not enough of the planning behind the mayhem. Just because the 'Bond
Formula' requires an evil character does not mean that he's being evil
just for the sake of being evil. There just doesn't seem to be much
motivation behind what he does and comes off somewhat aloof from the
story. 
        Now, no Bond movie is complete without its gadgets, its
violence and its action. Well, this movie has those in fair quantity.
Fair enough not to be over indulging and fair enough to keep the pace
going at a fairly high speed to keep our interest. One thing that
strikes as being rather pointless is opening sequence, too elaborate
and too destructive. The whole build up sequence could have been
created much more subtly for much greater effect. Especially since the
opening sequence turns out to be one of the more destructive and more
action packed ones in the movie. Other than that, the Bond formula
holds more than true for most of the film in this respect. The action
is where it is supposed to be and in proper quantity.
        But then when viewing a Bond movie, what is it that you go to
see it's the action, the character and the story. The story is there,
although riddled with holes.  The character is there and in fairly
good standing with only a minor blip. Finally, the action is there
although a bit excessive in the beginning. All in all, this movie is
exactly what it is expected to be. It is a Bond movie, maybe not the
best Bond movie but not the worst one either.  It had the potential to
be one of the better action films of the year, but it fell short by
its shortcomings. In the end, it's a decent action movie supporting an
old franchise with due respect. 


Title
Review for Ever After (1998)
     As fairy tales go, Cinderella has to be one of the most famous. Almost
everyone knows it, well at least in North America. So it is natural that
someone will try to make a movie out of it. It has been done before with
varying results. This version of the story is both similar to the original
and different at the same time. The basic story remains unchanged but,  one
thing that seems to vanish with this version, and that is all the
fantastical elements of the story. There is no fairy god mother or anything
even remotely of that nature. After the fantastical elements are stripped
away  what is left is a realistic believable rendition of the Cinderella
story and an interesting love story at the least. .
 Unlike in the fairy tale, the prince plays a much larger part than just
that of  the masked ball at the end. The ‘Prince', who happens to be the
crown prince to the throne of France,  meets 'Cinderella', known as
Danielle,  on a few occasions, most coincidentally and he becomes smitten
with her. Although this seems to be a far cry from the traditional story it
allows for the main plot to proceed with enough room for some imaginative
story telling.. The story takes place in a renaissance setting;  in France,
with Leonardo Da Vinci providing some comic relief on more than one
occasion. This addition of Leonardo Da Vinci, was quite successful in that
it added some color to the movie, since some of the roles are a bit
stereotypical. For example the role that was scripted for the prince leaves
a few things to be desired. For instance the character seems to be a bit too
unstable and fickle, a crown prince should not be anything remotely like
that. Especially since he is portrayed to be in his mid twenties at the
least and almost ready to take the throne.  The characters of
Danielle(Cinderella) played by Drew Barrymore, and that of the evil step
mother, played by Anjelica Huston, are well developed and well played by the
two women.  Although the part of Danielle is a bit stretched it is not too
unlikely and not totally unbelievable. The nuances of the character are
brought out well by Drew Barrymore and from watching the movie it seems like
she had fun making the movie. As a contrast the part of the evil step mother
is clearly seen from the very beginning and is almost clique. But,  Anjelica
Huston seems to add a certain flair to the role that makes it suit the movie
nearly perfectly.
     The actual story is fairly predictable since it is after all the basic
story of Cinderella, but there are more than enough twists in how the story
is told to make it interesting and enjoyable. The acting is of high caliber
and seems deserved of praise. All in all this movie takes you back into
history, into a seemingly magical fairy land. But, don't get me wrong there
is nothing but reality, it is just refreshing to watch a movie that is not
based in a familiar setting with everyday familiar things happening. So
although the story is basically familiar the world it is set in is not, and
that adds a dimension to the film which in this humble reviewers opinion
makes it worth seeing

Title
Review for Hurricane, The (1999)
Cast: Denzel Washington, Vicellous Reon Shannon, Deborah Unger, Leiv
Schreiber, John Hannah and Dan Hedaya
Director: Norman Jewison
Producer(s): Armyan Berstein, Norman Jewison, and John Ketcham
        As an up and coming boxer, Rubin 'Hurricane' Carter, had a lot
of things going for him and it looked like things in his life were on
the up and up until he was wrongfully imprisoned for murder. Ending up
spending many years in jail, trying in vain to get his sentence and
wrongful conviction overturned. This movie is the story of his life.
The movie is based on a true story about a real man and is quite
touching and surprisingly doesn't deviate from the truth other than
for some artistic leeway (a Hollywood first). 
        There is some great acting in this movie especially on the
part of Denzel Washington, he manages to capture the role of Rubin
Carter perfectly and makes the movie magical. He manages to portray
the real person as well as the character that is in the script he is
given admirably. Aside from Denzel Washington the remainder of the
cast portray their roles very well and bring out the warm characters
that are involved in this story as well as some of the truly harsh and
evil ones.  The casting for the roles in this movie is great everyone
fit their role perfectly; the movie is an example of what casting for
a movie should be like. The whole cast gives the movie a very real
quality that it needed to have in order to be credible.  
        Now, this movie is quite long being just under three hours so
that's my warning to anyone who can't sit for that long. Regardless of
length the pacing in the movie keeps you interested the whole time
(and we'll ignore the one guy who was happily sleeping when the movie
ended). The pace was perfect I didn't want to get up to stretch my
legs even and that is rare for a movie this long. 
        I like the portrayal of both the jail and the racially tense
atmosphere that is brought out during the course of the movie. The
racial atmosphere changes as time progresses and this is true with
reality, things became more tolerant as time passed with pockets of
hate still existing. This is nothing new and it exists in reality,
this was a good feature to make visible as it gave the movie a grander
more realistic feel to it.  I also like how the jail cell that Ruben
Carter was kept in changed along with the conditions of the jail. Time
doesn't stand still for anyone and things change over time as this the
case in reality the jail changed and the conditions that the inmates
were kept in changed. This attention to detail gives the movie a
certain quality that is often lacking in movies today.
All in all, The Hurricane is a whirlwind ride of a movie that takes us
through the life of a man that was horribly wronged by the system. I
highly recommend it, its informative and thoughtful as well as very
well done and a pleasure to watch. The movie also points out the
importance of being literate. Its definitely one of the best of the
year, well last year now, and I think that it should get some of the
credit it deserves. Good Luck at the Oscars!
February 13, 2000
For any comments I can be reached at bootsector@hotmail.com

Title
Review for Gattaca (1997)
Reviewer: M.P.  (bootsector@hotmail.com)
In a world where being conceived the natural way is looked
down upon, and being genetically altered is the only way to get a real
job. A story is born, a story that shows us a brief glimpse of what
could be and of what is mere fantasy. Gattaca is about the struggle to
survive against the impossible odds. Vincent(Ethan Hawke), is an
invalid who has a dream of flying into the stars because he doesn't
feel like he belongs. He is bared from decent jobs because he is an
invalid, a child who's conception was left to chance, he wasn't
genetically altered. Vincent goes against all the odds that a genetic
heart condition will kill him in his early 30's finds a way to get
past the system. Everything goes great until there is a murder at his
place of work, 'Gattaca'. The ensuing investigation brings him closer
to Irene(Uma Thurman) a co-worker assigned to help the police
investigation of the murder. The murder threatens his survival more
than seemingly possible since he had nothing to do with the crime in
question.  
This story is build up very well and the pacing of it builds
up very well. The story is set in a very sterile environment...
something similar to our earth today, albeit a bit further in the
future. And the director lets the audience know what the circumstances
are and how the protagonist finds himself in his situation. Although
this portion of the movie is a bit slower than the rest of the movie,
it is required and well balanced to the rest of the movie. Unlike many
other Sci-Fi movies of late, this one gives you the background to its
complex setting and brings the audience further into the story. The
setting is marvelously created, and everything seems fairly accurate
with at the very least current technology. Although some things can be
questioned, the movie does not leave gaping holes about the setting,
or situation, what holes are there can be overlooked. This movie shows
details that many other movies have intentionally avoided, so if the
sight of urine in a jar or bag bothers you, you may be advised not to
watch this movie. BUT don't get me wrong, these are merely props and
aren't the focus of the movie although they are seen from time to
time. That had to be mentioned unfortunately because not all people
react the same way to seeing bodily fluids. A few small things didn't
make much sense, and in my opinion seemed a bit predictable. But these
things although predictable to some extent are well placed and for the
most part not blatantly obvious. Aside from Vincent's real brother
just happening to be assigned to the murder case(must use willing
suspension of disbelief). Then again no story can be perfect and
without flaws, but that one point is a tad bit big... things like that
don't happen very often.
The acting in this movie is spectacular! The casting for this
movie in my opinion is perfect.  Although Ethan Hawke does look a bit
on the clumsy side in some places, and there is at the very least one
mistake in the script(wrong word used in dialogue). Ethan, plays the
role of Vincent almost perfectly. His mild clumsiness, shows that the
real Vincent is flawed and human, and at the same time shows a certain
grace that gives credit to the role. Although the acting by Ethan is
very good in my opinion, it wont be getting him an Oscar nomination.
Uma Thurman, who plays the role of Irene, is just stunning. The role
couldn't have been cast better. She plays the role very well, although
the role is a bit stiff at times. Uma, seems to glow in this movie(I
could be wrong here simply because I am male and find her very
attractive). Jude Law (Jerome, the person whose identity Vincent
borrows), also puts in a spectacular performance and plays the part of
Vincent's accomplice in duping the system really well. He seems like
he belongs in the role. And the conditions of the role demanded a fair
amount of patience, and the demands were more than met. All the acting
in this movie is of exceptional caliber, Ethan and Uma shine through
marvelously and are in themselves good reason to see this movie. 
Despite its flaws, and in some cases style oddities, this
movie is well worth the money you pay to watch it. Although I am
partial to Science Fiction movies in general, this one is in my humble
opinion one of the better ones that have been made in a rather long
time. And to top it all off, there are some subtle messages and ideas
in this movie.. it will leave you thinking, and if it doesn't you
should at least find the story entertaining. I rate this movie 3.5/4. 

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
        In 1912, a ship set sail on her maiden voyage across the
Atlantic for America. This ship was built to be the largest ship in
the world, and she was. She was also build to be one of the most
luxurious, and that she was. Finally, she was built to be unsinkable
and that unfortunately she was not. To get a ticket for this voyage
you either: spent a life's savings to get to America to start life
anew, were part of the upper class and had the money to spare, or
finally were lucky enough to have a full house in a poker match by the
docks like Jack Dawson. Jack Dawson makes the trip, and happens to be
at the right place at the right time. Rose DeWitt Bukater, a first
class passenger, climbs the railings at the aft of the ship with
thoughts of jumping. Thus is started a tale of romance and intrigue,
and a tale of death and tragedy...
        This movie is about a tragic event that took place a great
many years ago, an even that should not be taken lightly as any other
bit of historical trivia. The movie Titanic shows what happened, maybe
not with a 100% degree of accuracy, but it still shows it very
realisticaly. Now the Titanic is both a story on its own and a
backdrop for a story. It serves as both admirably, brining forth an
interesting story that although simple in its most simple premise is
very captivating. This movie is very emotional simply because of what
it is, but that alone is not enough. The story is brought out with a
certain style that makes is so much more emotional and so much more
effective. Movies such as this will not be forgotten all too quickly
and unfortunately then are not something that is produced by Hollywood
with any great frequency. The attention to detail that was paid is
remarkable. The whole premise for the telling of the story is
interesting, with the showing of brand new footage from the wreck of
the Titanic adding much flavor to an already good movie. 
        Part of the magical chemistry behind this story is the acting,
and for this movie its extremely good acting from the whole cast. The
performances put in by the main stars is something to be admired. The
characters were played out so memorably that both Leonardo DiCaprip
and Kate Winslet should receive at the least nominations for their
roles. Looking at the acting done in the movie it seems as if they
aren't acting but are actually the characters in the movie. The
casting for the movie could really have been better, in my humble
opinion that is. One character that will most likely not be mentioned
by any other review or commentary about this film is that of the ship
itself. Yes, you read correctly, the ship is a character. How is the
Titanic a character? you ask well simple, a ship had a certain
character about it and as most sailors and boats men will tell you.
This character is everything about the ship from its specifications to
its luxuries and the Titanic was no stranger to this. Mr. Cameron
brings the ship to life in an almost literal sense. All this adds to
the movie in a certain way that most Hollywood productions cant seem
to grasp. 
        Now, to produce the effect that I mentioned above and to sink
the ship itself are feats that are accomplished by special effects
wizards. The effects in this movie range from marvelous costumes to
beautifully rendered scenes of the ships sinking. In some respects you
cannot tell that the effects are there, you simply think that what you
see is what happened or what is happening(if your imagination is
good). The technical wizardry done in this movie is just spectacular
and actually getting new footage from the wreck of the Titanic is
unique. The movie will leave you amazed at the effects, and that is a
feat since there is no monsters or aliens in this movie, just humans
and an oversized ship. 
        The movie will amaze you and it will pull on your emotions,
the theater that I went to had a few people leaving with tears in
their eyes. Now that is not a feat accomplished by most movies, now
the fact that the tragedy actually occurred is brought home with
something of a punch, I wont spoil the ending and say what happens
regardless it is an interesting movie from beginning to the very end.
The historical value of this movie is quite high, and honestly is
something that should be watched for the sake of seeing it and seeing
the tragedy, for it is extremely well done. The method of telling the
story is also good, maybe not totally unique but effective none the
less. Regardless of anything mentioned above this movie is a grandiose
production and the sheer size of the project undertaken is something
to be marveled at. The simple fact that the movie is smashingly
successful at what it aims to achieve is just astonishing. If you get
the chance to see this movie GO!!! it might not be the best movie in
the world.. but it ranks fairly highly and is well worth the time
spent watching it. During none of the 3 hours and 13 minutes of the
movie are you bored nor does your attention wane from the movie. 


Title
Review for Nothing to Lose (1997)
        Life is absolutely perfect for Nick Beame, he loves his wife,
he loves his job, he's well off. Nothing could be better, then he
comes home to find his wife in bed with someone. Next thing he notices
are his boss' cufflinks. Putting two and two together he assumes the
worst. Now if his troubles weren't bad, he gets mugged, well not
really mugged.. this is where the fun begins. The would-be mugger is
taken for a joy ride along with the audience. 
        This movie turned out to be surprisingly funny. I knew, I was
going into a comedy from the moment the ticket was purchased.  But I
was not expecting any intelligent conversation, not to mock either Mr.
Lawrence or Mr. Robbins I just wasn't expecting something this
amusing. Needless to say this is actually a funny comedy the plot is
fairly believable, there is little blood spilt, and unless my memory
has decided to fail me there was no explosions. It was refreshing to
see a movie come out of Hollywood that relied on the acting of its
cast to produce the desired effect as opposed to relying on special
effects like Jurasic Park 2 was inevitably forced to do. Tim Robbins
puts in a good performance as Nick Beame, and Martin Lawrence Tee(AKA
Terrence) also puts in a respectable and witty performance. 
        The actual storyline of the movie is believable although not
something likely happen, it is possible and that is what lends this
movie credibility.  Remarkably the movie shows us the two contrasts in
our lives the poor and the fairly well off as they truly are, Humans
above all else.  Although this movie is no revelation it did bring up
the point that people have a hard time getting jobs and in many cases
its not due to their skills but due to other factors such as sex or
skin color. It  pokes some fun at life, at the same time showing that
something's in life are brutally hard to cope with. This movie is a
movie that lets your take a break relax, kick back, have some fun and
get away from it for about 2 hours. What you get from it is time well
spent and in most cases a smile on your face.

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
        As races grow and expand they need space and if there is a
limited amount of space they will interfere with one another. And
quite obviously they will conflict. Such is the case in the 23rd
Century, Humankind is essentially pitted against Insectkind. The world
as we knew it is not the same, the world is united and citizenship is
a duty that is given to those that serve the state. In this world,
graduating students such as Johnny Rico, Carmen Ibanez(...I think...)
and their classmates choose to be civilians or citizens. Citizenship
in their case is achieved by joining the military, whatever facet of
it each person is suited for. Here the movie begins in earnest, and
I'll stop as to not ruin it. 
        The story is based about a small group of friends and
classmates, that is originally from the Buenos Aires(which is
destroyed... I won't say how). Their relationships develop through the
course of the movie, this is the underlying plot to the movie and is
in some cases quite sad.  It shows that people are still people even
in the roughest of conditions. Other than the interactions between the
characters, which isn't very deep on its own, the plot of the movie is
fairly simple. And there are quite a few plot gaps, and some things
just happen without any previous buildup. Also some parts of this
movie are just a little cliché, and you can almost see things
happening. All this does not take away from the movie though and in
some cases even adds to the viewing quality of it. The movie flows
unbelievably, you are not left there wondering what just happened..
simply because you are already onto the next event.  The buildup for
this movie is fairly lengthy, the setting and situation is built up in
such a manner to let the viewer know what is going on and what is
happening before it happens. Even during the build up to action/war
the movie seems to flow very well.  One thing that is fairly
noticeable is that most of the characters in this movie are
aesthetically pleasing.. very aesthetically pleasing, this is just one
of those things that the budget seemed to be able to afford. I am not
saying that the future might not be like this its just hard to imagine
that everyone will look THAT good. 
        The acting in this movie was surprisingly decent, it is
obviously far from Oscar caliber anywhere in this production but the
acting that was needed for this movie was more than adequately filled.
Although personally, I found the main character, Johnny Rico, to be
played a bit on the stiff side, at more than one point in the movie he
should have showed a bit more emotion than he did.. a blank stare
could be a sign of numbness to a situation but... um.. this is acting
not reality, a bit more emotion could have been shown. Other than that
rather small detail, I would have to say that the acting in this movie
is good. Most of the actors/resses are fresh faces, and that is a
refreshing change from seeing the same super hero figures going at it
again in the same old tired roles. 
        The effects are the backbone of this movie and they are
delivered in abundance. To top it off they are spectacular and then
some. The movie is simply worth seeing simply for the special effects.
The scenes in space really blew you away, although some of the things
that the spaceships/cruisers were doing is simply beyond logic.. sorry
folks there wasn't the slightest shred of military tactics shown in
this movie.. just sheer military stupidity.. but again that is not why
this movie is being watched. If you want tactics or a real military
movie you will find more than enough on either or both of those
topics. Back to the effects, they were very life like and just
stellar. Some of the battle scenes were a bit hard to follow because
they were so fast but they added to the , the race for the special
effects Oscar this year is very tight, well maybe not as tight now...
        One thing that I do have to comment on is the violence,
personally I don't mind it and it very suiting for this movie.
Regardless I do have to say that this movie is about the most violent
movie that I have ever seen, even Braveheart has trouble comparing to
this, carnage abounds. So if that is not your thing then you may want
to consider not watching this movie. One thing that did strike me very
odd was that there was no swearing, lots of violence but no swearing.
Also the General style of the movie was a bit disconcerting, fascist
overtones were present(but then again they were almost fitting). Some
of the commentary in the movie hints at the fact that we as a society
take citizenship all too lightly, and that we are being given
something that we don't entirely deserve. This is just one of those
small things that are mentioned, its not continually hammered at you
like in other movies.
        All in all this movie is very entertaining and worth seeing if
you aren't really interested in gleaning anything from the movie other
than entertainment value. Its one of the funnest movies of the last
few years. The movie is a tad bit violent so the rating that it has is
well more than apt, people with children might want to wait till its
on tape where the carnage isn't on such a large screen. I rate this
movie 3/4 for its entertainment value and its special effects. Its
more than worth the money, I'd even say seeing it a couple times is
still worth it(not many movies have that ability)

Title
Review for Beach, The (2000)
Cast: Leonardo DiCaprio, Tilda Swinton, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume
Canet, Robert Carlyle
Director: Danny Boyle
Producer(s): Andrew Macdonald, Callum McDougall
        Disillusioned and trying to find the spice of life, Richard
(Leonardo DiCaprio) sets off for Thailand. There he a meets crazed man
by the name of Daffy (Robert Carlyle) who gives him a map to a Beach,
a secret utopia, then commits suicide. Richard sets off for this beach
with his neighbors from this hotel, Étienne (Guillaume Canet) and
Françoise (Virginie Ledoyen). Once they get there the three discover a
secret society existing on this beach, there Richard falls for
Françoise. This covers about half to two thirds of the movie and aside
from the romantic element, which is solely a creation of Hollywood,
seems to hold to the original novel.
        The cinematography and general beauty of this part of the
movie is breathtaking. I don't think anyone can argue that this movie
is visually stunning. But that is were many things go wrong, Darius
Khondji has totally outdone himself in doing the cinematography.
Though the script and the interpretation of the novel are quite
lacking. The plot of the movie moves along at a decent pace for about
half of the movie or there abouts. This is where the movie has some
great potential, then the three travelers get the island and there is
a turn for the better, yes folks I said better. Now up to about two
thirds of this movie its actually pretty good, nothing spectacular
aside from the cinematography but it still has promise. This is where
things start to degenerate to something that becomes almost
un-watchable. There is even a 'video game' style sequence that borders
on the disgusting, it doesn't make sense for the movie and just looks
dumb in my opinion (and I am hoping many other peoples). I am hoping
that in my little rant I've made it abundantly clear that the movie is
lacking quite seriously in plot and uneven pacing, so if you go see it
and you don't like it because of this don't blame me. 
The character development was not up to par either; I found the
character of Richard to be nothing more than a spoiled child. Although
there is a feeble attempt to make this whole story profound it fails
and Richard (Leo's character) comes off as a wannabe philosopher. The
character seems to be underdeveloped from the get go and seems to just
do things for no apparent reason, granted some people are like this
(myself included) but I nor anyone I know that is fairly random would
ever do things of the sort this character does. The next point is that
some of the really interesting characters are simply not developed
enough. Richard is obviously obsessed by Françoise at the early stages
of the story, yet there is actually very little development along this
story line. This I am sure contributes to the movie's lack of core
plot and being unfocused.        
Now, I shall move onto something a little better about the movie (for
all you cynics out there the movie did have a few good things about
it). The cast and acting was passable at the very least, and I think
that Leonardo DiCaprio actually did pretty well in the role of
Richard. Mind you I think the rest of the cast that had some which had
reasonably sized roles did equally well if not better. Which begs the
question why is Leonardo paid so much? (I think this is a topic all on
its own so I won't get into it). But I like the fact that there was an
international cast used, had only and American cast been used I can
see this movie being horrible. The international flavor added a more
global feel to the movie that made it that much more bearable. Not to
mention the movie is set in Thailand and a global cast makes more
sense. 
        When all is said and done I liked the movie for the most part
but the gaping inadequacies of the plot are unforgivable. I would not
recommend this movie to anyone, the fact that I liked it has a lot to
do with the cinematography and the sheer beauty of the movie not its
plot or story. As it is the story tries to be much too philosophical
and fails at its attempt. If you do end up going to see this movie be
forewarned about its shortcomings.
February 21, 2000
For any comments I can be reached at bootsector@hotmail.com

Title
Review for Simpatico (1999)
Cast: Jeff Bridges, Nick Notle, Sharon Stone, Catherine Keener
Director: Matthew Warchus
Producer(s): Jean-François Fonlupt, Dan Lupovitz, Timm Oberwelland
        An affluent horse breeder's past comes up to haunt him; an
ages old cover-up and blackmail comes back to haunt him at the hands
of one of his accomplices. That's pretty much the essence of the movie
and I have to say that it becomes quite boring at times and is very
slow. That aside the story was well presented and probably quite close
and representative of its source. The acting in particular I found
very good, the character development was also quite interesting but
alas the story simply did not hold my interest enough for me to get
into the movie.  A few things about the story didn't sit very well
with me for example the original scam and cover-up heavily involved
the character played by Sharon Stone, yet in the end her character
played a relatively small role and it seems she should have been
utilized more to further the story along better. On the flip side the
character played by Catherine Keener I found to be very interesting
and I thought that it was developed very well and helped the story a
lot. The character's aside this movie had some interesting merits but
in the end it lacked in story and pacing. 
        As far as the acting and casting for this movie is concerned I
have to say that the choices of Nick Nolte and Jeff Bridges were great
as well as that of Catherine Keener. All these people acted their
parts admirably, as for the part that Sharon Stone played, she played
it well but the part was not utilized enough. 
        The directing for this movie is something that I have to
comment on because for once in a long while you see a director
actually add a very distinctive flavor to a movie, this is one of
those occasions. Matthew Warchus in my opinion added an interesting
touch and spin to the movie and I think he tackled a touch subject (I
myself wouldn't be able to look at horseracing and make a movie out of
it). There is a certain flavor about this movie and I think that the
direction of the movie is the reason for this. The one flaw that I do
have to comment on is the pacing, the subject matter in my opinion
wasn't interesting enough on its own to have this kind of flavoring
and directorial touch about it. I certainly hope that the director
makes more movies as this does show promise even if I myself don't
like it. 
        All in all I found this movie boring and very slow, the acting
was good but the story just didn't evolve enough and wasn't
captivating enough to make Simpatico an enjoyable movie to watch.
Although there is much going for the movie I didn't find it good even
though I see the merits and style used and can compliment the movie on
them. I wouldn't recommend this movie to anyone but if you are a horse
fanatic or a racing fanatic then you will most likely enjoy this
movie.
February 27, 2000
For any comments I can be reached at bootsector@hotmail.com

Title
Review for Red Corner (1997)
        In a land where there the concepts of crime and punishment
differ so greatly from our own. Where a crime committed is punished by
a swift death in most cases. In this land, a man is framed for a
murder he did not commit. In the north American justice system a man
must be proven guilty but till then he is presumed innocent. In china
one must effectively prove his innocence, and until then he is
presumed guilty. Such is the task undertaken by Jack Moore and Yuelin,
the court appointed defendant. Justice is served both ways, and the
real truth comes out in the process. 
        My first impressions of the movie were not all that convincing
I thought it seemed fake. The setting didn't seem like it was China.
Although I have never been to China in my life and probably never will
go, the set for the movie didn't seem to be authentic enough. One
thing that always struck me when I saw pictures from Beijing, was the
volumes of people, and the volumes of bicycles another thing is that
the automobiles that were being driven there seemed awfully American
looking.  I don't speak from experience but this seemed to be a little
inadequate. Also upon speaking to a few of my colleagues who are from
China, I was told that the whole movie is a bit outdated. The policies
and the setting. Other than that it did seem like the setting was very
well created as well as the atmosphere. That was only a first
impression, and those aren't always the proper ones. 
        Now going back the setting and looking at with thought of the
plot, the setting, especially the atmosphere seems to be a little bit
contrived or set up. Something's just seems to be a bit too
predictable. The scenes that are shown are in some cases pretty
shocking to most western peoples, for they show the methods of justice
in a Communist China. But this too is not half as bad as it could have
been. Therefore I have to say that the part of the plot pertaining to
the set up and the atmosphere is good up until a certain point. It is
more than sufficient for the movie, but would have been better had a
stronger hint been given towards the real conditions of the day. Mind
you I am speaking from opinion only here so I should not be taken to
be anything other than some unknowledgeable guy stating what he
thinks.  Now onto the real plot of the movie, it was actually pretty
decent.  There were occasions where things just happened that left me
wondering what was going on and why. But they could be overlooked. As
a general whole the plot seemed to be fairly intact. A couple things
in the plot jump out at me as odd but they suit the movie in their own
unique way. 
        Now to the acting, here we have two different performances.
Richard Gere who played his character fairly well and quite
believably, and Bai Ling, who played her part superbly. Bai Ling's
performance was one that leaves you imagining that she is the actual
character from the story and not some actress. This is a feat not
easily achieved by most actors, especially actors who are not native
to speaking English. The supporting roles in this movie could have
been done a little bit better in my opinion, or the casing could have
been different but that does not ruin the movie nor does it add
anything bad. The casting for the main characters is really well done,
especially in Bai Ling's case. She should be proud of this
performance, lets hope it proves to be a good starting point for her.
        As a whole the concept of the movie is a really good one, even
if not the most politically correct one. The movie works well towards
what it aims to achieve, but it doesn't quite get all the way. As a
whole the movie is worth seeing and it is good thoughtful
entertainment. I found the movie to be fairly well done but a few
things stuck out, there was a bit too much action for a serious drama
and that's what this movie should have been. I guess they were looking
for some audience appeal, and probably found it.  


Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
        Well if you are up for stellar effects then this is the movie
for you. Because thats all that there really is.... I found that after
watching this movie it had many many gaps and flaws in simple logic in
the Plot. For one thing, a white leading actor who has a black
daughter does leave some curiosity.... I am not saying that this isn't
possible.. but it does leave one to wonder...I know I did. Another
thing is that this movie has sections which are painfully stretched
out.... and certain Scenes are repeated essentially but with slight
variations. There was one scene that should have been short... but it
was horribly stretched and somewhere in the middle of it I found
myself thinking.. OK enough already get on with it. There are also
times where you have to wonder why things happen the way they do...
things just magically happen and there is no prelude or anything of
the sort... another thing that I noticed towards the end was that some
characters just vanished without a trace but they were fairly major
through most of the beginning. This movie is also very predictable...
you can almost tell the final story somewhere in the middle and you
definitely know what will happen at a given moment.. granted this is
hard to omit but here its just blatant it sits there and stares at
you. Also some of the things that happen are a little TOO predictable
and several cliques are repeated... It gets boring at times to tell
you the truth... even though there is still action going on. Another
little point I might add is that the main character is supposed to be
a quiet chaos mathematician not some Shoot them up type of Hero. Some
of the characters are not proper for their roles. The acting is fine
but the characters just don't seem to add up. If I was to base my
review totally on the plot then I wouldn't rate this movie too highly
        But that's just the thing this movie isn't just the plot, its
the whole package and this package is really well done. The whole
movie is really well done and looks really good and if one was to
overlook the flaws in the plot and characters then this is really a
movie. The special effects are just amazing, you can't tell that the
dinosaurs are created it looks like they were there live, in a few
instances of course you know its fake but there are other times that
you just wouldn't be able to say that the creature wasn't there during
filming, extinct or not. Another thing is the Destruction scenes...
WOW, those were masterpieces.. well some of them were they were well
choreographed and along with the Dino's make this one of the reasons
to see this movie. This movie is fairly long but it is action packed
so it should do well in the box office.. unfortunately it will take
away from Fifth element but alas what can we do.. I may be too cynical
for my age but this movie is only worth seeing for the effects and for
it few funny moments.. go see it in a matinee if you really must see
it its not worth full price if you ask me.
        One Little side note, although my opinion of this movie may
not have been the best the way that this movie was marketed and how
many theaters it was shown in Toronto this opening weekend is nothing
short of stupid, there were 10 theater movie theaters that were
playing this movie around the clock I think that some people really
want money badly.... and I think that this type of activity hurts the
movie industry let the other movies also have a chance.... you know
any movie with that much play would succeed even if it was the worst
movie ever made..... I thought I'd put this here to deflate the movie
hype about this flick... its not that bad a movie but its not THAT
great either hope you people realize this.


Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
 http://www.alien-resurrection.com
        Ellen Ripley died 200 years ago trying to wipe out a violent
species, she succeeded. Until now. Brought back to life by methods of
cloning. Brought back to life with the Queen still inside her. The
queen alien is removed from Ripley and raised for breeding. 'Special'
cargo is required for this breeding and science that is going on with
the queen and her young. But as luck would have it the aliens are a
bit on the smart side and they escape, and here begins the fun...
        Well you should now have an idea as to what this movie is
about, nothing spectacularly original on its own. But with enough
originality to be a good idea. The beginning of the movie is great,
really well thought out and really interesting. Then instead of
continuing along this line the movie degenerates into the predictable.
Its pretty well executed with some original scenes that provide some
interest. The plot itself needed a bit of work in my opinion, some
things seem to be taken for granted and somethings seem to happen for
no real reason whatsoever. I wont give examples for that might spoil
the movie for some people, but some of the scenes could be removed and
the plot furthered by other means. All in all the plot is fairly sound
and doesn't leave you wondering why things happen, but then again the
plot isn't very demanding so at least this job was accomplished with
some proficiency. The plot in this movie is by no means perfect
though, but its a good start for a movie. 
        The characters, being such an integral component of the plot
have to be proper. This is usually a given and it in most cases just
ignored.  But in the case of Alien: Resurrection I am brining it up,
because a few of the odd scenes that I found in the movie were caused
by a particular character, Call. I don't know what bothers me about
the character, but something does. I think that the character should
have been looked into with a bit more effort, maybe giving the
audience something more to grasp a hold of so to say. The character
didn't seem to fit too well, I am not too sure that Ms. Ryder was
perfect for the role either. But thinking about it I am not too sure I
could think of any actress that would have been able to do as good a
job. So I will have to concede that she was cast well for the part,
even thought the part is a bit on the odd side. The actual acting in
this movie was fairly convincing, especially Sigourney Weaver. She
plays her part with an interesting passion and wit, very good
performance from her. The rest of the cast performed well, and
convincingly in some cases much better than an action picture could
have hoped for. Although in the end the two things that I will most
remember about the acting and characters from this movie is the
character of Call, simply because something about the character
bothers me and Ripley's new found wit. 
        Having some thought about this movies there is something that
bothers me about it, I have tried putting my finger on it but with no
avail. The character of Call is one thing but that is not the only
thing that bothers me. Something seemed to be missing when I was
finished watching it, I don't get that sort of feeling from most
movies. I got the distinct impression that it was rushed and that the
director was a bit too liberal with his cut. I don't know if I would
recommend this movie to everyone, the special effects of this movie
were spectacular in some scenes and very appropriate but nothing so
revelation that everyone had to see it. SO if you are a fan of science
fiction flicks or horror flicks you should like this movie. Now those
of you who are not die hard fans of either genre, here's the question
you should ask yourself: Do you really want to see a decent action
flick that is a bit out of this world? if yes then you should like the
movie. Just don't come crying to me if you didn't like it. Its nothing
grand, its an action picture you wont get any grand revelations about
life from it. You should enjoy the ride. And If I ever figure out what
is bothering me about the movie I'll add a little PS at the end. Other
than bin a bit rushed with some oddities its an OK flick. You might
want to be able to stomach some gore though. This movie isn't for all
audiences, you should know if this movie is for you or not, please use
your discretion folks, its at most a decent action/sci-fi/horror
flick. 
