Authors
Alex Sandell
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Star Trek: Insurrection (1998)
*This review was originally published at "The Juicy Cerebellum" and is
copyright 1998 Alex Sandell [All Rights Reserved].  To read the full review,
head to www.juicycerebellum.com*
If Merchant-Ivory produced a "Star Trek" film, this would be it. A man who
must have been about 7 feet tall sat in front of me at the theater, blocking
my view. At first, this infuriated me; by the end of the movie I felt like
thanking him. Watching his gigantic head bobbing up and down was the only
thing that managed to keep me awake.
"Insurrection" runs less than two hours but feels like it never ends. Whenever
Picard's new girlfriend Anij (Donna Murphy) magically puts the world in slow-
motion (don't ask), it feels like director Jonathan Frakes is applauding his
pacing of the film. It just plods along as though there is no need to actually
entertain the audience when you can just bore the hell out of them and still
bring in 30-million the first week.
There are a few redeeming scenes toward the end of the movie, but nothing you
haven't seen in the million sci-fi flicks that have went before it. There's
nothing new in the special-effect's department, either. The effects seem to
have been sacrificed to cover the lead actor's ever-growing salaries. The film
suffers from a dated look due to this. 1996's "Star Trek: First Contact" was
ahead of its time with the stunning visual effects it showed us. It is
unfortunate "Insurrection" took a step backward.
All in all, this film isn't worth your time. It is nothing more than one of
those "sucky" episodes you would turn off on TV. "Oh, no! They're playing that
'Insurrection' episode again! Is 'Jerry Springer' on?"
If you must see it, wait for video. Pass this one up at the theater and go
rent any of the even numbered sequels such as parts 2, 4, 6 or 8. When it
comes to the "Star Trek" series, odd just isn't better.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Thin Red Line, The (1998)
*This review originally appeared at 'The Juicy Cerebellum'.  It is copyright
1999 Alex Sandell/Juicy Cerebellum [All Rights Reserved].  To read the full
review, and others, go to www.juicycerebellum.com*
Where "Apocalypse Now" and "Platoon" were both one man's viewpoint on the
Vietnam war and "Saving Private Ryan" was the story of a handful of men
searching for one, "The Thin Red Line" is a film of every man and his quest to
keep the people around him alive. It weaves through a tapestry of dozens of
men's thoughts, actions and emotions without focusing in on any of them.
Instead, it melds everyone together into a gigantic collective where the
varying opinions add up to one powerful, but flawed, "soul".
Director and screenwriter, Terrence Malick, a Hollywood recluse who left
filmmaking for nearly 20 years after creating two classic films during the
1970s, has turned the second World War into a poem. He finds beauty hiding
under the surface of the grotesque, emotion tucked safely away in those who
claim to be emotionless, and a heart beating freely within a gigantic chest-
cavity which should have been locked for all time. The results are stunning.
The camera weaves through the long grass like a snake as the soldiers work
their way to the top of the hill. As it passes over their heads, we hear some
of their thoughts, we witness their actions and we see how the two oftentimes
conflict. In one scene, a single butterfly enters the film, only to disappear
seconds later. A lot of the actors follow the butterfly's lead.
Nature plays the biggest part in "The Thin Red Line"; everyone else, whether a
big star such as John Travolta, or a virtually unknown actor like Dash Mihok,
are stuck in supporting roles. When they're gone, they're gone, but nature
moves on, as it has always done, never stopping to worry about what it just
lost. Does this make nature inherently evil? As a part of nature, is that evil
inside of us? If so, one of the more philosophical soldiers wonders, who
planted the seed?
And that's where the trouble begins. There has never been a perfect war
movie. Each one stumbles over its own ideologies and/or pretensions. "The
Thin Red Line" is no exception. Most of the thoughts and philosophies spewed
out during the film sound contrived and juvenile; tired and weak. We've heard
all this before. I don't know if this was intentional on the part of the
screenwriter (trying to emulate the way a young man under tons of pressure
would try to make sense of it all), or if he just eats lots of fortune
cookies and needed somewhere to throw out these wonderful observations found
inside the sugary shell. Surprisingly enough, another negative aspect of the
film were the cameo roles played by John Travolta, George Clooney and Woody
Harrelson. Having noticeable stars popping in and out of the movie distracted
us from the point it was trying to make, and the parts could have been played
just as easily by an unknown. Finally, at nearly three hours, the film is too
long. Malick seems to lose his sense of direction during the last forty-five
minutes, and begins to wander aimlessly from scene to scene, not knowing
quite when to end the film that began as a classic.
That being said, the pros definitely outweigh the cons, and with the
wonderful directing, acting and cinematography which was already in place, it
would have taken just a little more work to make "The Thin Red Line" the
perfect war movie that a lot of people have been waiting for. As it is, it
stands as a brilliant film and one of the best war movies ever made. -Alex
Sandell
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Psycho (1998)
This review originally appeared at "The Juicy Cerebellum"
(www.juicycerebellum.com) and is copyright 1998 Alex Sandell/Juicy
Cerebellum [All Rights Reserved].
As a lot of you who have been reading this page for a while know, I
consider the original "Psycho" to be the best horror film ever made.
Millions of other people share that opinion with me. This creates some
mighty big shoes for a remake to fill. Some would say, "why even try?"
Universal would answer with, "$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$".
When you are remaking a film classic this legendary, the safest play
would be to make it as close to the original as possible. This is the
play the overrated Gus Van Sant (Good Will Hunting) chose to go with.
Most of this film is a shot-by-shot remaking of the original. It's
actually less of a remake and more of a retread. This will have a lot
of people asking, "what the hell is the point?"
Universal will answer with, "$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$".
There are a few mindless additions to the film (maybe a total of 3
minutes worth. All 3 minutes will be unnoticeable unless you've seen
the original at least 30 times.) which are put there to try and keep
diehard fans on their toes for two hours. A couple lines of dialogue
have been altered in a failed attempt to bring the 1960 "Psycho"
"up-to-date" with the nineties. And, most annoyingly, whenever a
killing occurs we get some sort of MTV, "Beavis and Butthead on Acid"
sort of directing style where images flash in front of our face
in-between each slice of the knife. 
Wow . . . I wonder if this guy ever saw "Natural Born Killers" before?
Sadly, the film-cloning ends with the actors. The new cast just cannot
live up to the one Hitch assembled back in 1960. Anne Heche does okay
as Marion Crane, but her performance can't compare to Janet Leigh's.
Julianne Moore, an exceptional actress in past roles, just does not
seem to fit the part of Lila Crane. The "nineties" addition of
headphones blaring out rock 'n' roll definitely didn't help any. Viggo
Mortensen is absolutely unbearable as a redneck version of Sam Loomis,
a character portrayed wonderfully in the original by John Gavin.
Finally, although he gives it his best shot by over-acting and
mimicking moves which were perfected by Anthony Perkins, Vince Vaughn
comes off as nothing more than a weasly pest while playing the
infamous Norman Bates. His character doesn't even seem real, and
actually takes away from Mr. Perkin's exceptional performance. It's
almost as though Vaughn climbed inside Perkin's portrayal and beat it
into a whiney, fragmented parody.
This film is ridiculous. A waste of celluloid. I have never seen
anything so abhorrent come out of Hollywood. This is an insult to the
writers, producers, and more than anything, the director (Alfred
Hitchcock, of course) of the original "Psycho". It isn't played as a
tribute, being that the film fails to mention Mr. Hitchcock, or any
other members of the original cast and crew. It isn't played for
humor, such as "The Brady Bunch Movie" was. It seems like nothing more
than a gigantic rip-off meant to suck our wallets dry. Almost as if
Mr. Van Sant decided that if he waited long enough, no one would
notice. Why settle for being considered the "next" Hitchcock, when you
can simply be Hitchcock?
Go rent the original. Stay away from this scam. There's a unique movie
somewhere that wants your attention, instead.
