Authors
Spedersono
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
"South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut" (1999)
Directed by Trey Parker.  Written by Parker, Stone and Pam Brady.  With Voices
supplied by Parker, Stone and Isaac Davis.  Running Time: 80 minutes.  Rated
"R".
Having not actually ever seen a complete episode of Comedy Central's, "South
Park" I walked into the theatre not knowing what to expect.  I had only seen a
few minutes of the animated show on television once and although I found it
funny it did not prepare me for anything in the film version.
The film begins when the South Park kids (Cartman, Stan, Kyle and Kenny) make
their way the local theatre to see the new Canadian film, "Asses of Fire"
starring Terrance and Phillip.  After being informed by the ticket seller that
the film is "R" rated and that they need an adult guardian the kids bribe a
homeless man to by them the tickets.
The film, as the title promises, includes a lot of vulgarity.  After
experiencing three hours of non-stop cursing in the film, the kids' mouths
become filthy too.  Eventually, the rest of the kids in town see the film and
they too become "corrupted" by the Canadian duo.  Soon the mothers of these
kids form an organization called, "Mothers Against Canada" convinced that
Terrance and Phillip's home turf is responsible for the corruption of their
children and that the only way to stop any further damage is to execute them. 
Also, Kenny is killed and sent to Hell where he discovers that a recently
deceased Saddam Hussein and Satan are lovers and that they plan to take over
the world if Terrance and Phillip die.  Now, the fate of the world rests in the
hands of the South Park gang.
"South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut" is perhaps the most unexpected biting
social commentary you'll see in a film this year.  No target is too low for
it's creator's Trey Parker and Matt Stone and I'm a little surprised the film
didn't receive a NC-17 rating.  Their many targets include: The MPAA, the
military, Brooke Shields, The Baldwins and Bill Gates.  To top it off the movie
is a musical. However, the movie isn't flawless.  Some of the jokes fall flat,
especially the Saddam Hussein-Satan subplot, and it goes on too long and
although it's not boring the last 20 minutes don't match up with the first 60.
But, "South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut" is still a worthy film.  I just hope
that kids not allowed in because of the "R" rating don't bribe homeless people
to buy them tickets.
