Authors
Gordon Shumwa
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Thirteenth Floor, The (1999)
   I've been a fan of Daniel F. Galouye's work for over four decades.
Galouye was a WWII Air Force hero, retired early due to service-related
injuries; he switched professions to become a journalist, and when
further health problems appeared, became a free-lance writer in several
genres.   His work in Speculative Fiction, particularly minor milestones
like "DARK UNIVERSE" and "SIMULACRON-3," put him near the top of the SF 
field, and earned him a good deal of respect (and awards nominations.)
   For over three and a half decades, I've wanted to see a good movie
adaption of "SIMULACRON-3."   In fact, in the middle seventies, I
pitched the idea to a couple of Suits at Universal, trying to get them
to acquire the rights for a TV-movie.   
   Hilariously, I was completely unaware that Rainer Werner Fassbinder 
had already done a German TV "miniseries" adaption, which by all accounts
was competent, respectable, decent work (1974).   I have yet to see a copy
of it, and as far as I know, no English-language or dubbed versions exist.
The German version had a pretty healthy budget and production capacity
behind it, so at least Daniel Galouye got to live long enough to see his
work done on the screen, apparently by folks who did it well.
   It's a pity that Galouye didn't live another couple of decades to see 
the current Emmerich/Rusnak version; I strongly believe he'd have been
delighted, flattered, and hugely pleased.
   "THE THIRTEENTH FLOOR" will be largely savaged in reviews, and not get
the box office it deserves, due to the heavy mining of the concept and
similar concepts in recent years;  viewpoint characters lost in ambigous
realities finally shown to be a sham have been thrown at us over and over
again, with over-budgeted c**p like "DARK CITY," "MATRIX," and "eXistenZ,"
and respectable efforts like Weir/Niccol's "THE TRUMAN SHOW."  ( And 
Carrey was robbed, come Oscar Time, but I digress. )
   Sadly, most of the movie-going public will simply not realize that
Galouye did it first, did it better, and has been adapted by scriptwriters
who obviously took the trouble to actually *READ* the book and show it
some respect during the adaption process.  The very real accomplishment
here will be drowned out and buried beneath the high-budget flash of
predecessors who derived their storylines from conceptual descendents
of Galouye's original work.   ( Galouye didn't do it first in prose SF,
by any means; he was just the first one to do a really good job of it,
and in its era, his novel was hugely innovative and important.)
   The only prior English credit I can find on Joseph Rusnak is a
second-unit director job on "GODZILLA, and I've certainly never heard
of Ravel Centeno-Rodriguez, but I want to go on record as formally 
thanking them for not messing up one of my favorite books.
   The movie's opening scenes, with Hannon Fuller ( played by Armin 
Mueller-Stahl, who's practically a German national treasure ) Seriously
Fooling Around In, and leaving a mysterious message in, a Virtual Reality
world -- and then getting killed after he returns to the real world --
set the tone for the entire movie:
   Wonderful period sets, props, and costuming, and a selection of film
stock and processing that creates a beautiful color version of classic
"film noir" to establish a period "feel" very important to the rest of
the movie.... the cinematographer, Wedigo Von Schultzendorff, has created
a unique feel and look for the movie without blowing the entire budget.
The handling of the obviously purposeful use of non-modern lighting,
grain, and color balance are absolutely wonderful work, particularly
considering the movie's base budget.  The period music is handled
superbly and is lovely to hear, in an era when movies seem to pride
themselves on their ability to damage the patrons' hearing.
   For me, the movie's greatest strength is that most of the major cast
members are not "stars," but are professionals, quite good indeed.
   Craig Bierko, who plays Douglas Hall, the much-beleaguered hero, and
Gretchen Mol, his love interest, are both excellent and understated in
their roles.  The have to portray slightly unreal characters, in slightly
unreal environments, and still make us believe in their characters; they do.
   While it's a truism that any competent actor should be able to change
into a different character with only alterations of body language and
micromomentary facial expression, we don't often get to see it done with
a reasonable degree of skill.   Bierko, Mol, and Vincent D'Onofrio probably
had a good deal of fun with their on-screen character transitions.
   The plot is a bit simplistic by our present-day standards; Hall has
to figure out how, and why, his life is being messed with, and Who The
Mysterious Lady actually is.  Long-time SF fans will see everything
coming a mile away, since Galouye's major plot points have been recycled
and fiddled with for decades.   But like any classic or minor-classic
work, the joy lies in the process, the trip.
   The only carps I have about this movie are the relatively gratuitous
use of zooming-tunnel-of-light symbology during the consciousness-transfer
scenes, and sparkling eyes.  Neither were necessary, and possibly should
have been avoided.  I would have preferred different architecture and
atmosphere for the final scene, but it worked just fine the way it was,
so what the heck. 
   This is the first movie I have ever seen with Emmerich's name on it 
that I was not embarrassed to admit in public I'd sat through all the 
way.   I plan to see it at least one more time while it's still in the
theater, just to take a few notes.
   You'll be amazed by the exterior scenes from the late 1930's.  The
work is occasionally breath-takingly good.
   I've been told that "THIRTEENTH FLOOR" was shot on $35 million, and
frankly have trouble believing it; that's a pretty danged decent piece
of work on a relatively average budget for something with FX work in it,
and all I can say is, if this is the quality of work that Emmerich can
manage when he's constrained to a sensible budget and does *NOT* have
Dean Devlin on the staff, I'll be looking forward to his next project.
   I might have gone five stars, if they'd left out the Descartes quote
at the beginning and the diving-through-light-tunnels footage.  ( Well,
once would have been okay, since the glowing-network imagery was nice,
and a good subliminal referent to neural dendritic structures. )
  As far as I'm concerned, this one is " * * * * " out of five possible.
In my personal rating system, this equates to "worth evening prices,
WITH popcorn."
>From Centropolis Pictures, U.S. release by Columbia
Cinematography: Wedigo Von Schultzendorff
Stars: Craig Bierko, Gretchen Mol, Vincent D'Onofrio, Dennis Haysbert,
       Armin Mueller-Stahl.
MPAA Rated:     R (for mild violence, profanity, adult themes)
Running Time:   ~120 minutes.
