Authors
Eric Vormelker
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Before Sunrise (1995)
Director:  Richard Linklater
Starring:  Ethan Hawke and Julie Delpy
Written by:  Richard Linklater and Kim Krizan
     I attended the world premiere here in Austin, and I don't know when
it will be appearing elsewhere, but it will be soon.
     I have to say that, right off the top, I have loved all of
Linklater's movies so far.  Maybe it's because I find his characters
speaking with my own words in situations that I remember, or maybe it's
because he is my own age, and lives here in Austin, and so the
experiences he's dealing with are such strong echoes of my own.  Or
maybe it's because the people in the film talk like real people, with
nerves and facades, startling honesty and stupidity, and absurd
solipsism.
     So I honestly have no idea how other people outside the dip
between GenX and Boomers where I am will respond to this movie.
     But Linklater and Kruzanne, Hawke and Delpy (they did have
influence) have drawn such strong characters, written such strong
dialog, that, as I look back on it, it felt to me like a romance like
the old Hollywood romances, a sharp, clean blend of innocence and
wisdom, but with a voice like my own.
     As I watched the film, I tried a couple times to step out of
myself and observe things from the woman's perspective, because I found
myself identifying very strongly with Hawke's character, and wondering
whether Delpy's character was developed so well.  But in talking with
my girlfriend afterward, it seems that she wasn't.  So if there was any
weak point, it was that.
     What most impressed me about the film was the way in which,
through dialogue and space, and choice of scene, they managed to bring
to life the experience of meeting someone, and, in the space of
fourteen hours, connecting so closely and deeply that you will remember
the event forever.
     What strongly reinforced this was the way Linklater used Delpy's
looks.  When the two first meet on the train, my initial reaction to
her was "This woman looks pretty average."  And through the film, she
slowly became more attractive, until at the end, she appeared
stunning.  It was as if we were seeing her through Hawke's character's
eyes.
     One little touch that just cemented the film for me was at
sunrise.  Just a filler clip Linklater had, of a sky that was that
color of blue that only happens about mid-dawn, that color that only
looks that way after you've just been up all night.  It defined the
event, and resonated with me, reminding me of those times, which have
been some of the most precious bonding experiences of my life.
     Early on in the film, Hawke's character talks about an idea he has
for an "All Day in the Life" cable channel, in which, for a full day,
the camera just follows a person's life.
     In the after-film discussion with Linklater, he admitted that that
was not a bad way to describe his filmmaking:  looking at the story of
the everyday, and bringing out the art of it.
     And as far as I'm concerned, he succeeded brilliantly.
