Authors
Sean Townsend
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for Dogma (1999)
STARRING:  Matt Damon, Ben Affleck, Linda Fiorentino, Chris Rock, Alan
Rickman, Janeane Garofalo, Jason Lee, Jason Mewes, Kevin Smith
DIRECTOR:  Kevin Smith
WRITTEN BY:  Kevin Smith
In the North America of the late 90's, a time and place wherein the
description "devout Catholic" is an oxymoron, you wouldn't think a film
like Dogma would have had trouble finding a distributor, much less
require the painfully self-embarrassed disclaimer which precedes it.
Surely even the most pious, guilt-ridden RC couldn't possibly take
offense to something Smith rightly calls a "comic fantasy," something so
purposely irreverent it rivals the Great Schism for sheer,
laugh-out-loud ludicrousness.  I mean, come on.  We're talking about a
movie that features Damon and Affleck as fallen angels (complete with
really fake-looking wings) who discover a policy loophole that will
either allow them to get back into Heaven with a clean slate-- or cause
the obliteration of everything, depending on whom you ask.  We're
talking about dusky-voiced Fiorentino as a heroine whose family tree
contains more 'begot's than the Book of Genesis, and Chris Rock as
"Rufus, the Thirteenth Apostle," who insists he was written out of the
Bible because he's black.  We're talking about inspired bits of ironic
casting like Alanis Morissette as God, or better yet, George Carlin as a
Cardinal who interprets Jesus' "Let the children come unto me," as "Get
'em when they're young."  We're talking about stoners Jay and Silent Bob
(Jason Mewes and Smith, who show up as these same characters in every
Smith movie) as prophets, fer chrissakes.  By all rights, a film this
goofy should have inspired nothing more than simple indifference, and
not just in Catholics.
Yet for the most part, it all clicks.  Damon and Affleck are ideal as
millennia-old buddies; their scenes together have a seemingly
effortless, comfortable ease, and they even get to poke fun at
speculation about their offscreen relationship.  Certain corporate
idolaters are slammed mercilessly, to hilarious effect.  Even Jay's
juvenile, expletive-riddled banter, annoying as it can be, often
provides a shockingly funny counterpoint when the going threatens to get
serious.  The film does lose some steam in the late going, however, and
the ending doesn't match the promise of the first half.  Still, Dogma
ends up being a thoughtful and heartfelt expression of Smith's simple
message about the difference between ideas and beliefs, faith and
religion, and why we're all here.

Title
Review for Eye of the Beholder (1999)
STARRING:  Ewen MacGregor, Ashley Judd, Patrick Bergin, k.d. lang, Jason
Priestley, Genevieve Bujold
DIRECTOR:  Stephan Elliott
WRITTEN BY:  Stephan Elliott (based on the novel by Mark Behm)
An early candidate for "Worst Film of 2000," Eye of the Beholder is a
soporific ordeal that completely ruins a mildly interesting beginning,
gropes blindly through some very hard-to-swallow plot points in the
middle, then takes far too much time lurching to its conclusion.
The story unfolds almost entirely from the point of view of a British
surveillance expert named "The Eye" (MacGregor).  He's a troubled
fellow; his wife has left him and taken their young daughter, and he
can't find them despite all his expertise, so he carries on imaginary
conversations with his child.  Assigned to track the son of a British
official in order to catch a blackmailer, he witnesses the poor fellow's
brutal murder by a beautiful but obviously disturbed woman (Judd, who
must really want to be pigeonholed in these third-rate thrillers).
Improbably, he recognizes a kindred spirit and quickly becomes obsessed
with her.  Soon, thanks to the thoroughly risible script, he quits his
job with Her Majesty's Secret Service and doggedly trails her on a
whirlwind tour of much of the United States (mostly filmed in Montreal,
presumably so the filmmakers can show the world how sophisticated
Quebecers are with their Gitanes and Cognac.)  She's a chameleon who
changes identities as often as she changes outfits-- which is a lot.  Of
course, Our Hero knows this is merely the result of her being abandoned
as a young girl by her father, and he fantasizes that he can save her,
just as he knows she will fill the void in his life.
That we are expected to accept such lip-service characterization and
porous plot structure is only the least of the film's flaws.  Even the
spy gadgetry, which can often be fun in movies like this, is
unconvincing.  To be fair, the movie starts out rather promisingly with
the eavesdropped murder, but very quickly degenerates into a steaming
pile of what they call merde in Montreal.  What it doesn't do very
quickly is end; it drags on interminably through scene after pointless
scene, including a stupid interlude between Judd's character and a
heroin-addicted loser played by Jason Priestley.
Director Elliott seems to run out of ideas about halfway through this
clunker, so he resorts to the road-movie plot device he used to far
better effect in 1994's The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the
Desert.  Needless to say, it doesn't help.  The film's pacing is simply
too slow and the main characters too inaccessible to elicit much in the
way of interest.  Suspense, so important to any thriller, is rarely
generated after the first murder scene.  In the eye of this beholder, at
least, the movie is a waste of about two hours.

Title
Review for End of Days (1999)
STARRING:  Arnold Schwarzenegger, Kevin Pollak, Gabriel Byrne, Robin
Tunney, Rod Steiger, CCH Pounder
DIRECTOR:  Peter Hyams (The Relic, The Presidio)
WRITTEN BY:  Andrew W. Marlowe (Air Force One)
Once upon a time in the summer of 1987, in the small town of Spruce
Grove, my friend and I sat in my parents' car outside the local movie
theater, trying to think of a way to get in to see Predator, starring
Arnold Schwarzenegger.  You see, we were only 16-- not old enough to get
into the R-rated picture, but certainly old enough to want to.  Very,
very badly.     So there we sat, feverishly thinking of ways to overcome
every possible objection the person at the ticket booth might raise to
our getting in.  After almost an hour of this, we were finally ready to
try it.  The much-feared counter clerk barely gave us a glance as he
sold us our coveted tickets.  What followed was some of the coolest shit
I had ever seen in a movie.  When it ended I was pretty sure that, given
enough weaponry, Schwarzenegger would kick even the Devil's ass but
good.  All of which brings me to End of Days, and the point of this
little anecdote.  Apparently, 16-year-old boys are greenlighting films
these days.
The film casts the Austrian Oak as Jericho Cane, a security specialist
who stumbles upon a conspiracy of Biblical proportions after foiling an
assassination attempt on his investment-banker client.  It seems that
every thousand years, Satan puts in an appearance on Earth in human
guise (the investment banker is this year's host), seeking a predestined
mate.  If he is allowed to consummate his unholy union, the gates of
Hell will be thrown open, and so on and so forth.  Naturally, Jericho
has to find and protect the prospective bedmate not only from Satan, but
also from religious zealots who want to prevent the prophecy by killing
her.  Furthermore, he has to do it without the help of the police,
because they're all in thrall to the Devil.  Hey, waitaminnit... that
means it's Schwarzenegger vs. Lucifer, one-on-one!  Arnold has plenty of
military hardware, but the Devil has extremely explosive piss.  While
this may have made for a funny episode of South Park, the laughs in End
of Days are strictly unintentional..
About a third of the way into this hokum, it becomes increasingly clear
that Hyams' solution when the nonsensical story starts to drag is to
either show tit or blow something up.  I started wishing I was
elsewhere.  At the two-thirds mark, I was trying to figure out where I'd
seen baby-faced actress Tunney before (it was in 1996's The Craft.)  By
the time the credits mercifully rolled, I found myself wondering how
someone with the offscreen business savvy and intelligence of
Schwarzenegger could have been talked into doing this lamentable
picture.  Not since Commando has his peculiar brand of acting been so
unwatchable.  Normally, his self-effacing sense of humor pulls him
through, but all his half-hearted attempts at wisecracks fall horribly
flat this time.  Pollak, saddled with a poor man's version of Tom
Arnold's True Lies role as the regular-guy buddy, isn't much better
off.  Even Byrne, who could have made much of his diabolical role with a
decent script, is reduced to ogling women and smirking a lot as proof of
his character's ultimate evil.  Much of the dialogue is unforgivable; I
actually groaned out loud during one particularly idiotic interlude in
which Jericho is tempted by Satan (as if the unsubtle initials weren't
enough.)  Eventually, the obligatory climactic effects blowout arrives,
and we get to see the Devil in the flesh, so to speak.  Like everything
else that happens in the movie, it's a letdown, a bit of unconvincing
computer-generated silliness lifted out of some mindless videogame.
As a longtime Schwarzenegger fan, I hope the man realizes that the title
of this miserable failure of a movie also applies to his tenure as an
iconic action hero.  At 54, he's still in incredible shape, but he's
older nonetheless, and so are the teenagers who once elevated him to
box-office champion status.  If he is to remain relevant in the
Hollywood of the 21st century, he'll have to find a Clint Eastwood-esque
way to segue gracefully into a new identity.

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
STARRING:  Brad Pitt, Edward Norton, Helena Bonham Carter, Meat Loaf
DIRECTOR:  David Fincher
WRITTEN BY:  Jim Uhls (based on a novel by Chuck Palahniuk)
Not since Oliver Stone's Natural Born Killers has there been a movie
this incendiary, and not since David Cronenberg has a so-called
mainstream director been this willing to repeatedly tiptoe the fine
line between pointed social commentary and outright social
irresponsibility.  While Fincher's films have never suffered from a
lack of shock value (his major character killings in both Alien 3 and
Seven are fine examples), Fight Club marks the distillation of his
pitch-black comedic sensibility (see 1997's The Game) into something
like a definitive statement.
Jack (Norton, acting as both narrator and protagonist) is your typical
cubicle clone, whose disillusionment is amplified by a seemingly
incurable insomnia.  On the offhand advice of a doctor, he sits in on
group-therapy sessions for everything from blood parasites to
testicular cancer.  Here he meets Bob (Marvin Lee Aday, AKA Meat
Loaf), a cancer-emasculated eunuch with profound gynecomastia.
Strangely, the release he finds while sobbing on Bob's breasts allows
him to sleep at night, at least until a fellow group-therapy "tourist"
named Marla Singer (Carter) comes along to ruin things for him,
forcing a grudging compromise that recalls Monty Python in its dark
hilarity.  Later, he meets Tyler Durden (Pitt), a soap salesman with a
decidedly subversive outlook on life.  One night, after his IKEA-
furnished condo explodes (don't ask-- you'll just have to see the
movie, awright?), he is goaded by Tyler into a fight, and damned if it
doesn't feel good.  It is pure, raw existence, a brief moment of
clarity and purpose that makes his dreary workaday life pale in
comparison.  He moves into Tyler's squalid abandoned mansion, and they
form the titular organization, an underground therapy group where men
bond with bare-knuckle savagery and very few rules, the first two of
which are "Don't Talk About Fight Club."  Armed with charisma and an
attractive anti-corporate philosophy, Tyler assumes leadership of the
burgeoning membership of white-collar slaves and dead-end McEmployees.
Resentment creeps into Jack's heart, made worse by the fact that Tyler
is also regularly and noisily boffing the hated Marla.  Funded by a
frivolous lawsuit, Tyler begins molding his devotees into an army
dedicated to mischief and mayhem.  Their initially juvenile pranks
(like pissing in food and putting spike belts on roads) quickly evolve
into something more like sedition, and Jack fears that things have
gone sour.
It is after this point, when you are plenty uncomfortable and
wondering just how far Fincher will go to say something original, that
the film uncorks a disappointing plot twist.  It is so contrived-- and
so conventional compared to what precedes it-- that everything which
follows (including the ending) becomes far less interesting.  It's a
major (though not fatal) flaw, and for a director as notoriously
unpredictable as Fincher, it feels like a cop-out.
Fight Club is going to be misconstrued by a great many people.  In the
early going, it has a downright dangerous feel; it seems to be saying
that violence and civil disobedience are good for the soul, and this
is undoubtedly the message that a few moronic punks are going to take
from it.  I'll be mightily surprised if imitation Fight Clubs don't
spring up here and there, and I'll be even more amazed if Fincher
isn't vilified for it by the same humorless witch-hunters that are
currently after Oliver Stone.  They needn't bother, because Fight Club
is less a message movie than Fincher's elaborate attempt at a joke.
Tyler Durden, for all his Dionysian allure, is really nothing more
than the logical (and far less hypocritical) extrapolation of all
those self-help gurus who constantly show up on Oprah to preach their
me-first gospel of self-actualization.  In this context, the joke
works, but like the latest Columbine joke, some people will get it and
enjoy a good laugh, and others won't.  Hopefully, though, their silly
moral outrage won't spoil the joke for the rest of us.

Title
Review for Any Given Sunday (1999)
STARRING:  Al Pacino, Jamie Foxx, Dennis Quaid, James Woods, Cameron
Diaz
DIRECTOR:  Oliver Stone
WRITTEN BY:  John Logan, Oliver Stone, Rob Huizenga (novel), Pat Toomay
(novel)
The worlds of professional sports and movies are very similar in a lot
of ways:  both involve spending vast sums of money for the sake of
entertainment; both bring adoration and fame to highly paid, instantly
recognizable stars, and both feature central figures upon whom all the
pressure rests.  When they succeed, they are respected and admired,
sometimes even immortalized.  When they fail, they shoulder the blame
and often lose their jobs.  Whether you call them 'directors' or
'coaches,' their lives are usually summed up, rightly or wrongly, in
terms of their work.  Which brings us to Tony D'Amato, the fictional
football coach and central character in nonfictional director Oliver
Stone's Any Given Sunday.  It's not hard to see why the beleaguered
Stone wanted to do a film about a guy whose passion remains firm despite
being second-guessed, criticized, and told he's washed up.  It's this
passion, both D'Amato's and Stone's, that makes the film worth watching.
D'Amato (Pacino, looking a bit like Pat Riley after a huge loss) is the
coach of the Miami Sharks, a team whose four-game losing skid is
compounded by the injury of star quarterback Jack "Cap" Rooney (Quaid)
just as the playoffs are approaching.  Luckily, third-stringer Willie
Beamen (former sitcom star Foxx) is an undiscovered talent, and he gives
the team a much-needed boost in the late season.  Not so luckily, he's
as mouthy as he is talented, and his public remarks about the team and
particularly D'Amato quickly cause friction as his fame increases.  To
make D'Amato's problems worse, he's got to deal with ice-cold Christina
Pagniacci (Diaz, attacking the role with unsmiling relish), the
win-at-any-cost owner who has inherited the Sharks from her father.  To
her, the players-- and coach-- are mere stocks to be traded away when
their value shows signs of diminishing.  Then there's team doctor Harvey
Mandrake (Woods, in fine snarky form), who uses the players' willingness
to sacrifice their bodies as justification for his lack of medical
ethics.  Worst of all is sportswriter Jack Rose (Stone film regular John
C. McGinley), who attacks D'Amato relentlessly in print and on TV.  If
there were any lingering doubts as to Stone's opinion of critics, they
can now be safely put to rest.
None of these characters are particularly original, and the football
games that drive the plot are no less predictable in their melodramatic,
down-to-the-wire outcomes than any other standard sports-movie fare.
This is not to say that the games aren't exciting to watch.  The camera
pans in blurry zigzags and quick shots of bodies in motion;  linebackers
crouch like hunting tigers, stalking their quarterback prey.  The hits
are huge, bone-crunching affairs punctuated by loud, beat-heavy music.
What really makes Any Given Sunday work, though, are the characteristic
Stone touches:  his fascinating depiction of the machinations behind the
scenes, his lengthy scenes of charged dialogue, and especially his
moralistic approach to the effect of television and big money on
athletes, coaches, and the game itself.  Football players have often
been called modern gladiators; Stone takes the metaphor one step
further, using the famous Ben-Hur chariot race to make his point.  Like
the hapless charioteers who fall and are crushed by their onrushing
rivals, today's pro football players are slaves to the spectacle, meat
for the grinder of televised entertainment.  The only thing the
highlight reels crave more than a Hail Mary pass, Stone points out, is
footage of a player puking or a blown knee.  Even more than Quaid's
aging star quarterback, the tragedy of this fate is embodied in the
character of Luther "Shark" Lavay, who is willing to literally risk his
life for his performance bonus.  Former New York Giants great Lawrence
Taylor gives the role a naturalness and depth of feeling that could only
have come from living it.
Any Given Sunday is both a nostalgic remembrance of professional
football's storied history, and an ultimately optimistic look at how
today's game relates to that tradition.  It may be bigger, richer, and
more slick than ever before, but the love of the game is still the most
important thing.  In that, the worlds of sports and movies are very
similar indeed.

Title
Review for Midsummer Night's Dream, A (1999)
STARRING:  Kevin Kline, Michelle Pfeiffer, Rupert Everett, Stanley
Tucci, Calista Flockhart, Christian Bale, Anna Friel, David Strathairn,
Sophie Marceau, Dominic West
DIRECTOR:  Michael Hoffman
WRITTEN BY:  Michael Hoffman
William Shakespeare has been dead for almost 400 years now, but his
plays are truly immortal as a source of entertainment-- not to mention
trepidation for young English students.  His colleague Ben Jonson (in
one of whose plays Shakespeare acted) wrote, "He is not of an age, but
for all time."  The recent trend for film directors has been to put that
theory to the test by setting the Bard's tales in entirely different
historical eras, but leaving the dialogue intact.  In 1996, Australian
director Baz Luhrmann transplanted Romeo and Juliet into modern-day
Verona Beach, complete with guns, gangs, and Leo.  This year, Michael
Hoffman (One Fine Day, Restoration) takes Shakespeare's early comedy,
changes the milieu from ancient Greece to 19th-century Tuscany, and
throws in a few bicycles for good measure.  These conceits aside, there
are some good moments in the film, thanks to thoughtful set design and
engaging performances by Everett as Oberon and Tucci as the, er, puckish
Robin Goodfellow.
If you want to know how the plot of this thing unfolds, read the
frickin' play, because it's pretty convoluted.  Let's just say it
involves a love triangle complicated by political intrigue, an attempted
elopement by night, a female stalker, a troupe of low-rent actors, and a
jealous fairy king whose schemes cause the sort of multi-layered
misunderstandings that would go on to inspire any number of Three's
Company episodes.  It's a comedy, though, so everything turns out
happily in the end.
In the wrong hands, such exquisitely mannered stuff can be either
stultifying or just silly.  The actors have to understand it deeply
enough to make it accessible to the audience, yet also utter the lines
as though they'd never been spoken before.  After 400 years, both
requirements are tougher than ever, but some of this cast pull it off.
Rupert Everett (My Best Friend's Wedding) in particular, with his
brooding, English handsomeness, brings the fairy king Oberon to life
with equal parts bitterness and mischievousness.  As Puck, Oberon's
underling and errand boy, Stanley Tucci (Big Night) also demonstrates an
easy facility with the Bard's turn of phrase.  When he bemusedly says
"What fools these mortals be," it seems so natural that it takes a
second to register that he's just uttered one of the most famous quotes
in all of Shakespeare.  Together, the two actors give their characters a
depth of mutual familiarity one would expect from immortals.  Michelle
Pfeiffer, for her part, is a beautiful (if strangely virginal) Titania,
and Kevin Kline has great fun making an ass of himself as the aptly
named Bottom.  Less successful are David Strathairn and Calista
Flockhart.  Strathairn, whose Theseus sounds like something out of a
high school drama class, should have been reminded that it's okay to
break the iambic pentameter rhythm.  As the lovelorn Helena, Flockhart
tries too hard, with too much Ally McBeal melodrama, and thus fails to
convince.
With all these characters (and more) flitting from scene to scene,
Hoffman and production designer Luciana Arrighi wisely chose to create a
small but effective forest set rather than film on location.  It's
stagy, but that's the idea; it allows for an Elizabethan intimacy, but
still looks wild enough to harbor sprites and nymphs and such.  This
latter aspect also heightens the film's sensuality, both in the scenes
involving Lysander and Hermia and in Titania's languid pillow talk with
Bottom.  Backed up by special effects which for once aren't intrusive,
it's a cozy environment that never steals attention from the actors.
The film tends to drag at first, but picks up the pace by the third act
and finishes strongly with the troupe's hilarious production of "Pyramus
and Thisbe" and the all's-well resolution.  While Hoffman's more modern
setting doesn't really matter, he makes it work without awkwardness, and
he restrains his directorial caprice enough to leave the writer's
dialogue alone.  By the time Puck finishes his final whimsical
disclaimer, that dreaded 400-year-old ghost of English class past won't
seem so bad after all.

Title
Review for Fantasia/2000 (1999)
STARRING:  (animated)
DIRECTOR:  Pixote Hunt, Hendel Butoy, Eric Goldberg, Gaetan & Paul
Brizzi, Francis Glebas, James Algar
WRITTEN BY:  Various (see above)
The original Fantasia, made in 1940, was intended by Walt Disney as the
first of a planned series of 'concert features,' a continually evolving
document which would showcase some of the world's finest animation
married to some of the world's finest music.  It was an overly
ambitious-- and very expensive-- undertaking, and despite a successful
run, the sequels to Fantasia never materialized... until now.  Never a
company to shy away from hype, Disney has decided to kick off the new
millennium with an IMAX-size version of the classic, featuring seven new
animated segments (retaining the original's most famous segment, The
Sorcerer's Apprentice, featuring Mickey Mouse in the title role) and
different pieces of classical music (except, of course, Paul Dukas'
"L'Apprenti sorcier").  Assorted celebrity hosts (from Penn and Teller
to Angela Lansbury) are also recruited to introduce each short.  The
result is quite often visually and aurally breathtaking; nonetheless, I
felt strangely distant from the proceedings.  No matter how hard I
tried, and despite the inescapably immersive IMAX screen and sound
system, I simply could not lose myself in the childlike wonder I was
really hoping to feel.  It was a continual reminder that I, like the
company Walt Disney founded, have grown increasingly cynical over the
years.
The first segment, set to music from Beethoven's instantly recognizable
Fifth Symphony, is also the weakest, if only because the color-splashed,
triangle-based butterfly motif seems so out of tune with the strident
music.  This'll be the one most people forget to tell their friends
about when they describe the movie.  The second piece is far more
effective:  with its gorgeous look and majestic humpback whales, it
would have been moving enough, but when those whales rise slowly into
the air in vast numbers to the accompaniment of Ottorino Respighi's
Pines of Rome, the effect is absolutely spellbinding.
The third segment features the stylized artwork of longtime New York
Times caricaturist Al Hirschfeld and the slinky clarinet of George
Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue in a funny little fable about a few big-city
dwellers whose lives affect each other in profound ways.  Although the
constant references to Hirschfeld's subliminal name-dropping get
annoying, the piece is probably the best match of musical and visual
styles in the film.
Fourth in line is a condensed version of Hans Christian Andersen's The
Steadfast Tin Soldier, whose very basic plot is hurried along by a rush
of tinkling notes from Dmitri Shostakovich's Piano Concerto No. 2.  It
is followed by the shortest piece, a cute and clever homage to the
original's pink hippos involving flamingos, a yo-yo, and Saint-Saens'
Carnival of the Animals.
A Disney-character double bill comprises the sixth and seventh entries.
First, Mickey Mouse tries on the sorcerer's hat with disastrous results
in The Sorcerer's Apprentice (which, with its resonant themes of the
miscreant Mickey and parental, authority-figure wizard, should win
Disney a few more kiddie converts); afterward, Donald and Daisy Duck
show up in a love story set aboard Noah's Ark to the strains of Edward
Elgar's Pomp and Circumstance.  This is another case, as in the
Beethoven piece, in which the sheer familiarity of the music works
against the animation.
The film ends on a strong note, with a segment that depicts nature's
endless life cycle of life destruction and renewal by pitting a
beautiful dryad against a fire-breathing, volcanic bird of prey.  Igor
Stravinsky's Firebird Suite provides the ideal musical tone for the
segment, making it the best of the bunch.
The first Fantasia was a bold experiment in fusing two very different
forms of art into something which combined their emotional power.  With
Walt gone, however, Disney's idea of bold experimentation has
increasingly been to cannibalize its own successes in a short-sighted
attempt to maintain a bloated corporate empire.  For all its delusions
of grandeur, Fantasia 2000 is no less derivative than any of the
animated fodder the Mouse House has churned out in the last decade, no
matter how big and loud it may be.

Title
Review for Whole Nine Yards, The (2000)
STARRING:  Bruce Willis, Matthew Perry, Rosanna Arquette, Michael Clarke
Duncan, Natasha Henstridge, Amanda Peet, Kevin Pollak
DIRECTOR:  Jonathan Lynn
WRITTEN BY:  Mitchell Kapner
As creator of the British TV series "Yes, Minister" and the
writer/director of movie comedies like Clue, Nuns on the Run, and My
Cousin Vinny, Jonathan Lynn isn't lacking in the offbeat humor
department.  With The Whole Nine Yards, he shows a considerably darker
side to his sense of what's funny; this time there are contract killers,
murder plots and double-crosses to go with the pratfalls and silly
accents that characterized earlier Lynn films.  Picture an Elmore
Leonard novel filtered through a Brit-com sensibility, and you get the
idea.  While the film begins unpromisingly, it kicks into an entirely
more satisfying gear in its second half, giving Matthew Perry the
distinction of having the best Friends cast member movie thus far.
Perry stars as Nick "Oz" Oseransky, a dentist who's distinctly unhappy
with his mooching French-Canadian wife (played with a silly accent by
Arquette) and unfulfilled life.  After recognizing his new next-door
neighbor Jimmy Jones (Willis) as notorious hit man Jimmy "The Tulip"
Tudeski, Oz is forced by his wife to go to Chicago in hopes of
collecting a reward for revealing Tudeski's whereabouts to Yanni
Gogolack (Pollak), the crime boss Tudeski sold out for a reduced
sentence.  Naturally, assorted hijinks ensue, including but not limited
to Oz's getting worked over by Gogolack's enforcer Frankie Figs (The
Green Mile's Duncan), sleeping with Tudeski's wife (Henstridge), and
finding out about a particularly large sum of money that everyone wants
to "off" everyone else for.  Oz learns that Tudeski doesn't believe in
divorce (it's a sin), but would happily kill his wife to get at the
money.  As he becomes a pawn in the schemes of everyone around him, Oz
has to figure out a way to keep the people he cares about from getting
whacked-- especially himself.
At first, laughs don't come easily.  Perry seems unsure whether to go
with his sarcastic wiseacre character on Friends or the bumbling,
in-over-his-head naďf Lynn seems to want.  Worse, he looks embarrassed
at having to perform the too-numerous pratfalls that mar the entire
movie.  Pollak, doing an even more silly accent than Arquette's, tries
to make his pronunciation of "vermin" this year's version of Joe Pesci's
"yoots" in Vinny but fails horribly.  By the second half, though, after
a few more characters have been established (particularly Jill, Oz's
dental secretary and contract killer wannabe, played with fervid
enthusiasm by Peet), the humor starts to click.  Willis' friendship with
Duncan is so patently obvious that it shines right through their line
readings, and Perry seems to relax into a much better mix of peevish
tightass and nice-guy hero.  Even the sight gags are funnier.  In the
end, everything works out in a twisted yet moralistic way that Jimmy the
Tulip would appreciate.

Title
Review for Titus (1999)
STARRING:  Anthony Hopkins, Jessica Lange, Alan Cumming, Colm Feore,
Harry J. Lennix, Angus MacFadyen, Matthew Rhys, Jonathan Rhys-Meyers
DIRECTOR:  Julie Taymor
WRITTEN BY:  Julie Taymor, William Shakespeare (play "Titus Andronicus")
If Tales From The Crypt had been around in the sixteenth century,
William Shakespeare's Titus Andronicus would have made a perfect
episode.  One of the Bard's earliest and least-known plays (written in
his formative stage before 1599), it's a nasty little tale of betrayal,
murder, and revenge that still packs a shock-value wallop.  In bringing
her stage adaptation to the screen, theater director Taymor (best known
for her Broadway version of Disney's The Lion King) admirably doesn't
shy away from these lurid elements.  In attempting to tinker with the
original play's ancient Roman setting, however, she has created a film
that is at once mesmerizing and preposterous, fascinating but ultimately
frustrating.
The story centers around Titus Andronicus (Hopkins), a victorious
general who returns to Rome with several prisoners in tow.  These
include Tamora (Lange), the vengeful Queen of the Goths, her three sons,
and her lover, a dark-skinned Moor named Aaron (Lennix).  All of these
captives will eventually spell disaster for Titus and his family.  In a
typically Shakespearean turn of events, Tamora ends up marrying the
newly crowned Emperor Saturninus (Cumming), and promptly proceeds to
take revenge on Titus for killing her firstborn son as a sacrifice.  By
the time Tamora and Aaron are through, three of Titus' sons are dead,
another banished from Rome, and his daughter subjected to particularly
gruesome atrocities.  Naturally, Titus is devastated to the point of
insanity, but he keeps it together long enough to cook up a revenge
scheme that would make the Crypt Keeper proud.
In terms of interpretation, Taymor's adaptation is brilliant.  She
stages scenes with a mastery that truly brings the play to life, and she
gets performances that are solid all around.  As the duty-bound Titus,
Hopkins plumbs depths of despair and madness with riveting presence.  As
the irredeemably evil Aaron, Lennix skillfully avoids caricature, and
Cumming makes a memorably snide and capricious Saturninus.  Lange, in
her first Shakespeare role, gives Tamora the benefit of her age.  In bed
with Saturninus and her sons, the Goth Queen radiates an almost
incestuous sexuality.  Despite the occasional accent slip, Lange holds
her own against Hopkins and the rest of the exceptional cast.
Unfortunately, Taymor can't resist the urge to customize the play's
original setting.  While she isn't the first director to try it (see A
Midsummer Night's Dream), she does such a poor job that it nearly
torpedoes the entire film.  She seems to be striving for the sort of
uniquely indeterminate time frame that Terry Gilliam (Brazil, The Fisher
King) does so well, but too much of the production design is merely
clumsy anachronism.  Every time the story threatens to become totally
engrossing, a motorbike or an arcade videogame or a shotgun will
suddenly appear as an irritating distraction.  Worse yet, the character
of Young Lucius (Titus' grandson) acts as a surrogate audience
throughout the film, undermining the effectiveness of nearly every scene
he's in.
While these touches are more artifice than art, they thankfully don't
outweigh the film's merits.  Titus is worth seeing for the performances,
and for Taymor's confident interpretation of the dialogue.  Besides, as
the Crypt Keeper would say, "there's plenty of meat to the story, boils
and ghouls."  Heh heh.

Title
Review for Beach, The (2000)
STARRING:  Vin Diesel, Radha Mitchell, Keith David, Cole Hauser
DIRECTOR:  David Twohy
WRITTEN BY:  Jim Wheat, Ken Wheat, David Twohy
Remember when you were a kid, and you were afraid of the dark?  Come on,
now, it wasn't that long ago, and don't hand me any of that crapola
about how you never needed a night light or a partially open bedroom
door.  As far as fears go, it's pretty much universal, hard-wired into
the primitive part of our brains that still recalls what times were like
before we figured out the fire thing.  As a result, it's also a handy
emotional trigger, one that fright films have always relied upon as a
cheap and easy way to heighten the emotion of horror.  In the movies,
what we can't see can (and usually does) hurt us, and it almost always
happens in the dark.  Light, in all its forms, means salvation. Pitch
Black takes this tradition and extrapolates it in a way that's so
ridiculously literal it should be awful.  Thanks to Diesel's great
charisma and a few well-handled scenes, though, it's actually quite a
bit of fun.
All you really need to know about the film is that it places a typically
diverse group of interstellar crash-landing survivors on a barren,
sun-soaked planet.  These include a strong-willed female pilot
(Mitchell), a Muslim imam (David) and his youthful followers, a fussy
antiquities dealer, and a sort of galactic cop (Hauser) along with his
prisoner (Diesel), who just happens to have surgically altered
night-vision eyes.  The film goes to great lengths to make it clear that
said prisoner is one bad dude before his obligatory escape, but I doubt
I'll be spoiling anything by saying he plays a key role in the group's
survival.  As the group attempts to find water, they discover a hostile
species that requires darkness for survival.  They also discover that
the planet's three suns are about to be eclipsed for an indeterminate
amount of time, rendering the entire place, well, you know.  The rest is
standard scare-flick stuff as the group's numbers (and light sources)
dwindle as they try to make it back to an escape ship.
In order to enjoy this film, it helps to purposely overlook the
implausible sci-fi trappings and horror-movie obviousness, because there
are elements that work.  The scenes dealing with the actual eclipse are
effective, building suspense as the suns are gradually blocked, then
showing hordes of light sensitive nasties coming out of what look like
huge termite mounds.  As for the creatures themselves, they're a
reasonably threatening bunch, created by Patrick Tatopoulos (also
responsible for the new-look Godzilla).  While comparisons to certain
H.R. Giger-designed Aliens will be inevitable, they reminded me more of
the creatures in Stephen King's novella "The Mist."  They fly, issue
deceptively cute sonar calls, and generally creep around menacingly,
always just outside the dimly lit perimeter of the group's flares and
flashlights.  In one memorable scene, a character is shown only by the
light of a Zippo, until a brief burst of illumination reveals that he's
completely surrounded by the things.  It's good for a shock (unless
you've seen the trailer), but it's better as a quick jolt back to a time
when you were certain that something waited just beyond the night
light's reach.
Diesel (an indie director also seen in Saving Private Ryan and heard in
The Iron Giant) never takes himself too seriously, and it helps.
Physically, he's a striking presence, with a deep, pliable voice to
match.  After the novelty of the creatures wears off (and it happens
pretty quickly), he's by far the most interesting and entertaining thing
about the movie.
While Twohy can't be accused of showing too much of the creatures,
neither does he leave enough to the imagination.  Given the film's
premise, it would have been nice if he had trusted Diesel's ability to
hold an audience and used sound and dialogue clues instead of computer
graphics to bring the beasties to life.  In shedding a bit too much
light on the subject, Twohy restrains the power that makes the imaginary
monsters of childhood so terrifying.

Title
Review for Sleepy Hollow (1999)
STARRING:  Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci, Miranda Richardson, Michael
Gambon, Casper Van Dien, Jeffrey Jones, Ian McDiarmid, Christopher Lee
DIRECTOR:  Tim Burton
WRITTEN BY:  Kevin Yagher, Andrew Kevin Walker (based on "The Legend of
Sleepy Hollow" by Washington Irving)
By now, after Beetlejuice, two Batman movies, and Edward Scissorhands
(also starring Depp), one might conclude that the sky in
weirdo/wunderkind Tim Burton's world is decidedly black.  Yet, his bleak
Gothic imagery has always been tempered by a childlike wonder (perhaps
best realized in the truly marvelous musical fantasy The Nightmare
Before Christmas, which he produced and co-wrote.)  Underlined with
strange and sublime music from constant collaborator Danny Elfman,
Burton's films have a unique, fairy-tale-like quality that has often
endeared him to both critics and audiences in a rare synergy of art and
commerce (although not always; 1996's Mars Attacks! was just plain
dreadful, while 1994's critical favorite Ed Wood was box-office
anathema.)  These same artistic and commercial elements appear in Sleepy
Hollow, but blend less smoothly thanks to writing flaws that complicate
what should have been a simple and straightforward tale.
The film's plot bears only a passing resemblance to Irving's short
story.  Ichabod Crane is now a constable and forensic scientist instead
of a schoolmaster.  This allows the writers to cook up an unnecessarily
convoluted murder mystery involving conspiracy and witchcraft, a
whodunit that in its resolution makes even the origin of the Headless
Horseman seem completely plausible in comparison.  Thrown in for good
measure is some uncalled-for subtext involving Ichabod's Puritan
childhood.  In fact, Sleepy Hollow is even less faithful to its source
than the short but memorable Disney cartoon (the last half of 1949's
Ichabod and Mr. Toad) that is, to my mind, still the best-- and
scariest-- film version of 'em all (so memorable, in fact, that Burton
includes several bits of hommage to it, like the toads that croak
Ichabod's name as he nervously guides his old horse across a covered
bridge at night.)
This is not to say that the film is a waste of time.  On the contrary,
it's worth ponying up the bucks just to see the patented Burton visuals
(accomplished this time by cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki) married to
Elfman's magical music.  Pastoral vistas of upstate New York are as
beautifully rendered as oil paintings, but the real treats are the
gloomy little township of Sleepy Hollow and the gnarled, leaf-strewn
forest surrounding it.  They're like an Edward Gorey drawing come to
ominous life.  Even the few daylight sequences have a dreamlike,
dark-at-the-fringes feel, and the characters all share an
unhealthy-looking pallor that suits the grim (and often gruesome)
proceedings.  Depp's Ichabod Crane, with his constantly pursed lips and
stiff, vaguely effeminate demeanor, matches Irving's conception in
character if not appearance (in this respect, the Disney version is
bang-on.)  Ricci, on the other hand, matches Irving's physical
description of Katrina Van Tassel letter for letter, but is neither
coquettish nor fickle enough to be considered anything but a
goody-goody.  Thanks to the demands of a script that requires obligatory
plot twists and action scenes, we are expected to believe things about
both characters that simply don't add up.  Worse, the villain is made to
explain the whole messy mystery near the end, with the immediate and
unfortunate result that we are suddenly yanked out of Tim Burton's
darkly imaginative world and left sitting in a theater, watching
something no more real than a Headless Horseman.

Title
Review for 13th Warrior, The (1999)
STARRING:  Antonio Banderas, Diane Venora, Omar Sharif, Vladimir Kulich
DIRECTOR:  John McTiernan, Michael Crichton
WRITTEN BY:  William Wisher, Michael Crichton (based on Crichton's
"Eaters of the Dead")
At last, the long wait to bring this adaptation of Crichton's 1976 novel
(an interesting blend of an actual manuscript and the epic
poem "Beowulf") is over, giving audiences nationwide a chance to see...
a moderately entertaining, fairly by-the-numbers
Hollywood action film that lacks the scope and significance to make it
really click.
Banderas plays Ahmad Ibn-Fahdlan, a 10th-century Arab emissary who fools
around with the wrong woman and ends up
essentially banished to the North, where he meets a rowdy group of
Vikings.  After word is received that a village in the
Vikings' homeland is being threatened, he is chosen in typical
Hollywood-cliché fashion to accompany twelve Norsemen who
will investigate the situation.  During the journey, Ibn (as he is
dubbed by the Vikings) quickly learns their language in typical
Hollywood-cliché fashion.  When they arrive, they find partially eaten
bodies (which Banderas helpfully informs us have been
"gnawed upon") and a distinct lack of men.  That evening, they are
attacked by a group of Wendels (rhymes with Grendel, get
it?), mysterious creatures who just as quickly vanish, carting away
their own dead (along with the heads of a couple of Vikings
for good measure).  Soon enough, they are beset by a horde of Wendels,
which appear to be a hybrid of human and bear.
Barely holding out after the second night, they consult a local oracle
(an old, gap-toothed, Hollywood-cliché hag that talks like
a Scandinavian Yoda) to determine a way to counterattack the Wendels.
The rest of the film deals with their covert raid on the
Wendels' lair, and the resulting final battle for the village before
reaching its resolution just shy of the two-hour mark.
Watching this film, one gets the feeling that McTiernan was too busy
this summer with his remake of "The Thomas Crown
Affair" and the upcoming "Airframe" (also with Crichton) to give "The
13th Warrior" his full attention.  Instead, he seems content to cobble
together a few hoary-but-useful Hollywood clichés, throw in some
recycled scenes from his own "Predator", and let Crichton's and
Banderas' reputations do the rest.  Banderas, in fact, is his usual
charismatic self, but he's at his most appealing when acting with women,
and this film gives him very little opportunity (not that this is a bad
thing; McTiernan and Crichton are to be credited with paying only lip
service to the love-interest aspect of the plot, which didn't need to be
any larger).  The film's major flaw is a glaring lack of
characterization of the Vikings, who have to be summarized with little
descriptions like "The Superstitious" during the end credits just so the
audience will remember who they were!  The actors are all suitably
craggy and bearded, but that's not enough.  The exception to this rule
is the extremely well-cast Kulich ("Firestorm") as Buliwyf, the group's
newly crowned King.  With his size and Nordic features (especially a
mane of blond hair that makes him look like the Marvel Comics version
of  Thor), he is completely believable as the strongest and most capable
warrior of the bunch.  Still, more time could have been spent developing
these characters, even at the expense of some of the battle sequences.
Speaking of which, they are some of the film's better moments, despite
their obvious debt to "Braveheart"'s skirmishes (which already seem in
danger of becoming a Hollywood cliché).  The two films also share some
great cinematography; British Columbia fills in for the fjords, and
provides some striking coastal vistas and misty forest settings.
Unfortunately, "The 13th Warrior" lacks the epic scale and sense of
historical importance that distinguished Mel Gibson's masterpiece.
Combined with the lack of character development and the weight of all
those Hollywood clichés, it ends up feeling like a Reader's Digest
condensation of the book.
Nonetheless, it is well paced, the costume design is noteworthy, and the
"Beowulf" references sprinkled here and there (like
Buliwyf's line about luck resulting from courage) are a nice touch.
Action fans likely won't be disappointed.

Title
Review for Toy Story 2 (1999)
STARRING:  (voices of) Tom Hanks, Tim Allen, Joan Cusack, Kelsey
Grammer, Wallace Shawn, Jim Varney, John Ratzenberger, Don Rickles,
Wayne Knight
DIRECTOR:  John Lasseter (co-directed by Ash Brannon & Lee Unkrich)
WRITTEN BY:  John Lasseter, Peter Docter, Ash Brannon, Andrew Stanton
Way back in 1995 (just slightly more recent than the Dark Ages in
computer-graphics terms), Pixar Animation Studios unveiled the first Toy
Story.  It was a technological and visual wonder, the first-ever
completely computer animated feature film.  More importantly to
distributor Disney, it became the third-highest grossing animated movie
ever.  Four years later, we have George Lucas pioneering the idea of
"Synthespians" with a certain floppy-eared pariah.  Fortunately, we also
have Toy Story 2, that rarest of sequels that outranks the original in
every way (except, of course, originality, but in this case that's no
big deal.)
This time, Buzz Lightyear has to lead his owner Andy's other toys on a
danger-fraught adventure to rescue the old cowboy doll Woody, who has
inadvertently fallen into the greedy clutches of a toy collector.  The
plot thickens when Woody meets the other members of his 'complete set'
(including a felt horse, a feisty cowgirl, and Stinky Pete, a grizzled
old prospector still mint in the box) in the collector's office and
realizes he's a valuable part of toy history.  Woody has to choose
either his owner and friends, or a permanent place of honor in a
Japanese museum with his new family.
While the resolution of this dilemma may be somewhat more obvious to
older audience members than kids, getting there is no less fun.  The
movie is liberally sprinkled with clever in-jokes (the chess-playing
geezer from Pixar's Oscar-winning short 'Geri's Game' shows up in a
cameo), referential gags (post-Sputnik 'space toys' are derided, and the
riffs on Star Wars happen early and often), and hilarious one-liners
that will fly right over the heads of the sprogs while getting big
laughs from their parents.  Better still, Disney's recent trend away
from musical numbers has left Toy Story 2 with only two:  a lovely but
depressing Sarah McLachlan tear-jerker and a rehash of Randy Newman's
"You've Got A Friend In Me" from the first film.  In both cases, the
songs become critical plot points instead of momentum-killing
distractions.  Obviously, the computer graphics are much improved (check
out the trees and the family dog's highly realistic coat), but the truly
remarkable achievement is that after a while, you stop noticing them and
focus instead on the characters.  Much of the first film's look-at-me
graphic wizardry has evolved into more stylish and effective imagery.
Like the French impressionists they subtly mention in the film, Pixar's
army of programmers, animators, and renderers may one day be regarded as
the first and finest examples of a new kind of artist.
One quickly gets the sense watching this movie that Lasseter and his
gang have never stopped playing with their toys.  In their world, a toy
doesn't come to life until a child plays with it.  Collectors, with
their glass displays and hermetically sealed imaginations, are the
enemy.  In the real world of eBay bidding wars and Pokemon extortion,
that's a fine message indeed, and Toy Story 2 delivers it with matchless
creativity and invention.  It'll make you wonder whether all those toys
you loved as a kid miss you as much as you miss them.

Title
Review for Galaxy Quest (1999)
STARRING:  Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Sam
Rockwell, Enrico Colantoni, Daryl Mitchell
DIRECTOR:  Dean Parisot
WRITTEN BY:  David Howard, Robert Gordon
Ever wonder if extraterrestrial beings are listening in on all the radio
and TV signals that have been beamed into the heavens since 1895 or so?
The idea has been touched on in films like Joe Dante's Explorers (in
which aliens learn English from watching old reruns of The Honeymooners)
and Robert Zemeckis' Contact (with its astonishing opening shot wherein
the broadcasts get older as the camera zooms out into deep space.)  In
the unexpectedly good Galaxy Quest, a group of ingenuous aliens look to
a bunch of actors from a canceled sci-fi series as saviors of their race
after watching the "historical documents" they've intercepted.  It's a
great premise, ripe with possibility, and director Parisot delivers with
a highly entertaining film that pokes gentle fun at Star Trek and the
obsessive fans who keep it alive at conventions and on the Internet.
The film begins at one of these conventions, portrayed with dead-on
accuracy in its characterization of various fan types, from the hardcore
know-it-alls to the snide tourists.  We're also introduced to the actors
as they bicker backstage.  Gwen DeMarco (Weaver, displaying an
eyebrow-raising buxom blondeness), whose character did little on the
show but look good and repeat the computer's phrases, is resigned to her
fate but appreciative of the fans' loyalty.  Tommy Webber ('Chill'
Mitchell, who also appeared in Parisot's 1998 Home Fries) is the
grown-up version of the show's boy genius pilot; Fred Kwan (TV actor
Shalhoub, in a hilarious low key) was the show's Tech Sergeant.  The two
most famous and popular actors are Alexander Dane (Rickman, in a very
Trek-like fin-headed prosthesis), a frustrated Brit who constantly
bemoans his missed career as a serious actor, and Jason Nesmith (Allen),
who played Commander Peter Quincy Taggart and still enjoys the little
slice of adulation he receives.
After overhearing some scathingly hurtful truth about himself at the
convention, Nesmith blows off some diehard fans, walks out on the
autograph session, and goes on a solitary bender at home.  He is
awakened by an odd group of strangely dressed people knocking on his
balcony door.  Assuming they are fans who want to hire him for a
personal appearance, he goes with them in a limo but falls asleep during
the ride.  When he comes to, he finds out that the 'fans' are in fact
aliens who have recruited him, their greatest hero, to negotiate with a
tyrannical enemy who has all but eradicated their people.  Convincing
the other actors to join him, he takes command of a faithful, functional
replica of the show's starship (based, of course, on the aliens' careful
observance of the show's episodes) and, with the help of several of the
guileless aliens, the crew tries to vanquish the bad guys.
There are a great many opportunities for humor here, and Parisot takes
full advantage, yet never condescends to Trekkies.  In fact, the movie
is at times a celebration of the strange symbiosis between the beloved
series and its dedicated admirers.  The scenes that directly parody Star
Trek conventions are often laugh-out-loud funny, and footage of the old
Galaxy Quest show, complete with foam rubber rocks and badly
choreographed fisticuffs, is nothing short of inspired.  Rickman, as
usual, is a pleasure to watch as he venomously spits out the show's
silly catchphrases.  Recently popular actor Sam Rockwell (The Green
Mile, A Midsummer Night's Dream) is also amusing as a bit player in the
series who weasels his way into the adventure but is sure he's going to
die because "that's how it always goes."  The best casting job, however,
is undoubtedly Tim Allen, who turns his trademark oblivious swagger into
the perfect Shatner impression.  Even the obligatory special effects are
welcome, adding a real excitement to the space battle scenes.
Were it not such a critical cliché, I might be tempted to describe
Galaxy Quest as "fun for the whole family."  Judging from the delighted
giggles and shrieks of the tykes at the screening I attended, that
description would certainly fit (although there are some sequences that
might scare the younger ones a bit.)  In any case, it is a fun movie,
and even if you've never been to a Star Trek convention, you'll be
pleasantly surprised.
