Authors
SSG Syndicate
Number of Reviews
32

Title
Review for Down to Earth (2001)
When Lance Barton (Chris Rock), a bicycle messenger by day and struggling stand-up comedian by night, finds himself suddenly in heaven, he's convinced there's been a mistake. And he's right: in a celestial foul-up, an assistant (Eugene Ley) grabbed him before his time. So, since his body is no longer available, he strikes a bargain with the Heavenly Host (Chazz Palminteri) to return to Earth as Charles Wellington, a Manhattan billionaire who's just been murdered by his trophy wife (Jennifer Coolidge) and executive secretary (Greg Germann on TV's "Ally McBeal"). In his new guise, he's attracted to a social activist (Regina King) who finds his sleazy business practices reprehensible. It's a re-make of Warren Beatty's "Heaven Can Wait" (1979), which was taken from "Here Comes Mr. Jordan" (1941), based on Harry Segall's 1937 play - with the added twist of a hip, young black man trapped in a rich, 50ish, white man's body, a racial gimmick done before in Eddie Murphy's "Trad!
ing Places" (1983).  Which leads me to wonder exactly when does a remake become a rip-off?
   This updated concept, geared to the MTV crowd, rarely works, mostly due to the plodding pacing and inept comedic direction of brothers Chris and Paul Weitz ("American Pie"). Last year, Chris Rock quit his HBO comedy show to build a movie career and this is his first starring role. Unfortunately, it's not a good showcase for his talents, since supporting actors like Fred die Faison, Mark Addy and Wanda Sykes fare far better than he does with the material. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Down to Earth" is a floundering 4. And, when it appears in the video store, don't confuse it with a 1947 musical of the same name starring Rita Hayworth.

Title
Review for Baby Boy (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "BABY BOY" (Columbia Pictures)
     In previous films like "Boyz N the Hood," writer/director John Singleton has focused on understanding troubled black men trapped in South Central L.A. but in this new film he is critical of them for not growing up and achieving their potential. The opening narration shows a young black man floating in a womb; he calls his best friend his "boy," his girlfriend his "mama," and his home his "crib."  It is Singleton's thesis that pervasive racism and a lack of role models have psychologically infantalized African-American men. And it's obvious from the getgo that 20 year-old Jody (R&B singer and MTV veejay Tyrese Gibson), accepts little responsibility for his own life. Still living rent-free at home with his mother (A.J. Johnson), he aimlessly shuttles between the mothers of his two children, Yvette (Tajari P. Henson) and Peanut (Tamara LeSeon Bass). "One thing I know how to do is make pretty babies," he brags. Occasionally he and his violence-prone buddy Sweetpea (Om!
ar Gooding, Cuba's younger brother) fence stolen clothes but mostly they hang out, smoking, munching and watching TV. Jody refuses to commit - to a woman, to a job, to a relationship. This infuriates his mother's new lover, Melvin (Ving Rhames), a tattooed ex-con with his own gardening business, who notes Jody's obvious Oedipal complex. It all leads to a confrontation with Yvette's evil gangsta ex (rapper Snoop Dogg). But in his eagerness to deliver a cautionary message, John Singleton falls into the trap of creating a superficial, contrived, coming-of-age melodrama. Plus, the vulgar, raunchy language, drug use, nudity and graphic, even degrading sexuality may discourage mainstream audiences. So, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Baby Boy" is a provocative but preachy 5, targeted primarily to an urban audience.

Title
Review for Bridget Jones's Diary (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "BRIDGET JONES DIARY" (Universal/Miramax)
 Amid a cauldron of controversy, director Sharon Maguire cast an American, Renee Zellweger, in the title role in this witty, warm adaptation of the post-feminist best-seller. But with a pitch-perfect British accent, Zellweger is sensational! She's totally believable as the "verbally incontinent spinster who smokes like a chimney and drinks too much," which is how an eligible neighborhood bachelor, Colin Firth, bluntly describes her. (In the book, Bridget goes daft for Colin Firth in "Pride and Prejudice," and Mark Darcy is the name of his character.) Coping with a massive lack of self-esteem, the well-rounded Bridget easily falls for a cad, played by Hugh Grant, her sly, sexist boss at a London publishing company. Renee Zellweger combines strength and vulnerability with an irresistible smile. And if she hasn't won your heart already, she nails it when she answers the phone, "Hello, Bridget Jones, wanton sex goddess with a very bad man between my thighs" - only to disco!
ver it's her mother (Gemma Jones) calling. But mum's not too shocked because she's left dad (Jim Broadbent) to shack up with a sleazy TV shopping network pitchman. And if you're wondering why author Salman Rushdie ("Satanic Verses") does a cameo, it's because, when Helen Fielding's novel/diary was published in 1996, he called it "a brilliant comic creation, adding "even men will laugh." No argument here. Not only is the script by Fielding, Richard Curtis and Andrew Davies filled with hilarious one-liners but it captures the angst of lonely thirtysomethings. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bridget Jones's Diary" is a fast-paced, funny 9. To paraphrase a key concept of Bridget's hard-won self-worth, I love it just the way it is! And don't miss the amusing childhood shots in the final credits.

Title
Review for Anniversary Party, The (2001)

Susan Granger's review of "THE ANNIVERSARY PARTY" (Fine Line Features)
   When you and I make home movies, they're on a camcorder with family and friends but, when Jennifer Jason Leigh and Alan Cumming decided to make their own movie, they recruited some heavy-hitting pals like Kevin Kline and Gwyneth Paltrow and utilized digital video in the hands of cinematographer John Bailey. The result is an interlude of caustic wit, reminiscent of Jason Leigh as Dorothy Parker in tales from the fabled Algonquin Round table. Jason Leigh plays Sally, an insecure, fading actress, while Alan Cumming is Joe, a "sexually ambivalent manchild" about to direct his first movie which is based on his latest novel. After a five-month separation, they're celebrating their sixth anniversary along with their intention to start a family. In their glass  house in the Hollywood Hills,  their show-biz guests include Parker Posey, John C. Reilly, John Benjamin Hickey, Jane Adams, Jennifer Beals, Gwyneth Paltrow, Kevin Kline, Kline's real-life wife, actress Phoebe Cates,!
 along with their son and daughter. And they're all trying to be nice to the litigious, non-show-biz neighbors, Mina Badie and Denis O'Hare. It's a strong ensemble but certain performances inevitably stand out. For example, Gwyenth Paltrow as the younger actress to whom Joe has offered the leading role in his film - much to the surprise of  wife Sally, and Phoebe Cates as a former actress who gave up her career to care for their children. If all this sounds vaguely familiar, think of Blake Edwards "The Party," Lawrence Kasdan's "The Big Chill," and Kenneth Branagh's "Peter's Friends." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Anniversary Party" is a verbally vicious and venomous, if self-indulgent 7. But - be warned - there's drugs (ecstasy), booze, nudity and adultery on the menu in this confessional comedy.

Title
Review for 15 Minutes (2001)
             "In the future, everyone will be famous for 15 minutes," said Andy Warhol, back in 1967, and this action thriller follows a celebrated New York Homicide Detective (Robert De Niro) who teams up with an idealistic, young Fire Dept. Arson Investigator (Edward Burns) to track down a pair of Eastern European killers (Karel Roden, Oleg Taktarov). "I love America! No one is responsible for what they do," marvels the cunning Czech, while the Russian obsessively records their crime spree on video tape. Using their media attention to attain fame, they capture the attention of a glib tabloid news anchor (Kelsey Grammer) and wind up as his lurid "Top Story."
    While director/writer John Herzfeld ("2 Days in the Valley") "borrows" much of this concept from "Network," the plot has the subtlety of a sledgehammer. Cinematographer Jean Yves Escoffier creates edgy suspense, particularly during the graphic arson scenes. Wearing a black wig, Charlize Theron does a cameo as the madam at an escort service, Melina Kankaredes ("Providence") is a reporter, and Kim Cattrall ("Sex and the City") scores as a ruthless "If it bleeds, it leads" TV producer.  Robert De Niro's role is so reminiscent of his previous performances that he seems to do it effortlessly, if superficially, while Edward Burns struggles to overcome the sheer blandness of the way his part is written. As the savvy sociopaths, Karel Roden and Oleg Taktarov steal the picture, leaving Kelsey Grammer as a slimy, one-dimensional villain. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "15 Minutes" is a gritty, satirical 6. If sensational  fame is truly the American game, we're all lo!
sers.

Title
Review for Along Came a Spider (2001)
http://www.susangranger.com/
Susan Granger's review of  "ALONG CAME A SPIDER" (Paramount Pictures)
  Morgan Freeman is back as savvy Washington D.C. police
detective Alex Cross in this psychological suspense thriller adapted
from James Patterson's novel, actually a prequel to "Kiss the Girls."
The story begins as Cross retreats into retirement after the death of
his partner but catapults into action when Megan Rose (Mika Boorem),
the 12 year-old daughter of a Senator, is kidnapped from her posh
private school, right under the nose of Jezzie Flannigan (Monica
Potter), the Secret Service agent in charge of security. As Cross is
watching the news on TV, his phone rings and the electronically
altered voice of Gary Soneji, the kidnapper (Michael Wincott), tells
him to look in his mailbox. There sits the girl's shoe. It seems this
psychopath wants to copy the Charles Lindbergh baby kidnapping,
committing another "crime of the century." So, while the Feds don't
appreciate his involvement, Cross has credible expertise they don't
have - like using tiny details to profile Soneji as "a spider." So
does disgraced Jezzie Flannigan, who's distraught that she "dropped
the ball." So it's their job not only to find Soneji but to rescue
Megan Rose.
   Marc Moss's well-constructed script actually improves on
the novel, adding unexpected twists and turns, involving
double-crosses, deception and duplicity. And director Lee Tamahori
keeps the pace fast and the tension taut, staging an intricate race
through the streets of Washington, D.C., culminating in a convoluted
ransom drop. There are several problems involving logic, not the least
being that the Secret Service does not protect children of Senators,
but on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Along Came a Spider" is
slick, solid, escapist 8. It's great to see an actor as classy and
good as Morgan Freeman propelling a franchise like this.

Title
Review for Enemy at the Gates (2001)
     Beware of any W.W.II movie in which you find yourself
rooting for the murderous Nazi! Because of unfortunate casting
choices, that's what happens in this otherwise impressive epic set
during the bloody battle of Stalingrad in '42 and '43, the pivotal
confrontation between Hitler's invading troops and the overpowered,
under-equipped Russian Army. When an overwrought Nikita Krushchev (Bob
Hoskins) demands a victory for Stalin, an enterprising propagandist
(Joseph Fiennes) turns a young shepherd boy-turned-sniper, Vassily
Zaitsev (Jude Law), into a national hero, thus changing an atmosphere
of hopelessness into optimism. Vassily has a brief romance with a
plucky comrade (Rachel Weisz) before an expert German marksman, Major
Koenig (Ed Harris), is sent to eliminate him. Pitting the country lad
from the Urals against the aristocratic nobleman is, of course, the
essence of class struggle. Staging the battle sequences, director
Jean-Jacques Annaud and co-writer Alain Godard lift liberally from the
combat-intensity of Steven Spielberg's Normandy landing in "Saving
Private Ryan," but their less-than-compelling story is further
weakened by mediocre acting. Jude Law is handsome but vacuous, while
Joseph Fiennes flounders in caricature. Only Ed Harris with his steely
blue eyes and soft speech, smoking gold-tipped cigarettes, delivers a
riveting performance. He's a cruel villain but, with the protagonists
so uninteresting, his dogged persistence ignites the screen. In
addition, the distracting accents of the polyglot cast are ludicrous
and James Horner's blatant musical score is downright intrusive. So,
on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Enemy at the Gates" is a
flawed 5. And, if you want to know more about this historic battle, I
suggest renting "Stalingrad."

Title
Review for Sexy Beast (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "SEXY BEAST" (Fox Searchlight)
  Given the hype surrounding this stylish British thriller, there's less to it than meets the eye. Director Jonathan Glazer, best known for his commercials and music videos, executes the sordid gangster story with far more pace, pizzazz and polish one would expect. And that's evident from the quirky opening shot revealing the paunchy, bronzed body of Gal (Ray Winstone), a retired criminal, happily sunning himself on the patio of his villa on Spain's Costa del Sol, where he lives with his wife (Amanda Redman), a former porn star. Suddenly, as he places an ice-water compress on his overheated crotch, a massive boulder falls from an adjacent hillside, landing with a splash atop the intertwined hearts at the bottom of his azure pool. It's a harbinger of things to come as the tranquility of his sun-drenched, sybaritic idyll is threatened by the arrival of a hot-tempered former associate (Ben Kingsley) sent by a London mobster (Ian McShane) to recruit Gal for one last heist.!
 And this is a stubborn thug who won't take no for an answer. After a lethal battle-of-wills, redolent with pent-up rage, hapless Gal winds up in London taking part in a clever underwater robbery. So much for plot. It's the characters that count. Winstone portrays a resistant middle-aged man who is wildly in love with his wife, while the lean, mean Kingsley is charismatic as the forceful, defiant, psychotic criminal. Unfortunately, there are some surreal, self-indulgent, distracting dream sequences involving someone dressed as a menacing rabbit-demon, and the thick East London accents make the staccato dialogue and pervasive profanity often difficult to decipher. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Sexy Beast" is a grim, brutal, tawdry 5. Unless you're into a flashy, nasty Guy Ritchie "Snatch"-type story, you can do better.

Title
Review for Atlantis: The Lost Empire (2001)

Susan Granger's review of "ATLANTIS: THE LOST EMPIRE" (Walt Disney Pictures)
    Disney dives into summer as an inexperienced young explorer follows his grandfather's long-lost journal on a mission to find the legendary island of Atlantis. It's 1914 when a nerdy linguist named Milo Thatch (voiced by Michael J. Fox) is recruited to "advise" an expedition on the Ulysses, a state-of-the-art submarine under a gruff military Commander (James Garner), his cool assistant (Claudia Christian) and a motley crew that includes an explosives expert (Don Novello), a flippant mechanic (Jacqueline Abradors), a crusty cook (the late Jim Varney), a fast-talking doctor (Phil Morris), a zany geologist known as The Mole (Corey Burton), and a cranky, chain-smoking communications op (Florence Stanley).  Milo thinks it's going to be all "discovery, teamwork and adventure," but they're a Jules Verne-like "Dirty Dozen." En route, their most memorable encounter is with the ferocious Leviathan, a mechanical, lobster-like sea-serpent, who shreds their sub. Then, after surv!
iving some fiery flies, they meet the Atlanteans who are in the midst of a "crystal" crisis, losing their mystical source of power and healing. Romance sparks between Milo and Princess Kida (Cree Summer), much to the dismay of her father (Leonard Nimoy) and there's a treacherous twist from the mercenary Commander. Directors Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise opt for a non-traditional approach - no songs, no cutsey animal sidekicks. Instead, they're into the courageous derring-do, solidly punctuated by James Newton Howard's music.
 The flat characters pale in comparison with the flashy, eye-catching action and it's best to just ignore some of the obvious plot loop-holes. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Atlantis" surfaces with an imaginative, spectacular 7. Another triumph for Disney animation.

Title
Review for Left Luggage (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "LEFT LUGGAGE" (Trident Releasing)
     Set in Belgium in 1972, this Dutch film explores the emotional journey of Chaja Silberschmidt, a Jewish, yet thoroughly assimilated, 20 year-old student (Laura Fraser). Her parents are Holocaust survivors who seem, to her, obsessed with the past. Her father (Maximilian Schell) spends his time digging all over Antwerp to find two large suitcases that he buried when he fled from the Nazis; they contain his violin, family silver and photographs. Meanwhile, her mother (Marianne Sagebrecht), in denial, compulsively weaves a blanket and makes pound cake.  Since she's in need of rent money, a family friend (Chaim Topol) finds Chaja a job as a nanny to five children in a Hasidic family, headed by Mrs. Kalman (Isabella Rossellini) who teaches her about orthodoxy. Though initially intolerant of the seemingly pointless traditions and strict rules under which the family operates, Chaja bonds with the youngest child, Simcha (Adam Monty), a five-year old, who refuses to speak, !
much to the chagrin of his formidable father (Jeroen Krabbe).
     The culture clash and survivor-guilt concept comes from Carl Friedman's novel, "The Shovel and the Loom," adapted by Edwin De Vries. In interviews, director Jeroen Krabbe revealed that he was attracted to the story, meaning both emotional and literal baggage, because he came from a mixed (Jewish-Gentile) marriage and was, for many years, unaware of his own family's wartime travail. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Left Luggage" is a sensitive, somber 7, although I suspect it's more suited to video or cable TV than the big screen. And, if you're curious about Hasidic tradition, I recommend Boaz Yakin's "A Price Above Rubies" (1998), starring Renee Zellweger as an unhappy Hasidic housewife who yearns for liberation.

Title
Review for Evolution (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "EVOLUTION" (DreamWorks)
 "Let's shampoo some aliens," shouts David Duchovny to the Glen Canyon Fire Department as they set off to save the world from total destruction by phantasmagorical creatures from another planet. Absurd?  Totally - and that's the key this goofy sci-fi comedy from Ivan Reitman, who heists the idea from his own "Ghostbusters."  The story begins when meteor crashes in the Arizona desert, narrowly missing a dense wannabe fireman, Seann William Scott, practicing for his fire-fighting test. He alerts a local geologist, Orlando Jones, who recruits Duchovny, a former government scientist now teaching at a community college, and they discover one-cell organisms that are evolving at an exponential rate. "Snag one and put him in the bucket," says Duchovny, envisioning a Nobel Prize. "I've seen this movie," Jones wise-cracks. "The black dude dies first. You snag it!"  There's the inevitable government interference in the form of Julianne Moore, a brainiac epidemiologist from the CD!
C (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), who soon realizes there's a bigger danger than the military. And I'm not referring to Jones's anal probe, Scott's serenade in a suburban shopping mall, or "Ghostbuster" veteran Dan Aykroyd as the undignified Governor of Arizona. Ivan Reitman and screenwriter Don Jakoby's satirical, cliche-laden, four-misfits-save-the-universe formula is outlandish as Duchovny plays preposterously off his wry, deadpan "X-Files" persona, while Jones provides fast-paced comic relief - but not as effectively as Tommy Lee Jones and Will Smith in "Men in Black." Moore's the klutzy, slapstick eye-candy and Scott's there for the teeny-boppers. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Evolution" is a zany, silly 6. Rated PG-13, it's a cockamamie summer comedy.

Title
Review for Recess: School's Out (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "RECESS: SCHOOL'S OUT" (Walt Disney Pictures)
             At "Preview 2001 and Beyond," last week in Manhattan, Disney made it clear that they wanted to "own" President's Day weekend - and this G-rated animated feature is this year's attempt. Based on the popular Disney Channel cartoon, the story begins at the start of summer when a lonely fourth-grader named T.J. Detweiler (voiced by Andy Lawrence) is left behind to pedal his bike alone as his friends go off to camp. But his life suddenly has purpose when he learns that "a rogue teacher" (James Woods) at the Third Street School plans to use a laser-like beam to alter the Earth's orbit and create a permanent winter, thereby eliminating summer vacation entirely. This calls for action! Quickly, T.J. hatches a plan that includes a S.W.A.T. team of pint-sized warriors, armed with Silly String, to battle this villainous former U.S. Secretary of Education who was dismissed for trying to abolish the June, July, August recess in order to raise grade scores. (This character is ob!
viously based on real-life former Education Secretary William J. Bennett and his highly-touted "Book of Virtues.") The sympathetic adult figure is Principal Prickley (Dabney Coleman) who has a history of conflict with the smarmy bad guy and still keeps a '60s peace symbol hidden in his desk. The animation is of the flat TV-cartoon variety, and the soundtrack includes songs by Steppenwolf, Three Dog Night and the Strawberry Alarm Clock.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Recess: School's Out" is a kid-friendly 5 - and don't miss the psychedelic homage to "Yellow Submarine," called "Green Tambourine," sung by Robert Goulet over the closing credits.

Title
Review for Animal, The (2001)
   "America's Sweetheart" Colleen Haskell didn't outlast Richard Hatch on "Survivor," but the plucky 24 year-old emerges from this crazed catastrophe unscathed - unless you count Rob Schneider's running his tongue across her face. Schneider plays Marvin Mange, a mousy, mild-mannered police department file clerk who is the victim in an awful automobile accident. While unconscious, he's reassembled by a weird scientist (Michael Caton) who gives him organs from various animals.  So the once-physically challenged dork awakens from a coma with the speed of a cheetah, the olfactory sense of a dog, and the sexual drive of a goat. At the local airport, he's able to sniff out heroin and nab a drug smuggler and, as a result, is immediately welcomed on the police force by the grateful Chief (Ed Asner), much to the chagrin of his bullying, muscle-bound sergeant (John C. McGinley).  He discovers he can outrun a man on horseback and swim like a seal. (All of the best clips were in t!
he "Coming Attractions.") Since he has no idea about the implants, he attributes his amazing physical prowess to a disgusting beverage called Badger Milk.  But his feral instincts prove a definitive distraction in his courtship of a vegetarian environmentalist (perpetually smiling Colleen Haskell) who runs the local animal shelter, not to mention the tufts of coarse hair sprouting from his buttocks. And I won't even delve into his  barnyard flirtation with a female goat in heat.  Produced by Adam Sandler, this behavioral  fable was co-written by Rob Schneider with Tom Brady and directed by Luke Greenfield, who is obviously a novice. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Animal" limps in with a crass, crude 3. Think of a dumb and demented "Island of Dr. Moreau" Saturday Night Live spin-off.

Title
Review for Cats & Dogs (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "CATS & DOGS" (Warner Bros.)
  Unbeknownst to us humans, a struggle for control of our planet has been waged between cats and dogs for centuries. And the balance of power is tipping. Professor Brody (Jeff Goldblum) is working on a medication for people who are allergic to dogs, causing an edgy, maniacal white Persian cat, Mr. Tinkles (Sean Hayes), and his reluctant henchcat Calico (Jon Lovitz) to declare war, targeting the Brody home, including Mrs. Brody (Elizabeth Perkins) and their 11 year-old son Scott (Alexander Pollock) as their newly adopted pocket beagle, Lou (Tobey Maguire), becomes pivotal in the canine counter-spy network. Working to prevent a cat-astrophe are Butch (Alec Baldwin), a jaded Anatolian shepherd; Ivy (Susan Sarandon), a wise Saluki hound; Peek (Joe Pantoliano), a small Chinese Crested who's a computer whiz; Sam (Michael Clarke Duncan), a bumbling Old English sheepdog; and Mastiff (Charlton Heston) in charge of Central Dog Command.  Their adversaries include a secret agent k!
nown as The Russian, along with a team of Devon Rexes as Ninja cats, armed with knives and grenades, and 6700 "infected" mice. And it all leads up to a confrontation in Mr. Mason's Flocking Factory, filled with industrial-size tree-flockers, plus snowmen, Christmas trees.
   Despite the ad copy, writers Glenn Ficarra & John Recqua don't allow you to "root for" pet rivals, since they stack the doggone deck against the sneaky felines. And director Lawrence Gutterman, working with renowned animal trainer Boone Narr, is far more concerned about seamlessly combining live-action with puppetry and CGI. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Cats & Dogs" is a purr-snickety 6. For a matinee, it's frisky, fanciful, furr-ocious family fun!

Title
Review for Harry, un ami qui vous veut du bien (2000)
    Harry's like a subversively black comedy version of "The Man Who Came to Dinner" as interpreted by German-born, France-based director Dominik Moll via Alfred Hitchcock with nods to French film-makers Henri-George Clouzot and Claude Chabrol. Let me explain. On a hot summer day, bickering Michel (Laurent Lucas) and Claire (Mathilde Seigner) and their three cranky, squalling daughters, all under the age of five, are driving in a car with no air-conditioning when they pause at a rest stop. In the men's room, Michel, who's enmeshed in domestic chaos and strapped for cash, meets Harry (Sergi Lopez), who's now a wealthy businessman and remembers him from school. Perhaps they were classmates 20 years ago; Michel can't recall. But Harry obviously idolizes him and invites himself and his fiancee, Plum (Sophie Guillemin), to Michel's half-finished vacation home in the French countryside. Soon Claire's suspicious of their bizarre, lingering guests, who are overtly charming (de!
termined to "solve every problem") and seductively generous (giving them a new SUV) but also hedonistic and overbearing. And Harry's downright creepy in his homoeroticism. By the time misguided Michel realizes what's happening, they're all in mortal danger. Charismatic Sergi Lopez treads that subtle line between charmingly pleasant and obsessively psychotic, while Laurent Lucas rings true as the stressed-out husband. While Dominik Moll evokes memories of "Strangers on a Train" and "Apartment Zero," he still can't elude the sinister cliches of the genre and fails to sufficiently delineate Michel's gullible psychological discontent. Plus, there's a weak conclusion. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "With a Friend Like Harry" is a droll, deceptive, insidious 8. It's a wicked psychological thriller.

Title
Review for Pearl Harbor (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "PEARL HARBOR" (Disney/Touchstone Pictures)
          It's a glossy, three-hour, epic love story about the loss of 
innocence, set around the tragedy of "the day which will live in infamy," 
according to President Franklin Delano Roosevelt (Jon Voight). And at $140+ 
million, it's also the most expensive movie ever made. So, is it a patriotic 
blockbuster? Yes. Is it an Oscar-contender, like "Titanic," its obvious 
inspiration? No. 
  Written by Randall Wallace ("Braveheart"), directed by Michael Bay 
("Armageddon") and produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, "Pearl Harbor" delivers 
primarily in the violent, realistic action sequences: the Japanese sneak 
attack on the U.S. fleet on the fateful morning of December 7, 1941. Planes 
swoop in. Bombs explode. Battleships sink. Machine guns fire. 
   The two-pilots-and-a-Navy nurse love story fares less well. Ben 
Affleck and Josh Hartnett are boyhood pals who fall in love with the same 
woman, Kate Beckinsale. Affleck meets her at an Army induction center, where 
she inoculates his bare rump - twice. Romance ignites and blazes until his 
plane is shot down in the Battle of Britain. In Hawaii, Hartnett, delivers 
the news to Beckinsale and soon they find passion under the parachutes in an 
airfield hangar. But Affleck's not dead, and Beckinsale's pregnant. If it 
sounds trite, sappy and prosaic, it is. Without high drama or sentimentality, 
there's an emotional detachment, and it takes Col. James Doolittle's (Alec 
Baldwin) Tokyo raid, four months later, to resolve their destiny. But Cuba 
Gooding Jr is charismatic as cook who shot down Japanese Zeros and was the 
first African-American awarded the Navy Cross; too bad his part is so 
truncated. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pearl Harbor" is an 
stunning, explosive 6. It's a contrived, commercial war movie. If you want 
accurate history, rent "Tora, Tora, Tora."

Title
Review for Dr. Dolittle 2 (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "DR. DOLITTLE 2" (20th Century-Fox)
When I took a seven year-old and a ten year-old to see Eddie 
Murphy, once again, play Dr. John Dolittle, they loved it. And 
why not? Filled a merry menagerie, including his faithful dog 
Lucky (voiced by Norm Macdonald), plus lots of fart and 
poop jokes, it's aimed directly at pre-teens. The story begins in 
Dr. Dolittle's San Francisco clinic where, after hours, he 
conducts a group therapy session for strays, assuring them, 
"Every dog can find a family and be someone's best friend." 
But his healer-who-talks-with-animals routine is interrupted 
by a summons to meet the Mafia-connected Mr. Beaver 
(voiced by Richard C. Sarafian). It seems the little critters 
need his help to save their forest that's being threatened by an 
evil logger (Jeffrey Jones) and his lawyer (Kevin Pollak). So 
Mrs. Dolittle (Kristen Wilson), a lawyer, gets an injunction, 
pleading that the forest is home to the last Pacific Western 
bear, an endangered species. The catch is that Dolittle must 
play match-maker for the bear, named Ava (voiced by Lisa 
Kudrow), pairing her with Archie (voiced by Steve Zahn), a 
circus-trained bear, who has no desire to live in the wild. 
"Winnie the Who?" Dolittle cajoles, appealing to his vanity. 
"You'll be famous!" But once Archie gets a look at Ava, he 
changes his tune to "I Will Survive" and tries to win her 
affections from a rival Kodiak bear. Written by Larry Levin 
and directed by Steve Carr, Dolittle's survival-training with 
Archie provides plenty of laughs, as does the subsequent 
world-wide Animal Strike. There's also a dreary romantic 
subplot involving Dolittle's petulant 16 year-old daughter 
(Raven-Symone) and her pizza-delivery boy-friend (Lil' 
Zane). On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dr. Dolittle 
2" is a sweet-natured 6. It's an amiable, big-screen sit-com 
that's not hard to bear.

Title
Review for Blow (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "BLOW" (New Line Cinema)
      Put this coke-drenched cautionary caper at the top of your "must see" list. Based on the true life story of George Jung, the first American to become one-man drug conduit, bringing Colombian cocaine into the United States in the '70s and '80s, it chronicles the rise and fall of a crime entrepreneur.  Raised by dysfunctional parents, Jung was a money-hungry kid from Massachusetts, stoned in California's sun and surf, when he ran into a sultry stewardess who flew in marijuana from Mexico. So why not cocaine from Colombia? Jung saw himself as an ingenious modern-day pirate, defying politics, governments and the police. Eventually, he self-destructs with hedonism and greed and, as a result, will remain in prison until 2014.  As Jung, Johnny Depp delivers a wickedly faceted display of acting prowess, filled with detail and specificity. Ray Liotta and Rachel Griffiths are poignant as Jung's troubled parents.  Paul Reubens (a.k.a. Pee-Wee Herman) scores as a homosexual !
hairdresser/dealer, Franka Potente's vibrancy glows as Jung's giddy girl-friend, and Penelope Cruz snarls as the selfish, spoiled shrew who becomes his wife. Too bad that the hyperambitious but predictably formulaic script by Nick Cassavetes and David McKenna is clich=E9-riddled and fragmented in its condensation of Bruce Porter's book and that director Ted Demme relies so much on Depp's voice-over narration as the third-act disintegrates into a banal morality morass. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Blow" is a disturbing 8, a chilling saga that gets under your skin in its assertion that there's simply no way to stop the importation of drugs into this country. Although it will inevitably be compared to "Traffic," "Boogie Nights," "Casino" and "Goodfellas," "Blow" is a definite must-see.

Title
Review for 3000 Miles to Graceland (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "3,000 MILES TO GRACELAND" (Warner Bros.)
 Despite its catchy title, this is an excruciatingly long, violent, despairing journey into the heart of darkness - without a paddle. Going "from Rat Pack to fat pack," it's International Elvis Week in Las Vegas when Kurt Russell, Kevin Costner, Christian Slater, David Arquette, and Bokeem Woodbine - clad in glitzy jumpsuits and sideburns - stage an explosive, blood-splattered $3.2 million heist at the Riviera Hotel & Casino. After the excessive carnage clears, it's obvious that Costner wants all the cash for himself, so Russell grabs the loot and sets out to launder the marked currency, hooking up with a sexy grifter, Courteney Cox, and her bratty, kleptomaniac kid (David Kaye) with two bumbling Feds (Kevin Pollak, Thomas Haden Church) in pursuit. Writer Richard Recco and director Demian Lichtenstein concocted senseless, humorless banter that passes for dialogue and a banal murder & mayhem plot in which not one participant is either likable or sympathetic. Rather than!
 bother with character development, they fixate on deafening gunfire, fiery explosions, fighting scorpions and car stunts, often involving an eye-catching fire-engine red '50 Cadillac Coupe de Ville. Russell plays a cliche bad guy-with-a-conscience, while Costner is a one-dimensional, nasty, sinister mercenary who thinks he's Elvis's illegitimate son. As a despicable mother who abandons her son, Cox is not only shrill but so skinny that, clad in tight pants, she looks like a stork. In the final credits, Russell, who got an Emmy nomination for the TV movie "This is Elvis" (1979), finally does his impression of the King. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "3,000 Miles to Graceland" is an ominous 1. It's an ineptly edited, tedious trip to nowhere that is deservedly R-rated for strong violence, sexuality and language.

Title
Review for Luzhin Defence, The (2000)
X-Questions-to: graham@jetcity.com
X-Submissions-to: graham@ee.washington.edu
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Summary: r.a.m.r. #28300
Keywords: author=granger
Subject: Review: The Luzhin Defense (2001)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Approved: graham@ee.washington.edu
Organization: None
Author: Ssg722@aol.com (SSG Syndicate)
Susan Granger's review of "THE LUZHIN DEFENSE" (Sony Pictures Classics)
  It's all about chess and madness, set in 1929 in the Lake
Como region of Northern Italy, where the World Chess Championship is
underway. The now-grown Russian prodigy Alexander Luzhin (John
Turturro) is the favorite, and his mind is totally focused on winning
- until he encounters a lovely Russian Emigre, Natalia Katkov (Emily
Watson), whose mother is determined to marry her off to the French
nobleman Jean de Stassard (Christopher Thompson), a chess enthusiast
who's come to watch the tournament. Socially inexperienced and inept,
Luzhin proposes marriage and, surprisingly, she accepts. But there's
opposition in the form of Luzhin's former manager, Valentinov (Stuart
Wilson), who is determined to see him lose. The suspense intensifies
as the contest comes down to Luzhin and Turati (Fabio Sartor), the
Italian Grand Master. Under intense mental pressure and becoming
increasingly unstable, the obsessed Luzhin devises a brilliant set of
moves, which come to be known as the Luzhin Defense. Checkmate!
    From the nicotine stains on his fingertips to his
disheveled clothes and clipped, mono-syllabic speech, John Turturro is
a superb actor but he goes overboard in demented eccentricity,
muttering to himself and spinning circles in the rain, while Emily
Watson exudes the required propriety and nurturing instincts. Based on
"The Defense" by Vladimir Nabokov, adapted by Peter Berry and directed
with a heavy-hand by Marleen Gorris ("Antonia's Line,"
"Mrs. Dalloway"), it's as slow and ponderous as the game it depicts,
soon the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Luzhin Defense" is a
sedate, simplistic, even dispiriting 5.  If you're intrigued by chess,
I recommend renting "Searching for Bobby Fischer" (1993), a far
superior film.

Title
Review for Varian's War (2000) (TV)
Susan Granger's review of "VARIAN'S WAR" (Showtime TV movie)
 In this true story of an unknown W.W.II hero, William Hurt plays Varian Fry, a modest, self-effacing New York editor who became the American Oskar Schindler. At great risk to his own life, he saved prominent artists, musicians and writers, "the soul of Europe," as well as 2,000 others, from Nazi persecution. Varian Fry's story begins in the late '30s when, in Berlin, he saw first-hand the street pogroms. Sickened by Nazi brutality, he joined with novelist Thomas Mann (Michael Rudder) to form the Emergency Rescue Committee (ERC) with the blessing of Eleanor Roosevelt (Sheena Larkin). But when he's refused help by the U.S. State Dept., Fry travels alone to Marseilles in 1940 with a top priority list: painter Marc Chagall (Joel Miller) and his wife (Gloria Carlin), political writer Hannah Arendt (Elyzabeth Walling), historian Heinrich Mann (John Dunn-Hill), novelist Lion Feuchtwanger (Lorne Brass), novelist Franz Werfel (Vlasta Vrana) and his wife (Lynn Redgrave), who sm!
uggles out the original musical manuscripts of her former husband, Gustav Mahler. Fry's aided by an idealistic American (Julia Ormond), a forger (Alan Arkin) and a refugee (Matt Craven). Written and directed by Lionel Chetwynd, this is an amazing story, not only of courage but of suppression, since the "enemy" was the Vichy French. In the years since W.W.II, there's been this myth that France was an ally when, in fact, large parts of France were part of the Nazi conspiracy to destroy the culture of Europe. On the Granger TV-Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Varian's War" is a  moving, heroic, engrossing 8. "How we rise to meet the challenge is how our children will judge us," says Varian Fry - and that's still true of our dilemmas today. "Varian's War" premieres on SHOWTIME TV, Sunday, April 22nd, at 8 PM with additional playdates on May 11 at 10 AM and May 15 at 4 PM.

Title
Review for Swordfish (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "SWORDFISH" (Warner Bros.)
  "You know, the problem with Hollywood is that they make s**t," says John Travolta as this enigmatic cyber-crime caper opens. He rants on about how films, particularly "Dog Day Afternoon," lack realism, failing to push the envelope. But you're jarred to ruthless reality when you realize he's holding 22 hostages, wired with explosives, in the midst of a heist at L.A.'s World Banc. Then a flashback reveals what happened three days earlier when he sent Halle Berry to recruit "the most dangerous hacker in America," Hugh Jackman, an ex-con on probation for computer piracy. The only bait he'll bite is enough cash to gain custody of his young daughter whose alcoholic mother has now married a porno-producer. But money's no problem since, in a perverse twist on patriotism, Travolta's determined to pull off a massive cyber-heist, stealing $9.5 billion in a DEA money-laundering slush fund that's code-named Swordfish. Despite a bizarre haircut, Travolta's menacing and manipulativ!
e as "a driven, unflinching, calculating machine who takes what he wants when he wants and disappears." In contrast, Jackman ("X-Men") embodies the reluctant hero, while Berry delivers shifting signals about her motives, along with baring her breasts, and Don Cheadle is a determined FBI cyber-crimes agent. Despite writer Skip Woods' complex, high-tech cyber-babble about decrypting data and hidden worms, director Dominic Sena ("Gone in 60 Seconds") basically loves to blow things up, going over-the-top in terms of shoot-outs, car crashes and shattering glass. But the final spectacular confrontation, involving a Sikorski helicopter and a bus full of hostages, is truly jaw-dropping. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Swordfish" blasts in with an intense, action-packed, fast-paced 7. It's a dynamite thriller!

Title
Review for All Access: Front Row. Backstage. Live! (2001)
Susan Granger: "IMAX: ALL ACCESS. FRONT ROW. BACKSTAGE. LIVE!"
           It's the dream of every rock fan to weave your way through the arena parking lot, filled with tour buses, semis and performers' limousines, and be waved through the Artists' Entrance door with an "All Access" pass that identifies you as a VIP. You're escorted by a security guard through the winding corridors beneath the stage and into a prime viewing area. You watch the sound engineers in front of their mixing boards, electricians adjusting speakers and musicians tuning their instruments. Then there's the backstage visit with your favorite musician who is preparing for a mega-concert.
             Fantasy? No. It's reality at this new 63-minute IMAX presentation which combines the intense visuality of the giant screen with up-close-and-personal views of performances by some of the greatest multi-platinum acts in music. The charismatic Sting leads off with "Desert Rose" accompanied by rai singer Cheb Mami. Not that this European star is introduced or even identified. He's just there singing with Sting, adding a Middle Eastern flavor - and, as a fan, you're supposed to be able to recognize him. But the camera work's terrific - with Sting reminiscing, "I saw Jimi Hendrix in Newcastle, and I'd never seen anyone play the way he played" -  in front of a mirror, creating an intriguing double reflection.
               After that, without transition or explanation, there's the Godfather of Funk George Clinton with his rainbow-colored hair, along with Mary J. Blige, shimmering in an ankle-length silver leather coat. The unpredictable Kid Rock explodes with his signature anthem "Bawitdaba," and sultry Sheryl Crow croons a plaintive "If It Makes You Happy," seated alone on a rehearsal stage. Legendary bluesman B.B. King, hip-hop group The Roots and Phish guitarist/vocalist Trey Anastasio combine forces in King's classic, "Rock Me Baby." R&B soul singer Macy Gray performs "I Can't Wait to Meetchu," shaking her black feather boa. Carlos Santana and Rob Thomas of Matchbox Twenty jam with "Smooth." Soul singer Al Green and the Dave Matthews Band render "Take Me To the River," and Moby does "Porcelain."
            Admittedly, the music is terrific and it's all very entertaining but - without sub-titles or a scorecard - you don't know who the players are. Being over 40, I brought a savvy teenager with me, hoping he could ID them, but even he was at a loss with many. Only having the press kit notes saved me from the bewildering ignorance which ran rampant among others in the audience.
             Also, the commentary by the various musicians is banal: "Music is a totally infectious thing that just grabs you." "I think the point of rock 'n' roll is rebellion." "Music has no age limit."   "Music soothes the savage beast and I guess I've got a lot of beast in me because it soothes me." If you're a die-hard rock fan, perhaps you're gonna love this concert film. For others, I wonder.
One final cautionary note from management: your local IMAX theater is not responsible for broken eardrums.

Title
Review for Memento (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "MEMENTO" (Newmarket Films)
  "Memories are just an interpretation, not a record. Facts are facts." That's what Leonard Shelby (Guy Pearce), an insurance claims investigator, keeps repeating to himself as he recalls discovering his wife sprawled on their bathroom floor and then being hit on the head from behind. That blow caused a permanent condition called short-term memory loss, meaning that, while he can draw on memories from before the accident, Leonard cannot recall what happened from one moment to another since. He constantly forgets what he's doing, where he's going and whom he can trust. To maintain some semblance of order in his life, he snaps Polaroid photos of people he meets, jotting cautionary captions on each, like "Don't believe his lies." For other pertinent information, he tattoos his body, like "John G. raped and murdered my wife" on his chest. Which is important, because Leonard's determined to avenge his wife's death. Writer/director Christopher Nolan, working from his brother!
 Jonathan Nolan's short story and with cinematographer Wally Pfister, tautly alternates color with black-and-white sequences to reveal Leonard's recollections backwards. Jumbled imagery fits together like pieces of an intricate jigsaw puzzle, and the audience is as confused as Leonard. As the brain-damaged protagonist, Guy Pearce ("L.A. Confidential") delivers an ironic, tour-de-force performance, particularly playing off Carrie-Ann Moss, who enjoys messing with his mind, and Joe Pantoliano, who could be either a friend or foe. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Memento" is an edgy, disconcerting 9. It's a weird, murky thriller that toys with your mind, culminating in an unsettling universal truth, as Leonard admits, "I have to believe that, when my eyes are closed, the world's still here."

Title
Review for Tailor of Panama, The (2001)
  Pierce Brosnan may play a British spy but he's no 007 in
John Boorman's stylish adaptation of John Le Carre's 1996 post-Cold
War thriller. Instead, Brosnan plays a sleazy, disreputable and
disgraced M16 agent who's been sent to Panama City. "It's 'Casablanca'
without heroes," he's told.  His job is to check on drug trafficking
and money laundering. Armed with bribes and a bit of blackmail, he
coaxes debt-ridden Geoffrey Rush to pass along information about his
wealthy customers at the elite Braithwaite & Pendel
custom-tailors. ("That was Mr. Connery's choice," Rush murmurs about a
fabric - wink, wink!) Plus, Rush is married to Jamie Lee Curtis, an
American who works as assistant to the Panamanian director of the
Canal. (Their son is Daniel Radcliffe, the future Harry Potter, and
their daughter is the director's child Lola Boorman.) So when there's
no gossip, Rush invents tantalizing if dubious tidbits, like selling
the Canal, perhaps to China, which immediately ignites a political
drama. Writer Andrew Davis collaborated with Le Carre and Boorman on
the amusingly sophisticated screenplay which evokes memories of Graham
Greene's "Our Man in Havana" and "The Quiet American" with ironic
touches of wit and whimsy, like having Brosnan chat with Rush as they
dance in a gay bar to Irving Berlin's "Let's Face the Music and
Dance."  There's a superb supporting cast: Harold Pinter as Rush's
deceased mentor and conscience, Brendan Gleeson as an alcoholic
revolutionary, Catherine McCormack as a sultry embassy attache, and
John Fortune as the Ambassador. And Philippe Rousselot's
cinematography captures Panama's skyscrapers and squalor. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Tailor of Panama" is a caustic,
clever 8. It's a tantalizing romp of international intrigue.

Title
Review for Mexican, The (2001)
 Not only is vibrant Julia Roberts America's Sweetheart but
she's also this year's Golden Globe winner with a lock on the Best
Actress Oscar for "Erin Brockovich." Brad Pitt's been voted People
magazine's "Sexiest Man in the World."  They possess two of the
screen's most photogenic faces, so teaming them, along with "The
Sopranos" Joe Gandolfini, was a stroke of marketing genius. Based on a
fateful screenplay by J.H. Wyman, directed by Gore Verbinski ("Mouse
Hunt"), the story follows a reluctant bagman (Pitt) who is sent to
Mexico to retrieve a legendary pistol, known as The
Mexican. Supposedly, it was crafted as a wedding present for a
nobleman if he'd marry the gunsmith's daughter who, in turn, loved her
father's apprentice who rigged the gun to misfire if it fell into the
wrong hands. He figures this errand should end his indentured
servitude to an underworld crime boss for past misdeeds.
  While Pitt, a lovable dork, has a serious problem with
moving vehicles, he's got even more of a problem with his group
therapy-addicted girl-friend (Roberts) who spouts psycho-babble and
demands that he join her in Las Vegas. ("When do you get to that point
if enough is enough?" she muses.) Finding the cursed pistol is easy
but getting it back is complicated, particularly when she's taken
hostage by a hitman (Gandolfini). This divergent plot is important
because the stars actually have few scenes together - which is a
mistake. Both exude charm and handle the comedy well but the pacing is
uneven and the pairing unsatisfying. The soundtrack's fun,
particularly Nancy Sinatra's "These Boots Were Made for Walkin'". On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Mexican" is a visually
stylish 7. It's a quirky caper movie about destiny.

Title
Review for Amores perros (2000)
 This entry in Oscar's Best Foreign Film category lost to "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon," but it's an amazing breakthrough for Mexican cinema. Beginning with a catastrophic car crash in the center of Mexico City, it spins into a trilogy of tales about those involved - and their dogs!  In "Octavio and Susana," a young punk (Gael Garcia Bernal) wants to raise money to run off with his abused, pregnant sister-in-law (Vanessa Bauche) by entering his pet mutt in hideously brutal, bloody dog-fights. In "Daniel and Valeria," a businessman (Alvaro Guerro) leaves his wife and family for a beautiful supermodel (Goya Toledo) whom the crash turns into a paraplegic and, while she's convalescing in a fancy loft, her pampered toy poodle vanishes under the floorboards, where he's threatened by rats. And in "El Chivo and Maru," an elderly, itinerant assassin (Emilio Echevarria) adopts a wounded Rottweiler. First-time director Alejandro Gonzales Inarritu and screenwriter Guillermo Arr!
iaga are obsessed with the ferocious cruelty of human nature, illustrated by the various reasons that the cars are at that intersection at exactly that time. And, clearly, they have been influenced by the grim realism of Quentin Tarantino, particularly "Pulp Fiction." Cinematographer Rodrigo Prieto's shaky camerawork conveys a feverish immediacy, while the eclectic soundtrack, masterminded by Gonzales who was in the music business before making movies, mixes Mexican rap with the cries of Celia Cruz. Running three hours in length, it could use judicious editing, and  the title means "Love's a Bitch." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Amores Perros" is a compelling, savage 8. It's obvious why it won the Grand Prize at Cannes Critics Week but it's not recommended  for those who are repelled by violence.

Title
Review for A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "A.I.: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE" (Warner Bros.)
Steven Spielberg is a cinematic genius. So was Stanley Kubrick. But 
this unconventional, collaborative effort may mystify movie-goers. 
Some will be beguiled, as I was. Others may be frustrated and/or 
disappointed. Told as a sci-fi fairy tale for adults, the story revolves 
around a perfect robotic child named David (Haley Joel Osment), 
adopted by a Cybertronics employee (Sam Robards) and his wife 
(Frances O'Connor) whose own seriously ill child (Jake Thomas) has 
been cryogenically frozen. David is programmed to love, but those 
around him aren't - because he's 'mecha' (mechanical), not 'orga' 
(organic) - and, therein, lies his dilemma. Like Pinocchio, he yearns to 
be a real boy. But how? When he's abandoned with only his supertoy 
Teddy bear as a companion, he's sets off in search of a dream. Steeped 
in romanticism, the plot is divided into three segments: the domestic 
drama, the quest or odyssey, and then the futuristic underwater/ice 
sequences, a consequence of global warming. This fragmentation 
breeds problems. In the darkly disturbing road trip, for example, David 
meets up with Gigolo Joe (Jude Law), a 'love mecha,' who takes him to 
the Flesh Fair, a nightmarish carnival, filled with robot torture devices. 
Then the eerie, sentimental third segment evokes "E.T." and "Close 
Encounters of a Third Kind," moving grandly, yet tediously. There's a 
lack of cohesion, a feeling of schizophrenia. Hayley Joel Osment  is 
truly amazing and Jude Law is charismatic. The rich visuals - sets, 
costumes and creature/make-up effects - are stunning. On the Granger 
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "A.I.: Artificial Intelligence" is an 
unpredictable, intriguing 10. Love it or hate it, it's a triumph of 
innovative film-making, a blend of science and humanity, and a 
brilliant collaboration of two acknowledged masters.

Title
Review for See Spot Run (2001)
     The comedic talent of David Arquette and the clever
casting of expressive six year-old Angus T. Jones make the wacky
slapstick antics of this canine comedy very, very funny. Arquette
plays an intrepid U.S. Postal carrier coping with a delivery route
that leads him straight through "dog alley," where one pugnacious
pooch after another tries to sabotage him. "There's not a dog on this
planet that can scare me," he boasts. But the pratfalls of his
personal life are another matter. He's immature and unreliable which
makes him less than appealing to his blonde, beautiful neighbor
(Leslie Bibb), a conscientious single mother whose baby-sitter cancels
on her just as she's leaving for an out-of-town business trip, forcing
her to leave her impressionable son (Angus T. Jones) in his
care. "You're a life-saver," she says. "Yeah, all five flavors," he
replies. Meanwhile, there's a canine crisis when a mob boss (Paul
Sorvino) puts out a contract on an FBI superdog, a 100-pound Bull
Mastiff, known as Agent Eleven: a.k.a. Spot, who seeks refuge in
suburbia and winds up in the truck of this mutt-hating mailman, much
to the dismay of his devoted FBI trainer (Michael Clarke
Duncan). Reminiscent of Buster Keaton, David Arquette has the heart of
a clown. He's a master of physical comedy. The five credited writers
and director John Whitesell make the most of his gleeful exuberance,
particularly as his relationship develops with the diminutive
child. "You'd be fun for a dad," the kid concludes. Yeah,
right. There's also some lame urologic and yucky dog-poop humor that
makes it PG, rather than G-rated. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "See Spot Run" is a fun-filled, silly 6. Sure, it's cops 'n'
robbers and a doggone dog, but, for kids, this is a crowd-pleaser and
a rollicking good time.

Title
Review for Sister Mary Explains It All (2001) (TV)
Susan Granger's review of "SISTER MARY EXPLAINS IT ALL" (Showtime TV)
          On-stage, I've been amused by Christopher Durang's biting, one-act black comedy about a teaching nun's former students who return after 20 years to perform a pageant at her popular Christmas lecture with the intention of confronting and embarrassing her. Supposedly, they are all dysfunctional with unresolved personal issues because her teachings failed to protect them from the pain and suffering of becoming adults. Soon the entire assemblage is caught in the middle of their unexpected challenge to Sister Mary's own particular orthodoxy and must witness how faith, when misapplied or taken to extremes, can prove to be fatal. But this crass, heavy-handed satire, directed by long-time Woody Allen-collaborator Marshall Brickman, underscores the virulent anti-Catholic theme and Diane Keaton's characterization of Sister Mary is particularly venomous and malicious. The quartet of former students includes Laura San Giacomo, Brian Benben, Wallace Langham and Jennifer Tilly - t!
alented actors who tussle with the unpleasant characters they're playing. As the lecture progresses, Sister Mary is increasingly more scary as she explains church doctrine and answers stereotypical questions about her family, sin, heaven and hell. Seven year-old Thomas (Max Morrow), her current favorite student, obediently recites the catechism and helps with the uncomfortable presentation. "Sister Mary Explains It All" premieres exclusively on Showtime, Sunday night, May 27th at 8 p.m. My advice is to avoid this unpleasant and abrasive experience which emerges as an insulting travesty of Catholic teaching.

Title
Review for Crazy/Beautiful (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "crazy/beautiful" (Touchstone Pictures)
   It's rare to find a teenage love story that appeals to
adults, too, but this saga of a rich, rebellious Congressman's
daughter and a poor Hispanic guy from East L.A. who has faith in her
crosses generational boundaries as it also explores the bond between
parent and child.
   Talented Kirsten Dunst plays Nicole, a sexually-aggressive,
self-destructive teen, who makes a play for Jay Hernandez, as Carlos,
a hunky Latino schoolmate. Raised by a busy politician, Tom Oakley,
(Bruce Davison) and a distracted step-mother (Lucinda Jenney),
Nicole's a damaged, defiant drunk with a D.U.I. record, while Carlos
is well-mannered, respectful, grateful to be able to attend the
suburban school, and determined to get into the U.S. Naval
Academy. Nevertheless, their steamy romance flourishes - much to the
dismay of their parents. His struggling single mother (Soledad
St. Hilaire) is justifiably afraid that flaky, grungy Nicole will
distract her son from his dream of being a pilot, and Oakley agrees.
"I love her but she can be so destructive," he warns. But Carlos won't
give up on Nicole, sensing the deep hurt beneath her angst. With the
intensity of first love, he's truly there for her when she needs
him. And that, in itself, should give parents something provocative to
talk about with their teens, along with the reckless permissiveness
(regarding promiscuous sex, booze and drugs) of Nicole's parents.
    Written by Phil Hay & Matt Manfredi and directed by John
Stockwell, this romantic melodrama, full of sincere performances, is
yet another twist on the familiar inter-racial dating theme explored
in "Save the Last Dance." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"crazy/beautiful" is a serious, syrupy 6, showing that it's not what
you have in your life but who.

Title
Review for Spy Kids (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "SPY KIDS" (Dimension Films/Miramax)
            The family that spies together, stays together. That's the homespun philosophy behind this fantasy that pairs two "retired" spies with their unsuspecting children in a rousing adventure. It all begins with the Cortez kids,  8 year-old Juni (Daryl Sabara) and 12 year-old Carmen (Alexa Vega), listening to their favorite bedtime story, "The Two Spies Who Fell In Love," which reveals, through flashbacks, how their parents (Carla Gugino, Antonio Banderas) met and married. The Cortezes are now "consultants" but eagerly jump back into action when former associates mysteriously disappear. But their past still mystifies their squabbling siblings who protest, "Our parents can't be secret agents. They're not cool enough!" However, after a hasty trip down a hidden passageway to an escape pod that becomes a submarine, not only are Carmen and Juni convinced, but they're propelling the action, rescuing their parents from the evil clutches of Fegan Floop, a TV kiddie-show host (Al!
an Cumming, resembling Pee-Wee Herman), and his Floogle army of robotic children and Gumby-like "thumb-thumbs." Innovative, imaginative film-maker Roberto Rodriguez ("Desperado,""From Dusk Till Dawn") creates empowered junior James Bonds, wide-eyed with delight at their wacky, Willie Wonka-like gadgetry, while fostering pride in Hispanic culture. Teri Hatcher, Tony Shaloub and Cheech Marin head the supporting cast  - with a quirky George Clooney cameo and groovy music. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, the PG-rated "Spy Kids" is a fast-paced, family-friendly 7. You can bet your electroshock bubble gum that, given the proper marketing, this could develop into a formidable franchise.
