Authors
Victor Salva
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
  
It is so rare that a big scale film that is predicated on
something as fantastic as alien life would take the first twenty minutes of
the film to build its characters rather than rush us into sensory overload,
that at first I thought this movie was going to be a classic miscaculation
on the part of the filmmakers. Filmmakers in the "instant gratification, I
have a very short attention-span, give me something big and easy and give
it to me now" culture that we have become.
But once I adjusted to the fact that this film was really
going to be about a person and not a pheonomenon, I sat back and watched
one of the truly greatest experiences of the summer. CONTACT is an
exciting, intelligent and incredibly moving experience about the unknown.
It proves that a woman, if talented and interesting enough, can pick up an
adventure film and carry it as well as any of the fellahs.
Jody Foster has some truly beautiful and transporting
moments in this film and my hat is off to her for sharing so much. At the
heart of every really strong performance there is sharing and she doesn't
hold back. 
I think I have now seen Zemeckis' finest work. Certainly a
far cry from the silly, feeble stuff of Gump. The moments of Contact in
this film would certainly make Stanley Kubrick proud, though the filmmakers
decide to take an infinitely more personal and intimate road vereing from
their 2001 style journey that may seen derivative but it is demanded by
this story and really unavoidable.  Where we end up is quite a different
take than the Arthur C. Clarke version of such a journey and depending on
your cup of tea, you will either love or vehemently dislike the choice the
film makes.
It has one or two false notes in its epic running time.
But it is amazing how negligible false notes are in a film where you are
enjoying the ride. A little less talk from the actual CONTACT sequence
would've been great. But there is really no way to pay off this incredible
premise and make everyone happy.  I thought ultimately it was a wonderful
way to spend an evening.
If more films were as smart as this one and as brave, I
shudder to think where the movies might be headed.  Its been a long time
since a film got me so excited about the human race...
For that, I'm moved and grateful.  Hats off to the filmmakers!
