Authors
Chen Chiou Beng
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for War Zone, The (1999)
Tom seems to be living in a seemingly happy family, that is, until he
witnesses what his father and his sister, Jessie, doing something together.
Almost immediately, he becomes a recluse. To makes matter worse, he witness
her sister and father committing sex. Very soon, he can take it no longer
and decides to break the silence, and this leads to a terrifying conclusion
The directorial debut of Tim Roth, The War Zone deals with a theme which no
much film dares to deal with, and that is incest. Right from the point where
Tom witness the scene of both his sister and father in the shower to the
final shot where Tom killed his own father, we are forced to see the film
from a voyeurs point of view, especially the scene where we witness the sex
scene between Jessie and her father.  Also, we are forced to see the film as
a true nature of life itself, bleak and stark naked, devoid of any humour.
Every scene in the film can be as truth as it is. It also raises a problem
for all to solve, whether home is the safest place, and whether your family
can be trusted. For it is now too common in every society that even among
every family, that may be a chance that anyone cannot be trusted, and
especially your closest one.
That is, however, one nudging question in my mind after the show. Is Tom
also interested in Jessie, just as his father? In the scenes where Tom looks
at Jessie, I suspected that. When at the end scene when Tom, alone with
Jessie, closes the bunker door, where Jessie have sex with her father, I
suspect that he wanted to enact what his father did. That is just my humble
opinion. Maybe you can explain it to me.
The War Zone was shown on 15th April 2000 at the 13th Singapore
International Film Festival.

Title
Review for Sôseiji (1999)
In the Meiji era of Japan, a doctor named Yukio is a doctor who has worked
as a medic officer during the war, gaining fame in the process. He comes
from a prestige family and is happily married. The life he leads seems
perfect, but is shattered when his family members died under mysterious
circumstances. Soon it is revealed that it is but Yukios twin brother, who
was abandoned at birth due to a birthmark, is behind all the murders and he
is now coming back to reclaim whats his, especially  Yukios wife, who was
once his lover
The film is a refreshing depart from Shinya Tsukamotos previous works,
whose works previously included the very mechanical Tetsuo and its sequel,
and also the very violent Tokyo Fist. All previous films he made were filled
with jarring images and an almost incomprehensible plot, but Gemini is
different. Gemini is made with the purpose of straight story telling.
Despite this, Gemini still flashes the old Tsukamoto, with the opening
showing a decomposed cat eaten but vultures and a scene with a nail is
driven into a guys neck, sprouting blood.
Gemini also deals with duality. This can be seen right at the start of the
film, where a contrast between the rich and the poor. He is born with a
silver spoon in his mouth, and he despises the slum people. At one scene
Yukio has to save between a poor woman is pleading for her child and the
injury of the mayor, he chose the rich, and forced the old woman out. In the
starkest contrast, however, is when his twin brother, who was abandoned when
birth and forced to live within the slums, exchanged identity with Yukio by
imprisoning him in a deep well and forcing him to eat on scraps of food. In
this scene, we really see the reversed life on each other as a psychological
game is played out, forcing him to reconsider the sides of the rich and the
poor. As the end scene shows, after he kills and knows the truth of his twin
brother, he walks into the slums, presumably to cure the poor people he once
loathed. At a minor turn of duality also sees Yukios wife, whose lover was
Yukios twin brother, has chosen to forsake a life of poorness and lives
with Yukio, whom she has initially mistaken for the other guy. As I said to
end this review, I would say Gemini is a compelling, albeit a little
conservative directing from Tsukamoto, film, and I would highly recommend
it.
(In Japanese With English subtitles)
Note:
Gemini was shown on 9th April 2000 at the 13th Singapore International Film
Festival and will be scheduled released for commercial release in Singapore
on a later date.

Title
Review for Guo nian hui jia (1999)
After the unintentional murder of her stepsister for just five Yuan, Tao Lan
is sentenced to jail. Seventeen years later, she was given special pass out
to jail to celebrate new year with her family for three days. But her
parents have moved away and her old resistance demolished, she is at a lost.
With the help of a prison warden, together they go on a journey to search
for Taos family, but when they finally found it, Tao refused to enter the
house, as her guilt overwhelmed her of killing her stepsister
A simple movie with a simple storytelling, and based on a true story,
Seventeen Years deals with guilt and redemption of a family facing with a
past that almost cannot be redeemed. This can also be seen in the final
scenes where Tao Lan reaches home, the scene where the mother confessed to
her husband that she has known all along that her daughter is coming home
today, but she did not tell her husband (After all, the killed stepdaughter
is the husbands daughter.). In the end of the scene where the fathers
thought was opened, where he initially wanted to leave his wife after her
daughters return, but changed his mind when he realised that what he really
loves is his current family.
The title, Seventeen Years, also drives across two meanings, the years Tao
Lan has been in jail for manslaughter, and also the times a girl lost, her
most precious times of her life. This is a film that should be watched, if
anything, for the simple message it drives across.
Note:
Seventeen Years was shown on 15th April 2000 at the 13th Singapore
International Film Festival. Seventeen Years also won the Best Actress and
Best Director for this years Silver screens Awards.

Title
Review for Perfect Blue (1997/I)
Mima is a singer in a popular pop idol group. Then one day, she decides to
forgo her singing career for a serious acting. But alas, she got only a
minor role to contend to, and so, to further her career, she chose to strip
and even appear in a rape sequence in the film. But things are not going
fine for her. First, she received threats. Then, she found a fan page
dedicated to her is actually reporting on her every move. Next a mysterious
figure, claiming to be the real her, started appearing everywhere and
talking to her. And she started developing memory lapses, forgetting what
she has done in those hours. And finally people are getting murdered around
her in the most gruesome way possible during her lapses. But who is the
killer? Is it the mysterious security guard that is stalking her? Or is it
her friends? Or could it be Mima herself? But is she capable of murder?
Forewarned, the anime is not for the squeamish. For though Perfect Blue runs
at only 81 minutes, it contains enough nudity and violence for a longer
film, and the murders occurred is at its most violent. But Perfect Blue may
be, in my opinion, the best Japanese animation in this years Singapore
International Film Festival. It does not delve in the usual science fiction
that Japanese anime normally deals in. It deals, however, with the dark
reality of film-makings. Also, Perfect Blue is also a murder mystery.
Everything you see in the film may or may not be reality. As for the ending,
I would spoil it for you. See for yourself and be amazed.

Title
Review for Ruang talok 69 (1999)
Due to the economic crisis in Thailand, Tum, a 25 year old secretary, is
dismissed from her work. Without money, she thought of suicide, but the newt
day she found a box containing a lot of money on her doorstep. As it turned
out, the money was used in a match making for the nights boxing match, and
due to a mix up, the money was landed on her doorstep. Soon, everybody,
including crooks, cops and neighbours alike, are at her house trying to get
back the money, and everybody are literally falling dead in Tums house
6ixtynin9 is one hell of a commercial film. From the opening sequence to the
very conventional ending, the film plays out like a Hollywood blockbuster.
6ixtynin9 is also very similar to a British film known as Thursday, where
the main character in that film life is thrown into turmoil when his old
friend gave him a suitcase of money. Like the protagonist in Thursday, Tum
was thrown in a strange chain of events that will react like a nuclear
reaction, with her as a catalyst.
This film also pokes fun at modern problems of Thailand. From match making
to the economic crisis which affected the society today. But do not watch
this if you are looking to identify the problems in this show; watch it only
if you want to be entertained.
6ixtynin9 was shown on 01th April 2000 at the 13th Singapore International
Film Festival.
