Authors
Harry K. Zink
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Two Jakes, The (1990)
     Just got back from watching THE TWO JAKES, the "sequel" to
Chinatown directed by Jack Nicholson.
     This will not contain any spoilers (so those of you paranoid about
getting your movie experienced destroyed by them may breathe easy).
This is meant more as a description of my feelings after seeing this
movie.
     Well, first of all, I am extremely happy to note that Jack
Nicholson has resisted the temptation to make a "popular" movie (quick
cuts, upbeat soundtrack, lots of action, lots of sex) but instead has
opted to make a "good" film.  It might not appeal to the 18-25 year old
crowd, but who really cares about them....
     This movie takes off a few years after CHINATOWN and Nicholson
reprises his role as Jake Gittes, Private Investigator.   It seems that
the years have been good to Jake, as his business has expanded, but that
he is still pre-occupied with the past (of Chinatown).  So much for plot
summary - go see it if you want to know what the story is.
     The movie is exceptionally well made and very pleasant to watch if
you are a fan of the original CHINATOWN.  Nicholson has obviously gone
to great trouble to recreate the same atmosphere and ambiance the
original gave the audience.  The movie just "felt" good, down to the
quality of the color and the cinematography (beautifully executed by
Vilmos Zsigismond).  
     Visually the movie is stunning, but fortunately the storyline and
continuity (in my opinion) were not disregarded either.  The story kept
me at the edge of my seat, though slow at times, yet it kept serving up
surprises and twists (especially every time I thought I had it all
figured out).
     Just as it was a joy to watch the handiwork of Nicholson, The
Director, it was equally pleasant to watch Nicholson, The Actor in
action (then again, name one movie where that was not the case...)
(with the possible exception of THE  RAVEN and LITTLE SHOP...).
     All I can say is that this movie is definitely worth watching if
you would like to see a *GOOD* movie for a change, reminiscent of a time
when such movies were still made.  
