Authors
Robert B. Marks
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Virus (1999)
     Virus is a movie with a great deal of potential.  The idea
of an alien being, composed entirely of energy, coming to Earth
is one which could be developed in any number of interesting and
intelligent ways.  Unfortunately, in this movie, it isn't.
     What could have been an interesting piece of science-fiction
quickly becomes sci-fi (the SF writer's word for "crap").  When
the alien life form beams itself into the computer of a Russian
research vessel in an odd electrical storm (somehow managing not
to short out the computer in the process), it immediately begins
to build robots and tries to take over the ship, killing the
crew.
     And then the crew of a small tugboat, commanded by a wooden
Donald Sutherland (who looks almost embarrassed at his role),
finds and decides to salvage the deserted Russian ship.  Ignoring
the obvious signs that something is wrong (such as bullet holes
and blood splattered all over the place), they restore the power
and are soon set upon by the evil intelligence which sees mankind
as a virus to be removed; an idea obviously used only to provide
an excuse for it to want to kill people.
     What follows is a very poor impression of _Star Trek: First
Contact_.  Supposedly horrific cyborgs stalk the crew, wanting to
turn them into spare parts.  And, just to show off the FX, each
new monstrosity is revealed before it actually begins to do
something even remotely frightening, destroying what little
suspense remains.
     The movie, like most Hollywood sci-fi horror flicks, is also
filled with stupid characters.  Donald Sutherland's Captain
Everton manages to ignore every single rational idea available,
and comes off looking like an idiot.  Crew members routinely
disobey simple instructions, resulting in several entirely
predictable results.  And, to make matters worse, there is not a
single two dimensional character present, much less a three
dimensional one.
     In the end, _Virus_ is an uninspired waste of money and
time.  While it is slightly amusing in some places, for the most
part it is predictable and almost boring.  It is one of those
movies that is best watched as a TV rental.
     So, the final score: 1.5/5.  Sometimes amusing, but not even
worth a half-price show.

Title
Review for Necronomicon (1994)
       Retrospective: H.P. Lovecraft's Necronomicon (1992)
     I am pleased to declare that I discovered H.P. Lovecraft a
short while ago when, out of curiosity, I picked up a copy of his
Dream Cycle.  After finding it to be excellent fiction, I was
hooked: I am now a Lovecraft fan.
     So, when I noticed H.P. Lovecraft's Necronomicon: The Book
of the Dead on a rental outlet shelf, I just had to have a look. 
I was expecting to see some well done Lovecraftian horrors from
the dawn of time, and perhaps even a bit of Cthulhu.  I was both
pleased and disappointed.
     The movie opens with H.P. Lovecraft entering a monastery
with the intention of looking at the Necronomicon, which is under
guard.  As he does so, the odd things which happen around him
serve as a frame for three stories.
     The first story is about a man who returns to his ancestral
home in America and finds a will from one of his ancestors.  The
will talks about how the Necronomicon helped him to resurrect his
dead wife, and the man decides to do the same, only to end up
awakening Cthulhu instead.
     The second story is about a reporter who discovers that
inside a house is a woman who has lived for sixty years without
aging.  The key to this secret of immortality, which is (of
course) found in the Necronomicon, turns out to have a very heavy
price for the reporter.
     The third story is a particularly gruesome tale where a
pregnant cop finds herself in an abandoned building searching for
her partner, who has been carried off by "the butcher".  When she
follows the trail, she finds herself being fed to a monster from
the dawn of time.
     Sadly, the movie very liberally adapts the stories written
by H.P. Lovecraft, and a great deal of style is lost.  However,
the first two are done quite well.  As a Lovecraft affectionado,
I was picking out bits and pieces of what I had read earlier.  I
was particularly impressed with the first story, which could have
been taken word for word from a Lovecraft tale.
     The linkage story, with H.P. Lovecraft reading the
Necronomicon, was a joy.  Not only did it fit nicely into the
Cthulhu mythos, but there were unseen monsters, tentacled horrors
(aside: for some reason Lovecraft had an obsession with two
things: tentacles and cats; cats I can understand, but tentacles
have always puzzled me), and Lovecraft makes a close escape with
the Necronomicon and the knowledge that there are horrible things
around us that we could never imagine.
     It is the third story that rains on the parade.  While
Lovecraft wrote of million-year old horrors, and the monster in
this story is as old as the dinosaurs, graphic dismemberment of
central characters was not something Lovecraft ever practiced. 
The story starts well and is very suspenseful, but once the main
character is betrayed, the story simply becomes a mindless
gorefest with little to do with anything Lovecraft ever wrote.
     The movie also has another failing: it explains very little. 
When I saw it, I saw it with some friends who had never been
exposed to any of Lovecraft's writings.  So, while I was enjoying
the tidbits of Cthulhu and other Lovecraftian horrors, they were
watching the screen in mystification.  This is a film that
actually should have a reading list attached: reading The Call of
Cthulhu before seeing the film helps it make sense, but without
some prior knowledge of Lovecraft, the viewer is lost.
     So, the rating: Necronomicon is not bad at all, with some
strong performances and horrific creatures from the dawn of time
(but, sadly, no cats).  However, the gruesome ending to the third
story and the lack of explanation pull the movie down
considerably, and might even turn people off of a brilliant
writer.  So, the final score is 3/5, with one warning: read The
Call of Cthulhu before you see it.

Title
Review for Conan the Barbarian (1982)
  Retrospective: Conan the Barbarian (1982) - By Robert B. Marks
     I wish Hollywood still made films like _Conan the
Barbarian_.  Based loosely on the stories by Robert E. Howard,
this film is an excellent example of the film-maker's art.
     Interestingly enough, the majority of the material for
_Conan the Barbarian_ does not come from the Conan stories at
all, but rather from Robert E. Howard's King Kull tales. 
However, this material is well used to create what should soon be
a classic fantasy film.
     The film begins with a young Conan receiving instruction
about "the riddle of steel" from his father.  The village is then
attacked by Thulsa Doom (James Earl Jones), and Conan is taken
into slavery.  He grows up as a slave, becomes a gladiator, is
taken to the east to learn the arts of war, and is then freed by
his master.  The now adult Conan (Arnold Schwarzenegger) begins
to wander the world in search of revenge.  In his travels he
encounters and falls in love with the lovely Valeria (Sandahl
Bergman) and becomes close friends with the archer Subotai (Gerry
Lopez) and an eccentric wizard (Mako; also the narrator).
     Where this sort of plot would usually lead to a rather dull,
unoriginal film, John Milius' direction turns it into a very high
quality tale.  The characters are well acted and generally do
intelligent things (for example, when Conan is preparing for a
battle, he puts on armour).  The story is told more with images
and music than dialogue, and Basil Poledouris' incredible score
helps create an unforgettable movie.  James Earl Jones is perhaps
the great star of the cast; his Thulsa Doom is both hypnotic and
believable.
     Also, unlike most fantasy films, _Conan the Barbarian_ is a
very intelligent film that keeps the viewer thinking long after
it has ended.  The riddle of steel is a mystery which rightfully
remains unsolved, and one is left realizing that, while evil,
Thulsa Doom always speaks the truth.  Towards the end, he tells
Conan: "Without me, you will have never been", revealing an
essential fact about great men: they are made by their enemies.
     It is not, however, a film for children or young teenagers. 
The violence is generally graphic and explosively bloody, and
there are several scenes of nudity.  Also, the younger audience
probably wouldn't fully understand all that there is to _Conan_;
unlike too many of its successors, this film is very subtle.
     Unfortunately, the film does not actually depict Robert E.
Howard's Conan.  The chronology of the character is wrong, and
the mercenary and vulgar Conan is changed into a quiet and
introspective one.  Valeria also bears little resemblance to the
character that appears in _Red Nails_, and Thulsa Doom does not
come from the Conan stories at all; he comes from the era of King
Kull (some 20,000 or so years earlier).
     However, all in all _Conan the Barbarian_ is a film which
set a new standard for fantasy in Hollywood; a standard which is
rarely met.  Between memorable images, an incredible score, and a
well-told story, it is worthy of becoming a classic.
     So, the final score: 4.5/5; it would have gotten 5/5 if
Conan had actually borne some resemblance to what Robert E.
Howard wrote, but that's Hollywood for you...

Title
Review for Species II (1998)
     Just when we Science Fiction authors and fans thought that
we were finally making headway in Hollywood with such films as
the grossly underrated _The Postman_, the Hugo Award winning
_Contact_ and the excellent _Dark City_, there comes a film that
shows us where we stand.  _Species II_ is one of those films.
     Even watching it on pan-and-scan video (a rare occurrence
for me, but a friend picked it out), I came out feeling insulted
and dirty.  You see, not only am I a Speculative Fiction writer
(albeit unpublished, but that will change soon), but I also
consider myself an intelligent part of the human race.
     _Species II_ was simply awful.  However, in a Hollywood
which just doesn't understand SF (and to realize the full extent
of this misunderstanding, read Harlan Ellison's 1974 article
_Somehow, I Don't Think We're in Kansas, Toto_), awful is
somewhat forgivable.  However, _Species II_ is more than just
awful.  It is awful and blatantly misogynistic.
     Perhaps the best example to represent the entire film is the
first scene with Natasha Hendridge.  She plays Eve, a more docile
version of Sil from the first movie.  And, the first time the
audience sees her, she is strapped naked into a chair, being
lowered into a vat of corrosive gasses.  This is later described
by a general as "accommodations fit for a queen".
     And it only gets worse.  The plot, like in the first film,
is virtually nonexistent.  The first manned mission to Mars
returns, and two of the three astronauts (one male, one female)
are contaminated by a soil sample which takes over their DNA. 
This soil sample, by the way, contains alien DNA which comes to
life after accidentally thawing, having been dead for millions of
years (huh?!).
     They return to Earth, and are then put into a sexual
quarantine for 10 days (that's right; diseases don't bother the
powers that be, but they can't let their astronauts have sex). 
Even before this is over, the male astronaut goes on a rampage of
sex and violence befitting a bad slasher porn movie.  Every time
he couples, his mate immediately begins to swell and have a fully
developed eight-year-old burst out of her belly.  And just to
make sure we haven't missed the point, the corpses are often
shown in all their gory detail.  Also, the female half-alien
astronaut, predictably, dies in the same fashion (after all,
she's a woman and she has sex; can't let her live in this movie).
     Soon this trail of corpses is noticed, and Michael Madson's
character joins the biologist from the first film (who, by the
way, apparently has had a 180 degree change in her
characteristics) in trying to hunt down this sexual predator. 
The audience is then subjugated to a bunch of inconsistent
characterizations, stupid ideas (such as re-activating Eve's
alien attributes), and generally poor plot.  Not to mention
idiotic science and generally unexplainable events (two examples:
a researcher gets killed by a blood puddle for no apparent
reason, and a soil sample thaws spontaneously itself without
anybody noticing).
     And, to make matters worse, the film ends in such a way that
there will definitely be a sequel.  So, what begins with
scientific stupidity and poor plotting, ends without actually
wrapping anything up.
     All in all, _Species II_ was an offensive and unintelligent
film.  But I can say one good thing about it: it was better than
_Plan 9 From Outer Space_.  But not by much.
     So, the final score: 0/5; absolutely nothing redeemable
about this one.
