Authors
al@167-290-33.hexacom.com (al)
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Cronos (1993)
     Perhaps insects are God's favorite creatures, after all.
Mosquitoes can walk on water, resuscitation is common amongst some
species, some can live for centuries trapped inside rocks, etc.
     CRONOS takes its name from a device made in the 1500s by an
alchemist, a device that can make someone eternal.  Inside this device
we find gears of all sorts and also what looks like an insect larvae
that filters a certain amount of blood pumped by the device.  The
device was entrapped in the base of a statue at one point, and was
discovered by an antique dealer in our present times, who have no idea
what it is about but of course, will soon find out.  The device comes
with an instruction booklet although this booklet found its way to a
rich dying man who deciphered it and knows what the device is about,
sending his gorilla-like son to hunt antique shops trying to find the
statue.
     CRONOS is at times a black comedy, at times serious.  When we get
a peek inside the device it reminds a graphic imagery from DELICATESSEN
or Gilliam's BRAZIL.  The general ambiance is on the light side,
although a serious under-current goes through.  The grand-father (the
antique dealer) and daughter team makes for an original bunch.  The
rich (as in 'stinkin' rich') man is what we expect him to be, living in
sanitized quarters and served by his son who looks like your typical
small-minded gorilla, always worried about the shape of his nose at
that.
     You may remember some "Twilight Zone" episodes where there was both
suspense/ horror and a touch of humour.  CRONOS is in the same vein.
Although some people may not like it because it is not blatantly
straight-forward, it is still good entertainment value.  It may also
remind some people of early Cronenberg movies.
     The print shown here in Montreal was in Spanish/with sparse spoken
English and English sub-titles.

Title
Review for Utomlyonnye solntsem (1994)
     SOLEIL TROMPEUR was shown in Cannes and at the Montreal Film Fest;
I think it did won some prizes, not sure though.  By the quality of the
film it wouldn't be surprising.  SOLEIL TROMPEUR (Deceiving Sun) comes
right after "Urga" in Mikhalkov's realisations.  And like "Urga," this
film got its share of beauty although this time around its emanating
from the people inside a rural Russian family in 1936.  Mikhalkov
(colonel Sergei Kotof) and his daughter are the main characters.  The
film relates the calm life of a family whose main character is a
well-known army colonel, admired by all, the kind of guy that has
strong roots in his country while having plentiful of simple and warm
human values.  Mikhalkov is a strong figure and the rural simplicity
emanates from him as easy as it could ever be.
     But this very nice way of life will slowly give way to a terrible
drama as the smiles becomes forced instead of spontaneous, as the
arrival of a young and aggressive, former boyfriend of colonel Kotov's
young wife stirs up feelings.
     SOLEIL TROMPEUR is a film of great human force.  While it lasts
two and a half hours, it is never boring and does not have to rely on
action, special F/X and the like to maintain interest.  We share the
warmth displayed, the intrigue and the fatal conclusion.
