Authors
Stian M. Landgaard
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Insomnia (1997)
INSOMNIA (Norsk Filminstitutt, Nordic Screen Production A/S, 
Norsk Film A/S)
INSOMNIA is the typical psychological thriller where someone
did something very bad, and is haunted by the deed.
A young girl has been murdered, and two homicide detectives, 
Jonas Engström (Skarsgĺrd) and Erik Vik (Ousdal), are sent to
conduct an investigation. Later on, the detectives discover a 
cabin where the suspect might be hiding. A fog covers the area, 
and during the operation one of the detectives shoot and kill 
the other by mistake. The local police believes that the suspect
was responsible, and the remaining detective must do whatever
he can to support that theory. But sinners don't sleep ...
INSOMNIA is Skjoldbjćrg's first directing job, and he does it
quite well. The scenes are eerie, the psychological aspect is
always with us, and the pacing of the movie is excellent.
However, we sometimes find it difficult to fully understand
what is going on. This is not a movie where one can ask a lot
of questions; way enough trouble attempting to figure out what
is happening, rather than why.
The actors perform with great panache; there is nothing much to 
discuss there. Skarsgĺrd has recently appeared in GOOD WILL 
HUNTING and AMISTAD. He certainly carries some creepiness and 
depth of character with him whereever he goes.
INSOMNIA is a tense and mildly violent thriller, and it
does well in the genre. I rate it 4+ out of 6.
Reviewed by Stian M. Landgaard, March 31st, 1998

Title
Review for Good Will Hunting (1997)
GOOD WILL HUNTING (Be Gentlemen Limited Partnership / Lawrence Bender
Productions / Miramax Films)
GOOD WILL HUNTING was to me a very warm-hearted, intelligent and
well-conceived story of a 20-year-old boy, Will Hunting (Damon), whose
skills in mathematics and general science are tremendous. He suffers
from a difficult childhood, and together with his friends, he has been 
involved in robberies, fighting, and vandalism. A mathematics 
professor, Gerald Lambeau (Skarsgĺrd), discovers Will's abilities,
and attempts to make use of him in his mathematical research. But
upon realizing that Will is uncooperative and difficult to handle,
professor Lambeau persuades Will to see a therapist, Sean Maguire
(Williams), who was Lambeau's room-mate in college.
Throughout the rest of the movie we follow the growing friendship
between Will and Sean, and Will's new-found love, Skylar (Driver).
Will Hunting must understand who he really is, and attempt to
deal with his past. Only then might he be ready to face the future ...
Ben Affleck (starring Will's friend Chuckie) and Matt Damon has
written a very impressive screenplay, and I was not surprised
that they snatched an Academy Award for it. Although the story is
somewhat predictable (several times we know what the next move will
be), I find it charming and quite good. The ending might be a bit
slow, but it's surprising and lovely. Robin Williams shows once and
for all that he can do drama roles, and Matt Damon is very convincing
as Will Hunting. Even the Swedish actor, Skarsgĺrd, seems to do well
in Hollywood pictures. His role is very basic and unemotional but
not cardboard-like. Generally speaking, all the actors did their part,
and brought the movie to a place among the best of 1997.
Reviewed by Stian M. Landgaard, April 12th, 1998

Title
Review for Conspiracy Theory (1997)
CONSPIRACY THEORY (Warner Bros. / Donner/Schuler-Donner Productions /
Silver Pictures)
CONSPIRACY THEORY wasn't very well received by audience and critics.
Personally, I think it lacked a sense of nerve and thrill. Mel Gibson
plays Jerry Fletcher, a paranoid taxi-driver with an extraordinary
past. He spends most of his time telling passengers of his conspiracy
theories and writing a newsletter named after the movie. Julia Roberts
is the U.S. Justice Department agent Alice Sutton. She met Fletcher
earlier when he saved her from some muggers. Constantly bothering
Sutton with his conspiracy theories, one day Fletcher finds himself
captured by ill-natured agents. The FBI, CIA and "all the other initials 
one could put together" seem to be after him. He can't understand why,
only that is has something to do with his past, and maybe his "thing"
for conspiracy theories. 
CONSPIRACY THEORY didn't quite enthrall me. Although Gibson is good
as Fletcher (maybe he borrowed some of his LETHAL WEAPON character?),
Roberts doesn't impress very much. She is more of a romantic character,
and only in a few scenes I feel that Alice Sutton is captivating.
Patrick Stewart plays the bad guy, but he lacks a certain evil charisma
that one would expect in a such a character.
All in all, half action, half thriller, but neither genre was fully
mastered. CONSPIRACY THEORY's plot is interesting, but the screenplay
as a whole doesn't succeed. Richard Donner has done well as the 
director, however.
Reviewed by Stian M. Landgaard, April 12th, 1998

Title
Review for Aladdin (1992)
ALADDIN is a very spectacular and thrilling adventure in the Arabian
nights.  The young and handsome thief Aladdin meets with the Sultan's
run-away daughter, and falls in love with her. At the same time, the
Sultan's evil vizir, Jafar, and his amusing side-kick, Iago, are in
search of a magic lamp containing a Genie who can grant the owner's
every wish. But only one person may enter the cave where the lamp is
hidden, and fetch it, and Jafar discoveres that it's the one and only,
Aladdin.  Aladdin is tricked into helping Jafar, and finds the magic
lamp. But when Jafar betrays him, Aladdin disappears with the
lamp. Then Aladdin releases the Genie and is granted his most desired
wish: to be a prince, so that he can marry the Sultan's daughter, whom
he loves. Everything goes according to plan, but Aladdin is beginning
to understand that he cannot pretend to be someone that he is
not. Jafar realizes that the prince is the boy whom he hired to get
the lamp, and soon everything is set for a masterfully depicted
struggle between good and evil.
ALADDIN's best aspects are the stunning animation, background scenes,
voice talents and music. (Are there more aspects to talk of?) Although
one of the first scenes, where a thief is mercylessly destroyed by
a certain cave, is a little too dramatic for small children, the rest
of the movie runs at a generally low violence level. There is evil,
but it's far more cartoonish and "harmless" than in THE LION KING or
THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME. Where Scar and Judge Frollo were sincerely
cruel, Jafar is more of a comedian attempting to look bad (although he
gets tougher in the end). Iago is a very fun character, and his position
as Jafar's talking parrot is extremely enjoyable. His imitations of
others are hard to avoid laughing of. The Genie (Robin Williams' voice 
is perfect for him) has a lot of impressive imitations of real people 
and brilliant fast-talk all the way. He certainly steals the show.
All in all, Disney has managed to create a spectactular and very
humorous animated feature that is one of the most light-hearted of
them all.  Romance, enchantment, magic, a little violence, some pretty
innocent cruelty, and a good deal of humor mixed together makes
ALADDIN a wonderful movie for everyone.
Reviewed by Stian M. Landgaard, March 27th, 1998

Title
Review for Jurassic Park (1993)
JURASSIC PARK (Universal Pictures / Amblin Entertainment)
JURASSIC PARK captured the world when it came. For the first time, 
truly realistic dinosaurs had been created and shown on the screen.
Although the dinosaurs in THE LOST WORLD were even more realistic,
the sequel suffers from too much stupidity, but we will come back to
that in another review.
JURASSIC PARK does work. It does the same for dinosaurs that STAR WARS
did for space-fantasy. We begin with a "teaser" that does nothing more 
than establish the fact we already have guessed: there are live 
dinosaurs on the earth now. The question is just how and where. An
eccentric millionaire, John Hammond (Attenborough), has created an
amusement park on an island not far from Costa Rica, and the attractions
there are to die for, as we shall see. He needs a couple of experts to
endorse the park in order to please the authorities so that he can
complete and open the park for the public. Doctors Grant, Sattler and 
Malcolm (Neill, Dern, Goldblum) are taken to the island to spend some 
days there and investigate the possibility for an amusement park where 
the attractions are ... live dinosaurs, recreated from DNA found in 
mosquito fossils. Unfortunately, one of the employees attempts to steal 
dinosaur DNA from the lab and sell them. By doing this, he causes the 
park system to break down and the dinosaurs are able to break out, 
especially the nasty carnivores, Tyrannosaurus Rex and Velociraptor. Now 
there is Man against Nature in an astonishing action adventure that 
causes adrenalin rushes all the way to the end.
One interesting aspect about the movie, is the low age recommended to
watch it. Actually, JURASSIC PARK is a horror movie, but Spielberg
probably did what he could to make it a grown children's movie. I 
haven't read Michael Crichton's novel upon which the movie was based,
but I would expect it to contain more actual science than the movie.
There are certain scientific goofs in JURASSIC PARK, and I wonder if
Crichton was aware of this.
JURASSIC PARK should NOT have been followed by a sequel (no matter if
the novel was there). Spielberg ruined the "awesome dinosaur image"
by attempting to make them twice as heavy and so on. But JURASSIC PARK 
is in its own right a great movie with marvelous special effects (at 
least in 1993), and the screenplay by Crichton and Koepp is quite good. 
There does seem to be some holes in it, however, and you probably
shouldn't attempt to think too much about continuity and understanding
of the entire story. Just relax (which is impossible in the long run)
and 
enjoy JURASSIC PARK as an action/science fiction movie. Perceived that
way, JURASSIC PARK works best. If you are into the science, read the
novel.
Reviewed by Stian M. Landgaard, April 12th, 1998

Title
Review for Ten Commandments, The (1956)
Starring Charlton Heston, Yul Brynner, Anne Baxter, Yvonne De Carlo
Directed and produced by Cecil B. DeMille
"The Ten Commandments" was a great epic when made in the fifties, and it
continues to enthrall the audience today. I saw it on a small TV-screen, and
most certainly wished I could have watched it on the big screen.
The script follows the Bible to some extent, but also draws in non-biblical
material, such as novels, which enhances the overall movie. (The Bible is a
bit secretive about Moses' life until he reached 30.)
The old-fashioned epic style, impressive and visually stunning as it may be,
isn't always as appealing to the modern movie-goer. Firstly, the movie is
well too long and moves a bit slow at times. Then there is a lot of
over-stylized acting, and although Charlton Heston is brilliant as Moses, he
may be a little pompous at times. But he is a more powerful and impressive
Moses than the animated character of the recent release "Prince of Egypt".
Except for the snake scene at Pharaoh's Court, the effects are enjoyable.
"Prince of Egypt" does a more 'realistic' Red Sea parting with modern
computer-generated animation, but "The Ten Commandments" did it the best way
possible in those days, and it's still impressive to watch.
As mentioned, the acting tends to be overdramatized, and this is a left-over
bone from the days when silent movies ruled the cinemas. It must however be
noted that Anne Baxter as Nefretiri and Yul Brynner as Rameses both do
excellent performances, and Cedric Hardwicke as Pharaoh Sethi is convincing,
and even humorous (his belated death scene).
Some of the love scenes, which function merely as subplots, do little more
than wear out the audience, as we all are very anxious to get Moses going.
After all, we do know the story. The ending is better than that of "Prince
of Egypt"; we are here getting to the point where Moses appoints Joshua to
lead his people into the promised land.
Stian M. Landgaard, February 3rd, 1999

Title
Review for Exorcist, The (1973)
THE EXORCIST (based on the novel by William Peter Blatty)
A 12-year-old girl, Regan MacNeil (Linda Blair) starts to behave
rather strangely. She loses control of her body, and strange telekinetic
phenomena occur in her bedroom. Her mother, Chris MacNeil (Ellen
Burstyn), believes her to have a mental illness. Regan is examined by
medical personell, who at first seemed to think she had a somatic
disease; she is then assumed to have an inexplicable mental disturbance.
Seeing as how the doctors can't help, and beginning to believe that her
daughter might be "possessed", Chris attempts to get in touch with an 
"exorcist", a person capable of dispelling evil spirits from a human's 
body by a religious ritual, and thus meets with Father Damien Karras
(Jason Miller), a Catholic priest and psychiatrist. Meanwhile Regan's 
body has been seriously twisted by the assumed demon inside of her, and 
she speaks with a strange, devilish voice. Father Karras believes her to 
be possessed by a demon, and finally agrees to perform exorcism on her, 
if he can get permission by the Catholic Church. But the bishop decides 
to hire another priest, a more experienced exorcist, for the job. Father 
Merrin (Max von Sydow) arrives, and the painstacking act of exorcism can
begin ...
I think THE EXORCIST truly is a powerful movie, even today. When it was 
released, it set a new standard for acceptable violence and gore on the 
screen. Although it's a bit slow in the beginning, and contains very few 
reminders of a "horror genre movie", it certainly builds up to the
inevitable and breath-taking ending. The way be follow Regan's 
transformation from a beautiful young girl to a horrific half demon, 
half human, is very well pictured. The demon's behaviour and speeches 
are less realistic. Especially all the "bad language", which rather than 
impresses us, makes us believe that Satan is a street punk!
The end of the movie is dramatic, and both von Sydow and Miller do a
tremendous and breathtaking performance as exorcists. Maybe the final
ending is a little cheap, and there are many unanswered questions. 
Perhaps, like several other movies that are based on novels, the 
audience feel that the story moves a little too fast forward, since the
length has been shortened down, and all the subplots and continuity of a
novel has to be thinned or cut.
Still, a very interesting and "afterthought-kind" of movie. Unlike the
slasher movies of the 80's, which for the most had no intelligent plot 
at all, THE EXORCIST brings up a fascinating story and very talented
 actors.
Reviewed by Stian M. Landgaard, March 11th, 1998
