Authors
A. S. Lenahan
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Last Man Standing (1996)
        LAST MAN STANDING is essentially a rehash of Kurosawa's YOJIMBO with
some additional western-film cliches and fanciful cinematography thrown
in for good measure.  That said, I found LAST MAN STANDING a thoroughly
entertaining means of wasting two hours.  There's more than enough
gunplay and visual stimulation to wash away any empty feelings left by
the cookie-cutter script.  If you don't take this film seriously (no
easy task when planning to write a review), you'll likely find yourself
enjoying it, as it does get more interesting towards the climax. 
Through a critical eye, however, LAST MAN STANDING is a fun but
forgettable mixed bag.
        The film's biggest downfall is the plot, pulled right from the
Hollywood recycling bin.  A remake of YOJIMBO, but borrowing heavily 
from every western and gangster film ever made, the script offers
little or no new ideas.  The story is simple:  in a typical lawless
town on the Texas/Mexico border in 1931, two rival gangs face off to
control the illegal liquor trade.  In this town, the line between good
and evil is eternally blurred, and the very streets fester and ooze
with police corruption, moonshining, and prostitution.  Sound vaguely
familiar?  It's been used in nearly every western since the days of
John Wayne.  The seedy bar (yes, even in the prohibition), the cheap
hotel, the dusty, beaten street, the sheriff's office... all echoes of
films past.  The film begins when common picture-show tough-guy Bruce
Willis drives into town, not expecting to stay.  Some local thugs smash
up his car, and he sees a girl walk by (love at first sight, of
course).  As any vigilant viewer can predict, Willis sticks around to
rescue his damsel-in-distress and get revenge on the bullies who
damaged his precious automobile.   It doesn't take a psychic to know
how the rest of the film goes.  In fast, LAST MAN STANDING probably
sets a record for film predictability: it's the only one I've seen yet
where the ending can accurately be predicted simply by hearing the
title.  Of course, there are some plot twists, but ultimately there's
nothing new to be seen here.
        The actors all try hard, with some success.  Willis is truly adept at
these roles.  In some recent efforts (PULP FICTION, the third DIE
HARD), Willis' tough-guy aesthetic is so natural and believable, he
scarcely seems to be acting  at all.  Soon, he won't even need a
script.  Willis adds some much-needed life to this film, certainly. 
The other most notable actor is Christopher Walken, playing his usual
over-the-top nut job role, this time as Chicago gangster Hickey. 
Hickey has a big scar running down his face (call the cliche police...)
and sometimes shoots his tommy gun for no apparent reason.  The rest of
the cast is mostly average, although I did enjoy seeing the underrated
R.D. Call as Joe McCool, another of the Irish gang.  The other gang is
Italian (at least LAST MAN STANDING can't be accused of political
correctness), but too stereotypical to be either realistic or
interesting.  The performances are among the film's high points,
though.  The dialogue was very well written, too, considering the
script.  LAST MAN STANDING contained some excellent stunts as well. 
        Another good point is the cinematography and direction.  Every scene
has a life and kinetic movement all it's own, a trait not shared by
most earlier genre entries.  The way gunshots go off in a dark room, a
roadhouse burning to the ground with people trapped inside--the camera
works with a certain artistry and grace that adds most of the
excitement and freshness to this otherwise stale movie.  A certain
flourish and verve exists in all the visual elements of LAST MAN
STANDING.  The principal visual element is dust, which adds to the
atmosphere and visual style of the film.  Some of the sets are stunning
as well, especially the abandoned church.  Visually, the movie is
colourful and interesting.
        The music is atmospheric and highly appropriate, but not really
anything special.  Needless to say, a soundtrack is available, but why
anyone would buy it is beyond me.  The sound effects are well done,
especially the gunshots (and there certainly are quite a few of them). 
Both the music and sound are passable efforts helping to save the film
from being below average.
        I maintain that LAST MAN STANDING is, despite a lackluster plot, an
entertaining and enjoyable movie experience.  The pace is fast enough,
and the action is nearly constant: there seems to be a deadly gunfight
in nearly every other scene.  The acting is good, and the plot is...
familiar.  Although the film is not among the best of the year, or even
the best of the movies currently in theatres, it provides suitable
entertainment for its running time.  Ultimately, the unoriginal plot
does not haunt the viewer in every frame of film... the visual style
does.

Title
Review for That Thing You Do! (1996)
        THAT THING YOU DO! is the latest Tom Hanks film (meaning that it
will more than likely be box-office gold).  Past that, it is a good,
but not great, musical comedy.  It is entertaining, fun, a
crowd-pleaser, but also unoriginal and ultimately unmemorable.  The
largest stumbling block is the weak story, but the music, acting, and
sets/costumes make THAT THING YOU DO! an enjoyable evening at the
movies.  However, I doubt any of that matters... this film will do
well because of the involvement of  Tom Hanks as writer, director,
contributing songwriter, and actor.
        The plot is simple and eternally familiar.  Set in 1964, a talented
group of young musicians form a band, win a talent competition, and
(what else?) rocket to instant stardom.  A movie based on this
formula comes out every two years or so, so if you miss this one,
dont fret (although youll also miss Tom Hanks! Horrors!).  The
script is so reminiscent of so many other films, one wonders if
screenwriter Hanks might have used some kind of fill-in-the-blanks
screenplay template... sort of a Hollywood "Mad Libs".  The band is
named the Oneders (later the Wonders), the four lads play a catchy
tune called "That Thing You Do", and the song is recorded as a
record.  Along the way, we learn all the expected lessons: music
producers are sleazy, all glory is fleeting, the film industry is
shallow, etc.  Surprisingly, the film spares us the moral about
eating all our vegetables, but not by much.  All the characters are
based on others from some other film or television show.  The Wonders
are the Beatles (the movie itself even hints at this).  Theres a
typical over-emotional girlfriend (played by Liv Tyler).  The role
Hanks wrote for himself is surprisingly unglamourous: hes a sleazy
music producer, loosely based other similar shady charactersfrom
other films.  Theres even a philosophical Jazz musician, surely
familiar to anyone who remembers Bleeding Gums Murphy from "The
Simpsons".  Actually, the plot is not a bad one, but certainly not
original or fresh by any means.
        The acting is quite good, despite the small number of big names in
the cast.  All four of the Wonders have individual personality, and
are all very likable.  When I saw TTYD! in a theatre, the audience
applauded after every big musical number, a good sign for a film
obviously intended as a crowd-pleaser.  Hanks gives a fine
performance despite his stiff, unemotional character.  Tyler is
suitably whiny as well, but her character doesnt really become
important until the end, although a better script could have changed
that.  On a trivial note, vigilant viewers may be able to spot the
guy from the "Aaron Burr" milk commercial as a fan.  Collectively,
the acting adds a lot to the enjoyability of this movie.
        The most important aspect of TTYD! is the music.  The title tune
sounds as though it were pulled from some mid-sixties vinyl record. 
Its a catchy, memorable tune, so the audience might find it running
over and over in their head even after the credits roll.  The rest of
the soundtrack is a mixed bag; the pop music might take you back, but
the stilted, plastic jazz will leave any fan cold.  Oddly enough,
some of the music credit goes to Hanks (Im surprised he didnt try
to be the gaffer or key grip as well...).  TTYD! is a music film, so
the expectations are high, but the movie never disappoints.   
        Where the true charm of TTYD! lies is in the great nostalgic sets
and costumes.  Although the flashiest sets are the television studios
and hotels later in the film, my favourite was the electronics store
where it opens.  The authenticity of that set alone enhanced the
movie experience, at least for me.  The glistening pastel appliances,
the props, advertisement displays, even the overall washed-out
look--if that scene doesnt take you back to the mid-sixties, nothing
will.  The costumes are equally well-crafted, although perhaps less
spectacular.  The visual look of TTYD! has a certain realness rarely
seen in other period piece films.
        Obviously, TTYD! is not for those who demand a brilliant plot, but
it remains a fun and engaging movie.  Its intended as a fun film,
and accomplishes just that.  If only the plot offered *something*
new.  Anything...
