Authors
Geoff Berkshire
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Down to You (2000)
Cast: Freddie Prinze Jr., Julia Stiles, Shawn Hatosy, Zak Orth, Selma Blair,
Rosario Dawson, Henry Winkler, Lucie Arnez, Ashton Kutchner
Director: Kris Isacsson
Late in Down To You, the lead female character (Julia Stiles) states her
greatest fear is having an "artificial conversation" with her boyfriend
(Freddie Prinze Jr.).  The irony of this statement will not be lost on audience
members who have not yet walked out, fallen asleep, or otherwise given up on
this pathetic attempt at romantic comedy.  The film is a multi-million dollar
testament to everything artificial.  Filled with characters, motivation, plot
and dialogue that ring fake and shallow at every step this is an unquestionable
disaster.
Prinze plays a college student intent on playing the field until he falls for
Stiles' freshman co-ed.  At first the movie seems to be an attempt to string
along scenes with the sole purpose of out-doing the previous in how "cute" it
can be.  The happy couple "psychoanalyze" each other; they pick out a song
because, as Prinze's DJ mother (Lucie Arnez) explains, every couple needs a
song; he smells her shampoo; she scratches his chest in the morning to let him
know she wants to make love.
Then, in standard romantic comedy style, things fall apart.  Why?  Well,
because they have to.  Otherwise the couple can't make up and live (presumably)
happily ever after.
Down To You exists outside the realm of normal logic.  Scenes do not connect to
each other and it often seems to be attempting some sort of surrealism, but
this is handled so poorly that everything comes off random and stupid instead. 
A picnic scene involving the six key characters is just bizarre, not only for
the stretched logic of these people hanging out together, or even knowing each
other, but mostly because an unusual amount of screen time is dedicated to a
goat.
The supporting characters are remarkably flat, and insultingly ridiculous as
well.  Stiles' best friend (Rosario Dawson) is a pot head, Prinze's roommate
(Shawn Hatosy) is a girl crazy fool who can't meet women, and then there are
the porn stars (Zak Orth and Selma Blair).  He is one of those famous porn
stars who is frequently interviewed on television, does the college lecture
circuit, and stars in high budget costume epic porns that are shot on film. 
You know, the average porn star.  The costume epic idea gives him a reason to
appear in a different ridiculous outfit everytime he's on screen, the porn
angle exists just so there can be a couple of stupid sex jokes.  She is a porn
star mostly so we know she's slutty, so her very existence will make Stiles
jealous and Prinze tempted.
Attempts at drama (which means Julia is going to cry) include a pregnancy scare
and the big break up.  These characters are so insipid only the most forgiving
viewer would be manipulated by these weak scenes.
What happened here?  The cast is full of likable, promising, young actors
(Stiles especially seems to be going places).  Writer/director Kris Isacsson
has simply given them material so weak not even seasoned pros could pull it
off.  In fact the whole film feels like a reworking of last year's extremely
unpleasant The Story of Us, for teen audiences.
The direction is film-school-grad obvious.  It's stylish in a hugely self
conscious way which throws in split screen, a pointless parody of "Cops,"
characters walking into the flashbacks of other characters, and a hilariously
cheesy airport meeting between Prinze and Stiles where all the extras move in
fast motion while the couple moves in extreme slow motion.  Plus, the whole
story is told flashback style, narrated by Prinze and Stiles directly
addressing the camera.
This is the second film in a row (following Wing Commander) starring Freddie
Prinze Jr. which should have premiered on the aisles of the local Blockbuster
but was likely saved from that fate due to the fluke success of She's All That.
 If he doesn't start making better choices fast his future films won't be so
lucky.

Title
Review for Scream 3 (2000)
Cast: Neve Campbell, David Arquette, Courtney Cox Arquette, Patrick Dempsey,
Scott Foley, Lance Henrickson, Matt Keesler, Jenny McCarthy, Emily Mortimer,
Parker Posey, Deon Richmond, Kelly Rutherford, Liev Schreiber, Patrick
Warburton
(This review makes a conscious attempt to avoid spoiling any surprises
contained within the film.)
One of the best jokes of Scream 2 was that the "movie" version of the "real"
events of the previous film was a typical, exploitational slasher flick.  It
served as a subtle reminder of the level this genre usually plays out at: a
stupid naked girl takes a shower and gets cut up.  The first two installments
in the Scream trilogy distinguished themselves as funny, smart and tense
thrillers.  Now the final (they swear) Scream has opened in theaters and while
it doesn't match the quality of the first two it still works as a slickly
crafted piece of entertainment, and plays out at a level far above the vast
majority of its genre predecessors.
The series has always done a nice job of developing its key characters as more
than one dimensional victims, survivors or potential killers.  The returning
characters have varied, believable, reactions to the infamous events of the
first two films.
Heroine Sidney Prescott (Neve Campbell) is now a paranoid prisoner in her
isolated home, working over the phone as a women's crisis councilor.  Bitchy
tabloid reporter Gale Weathers (Courtney Cox Arquette) has risen to anchor
level on an entertainment news show (just missing out on a job with 60 Minutes
II).  Sweet natured Dewey Riley (David Arquette) has relocated and found a new
girlfriend, both logical representations of his true feelings.  Cotton Weary
(Liev Schreiber), who at one point was wrongly imprisoned for the murder of
Sidney's mother, now has his own talk show: 100% Cotton.
Production has begun on "Stab 3," the latest in those successful exploitation
films mentioned earlier.  When members of the cast start turning up dead it
becomes obvious there's another killer on the loose.
Around for the ride to arouse suspicions and increase the body count are
Jennifer Jolie (Parker Posey) who is playing Gale in the film and has her
bitchy persona nailed, flaky ingenue Angelina Tyler (Emily Mortimer) who won a
nation wide talent search for the new Sidney, rising heartthrob Tom Prinze
(Matt Keesler) who improbably landed the role of Dewey, aging starlet Sarah
Darling (Jenny McCarthy) dissatisfied with her lack of screen time and
abundance of on screen nudity, and wisecracking Tyson (Deon Richmond) searching
for a way to stand out from the singer/actors who he competes for roles with.
There's also the young hot shot music video director Roman Bridger (Scott
Foley) making his feature helming debut, an aging, hack, producer John Milton
(Lance Henrickson), and local detective Kincaid (Patrick Dempsey) assigned to
the case.
Among the large ensemble there are two notable standouts.  Posey's caustic line
delivery and offbeat screen personality make her character one of the best of
the series.  This is some of Posey's best work yet, and certainly her best in a
mainstream film.  Her chemistry with Cox is priceless, as she constantly finds
new ways to show up her "real life" counterpart.  As the series' heroine
Campbell has continued her blossoming as a genuine talent and she carries this
film with the greatest of ease.
McCarthy, Foley and Schreiber all have nice moments while Kelly Rutherford and
Patrick Warburton bring everything required for their brief roles.  There are
several surprise cameos, some work (a veteran producer/director and a teenaged
actress are both very well cast) and some don't.  Arquette and off-screen wife
Cox have their best moments opposite Posey.  They play their characters well
but don't expose any previously unseen layers.
This is likely due in part to the notably underwhelming script from Ehren
Kruger.  The first two films helped make a star of screenwriter Kevin
Williamson (nearly unheard of for a writer) but he returns for this film only
with producer and story credit.  His absence is often felt, such as in an early
dialogue scene between four "Stab 3" cast members.  A lot of the material feels
more like one of the Scream rip-offs than the real deal.
Still, the film meets the basic requirement of any good thriller: a memorably
tense sequence or two.  Scream 3's stand out is a freaky visit Sidney makes to
an on set replica of the house that originally set the stage for much of
Scream's bloodshed.  As with any other good installment of a series, the film
has a lot of fun in referencing what has come before it.  There's also an
increased degree of psychological torture, as the killer plays mind games with
Sidney involving her dead mother.
Just as Scream 2 was filled with self reflexive material about sequels, Scream
3 involves discussion of film trilogies.  Unfortunately, promises made here
only serve to make the climax even less interesting.  Instead of wrapping
things up in a clever, or at least believable, way the revelations of final
scenes are simply random.  However the very last scene ends the series on an
appropriate tone (if still failing to shut the door on any further
installments).
The talents of the cast and crew work to keep the film at a level entertaining
enough for series fans and anyone who can handle a film where most of the cast
will end up brutally murdered. Director Craven can turn out this stuff in his
sleep now.  The technical credits are polished with the production design
especially standing out.  Major exception is Marco Beltrami's often irritating
and intrusive score.

Title
Review for Stepmom (1998)
Columbia Pictures; PG-13; 125 minutes
Cast: Susan Sarandon, Julia Roberts, Ed Harris, Jena Malone, Liam Aiken, Lynn
Whitfield, Mary Louise Wilson.
Susan Sarandon, one of Hollywood's most respected actresses, and Julia Roberts,
one of Hollywood's most successful actresses, team up for the Christmas 1998
release Stepmom.  They play, as the trailers put it, "two women who share one
family."  Unfortunately, the interesting combination is wasted by dropping all
opportunities for originality in favor of run-of-the-mill melodrama.
Sarandon is Jackie, a former editor for Random House, who has been divorced
from Luke (Ed Harris) for several years now.  They share custody of their
children: the very mature, 12 year old, Anna (Jena Malone) and magic fanatic
Ben (Liam Aiken).  Complicating matters is Luke's live-in girlfriend, Isabel
(Roberts).
At the outset, Stepmom appears to be about the conflict that will develop
between these two women and how it effects Luke and the children as they are
pulled into it.  This would give the film a very good possibility to explore an
issue that is widespread in life today but frequently ignored by Hollywood
films.  It would also seem to offer a nice alternative to a film like The
Parent Trap (1998) by showing how divorce can happen and everyone in the family
can still be happy.
Unfortunately, Stepmom has a whole other agenda.  By the end, the film turns
into a routine and melodramatic tearjerker.  It is revealed that Jackie has
cancer and this comes off as an easy out for the problems presented (and a
blatant attempt to make the audience cry).  In its last third the film invites
comparisons to One True Thing (1998) but pales next to that more mature
picture.
While the story falters, the acting helps to save Stepmom from becoming a
complete disaster.  Sarandon doesn't exactly deliver one of her finest
performances but she is more than adequate.  While her character is hard to
warm up to at first (she has a great house, the potential for a great job, she
sees her kids all the time and her only "problem" is that her ex-husband has
fallen in love again...), the disease is revealed after the first half hour. 
While this weakens the story it gives Sarandon more to play with and she dives
right into it.  Her performance overall is a bit of a disappointment
considering who she is and how much she did with so little in Twilight (1998),
earlier in the year.
Roberts, on the other hand, is quite a revelation.  This is certainly her
finest performance since her starmaking turn in Pretty Woman (1990).  Her
dialogue delivery in certain scenes is priceless (a key example being an
exchange between Isabel and Anna after school one day).  This is helped, no
doubt, by some of that dialogue having been written specifically for her by her
favorite screenwriter, Ron Bass.  (Bass is one of five credited screenwriters,
the others being Gigi Levangie, who also gets story credit, and the team of
Jessie Nelson, Steven Rogers and Karen Leigh Hopkins.)  She also holds her own
up against the formidable Sarandon, does a great job with the kids and builds a
believable romantic chemistry with Harris.  I found myself wishing her
character was transported into a better story.
Harris has limited screen time but is a welcome presence.  As the children,
Malone and Aiken are each used in a different way.  Malone (who made her mark
in the shattering child abuse drama Bastard Out of Carolina) is a powerful
little actress and she has a tendency to sometimes overdo some of the emotional
scenes.  This isn't entirely inappropriate though considering the age of the
character she is playing.  On the other hand, Aiken is an adorable child actor
with an infectious giggle and irresistible face.  It's nice to note that he
isn't simply used for "cuteness value" and is actually given quite a bit to do
in the course of the film.  The always reliable Lynn Whitfield also turns up in
a small role as Jackie's doctor.
Chris Columbus (whose previous directing credits include Adventures In
Babysitting, Home Alone and Mrs. Doubtfire) remains a minor director who relies
a bit too heavily on false manipulation.
There's a John Williams score that is characteristically intrusive but
surprisingly unmemorable.  However, the music supervision is quite good with a
nice mix of classic and modern tunes.  Most prominently featured is the classic
Motown song "Ain't No Mountain High Enough" performed by Marvin Gaye & Tammi
Terrell.  The song is featured in not one, but two, sing-a-long sessions with
the kids and one of the women.  The second comes shortly after Jackie announces
she has cancer.
Stepmom is designed to reduce audiences to tears but takes the easy way out by
relying on cliches and manufactured situations.  Both the characters and the
audience become victims of a bad script.

Title
Review for Varsity Blues (1999)
Cast: James Van Der Beek, Jon Voight, Paul Walker, Scott Caan, Ron Lester, Amy
Smart, Ali Larter.
One of the first films of 1999 is this MTV Pictures release which marks the
first leading feature role for James Van Der Beek, the star of The WB's runaway
hit Dawson's Creek.  Following in the foot steps of MTV's two other live action
films, Joe's Apartment (1996) and Dead Man On Campus (1998), Varsity Blues is a
bad film and is unlikely to cause much of a sensation in the marketplace.
Set in West Cannan, Texas, the film examines the small town obsession with high
school football through the eyes of second string quarterback John "Mox" Moxon
(Van Der Beek).  We know he's smart because he reads Kurt Vonnegut instead of
the playbook.  Coach Bud Kilmer (Jon Voight) has been around so long there is
actually a bronze statue commemorating him.  The star quarterback, Lance Harbor
(Paul Walker), is a handsome, blonde, hero who has his own billboard in his
front yard and dates the sexy head cheerleader, Darcy (Ali Larter).  Also on
the team are an enormous guy (Ron Lester) with some health problems and the
token African-American team member (Eliel Swinton) whose only real dialogue
scene deals directly with the color of his skin.
When Lance is seriously injured, Mox gets his chance to shine and he runs with
it, undermining Kilmer with his unusual playing strategies.  His relationship
with his dutiful girlfriend, Jules (Amy Smart), is threatened and there's a big
game at the end.  Guess who wins?
Nothing about Varsity Blues is inspired and the whole film simply moves through
the sort of conventional motions that Coach Kilmer would love.  There's a
chance for some smart satire on small town obsessions but the humor here is
decidedly lowbrow.
Van Der Beek does a decent job of carrying his first film although a silly
accent trips him up sometimes.  Also, the role isn't very much of a stretch
from his Dawson Leary character.  He's still a pseudo-intellectual, whiny, nice
guy, except here he also happens to be a jock.
Voight is a terror as he chews up every single piece of scenery and spits it
out.  The other adults are all notably awful while the younger performers don't
fare much better.
On the positive side, Walker is a charismatic actor who is due for a breakout
role following this and his supporting turn in Pleasantville (1998).  Scott
(son of James) Caan has some lively moments as Tweeder, the team's wild man. 
Larter, as a gorgeous seductress looking for a one way ticket out of Texas,
gets to show off the film's most interesting costumes, including a very
eye-opening "whipped cream bikini."
It's interesting to note that the film definitely earns its R-rating with a lot
of harsh language, alcohol abuse and an unusually high amount of nudity
(including a gratuitous trip to a strip bar that reveals a not very surprising
surprise).  All this is likely to come as a shock to the young female fan base
of Dawson's Creek, presumably the target audience for the picture.
Director Brian Robbins previously helmed the kids feature Good Burger (from
Nickelodeon Films, a sister company of MTV) and changes directions here a bit
but still fails to make much of an impression.  The look of the movie is as
bland as the town and characters who populate it.  The football scenes are
generally unexciting and the entire film looks a bit washed out.
There's an ok soundtrack featuring music from Collective Soul, Foo Fighters,
Green Day and Aaliyah but it's not as impressive as one would expect from a MTV
film.

Title
Review for Virgin Suicides, The (1999)
Cast: Kirsten Dunst, James Woods, Kathleen Turner, Josh Hartnett, Hannah Hall,
Danny DeVito, Scott Glenn, Jonathan Tucker, Michael Pare
Director: Sofia Coppola
The debut film from Sofia Coppola will provoke interest from many people for
many reasons, few of them involving the material itself.  Will she be as
disastrous a filmmaker as she was a performer in The Godfather Part III?  How
will she measure up to her famous father (or for that matter new husband Spike
Jonze, whose directorial debut Being John Malkovich was one of last year's
best)?  Those may be the initial curiosities knowing audiences bring to The
Virgin Suicides but it turns out they really should be far more worried about
the material itself.
Adapted by Coppola from a successful cult novel by Jeffrey Eugenides, The
Virgin Suicides is ostensibly the story of the Lisbon family: five beautiful
blonde daughters of a high school math teacher (James Woods) and his
conservative wife (Kathleen Turner).  Set in the upper class suburbs of Detroit
in the late 1970s it is told from the perspective of the boys next door, the
Weiner boys (that surname is supposed to be funny, I guess, but was already
used to far better effect in Welcome To the Dollhouse).  
The story focuses on the two youngest Lisbon girls.  The youngest, 13 year old
Cecilia (Hannah Hall, Young Jenny in Forrest Gump), recently made an attempt on
her life.  Her disturbed parents are advised by a psychologist (Danny Devito,
in a sharply observed one scene cameo) to allow the girls more interaction with
members of the opposite sex.  A party is planned in the Lisbon basement, the
Weiner boys are invited, and things are mostly awkward and uneventful in a
normal way until the party comes to a shocking early finish.
The story now switches gears to the second youngest girl, the blossoming 15
year old Lux (Kirsten Dunst) who is learning the value of her gorgeous physical
features.  She attracts the attention of school heartthrob Trip Fontaine (Josh
Hartnett) and begins a sly flirtation with him that eventually leads to going
together to a school dance.  It's in this section of the film where The Virgin
Suicides hits its stride.  The material has a familiar teen movie romance feel
but nails every scene with virtues of assured filmmaking, smart acting and good
attention to detail.  
Trip's introduction, perfectly backed by Heart's "Magic Man", is a particularly
vibrant stretch that instantly establishes his character.  A sequence where
Trip is invited to the Lisbon house to watch television is equally astute and,
although we have seen many, the school dance is giddy and memorably fun with
excellent use of Styx's "Come Sail Away" and a brilliant Peach Schnapps
reference.  In addition to the Styx and Heart songs the film has excellent
music supervision overall and also benefits from a superb score by hip French
techno band Air.
However, the film begins to lose focus again after Lux and Trip inevitably
split.  Lack of focus is the main problem with The Virgin Suicides.  Everything
is told from the point of view of an omniscient narrator (Giovanni Ribisi). 
This supposedly represents the collective voice of the Weiner boys, however
nothing in the film itself told me this (I learned it from a friend who had
read it somewhere and it's also contained in the production notes).  
Beyond Lux and Cecilia we never get to know any of the Lisbon girls, they
barely even speak.  The Weiner boys are almost completely indistinguishable,
although Jonathan Tucker's Tim seems to speak more than any of the others. 
There are also disorienting scenes where a grown up Trip (Michael Pare) talks,
on camera, about his relationship with Lux, the only time in the film something
like this happens.  Pare is perfectly cast in the role but the presence of it
in the film is questionable.  There are scattershot scenes which poke fun at
the community but these also seem random, although well done.
On the positive side, Coppola displays a transfixing visual style (Edward
Lachman's cinematography is lovely) and a nice attention to details.  She also
gets wonderful work from all of the actors who actually have a role to play. 
Woods has a nice departure from his usual character as the timid math teacher. 
Turner, completely de-glammed, grabs on to one of her best parts in years and
reminds what a great actress she is.  Of the younger players Hartnett shows
leading man potential in his memorable supporting role, Dunst proves she's
better in a dramatic role like this than in her recent attempts at comedy, and
Hall makes a vividly haunting impression, she reminded me a bit of a younger
Sarah Polley.
Unfortunately these strengths are not enough to overcome the considerable flaws
in the narrative.  The film is structured like a mystery in the first and third
acts but it's a mystery that is never solved.  Even if the movie is simply
about parents keeping too tight a hold on their children the message is never
fully conveyed.  Plus, as entertaining as the middle section of the film is, it
doesn't really fit in with the tone of the rest of the film.  Without learning
very much about the Lisbon girls and the Weiner boys the finale simply lacks
impact.  The movie will inevitably be compared to The Ice Storm, due to time
period and some tone similarities, but it pales terribly next to that milestone
of the genre.
