Authors
Mike Merrin
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Dead Zone, The (1983)
"The Dead Zone" is an interesting film in David Cronenberg's career
because it seems to have opened up a new avenue for him in his
work. With this adaptation of Stephen King's best novel, he invented a
new genre, which I can only describe as Romantic Tragic Horror. Other
film makers have dabbled in this - Roeg's "Don't Look Now" and
DePalma's "Carrie" are similar - but Cronenberg developed it in a
trilogy of films which become increasingly emotional in their
impact. "The Fly" is perhaps the first gore-film which is primarily a
love story, and "Dead Ringers" achieves an emotional wipe-out that is
only matched in recent years by Lars Von Trier's "Breaking the Waves".
At the centre of "The Dead Zone" is the question of what you would do
if you lost five years of your life. In the case of Johnny Smith,
played to perfection by Christopher Walken, he wakes up to find his
life has disintegrated, and in trying to build a new one he is
constantly hindered by a "second sight" that seems to be connected to
his coma. There is a big ellipsis here, because the audience is never
told precisely how and why this power developed. Fortunately, Walken
is convincing enough to get around this, and we come to accept it as
part of his illness, much as we come to accept Marilyn Chambers'
phallic appendage in "Rabid", or Samantha Eggar's children of rage in
"The Brood".
Christopher Walken has always had a slightly distracted quality that
serves him well in this role.  It also allows him to underplay some
incredibly emotional moments, which ironically heightens their
impact. Time and again, Cronenberg pulls off scenes that in other
hands would have become grossly sentimental. He seems to have enjoyed
having a hero who is uncompromisingly good - it's a big development
from "Scanners" where the good-evil conflict was fatally weakened by
the awful performance of Stephen Lack. Perhaps Cronenberg had simply
got better with actors - there are no bad performances in this film,
and actors like Herbert Lom and Anthony Zerbe, both prone to hamming
it up, are restrained and very effective.
The love story in the film is effectively played down, with a
beautiful "if only" scene when Brooke Adams comes to visit Johnny
after he learns to walk again. There are no big confrontation scenes
between Adams and Walken, just quiet resignation and sadness; the
final scene with Adams holding Walken's dead body is very touching,
again because it is underplayed, and speaks for itself. In "The Fly",
the romance would be put at the heart of the film, and there are big
emotional scenes that work very well, but there's nothing as poignant
as the scene before the crash, when Johnny refuses to stay the night.
The film tends to be rather episodic, as is the book, and after the
crash and the recovery, it focuses on the hunt for the Castle Rock
killer. Again, Cronenberg gets his points across with a subtlety that
other directors could learn from. We see a murder in brief, simple
details; the blow to the head, the undressing and the scissors coming
down. Quick and shocking, it's a great bit of film-making, as is the
later suicide of the killer. The actual death is, again, not shown,
but we see the horrific aftermath, in the only gratuitous gore in the
whole film. The suicide is almost like Cronenberg apologising to his
fans, and offering them some gory stuff, albeit very briefly.
Virtually all of the film is seen from the perspective of Johnny
Smith, which is very effective.  There is then a bizarre, and
completely unnecessary, cutaway to a scene where the crooked
politician, Greg Stillson, is blackmailing a newspaper editor. It gets
a point across about Stillson's corrupt ways, but we already knew
about that from a conversation between Walken and Anthony Zerbe. It
would have been better for Johnny to have had a flash of this
blackmailing, perhaps after touching the badge that he's given by
Stillson at Zerbe's house. As it is, it disrupts the flow of the
second half of the film. Two things hold it together; the force of
Walken's performance, and the great caricature of a corrupt politico
by Martin Sheen. Sheen manages to make us understand why Stillson is
so popular, and why he's so dangerous.
By the end of the film, Johnny has died heroically, and has found a
reason for his "gift", which he decides is not a curse but a
blessing. Except, of course, that it has led him to his inevitable
death with the inexorable force of a classic tragedy. In a way,
though, Johnny has been dead ever since the night of the crash, and he
seems to welcome death as a release from the burden of knowledge and
responsibility.
I think this is a very good film, although at the time, it seemed a
real disappointment. After the glory of "Videodrome" and its
extraordinary images and ideas, I thought Cronenberg had sold out by
filming a King story. This was at the time when everyone and his wife
was making films based on Stephen King's stories. The worst, by a long
chalk, was "Firestarter", but I think "The Dead Zone" has turned out
to be the best of that cycle.  It doesn't stick rigidly to King's
story, but it respects it and turns it into something very
moving. Looking at the film with the benefit of hindsight, it seems
clear that this was the film in which Cronenberg began reaching for
something that would later serve him well. I think he wanted to be
more than just a clever director with a talent for icky special
effects. In "The Dead Zone" he goes all out for emotion, and he
succeeds pretty well. This success was built upon by "The Fly", where
all the gore couldn't disguise that he was making his own "Love
Story", and ultimately by "Dead Ringers" where the gore was almost
non-existent and the focus was completely on the characters and the
impossibility of love ever working out the way it's meant to.
"Tchaikovsky - was he the tortured soul who poured out
 his immortal longings into dignified passages of stately 
 music, or was he just an old pouf who wrote tunes ?"

Title
Review for Mommie Dearest (1981)
You may remember the vogue in the sixties for casting ageing Hollywood
stars in horror-thrillers; "Whatever Happened to Baby Jane" is the
best, but also worthy of note are "Hush Hush Sweet Charlotte", "What's
the Matter With Helen" and "Frantic AKA Die Die My Darling". Some call
this the worst sort of exploitation, while others note that Bette
Davis revived her career by playing a shrieking hag, when no other
offers of work were forthcoming. Shelley Winters featured in a couple
of the films, while even Debbie Reynolds popped up as a murderess.
But the saddest story has to be that of Joan Crawford, whose
appearance in "Whatever Happened to Baby Jane", should have
resurrected her career, especially since she gives a much better
performance than Ms. Davis. For reasons that I can't explain, she
ended up in yet more, and much worse, horror films, going increasingly
down market until she ended up in the travesty of "Trog", giving, in
the circumstances, a wastefully committed performance.
It's therefore oddly appropriate that the film of her life, "Mommie
Dearest", should be a camp horror story about an old witch, hiding
behind the guise of a respectable biopic. Based on the first, and
best, revenge book, by her daughter, Christina, it is one of the
trashiest films ever made, and also a lot of not-so-innocent fun.
Faye Dunaway, whose career seems to have gone into even more of a
tailspin than Crawford's, gives a stunning performance in the title
role, but it's clearly not a realistic interpretation of the
woman. No, this is a truly nasty villainess, making Cruella DeVille
seem a model of calm responsibility in contrast. The story concerns a
beautiful little girl called Christina, all blonde hair and perfect
teeth, who is adopted by a nasty old witch called Joan Crawford, who
proceeds to make her life a misery. On her birthdays, Christina is
only allowed to keep one present, while the rest go to the
orphanages. This is the first sign that all is not well in the
Crawford household, and the hysteria that ensues when Christina puts
on her mother's make-up and pretends to be accepting an award, only
confirms the fact that Joan might not be making the running for the
mother of the year award.
Two scenes are etched in the memory of anyone who has ever seen this
film. The first takes place after Joan loses her contract at MGM. That
night, she starts pulling up her famous rose-bushes, and she calls the
children out of their beds to come and help clear up. Surely, we
think, Joan isn't mad enough to go any further. But her sights are set
on her daughter's beloved little rose tree. In one of the great
moments of gothic-camp, she intones to her daughter, "Christina, fetch
me.. the axe !!!". She then attempts to hack the tree to pieces, while
her crying children can only watch, helpless to stop this maniac.
The second occurs when Joan, clearly off her rocker, finds a ... gasp
... wire hanger in her daughter's closet. To say she throws a fit
would be understating. She screams at her sleeping eight year old
daughter, "NO WIRE HANGERS", and proceeds to beat the poor child with
the hanger. All of Christina's clothes are then strewn across the
floor, after which Joan orders her to clear up the mess. But, she
isn't finished. Going into the bathroom, Joan decides that the floor
isn't clean enough. She announces to her daughter that "We will clean
this together", throws soap on the floor, and then beats her daughter
with the soap box. If this scene isn't a classic of camp, I don't know
what is. The thing is, you see, it's played dead-straight. Joan, made
up in white cream, looks like a monster from a child's fairy tale,
while Christina is every inch the innocent victim of this creature's
wrath.
The irony is that the audience aren't on the side of Christina, who is
irritatingly idealised. No, we're on the side of Wicked Queen Joan,
and we can't wait for the next explosion to come and liven up the
film. Later, as Christina turns into the very lovely Diana Scarwid,
Joan tries to strangle her, after Christina has accused her of trying
to ruin her life. Luckily, a showbiz journalist is on hand to stop
anything too serious happening - the said journo is played by Marlon
Brando's sister, who looks very much like him, but only in latter day
porker mode, sadly.
This really is a very, very silly film, and Faye Dunaway's superb
performance is much better than the movie deserves. However, it is
consistently watchable, not least for a number of excellent
one-liners. Upon assuming control of Pepsi-Cola in the sixties, Joan
runs rings around the board, yelling "Don't fuck with me fellas, this
ain't my first time at the rodeo".
However, for horror fans, it assumes interest as, perhaps, the last of
the "Great Lady" horror movies, and it certainly can't be accused of
being boring. The film's version of Crawford is a sort of cross
between Baby Jane and Countess Dracula, which does nothing for
verisimilitude, but does make it very watchable.  I gather the film
became something of a cult in America at the time, with audiences
wearing clothes-hanger earrings, and shouting along with the more
quotable lines.
"Tchaikovsky - was he the tortured soul who poured out
 his immortal longings into dignified passages of stately 
 music, or was he just an old pouf who wrote tunes ?"

Title
Review for Duel (1971/I) (TV)
During these times when Spielberg has appointed himself official
guardian of Holocaust survivors, and has forgotten how to make small
scale films, it is salutary to remember that he was once one of the
best directors in what some of us think was the "Golden Age" of
American film-making.
"Duel" is the first in a series of films made by Spielberg which
really showcase his talents. He is not a great dramatic director - his
serious films are preachy, self-conscious and grossly overscaled. But,
god, the man is a great entertainer when he tries to be. "Sugarland
Express" is a witty, subtle road movie that has a stunningly powerful
conclusion. "Jaws" is the best blockbuster Summer movie ever
made. "CE3K" is a dose of pure joy, summed up by the look of elation
on Truffaut's face at the end. "1941" is overlong and patchy, but
contains some of the most incredible set-pieces I've ever seen in a
film, and is much more interesting as a film than "The Blues
Brothers", which is similarly overstuffed (and which, by the way,
makes the worst use of Aretha Franklin that I can imagine - why the
hell do they take Matt Murphy when they could have left him and taken
the Goddess ?)
"Duel" was his first big success - not his first professional film, as
some sources claim. His feature length "Columbo" episode was made in
1971. "Duel" was his first film as solo director to appear in cinemas
in Europe, and was certainly the film that got him marked as a
director to watch.  Watching it again, two things stand out. Firstly,
the sheer talent which is evident in every single frame. Secondly, the
absence of later Spielberg traits, those which drag down his films in
the eighties and nineties.
The story of "Duel" is classically simple. A man, called Dave Mann, is
driving to a meeting through the Californian desert - the film was
shot on a fifteen mile stretch of Highway 14. He encounters a huge
truck, which he overtakes. He then allows the truck to pass him and is
unnerved by the sheer bulk of the machine. All seems normal, except
that the truck won't speed on ahead of him and remains close, choking
him with fumes. Then the truck prevents him from overtaking, until an
arm waves him past - into the path of an oncoming car.
A primal story of man versus machine ? Well perhaps, except Spielberg
complicates things by introducing one of his favourite early themes -
the perceived inadequacy of the modern male. Mann is listening to a
radio phone-in, where a man is complaining that he has to stay at home
and keep house. He later has a phone conversation with his wife, who
complains that he is not agressive enough and that he let her be
"virtually raped" by one of his friends at a dinner party, without
intervening and knocking the man for six. Dave Mann is beset not only
by the truck, but also by his notions of what he should be, but
isn't. A later confrontation with a truck driver, when Mann gets
decked, proves the point to him - he just isn't macho enough. Except
... well, except that such things don't seem to matter. What could any
man do when faced with this fume-spouting monolith ?  Spielberg - no
macho man himself - gives the answer when Mann finds he can only
defeat the truck by beating it in a battle of wits.
The truck is one of the great monsters of horror cinema. Seemingly
banal in its ordinary appearance, it grows more sinister the more that
Spielberg's camera observes it. Indeed, it's very _lack_ of anything
unusual becomes suspicious. By the end, the front of the truck has
apparently grown character and looks malicious and greedy. The
headlights become eyes, constantly watching, waiting for Mann to make
a single mistake. The truck is one of the great examples in cinema of
a motiveless malignancy. It doesn't seem to want anything except to
destroy it's chosen victim - where it comes from, why it is doing
this; neither question is addressed by Spielberg, who wisely realises
that the less we know, the more intrigued we are.
The truck driver is never wholly seen, but his presence is established
through small details - the waving hand, the cowboy boots. He could be
anyone, a fact that Spielberg plays upon in a triumphant suspense
scene in a truck stop, when Dave Mann starts to believe that he has
found his tormentor. We are so skilfully sucked into the nightmare,
that we share his paranoia. The scene concludes in a punch-up, and
then a funny-unnerving coda.
If there is a weakness in this film, it is Dennis Weaver. He's an
efficient actor, but rather uninspired - he plays this role exactly
the way he played every other role. He's professional, but he doesn't
have the comic spark of lunatic terror that, for example, John Lithgow
brought to "Twilight Zone". There's a lovely scene towards the end
when Dave Mann is roped into assisting a school bus, while the truck
mockingly observes his discomfort. But Weaver doesn't seem to get the
joke, and his reaction to the mocking children at the back of the bus
is simply embarrassment.
The ending, however, is marvellous. Having arrived at the edge of a
mountain, Dave Mann adopts a matador pose, jumping off the car just in
time for the truck to smash into it, and then career down the
ravine. As the truck drops, we hear a wonderful groaning sound, that
might possiibly be the truck screaming its last. Then, in what might
be termed the twist, there seems to be no sign of the driver's mangled
body. But we saw the driver ... didn't we ? The final image of Weaver,
sitting, nowhere to go after his final victory, is potent and
memorable.
Spielberg's early triumph in this film is still one of his most
memorable achievements. That's not to belittle Richard Matheson's
spare, ironic screenplay, but this is a director's film. Every shot is
calculated to add to the final effect, and even the padding out,
needed for the theatrical release, is engaging and characterful. The
traits which are notably absent here are overlength and
sentimentality. There is a cruel streak of comedy running through
"Duel" which might have improved several of Spielberg's later
films. There is not a single moment of false sweetness in this film -
something which invaded Spielberg's technique in "ET" and which has
never been overcome since. Think of that awful ending to "Amistad" or
the glutionous saccharine sentiment that is all-pervading in "Hook"
and "The Color Purple".
Could Spielberg make a film as clean and tight as "Duel" again ?
Probably not, but he's not alone in . Martin Scorsese will never make
another film as fresh as "Mean Streets" - and it would, perhaps, be
unfair to expect him to. I just wish to Spielberg would stop being
Saint Steven and go back to being the witty practical joker who made
wonderful films about killer trucks, Great White Sharks and Generals
who cry over Dumbo. That Spielberg, the one who is long gone, is
summed up in the beautiful scene in "CE3K", when Roberts Blossom
stands up in the briefing room, and testifies to having seen Bigfoot -
and, dammit, we believe him. The new Spielberg may have God on his
side, but he was much more fun when he had a bit of the Devil in him.
"Tchaikovsky - was he the tortured soul who poured out
 his immortal longings into dignified passages of stately 
 music, or was he just an old pouf who wrote tunes ?"

Title
Review for Fly, The (1986)
If "The Dead Zone" opened up a new area of concern for Cronenberg,
then "The Fly" confirmed, not that it should have needed confirming,
that he is much more than just a gore merchant. The love story that is
on the margins of "Dead Zone" is placed centre stage in "The Fly",
which is surely one of the most moving love stories ever made. It is
the ultimate riposte to the banalities of Hollywood romantic trash,
notably "Love Story" in which, you will remember, the heroine dies of
an incurable disease, but does it very prettily and quietly.
The plot of the film is incredibly simple - Seth Brundle, a scientist,
invents a new process to transport matter from one place to another in
a matter of seconds. After a row with his girlfriend, he decides to
try the process for himself, and is successful, with one big
reservation. A fly has penetrated the teleport, and the scientist has
now become "Brundlefly" as the computer so matter-of-factly puts
it. He gradually disintegrates, becoming first a man-fly hybrid and,
ultimately, more fly than man. HIs girlfriend is initially fascinated,
not least by his new status as a sexual athlete, but subsequently
becomes disgusted, and finally pitying. Brundle, on the other hand,
retains his love for the woman who is rejecting him, and relies on her
to deliver the coup-de-grace at the end, when the transformation is
complete.
"The Fly" has been called a metaphor for AIDS, something which
Cronenberg has always been very keen to reject. In truth, there is
nothing very AIDS-like about Brundle's problem. What the film is
undeniably about, however, is the experience of changing from one's
normal state into something different - be it from cancer or simply
from ageing. The patient seems to accomodate themselves fairly quickly
to their new state - Brundle even keeps a video record of his
disintegration, and catalogues the bits that fall off him, keeping
them in the bathroom cabinet. The problem comes for the people around
him who cannot accept the change, and want him back the way he
was. What the film conveys very well is the idea of having someone you
love change beyond all recognition.
Geena Davis is very good at disgust, and very sharp and funny in the
early sections. She even pulls off the difficult final scene, when she
has to put Brundlefly out of his misery. The problem is in the
structure of the film; she does not seem committed enough to Brundle
and their relationship has not been going for long enough before the
changes begin. The film would have been more effective if they had
been having a relationship for a more considerable period of
time. Incidentally, the same problem occurs yet again in "Dead
Ringers", but that's another story.
The strength of "The Fly", however, lies in its essential
honesty. Disease, particularly a fatal disease, is horrible, it's
messy and unpleasant. The film doesn't duck the nastier side of the
transformation; the new method of eating is a show-stopping sequence,
especially when it is later applied to a cartoon baddie, played by
John Getz. What helps a lot is Jeff Goldblum's incredible
performance. He gets over two important things; the self disgust at
the change, and the scientist's fascination at what is, after all, a
unique situation. He's also capable of unexpected anger, when he tells
his Davis to leave before he hurts her. It's a great performance, one
of the best in any of Cronenberg's films.
The effects, design and make-up are beyond criticism - the acid test
for this is the final scene in the film. Brundlefly, having turned
malevolent, wants to combine himself with Davis to create an eternal
union. Saved at the last moment, Davis escapes and Brundlefly only
combines himself with the teleporter. Dragging himself out of the
machine at the end, the creature picks up the end of a shotgun and
points it at his head. It sounds stupid, but on film it is incredibly
powerful. The look that the creature gives Davis at the end is
heartbreaking, which is perhaps the highest compliment I can pay the
effects team. It's in the great tradition of the tragic monster, which
goes right back to "King Kong".
Interesting that, in several of Cronenberg's films, the hero goes to
his death willingly at the end - even if it isn't suicide, it's a
blissful escape from a life which has become intolerable.  Cronenberg
seems to genuinely believe in the idea of the final redemption through
sacrifice; part of his romantic spirit, I suppose. It's a device which
works well in his films, largely because he plays it straight. There
is no camp in these films - camp being one of the major problems in
"eXistenZ". The emotions are for real, and the most important emotion
in "The Fly" and, even more so, in "Dead Ringers", is love. At the end
of "Dead Ringers", we can only really feel despair, but there is a
sort of hope at the end of both "The Fly" and "The Dead Zone". In
both, the hero dies, but there is also a final reconciliation with the
loved one that suggests, at least, some sort of closure.
Is "The Fly" an anti-science film ? I only raise the question because
I've read critics who argue that it is, but I'm not so sure. The
problems are caused by user-error, not by the computer, which only
does as it is supposed to. I'm not sure that science really comes into
it in "The Fly", because it has the structure of a classical tragedy -
the hero is brought down by one small mistake which then snowballs
into his destruction. Science is the enabler of the tragedy, but not
the sole cause of it.
"The Fly" was a huge hit with audiences, many of whom seem to have
misinterpreted it as a gore-fest.  It's not that simple; yes, it's
gory, but the gore is completely central to the story, rather as it is
in Carpenter's "The Thing", a film with which this shares little,
except an awareness of the vulnerability of the human body. In an
interview, Cronenberg said something very penetrating about this
central theme, one which recurs in many of his films. He talked about
the AIDS epidemic, and asked the interviewer to try to see it from the
point of view of the virus. For human beings, it's a crisis, but for
the virus, which is, after all, a living creature, it's like Christmas
and birthdays all rolled into one. It seems to me that this is very
illuminating, both as an observation, and also as a footnote to
Cronenberg's attitude to horror.
Ultimately though, what makes "The Fly" special is that it has genuine
concern for the problems of the human heart, and acknowledges that
while love may not conquer all, it can at least make an imprint upon
those it touches that they can never forget. Having said that, it also
accepts that in real life, love doesn't always work out, and that, for
some, this failure can be more than they can bear. Indeed, the theme
of the failure of love to work out is central to his next, and best,
film "Dead Ringers".
"Tchaikovsky - was he the tortured soul who poured out
 his immortal longings into dignified passages of stately 
 music, or was he just an old pouf who wrote tunes ?"
