Authors
Steve Legge
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
If you've seen the trailers for Fight Club, you will probably be expecting
a different film than the one you will see. It is not spceifically all
about fighting clubs, and the goings on there, but about a man's journey
outside of himself, his "normal" life, everything he knows and takes for
granted, and then back again, and his relationship with the man that will
change his life, and the lives of many others as well.
The violence depicted in the film is brutal and realistic, and we
thankfully only see the actual goings on at the "fight clubs" a few times
during the course of the two hour plus movie. But when we do, we are not
spared, and the camera almost never looks away when it should. 
Edwrad Norton plays an insomniac. In order to find release and get some
much needed sleep, and on the advice of his doctor, he starts attending a
therapy group for testicular cancer, where he lets his guard down and ends
up crying on Bob's (Meatloaf) large male hormone imbalance induced breasts.
After that,
Norton becomes addicted to the group therapy, and attends a different group
every night, which is also how he meets Marla. Marla is also a "tourist".
And Norton can't cry with another faker around, and so, he relapses into
insomnia. So they eventually strike up a deal, on who goes to what groups
on what day in a funny, if slightly morbid scene. A lot of the humor in
Fight Club comes from such awkward or disturbing places.
Norton later meets Tyler Durdern on an airline flight, where they strike up
a conversation, and Durden gives Norton his business card. When Norton
comes home to his condo, he finds his his apartment has exploded, So he
calls Durden to perhaps get some shelter. and after a brawl outside a bar,
which leads to the creation of the fight club, ends up finding refuge at
Tyler's run down house. 
Tyler lives the complete opposite to Norton. His house is a dive, and the
jobs he takes other than selling his soap, are basically a means for his
mischief. Tyler has total disdain for the status quo, the lives of normal
people who are sheep, herded around by what they do, what they want, and
what they own. Durden's has an almost obsessive need to free everyone
else's id from the shackles of corporate america's superego. Tyler and
Marla eventually get involved which each other, which bothers Norton,
although he can't understand why, since he doesn't seem to like Marla at
all, or at least, pretends he doesn't. Setting up a conflict between Norton
and Pitt's characters which builds to the point where Norton beats an
attractive man to a bloody pulp
for falling more into favour with Pitt, in a scene reminiscent of Raging
Bull's "he ain't pretty no more" scene.
The amount of Fight Club members grows during the film, across the country,
to an almost "Invasion of the Body Snatchers" level where The Fight Club
becomes a 
recruitment center for Durden's mass mischief plans. As the bigger pictures
becomes clearer towards the end
of the film, even the details of "project mayhem" isn't the final cimactic
revelation of the movie.
The performances in the film are excellent. Norton's everyman, and Pitt's
not-so-everyman are wonderful, and in Pitt's case, probably his best work.
If you've ever wondered what id and ego would sound like if they spoke to
each other out loud, then you're in for a treat as  that's how Pitt and
Norton's characters get along with each other. Helena Bonham Carter's
fiesty Marla is also a terrific performance. The lone woman in the film,
(excluding Meatloaf's breasts) who is as tough on the inside as any of the
men, or at least, pretends to be. She just needs attention to keep her from
thinking about herself and from making half-hearted attempts on her own
life. Marla's "fight club" is found in Tyler Durden's bed and in her stormy
relationship slash friendship with Norton.
David Fincher's directing is an extremely stylized departure that he seems
to have been working towards ever since Alien 3. Fincher's camera swoops
down buildings, through bulletholes in windshields, and other places that
can only be achieved through subtle useage of computer technology, not
excluding the bizarre brief sex scene between Marla and Durden. I haven't
seen a film this stylistically powerful since Pulp Fiction, only where that
film snap crackled and popped, Figh Club's viceral experience is like an
atomic blast. Fincher takes us places we've never been, and some places we
probably shouldn't be going to.
I've heard Fight Club as being called a film about a lot of things,
including "emasculated males in the age of feminism", which not being a
woman or emasculated,  I can't disagree with enough. Although in the film
Durden does mention being part of a generation brought up by their mothers,
but that is a direct reference to both Durden and Norton's characters
fathers having left them at a young age, and the dynamic between Pitt's Id,
Norton's Ego, and the partial superego of their absent fathers.
The purpose of the Fight Club is as much therapy as the testicular cancer
survivors sharing their pain with the group. Only in Fight Club, they don't
just share the pain, they dish it out as well. Their pain truly becomes
another's pain. And in that pain, they find release. Everyone is equal, and
there is no room for tourists. But "Fight Club" the movie isn't just about
the fight clubs, or violence, it's about a lot more. There is much subtext
to the story, and everyone's opinions have validity, even "feminist
emasculation". Fight Club is one of the rare films that begs to be thought
about afterwards, not just tossed out of mind with yesterday's empty action
flick.

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
{Please be advised that during the course of this review, I may speak of
things that could spoil the film for those who haven't seen it.}
A low budget fright fest, The Blair Witch Project plays upon our
now-programmed ideology, brought about by News footage and Real Video
programs, that video footage is "truth", bringing a realism to the story
that probably wouldn't exist if it were made entirely on film.
TBWP has had a great turn of excellent hype and word of mouth, but it didn't
do it for me. The story elements of the Blair Witch during the beginning of
the film went by too fast, and some key elements that were to be
foreshadowed later on, zipped by almost imperceptibly. The BWP website gives
much detailed information about the background of the Blair Witch, more than
is presented in the film. This, in my mind, is good and bad. Good that we
get the fascinating background information, bad that most of it isn't in the
film.
The characters were all realistic and well acted, considering that the
entirety of their performances was more or less improvised on the spot.
Their camerawork has an honest amateurism to it, but the constant shakiness
wore me down, and inability to turn off the auto focus would have been
something any filmmaker worth their salt would have done. (Unless, of course
they were told to turn off the auto-focus.) Also the rationale of constantly
taping every day's events was thin at best, other than that if they didn't
there wouldn't have been much of a film. And on that note, while the
characters are lost and hungry in the woods, why doesn't Heather take out
her book "How to Stay Alive in the  Woods" which we clearly see at the
beginning of the film? I guess she only had it out of a sense of irony.
The characters also seem to dump the human instinct of self preservation and
"flight or fight", that say, that characters in "The Edge" displayed so
well. In that film, it was a Bear, Not a "Ghost" or a "Witch", or a "Witch's
Ghost". A large bonfire was built in that film to light up the darkness, and
weapons were fashioned for self protection from a very real, menacing
Grizzly Bear. But what do our intrepid filmmakers do? They hide themselves
in a cramped tent and complain that they're out of smokes. And for that,
they deserve thier fate.
After they team leaves the town and finishes their interviews of the
townsfolk ,the film breaks down into simple formula:
Walk around. Tape stuff. Get lost. "Colorfully" complain about how lost they
are. Gradual group dynamic and individual breakdown. Sleep in tent. Get
scared late at night. Repeat.
The days were longest parts of the film, and while the conflicts between the
characters were fine, and shouldn't have been made any shorter, the night
scenes should have been made longer, considering they were the best parts of
the film, although they never became more than fleetingly frightful. In
contrast, the climax, taking place in the old house in the woods had what
all the other night scenes didn't have. A sense of dread. The characters
became separated (which is a genre no-no) and the character Mike frantically
rushes around the house looking for Josh, the member of the team who went
missing, whose voice can be heard yelling, from no discernible direction.
Meanwhile, Heather tries to follow him, screaming all the way. It was the
best edited, best shot scene, and the most effective.
Had the other night scenes been this effective, the film would have lived up
to the hype. Although I would have liked to have seen the Blair Witch at
least once. Not seen dead on, but seen for less than a split second, moving
just out of frame, enough so that we can see it, but not enough to make out
what it is, or even so that we debate that we saw it at all.
Although I didn't really like the film, it later played with my imagination
like a good spook story, making every little noise a threat, and I caught
myself occasionally looking over my shoulder. But I wanted more satisfaction
in the theatre, not a creepy afterglow. If I wanted creepy afterglow, I'd go
to the secondhand bookstore and pick up a spooky ghost story book for less
than 2 bucks. Instead I blew 9 bucks on a shaky 80 minute home video.
