Authors
Chris J Hillery
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Die Hard 2 (1990)
     Finally, a movie which restores my faith in sequels.  After the
disjointed disappointment of ROBOCOP 2 and the utter idiocy of GREMLINS
2, I must say I went into DIE HARDER with a few reservations.  Happily,
they were mostly proved unfounded.
     Now, make no mistakes: the original DIE HARD was the superior
movie of the two.  It was a fabulous thriller and a well planned action
movie, with plenty of amazing stunt work and expensive (!) scenery-
chewing; a pretty hard act to follow.  However, DIE HARD 2 makes a
valiant effort, and with considerable success.  It certainly matches
up in action and violence; this was almost certainly a more expensive
movie, and the action, stunt work, and blowing-up-of-expensive-objects
were all at least on par with the first.  I would go so far as to say
that, as an action movie, this was superior to the original.  Where it
falls a bit short is in the suspense end of the line.  DIE HARD 2 has
few edge-of-your seat thrills, little "omigosh, what's going to happen
now?"; indeed, there's little room for this between the continuous
stream of finding out what's going to happen (mostly "boom!"s).  The
main cause for this is that, while the first movie was placed in a
skyscraper, with close proximity between McClane and the Bad Guys (tm),
no escape and the claustrophobic tension brought about by that, DIE HARD
2 is set in a big, open airport -- and the Bad Guys weren't even there,
for the most part, instead having their base of operations in a nearby
church.  Because of this, there's few times we either are tensely
expecting someone to jump out or are surprised by someone jumping out,
etc....
     Despite this, DIE HARD 2 succeeds well in being a non-stop action
movie.  It doesn't fall into the common trap, of which even DIE HARD 1
was somewhat guilty, of taking too long to get going; the action is
nearly from the word go.  Also, the plotline, while necessarily a bit
credibility-stretching (these terrorists were *really* prepared for
anything) and over-done, was not distractingly so; it followed its own
lead, all apparent inconsistencies were well-explained, and while
several turns were pretty obvious, there were a couple true surprise
twists stuck in to keep things interesting.  On the other hand,
character development was a bit lax in this sequel.  McClane was again
surprising and interesting, but even he was somewhat flat; the wry
humor which was so common in the first movie was notably absent.  Also,
the other central characters were, in the main, pretty one-dimensional,
and maybe even a little cliched.  I must say, though, I'm only now
thinking of these problems; it's a tribute to the amount of sheer action
in this movie that those flaws simply didn't occur to me while I was
actually watching the thing (I guess that makes them not really flaws,
doesn't it?).  DIE HARD 2 tries to blow you away with action, and it
does that exceedingly well.
     Principally because I prefer a good thriller, I can't rate this one
as well as the first, but nonetheless it is far and away the best movie
I've seen yet this summer (although I have yet to see DICK TRACY, TOTAL
RECALL or ANOTHER 48 HOURS).  If you enjoy a good slug/blow-up fest,
this is the movie to see (definitely more so than ROBOCOP 2); and, if
having seen a few too many rotten flops, you need something to convince
you that a sequel to a good movie *can* be made and made well, here's
your choice.  Do note, though, that this really is not a movie to take
the whole family to.  While many of the deaths involved seeing how many
ways one can blow up airplanes, there were a good number of  unique and
grisly ways to finish off your favorite enemy employed and plenty of
bodies filled with lead; and these people are every bit as foul-mouthed
as in the first.
   DIE HARD 2, Rated R:  violence, profanity.
   Please note that the "Overall" rating is not designed to be an average
   or any sort of summary of the preceding ratings, but rather a true
   rating of how good the movie was taken as a whole.  With four
   categories one can't fully rate all aspects of a movie, nor should
   they all be weighted equally; also, as is the case with DIE HARD, a
   movie can sometimes be more (or, in other cases, less) than the sum
   of its parts.  In the case of DIE HARD 2, the movie was exactly the
   sum of its parts; fortunately, most of the parts were pretty strong.

Title
Review for Bird on a Wire (1990)
     After reading Robert Dorsett's review of BIRD ON A WIRE, I have but
one question: did we see the same movie?  I thoroughly enjoyed this
movie, and disagree with nearly every point Robert made to the movie's
fault.  I feel I should at least offer this alternative review; I'll go
approximately in the same order as did he (have his review displaying in
another window; multi-tasking's grand =), so here goes...
     I thought the story, while not the world's most original, was far
more than "very, very weak"; it was considerably more literate than most
these days, with no real holes.  There were no great surprises (yes,
love triumphs; would the movie be as interesting if they ended up hating
each other?), but plenty enough twists and turns to keep things moving.
I didn't see much of Gibson "posturing"; he was merely trying to save
his life.  And Hawn was more than "cute"; she had a definite and
reasonably strong personality of her own.  Sure, there was plenty of
action (explosions, car chases (a really good one, I thought), etc);
why is this bad?  The movie is an action-comedy.  
     The one point Mr. Dorsett (don't that sound formal?  =)) made
several times was the Bad Guys (tm) were "inexplicable"; I didn't
understand how he arrived at this opinion at all.  Obviously they were
(somewhat stereotypical, granted, but hey...) corrupt drug cops, in
search of revenge against the narc that did them in (Gibson).  Fifteen
years in prison would be enough to give them a pretty strong grudge.
The FBI agent that deleted Gibson's file and otherwise helped the bad
guys trail him was being blackmailed by the two ex-cops.  The points
Robert lists in the "Spoilers" section of his review at the end...  I
didn't understand any of them.  Who were the "people the ex-DEA people
were doing deals with" that wanted Gibson dead?  I didn't see them; the
primary bad guys were the two bad ex-cops and the FBI agent they were
blackmailing.  He made a few other points too; as I said, I didn't
follow his logic or what he was saying.  At any rate, I don't think
there were plot holes relating to this aspect of the movie.
     Moving back to the first part of the review, on Product
Endorsements: I didn't see these to be big at all.  She was driving a
blue BMW, the police had to refer to it as such; they couldn't just be
on the lookout for a "blue convertible luxury car."  And the Apple
placement was similar, although a bit more noticeable (Apple emblem on
the side of the machine).  I guess my point is: so?  It'd be tough to
make a movie without tossing in a few brand names.  It wasn't
distracting or anything.
     In his "Downer" section, Robert again refers to Gibson as a "Sex
Symbol" and Hawn as a "Giddy Flake."  Again, I didn't see this.  Gibson
*is* a sex symbol, and again he was running for his life so I think he
was excused in being a Tough Guy (tm).  Casting against type is
difficult, and what's wrong with casting *with* type?  And, again, I
didn't see Hawn's character as being a giddy flake, or a rich spoiled
mover and shaker.  Sure, there were a few obligatory jokes by Hawn along
those lines ("I need food; I need a shower; I need a massage" when lost
in the woods, etc.) but these were nowhere near as frequent or silly as
many movies with similar openings.
     And on to the Spoilers section... guess I better stick one of
these things in although I guess I've let a few slip by already...
     As to the "left at the altar"/"grieving widow" contradiction, well,
I guess either Hawn was speaking metaphorically in one or the other's
case, most likely the latter.  At any rate, a minor nit-pick.
     I've covered the bad-guy debate, so: about the flying scene.  I
thought it was quite well done, and I'm usually on the lookout for bad
special effects as I hope to make a career in that field (good luck,
huh?).  What particular instance does he think he saw a model?  I
thought it was quite apparent in most parts that they were indeed using
a real plane/helicopter, and I didn't see any obvious models.  And about
the plane/helicopter number prefixes: didn't catch that, and come on...
that is a minor slip.  Most people don't know about those things
anyway...
     His appraisal of the zoo scene I almost can agree with; it was
pretty contrived and it probably wasn't necessary to have it there.
However, it was well done and had good tension, and was a reasonably
good climax.  I've seen a few better and many worse.  The two first
oddment he mentioned (tiger chasing Hawn's coat instead of her); well, I
guess maybe you have a point, that was a little daft.  But, it worked.
(=  As to the second, though (why tigers passed up fresh meat and kept
nipping at Gibson swinging there); don't most wild animals prefer to
hunt their meals?  This is why "playing possum" works, in at least some
cases.  The tigers were probably simply more interested in the prospect
of "hunting" the still-moving Gibson than preying on the already dead
and quite still Bad Guy.  This also goes to suggest that yes, indeed,
these animals were fed previously; a starving tiger will eat whatever,
whether or not it killed it personally.  And wasn't the Bad Guy still
lying on the electric fence?  The tigers had certainly learned long
before to avoid that sucker.
     Finally, he says, the movie seems to be intended for television:
virtually no profanity and surprisingly little violence.  Well, I for
one found it pretty refreshing to hear something other than four-letter
words every verse end.  As to little violence: there was a considerable
amount, I thought, granted not terribly graphic, but nonetheless
violence; I suppose "surprisingly" is a relative term, though.  It
worked for me.
     Overall, then, I almost fully disagree with Robert Dorsett's review
of this movie.  I thought it was a thoroughly entertaining, well-laid
movie with plenty of action and humor and enough romance to pass muster.
I don't think there were any real holes in the plot, and there was
enough depth to the plot to make it interesting to the thinking mind,
too.  I'd give it a solid 8 out of 10 (3 1/4 stars).  If you like action
movies with comedy, it's definitely worth a see.  Enjoy!

Title
Review for Arachnophobia (1990)
     *Do not* see this movie if you actually are affected by
arachnophobia (fear of spiders, in case you didn't know).  The friend I
saw this with is a severe arachnophobe, and he practically broke the
poor chair he was sitting in by flying out of it so hard.  If you can
guess from this that this is a scary movie, well, it is.  While it is
marketing itself as a "Thrill-omedy," this movie has much more thrill
than "omedy," which is fine if that's what you're prepared for.  It also
spends a good deal of its time in extreme close-ups of spiders in
action, hence the opening warning.
     Basic plot synopsis: a large (!) and ill-tempered South American
spider (a new species no one knew of previously, natch) hitches a ride
to a small backwoods town in the coffin of a photographer whom it had
killed in the  jungle.  It escapes into the local woods, where it mates
with a local spider and creates a whole bunch of deadly toxic
mean-spirited little spiders, which take off to terrorize the town.
     Most of this movie centers around the new local doctor's struggle
to get people to believe that the deaths of several people were not
cardiac arrests brought about by his own negligence, as the old doctor
would have it, but are in fact attributable to these spiders.  Once real
evidence is found for this, a regional spider expert is brought in, and
the ground is laid for a plan to rid the town of the threat, leading (of
course) to a grand confrontation  between the grandaddy spider and the
doctor, who (of course) has a serious fear of spiders due (of course) to
an incident in his infancy.
     You might have notice that this summary makes no mention of the
role of the exterminator, played by John Goodman, who is in all the
commercials.  This is because, unfortunately, he has very little screen
time and is not at all important to the plot or development.  This is a
real shame, and a great waste of both a good character and a good actor.
The scenes involving Goodman are uniformly quite funny, as his role as
the down-n-dirty and rather thick-headed exterminator is ideal for him
and played to the hilt.  If this movie had been, as I suspected,
Goodman's first real starring role and centered on his battle against
the spiders with his spray-gun, this could have been a truly hysterical
movie, while still being a thriller.
     Luckily, the movie isn't a total loss without this; indeed,it's a
reasonably enjoyable flick with many good scares (plenty of spiders
flying around) and quite a few laughs along the way.  It's pretty
formulaic, beyond its unique plot device, but still well-done; the plot
and tension build nicely if a bit slowly, and the climax is quite, well,
climactic.  All the important characters are pretty well fleshed out.
The plot is sensible and has several sub-plots which interact quite
nicely.  And so on.
     All in all, this is a "solid" movie.  It could have been much
better had it been, as it is being marketed as, a movie starring John
Goodman as the back- woods exterminator on a mission to save the town;
that could have been made into a truly funny, cornball movie based on a
thriller, in the same style as the classic GHOSTBUSTERS (the first one,
of course).  However, when you realize that it isn't that movie, you can
enjoy what it is.  Check it out; it's worth a look.
     Please note that the "Overall" ratings above are in no way intended to be
a summation of the previous ratings, but instead a true rating of how good the
movie was taken as a whole.  Four categories are not enough to rate all aspects
of a movie, neither should all four be weighted equally.  For instance, the
rating for Thrills in GHOSTBUSTERS above was quite low, but that wasn't what
the movie was intended to be about; whereas Thrills were central to ARACHNO-
PHOBIA.  The reason I chose to compare it to GHOSTBUSTERS was, as I said, that
ARACHNOPHOBIA was marketed to appear to be a similar type film.
-- 
-- Ceej    (=
ceej@pawl.rpi.edu
gmry@mts.rpi.edu
aka Chris Hillery
