Authors
Stoneheel Michael
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Unforgiven (1992)
     Many Western fans consider this genre to be a cinema par
excellance, while other persons claim that only a few Westerns are good
films.  UNFORGIVEN is a perfect opportunity to confront this issue.  It
seems to me that this film is about the Western myth, but what is that
myth?
     It is the myth of open landscapes and wide spaces, a hero on his
horse, the good prostitute and the pure virgin, the progress against the
primitive, and the use of Christian values.  But most of all, it is the 
myth of the border between good and evil (usually the good hero is a 
reformed criminal, that could hardly be considered pure--like John
Wayne in STAGECOACH) which resolves in a conflict between individual 
morality and the law.
     Does Clint Eastwood follow this pattern?  Certainly yes!  The
landscapes are as wide as ever, the hero is a reformed not in shape
gunfighter (this is almost a cliche), the good guys act to restore the
dignity of a prostitute, the only way to solve problems is by lynching
and at the end we have a spectacle duel between the hero and the evil.
     Actually, we could not have been more wrong.  It seems that Clint
Eastwood tried to break the myth from every possible angle.  The abuse
of a woman is very rare in Westerns and it is more likely to be done by
Indians.  All the good gunfighters are being humiliated during the film
(either they cannot shot or cannot ride on their horses).  Can anyone
imagine a film in which John Wayne would be bitten by someone without
responding?
     From the narrative perspective, some things are worth to be pointed
out.  The tremendous use of closeups and the photographing of the hero's
face during a gunfight are against the principles of the old Western in
which everything was done to increase the myth.  Another way that
Eastwood use to break the myth is by making the Western more realistic
(the curses, showing scars and wounds, the way sex is treated and the
realistic killing).
     One may presume that Eastwood was trying to define the limits of
the myth.  If such a claim is correct than the limits could be pushed
even further.  The cause for the struggle could be less moral, the
sheriff could be more (or less) cruel, and the stereotype of the hero
could be less conventional.  At the end of the film the myth is as valid
as ever (not only for the spectator but also for everybody in the
film).  Could it be shattered?
     If Gene Hackman (or someone from the town) had made the score even,
the answer would have been probably yes.  Not only would such an act
break the myth, but it would shutter a much more important thing, the
myth of Clint Eastwood, the actor.  In fact, Eastwood has demonstrated
that even if he looks ugly, being humiliated, has a dubious sense of
morality, the myth of him as a super hero actor is greater than ever.
It is quite impressive, but should we admire him for it?
     Actually, the myth of the hero is being finally realized in the
duel scene.  Eastwood has found the primer component in the aesthetics
of the struggle, namely, the sympathy and admiration for the weak
against the strong, for the few against the numerous and for the
individual against everybody else.  The result is a transformation of
the conflict between the individual and the society from the moral
level to a struggle dealing with action.  Are all the ideas, stated so
far, sufficient for explaining the evolution of the myth?
     One must admit that the myth exists inside of us from the first
moment we lay our eyes on the screen.  To understand it profoundly, one
should see classic Westerns like STAGECOACH, SHANE, RED RIVER, THE MAN
WHO SHOT LIBERTY VALANCE etc., but even by watching BONANZA much of the
myth is becoming a part of the viewer.  If many years ago the myth was
a benefit for the Western, at some stage the overloaded self concern
with it became an artistic obstacle.  When discarding the exhausted
self concern with the myth, there is no form of expression and not much
is left.  I'm not saying that there aren't Westerns which are great
films.  Usually, such films are being consisted of more aspects.
     Eastwood's UNFORGIVEN is probably the best Western created in the
last ten years, nothing less and nothing more.

Title
Review for Crying Game, The (1992)
     Usually, when evaluating a film I try to isolate the formalist
elements and to analyze how they form aesthetics components which
relate to the theme and sometimes to a certain meaning.  This time it
seems irrelevant to proceed in such a manner because the film is based
on one and only one thing, namely the secret.
     It is very easy to notice that the revelation of the secret
shutters the expectations of the spectators.  The cinema is the perfect
media for such a turning point.  No sentence could have such a sudden
effect as the harsh visual exposure.  Obviously, the exposure effects
everyone, but how?
     For a male spectator, it is the culmination of an erotic scene.
Normally, he would identify himself with the hero, considering his love
actions his own.  When the true nature of the heroine is exposed so
suddenly, the spectator is forced to react emotionally and to
sympathize with the hero.  The general feeling seems to be of a shock.
What about the female spectator?
     Even tough I am not a woman, I think that the mechanism of
identification works for women in a symmetric way.  Naturally, after
the exposure the woman spectator has no one to be sexually identified
with.  The reaction of a woman spectator could be: "what?", "no!",
"yes!", "at last!?", "Disgusting!", but the most reasonable one would
be - "Definitely, it isn't I".  From this point, the man spectator may
succeed to put the feeling of astonishment behind (and this is not a
simple task) and to reconnect to the hero, but the woman spectator
seems to lost her contact with the main characters.
     One may argue at this stage that I am missing the whole point, and
that this film is not about sex, nor about love, but about our nature
and about learning to accept each person as himself.  After all how
could we forget the frog and the scorpion?
     It seems that such an argument makes sense.  The terrorist is
destructive in nature, the blond woman is cruel in nature, the hero is
good in his nature, and the heroine is a woman by her (or should we say
his) nature.  We could extend this principle even further.  A murderer
hurts people in his nature, war is horrible in its nature, and this
film is far from being perfect in its nature.  If this film is about
love, than love is one-sided or possible only in a detached way.  If it
is about morality, the ideas are superficial.  The only valid
interpretation seems to be that this film is about accepting the
different as a beloved human being.  Now, can the usage of the secret
be justified?
     It might be correct that in order to understand the different one
has to believe that he is normal.  Should we treat the heroine in a
different way before the secret is exposed and at the end of the film?
In fact, the heroine hasn't been changed.  The only persons changed are
us.  It is not difficult to sympathize with the heroine because she is
the only pure character in the film.  Most of the men characters are
terrorists, the two good men accept the heroine as she is, and the only
woman character is detestable.  The only problem is that it is very
difficult to transcend beyond our expectations and beyond the shock.
     Personally, I would prefer that such an important subject would be
handled in a more directed fashion that could effect a larger
audience.  I might be totally wrong, but is seems to me that this film
is another "womenless" film, directed by a man, intended mainly for
men, and has no women main characters.  The heroine itself is a
substitute for a woman.  I would rather see a film directed by a woman
with balanced roles for both sexes.  Why?
