Authors
Aaron Michaels
Number of Reviews
13

Title
Review for Dark City (1998)
John Murdoch: Rufus Sewell
Inspector Frank Bumstead: William Hurt
Dr. Daniel Poe Schreber: Kiefer Sutherland
Emma Murdoch/Anna: Jennifer Connelly
Mr. Hand: Richard O'Brien
Directed by Alex Proyas. Written by Proyas, Lem Dobbs, & David S. Goyer.
Running time: 100 minutes. Rated R (for violence and nudity).
Dark City is a dark, dark movie. It deals with a group called the
Strangers who have taken over a city and are using the locals as
experiments. They have an ability to "tune" which causes people to sleep
and buildings to move. They imprint thoughts into people's brains to see
what makes them tick while they are asleep.
John Murdoch (Rufus Sewell), a young man who is your everyday guy, wakes
up the middle of being imprinted. His memory is lost. He stumbles around
and notices a dead prositute horribly murdered near him. How could he
have done this?
He gets a phone call from a excentric doctor Dr. Schreber (Keifer
Sutherland) telling him to get out the building because the Strangers
will find him. He travels around the city for the next 90 minutes being
chased by an Inspector Bumstead (William Hurt) and the Strangers lead by
a pale-faced man named Mr. Head (Richard O'Brien) while peacing together
the story.
Dark City is a technically well made film. Proyas along with
cinematographer Dariusz Wolski, composer Trevor Jones, and the art and
set direction teams have created a very interesting world for the
activities to exist in. Towering buildings and city streets are a marvel
to look at. The script by Proyas, Lem Dobbs, and David S. Goyer is also
good and features a new suprise constantly. It plays out like a dark
comic book that was made picture by picture into a movie.
The cast does a fine job with Sutherland and Hurt being the standouts.
Sutherland has always been a sub-par actor in my mind with has
villianous turns in The Lost Boys and Freeway but in this film he plays
a not good, but not bad guy very well. He seems to be having fun gasping
for air constantly
just to sputter out fast dialogue. Hurt has always been a good actor and
he is a great choice as the inspector due to his charm and intelligence.
Almost all films that use visual effects extensively overuse them and
use them for stupid reasons. CGI is almost always just used to create
beasts or fake looking stunts but in Dark City it is used correctly. It
adds to the film very well and is a must have. The "tuning" scenes
highlight the greatness of the technology.
I do have a complaint with the film though. Jennifer Connely has never
been a good actress. She always plays a girl who every guy goggles at
and seems to just be eye candy. In this film she plays Murdoch's
girlfriend and I didn't feel that she was a character. She wasn't
interesting even though she had to be to pull off the character. She
looks out of place in an science fiction film.
With my complaint aside, Dark City is one of the better science fiction
to come out of Hollywood (actually the film was shot in Australia) while
other films are just gory space pictures. Proyas continues his streak of
comic book scripts that are put to screen that he started with The Crow
and I am anticipating his next book on film.

Title
Review for Vampires (1998)
Directed by John Carpenter. Written by Don Jakoby. Based on the novel
Vampire$ by John Steakley. Running time: 107 minutes. Rated R (for
strong vampire violence and gore, language and sexuality).
Vampires have been shown in movies through the years as blood-sucking
demons that prowl the night looking for a snack. The film's have ranged
from very good (Bram Stoker's Dracula) to just awful (Once Bitten).
Recently though, vampires have been very big. "Buffy, the Vampire
Slayer" is a huge TV hit and Blade did a bang-up job at the box office.
Now the most liked horror director has put his touch on the genre.
John Carpenter's Vampires is about Jack Crow (James Woods) who along
with a group of a dozen or so hunt down vampire nests. They use a
variety of automatic weapons (but they have to use a wooden stake also)
to beat up the vampires. They then use a pulley system to drag the vamps
into daylight which causes them to explode in a big fiery mess.
Jack Crow is your typical nonhero character. Carpenter has used this
character before in Escape from New York and Escape from L.A.. Crow is
so much like Kurt Russell's character in those two movies it makes you
wonder if Carpenter is losing originality. The only addition to the
character is that now he sounds like a Howard Stern wannabe. He drinks,
he swears, and he makes inappropriate conversations with priests.
After a tough day of work Crow and his team party at a nearby motel.
They are interrupted by a vampire named Valek (Thomas Ian Griffith), who
can't be hurt by automatic weapons or stakes, who brutally murders the
group. The only surviving members of the massacre are Crow, his right
hand man Montoya (Daniel Baldwin), and a hooker named Katrinia (Sheryl
Lee) who just happened to be at the party.
After Crow consults with his church "sponsors" who pay for the
destruction of the vampires, he finds out that Valek was the first
vampire ever. He plans to find a black cross and when he finds it he
will be able to create a new race of super vampires which can walk the
day. Katrinia, while at the party, was bitten by Valek before he took
out the rest of the group. She has 2 days before the vampire 'virus'
overcomes her. In these 2 days she is able to have a physic link with
Valek and is able to see what he sees. Crow and Montayo use this to stop
the evil vampire from destroying the world.
John Carpenter is one of the most well liked director's in the
horror/sci-fi/action genre. He has made such classics as Halloween and
The Thing (not 1951 version). His 70s and 80s collection of films have
developed a huge following by fans of the genre. Then the 90s came
around and his movies
went into the toilet. No J.C. film in the 90s has been worthwhile.
Vampires is quite a bit better than most of his productions of this
decade but that's not saying much.
What Carpenter was known for is the horror classic Halloween. In that
movie he relied heavily on tense music (which he almost always creates
himself) and wonderfully made scenes to the scare the heck out of
everyone. Although Halloween is a violent movie with a pretty high body
count, the film didn't rely on gore to create scary situations. Vampires
believes that if we see a vampire knock a priest's head off with bloody
results we are going to be scared. This is not true.
Another major complaint I have with the film though is the villain.
Valek just isn't that good of a villain. He's your tired old character
who is indestructible and will stop at nothing to rid the world of good
guys. He vanishes from the screen many times in this movie for 15
minutes sometimes. Then when he reappears he just kills a church member
who is in his way (seen mostly through psychic images in Katrinia's
mind) and then disappears.
Of course Vampires isn't all bad. Woods does a good job as the anti-hero
and will no doubt be well liked by Carpenter fans. The vampire hunting
sequences (which are suprisingly short and far apart) are cool. They are
brutal fights with machine guns firing everywhere and vampires erupting
in fire. Scenes of Crow burying his dead group members are great. I can
just barely recommend this movie to fans of John Carpenter or of violent
action/horror movies.
Vampires, had it been done more originally, could have been a great
horror film and one of Carpenter's best. But it is currently just a
mixed bag of a movie that supplies some quick small thrills and is
easily forgotten.

Title
Review for Amadeus (1984)
Directed by Milos Forman. Written by Peter Shaffer (based on his play).
Running time: 158 minutes. Rated PG (for language and sexual
references).
Amadeus is considered one of the best films of the 1980s. That decade
mostly developed Brat Pack films so there's no doubt that the epic film
would be one of the best. It made the American Film Institute's Top 100
List in the summer of 1998. Although it is not as good as some of the
films near the bottom or off the list it still deserves it's place in
cinema.
Antonio Salieri (F. Murray Abraham) is a struggling composer who has
worked hard to become great. Throughout his childhood he has seen a
little boy named Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. The young boy performed for
royalty. When Mozart grows up he is a giddy, over excited brat (played
now by Tom Hulce) who makes obscene comments to women and curses.
Salieri can't understand why God has chosen such a delinquent to pass
his music through. Salieri swears hatred on Mozart and the God who
raised him to his status.
The highlight of this movie is, of course, the music. John Strauss did
much of it but also included music by Mozart, Salieri, and Giovanni
Battista Pergolesi. The music is used beautifully in the many operas
that take place during the movie. Hulce and Abraham do a great job
acting during their many
scenes of conducting and piano playing.
Abraham and Hulce each were awarded Academy Award recognition which they
deserve. Abraham won Best Actor over Hulce, which isn't wrong because
two people can't win. Abraham plays Salieri with all the hatred he can
without becoming an evil character. He has no heart and just wants the
life that he thinks was taken from him as a brilliant composer.
Hulce does an excellent job as well as the eccentric Mozart. He is able
to act extremely serious during his compositions but then chase a woman
around a house. This was easily his best role to date. He is very well
cast with his young looking face and acting talent.
Director Milos Forman along with Cinematographer Miroslav Ondrícek and
the Art and Production Designers have created one beautiful movie. The
opera theater scenes, along with wonderful wigs, costumes, and makeup,
are a delight to watch. The use of scope is also very good.
Now to why I believe Amadeus to be less a film then the AFI makes it to
be. While I do really like many things about this movie I still have
some complaints. The movie is quite long at 158 minutes. The movie isn't
boring and is much shorter than other epics but it is still quite a long
time. A couple
of scenes could have been shortened and not have hurt the movie much.
With my complaint aside, I can still say that Amadeus was definitely one
of the better movies to come out in the 80s. I don't know if it's one of
100 best of all time but it is a very good movie.

Title
Review for Disturbing Behavior (1998)
Directed by David Nutter. Written by Scott Rosenberg. Running time: 83
minutes. Rated R (for strong violence, sexuality, language, and drug
content).
Disturbing Behavior is the newest teen horror film that desperately
tries to milk a little more money from the crowd that liked Scream and I
Know What You Did Last Summer. Disturbing Behavior doesn't hold a candle
to any of these films which in comparison deserve to be studied
thoroughly by film historians and placed on the AFI list.
The plot of Disturbing Behavior is so disgusting it's almost unbearable
to write it in the review. Steve Clark (James Marsden) and his family
move from Chicago to get away from the personal demons of an older son
who had committed suicide which we see in quick flashbacks. These quick
flashbacks
have absolutely no point and are only inserted to add gasoline to the
fire that will be created later in Steve's mind.
The family moves to a little fishing town called Cradle Bay which is
very reminiscent of the little fishing town the characters where
terrorized in I Know What You Did Last Summer. Of course we must go
through the 'I'm new here' scenes where Steve feels out of place. First
day of school rolls along and Steve is introduced to the gothic, stoned
teenagers Gavin Strick (Nick Stahl) and Rachel Wagner (Katie Holmes of
WB's "Dawson Creek") who he becomes friends with.
Gavin has a theory that something's up with the popular kids at Cradle
Bay High. They call themselves the Blue Ribbons. They are the jocks and
cheerleaders who have bake sales and blood drives annually. Gavin
witnesses a murder in an earlier scene and this starts his mind running.
He believes that
teachers and parents are mindwashing bad students to make everyone
perfect. None of his goth friends believe his story and claim he was
just "high". Could these parents be purifying the world? Who will be
there next victim? You can only guess. You won't need to think hard.
Well the next 40 minutes is devoted to chases and body counts. Each
scene is shot very dark with gloomy images and whispers everywhere. Blue
Ribbon members mutilate people in large populated areas and are not
noticed whatsoever.
Is this movie an entire lost cause. Almost. There is one character I
liked quite a bit. William Sadler does a good job as the school's
janitor who is looked on as the village idiot. Could he be more?
Probably. He seems to be having a good time and plays his part very
excited.
This horror film breaks a lot of the horror film rules that were defined
by the modern day classics like "Halloween" and "Scream". They think
that just showing a person being murdered is scary. What the above films
do well is play with your mind. They don't believe the gorier the
better.
"Hey! Producers! Leave us critics alone!"

Title
Review for Buffalo '66 (1998)
Directed by Vincent Gallo. Written by Gallo & Alison Bagnall. Running
time: 110 minutes. Rated R (for language, strong violent images and
scenes involving nudity).
What is Buffalo '66 supposed to be anyway? A romantic comedy? A troubled
family presentation? The 90s answer to Taxi Driver? Half the fun of this
movie is trying to figure it out for yourself.
Buffalo '66 is about Billy Brown (Vincent Gallo) who has been imprisoned
for 5 years and is finally let out. He has been lying to his parents
(Anjelica Huston, Ben Gazzara) saying that he was working for the
government and is married. He is asked by his parents to come over along
with his wife. He
thinks he has to our his parents will suspect that he is lying. He
kidnaps a twenty something girl named Layla (Christian Ricci) and uses
her as a fill in.
To relieve any more of the plot (much like Pulp Fiction) would be to
spoil the amazing second half. I'm sorry I can't help you out but you
just have to see the movie.
The film was no doubt constructed on a very small budget. It was a big
hit at the film festivals and it's easy to wonder why. It is a touching
and yet tough as nails representation of the life of a underprivileged
man with a horrible family that cares more about football games then
about their son.
Vincent Gallo wrote, directed, starred, and constructed the excellent
soundtrack to this pet project. He shows greatness that hasn't been seen
since Quentin Tarantino debuted with Reservoir Dogs. Every scene is
fantastic in the storytelling. The images burn into your mind and stay
there forever. The story may sound simple but I didn't say a lot of it.
I'm not the spoiling type.
All members of the cast need to be congratulated on this project. Gallo
explodes into the film world with a beautiful script and acting talent.
Huston and Gazzara are perfectly cast as the two parents who are about
as a bad as they can get. Ricci is also very good as the girl who comes
to love Brown. She is quickly becoming one of the best actresses around.
It's a pity that Buffalo '66 wasn't given a wider release in it's
theatrical run. It would have locked into viewers like the Tarantino
films or like Trainspotting did. Now that the film is out on video it
gives a much easier opportunity for regular film fans to check out this
great movie. Buffalo '66 is easily one of the best movies of 1998 and
should be seen.

Title
Review for Blast from the Past (1999)
Directed by Hugh Wilson. Written by Bill Kelly & Wilson. Running time:
106 minutes. Rated PG-13 (for brief language, sex and drug references).
Brendan Fraser has always seemed as a twenty-something actor who the
studios want to be their next vehicle. Early in his career studios
showered him with good roles. The career spawning School Ties was one
of his first big films. Later on he started to head downward. He made
films like Mrs.  Winterbourne and Airheads both of which bombed
critical and commercialy.  Fraser last couple of films have helped his
career a lot though. George of the Jungle was a huge hit and his
latest movie Blast From the Past deserves the same.
Blast From the Past starts out in 1962. We are introduced to the
Webber family which is made of the brilliant scientist Calvin
(Christopher Walken) and the housewife (Sissy Spacek) with her baby on
board. John F.  Kennedy releases his speech on the Soviet missiles in
Cuba aimed at the U.S. and Calvin knows what to do. You see he has
been secretly building a fall-out shelter under his lawn which is full
of all the needed resources (e.g. beef roast, roller skates,
Dr. Pepper). He takes his wife and unborn baby underground and waits
for the big boom. An airplane crashes into his house which he takes as
missile fire. He locks the fall-out shelter door and sets a timer for
35 years which he says would give the world enough time to be able to
support life again.
The baby son (cleverly named Adam) of the family is born underground
by Calvin and he lives a normal life only blocked off from the nuclear
world. Adam grows up into Brendan Fraser and on his 35th birthday he
makes a wish to meet a girl. His parents soon give him the chance and
this begins this fish-out-of-water.
Adam is amazed at how the world is since he has never been on the
surface. He meets up with a streetwise girl name Eve (Alica
Silverstone). Adam turns out to be a lady's man. While underground he
learned perfect manners, dance steps, and several languages. He uses
all of the above to woo Eve. Together the two get supplies for the
fall-out shelter and maybe Adam will meet the girl of his dreams.
Almost ever actor in Blast From the Past does a great job. Christopher
Walken has always been the psycho villain in almost all his movies and
I've never really developed a taste for him. This movie changed it. He
is funny and is a great choice as Calvin. Both Fraser and Silverstone
are both very good. I'm glad Silverstone found a good movie after her
disappointing films Excess Baggage and Batman and Robin.
Blast From the Past is unexpectedly a very well produced movie. It has
a good script by Bill Kelly and Wilson with funny lines and clever
scenes.  Also I'd like to highly praise the set decorator, Michael
Taylor, who makes each shot look great. A nostalgic nightclub The 40s
which Adam and Eve go to is beautifully constructed. It reminded me a
lot of The Mask with it's great design of the nightclub.
Blast From the Past is almost without cliché. EVERYONE knows that
at the end Adam and Eve are going to get together and Eve will find
out about Adam's underground family. The ending 20 minutes in which
this happens is unexpectedly slow and doesn't provide any effective
laughs. It's basically just used to finish off the movie. It really
set me off course.
Of course the ending doesn't take away from the earlier 80 minutes
which show how to make a good romantic comedy for the teenage set. The
studio that made Blast also made last year's underrated The Wedding
Singer have hit a way to make a smart and goofy romantic comedy that
pleases audiences. I hope they continue their tradition in the future.

Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
Hello everyone. This is my first review posting on the
rec.arts.movies.reviews newsgroup. Please give me any criticism you
have. Thank you and enjoy my review of...
Directed by Joe Johnston. Screenplay by Lewis Colick (based on book by
Homer J. Hickam Jr.). Running time: 108 minutes. Rated PG (for language,
brief teen sensuality and alcohol use, and for some thematic elements)
October Sky is a great movie. It's family friendly, grandparent
friendly, and it's a film you can recommend to almost any aged
person. It funny, touching, and a great made film.
October Sky is the true story of Homer Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) who is
interested in rocketry after watching the Russian spacecraft Sputnik
fly through the "October Sky" over his small town in West Virginia. He
starts making plans which his friends Roy Lee (William Lee Scott) and
O'Dell (Chad Lindberg) to make a small rocket that will, hopefully,
fly.  They find they need more help with the technical elements of the
rocket building so they ask for help from the neighborhood smart kid
Quentin (Chris Owen). Together the four start a journey that will
hopefully get them out of the small mining town they live in.
Homer's father John (Chris Cooper) is the town's best miner and
expects his son to continue his tradition. So Homer has many scenes
that are tense with his father. Homer's teacher Ms. Riley (Laura Dern)
encourages him to make a great rocket and to get out the town on a
scholarship.  Both are storylines that play along with the boy's
journey.
Director Joe Johnston who has made great films before, like Field of
Dreams, puts a great feeling into this film. He doesn't overuse or
underuse a character through the whole film. Homer is the main
character but he doesn't steal screentime from any of his friends or
family. I have a feeling this project meant a lot to Johnston because
this type of film would probably be through into made for TV territory
without the great screenplay by Lewis Colick and Johnston's big
status.
Many will complain that this is film is full of cliches and plays with
the storyline like a well produced made for TV movie. I thought of
October Sky cliches as if they weren't there then it wouldn't be quite
as enjoyable. If Homer and friends failed and ended up wasting the
rest of their lives in the mine breathing in the black smoke then it
wouldn't a good movie would it? Also this is based on a true story so
we know this is humanly possible for these teen's to pull off what
they did.
My only complaint with this film is that it came out way too early in
the year. Come the 2000 Academy Awards (it feels very weird saying
that) it will be forgotten by many the nominators. This film should be
nominated a couple of times. The cinematogery is beautiful taking full
advantage of the surroundings of the small town. The acting is top
notch and I'd love to see Gyllenhaal, Cooper, and Dern get the
nomiantions they deserve.
How about that Gylenhaal. A unknown to me has shown a type of charm
and great acting I haven't seen since River Phoenix. Pray he doesn't
end up making teen horror films in the future. I can't wait to see his
next film though.
October Sky is a film that will inspire kids and teens to make
something great out of their lives. I'm not saying they will go out
and build rockets but I am saying that this is a film they will
remember when time to choose a job comes around.

Title
Review for American History X (1998)
Directed by Tony Kaye. Written by David McKenna. Running time: 117
minutes. Rated R (for graphic brutal violence including rape, pervasive
language, strong sexuality and nudity).
Racism is a horrible thing that has not been really put to film
much. A few films stick in my mind as anti-racist but most films that
stand up for other religions. Schindler's List was the last great
anti-racism film.  American History X is the newest.
Derek Vinyard has had a tormented life. His father was murdered while
he was a teenager and Derek's life changed completely. He became the
leader of a Nazi group in Venice Beach, California. After a horrible
crime is committed Derek is sent to prison. He leaves with him his
mother Doris (Beverly D'Angelo), his sister Davina (Jennifer Lien),
and his younger brother Danny (Edward Furlong)
Years later when Derek is let out of prison he comes to see a shaved
head Nazi Danny. Derek has been reformed the hardness of prison and he
is shocked at how evil Danny has become. He tries desparately to
change his younger brother. He shocks his former friends with his
reformed self and this sets off a night long adventure of running and
trying to set things right.
Edward Norton gives the performance of his career as Derek. Flashback
scenes show him musclebound, which is not like his tall and skinny
self, which Norton pulls off the know-how many veteran actors don't
reach. He conveys the evil that is rippling in every tattooed muscle
in flashbacks and a older brother approach for his present day scenes
out of prison. Edward Furlong also does a great job as Danny who is
titering between good and evil when Derek gets out of prison. He still
looks as he did in his debut Terminator 2: Judgement Day but he can
act a lot more now.
Director Tony Kaye, who's only past credits were commericals, was not
happy with the final print. He claims Edward Norton took over the film
and made a lot of cuts. If he did than he should be actor and editor
for the next movie. Kaye is very good in his debut doing both
directing and cinematographing. I don't know how much was Kaye's
original product but maybe we will see his cut on DVD as a director's
cut in the future. The current cut is good enough for me though.
This film is brutal. The Nazi scenes are violent, bloody, and hateful
as are the prison scenes. The flashbacks of Derek's past in prison and
as leader of the Venice Beach groups are all filmed in black and white
much like Schindler's List. I'm not exactly sure why Kaye decided to
film the flashbacks like this but it doesn't effect the flow of the
movie.
Some complaints I've heard about this film are mostly script
related. I can't find anything wrong with David McKenna's script. My
only complaint is that the film is awfully short. This lessens the
epic or classic feeling a film like this usually has. That's a very
small complaint though and doesn't change my rating much.
I've heard a lot of horrible racist stories in my life. Thank God I've
never had to experience any though. I grew up hearing stories about
how my ancestors who lived along the Civil War times and as recently
as their teens in the 1950s and 1960s. The stories are sickening and
shock you into not creating stories of your own. American History X
feels just like one of these stories only we actually get to see the
carnage.
Doug Galecawitz from Darien, Illinois wrote into the Internet Movie
Database (www.imdb.com) and posted a review to this film. He typed in
it that he saw American History X with his friend who had been a Nazi
and a raccist before. Doug says his friend hung his head in shame
while walking out of this movie. This film will scare both current
Nazis and people who want to be Nazis into a life of happiness. This
is the kind of film that should be mandatory viewing for high
schoolers. No school violence or discrimination would be fantastic.

Title
Review for Buffalo '66 (1998)
Directed by Vincent Gallo. Written by Gallo & Alison Bagnall. Running
time: 110 minutes. Rated R (for language, strong violent images and
scenes involving nudity).
What is Buffalo '66 supposed to be anyway? A romantic comedy? A troubled
family presentation? The 90s answer to Taxi Driver? Half the fun of this
movie is trying to figure it out for yourself.
Buffalo '66 is about Billy Brown (Vincent Gallo) who has been imprisoned
for 5 years and is finally let out. He has been lying to his parents
(Anjelica Huston, Ben Gazzara) saying that he was working for the
government and is married. He is asked by his parents to come over along
with his wife. He
thinks he has to our his parents will suspect that he is lying. He
kidnaps a twenty something girl named Layla (Christian Ricci) and uses
her as a fill in.
To relieve any more of the plot (much like Pulp Fiction) would be to
spoil the amazing second half. I'm sorry I can't help you out but you
just have to see the movie.
The film was no doubt constructed on a very small budget. It was a big
hit at the film festivals and it's easy to wonder why. It is a touching
and yet tough as nails representation of the life of a underprivileged
man with a horrible family that cares more about football games then
about their son.
Vincent Gallo wrote, directed, starred, and constructed the excellent
soundtrack to this pet project. He shows greatness that hasn't been seen
since Quentin Tarantino debuted with Reservoir Dogs. Every scene is
fantastic in the storytelling. The images burn into your mind and stay
there forever. The
story may sound simple but I didn't say a lot of it. I'm not the
spoiling type.
All members of the cast need to be congratulated on this project. Gallo
explodes into the film world with a beautiful script and acting talent.
Huston and Gazzara are perfectly cast as the two parents who are about
as a bad as they can get. Ricci is also very good as the girl who comes
to love Brown.
She is quickly becoming one of the best actresses around.
It's a pity that Buffalo '66 wasn't given a wider release in it's
theatrical run. It would have locked into viewers like the Tarantino
films or like Trainspotting did. Now that the film is out on video it
gives a much easier opportunity for regular film fans to check out this
great movie. Buffalo '66 is easily one of the best movies of 1998 and
should be seen.

Title
Review for Gone with the Wind (1939)
Directed by Victor Fleming. Written by Sidney Howard. Based on the novel
by Margaret Mitchell. Running time: 222 minutes. Rated G (although does
contain war-time violence, and sexual references).
Gone with the Wind is one of the best films ever made. I have not met a
intelligent person who hasn't liked this movie. Ted Turner has decided
to remaster this classic for it's 60th anniversary. He cleaned up the
picture and sound so that a new generation of people can enjoy this
perfect movie.
Gone with the Wind is a soap-operaish epic taking place around the time
of the Civil War with the classic character Scarlett O'Hara (Vivien
Leigh). Scarlett is the most sought after woman in all Georgia and she
teases men and makes them do what she wants. She was born into a family
that owns a large cotton plantation called Tara. Her father Gerald
O'Hara (Thomas Mitchell) expects his daughter to continue work on the
plantation after he's passed. This is not Scarlett's intent and she
would rather woo a rich beau.
Scarlett is shocked to find that a man, Ashley Wilkes (Leslie Howard),
is not completely in love with her. He is instead engaged to be married
the kind and gentle Melanie Hamilition (Olivia de Havilland). Scarlett
loves him, at least she thinks she loves him. She sets out to make
Ashley in love with her.
At a town party a rich playboy named Rhett Butler (Clark Gable) makes
his way into town for a political meeting having to do with the
possibility of war. Scarlett is interested in this poker playing
handsome man but still wants Ashley. Rhett finds out about her obsession
and lightens the movie with some humor about how she acts so whiny about
the situation.
When confronted by Scarlett, Ashley says he does love her but won't
leave Melainie for her. The Civil War breaks and Scarlett is shocked by
how Ashley wants to leave. Ashley leaves and this begins Scarlett's mad
quest for him which blocks the fact that she actually loves Rhett.
This is the poorest plot to talk about. The almost 4 hour movie is so
long and complex that it would take me about 15 paragraphs to just start
the review. I only usually write 2-4 paragraphs for plot to save room
for the review. This is the perfect movie to save room for.
This movie is one of the longest films ever made. It's beautiful, full
color images entranced audiences in 1939 and still do today. In inflated
terms, Gone with the Wind is the highest grossing film of all time by a
long shot. It makes much more than Titanic. Compare the $0.40 it would
cost to see Gone
with the $6.50 who would pay to see Titanic and you will know why it
beats the so-called largest grossing film of all time.
After 60 years the film still stays remarkable. The vast shots of war
victims and of the burning of Atlanta are some of the best ever and
don't show age. Some of the blue screened shots, such as one with
Scarlett in Rhett's carriage, do show their age but it's amazing the
special effects still look great after 60 years. Let's see how Jurassic
Park fares around 2055.
The acting in this film is the just plain perfect. Leigh is wonderfully
cast as Scarlett and plays the whiny women great. Gable is the standout
of the show though in this Oscar-snubbed performance. He shows in the
last hour some of the best acting that has ever been attempted by an
actor.
Director Victor Fleming has created one of the most perfect films ever
made. It still stands as a wonderful production of romance, action, and
self righteousness.

Title
Review for Bronx Tale, A (1993)
Directed by Robert De Niro. Written by Chazz Palminteri (based on his
play). Running time: 122 minutes. Rated R (for language and scenes
containing violence).
A Bronx Tale reminds me a lot of Goodfellas. It stars Robert De Niro who
also directed. It also has a cameo by Joe Pesci. I thought I even saw
Martin Scorsece as a priest at a confessional. I began to think that
this movie took it's style and grace from Goodfellas. Then it hit me
that it reminded me of
Goodfellas because A Bronx Tale is almost as great.
Lorenzo (Robert De Niro) is a working man. He has a city job as a bus
driver and makes enough to let his wife and son live well in an
apartment in the Bronx. He never got in the popular gangster business
that ruled the area. The apartment he lives in in near a busy bar that
is home to many of these
gangsters. He tells his 9 year old son Calogero (Francis Capra) to never
go in there and to stay on his stoop in front of the complex.
In a discussion earlier Lorenzo talked to his son about talent. Calogero
asks him who was the best baseball player of all time. Lorenzo tells him
it was Joey D(iMaggio) because he has class and talent. Calogero asks if
he has any talent. Lorenzo says that he has all the talent in the world
and just needs to
use it wisely.
Calogero witnesses a shooting while sitting on the stoop commited by the
local main gangster Sonny (Chazz Palminteri who also wrote the script).
When confronted by a police officer who is shown a line of suspects and
asked who shot. The lineup consists of some of the workers and some
gansters who were the bar. Sonny is in the lineup. Calogero walks past
the line saying that none of the men commited the murder.
Lorenzo takes him upstairs to get him ready for bed. Calogero asks his
father if he did the right thing. Lorenzo says "You did a very good
thing for a very bad man."
Cut to the late 60s. Calogero (now nicknamed C by Sonny and played by
Lillo Brancato) now is 17 years old and one of Sonny's "men". Lorenzo is
shocked that his son has not listened to anything he has said through
the years. C now has become everything Lorenzo hates. A gangster who
wants
his money the second he asks.
A Bronx Tale is actor Robert De Niro first directed film. He does a
great job directing himself and others. Some of the scenes such as a
fight in the bar are very nicely edited and staged to music that sets
the mood. Palmenteri also does a great job as Sonny and is both
frightening and fatherlike in the same instant. Lillo Brancato is a
great find and plays his part very well. He is a charming young actor
who I hope has a good career.
The film is also suprising funny. It is probably the most upbeat ganster
picture if you don't count Jonny Dangerously (which I don't). There is a
great scene in the first 20 minutes where C narrates the people young
Calogero meets in the bar. Some has nicknames like Coffeecake (the look
of that man's
face) and Whispers (everything's a secret to him).
The film ends suddenly and makes me ask for more. It is noticably very
short considering Goodfellas was about 20 minutes longer. Still A Bronx
Tale fills it's tight 2 hours with as much as it can. I wanted to spend
more time finding out what happens to C. I doubt a sequel will be made
but I'd still like to know.

Title
Review for Mummy, The (1999)
Directed and screenplay by Stephen Sommers. Running time: 120 minutes.
Rated PG-13 (for pervasive adventure violence and some partial nudity).
The Mummy is the first big movie to come out this summer. It follows the
summer movie formula to the last recipe (usually a bumbling idiot of a
sidekick) and offers up a fine appetizer for what is to come this
summer.
Loosely based on the 1930s classic The Mummy with Boris Karloff, the
1999 version burrows much more from the Indiana Jones films. Brendan
Fraser plays Rick O'Connell who is a gung-ho hero who is the only one
alive who knows the location of a secret land which may hold great
treasures. A kindly, if not accident prone, librarian Evelyn (Rachel
Weisz) finds a secret map and
key which may be related to the secret land. She along with her brother
Jonathan (John Hannah) get Rick out of an Egyptian prison and plan to go
searching for what Rachel wants the most, a lost book she has been
admiring for quite sometime that is of great importance (not to mention
made of pure
gold). Jonathan doesn't much mind the riches that are said to be there
either.
The three travel to a hidden temple where they find a book. Not the gold
book but the Book of the Dead. Rachel, being the fool she is, deciphers
the reading inside the book and reads them aloud. This causes an ancient
curse to awake from inside the temple. Imhotep (Arnold Vosloo) was a
ruler who was condemned to the worst punishment before electric chairs,
being mummified alive. The mummy Imhotep breaks from his casing and
after he has regenerated he will try to bring his dead lover back to
life using a sacrifice. So Rick, Rachel, and Jonathan along with a team
of treasure hunters who just happened to be looking for treasure too try
to survive the mummy's curse
Industrial Light and Magic has provided some of the best visual effects
of recent years and they continue to with The Mummy. ILM turned actor
Vosloo into the living dead with amazing results. I can't wait until a
director decides to make a zombie film using today's technology. They
also create some great images using sandstorms and plagues.
The actors seem to have a fun time. Fraser seems well placed as the hero
and delivers the typical one-liners very well. Vosloo probably deserves
the most credit though. He delivers his lines with such gusto it is fun.
It's also cool since he probably had to talk to the effects people
before making any movements. Weisz seems a bit out of place but still is
good and delivers some good bumbling comic relief.
The one thing I would tell anyone planning to see The Mummy (which is a
good idea) is that is dumb. I'm not saying I didn't like it but the
movie is predictable. You can tell when jump scenes are going to occur
or when a character is going to "buy it". The movie is very fun though.
Much like an update of the classic monster movies of the past.
I would recommend The Mummy to most anyone who likes a fun movie that
will give them something fun to do for 2 hours. Teens will lap it up but
I wouldn't take the little ones to this picture. The decaying Imhotep
and the massive visuals may leave them with nightmares. Go into the
movie with an open mind and think of all the cheesy but fun monster
movies of earlier that you loved as a kid and secretly love to this day.

Title
Review for Analyze This (1999)
Directed by Harold Ramis. Written by Peter Tolan, Ramis & Ken Lonergan.
Running time: 106 minutes. Rated R (for language, a scene of sexuality
and some violence).
Analyze This stars Robert De Niro and Chazz Palminteri who have both
used up a good amount of their film careers playing mobsters. It just
seems to be the characters they are offered. This time around they get
to put a little satire into the mix to produce one funny mobster
picture.
Ben Sobol (Billy Crystal) is a psychiatrist who is having a tough time
in life. He can't stand how pathetic and uninteresting the people who
come to his office are. His son spends all his time listening in on his
conferences with the patients also. The only bright spot in his life is
his upcoming marriage to his girlfriend Laura (Lisa Kudrow).
Don Paul Vitti (Robert De Niro) is also having a tough time. He is
having problems with anxiety attacks and crying at sappy TV commercials.
This is horrible because people can't be afraid of a crying mobster. He
calls upon Ben to cure him. This messes up Ben's wedding plans and turns
his life
upside down.
Robert De Niro does a wonderful job playing his usual mobster character
with a twist. His crying scenes caught me very off guard and got quite a
few laughs. Billy Crystal also does a good job and redeems himself after
My Giant and City Slickers 2: The Search For Curly's Gold.
Director/Co-Writer Harold Ramis does a fine job highlighting many scenes
and not over doing them. He has done this before with the very good
pictures Groundhog Day and Caddyshack. Other directors would have
overused the comedy or gangster parts of the movie and seem lopsided,
but Ramis balances them very well. The pacing of the film is also very
well done and the film is over before you know it.
The film does however overuse a couple of scenes dealing with the FBI
trying to track down Vitti. This type of sub-plot has been used over and
over again for a long time. Also the film, although has a good many
solid laughs, isn't hysterically funny like Ramis past pictures. Maybe
it was hard to make
more fun of the mobster business though.
Analyze This is a fine comedy that, although a little predictable at
times, does offer some comedy greats teaming together and is quite
enjoyable.
