Authors
Paul Haynes
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Metro (1997)
Metro   *  *  *   (Out of Four)
R, 1997, 122m.  Filmed in Panavision.  Distributed by Beuna Vista.
Like a good action film should, "Metro" has action that keeps you
involved.  Some action films have action sequences that are so
conventional, our attention is detracted and diverted by other thoughts. 
"The Ghost in the Darkness," which opened a few months ago, is a film that
s action was so bland and uninvolving, it not only invited my thoughts to
divert me, it nearly put me asleep.  But "Metro" is one of the best action
films in a while.  It is hip, sharp, nifty, and has nice little pieces of
suspense and comedy.
Eddie Murphy was in bad shape for a while.  And this invites me to mention
last year s "The Nutty Professor," which was his blessed revival back to
the position at which he used to be.  "Metro" happens to be a lot better
than any film in the "Beverly Hills Cop" series.  That is because "Metro"
takes itself seriously, but doesn t prevent itself from having a little
fun.  Eddie Murphy is at his best in the roles of responsible, and
controlled people.  The "Beverly Hills Cop" movies all featured Eddie as a
reckless, wild cop, always crossing the line by just an inch.  In "Metro"
he plays a hostage negotiator, so negotiation is his job, not his hobby or
his preferred way out of trouble.  His character in "Metro" takes himself
seriously.  Eddie Murphy s mischievous trademark grin is hardly anywhere
to be found in "Metro," and perhaps it is quite better off that way.
Murphy plays Scott Roper, and as I previously mentioned, he is a San
Francisco hostage negotiator.  In the first tense situation in the film,
we are introduced to Roper s kind of work, as he tries to calm down a
confused, unkempt young criminal who has taken captive the entire capacity
of the San Francisco bank he is holding up.  Murphy handles the scene
seriously, without his usual happy-go-lucky, misfit humor.
The film develops when its villain is established, and the villain here is
the beguiling Michael Korda, a jewel thief, and murderer who likes to let
cops know of his hostage fatalities by giving them the ear of the victim.
"Metro" takes different twists and slight turns, and there is one great,
virtuoso chase scene, involving the a cable car.  Cars flip.  Cars crash. 
Cars turn over.  And it is done so good in this film, I was reminded of
"Speed," and the speeding bus that couldn t go under fifty mile per hour
for very significant reasons.  There are also some other good scenes in
"Metro" that a lot of films would rather choose not to have.  Scenes like
the one with Roper and his new partner are at the horse track Roper is a
gambler who knows all the tricks and Roper teaches his partner a few
little methods of betting and winning.  Of course, the writers tried to
disguise the scene as being insignificant by having Roper draw parallels
between Hostage Negotiation and gambling.  The scenes between Roper and
his girlfriend are nice, too.  Those are the scenes that make up "Metro,"
which is mainly about Eddie Murphy s maturing as a personality.
The actor that I most enjoyed seeing in "Metro" was Michael Rapaport, who
plays Roper s new partner, a lip-reading, book-skimming genius, and a
master of observation.  It was not the actor s presence that pleased me as
much as the role he was cast in the role of a proclaimed genius.  Rapaport
is an actor who I usually see in the role of the dimwit the really, really
dopey dimwit.  I hardly recognized him in "Metro," and it was quite a joy
to be able to see him in a role like this I feel that I respect him more.
There are two main types of villains in movies like this: the ones that
are part of the story, and the ones that are devices.  The villain in
"Metro" is no more than a device, but he is a darn good villain
nonetheless.  He is played by Michael Wincott, whose voice is pushed out
in a abraded rasp, as if he smokes a cigarette between every take. 
Wincott makes his villain, Korda, as mean as could be, the classic type of
villain who would push an old lady down a flight of stairs just for kicks,
like Richard Widmark in "Kiss of Death."  And, in addition, Wincott s
physical appearance and mannerisms, in the film, actually reminded my of
an arrogant friend I use to have, who is no longer on my good list.
I liked "Metro," and I do not think would have worked with any other actor
but Eddie Murphy.  His past roles were the great ones but they were also a
precursor to the maturing that would later take place, possibly from
Murphy s growing as a person, now having a family.  "Metro" is a
no-nonsense movie.  It works as a buddy movie, which it does not overplay.
 It works as a dry comedy, which it does not overplay.  It works as a
suspense film, which it does not overplay.  And it works as an action
film, where it does have a tendency to occasionally go all-out.  But who
cares?  It still remains serious, and it does not overdo itself.  Oh, and
there were plenty of explosions in "Metro," as well.  How nice it was of
the filmmakers to give us those.  
If there is one major objection I had to "Metro", it was the length, an
area where a lot of action films seem to wear out their welcomes.  "Metro"
is a film that lasted a little too long, but it was still entertaining,
and it gave me something to do while I waited for it to end.
Paul Haynes


Title
Review for One Fine Day (1996)
"One Fine Day" is yet another romanctic comedy in the "Sleepless in
Seattle" vein.  It has two people in love, two cute kids, and jobs that
are just too much for an ordinary person to handle.  But, "One Fine Day"
is a film that is rather hostile.
Michelle Pfieffer and George Clooney play the title characters, and they
meet when taking their kids to school, one fine morning.  They are
amazingly hostile towards one another, which of course means, in movies
like this, that they are in love.
Pfieffer's character, Melanie Parker, is an archictect.  I never knew that
being and architect was as stressful as it is portrayed in this film.
Clooney's character, Jack Taylor, is a columnist for a New York newspaper.
 I never would have guessed that being a newspaper columnist was as
exciting as it is portrayed in this film.  What I think the film tries to
do is take all of the stress involved with being a single, working parent,
and cram it all into one fine day.  It seems that the tension is
amplified.
The main problem for both of them is that they have to spend the day with
their kids; both are divorced.  And there are no available babysitters, as
neither of them have a nanny.  So, their fine day becomes "take your kids
to work day," as they switch kids, switch cell phones, and switch hostile
dialogue, all the while one contrivance after another is played out before
our very eyes.  These are the type of contrivances that invites everyone
to the edge of their seat, as they hope that things will go okay for the
protagonist.
"One Fine Day" is not a boring film, and it is not a bad film.  But its
sweet and mushy tone tries to numb us from the convention, which therefore
*is* the film's tone, and its dialogue.  The two main characters, Parker
and Taylor, are always arguing and remain reluctant to deal with their
emotions toward each other, as if their jobs have made them cynical and
sheltered.  But, "Jerry Maguire" is a much better film about people whose
jobs interfere with their lives, and it plays itself out with realistic
observations; "One Fine Day" is played for quick, cheap laughs, and
temporary gasps.  For example, all of the scenes where the cute little boy
keeps spilling things on his mommy's work clothes, when Mommy has
important presentations to give, most of which seem like shabby little
get-togethers and meetings where she must impress someone who is easily
impressed.  A lot of the film's early humor consists of the character
saying one thing, and then, in irony, the opposite has to be done.
I saw a paralell in this film between the growing relationship of the two
adults, and the relationship of the two six-year old children.  Both
consist of a lot of insignificant arguing, and bickering, while you get
the sense that it is being done to cover the emotions that are really
there, but not being dealt with out of fear and cynicism.  George
Clooney's character seems to be a kid in an adult's body, and he was
totally unconvincing as a man who happens to be a writer.  In the film,
the occupation of its characters are simply plot devices to present some
kind of urgency and delima, to keep the film at a fast pace.
"One Fine Day" is like a romanticised "Home Alone" for adults.  Its
fast-paced, and full of clever, yet cheap little traps, some of which I
admit I enjoyed.  But the detachment of both of the characters threw me
off, and it didn't seem as if either one was capable of holding a
conversation for more than five minutes.  The film is cute, but it is a
rather unromantic Romantic Comedy that has one fine day to lead up to one
fine romantic moment, which isn't as complete as it could have been.  Oh,
and it wasn't such a fine day after all; it rained.
