Authors
Robert FERGUSON)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Fisher King, The (1991)
     There are few directors working today who fully grasp the nature of
film as a visual media, and even fewer still who have a distinct  visual
style which is evident through-out their work.  Along with people like
Tim Burton, Peter Greenaway and Akira Kurosawa,  Terry Gilliam is one of
those directors, and his latest film,  THE FISHER KING, is certainly
evidence that his unique style remains a fundamental part of his
filmmaking.
     Gilliam's previous three films (TIME BANDITS, BRAZIL, and THE 
ADVENTURES OF BARON MUNCHAUSEN) formed a trilogy which dealt with the
nature and relationship of fantasy and reality.  THE FISHER KING also
touches on that theme, but at heart, it is a film about retribution and
redemption, in the most traditional senses: retribution for sin, and
redemption from evil.
     As you might gather from the title, the device about which the plot
revolves is a modern day retelling of the myth of the Fisher King and 
the Holy Grail.  While THE FISHER KING is not an overtly religious
movie, it *is* very concerned with morality -- the master-stroke of the
plot is that myth and everyday life gradually form a seemless blend, and
the dramatic force of the movie comes from these entwined elements.
     To go along with fascinating plot, there is the bizarre and
brilliant direction by Gilliam.  His use of strange camera angles and
odd lens choices work together to make the film create its own reality,
still recognizably our own, but somehow cast in a new light; however, it
is his flair for staging and spectacle that grabs you again and again.
There is a scene set in the heart of Grand Central Station in New York
that is the visual centerpiece of the movie, and is as perfect a bit of
filmmaking as I have ever seen.
     Jeff Bridges plays a shock-jock radio personality, whose fall from
grace is as sudden as it is deserved.  Robin Williams plays a crazed,
homeless man whose life is entwined with Bridges'.  Bridges gives a fine
performance, but Williams is excellent -- with this film, and his
performance in  AWAKENINGS, Williams has without question established
his credentials as a "serious" actor.  Reuhl and Plumber play the love
interests for Bridges' and Williams' characters, respectively, and they
both do an equally fine job.
     THE FISHER KING is a profoundly good movie.  It has good
performances, an intellectually and emotionally engrossing plot, a
distinctive visual style, and a patented Terry Gilliam monster.  What
more could you want?
[THE FISHER KING opens either this week or next "at theaters everywhere"
in the U.S. and Canada].
