Authors
John Strelow
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
The Truman Show (written by Andrew Niccol, directed by Peter Weir, 1998)
I have long waited for Jim Carrey to be perfectly cast, hoping I could
see some glimmer of what other people find entertaining in his rubber
face and foolish antics.  I had thought it would have been as the
Riddler in BATMAN FOREVER, inasmuch as the best actor to play the most
obnoxious of villains should be the most obnoxious of actors. 
Unfortunately, it worked only too well, as the Riddler was easily the
worst part of a film that disaster, a so-called film which probably had
the worst quality per dollar ever.  (And don't tell me BATMAN AND ROBIN,
so low in quality that it does not qualify as a movie.)  I couldn't even
bring myself to enjoy the scenes he had with Nicole Kidman, despite the
fact that Mrs. Cruise reigns supreme as My Favorite Woman.
     But the appealing part of THE TRUMAN SHOW was director Peter Weir,
a director with a soul which makes movies like DEAD POETS SOCIETY and
WITNESS better than they have any right to be.  I can just see studio
executives happily chomping on cigars, declaring, "We'll get Peter
Weir!", because after all, Weir directed Robin Williams in his first
dramatic role, forgetting that Williams by that time had more than
proven that he had something which has hitherto been lacking from
Carrey's work:  talent.
     Furthermore, Esquire's David Thomson had assured us that THE TRUMAN
SHOW was "the movie of the decade".  When David Thomson speaks, I
listen, and assume nine times out of ten that the opposite is true. 
Thomson has the inimitable quality of drowning his reviews in his
intelligence and candor, disguising the fact that he more often than not
cannot tell a good movie from a bad one.  But before one discounts a man
who says THE SEARCHRES is practically John Ford's only good film, that
THE SHINING is Kubrick's only, and that Brian DePalma hates his talent,
one must realize that when David Thomson is right, he is usually very
right.
     In the case of THE TRUMAN SHOW, he is almost right.  Just because
the film is not really the movie of the decade or even the movie of the
year does not mean that it is not an excellent film, for it is.  Flaws
are minor, while design and execution are near perfect.  Weir and
screenwriter Andrew Niccol (who made a similar yet less accomplished
film in last year's underappreciated GATTACA) have crafted a pristine
postmodern fantasy world with only a few holes, which do not become
obvious until consideration later.
     THE TRUMAN SHOW is at least the third film this year about an
elaborate con setup, following Alex Proyas' DARK CITY and David Mamet's
THE SPANISH PRISONER.  (One could argue for PRIMARY COLORS, but there is
little focus on the victims of the political con.)  Proyas' film serves
for a more direct comparison, as both films are about characters in
artificial world of which they become gradually more aware.  Both films
were created by soulful Australian directors (though Niccol hails from
New Zealand).  Both films also have the same failing, which is to say
the ending.  Though THE TRUMAN SHOW does not sink to the sappy humanism
of DARK CITY, the ending is forced, and capped by a line of dialogue for
which there is no need.
     THE TRUMAN SHOW is rightly less sinister than Mamet's film.  While
Mamet takes on the menacing idea that all people are acting and no one
is what they seem, Weir and Niccol show us that the postmodern age is
not necessarily sinister; it just is.  It is less sinister because a
sympathetic face is given to the manipulator:  the always solid Ed
Harris plays Truman's creator, Christof.  And just because THE TRUMAN
SHOW falls short of making a lasting impact on its audience does not
preclude it from being enjoyable.  The ending turns away from a
statement, a statement which the film indicates need be there and then
never provides.  Nonetheless, Weir and Niccol have taken great pleasure
in creating Truman's world, and its imaginative flourishes provide the
film's best moments.
     And what of Jim Carrey?  Though he may be awarded an Academy
nomination, reports of Best Actor have been greatly exaggerated.  Which
is not to say that he is bad, for in this film he is not.  A minor flaw
in the Truman Burbank persona is that though he is supposed to be the
most real figure in an artificial world, he is its most fantastic.  Yet
on most occasions, the Carrey on the screen is actually Truman Burbank.
Occasionally, as in the disastrous last line, he is actually playing Jim
Carrey.  But then again, that may be the point.  The film shirks when it
comes time for an answer, but at least it dares the question:  in the
postmodern world, who can tell the difference?

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
Armageddon (written by Jonathan Hensleigh and J.J. Abrams, directed by
Michael Bay, 1998)
When you look up "guilty pleasure" in the cinema encyclopedia, there is
a still from ARMAGEDDON.  You probably won't recognize the still,
however; Michael Bay and his editors cut images together so quickly that
this film may have more individual shots than any other feature ever
made (it's 2 1/2 hour running time adds to that).  ARMAGEDDON is
essentially a cross between the spectacle/disaster film made popular
from THE ROBE to THE TOWERING INFERNO to INDEPENDENCE DAY and the
over-baked melodrama of TITANIC, only without the former's stodginess
and latter's damning pretentiousness.  It's the type of film where most
plot twists don't make any sense (machine guns in space?  Hello?), where
characters are likely to say dumb things as much as possible, and
everything blows up real good.
     Adding to the guilt for some and to the pleasure for others is the
unabashed right-wing tendencies of your typical Jerry Bruckheimer
production.  Go back to CRIMSON TIDE (Tony Scott, 1995), THE ROCK (Bay,
1996), and CON AIR (Simon West, 1997).  It's all there:  respect for the
military, the necessity of family (notice how the Nic Cage character in
THE ROCK cannot get married until he has become a "man" by learning to
kill people to get the job done), and the occasional blatant homosexual
stereotype (thankfully left out of ARMAGEDDON).  Add in a twist of
self-sacrifice, a squeeze of loyalty, and two pinches of patriotism, and
you have your Jerry Bruckheimer production.  Bruce Willis even has a
delicious moment where he declares his crew should have a night with
their families, an "order" he gives while standing in front of the Stars
and Stripes.  The Family is America, and you better believe it.
     Bruckheimer has employed once again Michael Bay, who is very good
at blowing things up on camera.  Mix in excellent effects work, and you
have an action event movie that has some fun.  The first ten minutes of
the movie are worth the price of admission alone.  You've seen bits of
it in the trailer, but cut in with the film the scene is amazing, ending
with NASA's response, a cameo by the director, and Billy Bob Thornton.
     Aside from the special effects, the film's strength, and what makes
the film enjoyable, is the fact that the cast is on the whole
overqualified, and transcends a screenplay hindered by more than a few
cliches.  (Example:  the red wire or blue wire conundrum.  At the first
screening I saw of the film, a few weeks before release, some members of
the audience applauded after this conundrum's all-too predictable
conclusion.  Perhaps these people had never before seen a movie.)  Billy
Bob Thornton makes the commander cliches come off beautifully.  Bruce
Willis is by no means a Great Actor, but he is very good at what he
does, and nails the role of Harry Stamper.  Steve Buscemi gets to make
wisecracks.  Will Patton, meanwhile, easily gives the best performance
in the movie.  The ad campaign tells you that Patton's Chick is "doing
it for adventure", but he's really doing it for loyalty.  Patton
surpasses often clumsy dialogue, and his truest expressions of loyalty
and humanity are not expressed though spoken lines but through delicate
subtleties and nuances.  He shines in a beautiful scene in which he
visits his estranged wife and son, a scene which must have been the work
of uncredited script-doctor Robert Towne.
     The case works because it is well cast.  Bruce Willis is the action
hero.  Billy Bob Thornton is the credible actor in charge.  And what
else is Ben Affleck than the young hot shot who will one day be the
star?  And Liv Tyler than the overbred daughter?  Or Steve Buscemi than
the independent soul?  And is Chick any more loyal to Harry than Will
Patton was to Kevin Costner when he labored as a villain in the latter's
THE POSTMAN?
     The supporting members of the cast are not as well-filled out as
they have been in previous Bruckheimer productions (where are George
Dzundza, Michael Biehn, and Danny Trejo when we really need them?).  The
dialogue is often clunky and unoriginal; Thornton and Buscemi can make
these lines come off well, but when you have Liv Tyler, who makes good
lines sound bad, you know an underwritten script puts you in trouble.
     There is an ode to TITANIC in the overplayed romance between the
Affleck and Tyler characters.  Fortunately, the film does not suffer
from TITANIC's delusion that it is a Great Movie.  The cartoonish
aspects of TITANIC bring the film down from its intended pedestal to the
level of hackneyed melodrama with awesome ship-sinking spectacle. 
ARMAGEDDON wants nothing more than to be a hackneyed melodrama (in which
the cartoonish characters and dialogue belong) against which is set the
awesome spectacle where the entire planet is on the sinking ship.
     And spectacle is truly what ARMAGEDDON is about.  There is no room
for originality or daring thoughts, and no time for Great Cinema.  There
is time, 2 1/2 hours of time, for sheer spectacle, the brand of which
believes that big is good, bigger is better, and too much is best of
all.  The music, imagery, and effects are designed to be bigger than
life.  It's okay to take an afternoon or evening to see a movie that
doesn't make you think.  Every now and then, we need a movie that makes
us see and hear, and attach ourselves to archetypes instead of real
people, because real people can hurt too much.  Which means that every
now and then, we should take some time out for ARMAGEDDON.
