Authors
George Moore
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Package, The (1989)
     THE PACKAGE is one of the better political/spy/action movies I've seen in
a while.  Starring an impressive list of big-name stars (Gene Hackman, Joanna
Cassidy, Tommy Lee Jones, John Heard) it manages to remain suspenseful
throughout most of the movie without being overly predictable.  Some other
films of this genre tend to be easily figured out within the first half-hour of
the film.
     Army Master Sgt. Gallagher (Gene Hackman) is called upon to transport a
"package" -- Tommy Lee Jones -- from Germany back to the US for court
martial.  The Package escapes in JFK airport, which results in Hackman
uncovering an international plot to short-circuit world peace negotiations.
After enlisting the aid of his ex-wife, Lt. Colonel  Gallagher (Joanna
Cassidy) and a Chicago police detective (played by the same actor who played
Lt. Buntz on "Hill Street Blues."  Geez, he had the same suit, same
mannerisms, even some of the same lines.  Talk about typecasting), they are hot
on the trail of Tommy Lee Jones.
     The way in which The Evil Plot is presented is entirely believable.  There
are quite probably some military types in both the US and Russian armies who
would attempt something of this sort.  Even the spoken Russian is accurate,
something very few movies can lay claim to.  Gene Hackman plays ... well, he
plays Gene Hackman ... which is quite all right, since most everyone expects a
certain set of actions which Hackman is famous for.  The pacing is fine,
slowing down only a little when Joanna Cassidy is on screen.  My major gripe is
that Joanna Cassidy is never quite believable as a full Lt.  Colonel.  It seems
someone would need a lot of iron will and determination to achieve that rank,
and Cassidy with her high heels and hysterical screaming doesn't pull it off.
     This film is rated R, mainly for language and violence (although the body
count isn't high -- rating one pint o' blood on the Joe-Bob scale).  I would
rate it a high +2 on the -4 to +4 scale, mainly for lack of plot holes normally
found in these movies.  Go see it.
