Authors
Sarah M. Elkins
Number of Reviews
21

Title
Review for Gizli Yüz (1991)
GIZLI YUZ/THE SECRET FACE: (Contemporary World Cinema, Dir. Omar
Kavur, Turkey, 118 minutes, subtitled badly--quite annoying)
Plot kickoff: Supposedly beautiful woman hires photographer to shoot
people in bars.  She sees a picture of a watchmaker and obsesses over
him, spying on him and so on.
Characters/acting: Hysterical woman, the photographer just wanted to
sleep with her.  I did like the watchmaker.
Violence/language: I left before the ending to see WHITE PAGE, so maybe
there was some at the end.
Analysis: This movie thought it was about Something Important and I
just couldn't take it.
WHITE PAGE: (made in Cambodia recently, subtitled, about 2 hours, the
director spoke at the start; no information on this one was printed;
they decided to show this the day the information went to the printers
-- I guess they should have had a DocuTech!).
Plot kickoff: Woman arrives in Cambodia in the 1970s (I guess) with her
two children after her husband sends for them from Paris, and the woman
and children are put in a forced "re-education" camp.
Characters/acting: I didn't catch any names, but everyone turned in a
good job.
Cinematography/FX: Lush, lush, lush beautiful Cambodian countryside,
old temples/stoneworks, contrasted with the harshness and ugliness of
the prisoners' lives.  This would lose a lot on the small screen.
Score: I liked the traditional music, didn't notice the rest.
Violence/language: Very little physical force is shown on screen, but
plenty of degradation and humiliation of the prisoners by their
"teachers."  No gore, just made me angry and sad.  Some sexist
slurs/profanities.
Skin/situations: Some implied marital sex, one implied rape.
Analysis: Although parts of this movie may be familiar to anyone who's
seen THE KILLING FIELDS, I thought the portrayal of these women trying
to hold onto their identities and the main character trying to hold onto
her children's love was very well done.  I now want to read up on
Cambodia.  I particularly liked the ending of the movie.
KES: (Dir. Ken Loach, Great Britain, 107 minutes).  Another (compared
to WHITE PAGE) vision of Hell on Earth.
Plot: Boy growing up in squalid surroundings near the Yorkshire Moors
attempts to overcome his awful school and home life through training a
young falcon.
Characters/acting: I don't know any names.  Top-notch performances,
especially by the actors who play the boy and his hateful brother.
Thank goodness, the young boy is not shown as a charming waif with a
heart of gold.  This is a pale, remote boy who fights when he has to and
steals when he can, and has one thing and one thing only which lifts him
out of himself - his joy and utter fascination in watching the falcon
fly and come to him.
Violence/language: Fist fights mostly; a lot of language I wasn't sure
I heard right, but was pretty sure were profanities in a thick Yorkshire
accent.
Skin/situations: Naked (mostly back views) boys in the shower after
soccer.
Analysis: There was one subplot going on that I mostly didn't
understand, something about gambling.  This is a very powerful movie,
and not pleasant to watch most of the time.  If you can stand the
squalor and hatefulness, you'll get a lot out of it.  I'd like to see
other movies by Loach.
LE CIEL DE PARIS: (FC, Dir. Michel Bena, France, 90 min., subtitled),
some good scenes and charismatic acting;
Plot: Neurotic people trying to build love with people who aren't
interested in them.
Characters/acting: The riveting actress from MONSIEUR HIRE is back, and
this time she has a friend who is, if anything, more appealing.  They
have some very good scenes together, talking about life and hanging out.
Too bad the movie didn't concentrate on their friendship more and forget
about the men, one bi with a crush on one who's not, both manipulative
liars, both of whom I'd lost patience with by the end of the movie.
Violence/language: Stupid fist fight.
Skin/situations: One scene of heavy kissing.
Analysis: Unfortunately, unlike A LITTLE STIFF, this movie was
primarily unrelieved by humor.  The only couple of laughs were from
scenes between the women, except that the audience laughed at some of
the manipulative tricks the men used.

Title
Review for Lawnmower Man, The (1992)
THE LAWNMOWER MAN:  Combines some stock elements with the new idea of
virtual reality (VR) to make an enjoyable SF/action/horror flick.
PLOT/KICKOFF:  While on hiatus from his job with a military-oriented
research company involving the new technology of virtual reality
(cyberspace imaging, using computers to 'project' an interactive reality
to users), Dr. Larry Angelo (Pierce Brosnan) starts his own special
experiment to increase the intelligence of the man (Jeff Fahey?) who
mows his lawn.  Things start to go wrong as the experiment has
unexpected results and Angelo's company gets interested in the military
potential of the new line of research.
CHARACTERS/ACTING:  Brosnan is fine as the borderline-obsessed-with-his-
work scientist (not too interested in "informed consent"), and Fahey is
fine showing the transformation of the gradually-getting-smarter
lawnmower man.  Most of the rest of the characters don't have much
depth.  I wasn't sure until three-quarters of the movie was done whether
the blond woman was actually one or two different characters/actresses
(the answer is two).  However, all the characters who got involved in VR
did good jobs making those parts of the movie believable.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  I've seen bits on 20/20 and elsewhere showing the
use of virtual reality, but this movie had some of the longest segments
I've ever seen.  The segments were well-done, but none of them were
mind-blowing for me.  People who have not tried to keep up with what's
going on with VR, or who haven't seen much computer animation (from
recent animated film festivals, etc.) lately may find it amazing.  The
movie did pretty well at showing what the VR experience might be like
for people actually immersed in VR instead of those just watching it
on-screen.  The transition between ordinary and virtual reality was done
well in every case.  This is probably a better movie for big-screen than
small-screen viewing.
VIOLENCE/GORE:  Belt-whipping, some domestic violence, bullets flying,
implied violent death, bodies disassembling (VR, not gory).
LANGUAGE:  Some profanity, not extreme.
SKIN/SITUATIONS:  Some foreplay, dancing in the sheets, VR sex (not
graphic, pretty in its way).
ANALYSIS:  I understand this movie was loosely based on a Stephen King
short story (no virtual reality involved).  I haven't read it, so can't
comment on that aspect of the movie.  I enjoyed this movie, though not
as much as I had hoped to.  There really was not all that much original
to it except VR, but there were a few nice small touches in it.  One
thing I liked particularly was that this movie *showed* me what was going
on, instead of always *telling* me.  It did not patronize the audience.
Although some might argue with the believability of the side effects of
the VR research, I put that down to the "neurotropic drugs" and left it
at that.  I think it could have been a better movie, but it is probably
worth watching for people interested in VR and cyberpunk, and others who
want to check out the special effects.

Title
Review for Malice (1993)
     I have to compliment whoever made the TV ads for MALICE.  For
once, you get an accurate taste of the movie without the plot being
given away.  I would advise those intrigued by the ads to go ahead and
see it before reading a review which gives away more than mine -- even
reviewers like me who avoid giving spoilers without warning would be
hard-pressed to review MALICE without at least hinting at some of the
generous number of twists.
MALICE --  1993, original, complex thriller
PLOT/KICK-OFF:  A serial killer stalks a quiet college town.
Meanwhile, one of the college profs meets the new hotshot surgeon and
realizes that they knew each other in high school.  Meanwhile, his wife
suffers sharp abdominal pains from time to time.  What will be the
connections between these threads?  Not what I thought!
CHARACTERS/ACTING:  Alec Baldwin as the doctor, Bill Pullman as the
college professor, Nicole Kidman as his wife, Bebe Neuwirth (Lillian on
CHEERS) as the police detective.  With the exception of Bebe's valiant
attempt at some urban accent (Boston? Brooklyn? the Bronx? the fault
could be mine in simply not being familiar enough with the locale), the
acting is excellent, with a wide range demanded from Baldwin, Kidman,
and Pullman.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  Unobtrusive but sharp photography makes the cast
and scenery look beautiful, antiseptic, or gritty as the plot demands.
There's no one outstanding shot I can call to mind, but the look and
feel will suffer a bit on the small screen.
SCORE/SOUND:  Fine.  Some pop & rock, and "mood" music.
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  Operating room scenes are a bit bloody but not
the worst I've seen.  Some obscenities and bullets thrown around.  A
nasty close-range fight (heads slammed into walls, objects swung at and
hitting bodies).
SKIN/SITUATIONS:  If you saw NYPD BLUES's opening night, expect a
similar amount of female skin.  More of Alec Baldwin than has been
shown before, though various nekkid women on top of him (not at the
same time or even in the same evening) barely cover certain
essentials.
ANALYSIS:  The movie is not a let-down compared to the ads.  It is not
a standard "main-character-in-jeopardy" thriller, either.  There is one
plot twist which seemed unlikely to me, but I can't think how they
could have fixed it without major re-writes, and it wasn't major enough
to get in the way of my enjoying the movie.  The pacing is good, though
it demands a few leaps of intuition on some of the characters' parts
(rather than slower periods of discovery).  Most of the pleasure I got
from this movie was from the many twists, most of which I had not
guessed beforehand.  There were also, though, some nice moments of
character interaction not required for what could have been just a taut
thriller.  I liked the way events and characters were developed in this
movie.  With the names involved, I was a little afraid of it just being
a vehicle, but this movie was a pleasant surprise.
- Sarah Elkins (elkins.wbst139@xerox.com)

Title
Review for Sneakers (1992)
SNEAKERS: Action/"sting" movie, up-to-date with cryptology, hacking,
and the NSA; high-tech thefts and double-crosses, the good guys against
"the gummint," or is it really?  Or *is* it really?
Plot/kick-off: Marty, the head of a security consulting firm with a 60's
rebel/hacker past, is threatened with jail unless he helps the National
Security Agency (an actual US government agency, which does seem to have
been overstepping its bounds lately, initially charged with monitoring
and decoding any signal transmission relevant to the security of the
United States) steal a cryptologist mathematician's  "black box"
invention.  He enlists his firm's help to get it and more action results
from this.
Characters/acting: Robert Redford is believable as Marty.  Mary
McDonnell was good as Liz, Marty's ex-girlfriend who got tired of
Marty's "boys club" but gets dragged back into Marty's life when he
needs her help.  Dan Ackroyd was hilarious as "Mother," the phone phreak
who lives the Illuminati trilogy, perhaps a little too deeply
(conspiracy theories abound).  Sidney Poitier was a pleasure to see as
the ex-CIA man.  These players all seemed well into their parts, not
"look I'm Robert Redford" etc.  Unfortunately, Ben Kingsley and James
Earl Jones seemed a little bit over-the-top as the characters they
played.  Ben!  Stop playing these power-hungry smoothies and get back to
Pascali's Island!  James!  Stop these cameos and get a real role!  Oh.
Please excuse me for my outburst.  :-)
Score/Sound: good varied soundtrack, also good sound FX.
Violence/Gore: some bullets flying, a couple of dead bodies (no gore),
a few fights and slugs.
Skin/situations: innuendos, some kissing and foreplay.
Analysis: Great throwaway lines, good twists and turns,
edge-of-your-seat at times, but a little self-indulgent, especially at
the end (think TERMINATOR 2).  I feel like one final draft could have
ironed out some of the movie's flaws (a couple of inconsistencies, a
couple of doubtful scenarios, and the overplaying mentioned above), but
on the other hand I didn't think about most of them until the day after.
It was nice to see a movie take a crack at the NSA (anyone interested in
our right to privacy in communications should read "Decrypting the
Puzzle Palace," John Perry Barlow's analysis of the recent
behind-the-scenes actions and initiatives of the NSA, printed in
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM, June 1992 and reprinted in EFFECTOR ONLINE,
Issue 3.1, July 29, 1992).  Minor flaws and serious considerations of
our eroding rights aside, however, SNEAKERS was a fun movie with some
cool scenes/tricks to cheer at, certainly an enjoyable ride.

Title
Review for Tongues Untied (1991)
     I have seen "Tongues Untied" twice so far, once in a local
(Rochester NY) theater which shows foreign/independent/classic movies,
and once on our local public television station.  It is a film about
black gay male life, told in a poetic narrative style from the point of
view of people living the life.  I thought it was a moving film, funny
and intriguing in some places, sad and beautiful in others, and
potentially (not to me, but I can acknowledge the potential)
in-your-face offensive in a few places.  I thought the part with the
snap divas was a howler (loved that "sling snap"), and was fascinated to
watch the voguers dancing.  The format was a little hard to follow the
first time, but I still enjoyed the film, and it's even better the
second time.
     I did not like PARIS IS BURNING as much, though parts of it were
absorbing as well.  It is a documentary about mostly black gay male life
in Harlem at the drag balls, featuring sequences of drag balls and
interviews with voguers and "house" matriarchs.  "Tongues Untied"
reached more of my heart.  Perhaps that is because "Tongues Untied" is
told from several insiders' positions, as opposed to the
"observer/interview" mode of PARIS IS BURNING.  However, both of these
films have valuable insights.  As a white, heterosexual woman, I can
attest that these aren"t just "specialized audience" movies.  The mixed
audiences seemed to agree with me, judging from their reactions.

Title
Review for Naked Lunch (1991)
NAKED LUNCH: An examination of the creative process?  A spy story?  The
new, updated version of REEFER MADNESS?  Or just writer/director David
Cronenburg playing head games?  You decide.
PLOT/KICKOFF: Bill Lee, an ex-addict, ex-writer (?), turned bug
exterminator turned bug powder addict, has to flee the US to go to
Interzone, an Arabic-style refuge populated mainly by the Interzone boys
(hustlers) and giant talking cockroaches, centipedes, and creatures who
eject narcotics from tubes sticking out of their heads.  Or is most of
the action a hallucination?
CHARACTERS/ACTING: Peter Weller (ROBOCOP, BUCKAROO BANZAI) plays Bill
Lee in a low-key way.  His character reacts to the strangest of events
not with hysteria, but mostly with an air of taking it all in,
sponge-like, except when he's having drug reactions.  I found this
worked for the movie on all levels.  An excellent job.  Judy Davis
(IMPROMPTU) plays Joan, Bill's wife in the US and a pawn in Interzone in
a dry, zombie-like way which also worked for this movie.  I did like her
better in Impromptu, but that was a much more likable character, after
all.  Julian Sands plays the mysterious Yves.  I don't know who played
Joan's husband in Interzone (Ian Holm?), the Interzone boy Kiki (?)  or
the various bug voices.  A fine cast, all in all.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX: A tribute to this movie is that all the unbelievable
things going on in this movie didn't *look* unbelievable; they looked
like reality, not F/X.  There's a lot of ugliness in this movie.
VIOLENCE/GORE: bullet holes in bodies, drug injections, but the major
disgust factor was those bugs - gore when they're splattered, gore
during "sex," gore gore gore.  Much worse than THE FLY, IMHO.
LANGUAGE: very offensive language, and lots of homophobic slurs and talk
about them as being perverts, but I think considering the rest of the
movie we weren't supposed to take it any more seriously than the
spy-vs.-spy bugs.
SKIN/SITUATIONS: This movie was a turn-off for me.  Bug "sex" portrayed,
and it's not a pretty sight.  Yeah, some people have sex too.
Analysis: I understand this movie was sort of inspired by William S.
Burroughs' NAKED LUNCH.  I haven't read it, so can't comment on that
aspect of the movie.  As seen in the first section of my review, this
movie has several different levels and possible meanings.  Taken
separately, I don't think they hold up, but strangely enough as a whole
this movie *does* work.  However, yesterday my reaction of "Gross!
Yuck!  Ugh!" etc., still had the upper hand.  It took a couple of days
before I could get past that reaction, but now that I have, I liked much
about the movie, and only wish I'd paid more attention to some of the
lines in the movie (they may have been straight from the book),
particularly the ones about writers.  I don't want to give spoilers, and
I don't want to lecture on what I thought different parts of the movie
meant, but this movie did make me think about what makes a writer tick,
what drives them to write and why they sometimes have to be driven to do
so, what they may have to sacrifice, and how involved they should get
whatever they're writing about.  And surprisingly enough, parts of this
movie were very funny.

Title
Review for Grumpy Old Men (1993)
PLOT/KICK-OFF:  A free-spirited teacher moves in across the street from
two old guys with an old feud, inspiring them to woo her and play dirty
tricks on each other.  The plot is a little contrived in a few places.
CHARACTERS/ACTING: Jack Lemmon plays John Gustafson, a retired teacher
alone except for his daughter (Daryl Hannah) and nasty neighbor Max
(Walter Matthau).  John's relationship with his daughter is a bit
strained, but Max gets along fine with his son (Kevin Pollack), who
tries to keep the guys from getting out of hand while campaigning for
mayor.  Ann-Margaret plays Ariel, the new neighbor.
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  Some of the insults and sexual euphemisms are
a bit crude, but didn't seem out of character for those who said them.
One fight, but everyone's well-padded in winter clothes.
SKIN/SITUATIONS:   A kiss and Ann-Margaret in a leotard is the most we
see; more is suggested.
ANALYSIS:  The comedy in this movie is mostly, but not completely,
derived from the feud.  It ranges from insults to simple slapstick to
some tricks with clever set-ups.  Refreshingly, the movie doesn't
depend on a lot of pop-culture references to show how hip it is, and it
takes some time to develop its characters subtly instead of firing off
10 jokes a minute in the hopes that one will stick.  I'm a big fan of
Jack Lemmon so it's to be expected that I would like it as much as I
did  -- nice to see him in an entertaining comedy for once, instead of
all these deathly serious things he's done lately -- but my friend who
saw it with me is not a big fan and she laughed as much as I did.  If
you can roll your eyes to get past some of the crudities and
contrivances, you might enjoy this simple, unpretentious little
comedy.
- Sarah Elkins (elkins.wbst139@xerox.com)

Title
Review for Daughters of the Dust (1991)
DAUGHTERS OF THE DUST:        Produced in a 10-year labor of love by Julie Dash.
Highest recommendation.  Please go see it.  If you can't catch it on the
big screen, I noticed in the credits that American Playhouse helped
sponsor it, so it might pop up on public television sometime.
Plot/kick-off:        A black family which has been living pretty much in isolation
since the Civil War on Ibo Landing, an island off the coast of South
Carolina (near Kiawah and Edisto, for those who know the area) gathers
in 1902 for a last meal before leaving for the mainland.  Conflicts
between family members will be recognized by anyone who's felt the pain
of wanting to belong to something that's pulling itself apart.
Characters/acting:  Nana, the family matriarch, a "salt-water African"
(or a first-generation child?) who practices the old religion and wants
to stay on the island.  Her children, including the very Christian
Viola, who wants her to come to keep the family together, and Yellow
Mary, the richest of the family, outcast for being raped and becoming a
prostitute.  Nana's grandchildren, including Iona, who wants to stay
with St.  Julien Lastchild, the surviving Cherokee of the island
swamplands, and Eula, pregnant by either her husband or a white rapist.
There are other important characters whose names I didn't catch,
including a citified photographer, commissioned to capture on film the
family's last hours on the island.  I covet his photographs.
Cinematography/FX: Possibly the most uniquely beautiful movie I have
ever seen; certainly in my top 5.  From the gnarled trees with Spanish
moss to the water laying off the beach and shining in the tidal pools,
from the girls in their white cotton dresses running and dancing, to the
close-ups of conversations between Nana and her grandson-in-law in the
graveyard, and between Eula, Yellow Mary and Yellow Mary's friend:  the
deceptively simple episodes are layered together to make a rich, complex
masterpiece.
Score/Sound:  Not much sound, other than the voices in conversation and
sometimes in song; the background noise is formed by the water lapping
on the beach and the ever-present wind
Violence:  None, except the grandson-in-law's taking a board and
smashing up some of his grandmothers' religious symbols, in rage that
neither they nor he were able to protect his wife Eula from rape.
Language:  No profanities that I recall, but people who haven't heard
Gullah (the patois of English with Yoruba/Ibo intonation and grammar
spoken by blacks on islands off the Carolina mainland) before may take a
few moments getting adjusted to it before they can really follow what's
going on (subtitles in the beginning of the movie help), and there were
a few moments of speech which even I couldn't follow near the end, and I
heard Gullah off and on growing up and in college.
Analysis:  One of the best movies I have seen in years.  Maybe the best;
it will take me a while to absorb it, not that it can all be taken in at
one sitting.  Dash is a genius.  This is not some mundane
feel-good-and-forget-it flick, but there are moments which are --  I
can't express it in words without trivializing it -- uplifting,
cleansing, empowering.  It's like a series of poems, pictures and short
stories, interwoven in an outcircling spiral dance, with all parts
touching somehow.

Title
Review for Blade Runner (1982)
BLADE RUNNER--THE DIRECTOR'S CUT:  First there was David Lean's LAWRENCE
OF ARABIA, then Stanley Kubrick's SPARTACUS, and now Ridley Scott's
science fiction cult classic BLADE RUNNER has been restored to the
director's original vision of the movie and the new version released on
its own to theaters.  As with the previous version, it can be taken
simply as a stylish, futuristic detective/action flick, or an
exploration into what it is to be human (those interested in the latter
might also wish to read Philip K. Dick's DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC
SHEEP, on which both versions were based).
Plot/kick-off:        In the near future, some Nexus 6 replicants (sort of robots,
difficult to tell from humans) escape and try to hide in Earth's grimy
21st-century society while their leader, Roy Batty, looks for a way to
"live" past their predesigned life spans.  Deckard, a retired Nexus 6
hunter, is coerced into tracking them down to kill them.  Good pacing,
interesting detective work: contrary to the previous version, I was
able to follow the action this time, since more transition scenes were
included (it didn't seem random this time) and the annoying voice-over
narration was cut.  I'd rather be shown than told, and this version did
a much better job of that.
Characters/acting:  Harrison Ford plays Deckard, a beaten-down man who
doesn't like his job but doesn't seem to have much of a choice, and is
smart at what he does.  Rutger Hauer is weird but compelling as Roy, and
his last scene in the movie is amazing.  Sean Young is beautiful and
stiff as the beautiful and stiff Rachel, who is drawn to Deckard.
Others include Darryl Hannah and other replicants, and Edward James
Olmos as one of the other officers of the law.  Which characters are
really the more "human" ones?  You decide.
Cinematography/FX:  This movie is worth seeing for its cinematography
alone, especially on the big screen.  The city is futuristic not so much
through new fantastic technology (though there were aircars flying
through the city, sometimes the viewers "flew" with them around
buildings and giant TV billboards), but through the small changes in
everyday objects.  New scenes were added in of the city in the early
parts of the movie, which helped give more of a "feel" to get the viewer
into what was going on in the movie earlier.
Score/Sound:  Vangelis, synthesized, but also some sax, I liked it and
it fit the movie.
Violence/Gore:  Bullet holes in bodies, crushed heads, finger-breaking,
fights/shootings.  Pretty violent, but not a gorefest, no slow-mo fights
or lingering shots of gore.
Skin/situations:  Kissing, fairly short breast shot.
Analysis:  It's been at least a couple of years since I saw the previous
vision, but I thought this version was great, partly because it was my
first time seeing it on the big screen for either version.  Some people
might prefer the previous, slightly happier, version, but I think this
is the superior version.  I recommend it to fans of the old, and even
more to those who've never seen either version.

Title
Review for Patriot Games (1992)
PATRIOT GAMES: "prequel" to THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER; based on the novel
by Tom Clancy (which I have not read).
Plot/kick-off:        The kickoff was one of the most exciting parts of the movie to
me, so I'll skip it and just say Jack Ryan and his family become the
targets of an IRA splinter group of terrorists.  He enlists the aid of
the CIA for protection.
Characters/acting: very different from THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER.
Harrison Ford plays Ryan believably and with charm.  Anne Archer looks
beautifully vulnerable, but what with her similar roles in *Narrow
Margin* and *Fatal Attraction*, I could have used a new face or or maybe
more attention in the script for her jep role.  Patrick Bergen is
competent as the leader of the terrorists; I liked the actress who
played his terrorist girlfriend but didn't think her disguise made much
sense.  James Earle Jones was the only actor also in THE HUNT FOR RED
OCTOBER.
Cinematography/FX: A couple of good chase scenes; I thought the most
unique scene in the movie was the live satellite observation.
Score/Sound: didn't much notice, though I thought the music was familiar
(not from THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER; from some other movie/score).
Violence: Lots of bullets flying and some hitting; a few bloody faces;
not a lot of gore compared with many recent action movies
Skin/situations: one scene with a couple in bed, male nude mostly
covered by mostly-undressed female; not long or graphic
Analysis: decent thriller, no major flaws, but a bit predictable.  I
would have cut out most of the scenes from the terrorists' viewpoints,
and perhaps put in more of the analysis work that Ryan and the CIA must
have done.

Title
Review for My Own Private Idaho (1991)
MY OWN PRIVATE IDAHO:  "She took the story in like some strange, spiked
gift, too fragile to drop, too painful to hold."  - from Lois McMaster
Bujold's SHARDS OF HONOR
Plot kickoff: Two Portland teenagers - one is Mike (?) a pathetic
narcoleptic (River Phoenix), one is Scott Faber, a rich kid slumming
(Keanu Reeves) until his inheritance kicks in - hustle "dates" with men
and women in Portland, and set off on a road trip to Idaho and Italy to
find Mike's mom.
Characters/acting: outstanding.  Phoenix strips away all defenses,
playing a helpless, lonely kid who's become numb to his own despair.
Reeves plays a complex character, sometimes jaded, sometimes
compassionate, sometimes cruel, slipping in and out of his "Prince Hal"
mode effortlessly, and yet the same person underneath it all - but even
though he's engaging, he's also so remote that we never quite know who
that person is.  The other characters, Hans, the bizarre performance
artist, and Bob, the "king" of the other hustlers, also fit their roles
smoothly.
Cinematography/FX: Dreamlike scenes of Idaho - I don't know how they
got the clouds and sky to do what they did.  Wonderful.  Gritty scenes
of the street, still probably not as gritty as it could have been.
Seeing the world through Mike's eyes as he has seizures is very strange
(I hunger to see director Gus Van Sant (Drugstore Cowboy) do a movie of
Dhalgren, or any Delaney).  See skin/situations below.  Definitely a big
plus to see this on the big screen.  I'd still recommend it even for the
small screen, though.
Score/Sound: Some of the dialogue was sort of whispered and hard to
hear.  The soundtrack is minimal for most of the movie as far as I
noticed; there were two good songs during the closing credits.
Violence/language: A few guns waved around, a fight in the dark (low
visibility).  Actually, I don't remember that much profanity, though it
must have been there.
Skin/situations: Intense and graphic, but in golden-tone "still" shots
too fast to really take in any one shot.  Very interesting technique,
more effective than any "heaving bodies" scene I've seen.  Menage a
trois among Hans, Mike, and Scott.
Analysis: The whole audience laughed at several scenes, but for me it
was partly to keep my throat from getting tight and my eyes from
watering.  This is not a "tearjerker", but at times I felt overwhelmed
by sadness.  The unique vision and occasional beauty of this superb
movie has enspelled me, and I want to be gripped by it again.  Highly
recommended.

Title
Review for Batman Returns (1992)
BATMAN RETURNS:        sequel to the box-office success BATMAN; directed again by
Tim Burton.
Plot/kick-off:        A bit messy and complicated to try to explain; a new set of
villains trying to take over Gotham City during the Christmas season,
plus the destructive Catwoman; a few subplots that are left hanging at
the end, but only if you think about them.  Despite the variety of
things going on, it all hangs together pretty well.
Characters/acting: Once again, the same mistake is made as in BATMAN:
the villains upstage Batman; at least the villains are more interesting
this time (but then, I've never been a big Nicholson fan).  I had my
doubts about Michelle Pfeiffer as Catwoman, but she was perfect*, from
the way she twitches her whip like a cat's tail, to her portrayal of
Selina's realization of her own disintegration while dancing with Bruce.
Smart, intriguing dialogue between her and Bruce/Batman, and her and the
Penguin.  Danny DeVito is okay as the Penguin.  Chris Walken was not as
over-the-edge as the psychotic he played in A VIEW TO A KILL, but the
loving father-son corporate villains angle added a fresh twist.
Cinematography/FX: Sort of a combo of BATMAN and EDWARD SCISSORHANDS;
still, a few new shots that I thought were pretty spectacular (watch the
neon letters in Selina's apartment and the pullback the first time she's
in costume).  Actually, I thought extra attention must have been placed
on good acrobatics/stunts (all those flips and kicks etc.); they
impressed me a little more than the gizmos, though they may have been
slightly overused.  The last shot was disappointingly obvious, though.
Score/Sound: Score by Danny Elfman again; pretty similar, except for a
cool closing song, "Face to Face" performed by Siouxsie and the
Banshees; no Prince this time.
Violence/Gore: Lots of flying bullets and bodies, but no buckets o'
blood; the gore  was in short intense scenes, which I thought was pretty
well calculated to make the audience start to squirm, but not
overplayed, except perhaps too many close-ups of the Penguin's
disgusting oozing-black teeth (though they don't beat out Willem Dafoe's
in WILD AT HEART).
Language: Lots of use of bi***; also some pretty overt suggestions of
and references to sex by the Penguin.
Skin/situations: Implied fondling (cut off by camera angle), some
kissing
Analysis: Despite a few continuity errors and problems with internal
logic, I found it pretty easy to suspend disbelief and enjoy the ride.
I liked it better than BATMAN, probably because I thought the first
one dragged.  I might even go back and see it again for a matinee or
when it hits the cut-rate theaters.

Title
Review for Together Alone (1991)
     Well, this year I finally made it to the Toronto Festival of
Festivals, which bills itself as the second largest film festival
(second to Cannes).  It certainly was big, though not having been to
Cannes or whatever's the third largest, I can't really say how it
compares.  I really had a good time, and recommend it highly.  It was
well-organized and had a lot of variety.  Their categories included
Contemporary World Cinema (big names, somewhat commercial), Galas (even
more commercial, though not all Hollywood) and Special Presentations,
Perspective Canada, The Edge (cutting edge, avant-garde, experimental),
Open Vault (classics), Midnight Madness ("The weirdest and most bizzare
programme in The Festival," though ERASERHEAD was stuck in the Special
Presentations category for some unfathomable reason), Latin American
Panorama, First Cinema (first-time feature film directors), Asian
Horizons, Que Viva Mexico, and Spotlight on Ken Loach.  Unfortunately,
since I was only there Saturday and Sunday, I was only able to see seven
movies (hah! beat your six/Labor Day Weekend record, John!), and was
not able to sample every category.  Since at any given time about eight
movies were showing at the different Festival theaters in downtown
(Yonge and Bloor district) Toronto, I just picked the ones which sounded
promising that I could fit into a schedule and had a hope of getting
into (unlike, say, BLACK ROBE or THE FISHER KING, both of which I do
want to see).  Out of the seven, three were worth seeing, and one was
*very* good and has already been added to my "Favorites" file.  The
other three ranged from pretty decent to annoying.
SAM AND ME: (Perspective Canada, Director Deepa Mehta, 94 minutes)
Plot kickoff: A young man, Nikhil, arrives in Toronto from India.  His
uncle tries to get him a job at Cohen Medical Supplies where he works,
but instead Nik is hired to play nursemaid to cranky old Sam Cohen, who
just wants to go back to Israel to die.
Characters/acting: Sam Cohen is played by Peter Boretski; the actor who
played Nikhil was not listed; both of them deserve Genies (Canadian
Oscars).  All of the acting was good.  The characters all seemed like
real people, not stereotypes or throwaway cardboard cutouts.
Cinematography/FX: There are some good visuals which would lose a
little on the small screen.  Fortunately I saw this one at the Showcase,
as opposed to the big-screen television-type screens at the Cumberland.
Still worth seeing on any size screen.
Score: I liked the score.  Some Indian, some traditional and
non-traditional Jewish (Yiddish?), some pop, miscellaneous.
Violence/language: A couple of short fights/hits, probably some
language I didn't notice.
Skin/situations: Skin/situations are a very minor part of this movie,
this is just FYI.  Back view of Sam singing and dancing naked in the
rain.  Exotic dancer (pasties).  Foreplay.  Indications of homosexual
activity, and an Indian cross-dresser.
Analysis: Two outstanding movies from Canada in two years (BYE BYE
BLUES in 1989)!; of course there may well be other great ones that I
simply missed.  This movie has moments of joy and hilarity, anguish and
bitterness.  The culture clash between Nik's crowd and the Cohens leads
to wicked humor and poignant moments.  I hope this shows up at the
Little Theater in Rochester.  It is not completely flawless (some
muttered dialogue, I'm not sure about one of Nikhil's reactions), but I
would encourage anyone to see this movie; I'll see it again if I get the
chance.  I hope Mehta makes another movie about Nikhil, or at any rate I
hope I get to see some of his other movies.
A LITTLE STIFF: (First Cinema, Dir.  Greg Watkins, Caveh Zahedi, USA,
85 min., black and white, made for $10,000, Zahedi at the Q&A
afterwards)
Plot: Neurotic UCLA film student attempts to woo standoffish art
student
Characters/acting: Zahedi plays himself in a semi-biographical role.
Greg plays his buddy.  I don't know who played the art student, except
that she used to be Zahedi's girlfriend.
Cinematography/FX: For $10,000 it looks pretty good.  I don't think big
or little screen would make much difference.
Score: Not much score, except when Zahedi was dancing around alone in
his headphones.  He told us during the Q&A it was the Smiths, but you
couldn't hear it through his headphones.  Also a dreadful song about
falling which was a part of one of his (the character's and the
person's) two-minute film student project about death and horror.
Violence/language: None I can remember.
Analysis: Very sharp, very funny.  One of the best lines: After the art
student tells Zahedi how she wants to take toad hallucinogen at the same
time her cat's on catnip, he asks, "Would that be as a performance
piece?"  But maybe you had to be there; his delivery was perfect.
Zahedi's deadpan delivery and kamikaze approach to love make this movie
a treat.
TOGETHER ALONE: (FC, Dir. P. J. Castellaneta, USA, 87 min., black and
white, made for $7,000, Castellaneta at the Q&A afterwards)
Plot: Two gay males sit around and talk after a one-night stand
Characters/acting: I really liked the characters in this movie, not
that I thought they were great guys (it seems like half the movies I saw
at the festival featured neurotic or manipulative people), but they were
very well drawn and acted.  Castellaneta told us that they rehearsed for
a month before shooting to keep the costs down.  I hardly knew who to
sympathize with because both of them said things that made sense at
different times, but also neither of them was perfect by any means.
Both of them had some great monologues.  The MBA had a long dialogue
which I was very drawn into and it was a little shock when it was over.
Cinematography/FX: B/W, no great shots for big screen.
Violence/language: Wrestling bout, a couple of profanities.
Skin/situations: Pretty frank discussion about AIDS and preventing it,
and about homosexual sex.  Some caresses, mostly pretty tame.
Analysis: I would recommend this movie, but not as a must-see.  I
thought the discussions about commitment and how to build love were
relevant to anyone.  I particularly was impressed by the naturalness of
the actors.  One the other hand, there's not much action in this film.
The director stayed away from the infamous "talking heads" syndrome, but
there's only so much you can do with a conversational movie like this.
I also liked much of the humor and wisecracks between the two
characters, though at times they were using it to avoid dialog.

Title
Review for Vanishing, The (1993)
*THE VANISHING*:  Suspenseful "missing person" action/mystery
PLOT/KICK-OFF:        Diane vanishes without a trace from an interstate rest
stop in Washington State.  Her boyfriend searches for her for years
(time-lapsed, this is not a slow movie), meets the waitress Rita and
tries to get on with his life but can't let go, and goes on TV to beg
whoever took Diane to meet with him to tell him what happened.
CHARACTERS/ACTING: Kiefer Southerland is fine as the boyfriend.  Jeff
Bridges is okay as creepy Barney but has an inexplicably goofy accent
(blame it on the director?).  It is Nancy Travis, as Rita, that makes
this movie succeed.  She's no Sarah Connor (T2's Uzi-toting,
sculpted-muscles waitress), but this admirable, believable and *smart*
heroine got the audience rooting and cheering for her.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  Some difficult scenes fairly well shot.
SCORE/SOUND:  pretty good, sort of jazzy in places
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  Shovel fight.  Not much gore, but realistic
boinging sounds and one mercifully short somewhat gross still shot.
Some curses, nothing not on TV.
*SOMMERSBY*:  Post-Civil War "missing person returns" drama
PLOT/KICK-OFF:        Jack Sommersby returns to his wife and farm in Tennessee -- or
does he really?  -- after being shut up in the Yankee prisoner-of-war
camp in Elmira, New York for most of the War Between the States.  His
efforts to restore the family farm and fortune after the devastation of
the war, and make a new start with his wife and son, are complicated by
a Tennessee version of the Klan (angered by his promise to sell off his
land to black as well as white sharecroppers after paying off the
mortgage on the farm), his wife's ex-suitor who had worked the farm in
hopes of marrying the grass widow, and accusations that he is not who he
claims to be.
CHARACTERS/ACTING: Richard Gere is natural and charming as Jack, and
Jodi Foster (Laurel Sommersby) excels as ever at unspoken conversations,
but is perhaps a bit melodramatic in a few of her spoken lines near the
end (again, blame it on the director?).  James Earl Jones has a small
but pronounced part as a judge (implausible, but this is a Hollywood
movie, though it rises above that at various times in the movie).
Although not as over-the-top as his performance in "Sneakers", I will
repeat my suggestion from my previous review: "James!  Stop these cameos
and get a real role!"
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  Most evocative of my roots since FRIED GREEN
TOMATOES.  Beautiful scenery and interesting scenes of tobacco-farming.
I avoided most of those films about farmers a few years back, but this
movie had just enough to communicate some of the problems of farm life
while advancing the plot, but didn't drag on interminably about them,
sort of like the barn-raising sequences in *Witness*.
SKIN/SITUATIONS:  A little foreplay (clothed)
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  Fighting, short shot of a man's whipped back.
Some slurs against blacks uttered by the Klansmen (Knights of the White
Chameleon).
ANALYSIS:  Why did I like both of these movies better than their foreign
originals (THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE, with Gerard Depardieu in Richard
Gere's role, and THE VANISHING, a Dutch film), even though it could be
said that the originals were more tightly plotted and did not have the
error of tending a few times towards melodrama?  Because the originals
didn't give me any reasons to care what happened to any of its
characters, and the remakes did.  Also, SOMMERSBY added interesting
sub-plots, and THE VANISHING ('93) had some surprising twists.
- Sarah (elkins.wbst139@xerox.com)

Title
Review for Jurassic Park (1993)
*JURASSIC PARK*:  Action-adventure with dinosaurs running amok and
people running away from them, with some food for thought as well.
PLOT/KICK-OFF:  Various experts are called in to assess safety and
other issues of a mysterious theme park located on an island off of
Costa Rica.  They find out the park's theme is *live* dinosaurs ...
then things start to go wrong.
CHARACTERS/ACTING:  All the characters were pretty natural in their
roles, both their interactions with each other and their reactions to
the dinosaur FX.  I had no trouble believing Sam Neill as the
paleontologist, Laura Dern as the paleobotanist, Richard Attenborough
as the island entrepreneur, or Jeff Goldblum as the chaos
theoretician/mathematician.  I thought Neill, Dern and Goldblum did
particularly well when debating the ethical and potentially disastrous
impacts of the project; from other actors, their lines might have
sounded stagey, glib or pedantic.  There were a couple of kids too,
used pretty well for the most part.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  One of the early shots of a dinosaur was a little
too obviously people against some sort of matte motion effect, but
other than that, the look and FX were seamless, superb, and quite
believable.  Considering the variety of dinos and their different
behaviors the movie depicted, this is quite a feat -- we see a lot more
than those few effects in the previews.  At one point, although this is
not a 3-D movie, I really did have the sensation that a dinosaur was
leaping directly at *me*--quite a visceral impact.  Clearly a movie to
see first on the big screen.
SCORE/SOUND:  Okay.
SKIN/SITUATIONS:  None.
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  A severed limb here and there, but other than
that, not much gore (nowhere near the level of the Alien movies, for
example).  Actually not much blood at all, but there is quite a bit of
violence nonetheless: you do have dinos chomping on each other and
people.  Stephen Spielberg (the director) has said he won't let his
8-year-old see it for a couple more years.
ANALYSIS:  Scary fun.  I and others in the audience shrieked and
screamed at several points in the movie.  None of the movie directly
contradicted the dinosaur-related info I've picked up from SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN articles, although it did refer to some points which are still
controversial.  There was one annoyingly silly product placement, and a
shot which was a bit too obviously staged for irony (analogous to the
shot of the Terminator mowing down the crowd in the Tech-Noir bar, only
not as well done), but otherwise it's a great, gripping ride.  I also
appreciated the discussions on cloning, biogenetics, and chaos theory
between the scientists, though I think some of the explanations were
cut short in the interests of pacing.  Good ending, especially because
the room for the sequel is embedded deeply in the movie and not
referred to again.
COMPARISON TO BOOK:  ******* Minor SPOILERS *******
The movie is tighter than Michael Crichton's book.  I think they did
well in combining a few of the characters and paring out extraneous
introductory subplots.  Hammond is less of a mad fanatic in the movie
and more of an enthusiastic idiot.  The kids' ages are reversed; the
girl is less of a whiner (thank goodness) and has more to do.  The boy
is more annoying at the beginning.  They did change some of the final
confrontations between the people and the dinosaurs, and Alan and the
kids are never on a raft, and the ending itself is changed a little,
somewhat for the better, I think.
- Sarah (elkins.wbst139@xerox.com)

Title
Review for Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (1991)
[I am posting five reviews of STAR TREK VI.  I could easily swamp the group
with reviews of this movie, so I will probably not post any more unless
they say something very different than those posted here (e.g., a review
of the fashions in STAR TREK 6 :-) ).  Followups are directed to
rec.arts.startrek to keep the discussion in the appropriate group.
-Moderator]
STVI: science fiction adventure, building on previous Star Trek adventures.
Plot kickoff: The Federation and the Klingon Empire try to have a peace
conference.
Characters/acting: Not much new here, except I really liked Kim Cattrall
as the new Vulcan, Valeris (violates the naming convention, hmmm).  Good
Vulcan.  I also liked McCoy better than in the last couple of movies.  I
would have liked to see more of Captain Sulu.  The humor wasn't as
stupid/out of character as in STAR TREK V: THE FINAL FRONTIER.  However,
next to the Shakespeare-quoting Klingons; the humans seemed pathetically
ignorant of Klingons and ethnocentric to boot.  Look quick for
Communications Officer Janice Rand.
Cinematography/FX: Good space battles (nothing new), other FX are better
and newer, especially the null-G blood.
Score/Sound: rehash of other ST themes.
Violence/language: null-G blood, mostly Klingon.  Some shootings, and a
couple of handfights.  Some curses, not all that much.
Analysis: People who haven't watched much Star Trek in the past may not
pick up on the flaws (see below), so they may like it better than many
regular fans.  Regular fans may like it because it's not as bad as STAR
TREK V was.  Overall mildly enjoyable, some pretty good moments, but
annoying in other spots.  My order of fanship of ST movies: 2, 4, 3, 1,
6, 5, ...  on some days I might put 6 ahead of 1.
Complaints: characters acting in ways they wouldn't have, saying things
they wouldn't have, doing things they wouldn't have.  Too numerous to
list.  Massive insubordination, some in front of junior officers, some
for no reason other than personal whim.  Court martial these sorry
excuses for Starfleet officers.  Why didn't they just beam the gravity
boots into space?  Yet another conspiracy.  Getting old, especially to
TNG watchers.  Pretty predictable.  Would Federation officers really be
dopey enough to conspire with Klingons on assassination attempts?
Non-working Universal Translator.  Kitchen.  Unrealistic last 10 minutes
-- come on, would the conference delegates really have believed Kirk
etc., busting in like that?  All shiny happy people?  I don't think so.
And what did Kirk mean, "And you have restored my son's [faith]?"
Howzzat?  Lack of adherence to IDIC (speciesist/ethnocentric).

Title
Review for Ballad of Little Jo, The (1993)
*THE BALLAD OF LITTLE JO* --  1993, drama, based on (the few known) historical
facts
PLOT/KICK-OFF:  Society woman Josephine Monaghan is kicked out by her
father and heads out West to make a new life for herself.  After
escaping a rape attempt, she cuts her hair and dresses as a man
(illegal at the time) so she can survive life in the mining camp she's
trying to reach to make her fortune.
CHARACTERS/ACTING:  Suzy Amis is totally believable as Jo in both parts
(as well as the transition).  Ian McKellen plays the cold, strange
Percy who teaches Jo survival skills in the West and gets her out of
mining.  Bo Hopkins manages to give warmth to the part of bigoted,
ignorant sheep herder Frank Badger, who gives Jo a job.  David Chung
gives a wonderfully subtle performance as "Tin Man" ("The correct
pronunciation is "Tien Mahn" (sp?) he tells Jo with dignity), an
escaped railroad laborer whom Jo later rescues from Frank's attempted
lynching.  It's a keen pleasure to watch him gradually lose his
"grinning dumb Chinaman" act with Jo as they learn more about each
other and lower their defenses, and then snatch it up again whenever
Frank comes by.  Writer-director Maggie Greenwald is generous with
unspoken scenes:  she allows characters to develop as much or more
through looks and body language as dialog.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  Uncompromising look at life in Montana in the
1860's; the viewer's impressions of the wide-open vistas and the stark
surroundings Jo endures will suffer a bit on the small screen.  Some of
the scenes are annoyingly intercut in an attempt to be artistic, I
guess, but for the most part the editing is straightforward.
SCORE/SOUND:  We know it's a Western from the banjo and fiddle opening
music as we watch Jo trudge along the "road."  I liked the music;
mostly instrumental, but some female folk/country-ish vocals.
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  As I said, uncompromising.  Jo mars her face
with a razor to complete her disguise; we also see a prostitute who has
been slashed with a knife for refusing Percy's request for alternate
sex, and a slain family of immigrants (victims of a cattle
rancher/sheep herder range war); also a shoot-out.
SKIN/SITUATIONS:  The most *tender* erotic scenes I've seen since
*Autumn Moon* at the Toronto Film Festival last year.  After all her
years alone, Jo's feelings of longing and wistfulness at seeing (the
gorgeous shot of) Tin Man washing in the river have quite an impact.
The role reversal of seeing short-haired, rough Jo and Tin Man, with
unbraided long silky black hair, in bed (both bare-chested) is
intriguing.
ANALYSIS:  I went afraid this movie would be cute, preachy or
romanticized; happily, it greatly exceeded my expectations.  This movie
is not flawless, but the unexpected irony (the audience laughed out
loud several times) and gentle humor, plus the depth of
characterizations of Jo and the others, make this movie worth watching,
if you can take the upsetting scenes (not gratuitous!) mentioned
above.  I liked the ending, too.
- Sarah Elkins (elkins.wbst139@xerox.com)

Title
Review for Prince of Tides, The (1991)
PRINCE OF TIDES: sweeping movie with big themes and big-star romance
Plot/kickoff: Tom Wingo (Nick Nolte), an ex-football player and English
teacher in South Carolina, goes off to New York City to help his sister
Savannah by telling her psychiatrist Dr.  Lowenstein (Barbra Streisand)
his family history.  Characters/acting:  Streisand is believable, though
I wonder if her character's actions were entirely ethical.  Nolte's best
role yet, though one scene seemed a little forced (maybe the script's
fault).  Fun appearance by George Carlin as Savannah's neighbor; Blythe
Danner plays Tom's wife, though she doesn't get to do too much (see
MR. & MRS. BRIDGE for her best); I also liked Lowenstein's surly teenager
as played by Jason Gould, Streisand's and Elliot Gould's son.
Cinematography/FX:   Ahhh, the South.  Beautiful shots of coastal
Carolina that made me want to visit Charleston (my college town) again.
Violence:  Not too gory, but there are some upsetting scenes
Skin/situations:  oh, some kissing, bodies in bed, nothing new or wild
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES:  a warm, intimate tale of love between friends
past and present
Plot/kickoff:  a timid housewife (Kathy Bates) meets an old woman
(Jessica Tandy) at a nursing home in Alabama.  As the old woman recounts
stories about Idgie (Mary Stuart Masterson), Ruth (Mary Louise Parker)
and other memorable characters from her past, we see the friendship
between the women in the present grow, and Bates' character undergo a
transformation.  Characters/acting:  Masterson was natural, true and
real, a rare performance that makes me want to see her other movies.  I
wish I knew more people like her character in real life.  Many fine
performances by those who played other minor characters of the past.
Tandy was enjoyable, and Bates was good for the most part (though I
thought her timidity at the start was a little forced)
Cinematography/FX:  Ahhh, the South.  Not lush like PRINCE OF TIDES, but
whoever shot this knows how to make you feel like you're right there
(and I don't mean just by using close-ups).  The rural Old South
sequences certainly seemed accurate.
Violence:  Some, upsetting, but not big-scale or bloody
Skin/situations:  None, except maybe some implications
Analysis:  There are quite a few similarities between the two movies:  secrets
from the past revealed through a sequence of memories mixed in with interesting
goings-on in the present, a strong Southern element in both movies, a little
audience manipulation (not enough to spoil things), and some more I won't get
into, to avoid spoilers.  The difference is in tone.  PRINCE OF TIDES showed
how people can become whole by dealing with the past.  FRIED GREEN TOMATOES
showed people whose courage and strength came from having good friends to lean
on, laugh with, and fight for.  I recommend both - but my guess is I'll want to
see FRIED GREEN TOMATOES again sooner than PRINCE OF TIDES.

Title
Review for Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992)
TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME:  "Prequel" to David Lynch's TV series
"Twin Peaks."
Plot/kick-off: An FBI agent investigates the death of a woman.  FBI
Special Agent Dale Cooper investigates this later on, and then the FBI
aspect is dropped almost completely as we turn up in the little
northwestern town of Twin Peaks, leading up to almost the very start of
the TV series.
Characters/acting:  Sheryll Lee turned in a very good performance as
Laura Palmer.  More than just the "woman in jeopardy," she was complex,
sometimes subtle and sometimes "out there" as the role demanded.  Other
Peaks returning regulars included Kyle MacLachlan as Coop, James, Miguel
Ferres as Albert, Leland, Shelly, Bobby and Norma.  Chris Isaak, Kiefer
Southerland, David Bowie in early scenes.
Cinematography/FX:  Some beautiful scenes, and some really weird scenes.
More of the red-curtained room and "The Lodge."  How do they make
Douglass firs look frightening?  Probably would lose a little on the
small screen.  Again very effective in the blend of supernatural with
reality.
Score/Sound: Similar to series.  New song by Julee Cruise.  Pretty gross
sounds during one autopsy.
Violence/Gore:  Dead bodies, bloody/split foreheads, most kill/scare
scenes imply rather than show directly.
Language: Oh, probably some, nothing really strong that I recall.
Skin/situations:  Lots.  Lots and lots.  Steamy in parts, and
non-traditional in others.  Topless dancing/foreplay, but not actually
much sex per se, not graphically shown anyway.  Not as wild as the
diary.
Analysis:  What *is* it with the creamed corn?  Yep, we're still left with
questions after seeing the movie.  It will answer a few of the ones we
had, but definitely not all.  That's okay with me, but it probably won't
be with some other viewers.  It's hard for me to make a call on whether
anyone who doesn't like Lynch or didn't watch "Twin Peaks" the series
would like the movie, but as a wild guess I will say, "Probably not."  I
thought it was a pretty good ride, though it was less scary as the end
drew near, since I had a better idea of what was going to happen near
the series start.

Title
Review for Fisher King, The (1991)
THE FISHER KING: A wild and original, warm, funny, bitter, frightening,
and human tale which rises way above its "redemption" genre.
Plot kickoff: I think it would be confusing and misleading to try to
describe this plot other than as a function of the characters, besides
which this is really a movie which shouldn't be "spoiled."
Characters/acting: Jeff Bridges plays Jack, a cold, cynical talk show
DJ trying to put his life back together after one of his shows
backfires.  Mercedes ?, the rebel from TOTAL RECALL, shows she can
really act as his girlfriend, bemused by his friendship with a homeless
man, Perry, played by Robin Williams.  Williams turns in his best
performance yet, surpassing his performance in THE WORLD ACCORDING TO
GARP (my favorite performance of his until this movie).  Perry believes
that the Holy Grail is hidden in a millionaire's condo in Manhattan.
Perry is also in love with a mousy woman who works at a book
publisher's, who is played charmingly by Amanda Plummer, the woman who
played the fey mute girl in THE WORLD ACCORDING TO GARP.  All four of
the main performers, and a few minor ones as well, turn in flawless,
heartbreaking and uplifting performances.
Cinematography/FX: The believable blending of fantasy with everyday
life is aided by the excellent cinematography, which seems dreamlike and
realistic at the same time.  Several scenes should definitely be caught
on the large screen.  I *loved* the Chinese restaurant sequence.
Score: If you just can't get enough of "I Love New York In June" this
is the score for you.  Seriously, the score is a mix of background music
and pop radio, with a few odds and ends.  Not a score I'd buy, but it
meshes well with the movie.
Violence/language: Quite violent at times, mostly by suggestion, but
there is some gore.  This is a movie which takes a serious look at the
homeless (though that's not the focus of the movie), and they get
treated badly.  Profanity, slurs mostly uttered by bad guys.
Skin/situations: Foreplay, some frank talk about sex.
Analysis: I would say the one error is the pacing, which is too slow in
the beginning, and too fast near the end to make certain plot twists
completely acceptable, but is just right for most of the movie.  Still,
that was a flaw my mind churned up after, not during, the movie.  I'd
like to catch it again sometime to catch the lines I missed when the
audience was laughing at the previous lines.  The little touches of
throwaway lines and background action add a richness to this movie which
is rare.  Highly recommended.

Title
Review for Last of the Mohicans, The (1992)
*THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS*:  Michael ("Miami Vice") Mann's tightened-up,
speeded-up version of the James Fenimore Cooper early U.S. adventure
classic, also partly based on a previous movie version's screenplay.
PLOT/KICK-OFF:        In 1757, Hawkeye, a hunter/trapper raised by Mohicans, gets
caught up in the French and Indian wars in upstate New York.  He and his
adoptive father and brother rescue (from Huron raiders) an English
officer and the two women being escorting to their father's fort.
CHARACTERS/ACTING: Daniel Day-Lewis, who won an Oscar for his
performance in MY LEFT FOOT, looks natural in his role as Hawkeye,
though unfortunately the script or director seems to have called for
overplaying a scene or two.  Madeline Stowe, recently of UNLAWFUL
ENTRY turns in a respectable performance as Cora, the intelligent,
courageous daughter of a British officer.  I liked the lesser-known
players better, particularly Jodhi May's portrayal of Alice, Cora's
younger, timid sister, and Eric Schweig played Hawkeye's adoptive
Mohican brother Uncas.  These two had hardly any lines, but they almost
stole the show regardless.  I would love to see what either could do
with a speaking role.
CINEMATOGRAPHY/FX:  Beautiful mountain wilderness scenes (filmed in
North Carolina), not as awe-striking as BLACK ROBE, but still mighty
restful to the eyes.  Parts of some fights in slo-mo.  Some rather
contrived shots (I can almost hear Michael Mann:  "Okay, now let's put
them in a cavern so they can kiss in front of a waterfall!").  On the
other hand, there were a couple of scenes that I thought were very well
done, which I will remember.  One in particular is a long shot of
Alice's face during a crucial moment, which I won't spoil, but it was
riveting.  That one scene raised the whole level of the movie for me.
SCORE/SOUND:  One of the things I liked about this movie was that we got
to figure out most things for ourselves, and yet, some of the dialog was
muffled and hard to make out, muting that same pleasure.  This didn't
happen too much, but enough to irritate.  Another problem I had (maybe
it's just me) is that I often find swelling symphonic music during
battle scenes to be in questionable taste, as well as a bit of a cliche.
But at least there were no Bryan Adams theme songs or other similarly
jarring anachronisms.
VIOLENCE/GORE/LANGUAGE:  Hardly any blood or gore, considering, but
plenty of musket balls flying and bodies dropping, plus a scalping or
two.  A couple of mysteriously bloodless hand-to-hand combats with
knives and axes.  No profanity.
ANALYSIS:  In some ways a disappointment, but a pleasant surprise in
others (especially the interesting sub-plots and non-lead characters).
The pacing was good; it kept moving, but wasn't rushed.  Overall a
pretty good movie.
