Authors
Mikel J. Koven
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
The following was originally published in The St. John's Express
(Newfoundland Canada). The copyright is held by both the author and
Robinson-Blackmore Publishers.
http://www.rb.nf.ca/express/expcol5.htm
Star Wars: impressive, but offensive 
By Mikel J. Koven 
'A long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away.' Those words still echo
through my memory, when 22 years ago, an excited nine-year-old saw Star
Wars for the first time. 
It changed all of our expectations about what could be shown in a science
fiction movie. Over two decades later, and 16 years after the last
installment of the series, Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace may
very well be the most anticipated film in cinema history. Unfortunately,
although noteworthy for the unprecedented hype, special effects, and
anticipated box office, it will not be remembered as the kind of classic
Star Wars was. 
Set a generation before Luke, Leah, and Han battled the dark side of the
Force, Episode I presents us with Queen Amidala (Natalie Portman - a
democratic monarch?) who is placed in the unenviable position of watching
as the evil Trade Federation invade her planet of Naboo. Jedi master
Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) and his young apprentice, Obi Wan Kenobi (Ewan
McGregor) are sent to negotiate a peace settlement with the Federation. 
While moving the Naboo queen and her court to safety, their ship crashes on
Tatooine (remember, that's where Luke came from), and there they meet a
10-year-old wunderkind named Anakin Skywalker, who just may be the
prophesized one who will bring 'balance to the Force'. 
The press notes identify five separate storylines in Phantom Menace, and
that is probably the first indicator this movie has gone seriously wrong.
George Lucas, the mastermind behind the entire Star Wars legacy, has
returned for the first time to the writer/director's chair since his 1977
epic, and in the interim it looks like he forgot how to tell a story. Ever
notice how little kids tell the plot of their favorite movies? 
"So the Queen goes and does this. And then the Jedi guy goes and does this.
And then they get together. And then the ship crashes. And then ... yadda,
yadda, yadda." 
That is how Lucas wrote Phantom Menace; it does not feel like a script as
much as an outline for a script. There is no character development, or
emotional engagement with any of the characters. Lucas writes like a
five-year-old with Attention Deficit Disorder. Any single plot line in the
movie would have been sufficient to develop a film around. With five
separate storylines, nothing gets beyond the level of a blueprint. 
We identified with Luke Skywalker, because he was 'us', the every man,
trapped on a desolate rock with dreams of something better. His adventure
was our adventure, and why we go and see movies like this is to vicariously
experience that which we never will. There is no one to identify with in
The Phantom Menace. Therefore there is no one to care about. 
Because of this, Phantom Menace feels very cold. For all of its positive
messages about heroism and spirituality, it is profoundly misanthropic; an
anti-human picture. So misanthropic, in fact, that Lucas, disappointed with
Natalie Portman's voice, altered it with a synthesizer. Yes, the special
effects are fabulous, but they should support the human cast, not the other
way around. 
Even more disturbing is the blatant racism of the movie. To dismiss the
characters as just fantasy figures is not a valid argument. Lucas, to his
credit, develops definite cultures for his alien races, but unfortunately,
he chooses Earth stereotypes as his models. And even though these creatures
are computer generated fictions, they still resonate with Earthling
cultural stereotypes. 
The invading Trade Federation are clearly modeled on the Japanese. And at
the beginning of the movie, when we first see Queen Amidala, I was struck
by how Chinese the costumes and sets were. I thought this might be an
interesting exploration of Japan's imperial take-over of Asia in the 1930s.
Nope, just racist stereotypes. 
Then we meet comic relief Jar Jar (computer generated, but voiced by Ahmed
Best), and he takes us to his 'under the sea' colony on Naboo. Since an
African-American actor is the voice of the character, it is reasonable to
expect that the character will take on some of those cultural and ethnic
attributes. But in the 'sub continent' (get it?) of Jar Jar's people, the
African stereotypes flourish, even with an Idi Amin type leader. And making
Jar Jar lazy, shiftless, incompetent, stupid, and a functional 'Uncle Tom'
figure to the rest of the clean, intelligent, white characters really made
me cringe. 
Finally we get to the slave owner who owns Anakin and his mother, and has
them working in his shop. With his clearly hooked nose, stubbly beard, and
his unscrupulous business practices, not to mention his 'Mediterranean'
accent, I couldn't figure out whether he was supposed to be Jewish, Arab,
or even Italian, but then I'm not so sure Lucas makes a distinction between
those groups either. 
Having your invaders modeled on the Japanese, your comic relief based on
African-Americans, and your shifty business men Semitic are too specific
cultural references, and presented too stereotypically. So on the one hand,
I was horrendously offended by the blatant racism of this movie. 
But on the other hand, the special effects are impressive. Unfortunately,
too much of the spectacle has already been given away in TV ads and 'behind
the scenes' footage on Entertainment Tonight. The big adventure moment, the
fight scene between Darth Maul, Qui-Gon and Obi Wan, has been ruined by
advanced promotions: we know that Darth Maul uses a two-ended lightsaber,
so it's no surprise when he lights up the other end, punctuated with a
musical 'ta-da'. It was months after the initial release of Star Wars that
we got the 'making of' specials, which demonstrated how those amazing
effects were done. Now we've been so inundated with information about the
movie before hand, it all feels anti-climatic. 
This is not to say the movie isn't a fun two-hour time waster. It is. And
Ewan McGregor does a great impersonation of Alec Guinness. Science fiction
fans in general, and Star Wars fans in particular, are an undiscriminating
lot. They'll see Episode I - The Phantom Menace a dozen times, buy as much
merchandise as their student loans will allow, and sell out movie houses
for months. I know I'll be among them. But when even the fan reviews are
luke warm there is something wrong. 
Rating (out of 4): ** 1/2 

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
 I think that saying that The X-Files is one of this summer's most
anticipated films is safe.  For five years, "The X-Files" television
show has developed a dedicated fan culture, whose rabid devotion to the
series rivals that of "Star Trek" fans.
 The premise of both the movie and the television series is two FBI
agents who investigate the paranormal; Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) is
the avid believer whose quest to find the truth about extraterrestrial
life borders on the paranoid, and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) is the
scientific skeptic trying to find a rational explanation to Mulder's
flights of fancy.
 Outlining the plot of The X-Files movie is virtually impossible, since
to be general would result in confusion, yet to be specific would give
too much away.  Nevertheless, I will try.  "The black ooze," and
extraterrestrial, virus-like substance is threatening Earth.  A "shadow
government" is aware of this, but tries to cover-up the alien
existence.  Mulder and Scully know "the truth is out there," and so try
to expose both the invasion and the cover-up.
 There are three central questions I have heard asked about this movie:
 1.  Will those who don't watch the series be able to understand the
movie?  Yes.  Isolated as an individual text, The X-Files can stand
alone.  They have given enough background for anyone, familiar with the
show or not, to understand the movie.  Although some of the secondary
characters' histories may confuse the uninitiated, those characters are
not essential to the film.  This is a major problem: they trot out token
secondary characters from the series out for an appearance and then
disappear just as quickly.
 Why bring Superintendent Skinner into the picture in the first place,
and then have him sat silently on an FBI internal affairs committee?
Why bring in "The Lone Gunmen," three computer geek conspiracy
theorists, for an even briefer appearance?  These characters are
recurrent on the series, and their appearance in the film was met with
whoops from the audience (suggesting their popularity among fans -
actually most of the audience could pass for "the Lone Gunmen").  Still,
then they vanish just as quickly.
 2.  The television show never gives us any answers.  Will the movie
actually explain some things?  Yes.  In The X-Files we get a fairly
complete history of "the black ooze," what it is and what it wants.  We
finally get some understanding of the motivations behind the "shadow
government."  There are even some subtle tie-ins with contemporary
UFO-ology, including the "greys" and the Roswell Crash of 1947.
 3.  Is the movie any good?  No.  The X-Files is a dreadful movie and
shows some fundamental problems with writer/creator Chris Carter's
talents and the relationship between cinema and television.
 First off, the screenplay by series creator Chris Carter is sloppy and
cliched.  After approximately forty-five minutes (the length of a
television episode minus the commercials), the pace drops to a snail's
crawl.  Not long after that point, when Carter attempts to answer some
questions we have had about the series, we wish he had not.  The
explanations are so trite and ridiculous that one would have preferred
it had Carter not explained quite so much.  I am willing to suspend my
disbelief a fair bit, but the absurdity Carter wants me to swallow was
just too much.  Breaking the suspension of disbelief destroys the movie
- and listening to other fans leave the cinema, maybe the series too.
 The explanations are not only absurd, they are tired and unoriginal.
The extraterrestrials breed and gestate like those from the Alien
series, and their craft looks like a leftover set piece from
Independence Day.  Note that the Alien movies, ID4, and The X-Files are
all from 20thCentury Fox - a studio that is beginning to cannibalize
itself I think.
 The X-Files is noteworthy for being the only movie based on a
television series to be produced while the series was still running.  In
comparing the movie and television series certain aspects of the
respective media emerge.
 The avoidance of the series to answer the questions it raised annoyed
and frustrated many people.  However, I rather liked that about the
series.  Television allows you to impose as much, or as little, meaning
on a show as you want.  It is the proverbial "blank screen" which we
project our minds on.  Meaning on television is open and ambiguous; it
is the nature of the medium.
 Cinema, on the other hand, is the opposite.  It projects onto us the
filmmakers mind.  We can, in some films, fill the textual gaps
ourselves, but that almost never happens in an American film.  Meaning,
in cinema, needs to be self-contained and determined.
 So, when The X-Files made that jump from small to big screen, Carter
needed to take into consideration the differences in the medium as
well.  He did not.  By making explicit, what the television show left
implicit, Carter reveals the limits of his creativity and skill.
 When they say that "fans" make a TV show, it is not far from the
truth.  On television, fan culture must impose its meanings on the text
because there is nothing there.  How true that is when we see the
"explicit" X-Files - there is nothing there.
--------------C6203DBE2EE2D65EFCC41C3B
Movie Review
by Mikel J. Koven

 I think that saying that The X-Files is one of this summer's most
anticipated films is safe.  For five years, "The X-Files" television
show has developed a dedicated fan culture, whose rabid devotion to the
series rivals that of "Star Trek" fans.
 The premise of both the movie and the television series is two
FBI agents who investigate the paranormal; Fox Mulder (David Duchovny)
is the avid believer whose quest to find the truth about extraterrestrial
life borders on the paranoid, and Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) is the
scientific skeptic trying to find a rational explanation to Mulder's flights
of fancy.
 Outlining the plot of The X-Files movie is virtually impossible,
since to be general would result in confusion, yet to be specific would
give too much away.  Nevertheless, I will try.  "The black ooze,"
and extraterrestrial, virus-like substance is threatening Earth. 
A "shadow government" is aware of this, but tries to cover-up the alien
existence.  Mulder and Scully know "the truth is out there," and so
try to expose both the invasion and the cover-up.
 There are three central questions I have heard asked about this
movie:
 1.  Will those who don't watch the series be able to understand
the movie?  Yes.  Isolated as an individual text, The X-Files
can stand alone.  They have given enough background for anyone, familiar
with the show or not, to understand the movie.  Although some of the
secondary characters' histories may confuse the uninitiated, those characters
are not essential to the film.  This is a major problem: they trot
out token secondary characters from the series out for an appearance and
then disappear just as quickly.
 Why bring Superintendent Skinner into the picture in the first
place, and then have him sat silently on an FBI internal affairs committee? 
Why bring in "The Lone Gunmen," three computer geek conspiracy theorists,
for an even briefer appearance?  These characters are recurrent on
the series, and their appearance in the film was met with whoops from the
audience (suggesting their popularity among fans - actually most of the
audience could pass for "the Lone Gunmen").  Still, then they vanish
just as quickly.
 2.  The television show never gives us any answers. 
Will the movie actually explain some things?  Yes.  In The X-Files
we get a fairly complete history of "the black ooze," what it is and what
it wants.  We finally get some understanding of the motivations behind
the "shadow government."  There are even some subtle tie-ins with
contemporary UFO-ology, including the "greys" and the Roswell Crash of
1947.
 3.  Is the movie any good?  No.  The X-Files is
a dreadful movie and shows some fundamental problems with writer/creator
Chris Carter's talents and the relationship between cinema and television.
 First off, the screenplay by series creator Chris Carter is sloppy
and cliched.  After approximately forty-five minutes (the length of
a television episode minus the commercials), the pace drops to a snail's
crawl.  Not long after that point, when Carter attempts to answer
some questions we have had about the series, we wish he had not. 
The explanations are so trite and ridiculous that one would have preferred
it had Carter not explained quite so much.  I am willing to suspend
my disbelief a fair bit, but the absurdity Carter wants me to swallow was
just too much.  Breaking the suspension of disbelief destroys the
movie - and listening to other fans leave the cinema, maybe the series
too.
 The explanations are not only absurd, they are tired and unoriginal. 
The extraterrestrials breed and gestate like those from the Alien series,
and their craft looks like a leftover set piece from Independence Day. 
Note that the Alien movies, ID4, and The X-Files are all from 20thCentury
Fox - a studio that is beginning to cannibalize itself I think.
 The X-Files is noteworthy for being the only movie based on a
television series to be produced while the series was still running. 
In comparing the movie and television series certain aspects of the respective
media emerge.
 The avoidance of the series to answer the questions it raised
annoyed and frustrated many people.  However, I rather liked that
about the series.  Television allows you to impose as much, or as
little, meaning on a show as you want.  It is the proverbial "blank
screen" which we project our minds on.  Meaning on television is open
and ambiguous; it is the nature of the medium.
 Cinema, on the other hand, is the opposite.  It projects
onto us the filmmakers mind.  We can, in some films, fill the textual
gaps ourselves, but that almost never happens in an American film. 
Meaning, in cinema, needs to be self-contained and determined.
 So, when The X-Files made that jump from small to big screen,
Carter needed to take into consideration the differences in the medium
as well.  He did not.  By making explicit, what the television
show left implicit, Carter reveals the limits of his creativity and skill.
 When they say that "fans" make a TV show, it is not far from
the truth.  On television, fan culture must impose its meanings on
the text because there is nothing there.  How true that is when we
see the "explicit" X-Files - there is nothing there.
Rating: * (out of four)

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
Review by Mikel J. Koven
The following review was published in The Express, St. John's
Newfoundland, 8 July, 1998.
Copyright 1998, by the author.
     Armageddon may very well be the biggest movie scheduled to open
this summer.  Touchstone Studios (i.e. Disney) have obviously banked a
lot of money on this flick, and perhaps I am just getting cynical after
The X-Files debacle, but it strikes me that we as movie audiences are
becoming more and more susceptible to studio marketing hype than ever
before.  No matter how bad Armageddon is, and it is pretty awful, thrill
seekers are going to line up for miles and days in order to watch the
destruction.
     Here is the plot of Armageddon: a big meteor is headed for earth.
This rock, referred to by the scientists in the flick as "a global
killer" will destroy every living thing on earth unless it is
destroyed.  The only hope for humanity is to land a crew of American
(naturally) deep-core drillers on the asteroid and blow it up with
nuclear weapons.
     Bruce Willis plays Harry S. Stamper, a rogue deep-core driller, who
is the best in his trade.  He is brought on by NASA to advise a team of
astronauts taking care of this mission.  Obviously, Stamper cannot trust
a bunch of strangers, and he assembles his own motley crew of
meteor-killers.  The boys blast off, blow-up the rock, and return as
heroes.
     What I think is most noxious about this movie is the absolutely
shameless flag waving: if you were bothered by the "rah, rah!  USA,
A-OK!" sentiments of Independence Day, you can certainly miss this
movie.  Every dramatic moment in the film has the "stars and stripes" in
the back ground.
     What starts as an "interesting"piece of Americana quickly becomes
jingoistic and annoying: Armageddon reifies the old frontier as its
theme.  NASA and the White House have all these scientists and advisors
who are helpless against the end of the world.  They run around like
Chicken-Little wondering how many "nukes" it will take to destroy the
meteor.  In walks the old "working class hero", Willis, who points out
that it takes a "real" man, and not some Pentagon desk jockey, to do
this job.  It is only the same gumption that built America, that can
save it - oh, yes, and the world too I guess.
     We see "foreigners", people of color, wearing "funny" clothes doing
their ethnic things in their far-off and dirty countries praying
superstitiously to their "gods" for salvation - completely unaware that
the good old US of A will save the day.  Even in the States, we see
Norman Rockwell-like tableaus of middle-America, workin' folk gazing
longingly at the Stars and Stripes looking for salvation.  It is
pathetic really - and makes one crave the subtleties of ID4.
     Producer Jerry Bruckheimer, the man who produced The Rock a few
years ago, as the television ads like to constantly point out, fails
Armageddon in the same way he failed with last year's Con-Air; it is not
sufficient to add more explosions, more action, more "zippy one-liners",
if you haven't got a decent script.
     Director Michael Bay (who also directed The Rock), is likewise
positioned to take responsibility for this turkey - he helmed one hit,
and it feels like Bruckheimer automatically assumes that the same
director will rework the same magic.  The problem is that in The Rock,
there was a crackling good script.  The characters were developed, and
the situation was, at least, plausible.  The humor came from the
situation, and did not, like in both Con-Air and Armageddon, get slotted
in as "one-liners".
     At the centre of The Rock was the awkward relationship between Sean
Connery and Nicolas Cage; in Armageddon we have "the awkward
relationship" between Willis' Stamper and Ben Affleck's A. J. Frost, who
is in love with Stamper daughter, Grace, played by Liv Tyler.  With the
Connery - Cage relationship, the two men got to know one another over
the course of the film; but in Armageddon, the relationship between
Willis and Affleck has been on-going for five years - none of which we
see or gets developed in the paint-by-numbers screenplay.  The result is
we don't care: Willis is being a weenie, Affleck is being a "sook". And
Liv Tyler is there just to look beautiful, framed against "Old Glory".
     The cast is alright with what they have to work with.  Chisel-faced
Willis is out to save the world and seems focused on not bursting out
laughing at the absurdity of this movie.  And Affleck is solid enough in
his first real-big movie, after his success in Good Will Hunting.  If
Hollywood needed verification that Affleck is an up-and-coming star,
this movie will probably do that.
     The real waste here is Billy Bob Thornton as NASA supervisor, Dan
Truman; Thornton commands the screen in a way that only a few other
actors can (George Clooney, I think also has this charisma).  Perhaps it
is his Southern drawl, but Thornton can make even the most sentimental
and ridiculous dialogue at least plausible.
     It is worth noting that, as is the standard in Western literature,
the two main protagonists on opposite ends of the central crisis, Willis
in space and Thornton in Houston, are frequently two sides of the same
psyche.  In Armageddon, should you fuse the names of Willis' Harry S.
Stamper with Thornton's Dan Truman, you get Harry S. Truman, the
cold-war president of the Untied States who ordered the bomb dropped on
Japan, another "Armageddon".
     But touches like that, or the brief joke at the beginning of the
movie attacking Godzilla(it's pretty hard to miss), are not sufficient
to save the film.  Neither are the special effects, which range from the
spectacular to the pretty lame.
     In part, I guess one can forgive the bravado of the film's
marketing team: with Dreamworks' Deep Impact beating Armageddon to
theatres by a couple of months, Touchstone needed to save some face.
But unlike last year's Dante's Peak and Volcano, two films which stood
on their own and whose only similarity was the presence of magma, Deep
Impact and Armageddon are virtually the same movie - except that the
former was good.  Sure enough, as I predicted, many people were
disappointed with Deep Impact in that it was character driven with few
scenes of mass destruction (which if you rent out some older movies, you
will discover is more in keeping with the disaster movie genre of the
1970s than the action extravaganzas we see today).  If all you want is
to see stuff blow up and get crushed, then Armageddon may be for you.
     But, as a movie, Armageddon bites.  The script is paint-by-numbers,
the characters are undeveloped, and the racism, sexism, and jingoism
which passes for patriotic heroism in the United States is frankly
offensive.  I cannot believe, or don't want to believe, that even our
cousins from south of the border would like this movie.  But I've been
wrong before.
