Authors
Rick Innis
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves (1991)
     I realise this has been extensively reviewed in the past, but as
it's just opened in Britain I thought I'd offer my 2d (old pence) worth.
     Summary: Robin of Locksley returns from the Crusades, accompanied
by a Moorish warrior whose life he saved and who has sworn to repay this
debt of honour, to find his father has been slain and his lands
appropriated by the Sheriff of Nottingham.  Evading pursuit by the
Sheriff's men takes Locksley into the supposedly haunted Sherwood
Forest, where he is accosted by a band of robbers which he then proceeds
to take over, turning them into a force through which he plans to take
his revenge of the Sheriff.
     This film has a lot going for it -- action, adventure and really
wild things by the score.  The script is well written, the plot has some
nice twists and turns in it and the supporting characters are well drawn
-- Marian is fiercely independent and contemptuous of the men's
crusading ambitions, the Sheriff oscillates between being a comic
buffoon and a dangerous madman, and the outlaws are a cheerfully earthy
bunch of Englishmen (with one exception, see below.)  
     Unfortunately, to my perceptions, this film has one major flaw --
the star.  In a film in which all bar two of the other characters have
English accents and use British English idioms (and one of them is a
Moor, so that's all right), Costner's American accent and mannerisms jar
dreadfully.  Costner is too clean-cut, decent and wholesomely
all-American to be convincing, and this destroyed a lot of the film for
me.  A decent voice coach would have gone a long way towards sorting
this out.  Unfortunately Christian Slater as Will Scarlet (in a role
severely underplayed, I thought) suffered the same problem.  If everyone
else in the film had had American accents it probably wouldn't have been
so noticeable (c.f., DANGEROUS LIAISONS and AMADEUS), but the mixture
just doesn't work.  I left with the feeling that was originally a
British production which had been hijacked by an American production
company with its eye on the box office and nothing else.
     Verdict: if you sink a few beers first and watch it on video it's
probably bearable, but I think I'll stick with the HTV series with
Michael Praed, made during the early 80's and also now out on video.
