Authors
John Smythe
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Shakespeare in Love (1998)
Impresario Phillip Henslow (Geoffrey Rush) is very concerned. He has 
outstanding debts and his theatre, the Rose, lies idle while his young 
playwright, William Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes) dithers about finishing 
his latest work, a comedy called Romeo and Ethel, A Pirate's Adventure'. 
To make matters worse, his chief creditor, Fennyman (Tom Wilkinson) 
expresses his dissatisfaction by dangling Henslow over an open fire, and 
threatens worse if his debts are not swiftly repaid.
So begins Shakespeare in Love, a gloriously witty, piquant and 
unashamedly theatrical yarn of the creation of the play Romeo and 
Juliet, one of the most famous and touching stories in literature (in 
English, anyway). Shakespeare is suffering from writer's block - he 
needs a muse, and (with his wife safely stashed in the country), he 
casts his eye around but is not impressed by the women he sees. His mood 
is not helped by the fact that everyone wants a comedy (whereas he would 
like to create something more worthy) and his fierce rival, Marlowe 
(Rupert Everett) is enjoying critical and popular acclaim.
Everything changes when Shakespeare sees Viola De Lessops (Gwyneth 
Paltrow), the beautiful daughter of a wealthy aristocrat. Viola is also 
a fan of theatre and particularly of the sonnets of a promising young 
playwright called Shakespeare. They eventually meet and fall deeply in 
love. Unfortunately, Viola has been promised in marriage to the 
insufferably arrogant Lord Wessex (Colin Firth), a union approved by 
Queen Elizabeth (Judi Dench), and therefore insoluble. As Shakespeare 
begins shaping his play, its character changes from comedy to drama to 
outright tragedy, as it mirrors the impossible but all-consuming love 
affair between a poor commoner and a rich aristocrat.
The movie skilfully weaves two rather different stories into a dramatic 
and beautiful tale. The first one is a hilarious account of the struggle 
to put on a show and I wish Kenneth Branagh had seen this film before he 
inflicted The Bleak Midwinter on the rest of us. There are lots of sly 
jokes as applicable to the film industry today as theatre then or now. 
Such as the decision to give the actors a share of the profits rather 
than paying them.(Henslow explains, "But it will never make money" and 
Fennyman replies, "Exactly"). Spoken like a true producer. Indeed, a 
wager is made that art cannot move people in the same way as real life - 
that art is lightweight and artificial. Viola disagrees - true art will 
always touch people. A dig at the entertainment industry today, perhaps 
?
There is always a danger that attempting humour in a medieval setting 
will invoke memories of Monty Python or Blackadder, but the writers 
(Marc Norman and Tom Stoppard) avoid such pitfalls. They do have fun 
speculating on the sources of Shakespeare's inspiration. He hears a 
preacher shouting at the unheeding, passing crowd, "A plague on both 
your houses". He decides on some of the plot while out drinking with 
Marlowe. What really illuminates the story, (and provides most of the 
inspiration) and raises it above the ordinary, is the on-screen 
relationship of Voila and Shakespeare. Joseph Fiennes brings a 
passionate intensity to the young Shakespeare, and his character, 
mischievous, committed, determined, impatient and erudite, is convincing 
as the man who could only conjure such emotions in his works by having 
tasted such extremes of desire.
The object of his desire has never looked better. Women world-wide must 
be a bit disgruntled. Having spent years reading women's magazines 
assuring them that "You too are special in your own way" along come 
women like Cameron Diaz and Gwyneth Paltrow, who are beautiful, 
talented, critically acclaimed, hugely popular and filthy rich. It's not 
good for morale. It's easy to see why Shakespeare would risk his life to 
see her - she looks sublime. With her long golden curls and delicate 
features, she calls to mind Botticelli's Birth of Venus. Paltrow's Viola 
is also strong-willed, intelligent and romantic. She also has (yet 
again) a faultless English accent (at this stage, she's just showing off 
). The prurient amongst you may also appreciate the fact that she strips 
off - rest assured it's in the best possible taste.
The supporting cast are uniformly solid - Ben Affleck as the egotistical 
actor playing Mercutio (who can't believe he gets killed off early), 
Dench as the Queen (wryly amused by the prospect of Wessex being 
cuckolded by a penniless artist), and Wilkinson and Rush as the 
producers. 
The movie, though sumptuous in terms of costume and scenery, makes no 
real claim at veracity whatsoever, and one suspects that Shakespeare's 
antics, as portrayed, would have shortened his life considerably in 
reality. There are some minor quibbles - some of the humour is a little 
farfetched - but these are very minor distractions. What is refreshing 
is that a movie such as this can get made in the first place. As we 
approach the 1999 Oscars, Gwyneth Paltrow must surely get at least a 
nomination for her performance. Funnily enough, one of her rivals may 
well be Cate Blanchett for her portrayal of...Queen Elizabeth. 
 
 
 
Directed by John Madden.


Title
Review for Vita č bella, La (1997)
A review from the Stockholm Film Review 
http://www.fortunecity.com/lavendar/heat/435/
Roberto Benigni's "Life is Beautiful" (La vita č bella) is a modern 
fairy tale, as touching and as relevant as the tales collected by the 
Brothers Grimm to entertain, enchant and ,yes, to scare children over 
150 years ago. Like many such tales (such as Snow White) this 
storyteller is not afraid to explore the dark side of humanity in order 
to highlight the power of good. And, in this century, what could be much 
darker than the concentration camps of World War 2, and the attempted 
extermination of entire peoples on the basis of alleged 'impurities' ?
The film begins on a truly whimsical note, with two young men, Guido 
Orifice (Roberto Benigni) and Ferruccio Orefice (Sergio Bini Bustric) 
motoring through picturesque sun-drenched countryside on their way to an 
Italian city to join their uncle and work with him. The car breaks down, 
and while Ferruccio attempts repairs, Guido, a happy-go-lucky but 
intelligent sort, wanders to a nearby farm. There, a beautiful woman, 
Dora, (Nicoletta Braschi) falls out of a hayloft, into Guido's arms. He 
is immediately smitten, though she is merely amused by his antics as he 
tries to impress her.
When the two men reach the city, Guido's plan to open a bookstore are 
scuppered by the inadvertent (though comical) upset he causes to the 
local councillor whose permission is required. However, he meets Dora (a 
schoolteacher) several more times, though each time it is in most 
unexpected manner. He woos her, and she seems interested. Unfortunately, 
she is to be married to the same arrogant councillor whose wrath Guido 
has already incurred. However, in a grand and magical sequence, Guido 
finally wins the hand of his princess, the name he has given her from 
their first meeting.
The challenge of Benigni's work is that it binds two diametrically 
opposed subjects in a balanced and entertaining way. His tale of a 'love 
that was meant to be' is told engagingly and whimsically in the first 
part of the movie. The second part of the movie delves into horror and 
tragedy which test the limits and meaning of such love (indeed any 
love). The second half of the movie is set in a concentration camp, five 
years later. Guido, Dora (now his wife) and their son Joshua have been 
sent there along with their uncle, (Giustino Durano). Dora is separated 
from the others, and Guido tells Joshua that their imprisonment is 
really a game, and that the winner of the game will win a real tank 
(Joshua's unfulfilled birthday wish). Thus, the guards are all part of 
the game, and certain rules must be observed in order to gain enough 
points to win. 
The first half of the movie, set in pre-war Italy, sets the tone for the 
events to follow by contrasting the evolving relationship between Guido 
and Dora, with the slow slide of Italy into the Nazis' Final Solution. 
When Guido is working as a waiter (and still trying to win Dora) , he 
encounters a school inspector who will visit her school. Guido turns up 
early, posing as the inspector, only to find out that the inspector was 
to deliver a race superiority lecture to the pupils. Guido invents a 
funny and satirical alternative. Of course, we, the audience, cannot 
fail to see the irony of a bunch of dark-eyed and sallow-skinned five 
year olds receiving a lecture on the superiority of the blue-eyed, blond 
Aryan nation.
When the teachers in the school complain that mathematical problems such 
as "What is the total cost to the state if the cost of each lunatic is 
four crowns and each cripple five, and there are 20, 000 in total" are 
being asked of the pupils, it is not because the questions are sinister 
and tasteless, but because the multiplication is too difficult for five 
year olds. The teachers rue that" it is not too hard for a German five 
year old". 
The second half of the movie focuses on the characters rather than the 
horror that confronts them. Guido is forced to work in the ironworks at 
the camp knowing that if he can no longer work, he will die. Even though 
he is weak and dreadfully tired after every day, he keeps a cheery face 
for Joshua so that the facade of the game never drops. This sometimes 
requires him to take extreme risks but Guido never hesitates. His love 
for his son is complete. In the same way, Dora had the option of evading 
the camp but chose to be with her family, albeit remotely. The central 
characters never allows their humanity to be overwhelmed by the events 
and the callous indifference shown to them by their captors. When 
Guido's uncle (Giustino Durano) is being led to the 'showers', a female 
guard stumbles and he helps her. He retains his dignity despite knowing 
his fate.
The movie has been criticised for trivialising the Holocaust; unfairly 
in my opinion. It is true that certain events in the movie are a little 
unrealistic. Perhaps Guido would not have escaped punishment for some of 
his antics in a real camp. But the appalling nature of the camps is 
never denied - merely pointed up in a subtle way. Joshua complains that 
he cannot find any of the other children competing for the prize. Guido 
tells him that they are better at hiding than Joshua, and only the child 
best at hiding will win. Guido knows the real reason for the lack of 
children is because they were all gassed once they arrived.
Guido meets an old friend in the camp - a Dr. Lessing (Horst Buchholz, 
reunited with Benigni from Faraway, So Close) whom Guido used to pit his 
wits against in games of riddles. Now Dr. Lessing decides who is fit to 
work and who must be sent to the 'showers' (fit to die, so to speak). 
Begnini's performance is central to the success of the movie, and his 
screen-time with his son Joshua (Giorgio Cantarini) is convincing and 
affectionate. Funnily enough, the weakest part of the story is why Dora 
and Guido get together (Braschi is Benigni's real-life wife). Yes, it is 
meant to be a tribute to the power of serendipity and fate. But, while 
we know that Guido is a good person, all we know of Dora is her beauty 
(which is a prerequisite for a princess in a fairy tale, I suppose), and 
that she hates her fiancée. Buchholz and Durano are also quietly 
effective as the doctor and the uncle respectively, using the slightest 
of expressions and gestures to convey a world of emotion and meaning.
Benigni's (who is director and co-writer of the film) use of a 
concentration camp as a backdrop to his story is a brave and inspired 
move. Though comparisons with Spielberg's Schindler's List are 
understandable, Life is Beautiful is closer to Charlie Chaplin's The 
Great Dictator. Both Chaplin and Benigni use the plight of 'the common 
man' to underline the effects of fascism. However, Chaplin resorted to 
rather obvious sentimentality which he contrasted with a heavy-handed 
satirical portrayal of Hitler. Benigni does not need to put horns or 
tails on his 'bad guys'. Their events and deeds speak of their character 
loud and clear. (To be fair to Chaplin, he did not have the benefit of 
hindsight). At a time when similar atrocities are still taking place in 
an area only a few hours flight from most cities in Europe, it is also a 
timely reminder of the consequences of such madness. This is a truly 
adult fairly tale; triumphant, poignant, timeless and one which will 
linger long in the minds of those who see it, and creating memories that 
one will wish to revisit time and time again.


Title
Review for Rounders (1998)
(c) The Stockholm Film Review
http://www.fortunecity.com/lavendar/heat/435/rounders.htm
After law student Mike McDermott (Matt Damon) loses all of his money in 
a poker game to a violent Russian loanshark Teddy KGB (John Malkovich), 
he promises his girlfriend Jo (Gretchen Mol) that he has given up 
gambling for good. This pledge is put to the test nine months later when 
a childhood friend (and fellow cardsharp) Lester "Worm" Murphy (Edward 
Norton) is released from prison. Lester is heavily indebted to 
loansharks and is anxious to win enough money to pay them back. However, 
while Mike relies on his skill to read body language and keep track of 
which cards have already been played, Lester prefers to cheat.
John Dahl's examination of card players seems like two movies grafted 
clumsily together. The first is a low-budget tale of people on the 
margins - desperately hoping for the big score which they think will 
transform their lives without realising that their obsession can only 
consume them rather than save them. The other movie is a star vehicle 
for rising stars Damon and Norton, with heavy-duty cameos from 
Malkovich, John Turturro and Martin Landau. Unfortunately, the synergy
does not add to the entertainment.
Dahl evokes the seedy surroundings of seedy back-street gambling dens 
most effectively and populates this environment with realistic 
characters. Turturro plays a professional poker player, Joey Knish, who 
'has never worked a day in his life' since he earns a solid if 
unremarkable income from his card games. McDermott (who is close to him) 
is vaguely contemptuous of Knish because he never risks everything just 
to bluff an opponent (which is how McDermott lost all his money to begin 
with). There's nothing glamorous about Knish and the other players - 
since the all know the tricks of the trade, they don't win much money 
off each other. Occasionally, they all head out to Atlantic City and 
separate some unsuspecting tourists from their cash.
Since gambling involves losing money, loansharks feature heavily on the 
scene, and the collection of a particular debt provides the dynamic 
which drives the film. On his release, Worm tempts Mike back into an 
all-night game with some wealthy students. Since the students don't know 
that the two are working together, Worm pretends to lose everything 
while Mike makes a killing. However, Mike doesn't realise the extent of 
Worm's debt and that Worm has been using Mike's name to gain credit and 
to run up more debt.
As Worm's luck turns bad, and his debt increases, he find out that his 
debt belongs to Teddy KGB, who will resort to very extreme methods to 
retrieve his money. His only hope is to raise enough money by going on a 
non-stop gambling spree in a week. Since Mike is a better player, Worm 
needs to his help or his doomed. This poses a dilemma for Mike, since he 
knows that he will lose his girlfriend and probably his law-degree if he 
agrees to help Worm.
John Dahl's previous movies (such as Red Rock West and The Last 
Seduction) have centred around deception and are usually inhabited by 
people with a very healthy distrust of each other. One would think that 
a film about poker-players, given that deception is an integral part of 
the game, that enable Dahl bring the same darkly gleeful interplay 
between the main protagonists. This doesn't happen, simply because the 
plot is too pedestrian to provide any diversions from the well-trodden 
path of predictability.
There are certain conventions which are always followed in film-making. 
For example, in a western, we all know that at the end of the movie, the 
hero (unless it's a horse) will strap on a gun, walk down a dusty street 
and shoot it out with the bad guy. Similarly, in a movie that features 
games such as pool or cards, there will have to be a climactic 
winner-takes-all match at the end, between the underdog, no-hope hero 
and the reigning champion whom nobody has ever beaten. Dahl doesn't 
stray from this convention and his intentions are clearly signalled from 
the outset of the movie. It is a bit surprising, considering the offbeat 
and original treatment he afforded to the genre of the heist movie in 
his previous work.
The weakest element, by a mile, is Matt Damon. He is not the least bit 
convincing as some-one so obsessed with gambling that he will sacrifice 
his career and relationship for gambling. His fresh-faced, clean-cut 
looks contrast sharply with the worn, faded appearance of the other 
card-playing characters, and it simply not credible that he could 
inhabit, with ease, the same world as Teddy KGB and Turturro (excellent 
as the world-weary Knish). His miscasting is highlighted by the 
narration (delivered by Damon) which is wise beyond his years - the 
voice simply doesn't fit the story it is telling. Damon seems to have 
taken the concept of a "poker face" too seriously, since he reserves the 
same half-smirk to express every emotion. I'm an admirer of Damon as an 
actor, but I did not think that this was a good performance. 
Edward Norton fares better as Worm, though his role is less substantial. 
His character is simply present to act as a foil for Mike and to test 
his resolve, and is subsequently less well developed. Though the 
supposed bond between Mike and Worm is crucial to the film, it is 
entirely unconvincing, and as Worm gets himself into more trouble, there 
is no clear reason why Mike should stick with him. The conflict between 
Mike's gambling and his duties as a law student are glossed over, except 
to provide some perfunctory conflict between him and his girlfriend 
(also a law student). The prospect and consequence of giving up law 
school is hardly considered. Gretchen Mol looks as beautiful and 
delicate as porcelain, but she and Damon might as well be brother and 
sister in the film as lovers, such is the lack of passion between them. 
However, this is a fault of the script rather than the actors, since 
they have very little time together onscreen. 
The supporting cast are far stronger, though Malkovich's Russian accent 
is more likely to provoke laughs than evince menace. Despite Dahl's 
attention to detail early in the movie, the film resorts to some 
standard Hollywood tricks later in the movie. Both Worm and Lester seem 
to be able to do without sleep for days at a time without feeling (or 
looking) any the worst for wear. They are both the recipients of a 
Rodney King-style beating , but are back on their feet with just a few 
scratches in the next scene. And Norton's character seems to do some 
particularly stupid things just to propel the plot to the next scene.
Rounders is a bit like The Cincinnati Kid or even The Color of Money 
when it should have been like The Hustler - solid without being 
unexceptional. Given the cast and the director, I would have expected 
far more.


Title
Review for Nephew, The (1998)
A review from the Stockholm Film Review
http://www.fortunecity.com/lavendar/heat/435/
Tony Egan (Donal McCann) devotes his time to farming a small holding on 
the Irish island Inishdaragh. He gets a shock when he receives a letter 
from America from his estranged sister. It is twenty years since she 
left, and she has written to Tony asking him to look after her teenage 
son Chad, since she is dying and he is her only living relative. When 
Chad (Hill Harper) arrives, his presence causes a reaction among the 
people of the island, and also revives a dark episode in Tony's past, 
which had lain simmering since his sister's departure.
There are a number of enduring themes in Irish story-telling, regardless 
of whether the medium is prose, theatre or film-making. One is the 
claustrophobic nature of small-town or rural life in Ireland, which is 
accentuated in an island community. No relationships of any sort can 
escape the attention of the community, and the close-knit nature of the 
community means that a destructive act can ripple throughout and affect 
everyone. Another is the long-lived nature of people's memories, where 
deeds of ancestors continue to colour the lives of the living. And, of 
course, no self-respecting Irish drama is complete without the sea. The 
sea, which introduces visitor and invader alike, and which provides the 
means of escape, usually to the new world (America). 
All of these themes feature in The Nephew, though happily as merely 
background material for a light-hearted and funny love story. It is 
probably just as well, since the story (by Jacqueline O'Neill and Jack. 
P. Steele) is almost too complex for its own good. Chad returns to 
Inisdaragh to learn more about his mother's family and background. His 
quest causes unease amongst several of the locals, especially his uncle, 
but also the local bar-owner, Mr. O'Brady (Pierce Brosnan, who also has 
a credit as executive producer). Egan and O'Brady hate each other, and 
the source of that hatred is a relationship between O'Brady and Chad's 
mother decades earlier, and Egan's opposition to it. Matters aren't 
helped when Chad begins to woo O'Brady's daughter, Aislin (Aislin 
McGuckin). If that wasn't enough, Chad incurs the enmity of Peter (who 
secretly desires Aislin), and whom Egan pointedly ignores every time 
they meet, even though Egan is friendly with his mother, the local 
postmistress (played by Sinéad Cusack). Phew !
Luckily, the potential for a gloomy drama is avoided by large helpings 
of humour. Donal McCann is one of Ireland's most underrated and 
versatile actors, and he conveys just enough bitter humour with 
dourness, guilt and regret to retain our sympathies. Egan's actions in 
the past has irreparably changed the course of his family for worse 
rather than better, and now Chad's arrival offers him a similar set of 
choices - can he live with the same consequences ? The blossoming 
relationship between Chad and Aislin is also nicely done (though Chad's 
interest in her is never clear - her friend Rachel (Lorraine Pilkington) 
seems far more fun). 
There are some nicely observed scenes, particularly Chad's encounters 
with farming, and a very funny (and accurate) depiction of a choir at a 
Roman Catholic mass, which features Tony (Phelim Drew) who appears 
throughout the movie to liven it up. Unfortunately, one of the better 
moments is spoiled by the trailer. 
The film is not without its flaws - the relationships dovetail too 
neatly, and are far too conveniently resolved, considering the dark 
nature of the story. In fact, the story would be better served with less 
characters, since some of them never develop beyond bare outlines. The 
character of Peter (Luke Griffin) does nothing but sulk and glower in 
every scene, but there's little else he can do since he has so little 
dialogue. Pierce Brosnan seems so intent on not upstaging anyone that he 
practically fades into the background - it's a shame that his character 
does not have a more central role.
The director never really captures the feeling of a small island 
community either - panning shots of mountain ranges and expansive lakes 
don't help (the movie was filmed in Wicklow, by the look of it), and 
there are probably too many shots of characters staring dolefully out to 
sea. 
Nevertheless, the Nephew is surprisingly good fun, and the instances of 
emotional catharsis are well outnumbered by comic moments.

