Authors
Homerodah
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Ta'm e guilass (1997)
The Palme D'Or was shared in 1997 between The Taste of Cherries, and
Shohei Imammura's The Eel. The two films are in many ways negatives of
each other; Eel chronicles a rebirth in many ways while, Cherries
narrates the slow progression of an ending. The award is evidence of
Kiarrostami's continued popularity with Western critics. This has been
a double edged sword for the filmmaker; although widespread interest
in his films has been generated, it has often resulted in reductionist
readings of them that avoid discussions of Persian and Middle Eastern
culture.
One of the most marked aspects of the film is its simplicity. Working
form an extremely spare premise and limited number of set-pieces,
Kiarrostami speaks volumes about the human condition in general and
Iranian society in particular. The triad of encounters that the main
charater has serve to clearly delineate positions from the state (the
soldier) religion (the religious student) and science (The
taxidermist). There is no trickery, no artifice, no manipulation,
virtually no story and no pretense whatsoever.  Kiarrostami has stated
that the era of cinema as a storytelling medium has ended and that
responsible cinema today must pose questions.  This certainly the case
with his latest effort which leaves the viewer contemplating a number
of philosophical contradictions.
The tone of the film is as persistent and stubborn as its protagonist.
There is a refusal not to continuously challenge the viewer to
question any assumption. For instance, Kiarrostami spends the first
twenty minutes virtually without a piece of dialogue and no expository
information about the main character. This opening sequence invites
the viewer to exhaust every possible cultural stereotype that comes to
mind concerning this man's motives before finally revealing his true
intentions. This patience and willingness to engage the viewer are
trademarks of the Iranian director's style.
The ending of the film has been read in a number of ways and is bound
to frustrate some viewers. In some ways Kiarrostammi plays a similiar
trick as Araki in Nowhere. The endings of both films sabotage the
narrative in ways that may appeal to a commercial audience (for
cursory reasons) but that leave a final dilemma for a more active
spectator. All of these considerations lead to a major film for 1997
and one that we can be shocked, and greatful, even found its way to
Ottawa.
