Authors
Jamahl Epsicokhan
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
(Warning to those who have not seen SEVEN: This review contains some
spoiler information.)
     SEVEN is a powerful, fully-realized film on the level of THE
SILENCE OF THE LAMBS.  It is a disturbing film that accomplishes its
biggest of goals--it occupies the viewers mind long after the closing
credits have rolled.  While this film is not for the squeamish, there
is no denying that SEVEN demands attention, for it is a film that
transcends its genre in both style and substance.
     For starters, classifying SEVEN as a "thriller" would not be an
altogether complete classification of this film.  While I was genuinely
thrilled throughout, I would rather call SEVEN an "intense drama,"
because that is what it delivers--meaningful scenes with a
relentlessness that does not readily let up.  Part of Director David
Finchers accomplishment is in style.  He seems to have a knack for
knowing exactly how the average person fears something as "simple" as a
corpse.  And visually, Fincher shows us the remains of murder victims
in all-too-realistic and graphic terms (courtesy of Rob Bottin's
always-grisly special effects).  Throw in the appropriate but
not-to-be-underestimated effects of lighting and a foreboding score and
the result is a technical masterpiece of the murder scene.  These
scenes alone are quite impressive; as fascinating as they are
harrowing.
     Yet, SEVEN is more than just a technical accomplishment.  In
addition to style, Fincher supplies substance.  SEVEN has compelling
characters that it wants us to know and understand, and Fincher ties
them all together in a completely pessimistic view of society.
Detective William Somerset (Morgan Freeman) is a man who has nearly
given up on the world.  Its easy to see why.  The world doesn't make
sense.  (Somerset drives this point home with a rather ghastly story of
a robbery victim who was attacked just blocks from the police
precinct.  After knocked down and robbed of his wallet, the attacker
stabbed the helpless man in both eyes.) Why should Somerset believe
that by following this murder investigation and "picking up the pieces"
he will be able to catch the killer?  Somersets new partner, David
Mills (Brad Pitt) has not given up on the world, perhaps because he is
still young (and perhaps by having this optimism he's naive in this
films portrayal of the world). He completely disagrees with Somersets
abandonment of hope.  However, David's wife (Gwyneth Paltrow) has so
much fear of her urban surroundings, she isn't even sure if she wants to
*tell* her husband about her recent pregnancy, let alone carry it until
birth and attempt to raise it in this environment.  These three
characters are all performed with skill and authenticity that makes
them feel like real people and not the typical Hollywood characters a
lesser film might have offered.  And in addition to making clear how
each of these characters sees the world, Fincher gives us support for
*why* they feel the way they do.
     But if there's one character that underlines the message SEVEN is
trying to convey, it has to be the killer, John Doe (Kevin Spacey).
SEVEN's payoff lies in its ability to allow us to see how the killer
views the world and what drives him to do what he does.  One important
thing to remember about Doe is how easy it is to simply dismiss him as
a "psycho," with no motives behind his slayings.  This is exactly the
mistake Mills makes.  In the extremely intense and superbly performed
closing scenes, were allowed to see that Doe is, in his mind, merely a
product of society.  He's a killer who kills those who are bringing
society down.  In his mind he didn't kill "innocent" people, and,
perhaps, they were not completely innocent (but, then again, who is?).
Hes absolutely infuriated that Mills believes that the murder victims
were innocent.  Really, SEVEN doesn't just comment on the superficial
obviousness of how screwed-up John Doe is.  SEVEN makes larger
statements about how screwed-up society is, hinting that society's
degradation is simply conducive of creating more John Does.
     Besides the stylistic and larger-issue arguments for seeing this
film, I recommend SEVEN because it is, after all, also a very slick and
well-made thriller.  It features exciting plot developments, commanding
performances, lots of suspense, and a conclusion that is chilling,
riveting, and quite unfair.  But then again, its a cruel world.

Title
Review for Star Trek: First Contact (1996)
Foreword: This review is a little later than I had hoped for, but I finally
have it done. Beware the length; it's quite long, the longest review I've
ever written. There's also a lot of synopsis in this review, because I felt
compelled to describe the plot in detail in my analysis. With that said...
Warning: This review contains extreme spoilers for the TNG feature film,
"Star Trek: First Contact." If you haven't seen the film yet then proceed
only at your own risk.
Nutshell: Very good stuff. Probably the best of all Trek films, with an
involving story and a skillful, even-handed approach.
Story by Rick Berman & Brannon Braga & Ronald D. Moore
Screenplay by Brannon Braga & Ronald D. Moore
Produced by Rick Berman
Directed by Jonathan Frakes
"Someone once said, 'Don't try to be a great man, just be a man, and let
history make its judgment'."
"That's rhetorical nonsense. Who said that?"
"You did, ten years from now."
   -- William Riker and Zefram Cochrane
--------------------
"Star Trek: First Contact" is one of the best Star Trek films--probably
*the* best Trek film--definitely the most even-handed. It successfully
balances just about every element I believe a good Trek film should
have--superior production and special effects, plenty of humor and fun,
involving conflicts and problems that must be overcome, and a compelling
story with human themes and values consistent with Gene Roddenberry's
optimistic vision. All of it is wrapped into a very neat package of plotting
and pacing. It's good Star Trek, and it's good cinema.
As an added bonus, "First Contact" brings back the Borg, perhaps the most
interesting and menacing race of villains in the history of Trek. Ever since
their introduction in TNG's second season episode "Q Who," the Borg have
been the most compelling threat to the Federation. In that episode, they
were simply hungry for any technology that was different and new.
Negotiation was not a factor; they wanted your stuff, they were without a
doubt bigger and stronger, their hive-like collective was overwhelming, and
if you resisted them, they would destroy you.
A little more than a year later in "The Best of Both Worlds," the writers
clarified another element of the Borg that made them even more
terrifying--the fact that they wanted not only your technology but also
*you*--they wanted to turn you into a mindless drone, to strip you of your
individuality and add you to their single-minded collective. Unlike the
relatively boring and simple-minded aliens of "Independence Day," who simply
wanted to destroy everyone and everything in their path, the Borg instead
threaten you with a fate worse than death: Their goal is to absorb people
and technology and forcibly make you one of them, so that you will become
one in their hive of conquerors.
That Borg ship was destroyed, but not before they assimilated Captain Picard
into their collective and stripped him of his individuality, which was only
regained after the cunning intervention of the Enterprise crew. Now the Borg
have returned, and they're again bent on doing whatever it takes to
assimilate Earth.
"First Contact" opens with a powerful and magnificent-looking shot--part of
a flashback dream sequence that begins as an extreme close-up of Captain
Picard's eyeball, and then tracks back to reveal Picard standing in a Borg
module on a Borg ship. The camera continues to track backward for what seems
like miles, showing what must be millions of Borg drones on the massive
vessel collective--of which Picard has forcibly become part of. Picard
suddenly awakens in his ready room aboard the new Sovereign-class
Enterprise-E, which, we learn, has been in service for nearly a year now.
A message comes through from Starfleet Command. The Borg have been
identified in Federation space, and they're on a direct course for Earth;
and as Picard states, this time there may be no stopping them. Further,
Starfleet orders Picard away from the battle--they fear his past
assimilation by the Borg may instigate an unstable element to an
already-volatile situation.
Well, no points for guessing that once the Borg start pounding on the
Starfleet ships and the losses start rolling in Picard takes it upon himself
to violate direct orders and engage the Enterprise in battle. What's
surprising here is the speed with which the film launches itself. Unlike in
"Generations" two years ago, little time is wasted here on old jokes or the
reintroduction of the TNG cast (a nature of the film keeps the plot taut and
should actually increase accessibility for non-Trekkers). Within ten minutes
of the opening credits, the Enterprise is in the heat of battle with the
immense Borg cube--as is the Defiant, commanded by Worf, apparently ordered
to the battlefield as part of a reinforcement effort.
I must say, seeing a Trek battle of this magnitude on the big
screen--especially with that huge Borg ship--is a sight that probably alone
is worth the price of admission. It looks great. Particularly attractive are
the organic motions of the Defiant, which flies around the screen with such
graceful, eye-pleasing movements that it makes war look almost like
choreography.
Perhaps one negative aspect about the initial battle with the Borg is that
it ends a little too abruptly and easily. As Starfleet's resident expert on
the Borg and their weaknesses, Picard orders the fleet to concentrate their
fire on a specific point, which destroys the Borg cube in a nifty
pyrotechnic display. But this victory transpires a little more easily than
it really should have--especially considering Picard's aforementioned notion
that "this time there may be no stopping them." By beating the Borg in five
minutes under only partially explained circumstances, the threat feels a
little less real than I hoped it would have, not up to the level of the Borg
assault on Earth back in "Best of Both Worlds."
But there's a flip side to this coin. Like I said, "First Contact" wastes
very little time--the pace of the movie is pretty fast, and once the Borg
cube is destroyed and the damaged Defiant crew is beamed aboard the
Enterprise, the main plot takes off. You see, just before it explodes, the
Borg cube launches a smaller sphere which creates a "temporal matrix" that
allows it to travel back to the latter half of 21st century. While in
pursuit, the Enterprise is caught in a temporal wake, and upon realizing
that the Borg intend to change history by assimilating Earth in the past,
Picard decides he must follow the Borg back and prevent such an occurrence.
Okay, so it's Yet Another Time Travel Plot. Time travel can be dangerous
territory in terms of plausibility, because it sets up the possibility of
the all-encompassing Time Paradox. Fortunately, the film steers clear of
most of the technobabble and confusion, and wisely delves into its story.
Still, time travel has been done on Trek so many times ("Star Trek IV,"
"Generations," and numerous episodes of TOS, TNG, DS9, and Voyager),
sometimes without success. There are a few things about "First Contact's"
logic of time travel that annoy me, like, for example, how time suddenly
became something that the Borg could manipulate at will, and how the
Enterprise reconfigures the time matrix at the end of the film to get back
to their time period. Such complaints are minor, however--the importance
here is the story once the movie goes into the past, which easily makes the
ends justify the means.
The Borg and the Enterprise arrive at Earth, April 4, 2063--shortly after
the widespread destruction of World War III that leaves the planet
particularly susceptible to an invasion; but, more importantly, as the crew
quickly notes, this date is the day before the historic "first contact"
between humans and intelligence beyond the solar system, which is supposed
to take place when Zefram Cochrane (James Cromwell), the Montana-based
inventor of warp drive among humans, takes a test flight in his
revolutionary space craft, to the interest of some extra-terrestrials who
are passing near Earth's star system.
The Borg want to prevent first contact and assimilate humanity, but the
Enterprise intervenes and destroys the Borg sphere. Before the loss of their
ship, however, the Borg are able to beam a small invasion party aboard the
Enterprise, and begin assimilating the ship and its crew like a cancer from
the inside.
>From here, the story divides into three narratives. One involves Picard,
Worf, and the Enterprise crew's efforts to contain the Borg from taking over
the ship. A second centers around Data, who is kidnapped by the Borg during
a confrontation and taken to the lower decks they control where they attempt
to assimilate him into their collective under the command of an element new
to Borg milieu--the Borg Queen (Alice Krige), a single entity who represents
the mind behind a massive collective of drones. A third follows Riker,
Geordi, and Deanna's attempts to see to it Cochrane's warp flight goes
through as history plans.
The type of movement between different plot lines exercised in "First
Contact" is nothing unfamiliar to Trekkian story structure, but under
Frakes' tempered direction, the plot holds together just fine and scenes
work. Most importantly, the plot proves consistently interesting and the
story remains involving. The key to the film is its big picture--the way it
works all of its elements into a coherent, cohesive whole in which each
development manages to be something both entertaining and relevant.
Picard's fight for the Enterprise takes an understandable and sturdy
character-driven turn--that of vengeance. The motif begins subtly; such
lines as Picard's order, "Don't hesitate to fire on crew members who have
been assimilated," make sense in their context, but also add to the bigger
agenda--that of Picard and his hatred of the Borg for what they do to any
who stand in their path, and--more specifically--what they did to him six
years ago. The vengeance factor present here is deftly executed, thanks in
part to another of Patrick Stewart's convincing performances. But another
important aspect here is in the screenplay's ability to make points about
this theme. For this purpose the writers have a character named Lily Sloane
(Alfre Woodard), Cochrane's 21st century assistant who winds up lost in the
bowels of the Enterprise after a series of events. Sloane is smart, and she
makes some keen observations about Picard's situation, at one point drawing
a very pointed comparison between Picard and Captain Ahab of "Moby Dick."
Woodard's energy is very commendable; she and Stewart work well together in
a host of scenes of varying depth.
It's clear that Picard allows his anger to cloud his judgment, particularly
when he refuses to arm the Enterprise's self-destruct sequence and orders
the futile fight for control of his ship to continue. This throws him into
conflict with Worf in a charged scene filled with fiery words. Conflict is
tough to do amongst the TNG cast, but the filmmakers pull it off here by
making Picard decidedly *wrong* and, further, insulting Worf for trying to
set him right. Based on TNG's history between Worf and Picard, Worf's very
Klingon response to Picard's insults seems sincere: "If you were any other
man, I would kill you where you stand." Pretty startling. (If the later
scene where the two make up seems a tad easy, remind yourself that this is
the TNG cast we're talking about.)
The entire revenge theme speaks for itself much of the time, and it's a
credit to the writers that the film looks at the situation from so many
perspectives. In one way it's easy for us as the audience to hate the Borg
and the relentless strive toward oneness and mass consumption they represent
(especially those of us who so vividly remember Picard's experience in "The
Best of Both Worlds"). On the other hand, many of the Borg now trying to
alter history used to be members of the Enterprise crew, and it's unsettling
to watch Picard barely bat an eye after damn near *enjoying* gunning down a
Borg (in an elaborate holodeck sequence) who used to be one of his own
Ensigns. Of the themes in "First Contact," this is the heaviest and most
complex, and the writers give it the analysis it deserves.
As Picard and the crew attempt to quash the Borg cancer, Data finds himself
in the position Picard was six years ago--on the Borg "operating table,"
where they attempt to turn him into one of them. For some reason, the Borg
take a particular interest in Data; they see him as the key to the human
puzzle that has defeated them once already. There are a host of intriguing
exchanges between Data and the Borg Queen, with some dialog that's really on
the mark. Data's quest for humanity has always been something pervasive on
TNG, but here the dialog reveals another purpose--it underlines the evil in
Borg oneness. Whereas data's quest is a search for his own human
individuality, the Borg simply conquer and force their way of life on
others, in their effort to become a more "perfect" network of drones. And as
Data so rightly points out to the Borg Queen, "to think of oneself as
perfect is often the feat of a delusional mind." The Queen has some retorts
of her own, and knows that Data's quest for human feelings is his weakness
and goes so far as to tempt him closer to the Borg collective with human
flesh, grafting it onto his circuitry for true skin sensations. It's a witty
and ironic approach by the script, that the key to the Borg's removal of
humanity from humans would be in giving Data more distinctly human
characteristics.
The Borg Queen turns out to be one of the film's most interesting
characters, partly in the way the filmmakers realize her--both physically
and mentally--but also because of Krige's skillful rendition of a calm,
seductive personality who aims to simultaneously consume and create Data
anew, as well as humanity along with him. (A particularly nice display of
the Queen's sense of superior tranquillity comes when Data attempts to
escape but freezes in pain when cut on his newfound flesh by Borg drones.
The Queen simply waves her hands and the drones disperse in random
directions, like a group of mindless insects. A very neat touch.) Michael
Westmore's makeup designs for the Queen, as well as the rest of the Borg,
are great--slick, creative, interesting to the eye, and very, well, Borg.
Noteworthy in the Data/Queen scenes are Data's emotional responses of fear
and subdued anger--appropriately utilized rather than released to run amok
like in "Generations." (This makes sense, since Data would have learned much
about controlling his feelings since that time.)
As the Enterprise copes with its problems, the script also supplies a
lighter story as Riker and Geordi attempt to convince Zefram Cochrane that
he's really a key figure in the future and that humanity is within a day of
being forever changed for the better. While the Borg-centered angle of the
story supplies issues of individuality and survival, this part of the story
is the true, Trekkian "heart" of the film. It deals with humanity and how it
views itself in the prospect of change. Riker's explanations to Cochrane
about how much the world will change after first contact is one of the many
highlights of the film. And, besides, the character interaction in this
story is just plain infectious. Cromwell, in particular, turns out to be an
amiable presence, with a lighthearted performance containing much grace and
humor--I liked Zefram Cochrane a lot. (I honestly don't remember the
Cochrane character that appeared in TOS, but I don't care, either.)
I could fully understand why Cochrane would be overwhelmed learning that
he's to be labeled a historic visionary. And I got a kick out of the whole
bit with the statue that Geordi explains, and the idea that the savior of
the future is merely a guy who wants to get drunk and make enough money to
retire to an island of naked women. (For that matter, I was amused at the
notion of Cochrane getting Deanna tipsy, agreeing to talk to her only after
"three shots of something called tequila.")
In a key passage, Cochrane explains to Riker that his motives were hardly
visionary--that he is not and does not want to be the "great man" that
everyone in the future knows him to be. Riker has a response:
Riker: "Someone once said, don't be a great man, just be a man, and let
history make its judgment."
Cochrane: That's rhetorical nonsense. Who said that?
Riker: "You did, ten years from now."
It's dialog like this that defines the Star Trek universe. It's reassuring
that at least some cinematic version of the future has imagination and hope
for humanity and still has the prudence not to always take itself so seriously.
As much that takes place in "First Contact" (and as haphazardly as I've
probably summarized it here), it's a credit to screenwriters Brannon Braga
and Ronald D. Moore that they manage to tie everything into an sensible,
efficient whole. They also manage to spread the material around all the main
TNG characters--much better than in "Generations." While obviously Picard,
Data, and the guest characters get much of the material, given the size of
the cast it's nice to see that everyone gets into the action one way or another.
And the plot's action provides some fresh and creative technical feats. The
most impressive set-piece is a neat zero gravity situation on the hull of
the ship, where Picard, Worf, and Lt. Hawk (Neal McDonough, who
unfortunately is provided little purpose in the film except to be the token
"dead meat" character) attempt to thwart the Borg's attempt to build a
beacon on the deflector dish. The special effects are convincing, to say the
least, and the entire episode is played out in a sort of slow-motion. In a
word, this is clever.
There's also the aforementioned Dixon Hill holodeck scene that Picard and
Sloane venture into to elude some Borg pursuers. The idea takes time out
from the standard chase to nearly transform into a movie with a life of its
own, complete with all the typical characters. (I particularly got a good
laugh out of the "Nicky the Nose" gag--one of the most subtly amusing
notions in the film.)
Naturally, there are the obligatory cameos--Robert Picardo as the EMH, Ethan
Phillips as a holodeck character, and Dwight Schultz recapping his character
Barclay at his most Barclayness--in the context of the film though, they
fit, particularly the moment when Barclay so enthusiastically meets
Cochrane, which underlines Cochrane's whole annoyance with being constantly
identified as a historical figure.
Nearing the end, the film brings the three plot lines together, with the
launch of Cochrane's warp rocket, the evacuation of the Enterprise (which
Picard finally comes to terms with losing and puts on a countdown to
auto-destruct), and the Queen's revelation to Picard that she has found an
"equal" to her in Data, who she is convinced is completely under her
control. She orders him to destroy Cochrane's warp ship with the
Enterprise's torpedoes. The most cheer-worthy moment of the movie, at least
for me, came when Data turned "Resistance is futile" around on the Queen,
much to her horror and disbelief. In one line, Data shows his ability to
keep his loyalty to humanity, surprising an arrogant creature and bringing
the entire Borg collective down with her. Nice job--it had me cheering.
After the Queen's demise, I still had some questions that left me a tad
perplexed, like, for instance, how exactly the Queen was on the Borg ship in
"Best of Both Worlds" that was destroyed. Seeing her again causes memories
to resurface in Picard--he remembers the Queen as the master behind his own
attempted assimilation. The Queen's retort that his feeble human mind is too
limited to understand was mysterious but unrevealing. Perhaps my primitive
three-dimensional mind isn't supposed to understand it, either. Too bad; I
would've appreciated understanding the Queen's history a little better. As a
symbol of oneness she works great, but the specifics are a tad overly vague.
As compensation, the film allows us to witness first contact between the
humans and the Vulcans. Without going too much into detail, I'll just say
that the sequence is a poignant, effective payoff, and a great way to end
the movie. I think it's the best scene in the entire film and one of the
better moments in Trek's history, with a genuine sense of wonder and
amazement and a real epic feel (and Jerry Goldsmith's theme is top-notch).
It lays down some of the background of the Federation, which I've always
wondered about, and it reveals that Star Trek cares not just where it's
going, but also where it came from. As a Trekker so close to the series, I
was moved. (Don't begin to ask me how a non-Trekker would react, though--I
wouldn't know.)
"First Contact" is not really the action-packed "Borg movie" the trailers
want to suggest. It's got action and adventure, sure. But it's really about
assembling a sci-fi plot to entertain in thoughtful ways, using the
resources and history of the seemingly-immortal concept of Trek itself. If
this film is an indication of where the franchise intends to go, I'll gladly
be aboard for the next ride.
--------------------
This review Copyright (c) 1996 by Jamahl Epsicokhan, all rights reserved by
the author, including the right to reproduce with the intent of unauthorized
distribution, electronic or otherwise. This review is an original work of
fair criticism and remains the property of the author.
Star Trek: Hypertext --
  http://www.students.uiuc.edu/~epsicokh/trek/
Jamahl Epsicokhan -- epsicokh@uiuc.edu

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 4 (1998)
This review contains some minor spoilers for the feature film "Lethal
Weapon 4," but I promise not to give away any major revelations
concerning the plot.
Nutshell: An unfocused action film, but an amiable revisit to the
characters.
Cast includes: Mel Gibson (Martin Riggs), Danny Glover (Roger
Murtaugh), Joe Pesci (Leo Getz), Rene Russo (Lorna Cole), Chris Rock
(Lee Butters), Jet Li (Wah Sing Ku), Steve Kahan (Capt. Ed Murphy),
Kim Chan (Uncle Benny), Darlene Love (Trish Murtaugh), Traci Wolfe
(Rianne)
Ah, Martin Riggs and Roger Murtaugh, how well we've come to know them.
In "Lethal Weapon 4" they banter back and forth at a mile a minute,
exchanging one-liners so quickly that sometimes we can't keep up.
Sometimes we realize it's just as well we can't keep up; the jokes
probably wouldn't be all that funny if we didn't know these two and
their familiar shtick so well. The "Lethal Weapon" series has managed
to survive so long because it allows its lead characters to interact
in quirky, amusing ways, usually with rapid-fire dialogue exchange.
These two are the definitive team for the buddy cop formula. And Mel
Gibson and Danny Glover, who play the entertaining duo, usually look
like they're having a genuinely good time up there.
All things considered, "Lethal Weapon 4" is an entertaining but
muddled movie. I'll look back on it fondly because it puts these two
guys on the screen for one last dance. But the problem with "Lethal 4"
is that it's torn between two agendas and never quite finds the happy
medium.
On one hand we have a movie that tries tirelessly to bring us up to
date with the lives of all the characters we last saw six years ago in
"Lethal 3," while simultaneously introducing new characters into the
mix. On the other hand, we have the unfolding action movie cop plot,
which often seems so unfocused that it looks as if the screenwriters
considered it only as an afterthought.
On the character plane, we have Riggs and Murtaugh, who must set some
sort of record for continuing to talk at the same time. Meanwhile,
they must also set some sort of record for getting mileage out of what
should be increasingly stale jokes. As always, the two argue over just
when they should go when "going on three." And, of course, their
adventures are bound to answer the question of just how much of
Murtaugh's personal property can be destroyed in the course of a few
days. Here the potentially stale jokes seem more like old friends.
But when you bump into an old friend, that doesn't mean you can simply
ditch your job, which is what "Lethal 4" has a tendency to do. There
is a plot of sorts here, but it's so choppy and constantly interrupted
by more trivial matters that it's hard to get wrapped up in any of it.
It involves a mysterious martial arts expert from Hong Kong (Jet Li)
who is heading some sort of criminal conspiracy involving illegal
Chinese slave labor and some foreign prisoners. The nature of the
conspiracy I won't get into, but it takes so long for the movie to get
this aspect of the plot off the ground that the Li character simply
becomes one of those menacing, half-defined movie villains--and not
all that compelling of one, either. That's too bad, because Li has
some phenomenal martial arts moves.
Meanwhile, there's Li's connection to the murder of some immigrants
and Murtaugh's subsequent attempt to do right by inviting into his
home a family of homeless immigrants he finds at the crime scene. The
notion is amiable, and in the tradition of humanizing the "Lethal
Weapon" characters, but none of this really comes together to a
satisfactory resolution.
Director Richard Donner and the screenwriters don't seemed very
concerned about the plot. The film is more a comedy than anything
else, and plays more like a sitcom than a cop drama. Previous "Lethal"
movies managed to sustain some sort of serious dramatic undercurrent,
but "Lethal 4" can't seem to get its tongue out of its cheek for more
than five seconds at a time.
For example, Chris Rock appears in a major supporting role as a rookie
cop who joins Riggs' and Murtaugh's investigation. Much of Rock's
dialogue is fast and funny, but the personality isn't really a
character so much as an excuse to bring Rock's stand-up routine into
the movie. On that level, it's effective, but there's very little
story-building at work here, despite some of the obvious potential.
Even when it's revealed that Rock's character has been secretly
married to Murtaugh's daughter, it's played for sitcom laughs based on
contrived misunderstandings.
Joe Pesci's appearance as Leo Getz is merely perfunctory, as if he
came back just to recite his obligatory lines--although there's a
quirky scene where Rock and Pesci prove that louder can be better.
Rene Russo reprises her role as Internal Affairs officer Lorna Cole,
but because her character is pregnant she's forced out of most of the
action.
The other "Lethal" movies added something to the canvas of the
characters that felt like genuine development. This story,
unfortunately, is paper-thin and too interested in being lightweight,
warm, and fuzzy. Riggs and Murtaugh exist mostly to get on the screen
and engage their shtick full speed ahead, and not to face any new
personal challenges. Most of what they face in this movie is
trivialized merely to move the jokes along.
But even so, there's room for some stuff that's of interest. I
particularly enjoyed the notion that we've come full circle, and now
Riggs is finally feeling the burden of old age set in. No longer can
he beat the bad guy (or even his sparring partner) purely with his
manic physical prowess. Riggs is realizing that he himself, in the
tradition of the long-lived "Lethal" catchphrase, is "too old for this
s---."
Even if Riggs and Murtaugh *are* too old for such nonsense, the series
proves it still has some energy left in its action sequences. There's
an exhilarating chase sequence--involving Riggs being dragged down the
highway on a table attached with a plastic tarp to a mobile home--that
is gleefully destructive. I also liked the manic comic goofiness of
the opening minutes of the movie, where a madman in armor blow torches
an entire city block. A showdown with Li near the end is also nicely
staged, although it goes so far over the top that it becomes absurd.
There's also a bizarre interrogation scene that takes place in a
dental office, where, through events that I won't even begin to
describe, the room fills with nitrous oxide, causing everyone in the
room to laugh uncontrollably. The scene isn't one of the movie's high
points, but you've got to give the filmmakers credit for going all
out.
"Lethal Weapon 4" is the least of the series, but it serves its
purpose: It's goofy, mindless summer entertainment. It could've been
more than that, but for what it does it gets the job done.
It's obvious this film exists more to please fans of the "Lethal"
series--and to give its cast and crew their final curtain call--than
it does to tell a story. The ending has a ring of finality to it,
which is hammered home with a surprising overabundance of narcissism.
Indeed, the excessively cheesy final minutes of "Lethal Weapon 4" feel
almost like the final episode of a high-rated sitcom series. But I did
find the ending strangely infectious, even poignant.
I will miss Riggs and Murtaugh. And all of their friends and family as
well.
-----
Copyright (c) 1998 by Jamahl Epsicokhan, all rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction or distribution of this article is
prohibited.
Jammer's Movie Reviews - http://www.epsico.com/movies/
Jamahl Epsicokhan - jammer@epsico.com

Title
Review for Bulworth (1998)
This review contains some minor spoilers for the feature film
"Bulworth," but I promise not to give away any major revelations
concerning the plot.
Nutshell: A smart, funny, and pointed political satire that takes some
risks.
Cast includes: Warren Beatty (Jay Bulworth), Halle Berry (Nina),
Oliver Platt (Dennis Murphy), Don Cheadle (L.D.), Paul Sorvino (Graham
Crockett), Jack Warden (Eddie Davers), Christine Baranski (Constance
Bulworth)
Distributed by 20th Century Fox (USA)
Screenplay by Warren Beatty and Jeremy Pikser
Produced by Warren Beatty and Pieter Jan Brugge
Directed by Warren Beatty
The central figure in "Bulworth" is a man who is fed up with the
pointlessness and nonsense of the system. The problem is, he's part of
the system--a U.S. senator who plays the political game not unlike, we
may suspect, every other person in American politics. He's trapped in
a world where words and image mean everything and in-practice policy
and true intentions mean virtually nothing.
The man is democratic Senator Jay Bulworth, portrayed by Warren Beatty
in a hypercharged, madcap performance that borders on the surreal,
which is perfectly appropriate, since "Bulworth" is a film that exists
in a sort of surreal state. This isn't a film about realistic events
or circumstances; it's all about attitude. The movie is a commentary
that takes situations and twists them into exaggerated parodies of the
American political arena.
As the movie opens, Bulworth, the incumbent up for re-election, sits
in his office in a trancelike state, staring blankly at footage from
his own TV campaign ads. He hasn't eaten or slept in days, but instead
has been pondering the nature of his political existence. He's
disgusted to the point of catatonia. He has reached a point in his
career where everything he does exists simply to serve his own
campaign's interests. Why is he even in office? All of his
advertisements and speeches begin with the same sound bite: "We stand
at the doorstep of a new millennium." But just what does that mean?
It's an irrelevant line of hogwash--frosting that just sounds good.
When you think about it, it doesn't serve any useful purpose.
One of his wealthy campaign contributors (Paul Sorvino) is a powerful
corporate influence in the insurance industry--a right-winger who is
happy that Bulworth's new platform takes a more conservative slant
than in the past. Sorvino's character is the type whose opinion of
blacks boils down to being a fan of Colin Powell and Michael Jordan,
but not at all sympathetic where black poverty and crime are
concerned. So the fact that Bulworth's new policy is to step away from
social programs and aid is a big plus in his book.
But Bulworth doesn't seem very interested with the issue at all. He
wants out--now. So he hires out a hit on himself. Set to travel to
California for his campaign, he expects to be dead before he returns.
("If I'm not dead by Monday, I'm going to stop payment on that
check.") Once he gets to California it seems like campaign business as
usual, until Bulworth realizes that he might as well make the best out
of knowing he's not going to see the end of next week.
>From here, Bulworth ceases all self-censorship and simply says what's
on his mind. When he gives a speech early in the film in front of an
African-American community, he says the only reason he made any
promises to black voters is so that he could garner their votes. Sure,
we've seen this "tell all truth" slant on such material before, but
the difference in "Bulworth" is that all of the film's points
eventually turn inward to stare the political machine straight in the
eye.
A big part of the movie's comedic sell is the way Bulworth's newfound
cavalier attitude leads him into a techno-rap dance club, where he
jams the night away with Nina (Halle Berry), a young black woman from
South Central L.A. who proves with each succeeding scene that there's
more to her than anyone might suspect.
As a satire, "Bulworth" is often scathing and always pointed, and it's
interesting to ponder the intended audiences of a film starring and
directed by a 60-year-old white guy and featuring a soundtrack that's
wall-to-wall with youthful hip-hop. After his night in the club,
Beatty's character incorporates rap into his political campaign, much
to the bewilderment of his campaign manager (Oliver Platt). Scenes
where Bulworth "rhymes" his speeches to a well-to-do audience or on a
TV broadcast could've been hopelessly silly, but Beatty pulls it off,
finding the balance between zany, tongue-in-cheek farce and blunt
social commentary. Beatty's decision to push the envelope pays off; I
was constantly interested in where the movie would go next, and was
glad that it pulled few punches.
As the plot unfolds and Bulworth careens from one campaign site to
another, he finds himself in an enigmatic relationship with Nina, who
has some interesting political views of her own. Bulworth, of course,
also realizes he has been freed from his burden of politics and thus
no longer wants to die, so both he and Nina find themselves on the run
from the apparent hitman whom Bulworth hired. The chase takes on a
life of its own.
In the process, the movie devours cliches just as fast as or faster
than it acknowledges them. The irony of the movie's use of rap music
in juxtaposition with politics is interesting; some politicians
frequently target rap as a social problem, but Bulworth's answer to
the accusation that rap is "obscene" is particularly interesting. In a
world with so many tangible problems, blaming the entertainment
industry seems more than just a little ridiculous.
As a comedy, "Bulworth's" laughs are generated through witty social
mockery as well as the plot's obvious sight and dialogue gags. The
pace is fast and furious; one of the film's biggest appeals is the
high-energy buzz generated by the rapid-fire dialogue. You have to
listen fast in many scenes, because the film is a constant earful.
Many characters serve to unleash snippets of the screenplay's points
of view, and some have entire speeches that add to the film's canvas
(particularly an interesting drug dealer character played by Don
Cheadle, whose exploitative use of his advantages is compared to the
methods of politicians). Such speeches are sudden an lengthy--yet
remain just far enough outside the confines of sullen
seriousness--that we always know "Bulworth" is a comedy, but also that
it is an angry comedy with a lot on its mind.
The topics range anywhere from big-business economics versus
government spending, the plight of forgotten minorities in the
inner-cities, the inefficient use of media to cover politics, and the
fact that drug use isn't limited to back alleys (Bulworth's campaign
manager snorts cocaine whenever his stress levels breach their
limits)--really, anything is fair game. Essentially, the movie is an
argument for socialism. But it's worth noting that a man like Bulworth
could never maintain a plausible existence in our mainstream political
system, which is perhaps why the film's closing scene is all the more
honest and true.
Perhaps everything about "Bulworth" can be summed up in that first
scene, where the "doorstep of the next millennium" is uttered over and
over again until it becomes its own useless cliche in the sea of
political cliches. Maybe, the film argues, that's what politics is all
about: It's all window dressing used to spice up a process that
doesn't serve its people nearly as adequately as it should. "Bulworth"
offers little in terms of realistic solutions to the problems it
points out; it is, essentially an angry farce that is willing to
tackle anything and everything it can muster. But it's so much smarter
and fresher than the average movie. It may not know exactly how the
world can be fixed, but it certainly knows that there's more broken
with America than the people in Washington would likely be willing to
acknowledge.
-----
Copyright (c) 1998 by Jamahl Epsicokhan, all rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction or distribution of this article is
prohibited.
Star Trek: Hypertext - http://www.epsico.com/st-hypertext/
Jamahl Epsicokhan - jammer@epsico.com

Title
Review for Fail-Safe (1964)
Warning: This review contains some spoilers for the 1964 film "Fail-Safe."
If you haven't seen the film yet, proceed with caution.
Nutshell: A relevant, intelligent, suspenseful drama. Still powerful today,
even after the end of the cold war.
Screenplay by Walter Bernstein
Based on the novel by Eugene Burdick and Harvey Wheeler
Produced by Max E. Youngstein
Directed by Sidney Lumet
The most ironic aspect of nuclear war is that it doesn't have a winning
side and a losing side. In a nuclear confrontation, everybody loses, and
the aftereffects have devastating effects that impact the entire
world--assuming the world survives. The idea--and perhaps the only real
option--is to avoid war at all costs. This is the theme of Sidney Lumet's
"Fail-Safe," a fictional drama based on the novel by Eugene Burdick and
Harvey Wheeler.
"Fail-Safe" takes place during the heart of the cold war (the actual film
was released two years after the Cuban Missile Crisis), when the United
States and the Soviet Union were in static discord over an issue that can
be summarized in a single word: communism. The premise centers around a
combination of accidents and operation flaws. Five U.S. bombers carrying
nuclear warheads are ordered to set a routine course for Moscow after an
unidentified aircraft is spotted heading toward America. The unidentified
aircraft turns out to be a commercial airliner, but a mechanical failure
strikes the military base that commands the bombers. Suddenly out of
contact, and with standing orders to remain on course until receiving new
directives, the bomber pilots cannot be recalled, and they proceed to
Moscow with the intention of destroying it with a nuclear strike.
A great deal of "Fail-Safe"'s plot follows various characters as they
attempt to devise ways of stopping the U.S. bombers from reaching Russia's
borders--at any cost. The plot is compelling, and the story creates urgency
and dread by painting the grimmest of worst case scenarios. The reality
sets in quickly as one attempt to turn the bombers after another fails.
General Bogan (Frank Overton), taking orders directly from the President of
the United States himself (Henry Fonda), is powerless--the fate of the
world lies in the hands of an automated, pre-programmed system that may not
be stoppable, simply because the creators of the war machines were too
efficient in their task to make a no-win situation winnable. 
The events in "Fail-Safe" are fascinating because they're anything but
predictable, but the real reason "Fail-Safe" works is because it
understands more about nuclear war than what exists within the confines of
its plot. A key ingredient to the film is its ability to create an ongoing
polemic about nuclear war, communism, the cold war, and the United States'
role in all of it. Most of this is through the film's use of the character
Groeteschele (Walter Matthau), an arrogant civilian theorist of nuclear
weapons use who, incidentally, is on the President's advising staff for
analyzing the statistical plausibility of waging a nuclear war.
Many of the film's most pointed messages arise from discussions where
Groeteschele is one of the key voices. Early in the film, he hosts a dinner
party where he explains the importance of "strategy" in a nuclear assault
to "minimize" casualties. "What's the difference between 60 million and 100
million dead?" a guest asks impatiently. "Forty million," Groeteschele
responds wryly. The problem with Groeteschele's mindset is that he
*believes* nuclear combat to be a viable method of war. The only difference
to him between nuclear Armageddon and conventional warfare is the raw data
and the casualty totals.
Groeteschele realizes that these weapons can destroy the world several
times over. Yet his answer to the arms race is not to slow down and try to
cool the situation off, as General Black (Dan O'Herlihy) has often
recommended. On the contrary--according to Groeteschele, that would lead to
Russia having *more* nuclear weapons than the U.S., which would clearly put
America at a disadvantage. Such a stance was perhaps the central paradox
and misguided practice of the arms race. "Fail-Safe" clearly sees it as one
of the central issues of the cold war, and, likewise, it becomes a central
theme in the film. Why continue to build such machines of mass destruction
while already possessing enough of them to destroy the world several times
over? Is it wise? Is it even logical? No, not really.
Although "Fail-Safe" is more about the issue of nuclear weapons than it is
about the political ramifications of communism, there is a scene in the
film that deals with communism in an intentionally superficial, one-sided
sort of way. Again, this is achieved through Groeteschele, who is easily
the film's most important character in terms of the larger-theme
significance. In addition to providing the central "pro-nuclear war" voice
that the film warns against, he also makes key remarks about Communists
that show just how much fear and resentment people of the period were prone
to when it came to communism. The context the film uses suggests that this
hatred was often glib. One of Groeteschele's "logical" trains of thought
ventures so far into fantasy theoretical prediction that it's merely
absurd. He labels the average Marxist an "unfeeling, calculating machine"
that will do whatever it takes to preserve itself. Groeteschele takes it so
far as to say that if the U.S. drops the warhead on Moscow, the Soviets
will *instantly* surrender, for to retaliate would invite counter-measures
that would further destroy Russia's home soil--which must be preserved at
all costs. Groeteschele seems to forget these people are human beings with
emotions; General Black quickly reminds him that the Soviets would attack
out of revenge--as any normal person would. The irony here is
Groeteschele's own mechanical theorizing. He is so quick to judge the enemy
that he doesn't even realize his own seemingly programmed thought patterns.
Once the film makes it evident that turning the U.S. bombers will be
impossible, the question becomes what the *consequences* of destroying
Moscow will be. Just how will the Soviet Union's leader react, and what can
the President do to convey his best intentions? (Just *how* does one pass
off the deaths of millions of people as an *mishap*?) With the help of his
translator Buck (Larry Hagman), the President negotiates at length with the
Soviet leader, in scenes that prove amazingly taut and powerful in their
simplicity, with Lumet's long takes of Fonda and Hagman in the same frame,
exchanging the dialog between the President and the Soviet leader. Without
getting into too much detail, I will say that the compromise they
ultimately reach is very costly, yet necessary and as sensible as possible
under the circumstances. (That is, as sensible as a nuclear "incident" can
probably be.) It does accomplish what it must: it avoids an all-out war,
something that simply isn't possible because of its all-too-real
consequences. Dramatically, the ending is quite powerful, and the use of
O'Herlihy's character as the symbolic "matador" (providing a bookend to the
film by ending the story while tying into his dream sequence from the
film's opening), is particularly appropriate.
"Fail-Safe" is a production of a major Hollywood studio (released by
Columbia Pictures), and it has the structure of a high-tension suspense
thriller that one might expect from a Hollywood film. Nevertheless, under
Lumet's direction and Walter Bernstein's intelligent adaptation of
Burdick's and Wheeler's novel, the film continues to have a lasting effect
even after the events on screen have unfolded. The film often warns that
the automation of war is something that may make nuclear holocaust an
unintentional consequence of such mass arming. But it was the conscious,
human choice to *initialize* this automatic arming that "Fail-Safe" also
finds dangerous. In retrospect, the arms race seems to be one of the most
puzzling exercises in futility of the century. It's just fortunate that
both sides were finally able to come to their senses and slow down, rather
than continuing Groeteschele's dangerous approach of speeding up and
causing a possible meltdown.
--------------------
This review Copyright (c) 1997 by Jamahl Epsicokhan, all rights reserved by
the author, including the right to reproduce with the intent of
unauthorized distribution, electronic or otherwise. This review is an
original work of fair criticism and remains the property of the author.
Star Trek: Hypertext --
  http://www.students.uiuc.edu/~epsicokh/trek
Jamahl Epsicokhan -- epsicokh@uiuc.edu

Title
Review for Star Trek: Insurrection (1998)
First, a moment of silence for the passing of Gene Siskel, a man who, along
with Roger Ebert, helped bring film criticism to the mainstream of America...
--
Hey, it's only two months late. Hey, the movie is no longer even playing in
most areas. But I promised it; here it is.
Warning: Spoilers follow for TNG's latest feature film, "Star Trek:
Insurrection." If you--after all this time--still haven't seen the movie,
then proceed only at your own risk of spoilage.
Two years ago, "First Contact" set a very respectable new standard for the
Star Trek film franchise. It maintained the perfect balance of everything
Trek cinema should, in my view, have: action, humor, neat sci-fi technical
aspects, a story with imagination and wonder, and an overall sense of
insight regarding what Star Trek is about. At the same time, it was
approachable as good science fiction, so even a non-Trekker would probably
find it well worth the time.
"Insurrection," on the other hand, is more of a Hollywood comfort film.
Omnipresent in the movie is the sense that everyone involved was so intent
on having fun while making it that they could barely extend themselves far
enough to tell a story bearing any consequence.
Don't get me wrong; there's a lot that works in "Insurrection." But overall
I couldn't escape the feeling that I was watching actors who were trying
very hard to deliver lighthearted lines with the underlying attitude of,
"Oh, but this is all just fluff and fun--feel good about it!" than a
genuine attempt to say much new about their characters or the state of the
Federation or Star Trek universe.
The plot involves a science-fiction device that's older than science
fiction itself: A Search for the Fountain of Youth. The fountain might lie
within the planet of the Ba'ku, a peaceful non-technological people who, as
the movie opens, are being watched by Starfleet. Is it a prelude to first
contact, or something more insidious? Starfleet high-ups talk ominously.
The plot thickens: Suddenly, Data comes bursting onto the scene wearing a
suit that makes him invisible to the naked eye. (Pretty neat.) Having been
damaged, he's malfunctioning and out of control. He turns his phaser on the
hidden Starfleet watching post, making it visible to the nearby Ba'ku. The
issue involving the Ba'ku is forced when Picard is brought to the planet to
disable and retrieve Data, who is operating on "conscience" alone: Data
knows there's something morally wrong with the Starfleet plan for the
Ba'ku, but he has no mental process for addressing it. What's Starfleet's
unusual interest in this planet--located in a turbulent and unstable area
of space known as the "Briar Patch"--and what is the motivation behind the
Son'a, the race with which Starfleet has allied itself while investigating
this world?
Who are the Son'a? Well, for one, they scream "BAD GUYS" in capital
letters. They speak in gruff, stern voices and wear ominous-looking hoods.
(How does a hood look ominous? I dunno; it just does.) And they look as if
they've had skin grafts on their faces just a few hours ago--probably
because they have; on more than one occasion in the movie, we see them
receiving grafts while lying down under a device that literally stretches
their faces to make the new skin fit better.
Once the Enterprise arrives on the scene, Picard, along with Worf (whose
presence on the Enterprise is so contrived this time around that we aren't
even allowed to *hear* most of the throwaway lines explaining it), retrieve
Data in an action scene combining music, singing, special effects, and
goofy comedy in a somewhat unlikely yet effective way that sets the tone
for the film: light, funny, relatively inconsequential, fairly diverting.
With Data's memory restored, a quiet investigation of the Ba'ku village
leads Picard to uncover the planet's mystery. A Ba'ku woman named Anij
(Donna Murphy) gives Picard the brief tour and history of their people. As
it happens, the Ba'ku are not as technologically primitive as they appear;
they were warp-capable space travelers at one point, but a small subset of
their civilization abandoned the problems of technology in favor of a
simpler life in this village. Picard becomes more suspicious of the
situation when he and Data discover a cloaked ship resting in a lake not
far from the Ba'ku village. The ship is equipped with a massive holographic
grid, purpose unknown. Eventually, Anij levels with Picard: The Ba'ku do
not age on this planet. No one does.
It's not long before the brass have to come clean with Picard: Admiral
Dougherty (Anthony Zerbe), on orders from the Federation Council, has made
a deal with the Son'a to relocate the Ba'ku to another planet, using a
holographic simulation on the specially designed ship as a way of
transporting them without their knowledge and therefore, as what would be
the cause for objection, without their consent. The Federation wants to
study the world because of its properties that slow or halt aging, and
they've made a deal with the Son'a because only they have the technology
that will allow Starfleet to harvest any permanent scientific advances from
the planet's mysterious properties. Unfortunately, this will leave the
planet uninhabitable. Starfleet has looked at other alternatives, Dougherty
tells Picard, but this is the only option.
Picard calls the action an outright theft of a world. He will have nothing
to do with it and intends to argue the matter with the council. Problem is,
doing so would render the issue moot; by the time the council hears what he
has to say the Ba'ku will be relocated (which could potentially have
serious consequences to their survival) and the planet will be all but
destroyed.
The morality question is the film's most interesting element: At what point
do the ends justify the means? Is research of a phenomenon that could
literally be a fountain of youth benefiting billions of people worth
sacrificing one's principles? After all, Dougherty argues, it's only 600
people. But how many people, Picard responds, does it take before it
becomes wrong?
As interesting as the moral question is, the film doesn't develop it nearly
as far as it could've and should've. The film's titular "insurrection"
comes when Picard and crew decide to take up arms ("Lock and load," Data
says, obviously unaware he's been reprogrammed as a sound bite for
Paramount Studios) and defend the Ba'ku from being forcefully removed from
the planet. Being inside the Briar Patch, with complications arising from
the intervention of the Son'a and a host of other mitigating factors, the
Enterprise crew's actions comprise not so much an insurrection as a minor
resistance against an adversary that becomes completely severed from the
rest of the Federation's knowledge and control (though I must admit that
"Star Trek: Isolated Skirmish" probably wouldn't have been a very good
movie title). Picard isn't taking a stand against the Federation; he's
taking a stand against Dougherty, who's judgment and actions clearly become
suspect as the film progresses, thanks to the presence of Son'a leader
Ru'afo (F. Murray Abraham) who's personal interest in the matter is neither
selfless nor subtle.
Particularly since Ru'afo changes the master plan whenever he damn well
pleases--deciding to remove the Ba'ku from the planet by force once Picard
intervenes--the moral ambiguity dissipates rather quickly, turning the
conflict into an entertaining but routine example of the Enterprise crew
versus the bad guys. Admiral Dougherty just gets stuck on the wrong team.
That's a shame, because a real "insurrection" could've been very
interesting--something that might've actually challenged the moral compass
of the Federation. I liked the idea of Picard putting his career on the
line to defend these people, but if two-thirds into the film it becomes
clear that Picard's actions will ultimately be unquestionably heralded as
the Right Thing by the Federation Council, it seems a little too much like
the Easy Way Out. The risk to Picard's career isn't real because he was
never in any real danger of facing any consequences.
The "battle for paradise," as the taglines put it, works through a familiar
two-tiered plot structure. On one level is Picard's planet-bound defiance,
as he leads the Ba'ku from their village into the rocky area terrain where
they can hide from flying Son'a "tagging" devices, which tag people with
small transmitters that beam them into a Son'a ship's holding cell.
On the other level is Riker in command of the Enterprise, which is pursued
by Son'a ships, leading to the entertaining requisite battle sequences
involving technobabble and gas particles that ignite and explode, thanks to
the volatile properties of the Briar Patch. The space battles between the
Enterprise and the Son'a ships (which look really cool, by the way) are fun
in their cavalier sense, including a line where Riker actually says, "We
aren't running from these bastards anymore!" and then uses a *joystick* to
manually take control of the helm. Meanwhile, Geordi is ejecting the warp
core as a necessary defensive measure, and when the Son'a regroup for
another assault, Geordi gets the priceless opportunity to say, "We're fresh
out of warp cores!" I liked the departure from the TNG battle standard
(this turns back the clock to "Star Trek II" battle attitudes), although
the cavalier sense also supports my argument that the film panders to a
mass-market audience.
Of course, if you want mass-market pandering attitudes, you don't have to
look much further than the humor undercurrent. The tone of "Insurrection"
is very different from "First Contact" (and very different from its own
advertising campaign), and I have no problem whatsoever with that. Star
Trek has always been diverse in story theme and approach. The problem with
this approach, however, is that "Insurrection" has a tendency at times to
beat the audience over the head with the sentiment.
Natural humor is one thing; obligatory forays into humor are another.
"Insurrection" has both, but it seems there's more of the latter than the
former.
Example: "Have you noticed your boobs starting to firm up?" Beverly asks
Deanna in one scene, obviously amazed at the wonderful benefits of a
Fountain of Youth. Data overhears. Then he walks a few feet away and
repeats what he has overheard to an innocent bystander. Funny? Somewhat so,
if for the wrong reason--the I'm-surprised-they-stooped-to-such-silliness
reason. There's plenty of that sort of thing in "Insurrection." Worf is
detoured into the film mostly so he can be on the receiving end of jokes
involving pimples and the nature of Klingon puberty. (I suppose that's
better than Gates McFadden's character, though; for the third movie in a
row, Crusher is reduced to a cog in the wheel of the plot and given little
to do.)
I have nothing against Trek humor, but I enjoy it more when it comes
naturally. "Star Trek IV's" humor was somewhat understated, and grew
naturally from the characters as we knew them. "Insurrection," however,
goes on fairly large detours of circumstance to arrive at goofy situational
humor, and comes off as more forced as a result. But some of it is fun.
And concerning matters of romance ... it's something of a mixed bag, too.
The Riker/Troi thing is something that's obviously been in the character
histories for a long time, and I particularly liked the amusing issue
concerning Riker's beard. But this is the sort of thing that worked better
in television series format, where one could get an update every few weeks.
Coming in the third TNG film, it seems out of the blue, and I have to ask
if it's worth the time given how rarely we see the cast these days. It's
exactly the sort of thing that makes "Insurrection" more difficult for the
non-Trekker to understand; they aren't in on the joke. In film format, I'd
rather see a solid story than a bunch of detours into past elements left
unresolved.
Picard's gradual affections for Anij make more sense in story terms, and
the chemistry between Patrick Stewart and Donna Murphy is always right
there on the edge of being powerful ... yet it doesn't quite get there.
Anij has an ability to slow down time, and she shares this experience with
Picard, but in the flurry of the plot the romance almost feels like an
afterthought.
The other subplot involves Data's friendship with the young Ba'ku boy,
Artim (Michael Welch). Artim initially fears Data as an artificial being,
as he was raised without an understanding of technology, but a friendship
begins to develop, especially after the boy's father, Sojef (Daniel
Hugh-Kelly), is tagged and beamed away to the Son'a ship. This subplot is
amiable, but not very useful in terms of Data's quest for humanity. We've
been here, and done this, haven't we? There's also the whole issue of
Data's emotion chip, which now apparently can be removed on a whim. My
question to the producers of the TNG film series: Do you want Data to have
emotions or not? Whatever the case, it's a waste to simply have Data in a
state of non-growth. The dialog here between the android and the kid at
times seems to regress Data back to mid-run of the television series--at
the very least pre-"Generations." There are only so many opportunities for
Data these days; wasting him like this is a shame.
Overall, the guest cast is entertaining, but, again, thin. They certainly
cast these roles perfectly, and the guest actors did a great job with what
they were given. Unfortunately, they simply weren't supplied with much
substance.
Anthony Zerbe is perfect as Admiral Dougherty, a figure of bureaucracy that
finds himself on the wrong side, comes to his senses too late, and pays the
price for it. He gets the movie's best death scene when Ru'afo knocks him
around and then shoves him into one of the face-stretching machines and
face-stretches him to death. Fine and good, but there isn't much subtlety
or depth to Dougherty concerning his motives and actions. His about-face
once the situation runs out of control is nothing short of obvious, and the
second he went into a room alone to confront Ru'afo, I said to myself,
"Welp, he's gonna die."
As a villain, Ru'afo is essentially a thug. He isn't coolly bitter like
Malcolm McDowell in "Generations," and he isn't manipulative or mysterious
like the Borg Queen in "First Contact." He's an intimidating brute short on
patience and high on repressed rage, and he doesn't hesitate to throw an
admiral around a room when he gets ticked off.
It's almost as if a conscious decision were made in the pre-production
stage that Ru'afo would be a return to the scenery-chewing comic-book
villains like Khan or Kruge (which is not to slight Khan at all, because
his style and dialog as such was unforgettable). The problem is, Michael
Piller's script doesn't give Ru'afo much in terms of good dialog to flesh
out the character. Lines like "If Picard or any of his people interfere,
eliminate them" seem to emanate from the comic-book realm.
But even if Ru'afo is a one-note thug, he's a *good* one-note thug. F.
Murray Abraham, not surprisingly, brings a lot to a relatively underwritten
villain, with an explosive anger and a directness that sells the
intimidation well. Abraham has an urgency that transcends the part, making
Ru'afo teeter on the edge of obsession and bitter fury. When Abraham says
something like "eliminate them," it's still enjoyable on a sort of cheesy
theatrical level.
Ru'afo's motives aren't very nice. Perhaps that's an understatement. Turns
out the Son'a and Ba'ku are really the same race. The Son'a had long ago
been expelled from the planet following an attempt to revolt against the
Ba'ku's non-technological ideology. Now the Son'a want the planet back (so
they can harvest its life-rejuvenating properties), and Ru'afo will do
whatever it takes to get what he wants. The Federation's interest in the
Ba'ku planet had unwittingly found its way into the middle of a blood feud.
I did appreciate that there's subtlety to be found in Ru'afo's number two,
Gallatin (Gregg Henry). He was also part of the original revolt against the
Ba'ku, but it becomes clear that all the killings Ru'afo is about to commit
to take the planet back is something eating away at Gallatin's conscience.
With time ticking down, Picard clues in on this, and, in a scene of extreme
swiftness yet surprising urgency (a Patrick Stewart performance can bring
urgency to about any situation) Picard talks Gallatin into listening to his
conscience and doing the right thing.
This leads to a series of events that nearly defies synopsis, as Picard
somehow beams Ru'afo and his crew onto the holographic-illusion ship to
trick Ru'afo into thinking he is on board his own ship. Thus, when he
thinks he's activating the "metaphasic injector" (the device that will
harvest the fountain of youth and poison the planet), he is actually only
flipping a dummy switch, thereby buying Picard and his crew time to foil
the plan. Jonathan Frakes, who brought great clarity to "First Contact,"
does his best in directing this confusion, but it somewhat strains
credibility. It makes more sense than it probably should, but I still felt
the symptoms of several double-takes.
Ru'afo figures out what's going on and beams himself onto the injector to
manually start it, leading Picard to beam over to stop him in The Final
Showdown [TM].
Like most everything else in the movie, the special effects are
entertaining and move the story along. But they're not
breathtaking--certainly nothing that connects the visual with the visceral
like, say, the opening shot of "First Contact." The invisible suits
comprised a reasonably interesting action scene. And there's the "palm
pet," which was cute but hardly essential. Then there are plenty of flying
tag robots, which provide a series of watchable though not exactly riveting
action scenes. And the decent holographic deceptions. Oh, yes, and Anij's
ability to slow down time until we can see the wing flapping on a
hummingbird--one of few visual effects that exists for its emotional
content rather than spectacle.
But most of the big special effects are about blowing things up. Case in
point: this final showdown, which comes complete with a Movie Bomb, which
naturally comes equipped with a digital readout that counts down while
beeping, while Picard and Ru'afo shoot at each other inside the metaphasic
injector--a huge device with awesome-looking space sails on the outside and
plenty of open space (conducive for a shooting gallery) on the inside.
Original villain death scenes are hard to come by these days, but Ru'afo's
death is another one of those instances where we're supposed to cheer when
Picard is beamed out of the exploding injector at the Last Possible Moment,
while Ru'afo gets blowed up real good. This is Hollywood moviemaking all
the way, lacking imagination and instead going with the safe bet.
In a way, Ru'afo's explosive demise perfectly sums up my feelings of
"Insurrection." Did I enjoy watching him blow up? Sure. Was there much
thought or ironic insight required to come to the conclusion that Ru'afo
must be blown up? Not a chance. Did I want something more? Yep.
The movie is entertaining in a superficial way. I sort of liked
"Insurrection." But I also felt kind of disappointed afterward. Considering
TNG movies only happen once every two (or more, in the future) years, it
seems to me that more should be done with a film than to make it a
glorified episode where the ship glides in, solves the problem, and glides
out--end of story. What's lacking are the lingering questions. A fountain
of youth is something that would change the perception of the entire
Federation. Isn't that worth examining? Having one admiral (who dies) as
the sole Federation representative for eternal youth is simply not enough,
and watching the Enterprise fly away from what could be the Greatest
Discovery Ever seems a little simplistic.
The bottom line is simple: The film is a good diversion. But you might want
to be sure your brain is in the "off" position before, during, and after
viewing.
--
Upcoming: Assuming there will be another TNG feature, I'm of the opinion
they should wait more than two years for the next one. As much as I like a
Trek movie, I'd much rather see them as "event" movies, rather than getting
in the habit of releasing them so frequently that the receiving attitude is
one of "Another Trek movie ... *already*?"
-----
Copyright (c) 1999 by Jamahl Epsicokhan, all rights reserved. Unauthorized
reproduction or distribution of this article is prohibited.
Star Trek: Hypertext - http://www.epsico.com/st-hypertext
Jamahl Epsicokhan - jammer@epsico.com

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
This review contains some minor spoilers for the feature film "The
concerning the plot.
Nutshell: Entertaining and efficient. The plot doesn't really add up,
but the movie works nonetheless.
Cast includes: David Duchovny (Fox Mulder), Gillian Anderson (Dana
Scully), Martin Landau (Alvin Kurtzweil), William B. Davis
(Cigarette-Smoking Man), John Neville (Well-Manicured Man), Mitch
Pileggi (Walter Skinner), Blythe Danner (Jana Cassidy), Armin
Mueller-Stahl (Conrad Strughold), Terry O'Quinn (Darius Michaud)
The new feature-length "The X-Files" provides a good example of what
"The X-Files" television series is all about. To that end, I was
simultaneously intrigued, entertained, bemused, and frustrated--a
perfect example of what the TV show tends to invoke in me these days.
If (heavens forbid) you've never seen "The X-Files" on TV, you'll
still get something out of this movie, which provides slick, efficient
summer escapism and doesn't require you to be an "X-Phile" in order to
understand the plot. On the other hand, even if you *are* an "X-Phile"
who knows all the convoluted plot lines, you're not likely to gain
much of an advantage over anyone else. This is a movie where plot
pieces are based on events from episodes that, really, could've meant
nearly anything a writer wanted them to.
For anyone who doesn't know the general outline of the "X-Files"
premise, the X-Files are bizarre, unsolved FBI cases that usually
feature paranormal circumstances. David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson,
who are destined to go down as one of the most famous character pairs
in history, play FBI Special Agents Mulder and Scully, a pair that has
benefited from an intriguing chemistry that isn't defined by a typical
friendship or romance (though the two certainly are close to each
other), but by a need to continue their mission in finding the truth,
whatever that may be.
Like much of "The X-Files" TV series' primary focus, Chris Carter's
story for this film is paranoid, implausible, and without any concrete
answers. And even though the movie tries to address a few questions,
it doesn't actually come to any resolution. Really, anyone expecting
to find believable circumstances or the answers to all their "X-Files"
questions is probably going into this movie with the wrong attitude.
"The X-Files" has proven over and over again that answers are probably
the last thing Mulder and Scully will ever find on their quest. What
they usually find instead are clues that lead only to new questions.
The film brings back a number of elements that have been featured on
the TV series, including pathogen-carrying bees, possible alien
visitation and conspiracy, and bizarre parasites that cause people's
eyes to turn to black.
I must admit that I somewhat wonder why we have been given an
"X-Files" feature at this point. The answer: probably because "The
money. Dramatically, Chris Carter's screenplay covers very little
ground that couldn't be traversed in two or three episodes of the TV
show. The movie, naturally, has better production values and special
effects than any television episode could realistically aspire to
(Gasp!--location shooting on "The X-Files"!), but at the core, this is
a story that could've happened any time on the TV series. It's
interesting: Now TV producers don't even wait for their series to
*end* before launching them into film franchises.
Like a lot of thrillers, this film benefits from the mentality of
cleverly executed set pieces. Scenes like one near the beginning of
the movie where an entire downtown Dallas office building is decimated
by a bomb explosion. Scenes like the one where the discovery of a
mysterious facility somewhere in Texas leads to an attack of the
largest swarm of killer bees I can remember in the movies. Scenes like
the one where a massive underground facility in Antarctica turns out
to be ... ah, but I won't say.
Overall, this movie is a good way to spend a couple hours at the
movies, but one thing that has always annoyed me about "The X-Files,"
and annoyed me in this movie as well, is the ability of a few
all-powerful men to manipulate the story's other characters in ways
that prompt near-complete incredulity and frustration.
Are we, for example, to believe that, when these men decide they want
to take control of Agent Mulder via the extremely roundabout way of
abducting Agent Scully, they have the ability to control or predict a
single bee, which manages to hide in Scully's collar for several hours
so it can sting her at precisely the right time? So much of the
mysterious men's "plan" is determinant on the most spectacular
coincidences that I wondered why they didn't just use their apparently
divine insight to control whatever in the universe they really needed
to take control of.
And who are these men, anyway? They all wear suits and recite vague
dialogue that promises to spell trouble. Trouble for whom, aside from
Mulder and Scully, we're never really sure. These men, of course,
don't have names. (The most important of them are played by William B.
Davis and John Neville, who are known merely as the "Cigarette-Smoking
Man" and the "Well-Manicured Man," respectively). Mulder always talks
about a global conspiracy, but what does that even mean? The
conspiracies of "The X-Files" most often are the conspiracies of comic
books; the stylistics surrounding the actions and dialogue of these
shady men are far more important than what actually happens.
But to that end, I enjoyed the riddles and mysterious dialogue. Martin
Landau turns up in a supporting role as a conspiracy theorist to offer
more mysteries, providing Mulder with ominous warnings of what these
men plan to do. How he knows and what he says I'm not even going to
begin to explain; this is a film that practically defies synopsis.
Yet the plot, surprisingly, is fairly easy to follow, which is a
credit to Carter and director Rob Bowman, who make sure we always know
where we are, what is happening and why. Sure, none of it can possibly
be believed in retrospect, but that's not really the point.
Besides, the questions I have about "The X-Files" are not related to
what various threads this movie will have either tied up or
complicated. Asking such questions is futile; we're not getting the
answers. My questions are a little more practical. Questions like,
just why is it all aliens in the movies are slimy and plastic-looking,
like the aliens in "Alien"? And why is it all aliens feel inclined to
chase people through ventilation ducts and make squealing sounds like
the creatures in "Jurassic Park"? And just how can Mulder and Scully
survive the frigidness of Antarctica without shelter, and who could or
would rescue them? And how did Mulder get to Antarctica in the first
place? Did the FBI fund the trip?
Maybe the plot is a bit ridiculous, but I don't really care. "The
universe, and must be gauged on a different level of realism. "The
the screen, and then wonder if it really makes sense. I urge you not
to spend much time thinking about it, because it's more fun to just go
with the flow.
What I most enjoyed about this film was the relationship between
Mulder and Scully itself. We learn that the X-Files have been recently
closed due to a lack of reasonable progress. Mulder and Scully are
back investigating "normal" matters, like bomb threats. The central
theme of the film is whether or not Scully will choose to leave the
FBI; finding no truth in the X-Files has taken its toll on her.
Naturally, this incredible adventure will convince her to stay, but
the real drama of the film is in the implications of her departure: it
would be tragic, especially for Mulder. These two are symbols of a
hopeless struggle against something--we're not sure exactly whom or
what or whose interests are represented--that lives to perpetuate a
sea of lies. But Mulder simply can't continue the mission alone. The
payoff is in knowing that these two people will continue their
crusades, no matter how insignificant, futile, and painful their
efforts might be.
As a storytelling setting, "The X-Files" is its own paradox. It claims
to have a truth that's supposed to intrigue us, but it probably never
will reveal that truth to its two central characters. The quest itself
is what is supposed to entertain us, not the possibility of solving
the mystery. Some people claim that "The X-Files" takes an infinitely
long attention span to truly understand. I disagree. "The X-Files"
shifts its own perception of the truth so often that it doesn't matter
what is true from one day to the next. What matters is that we have
Mulder and Scully in the middle of it all, trying to make sense of it,
as if they're the sole constant in a twisted universe.
At the same time, it might be nice if, in the event we do get another
"X-Files" movie after the series is over, the filmmakers invest their
time in a complete train of thought that doesn't play like a series of
set pieces for the middle chapter of a story that has no discernible
beginning or end. This "X-Files" film is certainly entertaining, but
not really satisfying on narrative terms.
The taglines for "The X-Files" read, "The truth is revealed." I doubt
it. The truth may still be out there, but a tagline is still a
tagline, and probably, in the most important ways, just a lie.
-----
Copyright (c) 1998 by Jamahl Epsicokhan, all rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction or distribution of this article is
prohibited.
Jammer's Movie Reviews - http://www.epsico.com/movies/
Jamahl Epsicokhan - jammer@epsico.com

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
This review contains some minor spoilers for the feature film
"Armageddon," but I promise not to give away any major revelations
concerning the plot.
Nutshell: Big, dumb, and expensive. Certainly not boring, but
certainly not unpredictable or memorable, either.
Cast includes: Bruce Willis (Harry S. Stamper), Billy Bob Thornton
(Dan Truman), Liv Tyler (Grace Stamper), Ben Affleck (A.J. Frost),
Will Patton (Charles (Chick) Chapple), Peter Stormare (Lev Andropov),
Keith David (General Kimsey), Steve Buscemi (Rockhound)
Distributed by Touchstone Pictures
Screenplay by Jonathan Hensleigh and J.J. Abrams
Produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, Gale Ann Hurd, and Michael Bay
Directed by Michael Bay
"Armageddon" is a technically skilled summer crowd-pleaser that's
about as deep tissue paper, with a brain that operates on the power of
a nine-volt battery. It's formulaic, predictable, and can't be taken
remotely seriously for more than about 10 seconds at a time. This is a
movie where you must walk in, instantly suspend all disbelief, see a
series of elaborate special-effects sequences on the screen, and never
once stop to think about any of it.
Then again, why on earth else would you want to see this movie? This
is what summer blockbusters are all about these days. If you go in
looking for anything deep or challenging, you're wasting your time.
What you'll get in "Armageddon" is all polish and no substance--a
story that will occupy your attention for 150 minutes and never really
bore you, but at the same time is something you can (and probably
will) forget about almost instantly afterward. It's effective
bubble-gum cinema--chewing gum for the mind. Considering we've already
covered the topic of cosmic collision once this year (see "Deep
Impact"), and that film was supposedly the more substantive episode of
angst, it seems only natural that this time when we go through the
cataclysmic exercise, we don't really stop to look at how people would
act with doomsday at hand. This is a nonstop action picture, plain and
simple.
"Armageddon" emerges from what I'm calling the Jerry Bruckheimer
school of cinema, an institute that brought us similar recent summer
escapism in the form of "Bad Boys," "The Rock," and "Con Air." Among
the alumni of this institution are directors Simon West ("Con Air"),
Tony Scott ("Top Gun," "Crimson Tide"), and of course Michael Bay
(this film, "Bad Boys," and "The Rock"). Bruckheimer's institute is
one that ensures no camera may be allowed to sit stationary (it must
always track or pan slowly), and that no shot be allowed to exist for
more than five or so seconds before there's a cut to another angle.
Oh, and the film must be wall-to-wall with music. (It's strange: The
above-mentioned Bruckheimer films used several different composers,
yet the score always sounds about the same.)
But never mind. "Armageddon" is in the tradition of large-scaled
summer disaster action. In this case, a meteor "the size of Texas" is
discovered to be on a collision course with Earth. With only 18 days
to stop it, NASA recruits expert oil driller Harry Stamper (Bruce
Willis) and his band of misfits to go up in space shuttles, drill a
hole deep into the asteroid, and detonate a nuclear bomb inside it to
shove it off course. Stamper wants things done right, and done his
way. He's the type of guy who, when he realizes his protege (Ben
Affleck) is sleeping with his daughter (Liv Tyler), he chases the guy
all through his oil rig with a loaded shotgun, and later confesses he
was just trying to scare him. (But of course!)
Once the movie gets into space, it's relentless in its visuals and
action sequences, but I can't say that I was particularly thrilled by
much of it. A steady diet of "extreme action" doesn't equate
excitement. It has to connect on some sort of emotional level. The
special effects merely grow tiring after awhile. Sure, they're more or
less convincing, but they're also so quickly edited together that
sometimes it just feels like random chaos on the screen. And there's
simply not enough invested in the story to make me believe that these
people were really saving the world, and not just going through the
motions of elaborate stunt coordination and digital artistry.
Besides, I've seen so many effects-laden movies lately that I just
don't find the eye candy all that tempting anymore. "Armageddon" plays
like a series of tasks: We have to promise our loved ones that we'll
succeed! We have to stop that asteroid before it hits us! We have to
get off this space station before it blows up! We have to cut the blue
wire before the bomb goes off! We have to crack our joke for this
scene to prove that we can be funny! Every scene is essentially the
same: Crisis, resolution, wry one-liner from Steve Buscemi. What's
lacking is cleverness, spontaneity, and interesting turns in the
action.
There are a couple of major snags for Our Heroes, but they're
derivative of snags we've seen over and over again in the movies.
(Name an action film where the heroes could actually trust the
government to do the right thing rather than being at the mercy of
bureaucratic officials who are persuaded by invisible advisers to take
what is so obviously the wrong action. Name an action film where a
countdown bomb isn't stopped with three seconds to spare. And so on.)
I think the main problem with the oversized disaster movies of recent
years is that they just make the stakes too laughably high.
"Independence Day," "Deep Impact," "Godzilla," and now
"Armageddon"--all are movies where the price of failure is the
destruction of the world and/or humanity itself. The outcome of what
lies in the story's background is always a foregone conclusion, yet
the characters still exist in a movie cliche world of discussing
trivial relationships and cracking one-liners when widespread dread
and despair should probably be winning out. "Armageddon" gets past
this problem by effectively ignoring it, keeping the end of the world
completely out of its mind except in the most superficial of ways. It
reduces "saving the world" to a goal which will earn its characters
hero status. Consider a scene where a large asteroid fragment hits
Paris, destroying half the city. Does anyone seem to care? Nope; it's
just an excuse for a "really cool special effect."
Can't we scale back just a little bit? Action and special effects are
certainly fun, but if the characters don't have to carry the
unfathomably ridiculous weight of saving the world upon their
shoulders, then won't there be a little more breathing room for the
standard examination of various relationships and personality quirks?
I tend to think so, because with the plot of "Armageddon" there's not
a twist or surprise to be found anywhere on the horizon. Everything
that happens follows the formula from A to B; every emotion is cued
with blatantly obvious manipulation; every bit of comic relief is
applied on cue; everything that happens can be anticipated five scenes
in advance.
Watching this movie, I felt like I was watching a large Hollywood
production trying so very hard to be huge, appealing, funny, and
entertaining. To a degree, it worked. Most of the performances are
right on target given their cardboard parameters, the suspense scenes
are sometimes taut and well-played (if hopelessly predictable), and
there are moments when the movie almost won me over before the formula
turned obvious and snapped me back into reality.
But never, for one moment, was the spell of sexy, shallow, visually
motivated cinema outweighed by the spell (or lack thereof) of
characters or story events. I could say I got caught up in isolated
pieces of the movie for brief moments at a time, but I can't say that
I was ever caught up in the flow of the narrative.
What this movie aspires to be is what you can find has been done 10
times better in "Apollo 13" (1995). When it comes down to it, both
films are about people in high-pressure situations trying to perform.
The difference is that "Apollo 13's" suspense was believable on human
terms, making it more exciting. "Armageddon" is just big and dumb.
Even so, if you just want overblown, overwrought, over-sensational
comic book summer entertainment that fully knows just how loony it is,
then "Armageddon" delivers. If you want characters that are even
remotely complex, or a plot that doesn't exist for the sole sake of
special effects sequences and cardboard manipulation, then please look
elsewhere.
-----
Copyright (c) 1998 by Jamahl Epsicokhan, all rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction or distribution of this article is
prohibited.
Jammer's Movie Reviews - http://www.epsico.com/movies/
Jamahl Epsicokhan - jammer@epsico.com

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
This review contains some minor spoilers of the feature film
"Godzilla," but I promise not to give away too many major revelations
about the plot (not as if there really are any, but still...).
Nutshell: Summer has begun; mindless destruction and virtually no
story, done with surprisingly less wit and inventiveness than usual.
Cast includes: Matthew Broderick (Dr. Niko Tatopoulos), Jean Reno
(Philippe Roche), Maria Pitillo (Audrey Timmonds), Hank Azaria (Victor
"Animal" Palotti), Kevin Dunn (Colonel Hicks), Michael Lerner (Mayor
Ebert)
Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich, the two industry-smart coordinators
behind "Stargate" (1994) and "Independence Day" (1996), have taken
their special-effects approach to filmmaking a step further with
"Godzilla," a film that has plenty of computer-generated
monster-induced destruction but next to zero in terms of a story.
Quite frankly, I wasn't really expecting much in terms of a story.
>From the word go, "Godzilla" was very obviously intended as the first
mindless summer blockbuster of 1998. It promised a simple, streamlined
story, lots of mayhem and destruction (a la "Independence Day" two
years ago), and all the elaborate special-effects sequences a
filmmaker can conjure with a $120 million budget.
But somewhere along the line, Devlin and Emmerich forgot that we still
need to feel *something* as the movie progresses. We need to care how
the events of the story will unfold. At the very least, we need to
feel viscerally involved as New York City becomes a stomping ground
for a 300-foot lizard.
Unfortunately, aside from a few isolated moments, "Godzilla" fails to
generate those feelings of awe. I didn't care about any of the
characters, I didn't care about the possible downfall of New York City
or "the entire world itself"--and I didn't really even care about the
lizard.
What we have here--a summer tradition invented once it became clear to
producers and directors that computer-generated effects could bring a
new sense of realism to the realm of natural (or unnatural) disaster
action--is yet another "special-effects movie." Without the special
effects (and a need to have well-known structures like the Chrysler
Building and Madison Square Garden leveled by film's end) there
wouldn't be a point to have the movie at all.
As always, there are good ways to do special-effects movies and bad
ways. "Jurassic Park" back in 1993, with its sense of wonder
concerning uncontrollable possibilities, was one of the groundbreaking
examples of the good way. And "Independence Day," while shallow and
silly, was also entertaining and had plenty of attitude to get by. But
as characterization and even the general sense of intensity get
stripped away, it becomes harder to feel that we're watching a giant
lizard stomping through a major city, and all too obvious that we're
watching millions of dollars and thousands of labor hours for special
effects being projected onto the screen.
The plot to "Godzilla" is a no-brainer. After a few token scenes used
to set up the premise and loosely establish the major characters, the
giant lizard (which, as most already know, is dubbed "Godzilla" and is
a mutated product of nuclear radiation) crawls out of the Atlantic and
begins stomping through the City That Never Sleeps. A biological
expert on mutated organisms (Matthew Broderick), known to most as "the
worm guy" (because he studies worms at Chernobyl, you see) is brought
in by the U.S. military to submit his opinions about the instincts of
the 300-foot lizard. He naturally offers helpful hints to the military
people, such as telling them to remove manhole covers so it can smell
the hundreds of tons of fish that have been placed on the street to
bait it. "What are they doing?" asks the unit's commander when his men
scatter to open manholes. Well, says I, they're *your* men. If you
can't keep up with what they're doing, then we're all probably in a
lot of trouble, aren't we?
There are scenes where helicopters chase Godzilla through the city,
firing thousands of rounds at him to no significant effect. One might
wonder why it takes the military characters so long to figure out that
bullets won't do the trick, except that a higher strategy is in work
here--a strategy set to ensure the movie will last close to 2 1/2
hours and produce a maximum amount of net destruction. At one point,
the mayor (Michael Lerner) complains to the colonel (Kevin Dunn),
saying, "You've destroyed more of the city than he has!" As someone
who is aware that this is a demolition derby rather than a plausible
reaction to a crisis, I suspect that's the whole point.
There are plenty of slow-witted characters at work here. It always
kills me the way officials in charge of situations like this one are
always the most likely to scoff at issues that any rational person
would address with swift action and undivided attention--like, oh, the
fact that Broderick suspects Godzilla is laying eggs that could
produce more Godzillas within only a few hours. Naturally, these
people don't look for this nest of eggs; instead, they kick Broderick
off the team because of a press leak. Talk about priorities.
As with all major disaster movies, there is of course a romantic
theme; in this case it's between Broderick's character and his old
college sweetheart (Maria Pitillo), who is an aspiring journalist
trying to break the "Godzilla story" (undoubtedly the biggest thing to
hit TV airwaves since O.J. Simpson). I was surprised at even how
ineffective and perfunctory this angle of the story was. I expected it
to be cliched, and it was, but I didn't expect it to be quite so
hollow. Pitillo's character comes off as a complete airhead, and the
performance doesn't bring a thing to it. At times the character seemed
worthy of self-parody, but Pitillo plays it hopelessly straight.
It's frustrating that this movie doesn't contain any interesting
characters or personalities. Everyone is a cardboard device used
solely to advance the plot. The most watchable character is probably
the one played by Jean Reno, an enigmatic persona who turns out to be
from an organization that's best summed into a sound bite as "the
French CIA."
I was also pretty amazed at how lacking the film was in original
action. The scenes that take place in Madison Square Garden prove
themselves to be so blatantly ripped off from the velociraptor attacks
in "Jurassic Park" and last year's "The Lost World" that I found
myself realizing how much more class and originality Steven Spielberg
brings to his set pieces.
And you'd think a movie from the makers of "Independence Day" would
have more room for good jokes about a 300-foot lizard. Alas, the humor
is surprisingly lacking here, and, when present, is surprisingly
stale.
The early-teenage level of the movie's pitch is perhaps a forewarning
that everything about the story is just a means to fill time between
lizard attacks: Every emotion is cued by David Arnold's relentlessly
obvious score, the dialog is as simple and succinct as it possibly can
be, and the supporting characters offer their comments only to prompt
the subsequent actions. It's plotting by comic book means.
On the other hand, even if the story completely fails to generate a
believable sense of doom, the effects manage to come off as very
realistic. Devlin and Emmerich and their crews are technical experts
when it comes to filming large-scaled destruction in a way that looks
utterly convincing, and the scenes of Godzilla stomping through the
streets, knocking down buildings and bridges and crushing cars are
extremely well done, and particularly effective in the taut final
fifteen minutes of the film. If you're going to see "Godzilla," see it
only because you want the visual experience of seeing New York City
decimated. There's no other reason to see it--though, deep down, you
probably knew that.
-----
Copyright (c) 1998 by Jamahl Epsicokhan, all rights reserved.
Unauthorized reproduction or distribution of this article is
prohibited.
Star Trek: Hypertext - http://www.epsico.com/st-hypertext/
Jamahl Epsicokhan - jammer@epsico.com
