Authors
Jeff Walters
Number of Reviews
13

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
There was alot of Aliens Resurrection vs Starhip Troopers talk last
year and both were tagged as movies to watch at the Box Office.
It came as a fairly big surprise when both movies fizzled and died
on release. Dissappointment aside, which movie emerged on top?
 Well, in my opinion - it's Starship Troopers.
               Alien's Resurrection was the movie I was waiting for in
1997 and I had very high hopes for it. Dissappointment was sadly the
end result. Besides one or two nice action scenes (the underwater
sequence was brilliant) the movie just really failed to make any
real impact. Quickly souring on bug-theme movies I wasn't really
looking forward to Starship Troopers and walked into it with my sights
set low. This movie is no masterpeice of cinema - that is for sure.
But damn it was entertaining, something A4 really failed to be.
             One thing you can't do with this movie, is take it
seriously - no sir. First time I saw it I was half-expecting a serious
film and didn't enjoy it as much - but the second time I
saw it I knew what to expect - and man was this film better the second
time around. The key is to accept that the movie in no way takes
itself seriously - so you must do the same. The cast appears to be
handpicked from Aaron Spelling's stables. The script
keeps the multiple syllable words to an absolute minimum ("You're some
big fat smart  bug aren't ya?") and the tactics used by the troopers
and ships in combat would have any retired army veteran
rolling around laughing hysterically. ('Duh yeah, let's park our ships
here where they can be shot out of the sky like last time or better
yet - let's walk down through this narrow canyon where falling rocks
betray the presence of bugs up high...no wait...I've got an idea -
then let's send a guy up out of the canyon to be hacked to death!').
Smart this movie ain't.
               With all this sarcasm and cheap jibes at the movie
you're likely wondering why I gave this movie 3 1/2 out of 5
stars? Well, to put it simply - this movie is fuuuun. The special FX
are simply awe inspiring. The bugs are the best CG creatures you'll
see in a movie. Forget the Jurassic Park dinos or Alien 4 cockroaches
- these bugs look incredibly real...and more then slightly
frightening. They are quick deadly and very difficult to kill. There
are also many different types of bugs. My favourite is the big
bettle-like bug that spits something resembling napalm at it's
 enemies - very nice. The scenes involving the massive starships are
also beautifully rendered, though it would have been nice if these
ships saw some kind of action besides getting shot down by
planet-launched balls of  'bug-plasma'.
               Ok...onto the characters. Casper Van Dien (Johnny Rico)
is likable enough in the lead role, but no-one would accuse him of
depth or his character of intellect. Dina Meyer (Dizzy Flores) is
actually pretty good as one of the two female leads, her character has
 much more life to her than most of her co-stars. The pick of the cast
are Michael Ironside as the no nonsense teacher turned combat leader,
Rasczak, and Clancy Brown as the incredibly tough and likely
certifably insane Sergeant Zim. He is the real scene-stealer of the
movie and his somewhat unorthodox methods for getting messages across
to his troops is hilarious if twisted (He turns the word 'MEDIC!' into
the ultimate one-liner). Ace Levy (played by Jake Busey, who is
a dead-ringer for relative Gary Busey) also provides some good comic
relief through the training section of the movie.
         The weak links of the cast? Two big ones. Denise Richard's
Carmen Ibanez has gotta be one of the dullest characters you'll see.
Talk about a barbie doll. She has zero one liners, no character and a
smile that seems to have been surgically fixed in place. Even
when her love interest (Patrick Muldoon) has his brains sucked out of
his skull by the 'big fat smart bug' she seems to be unable to stiffle
the gameshow host smile. Never  seen this actress before. No wonder
why. The other big mis-cast is Neil Patrick Harris as the geeky
psychic, Carl. Why did someone have to dig up Doogie Howser? I thought
we were finally rid of the runt. 
               The action scenes involving the troopers are very
thrilling indeed. Especially when Rico does his rodeo act on the
back of one of the bettle-bugs or when the small squad of troopers try
to hold the Fort against staggering odds. It takes quite a while to
reach the cool action seqeunces though, about 50 minutes of training
and scenes back on earth. Though you start itching for the action, the
lead up parts are still entertaining in their own way. The hilarious
'propaganda' commercials spaced through out the film keeps the
audience's attention. 
               The ending is a total anti-climax unfortunately. After
a short 'rescue the girl' sequence the movie ends abruptly
 leaving the audience fairly unsatisfied. Though the movie is long
enough as is I would have happily sat there for an extra 15 or so
minutes if it meant a more involved and thrilling ending.
               All up - I really enjoyed this movie. It is a very
violent movie, but it is delivered in such a way so that it is never
 disturbingly so. As long as you don't try to take this movie
seriously - you should enjoy it as well. There is talk of a
sequel already and I certainly hope it eventuates as there are many
loose ends left to be tied up. 

Title
Review for As Good As It Gets (1997)
        Is this movie as good as it gets this year? Well, no - I still
think Titanic and L.A. Confidential have this movie beat,
but damn this is one hell of a good flick. Much like the theme of a
Seinfeld episode this is a movie about nothing. Simply the story of
three people, how they react to each other and make it from one day to
the next.
               Jack Nicholson plays the compulsive
obsessive....er....obessive compulsive romance novelist, Melvin, who
is the 'King of the Put-down'. Let's face it, we all have come across
a Melvin type person in our lives. He's the kind of  person you spend
weeks bitching about after first meeting. That special kind of person
for whom you'd swerve   across four lanes of traffic just to get the
chance to run down. A real nice guy.
       Underneath the crusty exterior though is a kind man who simply
acts the way he does because he lacks the social skills to relate to
99.9% of society. One person in that slim 0.1% catergory who Melvin
finds intruiging is Christine (Helen Hunt) - a waitress in his
favourite local diner. The rest of the staff hates him and the boss
wants him banned, but Christine is able to see beneath the mask and
recognize Melvin for what he is......most of the  time. The third
person in this unlikely trio is gay artist, Simon (played by Greg
Kinear). 
        The acting is simply superb. It is a very rare thing when
other actors can keep up with Jack Nicholson in a movie,
 but in my opinion Hunt and Kinear both not only match his pace - but
even exceed him. Nicholson is still brilliant  though, I can't imagine
anyone else playing this role. It's just so him. Greg Kinear, who's
only other major role was in the recent re-make of Sabrina, exhibits
such character as the absolutely down and out artist who can't seem to
get a lucky break. Cuba Gooding Jr. is a lot of fun as Kinear's over
protective agent who makes Melvin cower at the slightest glare. His
effect on Nicholson is truly hilarious - turns the crusty old man into
jello at will.
       It is Hunt, however, who steals the show. A truly staggeringly
engaging performance in creating a character totaly unlike her Mad
About You, Jamie. If she had lost the Best Actress in the Oscars it
would have been an absolute crime. Being a Titanic fanatic (whoa, say
that three times) it's hard for me not to say Kate Winslet should get
it, but Helen Hunt is just too good. In her first real movie role (in
Twister she was buried behind the FX) she just blows  away all comers.
A very talented and passionate person. 
               The fourth main star in As Good As It Gets is the
script. The dialogue is original and witty - the jokes are all
thoughtful and clever, not just cheap jibes or obvious come-backs. The
 put-downs written for Melvin are instant classics - each is crafted
to completely deflate it's target. As someone who likes to stick it to
certain people myself - I had to love them ;) Don't think, though,
that this is a pure comedy - it's not. It is a powerful movie, with
moving moments and performances mixed together with a well-scripted
comedy.  Not a movie that's easy to place in any one genre.
       For me - the romance angle between Melvin and Christine doesn't
quitesit right. Nothing I can really put my finger on, but somehow
it's hard to picture the two characters together  romantically. 
               Anyway, if you haven't seen this movie - then I
strongly recommend doing so before it is banished to video. It's the
best comedy/drama of the past year and one of the best I've seen
period. 

Title
Review for Conspiracy Theory (1997)
       When I entered the theatre I was expecting a fairly light
mystery type movie, and came away pleasantly surprised and
somewhat dissappointed at the same time. The film opens with an
extremely amusing sequence which sees Gibson's character
(paranoid cabby Jerry Fletcher) trying to convince various fares of
several different conspiracies. Jerry is just a treat to watch,
especially in the first hour, where he manages to be funny and
touching in the same scenes.
     Jerry's manic behaviour is countered nicely by Julia Roberts'
portrayal of a caring Justice Department official, Alice Sutton, and
it is through her eyes that you experience most of the movie. Several
of the key scenes involving Jerry and Alice are genuinely
touching, like in Jerry's apartment where he gives his explanation for
owning so many copies of "Catcher in the Rye". There is no
doubt that this film's strength lies in the interaction between Mel
and Julia. The pair just have terrific on-screen chemistry. 
     Conspiracy Theory takes a dramatic change of direction not too
long into the film, with a fairly confronting torture scene that
really surprised me and many others around me, especially after the
light-hearted introduction. Don't get me wrong though, the scene is
terrific and Gibson does a brilliant job conveying the outright terror
the character is experiencing.
        I feel though that the 'conspiracy' storyline was
disappointing and bungled to a certain degree. What started out as an
intruiging premise (i.e. One of his theories is correct - But which
one?) peters out and when the conspiracy is revealed, it is after no
real deductive work at all by the main characters. Also, Conspiracy
Theory's main villan, Dr Jonas (Patrick Stewart), is not
explored as much as you'd probably like, but Stewart does a terrific
job with what he was given and was well cast. I'd never have picked
him as a villan before, but he's very cold and convincing.
             Overall, I'd say this is a film well worth seeing. The
acting was simply terrific and the movie was filled with genuine
humour, not lame Batman & Robin one liners. If it wasn't for the
fairly weak 'conspiracy' storyline - this would have been a big hit.
Many people have said that this film was simply too long, but I didn't
seem to notice any problem there. Anyway, go and see it, if for no
other reason than to listen to Jerry's off-the-wall conspiracy ideas
or to take a look at his apartment........he's got a combination lock
on the fridge and he stores his coffee in a padlocked container.

Title
Review for Peacemaker, The (1997)
           Disappointment #2. Well not so much a dissappointment,
everyone I'd talked to before hand regarding this movie
had made it clear that this was nothing special. But I still was
hoping to be pleasantly surprised by 'The Peacemaker' which truth be
known was actually made over a year ago but only released recently.
Not to be though. Ordinary is the word that pops to mind when I think
of this film. Plain ordinary. 
               The acting is not really worth focusing on much because
the two lead characters were so weak and undeveloped.
The audience feels no real attachment to Kidman or Clooney's character
(particularly Clooney's brain-dead Colonel Thomas Devoe) and the two
emotional sequences between the two fizzle badly and seem like carbon
copies of each other. The villian was actually not too bad, the
writers opted for a little extra originality here by making him an
ordinary man with very little fighting skills.
               What saves this movie from being an outright stinker is
a couple of nifty action  sequences that kept the audience involved to
a certain degree. The first of these is at the start of the film which
involves two trains and some nice camera work. This scene is
practically given away in the previews for the movie but is fresh
enough so that it sets up a nice tense atmosphere. The special effects
for the resulting nuclear explosion  that closes the scene is fairly
budget, but doesn't looks so cheesy that it ruins the scene.
               The best scene is really no contest and appears about
two thirds into the film. A trio of helicopters penetrates
Russian airspace in an attempt to halt a truck carrying some very
dangerous cargo before it can cross the border into Iran. This scene
is a real show stopper from start to finish and really grabbed my
attention after my mind was starting to drift from the dull and
somewhat idiotic earlier parts.
               The climax sequence in the streets of New York City is
pretty well done and does put you on the edge of your seat
 to a certain degree when everyone is madly searching for a bomber.
This however leads to a fairly dull and predictable confrontation
scene that we've all seen before many many times. 
               Now onto the 'idiotic earlier parts' I mentioned above.
What I am referring to here is a lengthy sequence that occurs
 around 40 minutes into the film. This involves Kidman and Clooney
'interrogating' a trucking executive in his own office and then their
following escape. This part was so dumb it defies description.
Seriously. Suspension of disbelief, once again, only stretches so far.
Devoe's actions in this series of events are simply S T U P I D.
Unfortunately stupidity is a common thread throughout The Peacemaker.
               The Peacemaker failed at the box office and it's not
hard to see why. It's a long time since I've seen weaker
chemistry between male and female leads. The movie's saving grace is
some exciting action sequences that draw the auidence back in and
that's the only way it got 2.5/5 stars in my book. See it if you feel
you can survive till the 1 1/4 hour mark when things start to pick up.

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
      I'm not a huge Michael Douglas fan.....maybe it's because he
likes to play characters that no-one could like. At the start of this
terrific movie, it looked like he would once again be playing an
unlikable.......a character who you just couldn't care if lived or
died. But slowly over the course of the movie, the character of
Nicholas Van Orton grows as he learns off his experiences.
     I have never seen Michael Douglas give a performance like this.
He was terrific - I can't imagine anyone cast to play the role of Van
Orton. Sean Penn plays his part well, but only really has
one or two scenes to make his impression. Deborah Kara Unger, who
plays the mysterious woman constantly crossing Van Orton's path,
performs just as well as Douglas does, and it's a full time job trying
to work out just what her agenda is.....is she really just an innocent
woman dragged into the Game?
      I thoroughly enjoyed this movie...up until the final two
minutes. Before I say anymore - let me warn you that I'm about to
give specific spoilers regarding the movies ending....so if you
haven't seen it and want to remain blissfully ignorant then flee
now.......they gone?....okay back to business. Van Orton has just
mistakenly shot his brother because he thought it wasn't a
Game, but a real plot against him. He is shattered and plunges off the
roof in despair much like his father did when he
was a child.....he is falling....and I'm sitting there thinking, Wow,
what a powerful movie.....still falling......this was
brilliant.....and then he lands safe and sound on a large air bag and
there is a big happy ending. I'm sorry, did I just see that?
        All of a sudden this dark and hauntingly brilliant movie is
all light and happy. No-one got hurt, all is forgiven. Even though
Van Orton was pushed to the brink of suicide and madness, everything
is immediately fine and rosy. The movie even ended with
Van Orton asking Miss Mysterious Woman out on a date......I don't
think I've ever seen a movie do such a 180 degree turn in my
life. What was a brilliant and powerful ending was thrown out the
window in favour of an unconvincing and sugary happy ending.
Why did they do it? My guess is that director David Fincher feared he
might might be condemned again after the huge negative
reaction he received the last time he made a character jump to their
death (Ripley in Aliens 3).
     This is a brilliant movie. You never know if it is a Game or a
con job designed to rob Van Orton of all his assets until the
end. But do yourself a favour, if you get this out on video - press
'stop' once Van Orton swan dives off the building, it will make a
much more powerful impression on you that way. For once, a happy
ending just really wasn't called for.

Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
        One of the best movies I've ever seen. I'd heard extremely
good things about this movie, and though the previews didn't really
intrigue that much, it was a movie I'd been anticipating for a few
months now. For some reason I'm not sure of - this movie was not that
big a sucess over in the U.S. It was a definite hit with the critics,
but didn't exactly set any box office records. After viewing this
incredibly well directed, written and acted movie, I can't help but
wonder - why?
     The strength of this film is it's gritty realism. The main
characters are all human with individual flaws, no stereo-type
hollywood heroes. You may not agree with many of their actions in the
movie or their approach to life, but that is what makes it
so real. I had expected this movie to be more of a drama than a
thriller, but I was mistaken. Even the interrogation scenes moved
at such a pace so that it felt just as thrilling as any car chase. And
the ending......whoa.
             I've never seen a movie in my life where everyone in it
acts brilliantly. The three male leads - Guy Pearce, Kevin Spacey and
Russell Crowe are all just  terrific. The 'Best Actor' Oscar talk
surrounding this film should have netted one of them a statue, but
there is one problem there. How could they have chosen between these
three actors? There is no way I could look at this film and say one of
them was better than the other two. It's impossible.
               Kim Bassinger's performance is also a revelation. I'd
never been a big fan of hers before and always thought she was,
well...what's the word - a twinky? That impression has changed, as she
complemented Crowe and Pearce perfectly. 
     The depth to the story and characters is truly astounding. No
cardboard characters here. The plot is full of twists and turns
and some very clever sequences. Pearce's interogation of three
seperate suspects is nothing short of brilliant.
     I really can't fault this movie at all. I was so glad to see
fellow Australian's Pearce and Crowe star in such a breathtaking
movie. I had been very familiar with Russell Crowe beforehand from his
many Australian films, but had not seen much of Guy
Pearce. I intend to change this next time I visit the video store :) 

Title
Review for Breakdown (1997)
        This little movie seemed to sneak up on me out of nowhere. And
when a movie with a cast like this 'sneaks' up on you - it usually
means that no-one is talking about it for a reason....that is - it
sucks! But not this movie. I'm sill trying to work out why this movie
received little press. Because it's a terrific film. In a year when
most movies have tried to thrill the audience with whizz bang effects
and progressively bigger and bigger explosions, this film
manages to out thrill them all through a chilling story and the
occassional terrific stunt.
           I knew from the clever opening sequence where seemingly
random spinning lines eventually form into a map of where the movie is
set, that I was going to like this flick. Very nicely done.
          Kurt Russell is perfectly cast as the frantic husband
willing to do anything to find his wife. What makes his character even
better is that he is very realistic. He makes mistakes, is often
outsmarted and does not jump to a fight, but rather is intimidated by
violence......at the start of the movie anyway.
       The villian's shoes are filled by a man who seems to be in
almost every single movie and tv show - the late great J.T. Walsh. .
He leads the small group of kidnappers and does a sterling job. The
rest of the kidnappers also preform well. In particular, Jack
Noseworthy, who was also in Event Horizon.
          I did have a few minor complaints with the film, where there
were a couple of huge coincidences. For instance when the wrapper of a
donut his wife had been eating just *happens* to float past whilst he
is drifting in a river. I don't think so. But as I said, the errors
are minor and should really be overlooked due to
the fact that the rest of the movie is scripted so well.
        Unlike many movies this year which have looked promising but
failed to deliver in the final 30 minutes, it is during this time
that Breakdown really shines. And it is also during this time that
you'll see the best stunts. The scene where the truck is tettering on
the edge of the bridge is one I'll not soon forget.

Title
Review for Hard Rain (1998)
Sigh. Here stands a movie that could have been so much more. Don't get
me wrong - I still found Hard Rain fairly enjoyable, but there was so
much unfulfilled potential in this flick. The story is very intruiging
as it is an interesting mix of genres. Unlike Twister and
Dantes Peak (your pure disaster flicks), this movie puts the disaster
side more into the background and instead focuses on the
thiller/bank-hiest storyline.
               The movie opens with a stunning piece of cinematography
where the camera starts at the flooded dam, then slowly makes it way
across the country side, into town and ends up with a close-up of the
Sherrif (played by Randy  Quaid) organising the evacuation. After
seeing how this seemingly one shot camera trick was done in the
'Making of....' TV special, it really is quite a brilliant peice of
work.
       This movie doesn't beat about the bush and it's not long before
the armored car heist eventuates and the first of the many chase
scenes ensues. The now jailed Christian Slater plays the part of the
bank security guard (Tom) determined to protect the three million
dollar bank money from the clutches of Morgan Freeman (Jim) and co.
        Slater does a good job with the stand-stock hero, but his
character is not explored in the slightest. To the audience he's just
another characterless good guy trying to do the right thing. Freeman's
character is the only one that is really memorable or interesting, but
what do you expect? It's a federal offence to under-write a Morgan
Freeman character and the script-writers have paid heed to this
fact....to a point.
         Minnie Driver (Karen) is pretty good as the fiery woman
trying to protect the church she's restoring, but like Slater's Tom -
there's little charcterisation and also little chemistry in her
pairing with Hollywood's bad boy.
         The characters I had the biggest problem with in this movie
was the Sherrif, his deputy and the Dam's operator. Halfway through
this movie their characters do a violent 180 and suddenly make Saddam
Hussein look like a sane humanitarian. This plot twist is nice for
the thriller and chase aspects of the movie as it changes the whole
perspective of the  audience - but overall the change in character of
the three is somewhat unconvincing and doesn't entirely make sense
given some of their earlier actions. Oh well - this ain't a
character driven movie and Randy Quaid is fun no matter how flawed his
character - so who really cares? :)
               Where this movie really succeeds is in it's chase
scenes. There is an awesome jet ski chase through the halls of
 the local school that is very gripping and original. Maybe one or two
more stunts could have been squeezed into the sequence, but overall
it's a key highlight. The periodic surges from the bursting Dam are a
interesting element that plays mayhem on all parties involved. The
final surge where the Dam breaks apart could have maybe been a bit
 bigger though in my opinion. The showdown sequence in Karen's
ill-fated church is an absolute ripper though. A very well done scene.
       If I had to pick the scene that puts sets the adrenalin pumping
fastest - I'd have to say it's  when Slater is locked in the jail cell
(heh, talk about ironic) and the flood waters start to rise...
               All in all this was an enjoyable movie that I see as an
oppurtunity lost to make a really break-thru movie much like Speed was
(man I wish they'd used the jet skis more often), but it is still a
very watchable movie. 

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
           Ahh.....how do I start this review? I could start with
saying it's the best movie I've ever had the pleasure to see in
 my life. Or maybe I could start by saying that if you haven't seen
this movie you should turn off your computer right now and get your
butt over to the cinema of your choice. Yeah, one of those two would
be a good place to start. 
               This was not a movie I'd been anticipating. I'd heard
test-screenings were positive, but it just didn't grab me. I was much
more anxious to see a movie that opened here a week after Titanic -
Alien Ressurection. I only went to see Titanic because a) It's James
Cameron (nuff' said?) and b) well, I see every movie that comes out.
               Titanic opened here a day earlier than anywhere else,
but stupid me didn't take this oppurtunity to see it early. It was
actually a week after it opened that I decided it was time to take a
look. Sold Out? Huh? A movie in Penrith selling out? And a week after
release? Whoa. Dissappointed and intruiged at the same time we decided
to buy tickets for the one of the later sessions. 
               'Why the hell did I waste a week before seeing this?',
echoed around my head as we staggered out of the theatre
 after a 3 1/4 hour emotional roller-coaster. My brother, Chris, (an
amateur film-maker) walked from the theatre shaking his head and
muttering incomprehensively. All I heard was the occasional snippet -
'......wow...cinematography'. Me and Chris usually see every movie we
can and then drive everyone else nuts by talking about it endlessly in
the car home from the cinema. Strangely this time not a word
 was spoken on the way home, oh...except for -
'stop....need...food...service station', but that hardly counts.
        After that night, I honestly couldn't have cared less about
seeing Alien Ressurection. It couldn't possibly have topped this. And
as I discovered a week later - I was right. Titanic is the best movie
I've ever seen. Said it before and I'll say it again - best! You may
be sitting there thinking - 'but it's 3 1/4 hours long and it's a love
story! Not my thing'. That's what I  thought too....but I didn't
notice a second pass as soon as T I T A N I C  appeared on the screen.
Even though the ship doesn't start sinking till the last hour, the
first half is so intruiging, enjoyable and beleive or not -
even funny. 
         The story of the two main characters - Jack and Rose, is so
engaging that I could have happily sat in that movie  theatre for way
longer than 3 1/4 hours. 
               The movie's best scene is without a doubt the very
final scene. I'm not going to give ANY details about this part,
because it's easily my favourite scene in any movie I've seen and I'd
hate to ruin it for those who haven't seen it yet. The funny thing
about this movie is that the images and scenes that make the biggest
impression on you are not the big budget sinking parts (though
impressive) - it's the scene's following the actual sinking that haunt
you most. 
               I'm not going to go into any more detail about this
movie at all, I just basically wanted to convey what a powerful
 impression it made on me, not ruin it for those who have neglected to
see it. If you have not seen this movie, then please do so. You will
regret not seeing this movie on the big screen. I have seen it three
times so far and plan to see it many more times. It was just as
powerful on viewing #3 as it was the first time, which is definitely
saying  something. If you have already seen it, then do what I'm going
to do and see it again and again and....... 

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
      Man, this was one wierd movie. Similar to Conspiracy Theory in
that it couldn't decide which genre it is. The first hour is your
standard stock Aliens clone, which nicely created an eerie atmosphere
about the ship. The last half hour? This was when the makers blew the
script out the airlock and just decided - "Screw it, let's just kill
everybody". From then on - forget Sci-Fi...this movie becomes 100%
horror.
           What really dissappointed me about this movie was that it
tried to scare you in entirely the wrong way. Instead of using
clever tricks or trying to build up to a scare - this movie just uses
loud noises, sudden camera shifts and short quick bursts of
gore.....yawn....everyone's seen it all before and knows when to
expect it. The one thing that was done well was the lead up to
finding out about what happened to the previous crew. There are
skeletons lying around mangled and mashed, but what did this?
Then finally after being painfully restored - the new crew views the
video.
         The acting isn't too bad at all.....considering what the
actors had to work with anyway, as there is no complex or interesting
dialogue to speak of. There was some very nice camerawork in certain
sequences though, like when the hull near the bridge of the Event
Horizon is breached and the camera pans back to follow specific
objects as they bounce across the deck and are sucked out into space.
      This movie could have been so much better. It had a good
experienced cast who deserved more to work with. There was just
nothing new here that any of us haven't seen before in Aliens or
Hellraiser. 

Title
Review for Face/Off (1997)
      A couple of months ago, when I first downloaded the Face/Off
trailer from the Net, my initial reaction was a fourteen carrot gold
'yawn'. Followed swiftly by a press of my computers delete key, not
wanting to waste six or seven megabytes of precious space on this
piss-poor trailer. Then I started reading the first wave of reviews
from the U.S.....unique...excellent....must-see. Well, I thought still
skeptical, I suppose I might as well go see it when it gets here.
'Here', of course, was still three months away.
       I'll admit, when I trotted off to see this film, the only John
Woo movie I had seen before was the fairly enjoyable but highly
forgetable Broken Arrow. I'd heard good things about his previous work
with movies like Hard Boiled, but his films were definitely not on my
must-see list. That, let me tell you, has changed completely. I knew
this fact only five minutes into the film, after the brilliantly shot
and acted opening sequence where Sean Archer loses his son blew me off
my feet.
     The acting throughout the film is staggeringly good for an action
 flick. Seriously. I've never been a big John Travolta fan, but he,
like Cage, perfectly suited his role in the movie.....sorry, make that
'roles' in the movie. Even Travolta's great performance, however,
paled in  comparison to Cage's character portrayals. My favourite Cage
scene was definitely when he was crashed out in compardre Dietrich
Hassler's hideout. Half drugged out of his mind, he sits there
reclining back in a chair talking about his son's death from Castor's
perspective - "Doesn't it just break your heart." he mutters coldly.
         Now don't go thinking from the previous comments about
brilliant acting that this is a drama focused movie - it's not. That's
what really makes this movie unique. It's an action movie with
brilliantly portrayed characters.....not a common mix at all.
Suspension of disbelief is paramount in this movie though.....that's
the only way to overlook the fact that Travolta and Cage fire around
5671 rounds at each other....and never hit.
         Several action scenes are just so well choreographed that
they just make wish that you could press 'rewind' and watch it over
again. The part where Archer and Troy have a stand off on either side
of a double-sided mirror is just plain brilliant. 
     Whilst Cage's and Travolta's performances would be enough
alone to sustain most movies, the lesser characters are just as
intriguing. Joan Allen, who usually sticks to the straight drama
movies, plays her part perfectly as Archer's long suffering wife. I
like the fact that her character didn't end up toting a gun at the
end of the movie...it would have wrecked her potrayal. Gina Gershon
was surprising to say the least as Castor Troy's mistreated
girlfriend.....make that *one of* Castor Troy's mistreated
girlfriends. Other movies would have used her character as just window
dressing...a sex object, but instead her character is very strong and
independent. Dominique Swain, who plays Archer's daughter,
also does a nice job, though her character is not as explored as much
as Allen's or Gershon's.
     Faults? Well...there were some I have to say. First, the movie's
ending, whilst being very good overall, was a bit too drawn
out for it's own good. After the two combatants begin duelling again
after the final boat crash you can't help but think - "Geez, are
you guys nuclear powered or what?". There were certain bits that
weren't handled properly, like where Archer appears safe and
sound on solid ground after jumping off the converted oil
platform/prison - more explanation here would have been nice. 
Overall, this movie was not perfect. But I thought it was about as
close as an action movie has ever came to perfect. Many
critics have claimed that this movie will change the way action movies
are made.....I certainly hope so. 

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
       Unlike L.A. Confidential - this movie made an absolute
TON of money at the box office. This in itself was very
surprising as I've yet to hear anyone but my brother talk about
this movie with any great enthusiasm. Airforce One is your
standard stock Hollywood Blockbuster....which was
disappointing. I did enjoy it to a certain degree as I'm a big
Harrison Ford fan, but it just wasn't anything special.
         This movie suffers from something that a lot of movies
in 1998 have in that in tries to cram too many things into it.
Some might say that it is to keep the pace of the film going, but
it just got a bit tiresome and the movie felt a lot longer than
two hours. It definitely followed the rule of 'more explosions is
better'. Unlike a lot of FX movies this year though, Air Force One has
a bit of substance to it. The plot, while not so original, is
handled more intelligently than many movies of this genre.
         Harrison does, as usual, a great job as the lead. Even
playing the U.S. President he portrays his typical down to
earth/ordinary man character. You did have to 'suspend your disbelief'
numerous times during the movie though when the 50+
year old President is duking it out with 25 year old trained
terrorists and always coming out without a bruise. My kingdom for a
hero who ends up with a black eye! 
  Gary Oldman did a terrific job as the head terrorist, but the
character he was given to work with was really no different to those
seen in many other movies of this type. I was not terribly impressed
by Glenn Close, but that was mainly because of the character she
played. She is made out to be one of the heroes at the end for not
signing the motion to take away the President's powers, even though
his judgement was clouded. If Harrison hadn't 'saved the day' in the
end she would have been responsible for allowing the release of a
 homicidal madman responsible for 10 000's of deaths in
return for the half-dozen people left on the plane at that
stage. I personally did not see her decision as something
to cheer about no matter what happened at the end.
        The highlights? For me the best part was the initial
taking of the plane. It was so quick and 'full-on' that it was
genuinely startling even though you knew it was coming. The race to
get the President into the escape pod was one of the most exciting
sequences I've seen in a movie this year. The special effects
were much better than I expected, with the exception of the final
crash scene which was more than slightly unconvincing.
     One of the real faults of this movie was that some important
things integral to the plot were left unexplained. Chief among
these is the traitor inside the Secret Service detail. Why, after the
plane was taken, did he remain with the captives? Why did he
wait until the end when all his terrorist comrades were dead before
pulling a gun on the President? This made no sense at all.
     Looking back, this was an enjoyable movie held together by Ford's
typically charismatic performance and some nice FX
and action sequences. But as a whole it was not something to write
home about. I felt Executive Decision (another plane hijack
movie starring Kurt Russell) was a much better movie. Less special
effects than this movie, but the suspense was built up
extremely well towards the conclusion. Air Force One is one of the
better "Die Hard in a {insert location here}" clones, but a
clone is what it was. Nothing new here...

Title
Review for Speed 2: Cruise Control (1997)
Welcome to your oh-so typical sequel. It tries to be twice as big as
it's predecessor, yet ends up twice as shallow. 
         Shallow....hmm...now there's an idea. Maybe if the ill-fated
cruise liner in this movie had struck a shallow reef early on things
may have turned out better. The first thing that struck me...and
surprised me, was that the camera work (for the opening sequence
anyway) was terrible. Looked like the cameramen were drunk and kept
tripping on their own feet......very different to the original movie.
         The characters? Well, not many of the characters actually
*had* characters, but here's a rundown. Annie, who was the highlight
of the the original, must have seriously banged her head in the train
crash at the end of the first movie. Why? Because something's got to
account for her losing that many IQ points. Even though Annie wasn't
exactly a rocket scientist in Speed, here  some of her actions just
make you want to beat your head against a wall. For instance, after
successfully using a chainsaw to cut a hole in a door so that a group
of people can escape noxious gases - she stands in the middle of the
opening for about five minutes till someone reminds her that the
people can't get ut till she get's the chainsaw out of their
faces....BANG BANG BANG 

     In point of fact Sandra's character is turned into little more
than one of those scantly dressed extras from Hercules, who constantly
has to be rescued.
     Jason Patric? All I can say is Bring Back Keanu. Keanu Reeves
might have the emotional range of a tree stump...but that's
one more tree stump than Jason has. I don't think he changed facial
expressions all movie - Jason, smile for the cameras!! Now
frown!...I said frown....oh...you are...BANG BANG BANG.. Wooden just
doesn't describe this guys performance, but it'll have
to do.
     The Bad Guy.....ahh...William Dafoe - there's a bright move. How
can you go wrong with the star from that acknowledged
classic, Body of Evidence? (Yes, that is sarcasm). His wide eyed
maniac of a character doesn't start out too bad....but goes
steadily downhill as the movie progresses. In the end he degenerates
to chasing Annie around for a hostage, even though he
already has the money and can escape....BANG BANG.
     Though I'd like to give this movie a double thumbs down, there
were some nice sequences. Considering the movie cost
over 100 million dollars - you'd hope there'd be at least a couple.
The real eye-popper for me, even though it was given away in
the trailer....BANG BANG.....was the sequence where the Cruise Liner
sideswipes the oil tanker. This looks terrific and I was
very surprised to hear that the Cruise Liner in it was....completely
computer generated! Wow....I don't think I've ever seen a CG
model look so real before. The sequence where Jason Patric in trying
to disable the propellers from under the ship is also terrific,
and the only time during the entire movie where you get that feeling
of....speed.
     This lack-of-speed problem affects many sequences. Such as the
oil tanker part.....it was - "Oh no, We're going to hit the
oil tanker!", 20 minutes later - "Oh no, We're going to hit the oil
tanker!" 20 min....you get the point. This movie failed simply
because it didn't live up to it's name....there was very little
feeling of speed. In the original movie, the lead characters had to
make split second decisions to survive.....in this movie it felt more
like - "Well people, we're gonna run into that there island in a few
hours - I think I might stroll over to Engineering and see if I can't
turn off the engines...I'm passing the cafeteria on the way, can I
get anybody anything?" 
      The ending of this movie really is terrible. Even though it
features what I've since found out is one of the most expensive
sequences ever in a movie - it just doesn't work at all. The part
where the liner crashes through the town looks very realistic,
but....surprise surprise - it just takes waaaaay too long. It seemed
to go for 15 minutes before the ship finally stopped. One thing
that struck me as extremely poor scriptiing was that as the ship
crashes through the harbour and town, around 25 people are
killed by the ship....and there's only 15 or so people left on the
ship. So when it stops safe and sound and the characters are all
cheering - the audience is sitting back and thinking - "wait a
sec...this is a happy moment because?" BANG BANG
     Then there was the dog.....I almost fell out of my seat when I
saw the bit with the dog dodging the falling debris. Putting a
dog in peril has become the ULTIMATE Hollywood cliche......every movie
seems to have a 'Dog-in-Danger' sequence - Volcano, Dante's Peak,
Independence Day, Daylight, Twister. Lost World......etc, etc.
     This movie is a perfect example of how NOT to make a sequel.
Director Jan De Bont should try watching the orignal
movie and this one back-to-back and see if he realises where he went
wrong.
