Authors
Eric Lurio
Number of Reviews
12

Title
Review for Men with Guns (1997/II)
The film begins with a Mother(Iguandili Lopez) and Daughter(Nandi Luna
Ramirez) making tortillas in the jungle. They are discussing the impending
arrival of a doctor. This a very alien jungle, and this is a very alien movie.
The doctor is Humberto Fuentes(Federico Luppi), a white haired widower who's
in need of a vacation. Usually he and his wife would go to the beach, but this
year, the first on his own, he decides to visit some students of his who he
thinks are in the mountains. Their training was paid for by the `progress for
peace' program from the USA. 
Everyone he knows tells him not to do it. There are rumors of atrocities he
does not belive. Then he sees an ex-student(Roberto Sosa) in the street and
follows him. He confirms the rumor.
But the good doctor still refuses to belive, and heads off into the bush.
The quest for the other students begin.
John Sayles is a great but perverse writer. He begins the journey with the
comic relief. Andrew (Mandy Patinkin) and Harriet(Kathryn Grody) are  two
lefty tourists who keep popping up at the weirdest times. They also get some
of the best lines [how do you say fajita in spanish?].
But most of the rest of the movie isn't at all funny. At his first stop, the
people are all afraid of him except a blind woman(Lolo Navarro), who tells him
that the second of his students has gone off to ‘school.' 
A young boy named Conejo(Dan Rivera Gonzalez) agrees, for a fee, to show him
where the school is. And tell him what really happened.
Through a series of adventures, Conejo and the Doctor collect more companions:
Domingo, the soldier(Damian Delgado), who originally stole the doctors tires,
then his money, and needs him to tend his wound, Padre Portillo, (Damian
Alcazar) a priest on the run from the men in the title, and finally,
Graciela(Tania Cruz) rendered mute since she was raped by Domingo.
Each has a story, told either out loud or in flashback. All are interesting. 
The ending is a revelation. Don't mind the subtitles, they work.

Title
Review for Mouse Hunt (1997)
 Computers are making cartoons obsolete. Take Gore Verbinski's `Mouse Hunt' for
 instance. Could they have made a live action film using Tex Averyesque cartoon
 physics any other way?
 No! Besides real people are far more belivable than cartoon people, a fact
 that isn't true for animals.
 William Hickey plays the late Rudolph Smuntz, who leaves his sons Ernie(Nathan
 Lane) and Lars(Lee Evans) an extremely antiquated string factory (even the
 workers are antiques), a derelict house and a box of precastro Cuban cigars.
 Unfortunatly, Ernie and Lars manage to drop old dad into a sewer, and there's
 a whiff of a curse in the air...
 The curse [which is implied, but never actually stated]works almost
 immediately. Lars' wife April (Vicki Lewis) immediately kicks him out of the
 house, the ancient box of cigars sprout cockroaches in the kitchen of Ernie's
 chic restaurant, killing the mayor and his business in one fell swoop, and our
 two heroes are homeless and friendless, but there is the old house, which
 turns out to be the missing work by the great 19th century architect LaRue.
 This is a live-action cartoon, so the laws of physics are against them, and
 not only that, but a cartoon mouse in live-action drag is living there! Tom
 and Jerry meets Laurel and Hardy! Lane even gets the tie stchick right! 
 Christopher Walken is great as the exterminater the two hire get rid of the
 title character, and the climax is just what you'd expect...in a good way of
 course.

Title
Review for Wide Awake (1998)
One would expect the location. What better place to look for God than in a
Catholic school, right? However, it doesn't work that way at all.
As the film opens, Joshua Beal (Joseph Cross) is about to enter the fifth
grade. He's heavily into sleeping, and his parents (Denis Leary and Dana
Delaney) literally have to drag him out of bed. There is a reason for this, we
soon learn...
Joshua's Grandpa (Robert Loggia) has recently died, and the kid's depressed.
He's shown in flashback as a caring and religious fellow who was very close to
our hero.
Not understanding how God could allow such a terrible thing could happen, Josh
decides to go on a quest of sorts, and find God for himself...
But regular life must go on,of course, and we have a surprisingly affectionate
portrait of life among the nuns. 
What's interesting here is how theology-free this quest is. The only mention
of Catholic ideology we really have is at the beginning when Sister
Terry (Rosie O'Donnell) gives out a homework assignment, and Josh asks her if
the nonbaptised are all really going to hell as mentioned in the workbook.
Director Shyamalan actually gives us a pretty good portrait of the fifth
grade. The kids are all good, especially Timothy Reifsnyder who plays Josh's
best friend Dave O'Hara and Heather Casler as his first crush. But there's
something not right here.
If Josh's parents seem to think that his quest is so unusual, why are they
sending him to CATHOLIC school?  'Tis a puzzelment.

Title
Review for Hard Rain (1998)
 Apparently, now that they know how to film in water, they're doing it with a
 vengence, first `Titanic,' and now this. Blubity blub-blub blub.
 It's raining. The river, it doesn't matter which, is rising Hank(Wayne Duvall)
 is manning the dam and trying desperately to keep it from blowing. The Sheriff
 (Randy Quaid), who's been defeated for reelection, is evacuating the town. He
 is not a happy camper. 
 Meanwhile, other people are making preparations for the disaster that will
 surely come. Henry(Richard Dysart) and Doreen(Betty White), the comic relief,
 are setting bear traps to deter looters, Karen(Minnie Driver) is trying to
 protect the church and those stained glass windows she's been restoring from
 the upcoming deluge. One of the banks in the state is sending an armored car
 manned by Charlie(Ed Asner) and his nephew Tom(Christian Slater)
 to pick up the money and keep it from getting wet.
 ...And in a local bar, Jim(Morgan Freeman) is waiting with his cohorts
 Kenny(Michael Goorjian),Mr. Mehlor(Dann Florek) and Ray(Ricky Harris) to steal
 it.
 The concept of a caper movie taking place in the middle of a natural disaster
 is a new one. It's one of those things where you take an idea and take it to
 it's most ridiculous and extreme. It usually doesn't work, but in this case it
 does.
 The reason is character. The characters are allowed to grow and change during
 the melodrama, and the changing coalitions within frame of the film are
 fascinating. Except for Driver and Slater, you're not one hundred percent sure
 who to root for, something that  director Mikael Salomon well understands.
 Freeman has to remind the audience every now and then he's one of the BAD
 guys.
 This also allows the deputies, Phil(Peter Murnik)  and Wayne(Mark Rolston), to
 show dramatic internal conflict.

Title
Review for Two Girls and a Guy (1997)
How precisley do you film a minimalistic stage play? Consider what we've got
here. The title says it all. We've got three characters [Okay, five, but one
character (Frederique Van Der Wal) has two lines and another (Angel David)  has
a teensy part as a masher on the street] and a large empty set. 
So what James Toback has done, is is put in a short introductory scene in the
front of a SoHo apartment building, and put everything else in one large set.
It works.
Carla (Heather Graham) and Lou (Natasha Wagner) are strangers. They are waiting
in front of an apartment house in SoHo, and after the brief encounter with the
aforementioned masher get into a conversation in which they have the same
boyfriend one Blake Allen (Robert Downey Jr.).
So Lou climbs up the fire escape breaks into Blake's apartment, and buzzes
Carla up, where they wait to confront poor, unsuspecting Blake.
Downey give the performance of his life. He sings! He dances! He does Hamlet!
It's amazing the way he mugs at the mirror, how he squirms in front of the two
p.o'd significant others. He weaves, he parries, he slices and dices! It's
amazing.
Think of Shaquille O'Niell or Michael Jordan going one-on-two against two
college woman's basketball stars. Graham and Wagner are perfectly fine, but
they just can't keep up. 
This is Downey's movie plain and simple. The closest thing one can compare it
to is Robert Duval's performance in `The Apostle.' Powerful, effecting and
enthralling.
Without Downey, this thing wouldn't have worked. 
There's a sex scene which was reportedly cut down quite a bit in order to
bring the film down from an NC-17 to an R. That was an excellent move as the
sex scene was mostly gratuitous. 
Without it the film would have been PG-13.

Title
Review for Apostle, The (1997)
 You can't really do one man shows in the cinema. Oh, people have tried, but on
 the whole it doesn't really work. so Robert Duvall doesn't bother in his
 latest opus. It's close, though.
 Duvall is The Reverend Euliss `Sonny' Dewey, a televangelist from Texas, who
 spends so much time on the job that he neglects his wife Jessie(Farrah
 Fawcett) and children. Jessie retaliates by having an affair with another
 preacher named Horace(Todd Allen), for whom she grabs control of the ministry.
 Upset at this turn of events, Sonny gets drunk and bashes Horace's head in
 with a baseball bat before fleeing.
 Justly wanted for murder, Sonny goes to Louisiana, where he takes the identity
 of The Apostle E.F. and begins his ministry anew.
 Along the way he meets a fellow who send him to Brother Blackwell(John
 Beasley), a retired minister who owns a derelict church which is restored by
 Sonny and where he starts his new ministry.
 While there is a failed romance with Miranda Richardson, who plays the
 receptionist at a local radio station, everyone else is just a prop for Duval
 to spout religion at and do his Billy Sol Hargus routine for.
 He's good at it, too. But the flaw(if you can call it that) here is the same
 as Scorcese's `Kundun,' unless you go in for that sort of thing, what's the
 point? It barely works as a character study.
 This is great performance, but alas, not a great movie.

Title
Review for Carne trémula (1997)
 This is what is known as melodrama. A loves B, but B doesn't remember A
 because she was too stoned to remember anything.
 Tragedy occers when C and D come along. So years later Fate steps in and A and
 B get back together, therebye infuriating C and D. It has to happen, there's
 no two ways about it. 
 Pedro Almodóvar's `Live Flesh' is an exercise in inevitablility.
 This is the life of Víctor Plaza(Liberto Rabal) from his birth in a bus in the
 dark days of Fascist Spain to the `divinely' mandated ending.
 A week before the real story begins, Victor has had sex with Elena(Francesca
 Neri), the rich daughter of an Italian diplomat and the aforementioned junkie.
 Victor manages to get into her apartment because she mistakes him for her
 dealer. Push comes to shove, and the police, namely David(Javier Bardem) and
 Sancho(José Sancho)  
 who gets into a fight with our hero, who winds up in jail for seven years in
 the Pokey.
 David is paralyzed, and gets not only an extremely guilty Clara, but fame and
 fortune as a wheelchair basketball star and Paralympic gold medallist. Sancho
 winds up with his cheating wife Clara(Angela Molina).
 So after six years in the pokey, Victor is out of jail. His mother is dead,
 and he visits her at the cemetary, where just at that moment, he
 spots....that's right!!!!
 The performances are fine, but the movie isn't. The characters, except for
 David, are completely uninteresting. One wonders why Almodóvar even bothered.

Title
Review for Castle, The (1997/I)
This is, in a way, payback. There have been lots of movies based on TV shows
recently, not all that many of them have been particularly good, and yet they
have been exported to many countries that have not been subjected to the
original TV shows. 
Are they comprehensible? Do they make any sense as cinema on their own? Does
the `Coneheads' movie, for example, stand on it's own if you're not a fan of
the old series of skits?
Well, what if some other country decided to dump one of IT's TV spinoffs on
our shores? How would it fare? Would we understand it?
`Frontline' is an Australian TV show. It's basically a satire of current-
events shows. `Weekend Update' writ large. It's reportedly very popular down
under and the spin-off feature did wonderfully at the box office.
It begins with an introduction `I'm Dale Kerrigan(Stephen Curry) and this is
my story.'
We are then introduced to the family father Daryl(Michael Caton), mum Sal(Anne
Tenney), brother Steve(Anthony Simcoe) and sister Tracy(Sophie Lee) [another
brotherWayne(Wayne Hope) is, of course, in jail]. In typical Saturday Night
Live fashion, they are all complete morons.
The Kerrigan clan live right next to the airport. About ten feet away. They
love their house. They love each other. They are the happiest family in
Austraila, if not the entire southern hemisphere. It's revolting!
So of course some bad men have to spoil all this bliss! In this case, the
airport decides to condemn the land on which they live in order to expand the
airport. 
And we are treated to a lesson in how the Aussies protect their rights....
Since Dad is a moron, his lawyer has to be one too. Dennis Denuto(Tiriel Mora)
isn't the densist soliciter in Oz, but he's close. 
The neighbors are also dumb, and if it wasn't for a deux-ex-machina in the
form of Lawrence Hammill (Charles 'Bud' Tingwell), an extremly emminant
lawyer.
The humor grates a bit, but on the whole, it is tolerable. 

Title
Review for Hush (1998)
A few decades back, every comedian did what's called a `mother-in-law joke.'
You know the thing about the old battle axe who would make the hero's life
hell. 
This is one loooooooonnnng mother-in-law joke.
Helen(Gwyneth Paltrow)  and Jackson (Johnathon Schaech) have been living with
each other for some time, and Jackson decides to take her home to meet mom.
Biiiiiiiiig mistake! 
For Mom in this case is a psycho named Martha(Jessica Lange),  every
misogynist's worst nightmare.
She's a clawing, cloying, sarcastic lying bitch with murder on her mind. Lange
has a great time with her and shows that she can chew the scenery with the
best of them.
To make matters worse, Mother-in-law hates her Mother-in-law(Nina Foch) who is
given the best lines. So, of course, she becomes Helen's soulmate and Martha
tries to kill her. 
The problem here is the script. In the words of Norman, patron saint of Movie
Critics, `It Stinks!' You know what's going to happen a mile away. 
Gwyneth Paltrow seems lost here. She's been in lots of classy films in the
recent past and doesn't seem to know how she managed to wind up in a cheesy
thriller like this one. 

Title
Review for Primary Colors (1998)
This couldn't have come out at a more opportune time. It's silly and profound
at the same time and timely as hell and tells a truth as only a
fictionalization can.
Ages ago, there was a miniseries called `Washington: Behind Closed Doors' with
Jason Robards, Jr. as  President Richard Monckton, a thinly disguesed Nixon
clone. Changing the last name, permitted Robards to dig into what he though
was the inner man without doing a Tricky Dickie impression like Anthony
Hopkins would do twenty years later.
Jack Stanton (John Travolta) is to Slick Willie as Monckton was to Tricky Dick.
Travolta gets to delve into the inner Clinton without having to do an
impression. But do we want to follow him there?
We meet Henry Burton (Adrian Lester) the grandson of a beloved civil rights
leader, while he's following Governor Stanton around during a tour of an inner
city school adult literacy program. 
Before he knows it, Henry is recruited into Stanton's presidential campaign,
thereby getting himself dumped by his radical journalist girlfriend. But
that's okay, he's soon shacking up with Daisy Green (Maura Tierney), an
assistant campaign manager.
This is kind of an idealized version of the ‘92 campaign. We WANT to see
Hillery...um...Susan Stanton (Emma Thompson) slap her husband around when she
hears about Gennifer Flow...Cashmere McLeod (Gia Carides) tapes on the tube.
We surely would have wanted to hear like Henry and Libby Holden (Kathy Bates)
did, that the tapes were faked.[well I WOULD]
Elaine May's writing sparkles and Mike Nichol's direction is on the money.
Nichols has gotten himself one helluva cast here. Billy Bob Thornton is great
as spinmeister Richard Jemmons, and Kathy Bates gives her best performance
since `Misery,' Larry Hagman gives a truly bravura performance as rival
candidate Freddy Picker
This is, more than anything, about idealism. The Stantons are portrayed as
genuine idealists as are most of the campaign bigwigs.
The question is if you really believe in the principles how far would you go
to put them into effect? Would you just stay pure and attack anyone who
disagreed with you the merest iota like Henry's girlfriend? Or would you cheat
a bit, and cover up a peccadillo or two like the Stantons?
It's a question that the last part of the movie attempts to answer to great
effect. More and more it becomes apparent that Libby Holden is more central a
character than Mrs. Stanton is. 
Stick another one up on the provisional top-ten list. Every Republican in
congress should see this film.

Title
Review for Fallen (1998)
 `Fallen' is what's known as a supernatural thriller. That means that the bad
 guy is a ghost or a demon or something weird like that. The question is in
 these things, who do you want to win? The insufferable good guy who is morally
 pure or the demon/ghost/devil?
 The i.g.g is John Hobbes(Denzel Washington), a heroic cop, who when we meet
 him, is at a state prison to witness the execution of Edgar Reese(Elias
 Koteas), a serial killer[serial killers are tres chic, you know] who's been
 taunting  Hobbs for years.
 We soon learn that  Hobbs lives with his extraordinarily wimpy brother Art
 (Gabriel Casseus) and Art's son Sam (Michael J. Pagan) and that because of
 this his girlfriend had moved out. Guess who's going to get it...
 But this is a supernatural thriller and Reese isn't just Reese. He's also
 Azazel, Satan's left hand man, who can possess innocent people and other
 mammals and can move from one to the other by touching them. A nifty gimmick
 that while giving a lot of actors work, begins to grate on one after a while. 
 This version of `the wave' isn't  quite as fun as those at baseball games
 because, unfortunately, most of the film is a sophomoric rehash of every other
 supernatural thriller made over the past twenty years.
 Most of the cast is okay. John Goodman, Donald Sutherland and James Gandolfini
 are good as Hobbs' fellow clueless colleagues, Embeth Davidtz overacts as the
 theologian daughter of a cop Azazel has played around with thirty years before
 and who gives some vital clues, and Robert Joy has a good time as Azazel's new
 temporary digs.
 But the film takes itself too seriously, and the use of narration and the
 ending are both cheats.

Title
Review for Newton Boys, The (1998)
Okay, it's a minor gripe and it wouldn't hurt the potential enjoyment of the
film by anyone. But it would have been nice if the character of Dock Newton
was played by Woody Harrelson.
Now I'm not knocking Vincent D'Onofrio by any means. He's wonderful here, one
of his best performances since that great one he gave in in `The Whole Wide
World.' In fact everybody's great in this flick.
I just think that Harrleson looks like Matthew McConaughey is all.
Now that that teensy rant is over, we come to what's the best movie to open
since the beginning of the year.
McConaughey plays Willis Newton, who when the movie opens is just out of
prison for a crime he didn't commit. He arrives home to the rural Texas of
1919, which for all intents and purpouses is still the old west. 
His possibly widowed mom(Gail Cronauer) owns a small ranch where her younger
sons Jess(Ethan Hawke) and Joe(Skeet Ulrich) break horses and live happy-go-
lucky lives.
Which is nice and all, but Willis is thinking bigger than that. He's getting
together with Brentwood Glasscock(Dwight Yoakam) and  a guy named Slim(Charles
Gunning) go start a career as a bank robber.
Slim's plan backfires, and with him out of the picture for a while, Willis and
Brentwood decide to bring Jess and Joe into the enterprise.
...And thus begins a hybrid western/gangster film that would be welcome in
either genre.
Rounding out the mob is Brentwood's wife Avis(Chloe Webb) and later the
aforementioned brother Dock.
There's also a romance between Willis and Louise(Julianna Margulies), who
works at a magazine stand in a hotel our heroes are staying at.
The characterizations are all wonderful. The acting is fine, the story
compelling, and there is action from beginning to end.
Had this come out three months ago, it would be up for an Oscar for something.
It's well worth the bucks.
