Authors
me@alanine.ram.org
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
/The X Files/, the TV series, reflects a phenomena that points to the
very heart and nature of America: a strong sense of individualism
combined with a deep (and healthy) distrust of authority.  While these
aspects are present only in a minority of the populace, I believe a
large percentage identify with it.  As Chris Carter, the series
creator, said "it goes as far back as the Boston Tea Party in a
sense."  Like in /The Truman Show/, /The X Files/ attempts to show how
most of society are manipulated like puppets by our public servants.
Analysts of the show have said that people relate to it because
conspiracies provide explanations and answers to real world
questions. I personally look at it as warnings about what has happened
or could potentially happen in the real world when you trust authority
(or anyone else---"trust no one" is /The X Files/ watchword) without
questioning it.
While the sinister-paranoid aspect of the TV show is present in the
movie, it is relegated to the background.  Instead what we have is an
intelligent and thought-provoking film with a bit of action.
Intelligent and thought-provoking, I'd add, probably only to fans of
the /The X Files/ show, as it tries mainly to clarify and confirm what
fans have long suspected, and present a coherent picture of The
Conspiracy.
The basic premise for /The X Files: Fight the Future/ is actually the
worst part of the plot: an anonymous caller warns about a bomb in the
FBI building in Dallas.  While FBI agents scour the building, Agent
Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) believes the bomb is in an another
building nearby and, together with Agent Dana Scully (Gillian
Anderson), he investigates and finds the bomb in a vending machine.  As
Scully barks orders to evacuate the building, Special Agent Darius
Michaud (/Millenium's/ Terry O'Quinn) orders Mulder out.  As Mulder
and Scully escape, the building blows up.
An inquiry is held and Mulder and Scully end up being scapegoats for
the loss of property and the five lives instead of being hailed as
heroes for finding the bomb in the first place.  But besides the
presence of agent Michaud, the building was thought to be completely
empty.  This sets a convenient stage for the entrance of Dr. Alvin
Kurtzweil (Martin Laundau), a friend of Mulder's father, who refers to
a conspiracy to hide the truth about the bombing.  He prods Mulder
into investigating the deaths of the other four people.
Mulder and Scully find that the four other people, from North Texas,
were actually killed by an alien virus black ooze that has been
present on the planet since at least 35,000 B.C.  The Elders, powerful
men in various governments across the world, have conspired with this
alien species, and covered up, to remake Earth as a colony for the
aliens, with the humans as the subservient species.  However, when
they learn of the killings in North Texas, they realise that
colonisation is not the goal of the aliens, but rather extermination
of the human species is.
The Elders' hands are tied because they are still in the process of
secretly developing a antidote/vaccine while aiding the aliens in
colonising the earth through the use of bees with virulent stings and
transgenic corn containing the alien DNA (for the first time, a goal
of the Elders/Syndicate is alluded to be a benevolent one).  They also
see Mulder as a threat to them but cannot execute him because that
would make him a martyr.  So they decide to kill someone close to him
and somehow manage to arrange it so Scully is kidnapped after being
stung by one of the bees (which travelled with her all the way from
Texas) carrying the alien virus.
However, the Well-Manicured Man (John Neville), his conscience
bothered by new threat posed by the alien life form to his grand
children, gives a vial of weak antidote/vaccine to Mulder and points
to Scully's location (a vaccine alone would not treat a disease after
it has been acquired).  Mulder travels to Antarctica and finds the
Cigarette Smoking Man (William B. Davis) in charge of an operation
involving a large number of humans infected with the alien virus, one
of whom is Scully. As he administers the antidote/vaccine to Scully,
it contaminates the network of aliens and creates a shutdown of the
process.  Mulder and Scully escape as the aliens awake from their
stasis and the entire "operation", which is really a spaceship, flies
off into the sky.  This is the part of the movie that raises the
biggest question: if the Cigarette Smoking Man is aware of the true
nature of the alien "colonisation", then why does it continue to help
them and why has he not informed the Elders?  If the Elders are
unaware of the existence of the Antarctic space ship, how did the
Well-Manicured Man know?
There are plenty of problems with the plot, many of which can be
rationalised only with the show's /modus operandi/ in mind: Why was
the X Files shut down? (Rationale: all the files were burnt in the
season finale preceding this movie.)  Who called in the bomb threat
and why, if the purpose of the bomb was to destroy the bodies killed
by the alien ooze? (Rationale: Kurtzweil did, since he knew about the
bodies, but his call was deliberately misdirected by Michaud.)  Why
were Scully and Mulder blamed for the bombing when they should have been
thanked for saving lives? (Rationale: the FBI wanted scapegoats and
they received orders from higher up to place the blame on the two
agents so they could be separated.)  How could the child and the
fireman killed by the alien ooze end up in a building allegedly
attacked by terrorists? (Rationale: The Federal Emergency Management
Authority, an arm of the Syndicate with the power to do away with
constitutional rights in the event of a national emergency, took
charge of the bodies by stating that it was the Hanta virus that was
responsible for the deaths.) How could the bee that stung Scully have
chosen that time and place, and how could Mulder's subsequent 911 call
be intercepted knowing that Scully would be stung by a bee?
(Rationale: this indicates the powerful nature of the Syndicate ("who
know Dallas", a reference to the Cigarette Smoking Man's hand in the
killing of John F. Kennedy).)  As Mulder arrives in Antarctica, the
gas gauge in his snowmobile is empty. But yet he makes it back to
civilisation after the alien spaceship takes off; how could this be?
(Rationale: The Lone Gunmen help him out.)  What convinced the FBI to
re-open the X Files in the end? (Rationale: Assistant Director Walter
Skinner (Mitch Pileggi) helped convince the inquiry that it would be
the wisest course of action.)
There are plenty of unanswered issues in relation to series (including
the clones, the aliens with toxic green ooze which change shape, the
chip in the back of Scully's neck responsible for her cancer, Mulder's
sister, the relationship between Cigarette Smoking Man and Mulder, the
enigmatic Krychek, etc.), but I expect time constraints would make it
impossible to address all issues (besides that's what the next seasons
are for). I think a wise choice was made in focusing only on the black
ooze aliens even though it is not entirely consistent with the series
story line.
The main thing the movie provides for fans of the show are constant
references to the show, and the purpose of the Syndicate/the Elders is
finally spelled out explicitly (even though it could've been guessed
from the show).  People who are not fans of /The X Files/ will
probably not consider this movie to be anything spectacular, unless
they have a special interest in science fiction and some tolerance for
unexplained plots.  Such people will not understand the Cigarette
Smoking Man, Skinner's relationship to Mulder and Scully, the Elders,
the Lone Gunmen, and even the significance of the black ooze, the bees
and the transgenic corn. Further the presence of characters like
Michael Kritschgau, a character from past episodes, that even hardcore
fans will have a difficult time rationalising, only obfuscate the
issues for the average viewer.
There is a lot of camp and humour in the movie at least initially
which works well to endear fans and non-fans alike to the movie (a
scene which included the /Independence Day/ poster was a classic). As
the situation gets serious, the humour appropriately disappears, but
it was good to see Scully not looking completely sombre all the time.
The score has its moments.  But yet it is vastly underdeveloped and
under used.  In general, the theme should have been present more
prominently, and variations of the theme should have been used to render
suspense and fill in awkward moments of silence.  The references to
/Star Wars/ and /Alien/ (in the final scenes) I thought were pretty
cool.
I cannot believe I am thinking so much about the show.  I rarely think
much of TV shows, but this is a show that has made me think a lot not
only about philosophical connections to the real world, but also
/about/ the show.  It is true, what some critics have said, that the
movie is just like a long episode, and that there have been better
episodes.  Still, I think /The X Files: Fight the Future/ is /the/
movie of the summer, and is one of the best movies I've seen. I can't
wait to see what they come up with on Season Six.


Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
It's not clear to me why /Lost in Space/ has been slammed so much by
critics.  The effects are great, the plot has its moments, and the
acting is mediocre.  That doesn't seem much different from many
blockbusters that have received far more positive reviews, such as
/Independence Day/ or /Mission: Impossible/.
The plot: Humans have exhausted the resources of Earth and need to
colonise other planets in order to continue their polluting existence.
The area of space humans are interested in colonising is known as
Alpha Prime, which requires a ten year journey by "normal"
space flight.  An "hypergate" is being constructed that will enable the
inhabitants of Earth to travel to Alpha Prime in no time, but for it
to work, the gate has to exist at both ends.  The Robinson Family,
John (William Hurt), Maureen (Mimi Rogers), Judy (Heather Graham),
Penny (Lacey Chabert), and Will (Jack Johnson), are the ones
responsible for building the hypergate at the Alpha Prime end (and
this is the most incredulous part of the movie).
With Major Don West (Matt LeBlanc) piloting Jupiter II, the spacecraft
carrying the Robinsons begins its ten year journey to Alpha Prime.
However, the Global Alliance undertaking this colonisation mission has
an enemy, the Global Sedition, who recruit Dr. Smith (Gary Oldman) to
sabotage the mission and kill the Robinsons.  When Smith himself is
double crossed and left on the spaceship, he helps avert the Robinson
family destruction.  In doing so, the Robinson family find themselves
pulled towards a sun and have to engage the hyperdrive to escape.  But
as John Robinson says at the beginning of the movie, using the
hyperdrive without a hypergate at other end will result in uncertainty
in the final destination, and the Robinsons end up being lost in
space.
At this point, the story begins to lose cohesion. As the family wander
around space, they encounter a ship from their future invested with
heat-seeking silicon-based spider-like creatures and a fuzzy animated
monkey-like creature who comes to be known as "Blawp".  The ship from
the future is no coincidence: the Robinsons find that they're caught
in a time bubble whose originator is intent on going back in time to
prevent the Robinsons from beginning their mission.  But unknown to
everyone, there's a fly, or should I say spider, in every dab of
science-fiction ointment.
While the futuristic set design is what makes this movie worth
watching, the acting by most of the characters is terrible.  Oldman,
Chabert, and Johnson are the ones that shine, while the rest of the
cast come off as uninspired.  The plot has its moments, but the ending
is too weak. Worth the matinee fare on the big screen.


Title
Review for Hope Floats (1998)
/Hope Floats/ has some interesting scenes, but is a boring
groan-inducing movie for the most part.  The opening scene, perhaps
the best one in the movie, starts off as a talk show audience delight
in the misery of Birdie Pruitt (Sandra Bullock) who has just learned
that her husband has been cheating with her best friend.
Devastated, Birdie leaves the fast Chicago life and heads back to
Smithville Texas, her home town, with her young daughter Bernice (Mae
Whitman).  Birdie, once elected Queen of Corn three years in a row (an
unparalleled achievement in the history of Smithville), finds single
life difficult to adjust to, particularly when the people she knew in
high school feel free to rub salt in her wounds.
The one exception who appears to treat Birdie normally is Justin
Matisse (Harry Conick, Jr.) who had a crush on her as teen.  If the
story hasn't yet started sounding familiar to you, it should: the
relationship between Birdie and Justin ploddingly progresses to its
obvious end, without any real resolution of issues between Birdie and
her former husband, her daughter, and her high school acquaintances.
The best part in /Hope Floats/ is the presence of young Travis
(Cameron Finley) who mimics animals which makes for some
humour. Other than that, this movie is a total dud.


Title
Review for Mulan (1998)
/Mulan/ is the latest offering from Disney, and for the most part, the
result is an average animation flick. Given the number of bad movies
this summer (/Godzilla/, /Hope Floats/), /Mulan/ actually may appear
better than it seems. However, compared to the greatness achieved in
previous Disney animated movies, I'd say /Mulan/ doesn't come close.
Mulan is the name of the heroine in the movie, a Chinese girl who goes
to fight in her father's place, disguised as a male.  Accompanying her
is a dragon invoked by her ancestors, Mushu (Eddie Murphy), and a
cricket, Cri Kee.  Needless to say, Disney capitalises on every
opportunity to take advantage of the fact Mulan is a female in the
world of males.  The most powerful part of the movie is how Mulan
actually makes the decision to not lead the life of a traditional
Chinese girl and take up arms instead, so her father does not have to
fight again. But once she does make the decision, she proves herself
in the army quite readily and before you know it, she's coming up with
ideas to save China from the invading Huns.  In some ways, /Mulan/ has
fallen victim to what even some of the better movies this summer have:
the plot has too much action and too little story.
As with /Armageddon/, what really works in this movie is the humour.
The animation is mixed: the backdrops and action scenes are gorgeous,
but I found the movements of the characters to be awkward.  I consider
the most spectacular scene in the movie to be the one starting with
the soldiers charging down the mountain and culminating with an
avalanche initiated by Mulan.  However, this pales in comparison to
scenes in previous Disney cartoons like the animal stampede in /The Lion
King/. The character development, particularly of the primary villain,
is minimal. This represents a marked departure from other Disney
movies where villains such as a Jafar or Scar have distinct fearsome
personalities.  The music is highly forgettable.
Parts of the film are daring and experimental by Disney standards.
Even though the movie is bold in terms of depicting a female heroine
who can do what the "big boys" can (which in itself is an incongruous
premise), in the end it all boils down to a typical
girl-hooks-up-with-boy ending.  There are plenty of disturbing scenes
that are effective particularly when animated as almost still
images. I thought one depicting the massacre left behind by the Huns
was pretty powerful, but, again, this does match up to the depiction
of the death of Simba's father in /The Lion King/.  While I do think
Disney did a positive thing by going for a somewhat experimental
structure, the fact they flop back to the cliches makes this a
somewhat schizophrenic movie and places it in the "average" category.
I recommend the matinee showing or waiting for it to come out on
video.


Title
Review for U.S. Marshals (1998)
One of my favourite kinds of movies are the ones in which the hero is
wrongly accused and has to fight a powerful adversary to clear his/her
name. What makes these movies work is the way in which innocence is
established, given the seemingly overwhelming odds. In other words,
the hero must win in the end, but it can't be too easily done, for
that would undermine the credibility of the plot.  /U.S. Marshals/
definitely pulls off this plot device convincingly, just as its
predecessor, /The Fugitive/, did.
In both movies, Sam Gerard (Tommy Lee Jones), is a Deputy
U. S. Marshal who is on the trail of an escaped suspect.  This time,
it is Mark Roberts/Sheridan (Wesley Snipes), who is falsely accused of
murdering two agents of the State Department in cold blood.  Sheridan
is a former Special Forces Marine, ex-CIA operative who knows all the
tricks of Gerard's trade, and that makes him more credible than the
character of Richard Kimble (played by Harrison Ford) in /The
Fugitive/.  Gerard is assisted in his hunt for Sheridan by his team of
Marshals as well as John Royce (Robert Downey Jr.), a Stage Department
agent whose friends were the ones "murdered in cold blood" by
Sheridan. From the beginning we know that Royce is up to no good,
especially given the simmering hostility between himself and Gerard.
At first Gerard is led to believe that Sheridan is just another
run-of-the-mill murderer.  But he soon learns that Sheridan was a
"kite", an agent of the U.S. Government in a position to perform jobs
(read: dirty work) where the government can disavow responsibility if
things go wrong.  Gerard also learns that Sheridan killed the two
State Department agents in self-defense.  As the story progresses,
more things don't add up. When Gerard sees one of his agents die,
allegedly shot by Sheridan, he becomes irrational and, forgetting his
brewing doubts, goes after Sheridan with a vengeance.
As I said above, in such movies, clearing one's name shouldn't come
easily, and in this case it definitely doesn't. Sheridan never really
manages to succeed in his attempt (people who can tell the truth are
killed off one by one--which in itself makes for quite a bit of
suspense).  Gerard does finally put two and two together and baits the
real criminal into revealing himself, thereby exonerating Sheridan.
The performances by the three main characters, Jones, Snipes, and
Downey are excellent in terms of action-movie fare even though there
is little character development.  The script is witty at times and the
action sequences are quite spectacular. The movie is being promoted as
a sequel to /The Fugitive/, but it is not a sequel as much as a rehash
of the original (read: clone).  Still, /U.S. Marshals/ is worth
watching on the big screen and I highly recommend it.


Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
/Armageddon/ is a taut fast-paced thriller which starts off great but
gets tiresome toward the end.  The plot is simple: an asteroid is
headed on a collision course toward Earth.  To stop it, the US
government sends a bunch of roughneck oil drillers into space to drill
a hole in the asteroid so they can drop and detonate a nuclear weapon
inside, before it is too late.
The problem with disaster movies is that it is very hard to find an
antagonist, i.e., someone you hate by the end of the movie. After all,
an asteroid or a volcano or a twister doesn't give a rat's arse about
what humans think (it can't).  Some movies try to cast natural
disasters as either a force out to teach us a lesson or as an evil
entity.  Wisely enough, the primary focus in /Armageddon/ is the
motley crew and not the rock floating through space.
I thought the visual effects were cheesy and the dialogue was corny.
The character (we're introduced to one too many) development is
non-existent.  The acting is mixed: Bruce Willis is a great actor and
he gets a lot of the spot light. Most of the other actors are just
there for the entertainment value.  Christopher Walken..., er, William
Filkner does a good job as captain of the space shuttle, but he
appears to be the only one taking the movie seriously.  Liv Tyler and
Ben Affleck, as lovers, have the chemistry of oil and water.  The
sound track is dated (music by Trevor Rabin, who, although a great
musician, could've done better here).
The one saving grace is that the action and suspense sequences are
great.  The attempts at humour work for the most part and make this
movie enjoyable. Worth the matinee fare.


Title
Review for Tomorrow Never Dies (1997)
As has been repeated several times, the demise of Communism in the
Soviet Union is one of the worst things to happen to Hollywood.
Dozens of plot devices were no longer available. Some writers,
however, kept going, dishing out the same plots, only realising later
that they could no longer bank on the anti-Communist tendencies that
were present in the general populace to carry the movie.  However, a
few movies in Hollywood managed to reinvent themselves.  Fortunately
for us, the James Bond series is one of them.
In the latest James Bond flick, /Tomorrow Never Dies/, not only do we
see cooperation between the Imperialists and the Communists, we see a
more confident Pierce Brosnan playing James Bond, and the contentment
of knowing that the more some things change, the more they stay the
same.
Brosnan is definitely the right person to play 007. Neither George
Lazenby nor Timothy Dalton were very charismatic, and Roger Moore and
Sean Connery are not as young (though it would be interesting to see a
Bond movie set in the future (i.e., depicting an old or retired Bond),
with Connery returning).  To his credit, Brosnan appears to have
settled into the driver's seat, making the depiction of James Bond
/Tomorrow Never Dies/ one of the best.
The plot in /Tomorrow Never Dies/ is essentially the same as 
other Bond movies.  The movie opens with a great action sequence, even
better than the one in /Goldeneye/, which depicts Bond preventing a
plane carrying nuclear weapons from being destroyed by a missile.  The
credits sequence is spectacular, primarily due to the presence of an
"electronic figurine". 
Soon we switch gears and learn of an evil media tycoon, Elliot Carver
(Jonathan Pryce), who seeks to control how information is distributed
around the world.  Carver is a character who literally is symbolic of
people like Ted Turner and Rupert Murdoch, but he reminded me of Bill
Gates.  Of course, the ultimate goal of this control is the epitome of
capitalism: acquisition of wealth.  How ironic then that a movie
series that relied on anti-communist tendencies now relies on
anti-capitalist tendencies to sell itself.
Carver's idea of information control involves being the source of
information generated, so he can be the "first" to distribute it.  To
this end, he manages to create a situation, through the use of his
technology, where China and the United Kingdom are almost at war with
each other.  Bond is assigned to stop him.
As Bond goes about his job, he runs into Carver's loyal henchman
Stamper (Gotz Otto), Dr. Kaufman (Vincent Schiavelli), one of the most
humourous characters in the movie, Wai Lin (Michelle Yeoh), a Chinese
agent who helps Bond fight Carver, and Paris Carver (played listlessly
by Teri Hatcher) an old flame of Bond.
At this point, the burning questions are: how long does it take before
Bond gets to sleep with Paris and Wai Lin? How many times does Carver
try to kill Bond and Wai Lin?  Who dies first: Stamper or Carver?  And
so on. For answers to these, you have to see the movie.
So while it may seem like a lot has changed, but in some ways, the
Bond movie series has still remained the same.
Brosnan and Yeoh are well-matched.  I much prefer Yeoh, who is fairly
charismatic, to many of the other ladies Bond has been paired up with.
Pryce plays a brilliant over-the-top villain. One of the most amusing
scenes in the movie is when Carver mockingly imitates Wai Lin's kicks
and punches, ending with "pathetic!"
The main problem I had with the movie was the less-than-perfect
production.  Perhaps it was due to filming in a foreign country, but
there's a lot of awkwardness among the extras, which indicates that
not enough footage was collected, or  enough attention wasn't paid on
the cutting room floor.  But since I like Jackie Chan movies, this is
only a minor nitpick as far as I am concerned.
The other problems include a suggested conflict between M (Judi Dench)
and a British general, which is never exploited fully.  The one-liners
by Moneypenny (Samantha Bond), whose role entailed little more making
little quips, irked me.  Finally, there is little inventiveness
(unlike in Jackie Chan movies) involved in how Bond gets out of the
scrapes he gets himself from. 
The premise of the movie isn't that far off from reality.  Given the
direction intellectual property laws are heading, nothing short of a
police state will ensure that the so-called "owners of information"
profit from every use of the information.  And who said a Bond movie
isn't thought-provoking?

