Authors
Gareth Rees
Number of Reviews
17

Title
Review for Trzy kolory: Bialy (1994)
     Karol Karol (Zbigniew Zamachowski) is a Polish hairdresser who has
married glamorous and successful model Dominique (Julie Delpy) and
moved with her to Paris.  However, he is impotent and unable to
consummate the marriage, so she divorces him, frames him for the arson
of her business, and throws him out onto the street with a large trunk
containing all his possessions.  Despite all this, she tells him that
she still loves him and wants him.
     Karol takes up playing sad Polish folksongs on a comb-and-paper
harmonica in the Metro, and meets Mikolaj (Janusz Gajos), a depressive
Polish chess player.  The two of them conceive a plan to get Karol back
to Poland despite his lack of passport, and once there, Karol
determines that he is going to win Dominique back: when he has achieved
equality (personal equality, financial equality and equality of power)
with her, then he will be able to perform sexually.
     The films lurches unsteadily between comedy and tragedy.  Zbigniew
Zamachowski reprises his comic persona from THE DECALOGUE: TEN with
initial success as the whole world (incarnate in a pigeon outside the
divorce court) seems to dump on him.  He's less convincing as a cunning
and successful businessman later in the film, but the sharp and funny
portrayal of the new free-market Poland, where everything is for sale
and where a few lucky people make money through being in the right
place at the right time saves this section.  The ending is so sad and
yet such an inevitable and appropriate come-uppance for both of the
main characters that I didn't know whether to laugh or cry.
     If WHITE is unfair to anyone, it's to Dominique.  Kieslowski is
sometimes accused of misogyny, and certainly in this film it isn't
clear at all why Dominique behaves as she does.  We never see enough of
her point of view to determine why she loves this clown of a
hairdresser or why she is forced to stand up in court and say that she
does not love him.

Title
Review for Przypadek (1982)
     A man sits in a chair screaming "No!."  A bloody corpse is dragged
through a hospital corridor.  A young boy, emigrating from Poland, says
goodbye to a friend.  Two young lovers are talking by the side of a
road.  A student doctor is disturbed by watching an autopsy of her
schoolteacher.  A man makes a phone call to his dying father and is
told "you are under no obligation." Krzysztof Kieslowski's film BLIND
CHANCE sets up these mysteries--important events in the life of the
protagonist, Witek--in the first couple of minutes, and then one by
one resolves these initially confusing and isolated fragments into the
story of a man's life (though we are made to wait until the very last
seconds for a final connection to be made).
     Kieslowski has always been fond of formal structuring devices in
his films--the changing cinematic styles of CAMERA BUFF, the separated
twins in THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE, the three colours of the French
flag and the three ideals of the French revolution in his recent
trilogy--and BLIND CHANCE exploits this potential for setting up
comparisons, irony and unexpected connections to the full.  Three times
Witek runs through a railway station, desperate to catch the train to
Warsaw.  Three times we see him run down the platform and reach out his
hand for the door.  Three possible futures await.  In one, he catches
the train, is befriended by a Party member and enters the Communist
Party himself; in another he knocks down a guard, is arrested, makes
connections with an underground movement and becomes Catholic; in the
third he misses the train and returns to his studies, marries and
becomes a successful doctor.  The three films of Witek running through
the station differ in tiny details; in one he knocks a man flying, in
another he just jogs his beer.  From such tiny changes grow the shape
of Witek's life.  Chance seems to have intervened in the lives of other
people in the film: two old Party members were both in prison at the
same time, but now one is in disgrace and the other has a high position
yet insists that it is only good fortune that has put him there.
     But there are constants too.  In each variation he meets a woman
from his past, falls in love with her and is separated from her.  He
wants to do good, to help people, but it's never quite clear to him how
to accomplish this in a country run by secret police, informers and
totalitarian government.  Three times Witek is offered a chance to
visit France--which seems to offer some elusive chance at
salvation--and each time events conspire to prevent him.
     Such is the skill with which the film is structured that, although
it ends in tragedy, the revelation of the last mystery completes the
story so surprisingly and yet so well that we feel, yes, this is right,
it has to end like this.

Title
Review for Parfum d'Yvonne, Le (1994)
     This film sets out to create a sense of isolation, of two people
becoming lovers in a cocooned summer of walks by Lake Geneva, parties
full of beautiful people, and languid love-making in hotels; two people
whose relationship is built more on their separation from reality than
anything they share between them.
     Patrice Leconte's film creates this feeling of isolation by
suggesting hidden subtleties in the background of the characters but
never revealing the truth behind them.  There is the mystery about
Victor's real name and background: he's lying about being a Russian
Count, but where does his money come from?  He can't really be living
off the proceeds of selling a collection of butterflies, can he?
Victor never, ever says anything about himself, and rarely about
anything.  What about the relationship between Yvonne and the old man
Rene?  Are they two loners drawn together by some spirit they have in
common?  Are they connected in some way by family?  They aren't
saying.  Yvonne's uncle is the only person who talks about Yvonne's
past, but it's not clear whether what he says is to be trusted.  What
is it exactly that Rene does?  He's a doctor, right, but what are the
"favours" he does for people in Geneva?  Why does an injured man
suddenly turn up at his house one day and why doesn't he want Victor
and Yvonne to see?  Who are the people he seems to be having feuds with
and why?  Who is the young man he is saying goodbye to at a railway
station?  Perhaps his son, going off to die in the war in Algeria?
     There are more mysteries, and none of them are resolved.  These
hints emerge suddenly from the depths of the film and then sink back
into the calm waters, never to be seen again.  The two lovers are
unaffected by this; they're incurious about each other; they just
exist, together, living from day to day.  Only when Victor starts to
plan, to think of the longer term, do things go wrong.

Title
Review for Double vie de Véronique, La (1991)
     THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE is a strange film.  The structure is
typically Kieslowskian--Veronika lives in Krakow and Veronique in
Paris, each feeling that she is not alone--and it seems that the stage
is set for a philosophical contribution to the nature/nurture debate, as
in his earlier BLIND CHANCE, but instead, the film drifts off into
whimsy.  Veronika's singing kills her, and Veronique, feeling the death
of her twin, gives up music and wanders moodily round her flat and her
father's house at night.  Bored with her boyfriend, she seems to find
fulfillment with a man who makes puppets and writes fantasies for
children.  There is a hint that THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE is a fairy
story or just-so fable about how we came to be ourselves rather than
someone else--because we didn't catch our finger in a car door or
because we gave up singing.  But it's only a hint; there's never really
any point where we grasp what the film is about--expecting pointful
contrasts between the two lives of this woman, instead we're left
adrift.  The film goes its idiosyncratic and fleeting way in a rich
mixture of beautiful images--especially the dreamlike slow-motion
quality to the anti-communist demonstrators fleeing from police in
Krakow--and sublime music courtesy of van den Budenmayer, that
composer who should have been but alas never was.

Title
Review for Trzy kolory: Bialy (1994)
     The three films are called BLUE, WHITE and RED; the colours are
those on the French revolutionary flag, the Tricolor, and the films are
nominally about the three ideals of the French revolution:  liberty,
equality and fraternity (respectively).  They are set in three European
cities:  Paris, Warsaw and Geneva (respectively).
     They are not otherwise connected in terms of character or plot,
except for a marvelously coincidental sequence in which the main
characters from the three films all appear together at the end of RED.
     There are occasional references to each other and to others of
Kieslowski's films, for example the old woman trying to put a bottle in
a bottle bank who appears in WHITE and RED illustrates some of the
differences between the situations and characters of Karol and
Valentine; Juliette Binoche (the star of BLUE) appears very briefly in
the courtroom at the start of WHITE; the funeral music in BLUE
attributed to the fictitious 18th-century Dutch composer "van den
Budenmayer' (actually Zbigniew Preisner) is the same as that in NO END,
Kieslowski's first collaboration with Preisner.  Van den Budenmayer
turns up again in RED, when Valentine buys a CD of his music.  There
are other references; Kieslowski is keen on this short of
intertextuality.
     As Kieslowski admits in interviews, the revolutionary themes are
just an excuse, a thematic structuring on which to hang the films,
which are about people, not about abstract themes.  The pan-European
settings (and the pro-European unity of the "Song for the Unification
of Europe" which features in BLUE) are to some extent a ruse to get
pan-European funding.
     The themes are treated very ironically: BLUE is about the unwanted
and unwelcome liberty experienced by Julie when her husband and child
are killed in a car crash; WHITE is about Karol's attempt to get even
with the glamorous wife who has divorced him, and RED is about a
retired judge who, cynical about the possibility of justice, uses a
radio to spy on the telephone conversations of his neighbours.
     Kieslowski has said that he does not intend to make any more films
after RED; he attributes this to the difficulty of getting funding.  If
he does retire, it would be a great shame, as he is surely one of
Europe's most talented directors.

Title
Review for Bez konca (1985)
     Antek is dead, but his ghost lingers on to watch his wife Ulla and
their son Jacek grieve for him.  The parallels with Kieslowski's later
film BLUE are striking.  Both films focus on a woman whose husband has
died in a car and who leaves behind unfinished business--in BLUE, the
"Song for the Unification of Europe," in NO END, the legal defence of a
strike organiser (it is 1984, and Poland is under martial law)--which
his wife initially resists but eventually becomes involved with.  She
discovers evidence of her husband's lover.  She befriends another
woman.  And the music that dominates NO END is the moving funeral march
that is attributed to the fictitious composer "van den Budenmayer" in
BLUE.
     The treatment of this subject in NO END is grittier, more
realistic, less optimistic.  There is no suggestion that Ulla will find
fulfilment in her new-found liberty.  All struggle seems futile--sex
is joyless, even hypnosis cannot make Ulla forget, and even though the
striker is freed, everyone knows that this is because he gave in to the
system instead of fighting it.
     In BLUE, the presence of Julie's husband Patrice is hinted at
through Julie's memories of his music.  In NO END, Antek's ghost looks
on unhappily as people's lives unravel.  The title may refer to the
unfinality of death, but it also seems to suggest that the painful
struggle of life is unending.  This is the most fatalistic of
Kieslowski's films.

Title
Review for Amator (1979)
     When his son is born, Filip buys a Russian-made hand-held movie
camera to record his child growing up.  His boss discovers the camera
and commissions him to make a documentary about a business meeting.  In
no time at all he is hooked on movie-making, rapt by the power he has
to point his camera at someone and turn life into art.  His enthusiasm
prompts others to join him in a film club at the factory, and
encouragement from professional film-makers leads him to believe that
he can use his camera as a force for good, to expose corruption at his
factory and in the Communist Party.  What he discovers is that things
the camera can make issues simple, but that it lies in doing so; life
is more complicated than he had thought.
     The cinematography and camerawork in CAMERA BUFF is very
effective.  The opening mimics perfectly the conventions of realistic
documentary, resembling early Kieslowski shorts such as Hospital: the
cutting is rapid, the people mutter indistinctly among themselves, the
dialogue is naturalistic.  This style is the simple, mimetic style of
amateur cameraman Filip as he shoots his first film.  As the film
progresses, Filip learns more about the art of film-making, develops
his own sense of aesthetic and of the duty that a film-maker has to be
true to his convictions.  A bereaved son is comforted by Filip's film
of his mother ("A person is dead, but here she still lives") and Filip
discovers that there are "things a man needs more than peace and
quiet".  Mirroring this internal change, the style of Camera Buff
changes, becoming more consciously dramatic and cinematic.  People talk
in turn, give speeches; the framing of the shots is more beautiful,
more contrived.  By the end, when his wife and child have left him,
when his personal life has been ruined and he realises that his crusade
to expose corruption by making films about it was naive and misguided,
the realism dissolves away completely and Filip points the lens only at
his own troubled head, no longer able to see things around him with the
clarity and simplicity of vision that initially inspired him to be a
film-maker.

Title
Review for Anchoress (1993)
     Christine Carpenter sees a statue of the Virgin Mary being brought
to the church in her village and it is the most beautiful thing she has
ever seen.  She asks the priest if she can become an anchoress, and be
sealed up in the walls of the church for the remainder of her life, to
intercede with the Virgin on behalf of the village.  The priest offers
her a choice: "You must choose between the rotten meat of this world
and the milk and honey of paradise."
     Chris Newby's film of this true story very adeptly demonstrates
how Christine's naive and sensuous spirituality becomes the
battleground for the contention between the priest (who gets status
from having an anchoress in the walls of his church), the reeve of the
local manor (who wishes to marry her) and her midwife mother (who wants
her to be happy).
     The film is shot in monochrome and the bleak medieval landscapes
have the apocalyptic feel of Bergman's SEVENTH SEAL.  The atmosphere is
one of a God-forsaken, poverty-stricken subsistence community but the
camera superbly conveys Christine's unique vision of the world by
concentrating on the textures of her world: skin, stone, mud, water,
hair - in all of these Christine sees her vision of the Virgin.  There
is a scene in which she has escaped from her confinement and is
standing in the sand with her arms outstretched as if embracing the
sky, and the camera whirls and tilts as it follows her, perfectly
conveying her joy at being able to commune with the world again.

Title
Review for Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media (1992)
     The media, Chomsky tells us, whether by deliberate intent or
through the effect of the power structure of our society, deceives us
and diverts our attention from the issues that matter.  In a democratic
society, where people's actions cannot be directly controlled, it
becomes a function of the media to control what people think and to
make sure that they do not want to change the status quo.  In order for
this to work, people must not only be misinformed, but they must also
feel that it does not matter that they are being misinformed, that some
information is too sensitive to be made public, that there is nothing
that one ordinary person can do about this misinformation.  Chomsky is
trying to challenge our apathy, trying to make us think about the way
our opinions and actions are shaped.
     Directors Peter Wintonick and Mark Achbar plunge into the awkward
situation of portraying a man who has attacked the very techniques they
use to present him with, it seems, hardly a second thought.  Chomsky
stands up on stage to argue his case, but the directors cut and
intercut him with pictures, graphics, visual metaphor and
"re-contextualisation," until the focus and force of his argument is
lost among the videobabble.  A mention of an article being cut by the
New York Times inspires a scene in which a group of surgeons perform a
dissection on a page of newsprint, and the irony is that this is
exactly what is being done to Chomsky.
     It's possible that I'm just not media-literate enough to
appreciate the film, that I'm not prepared for the thirty-second
sound-bite, but then neither I think is Chomsky.  I kept wanting to hear
what he has to say, not what the directors think I should hear.
     This is not to say that the film does not have some brilliantly
effective moments.  A section on the Indonesian invasion and occupation
of East Timor (with the complicity of the United States and other
western governments) supports Chomsky with some of the detailed
evidence on which his argument depends; a section on Chomsky's defence
of the right to free speech of a holocaust revisionist demonstrates
more clearly than anything else in the film the extent to which our
thinking on important issues can become controlled and inflexible.
     What saves the film is Noam Chomsky, whose genius shines through
everything his opponents or the directors can throw at him.

Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Rouge (1994)
     Valentine (Irene Jacob, the star of THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE)
is a model living in Geneva (the poster for RED shows a picture of
Valentine used in an advert for confectionery).  She runs over a dog
belonging to a retired judge (jean-Louis Trintigant), and as a result
becomes his confidante.  In an attempt to shock her out of her
idealism, the judge reveals to her that he spies upon the telephone
conversations of his neighbours.
     Valentine insists that something should be done, but learns that
the connections between people are more complex than she realises.  She
listens to a married man talking on the phone with his male lover and
determines to tell the wife about this betrayal, but then learns that
the marriage is a happy one.  She does not know which is the lesser
evil: to tell, and break up the marriage, or keep silent, and allow the
betrayal to continue.  She keeps silent.
     But the learning process is two-way.  The judge explains that he
had lost his youthful idealism when his girlfriend had left him on the
day he passed his final legal exams.  In the course of talking with
Valentine he recovers some of this idealism and loses his cynicism.
The conversations between Valentine and the judge are glorious to
watch; the house is beautiful in the dim light of evening and the two
characters are obviously attracted to something in each other they
cannot name.  The judge wishes he were forty years younger.
     RED is a film about connections between people, about the ways in
which people meet and interact with others, sometimes not even being
aware of these connections.  A young lawyer, about to take his final
exams, lives across the street from Valentine, but they have never
met.  Like the judge, he is being betrayed by his girlfriend; like the
judge he will leave on a futile trip to England to try to win her
back.  If the judge were forty years younger, perhaps he would be this
young lawyer.
     To emphasize this theme of connection between people, telephones
and red cars feature strongly and symbolically.  The film opens with a
phone call to America, and the camera follows the trans-atlantic cable
to suggest a world of visible and invisible threads joining people.
Other references weave in and out of the film and connect it to other
of Kieslowski's films: the photo of Valentine that adorns the
confectionery poster catches her in exactly the same pose as a final
shot of her on television; the young lawyer drops his books in the
street on the day before his exams (the judge had dropped his books in
the opera the night before his exams; the two Veroniques in THE DOUBLE
LIFE had dropped documents in the street to suggest their connection);
and so on and so on.
     RED is a marvel to watch, both for its visual beauty and for the
subtle and convincing development of the characters.  If it has to be
Kieslowski's swan song, then it is a good choice.

Title
Review for Baby of Macon, The (1993)
     When Greenaway came to introduce the film at the 1993 Cambridge
Film Festival, he explained that he was no longer interested in making
films in a naturalistic style, or in ideas such as "character" and
"plot."  As far as he is concerned, there are plenty of other
film-makers making films in these ways, and he wanted to set out to
make films that are different, that he would want to watch, films that
do for naturalism in cinema what the abstract movement did for
naturalism in art.
     The result is something that is difficult to identify with because
the characters are flat and the dialogue is completely unconvincing (in
much the way that the dialogue of a verse drama is unconvincing).  I
found the result utterly compelling, but very distasteful.
     The business of the film is a play called "The Baby of Macon,"
that is being presented to a group of Renaissance nobles in the
Cathedral at Macon in France.  The play is introduced by the figure of
Famine sitting on a swing describing how the land around Macon has been
beset by famine and pestilence; crops will not grow, everything decays,
when women give birth at all they give birth to monsters.  One
particularly ugly woman, horrendously distended, is about to give
birth.  We see one of the actors running up with a doll to represent
the baby, but before he can supply it to the midwives, a real baby is
born.  It seems that on this evening the play is to happen for real.
The miraculous baby becomes a source of contention between the Church,
represented by the bishop's son (Ralph Fiennes) and the baby's sister
(Julian Ormond), who later pretends that she is its mother.  Both sides
exploit the baby for their own ends, their own riches, and their own
power.  The play ends in tragedy and bloodbath.
     One of Greenaway's aims in THE BABY OF MACON is to say something
about the relationship between a film and its audience.  He said that
one of the sources of inspiration for the films was the banning of the
Benetton advertising poster campaign in the UK that featured pictures
of a newborn baby, covered in blood and still attached to its umbilical
cord.  An outcry caused the posters to be removed.  What is so horrible
about a newborn baby, Greenaway wanted to know.  Why is that image (one
that is seen many times a day in hospitals all over the country) so
unacceptable, when much more horrific images are presented on
television and the cinema, featuring murder and rape, but glamourised
and made safe.  Greenaway set out to make a film featuring murder and
rape in which nothing was glamourised and nothing was safe.
     The centerpiece of the film (I am not spoiling very much here; one
of the characters in the film explains beforehand what the scene is
going to involve and how long it will last) is a ten-minute long rape
scene, filmed in a single virtuoso take.  There's no edit to make it
safe for us, no looking away; we can't say so easily and so quickly "it
was all illusion" (although of course it is).  The play-within-a-film
construction of THE BABY OF MACON allows this scene to become a
representation of a snuff film: the actress "steps out of character" to
express relief that it's only a play, only to discover that this night
it is "for real."  This step out of the fiction is disconcerting and
horrifying; a number of people walked out of the cinema at this point
on both the occasions that I've watched the film (though not as many as
walked out of THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER - perhaps
cinema-goers had received more warning of the kind of images they were
likely to be confronted with in this case).
     At the end of the film, the camera pulls back through the theatre
(actually the cathedral at Macon) and the cast bow toward the camera to
the sound of rapturous applause.  Clearly it is the audience in the
cinema to whom the applause is attributed, and the effect is to make
the audience feel that it is complicit in its approval of what it has
seen on the screen.  I felt that however much I admired Greenaway's
film-making skill, I did not want to applaud the action, and yet the
framing of the end of the film made me complicit in the action,
implying that because I had chosen to attend the film, I had some part
in causing it to be made.  The feeling was uncomfortable and
thought-provoking.
     Other ideas in THE BABY OF MACON are treated in less detail: the
exploitation of children; the oppression of women by the medieval
Church; the relationship between science and superstition during the
Renaissance; the Catholic fascination with the Madonna and Child.
     If you expect a conventional film in which you can identify with
one or more of the leading characters and enjoy and entertaining plot,
then you are sure to be annoyed and disappointed.  If you're prepared
for a film that's quite different from Greenaway's previous feature
films (though anticipated by the "TV Dante" and "M is for Man, Music
and Mozart") then you might be impressed.

Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Bleu (1993)
     Julie (Juliette Binoche) is happily married to rich and famous
composer Patrice, and has a lovely young daughter.  Within a couple of
minutes of the opening of the film Julie's husband and child are killed
in a car crash.  Her life, that was once full of good things, is now
empty, and Julie has to somehow learn to cope.
     Her first reaction is to hide; she leaves her manor house and
orders that all its furniture be sold; she rents an apartment in a
slightly disreputable part of the city; she spends her time drinking
coffee and trying to forget.
     But she is unable to escape her husband's music.  Just before his
death, he was working on a commission for a grand symphonic chorus that
would be played at a festival of European Unity.  Whenever she is
reminded of her husband, poignant extracts of this unfinished chorus
appear to haunt her.  She visits the archives and destroys the
manuscript, but still the ethereal music follows her.
     There are minor twists and turns (she meets her husband's mistress
and befriends a stripper) but finally she is forced to come to terms
with her bereavement by completing the chorus.
     Stated barely like that, THREE COLOURS: BLUE sounds corny and
unconvincing.  But in fact it's a joy to watch; Binoche is very pretty
and conveys very well the anger and frustration and resentment of her
grief.  The music is wonderful (composed by Zbigniew Preisner who
composed the equally excellent music for LA DOUBLE VIE DE VERONIQUE),
more so by the spareness of its use--the only times the film uses
music are when brief extracts of the chorus visit Julie; at these times
the characters seem to stop moving and the screen slowly fades to
blue.  The plot may not be exciting but that doesn't seem to matter;
THREE COLOURS: BLUE is a simple film that left me wanting more.
     THREE COLOURS: BLUE is the first of a trilogy of films by
Kieslowski that will be dedicated to the three colours of the French
flag and explore the themes of liberty, equality and fraternity.

Title
Review for Stalingrad (1993)
     There is a documentary that gets shown from time to time on the
BBC consisting of archive film footage taken by the Russians during the
siege of Stalingrad.  After seeing these pictures of Russian soldiers
desperately defending every street, every building, every room of their
town (and dying in the hundreds of thousands) no fictional account of
the battle for Stalingrad can ever have the same emotional power.
     However, director Joseph Vilsmaier has made a courageous attempt,
courageous both because the current political climate in Germany may
not be appreciative of an epic account of one of Germany's worst
military defeats and because it is a difficult task to engender the
audience's sympathy for soldiers fighting for the army that killed
twenty million Russians.
     The film focuses on Hans Witzland, an officer in the German Sixth
Army newly arrived in Stalingrad.  Concerned about the treatment of
POWs he is branded a Russian-lover and from that point we see his
disillusionment with the war grow as he sees corruption among the
higher officers, worthless words from the leaders back in Germany, his
men provided with medals instead of food, and the terrible carnage on
both sides.
     Some of the scenes are very effective--a stupidly suicidal attack
on a machine-gun emplacement; soldiers hysterically attempting to get
medical help for their dying comrade; soldiers in a penal battalion
prodding gingerly with sticks at a snow-bound road in an attempt to
find anti-personnel mines.  There is a marvelously epic feel of the
tragedy of the war produced by the gradual attrition of Witzland's
company.  He arrives in Stalingrad with four hundred men, and
inexorably disease, frostbite and combat take their toll until at the
end all that remain are two men holding each other as they die of
cold.
     But the film founders on its lack of characterisation; the
characters aren't differentiated or individual enough to emerge from
their uniforms and from the horror of their experiences to stand out as
people and to enable the audience to empathise with them.  Instead of
being a harrowing and emotional experience, STALINGRAD is merely
numbing.

Title
Review for Stella polaris (1993)
     A woman lies in a hospital bed and remembers her childhood in a
fishing village in northern Noway.  It is not clear why she is in
hospital--perhaps she has been in a car accident--and she may even be
two different women (mother and daughter?) at two different times.  She
drifts through the landscapes of memory like a ghost, sometimes seeing
her village deserted, abandoned, empty; sometimes seeing it peopled by
her younger self (or her daughter?) and the people she knew.
     The film chronicles her youth without words, almost without plot,
using images and music only.  It has a lot of the feel of a
documentary--we see Germany occupying Noway in the second world war and
burning the village to the ground when they leave; we see the villagers
returning after the war to rebuild; we see the traditional fishing
industry of small boats (with wives tying hooks and gutting fish) being
replaced by fish factories and larger, more dangerous trawlers.
     This material is rendered out of order in flashback and intercut
with real documentary film (and sequences in black and white pretending
to be real documentary film) and it is often hard to make sense of,
especially with the ambiguities over the role(s) of the central
character.  The result is a film that manages to create an atmosphere
of timeless people and landscape enduring through a changing society,
but which loses out on character.  I found it hard work, but others may
be able to relax into the dreamy feel of the fjords and enjoy.

Title
Review for Piano, The (1993)
     Time: sometime in the nineteenth century.  Holly Hunter plays Ada,
a beautiful and talented pianist.  She has a mighty will and, it seems,
has refused to speak since childhood.  Probably on account of her
having an illegitimate daughter (Flora, played by Anna Paquin) she is
still unmarried, until her father finds Stewart (Sam Neill), a
landowner in New Zealand, who is willing to marry her (English women
being scarce in that colony).
     The film opens with Ada's "inner voice" (we don't hear her speak
out loud during the film) narrating the above and then we cut to a
lonely New Zealand shore with men struggling through the surf to unload
Ada, her possessions, and her beloved piano (Ada's only means of
expressing herself).  Stewart comes to collect her, but does not
realise how important the piano is to Ada, and she is unable to tell
him.  It is left, half-uncrated, on the beach.
     Ada has trouble coping with the damp and the mud of the
settlement where Stewart lives.  She demands her piano and sulks when
she is told that she is not in Scotland anymore and that there are more
important things than music.
     Another landowner, Baines (Harvey Keitel) sees Ada and is smitten
by her.  Knowning how important the piano is to her, he fetches it from
the beach and offers it to her in return (at first) for letting him
watch her play, and (later) for sexual favours.  Improbably, she falls
in love with him, and inevitable tragedy follows.
     Director Jane Campion has said of the film (I'm quoting from
memory): "These people don't have twentieth century sensibilities about
sex; they aren't prepared for its raw power".  Certainly the behaviour
of the characters is strange from a modern perspective--Baines' lust
for Ada is easy to understand, but why Ada's for him?  I think the film
may be rooted in Nineteenth Century Romantic sensibilities more than
Campion would care to admit--Ada and Baines are supposed, I think, to
be fey and wayward people (Ada talks about being ruled by a powerful
Will and her music is completely alien to the characters in the film
other than Baines; Baines seems to have attempted to go native;
certainly he wears Maori tattooing) thrown together by an exotic and
dreamlike setting.
     In the light of this, the ending in which they find comfortable
domesticity is completely unconvincing--the briefly considered tragic
alternative ending in which she kills herself is the much more
emotionally convincing of the two.  I guess it isn't what audiences
want to see these days.
     The best part of the film, for me, was the music--Michael Nyman's
hypnotic, romantic, slightly naive piano melodies have to carry much of
the responsibility for conveying Ada's character, but I think he
succeeds magnificently.

Title
Review for Bosna! (1994)
     It's hard to approach the good and bad in this film without being
caught up a discussion of the message of BOSNA!, for this is a film
that explicitly sets out to convert its audience to its side, to make
people aware of the war and to try to influence them to pressure their
governments to intervene.  It's a film that's very aware of itself, of
the process of its making and of the influence it might have: for
example, Mitterand's visit to Bosnia is portrayed as an outcome of
information given to the French President by the director,
Bernard-Henri Levy.
     The film is full of very disturbing images: a mother and child
fleeing from snipers in Sarajevo; bodies littering a street after a
shell has landed on a bread queue, many of them with legs or faces
blown off; starving prisoners staring at the camera through the barbed
wire of a concentration camp.  It's impossible not to be moved by the
suffering of these people, and difficult not to feel anger at the
inaction of the diplomats who do little but talk while people are
fighting for their lives and homes.  The film makes much of comparisons
between Western indifference to Bosnia today and Western indifference
to Czechoslovakia and the Spanish Republic in the 1930s.  There is,
suggests Levy, the same denial, the same explanations that it's all
much too complex to get involved in.  In 1945 people saw pictures of
the concentration camps in Poland and said "never again", but now that
the camps are back it seems that we would rather deny them, or suggest
that there's fault on both sides, then determine to stop the
atrocities.
     If there is anything I don't like about BOSNA!, it is the
incessant wordiness of the voice-over.  Perhaps Levy was so anxious to
persuade that he didn't dare to let the audience come to their own
conclusions.  At times sounding like a Biblical prophet, at times
hectoring us, at times reflecting on how the war affects our image of
ourselves as Europeans, the narration never lets the eloquent pictures
speak for themselves, pictures that have more than enough power to move
and to persuade on their own.
     Cambridge Arts Cinema hosted the British premiere of BOSNA!, a
powerful and disturbing film about the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina and
about the reluctance of governments in Western Europe to acknowledge
what was going on and their refusal to offer real assistance to
Bosnia.  Director Bernard-Henri Levy gave a short talk before the
film.  He said that the BOSNA!, filmed in Sarajevo between September
1993 and January 1994, and in other parts of Bosnia in March and April
of this year, was neither a dispassionate documentary nor an artistic
film; but was the answer to the question "What can I do to help these
people, to make their heroic struggle known?"  He wanted the film to be
as militant and passionate as possible without being inaccurate in its
presentation of the facts.
     A question and answer session followed the film, chaired by
Leonard Doyle of "The Independent."  The questioners mostly expressed
positive opinions of the films and asked Levy about the relationship
between his film and a wider historical context.  The film made much of
the comparisons between the West s failure to intervene in Bosnia and
its failure to take a stand over Czechoslovakia and Spain in the 1930s,
but what about the many conflicts within and between other ex-communist
states, such as Armenia and Azerbaijan?  Levy said that his own memory
and family history was concerned with World War Two, and so that was
where he turned more naturally.  He also wanted to try to convince
people in England that they should come to the aid of Bosnia as they
had come to the aid of France.  He suggested that the West wasn't doing
enough to help the post-communist states towards democracy, and that we
risked the creation of monsters from the volatile mixture of fascism,
nationalism and communism in these countries.
     One questioner suggested that the reluctance of the West to become
involved was out of a fear of Islamic fundamentalism in what the media
portray as a predominately Muslim state.  Levy agreed, and said that
this was an inaccurate view of Bosnia.  Sarajevo had been a "second
Jerusalem," a city in which sizable communities of Jews, Christians
and Muslims lived and worshiped in peace.  Levy described a meeting
with Bosian President Izetbegovic at the world premiere of BOSNA! in
early June.  Izetbegovic said that he had always refused a
fundamentalist Islamic state, but if the West were to stand back and
lets the country be partitioned along ethnic lines, then Bosnia may
have to become one.
     One questioner disagreed.  He said that the conflict in Bosnia was
much more complex than the film suggested, and that it was a mistake
not to examine the origins of the present conflict in World War Two, in
which the Serbians resisted fascism while Muslims were recruited into
the German army.  Levy responded passionately.  He said that being
right in 1945 didn't make the Serbians right now; even if their
grandparents had fought Hitler, that didn t excuse concentration camps
and ethnic cleansing.
     Bernard-Henri Levy made a very positive impression on me; he
seemed full of respect for the Bosnians he had met and spoken with and
filmed, and full of energy and passion to tell their story to the
world.

Title
Review for Ombre du doute, L' (1993)
     A princess is coveted by her father, the King, and escapes by
hiding in the skin of a donkey.  So goes the real fairy story, but in
eleven-year-old Alexandrine LeBlanc's version, the princess starves
herself until she is thin enough to fit through the bars of her window,
tries to fly away but is too weak, and drowns in the moat.  Her
teacher, reading this, is sure that something is wrong, and her concern
prompts Alexandrine to allege that her father has been sexually abusing
her.  Jean denies it: "I'm a father.  I could never do anything like
this.  It's unbelievable."  His lawyer agrees: "What's a child's word?"
Who is speaking the truth?
     True to its title, L'OMBRE DU DOUTE inhabits a world of shadows,
accentuated by heavy use of a blue filter.  In many scenes the
characters appear in silhouette: Alexandrine being chased through woods
by her father; shadows in the corridor outside her bedroom at night;
shadowy figures being led through corridors in the prison and in the
court.  Another shadow is cast by the white falcon, jean-le-blanc,
which haunts Jean's memories of childhood and stares accusingly at him
with glowing eyes from a painting in church.
     Several times we enter the imagination of Alexandrine: a figure
dressed in the skin of a donkey accosts her in the street in Bordeaux;
she flies around the house at night, banging her hands uselessly on
skylights in an attempt to escape.  These fantasies both support
Alexandrine--she is clearly disturbed--and undermine her credibility.
     Sandrine Blancke gives an extremely convincing portrayal of a
withdrawn, unhappy girl--we don't see her smile for the first hour--who
we nevertheless come to respect and like.  It is a great strength of
this film that we want to believe Alexandrine's story even though the
truth is hidden until the very end.  In most real cases of abuse, of
course, the truth never emerges.
