Authors
Ed Morris
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
    After finally seeing The Blair Witch Project (TBWP), my first thought
was: "I have not been affected like I was supposed to, back when I first
heard about this film in February."  Of course, the film doesn't live up to
the hype, not that any other film in history ever did. The hype surrounding
this film is comparable to that of this year's Star Wars, and quite possibly
1989's Batman, which is the most hyped film I can ever remember.  But the
film on its own isn't bad, it's just not very good either.
The premise, which everyone on earth is now familiar with, is that you
are watching the filmed footage of three twentysomethings who went into the
woods and disappeared while looking for the legendary Blair Witch.  One of
the major flaws of the film is that it never gives you a background on the
witch, other than snippets of interviews with the locals the kids do in the
first 20 minutes of the movie.  And I don't want to hear that I should've
visited the website, either!  It should be in the movie.  That's complete
hogwash.
The middle third of the movie shows the kids having a group mental
breakdown as they become more and more lost, even retracing their own steps.
The last third deals with one of the three disappearing and screaming in the
distance, and the other two's search for him.  This final act of the film is
the best part of the movie, but unfortunately you wait 60 minutes for it.
The night scenes are tense, but not frightening.  The only part that
actually upset me was the last scenes of the film, when the two remaining
filmmakers stumble upon a dilapidated house in the middle of nowhere, and
their friend screams from within.  The two forget that they are in mortal
danger, and run thru the house looking for their friend.  This also is the
part that I didn't understand: why are the remaining two still filming? It
doesn't make sense.  It's just too incredulous to even consider.
The film ends abruptly, and the audience that I saw it with wasn't
satisifed.  But if you think about it, it can end only one way.  There was
much confusion from friends who saw it regarding what the remaining boy was
doing standing in the corner for the last scene.  After I explained that one
of the interviewees briefly touched on a hermit (not the witch) who was
possessed in the 1940's and made one person stand in a corner while he
gutted the other, my friends said they missed that.  I have to admit, I
didn't miss it, but wondered why the witch would do that.  The film does
explain some of the ways the witch kills, but this was not one of them.
After thinking about this some time, I realized it was a plot device to
allow the viewer some, albeit little, closure.  Another scene involves the
finding of bloody teeth in the forrest after the one filmmaker disappears
and his heard to be screaming in agony.  I felt the scene wasn't necessary,
and got away from the spirit of the film.  If the film's premise is "it's
best not to know", why go against it?
In any event, I rate the film ** out of **** stars and add: wait for the
video.
