Authors
font@stlvm10.sanjose.ibm.com
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Gettysburg (1993)
     If you're looking for another one of those Oscar-worthy "Dances
With Wolves meets Glory" type of movie, you'd better not waste your
time sitting through GETTYSBURG.  I saw it.  It was probably the most
boring movie I have ever seen.  Where does it say that a movie like
this has to be four-and-a-half-hours long?  There is a scene in the
movie, at the start of the final battle of Gettysburg, where the
Confederate army has to make a march of one mile through an open field
to get to the Union army.  This scene is particularly painstakingly
boring and repetetive, as the director chooses to chronicle literally
every step of the march/ charge.  I never thought that I'd ever get
*bored* with realistic battle scenes, but this is one movie that
manages that task.
     It also manages to completely waste a cast of very talented
actors:  Martin Sheen and Tom Berenger have absolutely nothing to do on
screen other than shuffle around and give orders.  This is also the
first time I've ever seen Robert E. Lee (Sheen) played as if he were
some kind of nut.  C. Thomas Howell is miscast, and can't carry a
phony accent for the duration of an entire scene, let alone the whole
movie.  And here's the clincher: I don't like Jeff Daniels.  But in
this movie, his was the only remotely interesting performance.  Perhaps
with the exception of Richard Jordan, whose character should have had
more screen time than he actually does.
     As a historical document, this movie is right on target.  I think
it would have made a much better documentary than anything else, but as
a movie, something that is supposed to entertain, it falls flat on its
face.  In four-and-a-half hours there is very little, if any, character
development.  It's as if the director forgot about the actors and only
focused on recreating battles.  The dialogue is pitiful.  There are no
conversations between characters in this movie, only speeches.  Jeff
Daniels has one near the beginning, as does every other star, even Sam
Elliot, whose performance is little more than a cameo.  Practically
every single actor gets to preach about one topic or another while the
camera moves slowly in to a tight shot and the music plays beneath
their words.  It's enough to make anybody with reasonable taste sick.
     In the end you're left wondering how the hell a movie this bad
gets made without somebody somewhere getting either fired or sued.
This does not deserve a best picture nomination.  It should win all
kinds of awards for costume design, sound, maybe choreography of battle
scenes or whatever the hell.  Other than that, it's a pure waste.
