Authors
Jason Langlois
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Color of Night (1994)
     This is an eminently predictable film, with nothing much to redeem
it.  I'd suggest waiting for it to come out on video, or even not
watching it at all.
     The premise is a simple (and of late, often used) one.  Bruce
Willis plays a New York psychotherapist who has a patient commit
suicide before his eyes.  Faced with a lawsuit, and his own emotional
troubles stemming from the incident (he can no longer see the color
red--I suspect the backers of this film won't have this problem), he
resigns his practice and travels to Los Angeles after bidding farewell
to his elderly mentor.  There, he finds himself drawn into an ersatz
thriller.
   Arriving in LA, he meets with a college chum who is also a successful 
psychotherapist, and sits in with a Monday support group.  In 
conversation with this friend (played by Scott Bakula, late of "Quantum 
Leap") the next day, he finds out that someone from the group has been 
making death threats against his friend.  Sure enough, later that 
evening, the friend is horribly murdered in his office.
     Introduce the blustering cop (Ruben Blades), the mysterious and
gorgeous young woman (Jane March), and the collection of potential
killers.  While it is hard to point to the direct similarities to
FINAL ANALYSIS, watching this film constantly made me think of it.
Fondly.  (Yes, that's how bad this movie is.)  Bruce Willis' character
takes over his friend's practice, and also becomes an amateur sleuth
trying to figure out which of the disturbed patients could have killed
his friend.  Along the way, he gets to enjoy a few "steamy" sex scenes
with Jane March (yawn), before the grand, bloody, violent finale
(yawn).
     Are there any virtues in this film?  Brad Dourif's portrayal of an
Obsessive-Compulsive is fun to watch.  Ruben Blades is also effective
as the police detective (I kept wanting the film to be about him).
They aren't, however, worth the price of this film.  It's not the
acting, but the writing, that is the death knell of this movie.
     From the audience response, this movie does have some appeal.  The
appeal seems to center on the rare one-liner that Bruce manages to put
in, and the enjoyment Ruben Blades' character brings to the screen.
Really, skip this film.  If you have to watch it, make it on video and
you'll be much happier.  For complete happiness, just avoid seeing it
at all.
