Authors
Tom Pfeifer
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for NeverEnding Story III, The (1994)
Neverending Story III, The -- Escape from Fantasia
(Die Unendliche Geschichte III -- Rettung aus Phantasien)
Starring: Jason James Richter, Melody Kay, Jack Black, Freddie Jones,
          Julie Cox, Tracey Ellis, Kevin McNulty
Director: Peter Macdonald
Story: Karin Howard based on *characters* from Michael Ende's novel
Book: Jeff Liebermann
Producers: Dieter Geissler, Tim Hampton
Creatures: Jim Henson's Creature Shop
Camera: Robin Vidgeon, BSC
Music: Peter Wolf
Released by CineVox / Warner Bros.
     Making a sequel of a good movie is mostly a hard job, and rarely a
successful one.  It is even harder in this case, where the plot does not
only have to be continued but to be looped into itself as
"never-ending."
     While the first two movies were strongly based on the novel by
Michael Ende, this one is only based "on the characters."  The idea is
to transfer Phantasia now into the "real" world.  It focuses on the
problems of Bastian in school and family, his conflicts with a gang of
school bullies, the Nasties, and with his new step sister Nicole.
     Bastian finds his favorite book of THE NEVERENDING STORY when he hides 
from the Nasties in the school library.  He wishes himself to Phantasia, 
leaving the book on the floor, where it is found by Slip, the gang leader.  
The latter recognizes the power of the book and begins to form Phantasia 
after his bad intentions.  When the chaos becomes worse the Childlike 
Empress requests Bastian to move back to the real world, get the book back 
and save Phantasia.  Accidentally some Phantasien characters travel with him 
to reality, but get lost in different places.  Meanwhile Slip and the other 
Nasties spread anarchy.  Finally, Bastian gets support from Nicole, who 
begins to believe in the power of Phantasia.  Together the are able to 
solve the situation and become friends.
     The plot (Karin Howard) is very flat.  Decisions and conclusions in 
difficult situations are not developed, but instead solved too quickly.
     Due to the distance in time between the first movie (1984), the
second (1990), and this one, we have to accustom ourselves to the third
actor for the hero, Bastian Balthasar Bux, and for other characters
too.  Jason James Richter (FREE WILLY [1993], FREE WILLY 2 [1995])
delivers a good performance, and so did Melody Kay as his step sister
Nicole (stage and TV experience).
     The villains, the Nasties, were a bit overdrawn and fall sometimes
into the slapstick trend of HOME ALONE.  Later I saw a television
interview with the director where he confessed that he had exactly this
intention--to bring "some of the humour of the HOME ALONE movies" into
this one.
     The Childlike Empress (Julie Cox) is stiff and not at all
convincing, luckily she appears not too often.
     The inhabitants of Phantasia are now well known and not surprising 
anymore.  However, we miss some of their favorite habits (Falkor/Fuchur 
didn't ask to be rubbed behind his ear, for example).
     The style of the dialogues of Rockbiter Junior, trying to produce 
cuteness by being purposely infantile, is simply stupid.
     Due to the focus on the "real world" there are less and shorter
sequences in Phantasia.  In general, this sequel cannot provide the
magic of the previous movies.
     This impression is amplified by the sound track, which is
completely "real world"-like too (Music: Peter Wolf).  It is more
interested to hit the charts then to support a fairy tale as Klaus
Doldinger did 1984 in the first one.
     However, the 2000 premiere kids cried and applauded during the
showdown, probably because the critical mass of kids was sufficient,
and they obviously have had fun.
     I saw what was announced as the world premiere in Germany, where
the movie was shot in the Babelsberg studios.  It was made with mostly
American actors, because the American market seems not to honor other
and would demand a re-make of the movie for acceptance (the worst
example I remember was THREE MEN AND A BABY, which lost a lot of the
original French charm in the American re-make).
     However, the German market has its own flaws and would not accept
the English version--therefore I saw the dubbed German version of this
international production, which might have marginally influenced my
opinion about the acting.
     In general, the movie provides good entertainment, and there are
enough funny one-liners for the parents too.  Try to forget your
expectation from the parts 1 and 2, as this one has a completely
different style.  Have fun, but don't forget to bring enough kids with
you.  Part 4 is planned.
- Tom Pfeifer (pfeifer@fokus.gmd.de)
