Authors
Lisa-Marie Tan
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Hu Du Men (1996)
Directed by: Shu Kei
Cast: Josephine Siao Fong-Fong, Anita Yuen Wing-yee, Chung
King-fai, David Wu Tai-wai, Waise Lee Chi-hung, Daniel Chan Hiu-tung
Literal Meaning: Entrance from the Platform Side
Cantonese: Futomoon
Mandarin: Hudumen
Rating: ***1/2 out of *****
Run Time: Approximately 110 minutes
HU DU MEN is one of those shows which does not attract the critical
attention it deserves just because it is not a blatantly art-house
movie, directed by a fascinating artistic and political 5th generation
mainland Chinese director. No, rather, it is produced by and within
commercial mainstream, Hong Kong cinema. Nevertheless, this is a
thematically-satisfying effort which touches, subtly, on issues as 
limited
stardom, family obligations, personal priorities--all outlined against 
the
backdrop of theatrical developments in Cantonese Opera.
(This art form, by the way, is a form of street/popular opera only
superficially related to the highly-stylized Beijing opera seen in
FAREWELL TO MY CONCUBINE).
Director Shu Kei attempts some Brechtian alienation effects (after all,
didn't Brecht himself borrow his ideas from Chinese opera?) by inserting
semi-documentary explanations and stuff like the concept of "Hu Du Men"
itself, or at the end of the movie when the philosophies of  Josephine 
Siao's
character are summed up in similar playcard-like subtitles.
If you're looking for a simple, threading theme to explain this movie,
then it's probably about *dislocations* -- the dislocation/ 
disorientation
as Siao nears her unwilling retirement at the height of her career; the
dislocation of emotions when the son which she had chosen to give long
before re-appears--in the guise of her protegee's (Anita Yuen's) suitor.
The dislocation of her own voice and responsibilities in her family
(she is the stepmother to her husband's daughter, who has her own
alternative sexual preferences)...
The greatness of this movie must be in its subtlety in treatment of
subjects. Amidst the more recognizable, repressed turbulences in
Siao's life is the modernisation of the traditional art form of opera.
David Wu plays an un-enthusiastic (but still cute!) theatre-studies
type whose idealism aims to effect radical changes to the staging
practices of Cantonese Opera. It is precisely the story-telling
lyricism of Director that enables the juxtaposition between cultural
and personal change to be dramatized so effectively and subtly.
Director Shu Kei and Josephine Siao more than save the movie
from the hands of bland performances of Anita Yuen and
others. Watch this if you want to see what Fong Sai Yul's has been up to
ever since those Kung Fu days.
THE FLYING INKPOT's rating system:
 * Wait for the video.
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha!
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend.
 **** Amazing, potent stuff.
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.

