Authors
Kristian Lin
Number of Reviews
17

Title
Review for Ice Storm, The (1997)
I think Woody Allen started this.  THE ICE STORM is the latest in a
tradition of movies depicting sexually confused, emotionally repressed,
dysfunctional suburban WASP families who live in oh-so-tastefully
decorated houses and are fatally unable to relate to each other.  It's a
relatively new tradition; it couldn't have arrived without the changing
moral climate and the political and social unrest that the 1960s and
'70s brought to America.  The changes in society coincided with changes
in American filmmaking, as the studios collapsed and independent
filmmakers were now free to take a hard look at the nuclear family's
disintegration.  Woody Allen's subjects in INTERIORS (1978) may have
been Manhattanites and not suburbanites, but he seems to have been ahead
of the curve.  Two years later, ORDINARY PEOPLE (1980) snagged great
reviews and an Academy Award for Best Picture.  More recently, we've had
SHORT CUTS and SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION captured the same angst in a
rapidly changing American society.
THE ICE STORM revolves around Ben Hood (Kevin Kline), who lives with his
wife Elena (Joan Allen) in New Canaan, Connecticut in 1973.  His son
Paul (Tobey Maguire) goes to school in New York and is trying to lose
his virginity.  His 14-year-old daughter Wendy (Christina Ricci) is also
out to lose her girlhood by flirting with both Mikey Carver (Elijah
Wood), who lives nearby, and Mikey's younger brother Sandy (Adam
Hann-Byrd).  Ben, meanwhile, is carrying on an affair with the boys'
mother, Janey (Sigourney Weaver).  The youngsters try to sort out their
sexual feelings, and their parents aren't doing much better with theirs. 
I should say that I've never cared for these movies.  I think our
society is still having problems reevaluating its morals, and these
movies are right to point them out.  It's just that these films tend to
wallow in suburbia's moral malaise and come up short on the bigger
picture.  The people in THE ICE STORM seek psychotherapy and swap wives
at their little parties, and none of it brings them fulfillment or
enlightenment.  In fact, nobody in this movie seems to enjoy themselves
for even a moment, which makes it an ungodly drag.  You ask yourself why
these people don't convert to Judaism or take up skydiving or join a
theater group or read Oscar Wilde.  Maybe it's shallow of me to suggest
that these things might solve their problems, but these characters are
shallow - they don't have anything to do except be unhappy.  The suburbs
can be pretty dull, but intelligent, complex people manage to live there
without being entirely miserable.
Like ORDINARY PEOPLE, THE ICE STORM comes with a literary pedigree,
being based on Rick Moody's novel.  James Schamus's screenplay
adaptation suffers from arch, overly "literary" dialogue.  Mikey
explains that he's good at geometry but not at math by saying, "I get
the concept that two times two equals four.  Because it's a square.  Not
numbers, but space.  It's perfect.  Except that no one can draw a
perfect square."  I haven't read the book, but I suspect that
philosophizing like this plays much better on the page than it does in a
movie (not that it reads particularly well).  The dialogue hamstrings
all the actors, though Kevin Kline manages a few distinctive line
readings the way he usually does.  I'm also gratified at the casting of
Christina Ricci, an actress whose, oh, I don't know, voluptuousness
makes the character that much more real.  Any Hollywood studio would
have insisted on a supermodel-thin teenager, but the film acknowledges
the libido of a girl who still has her baby fat, and doesn't mock it. 
The cast as a whole, though, seems as pale as Frederick Elmes's
cinematography.  Here's where director Ang Lee's good taste finally gets
the better of him, as the wit and humor of his Taiwanese films and SENSE
AND SENSIBILITY disappear almost completely here.  There's a creepily
funny scene where Wendy makes out with Mikey while wearing a Richard
Nixon mask, but nobody here gets any pleasure out of cracking a joke.
Maybe I'm too harsh.  Maybe, like so many disciples of the great Pauline
Kael, I'm too severe to judge an austere piece like THE ICE STORM and
too quick to latch onto something like BOOGIE NIGHTS, which maybe isn't
any deeper as a critique of changing society but has moviemaking zest,
vitality, jouissance, flava, what have you on its side.  It just seems
to me that these movies about modern-day repression tend to kill off
their own dramatic possibilities - the characters may want to change,
but they can't, and usually they don't have any idea how to go about
it.  It pushes a movie towards stasis.  THE ICE STORM is a movie that's
trapped under the ice, and it'll leave you feeling the same way.

Title
Review for Anastasia (1997)
ANASTASIA begins when the Bolshevik revolution overthrows the Russian
tsars, and the reigning Romanov family is killed except for their
youngest daughter, Anastasia (voiced by Meg Ryan).  Ten years later,
18-year-old Anastasia is released from the orphanage and goes to St.
Petersburg, where she meets a con artist named Dimitri (voiced by John
Cusack).  She doesn't remember her parentage, so Dimitri decides to try
to pass her off as the missing Anastasia to collect the reward.
You don't have to be a dyed-in-the-wool monarchist to prefer the Romanov
regime to what came afterwards.  The tsars may have been just as
oppressive as the Soviets, but at least they had an antique sort of
charm (who could cuddle up to an apparatchik?).  Those Easter eggs they
had Faberge design were ruinously expensive toys at a time when millions
were starving, but they were pretty, weren't they?  And you feel a
certain pity for the innocent Romanov children and their mother whose
hysterical concern for her sick son made her prey to Rasputin's charms. 
You even feel for Tsar Nicholas, who died believing that the Russian
people loved him and would save him (attested to by his bewildered last
words upon being informed that he was about to be executed:  "What? 
What?").
Still, this myth that little Anastasia Romanov somehow escaped her
family's execution and lived on in Paris or Houston or wherever has
always seemed like a royalist pipe dream.  Why would presumably sane 
and intelligent people find comfort in the possible survival of the
Romanov line?  After all, the Soviet system was a repressive
dictatorship, but nobody ever showed so much nostalgia for the Weimar
Republic or the Emperor of China.  Are people really so desperate to
restore the mystique that royalty once brought to heads of state?  The
20th century has seen some pretty nasty stuff brought into the world,
but wanting to revert to the 19th century seems a rather extreme
response.
It's probably churlish to expect historical accuracy from a kid's movie
like ANASTASIA, but presenting imperial Russia as an enchanted paradise
is stretching it a bit.  To stretch even further, the Tsar is overthrown
because Rasputin, who has sold his soul in exchange for magic powers,
lays a curse on the Romanovs, thus causing the workers' uprising.  What
we have here is a Russian Revolution without Communism, Marx, Lenin,
Trotsky, or any mention of the grievances the people had against the
royals.  By 1927, the proletariat are singing happily of Anastasia's
rumored survival, while seeming to regard Party officials as party
poopers.  This is really perverse.
What redeems ANASTASIA from its dramatic slackness and drab songs are
the performances from the actors.  The romantic plot between Anastasia
and Dimitri is unusually sharp, funny, and well-written.  Meg Ryan has
better chemistry with Cusack than with any leading man since (dare we
say it?) Billy Crystal in WHEN HARRY MET SALLY...  Ryan seems to respond
best to a leading man who's slightly disreputable.  She overcomes her
initial distaste to let herself be dazzled by a guy who knows how to
break the rules in the right way.  In turn, she dazzles the outlaw
because she tempers her wholesomeness with a touch of eccentricity. 
That dynamic is present here where it wasn't with Matthew Broderick
(ADDICTED TO LOVE), Tom Hanks (SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE), or even Dennis
Quaid (FLESH AND BONE).  Unfortunately, Ryan doesn't have the voice to
carry off Anastasia's climactic confrontation with Rasputin, but she's
more alert to her onscreen lover, and thus funnier and more charming,
than she's been in years.
For his part, Cusack's always good at portraying a man living on his
wits - I'd like to see him as Shakespeare's Hamlet.  Like Michael
Keaton, he's an actor whose characters seem to be constantly improvising
their way through life's situations.  Maybe that's why I've never been
entirely convinced when the drama requires him to radically change his
way of thinking, be it in BULLETS OVER BROADWAY or GROSSE POINTE BLANK;
he's never given over to deep philosophical musings because he's too 
quick for that.  Luckily, though, he's dead on as a romantic lead, and
that's what makes his performances in those movies such rousing
successes.  He widens his eyes just a bit, and suddenly he's a guy who
has fallen in love and will follow his woman down the right path as long
as she'll lead him.  He does something like that here.  The fact that he
can only be heard and not seen hampers him somewhat, but he and Ryan
still make a perfect fit.     
Kelsey Grammer, though, is wasted as Vladimir.  The vaguely-defined part
calls for someone with as much warmth as worldly wisdom, and Grammer,
despite his plush baritone voice, isn't and has never been about
warmth.  He's meant to be an urbane wit with a neurotic streak, which he
is on "Frasier."  Vladimir is too content in his fallen gentility to
suit Grammer.  Hank Azaria's South Side of Chicago-accented bat is a
hoot, and Bernadette Peters squeals delightfully as Grand Duchess
Marie's silly cousin.  A rhetorical question rather than a complaint: 
I'm a big fan of Kirsten Dunst, who voices young Anastasia, but Fox
brings in Lacey Chabert (from "Party of Five") to sing for her.  My
question is, why go to such trouble?  Why not cast Chabert in the
speaking role as well, since she has proven that she can act?
As for Don Bluth's animation, it lacks the last ounce of Disney's
polish, and the characters' faces could use a little more definition in
close up, but the drawing still has its own splendor, especially when
depicting Russia's imperial court.  In the end, I was disappointed in
ANASTASIA, not because it wasn't good, but because it's the first direct
challenge to Disney's hegemony over the animated feature film market. 
In taking up the challenge, Fox created high expectations for its
movie.  ANASTASIA isn't the blockbuster success that you'd like to see
open up the genre for competitors, but it's good enough to give us some
hope 
for the next animated feature from a major studio.  Let's hope this will
inspire Disney to put as much care into their movies as they currently
invest in their marketing campaigns.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
I don't hate TITANIC.  Not now, anyway.  The last hour of it is
terrifyingly excellent.  It's not a hateful movie.  It's just that the
critics have gone overboard praising it, and bestowed something like
artistic respectability on it.  Come Oscar time, it'll get a few awards
it doesn't deserve.  It'll probably win Best Picture and defeat a movie
that deserves it more, like L.A. CONFIDENTIAL or DONNIE BRASCO or ROMY
AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION.  And then I'll hate it.  I'll be
unhappy with the Academy voters for the fourth straight year.
TITANIC chronicles the romance between Philadelphia socialite Rose
DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslet) and Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio), a
roustabout in third-class.  Rose feels trapped by her engagement to 
millionaire Cal Hockley (Billy Zane), and Jack shows her that the poor
live much better than their snooty counterparts in first-class. 
Unfortunately, the tub they're on has a date with an iceberg.
What is it about romantic tragedy that makes movie critics swoon? 
They're sane, intelligent beings who are paid to have a keener B.S.
detector than the rest of us.  The same people who went gaga over the
well-made but diffuse THE ENGLISH PATIENT have pulled the same act for
this movie.  THE ENGLISH PATIENT, though, was at least consistently
well-acted and -directed throughout.  TITANIC, on the other hand, gives
us scene after scene of rickety drama for two hours.  Writer/director
James Cameron's previous film, TRUE LIES, was two-thirds great action
and one-third failed romance.  The ratio is reversed in TITANIC, and the
good parts aren't enough to justify one's time investment.
The picture may have all the period details right, but its tone is all
wrong for its 1912 setting.  James Horner's pallid, New Agey music
immediately dates the movie as a 1990s period piece.  More seriously, 
Cameron has no sense of how to write these characters and make them
sound convincing.   Leonardo DiCaprio is a gifted and terribly likeable
actor, and not once did I believe him as a child of the 1890s (true,
he's young, but Winona Ryder was younger when she did THE AGE OF
INNOCENCE, and was much more idiomatically 19th Century).  Chained to a
pipe in a room filling with water, Jack says, "This is bad," with the
same offhand detachment we've seen from hundreds of other movie heroes. 
When they aren't speaking in the telegraphic sort of dialogue that marks
out most Hollywood action thrillers, Jack and Rose are advancing all
sorts of enlightened notions that prove they're ahead of their time. 
Rose quotes Freud - a neat trick, since he hadn't been translated into
English yet.  Jack advances his philosophy of "making every day count." 
The two admire Monet and Picasso, but Jack's sketches (which Rose
praises so highly) are hackwork.  Rose and Jack may be unconventional
for their time, but you'll find people talking like them in any high
school today.
The dialogue is strictly purple prose, yet the other aspects of the
script are even worse.  One can admire Cameron for making poor people
the heroes of his megabudget movie, but when the characters are 
stereotyped this baldly, he doesn't do anybody any favors.  The villain
never opens his mouth except to say something offensive; it's actually a
relief that Billy Zane is so bad in the role, because you'd hate to see
a good performance wasted in it.  Jack teaches Rose to spit.  She gives
Cal the finger as she makes her getaway.  Though Winslet looks tough
enough wading through icy water, you still can't reconcile Rose's 
action heroine's resourcefulness with her hothouse-flower upbringing. 
Her attempts to extricate themselves from below decks belong in TRUE
LIES or THE ABYSS.  If Cameron had just put this movie on a modern-day
cruise ship, it would have fixed many of his script's problems.  Of
course, no studio would have bankrolled his picture (at least not to the
tune of $200 million) and had him end the movie unhappily.  But if only
TITANIC had had a dash of SPEED 2, it would have been far less
fraudulent.
In retelling the ship's sinking, TITANIC is a compelling disaster flick,
partly because the ship sinks so slowly. Most movie disasters like
earthquakes, floods, and the destruction of the world by aliens happen 
relatively quickly.  Killer viruses, on the other hand, are too slow to
make for exciting visuals.  The Titanic's eventual progress to the ocean
floor means that the passengers are calm and businesslike at first, 
and then panic gradually sets in as the boat tilts further and further
into the water.  Amid the rising chaos, there's a nice touch: a tiny
shot of a tiny ship sending out a tiny signal flare, capturing the
futility and hopelessness of the passengers' predicament.  As Rose hangs
on to a railing for her life, her eyes meet those of a girl next to
her.  It's a marvelous moment of clarity; even before the girl plummets
to her death, you know their brief, wordless acquaintance will never
leave Rose's memory.
There's also an interesting chemistry between the oddly matched DiCaprio
and Winslet.  Maybe he isn't convincingly 1910s, but despite his youth
he exudes the cool confidence that only movie stars seem to have.  It's
no wonder that Rose is attracted to Jack - he's not of her world, but he
slips into it with such ease that you don't feel that she's slumming. 
The two leads give the illusion that their romance isn't old hat.  Kathy
Bates, who's always welcome, gives her part as "Unsinkable Molly" Brown
a good dose of spice.
Cameron has the right idea in framing a love story within the ship's
sinking.  He's smart enough to know that a special effects movie without
a human interest will turn off an audience (witness the fate of STARSHIP
TROOPERS and many others like it).  But his script is so thinly
ontrived, the result is the same.  It's right for us to praise TITANIC
for its technical wizardry and the very real filmmaking skills of 
its director.  But we should recognize that the movie's human elements
are entirely stale, however appealingly packaged.

Title
Review for Perfect Murder, A (1998)
A PERFECT MURDER is supposedly a remake of Alfred Hitchcock's 1954 film
DIAL M FOR MURDER.  In truth, it only uses the setup and a few details
from the original.  Wealthy financier Steven Taylor (Michael Douglas)
discovers that his beauteous and much younger wife Emily (Gwyneth
Paltrow) has a lover, so he decides to have her killed.  Rather than
blackmailing an outside party into doing the job, as in the original,
the businessman hires the lover, a con artist posing as a starving
artist named David Shaw (Viggo Mortensen).  With cold logic, Steven has
designed the murder to look like a routine burglary gone wrong, but his
intended victim fouls it up by killing the hit man in self-defense.
The movie is no masterpiece, but it's somewhat better than the lukewarm
reviews might lead you to believe.  The updating has mostly improved on
the original film, which just preceded Hitchcock's amazing run of
masterpieces, beginning with REAR WINDOW (1954) and ending with PSYCHO
(1960), THE BIRDS (1963), or MARNIE (1964), depending on whom you ask. 
DIAL M FOR MURDER shackles Hitchcock with Frederick Knott's stagey play
and the 400-pound immobile camera he had to use to film in 3-D.  With
its drab color and stiff acting, the only entertainment value in DIAL M
FOR MURDER is watching Ray Milland be what Hitchcock unwisely tried to
make out of Cary Grant in SUSPICION (1941) - a genteel charmer with an
icy murderous side.
Director Andrew Davis is still struggling to regain his form from 1993's
THE FUGITIVE.  He's so taken with showing us how fabulously rich these
people are that his direction skirts the absurd - the Taylors 
drink out of martini glasses that look like Jacuzzis.  Dariusz Wolski's
high-contrast photography looks self-important amid Manhattan's
jet-set.  By contrast, Michael Chapman's cinematography for THE FUGITIVE
combined with that movie's Chicago setting to give it a grim elegance. 
A PERFECT 
MURDER moves quickly and efficiently, but that only works with the
movie's glossiness to make it seem glib and disposable.
The remake does smooth out many of the original's implausibilities. 
DIAL M FOR MURDER leaves you wondering why the cuckolded husband doesn't
simply off the boyfriend and have done with it.  Patrick Smith Kelly's
script gives him a reason - his business is in trouble and his wife is
worth a ton of money to him dead.  Viggo Mortensen is preferable to the
stodgy and inept Robert Cummings in the original, and David Suchet's
basso profundo homicide cop (a rare positive portrayal of an
Arab-American in a Hollywood movie) is much weightier than John
Williams's fussy Scotland Yard 'tec.  Even the remake's disappointingly
conventional (and confusing) grappling-for-the-gun ending is better than
the tediously anticlimactic walk-through of the failed hit that
concludes Hitchcock's movie.  The updating, though, doesn't explain why
the Taylors don't have an answering machine, which is why Emily has to
get out of her bathtub to answer the phone so she can be attacked.
Michael Douglas spins perhaps the cruellest variation yet on his
embattled rich white man act.  His power-tripping megalomaniac in WALL
STREET isn't a killer, while his dangerously out-of-control cop in BASIC
INSTINCT is at least more casual in his brutality.  The night Emily is
supposed to be killed, she pleads with Steven to stay home and obviously
wants to admit everything.  He gives her a cold stare with a hint of a
smile in it as he says, "It's too late."  The tightly controlled Douglas
is, as one might expect, good at playing a control freak, but you wish
he had relaxed a bit and hit the key moments harder, like at the end
where he tells Emily, "The only way you leave me is dead."
It's only appropriate that Paltrow plays the Grace Kelly role, because
Paltrow essentially is Grace Kelly - a patrician goddess with a sense of
fun - but warmer and more vulnerable.  That vulnerability, projected 
through the very Paltrowvian stare that radiates confusion and pain,
probably got her cast in this thriller.  Like some other tall actresses,
she seems apologetic for her height, and here it gives the effect of a
16-year-old dolled up in designer gowns.  She looks callow and out of
her depth here, but then the character is out of her depth as well.  Had
the movie been made in 1990, Julia Roberts would have played this part. 
Roberts is now mature enough to select interesting material on her own,
but Paltrow's getting stuck with the boring damsel-in-distress roles. 
There's every reason to hope that she, too, will overcome Hollywood's 
typecasting.
Paltrow's presence is enough to provide a rooting interest, but the
movie's real problem isn't unsympathetic characters (as some reviewers
have said) but a lack of chemistry between any of the leads.  The
Taylors don't have a believable marriage.  Steven knows about the affair
and is set on murder from the beginning, while Emily cringes inwardly
whenever her husband touches her.  Good for the plot, but what brought
these people together in the first place?  Since Emily comes from money
and doesn't need it to marry it, why would she attach herself to a
middle-aged sadist, albeit a handsome and well-connected one?  You
really don't blame her for having an affair, but Mortensen doesn't have
the razzle-dazzle of a professional ladies' man, and somehow doesn't
strike me as a guy who's dynamite in the sack.  It's the shallowness of
the movie's personal relationships that make A PERFECT MURDER less than
the sum of its parts.

Title
Review for Bulworth (1998)
Political satire is tough to do.  Especially in America; our
government's absurdities aren't as outrageous as those of a banana
republic's.  And it's really tough to do it in a movie, where
considerations like narrative and characterization have to contend with
political commentary.  If you want to point out what's wrong with the
government, it seems you have to write either a long, dull, harangue of
a book, or a snappy op-ed piece which, if it's done really well, will
still be talked about two weeks after it's printed.
Even the greatest movies that we call political satires aren't really
about politics.  DUCK SOUP is much more successful as a vehicle for the
Marx Brothers' nihilistic insanity than as a patch on the rise of 
dictatorships in the 1930s.  DR. STRANGELOVE, too, is more of an antiwar
screed that mocks Cold War paranoia rather than going at the nuts and
bolts of America's political system.  Lately, we've seen WAG THE DOG, a
jaunty film whose shallow cynicism didn't accomodate serious political
commentary, and PRIMARY COLORS, more of a character study of politicians
and their aides.
These things are important to remember while pondering the
hard-to-fathom critical raves that have greeted Warren Beatty's
BULWORTH.  If this is what passes for political satire these days, we
should bring back the '60s.  Beatty's film is co-produced by Frank Capra
III, which is only appropriate, since this movie is about as trenchant
as MR. SMITH GOES TO WASHINGTON, though not nearly as entertaining.
The movie's title character is a Democratic U.S. Senator from California
named Jay Billington Bulworth (His family names evoke old money, but the
avuncular "Jay" is tacked on as his Christian name.  I suppose if he'd
used the initial "J." instead, he'd be a Republican and we'd have a
different movie.).  With a primary election approaching, Bulworth has a
Jerry Maguire-like crisis of conscience brought on by insomnia and bad
pizza, and he puts out a contract on himself.  Freed from caring about
what happens to him, he proceeds to a church in South Central L.A. and
tells the crowd that Democrats don't care about African-Americans any
more.  He then embarks on a crusade of publicity stunts designed to
expose the undue political influence wielded by corporate fatcats.
The first problem with the movie is that it's too placid.  Bulworth is a
dependably self-serving pol who suddenly goes off the deep end, and
Beatty's the wrong actor to play this type.  Al Pacino or Jack 
Nicholson would have been too crazy from the get-go, but Beatty isn't
crazy enough - there's no sense of liberation to Bulworth's unburdening
of his soul.  The part needed Gene Hackman, or maybe an older Mel 
Gibson.
It's more than just a case of the wrong actor playing Bulworth.  The
rest of the world around him seems curiously undisturbed by such a
high-level politician's pulling a Howard Stern act.  When he raps at a 
fundraiser (the movie's best scene), Bulworth's wife Connie (Christine
Baranski) just pinches the bridge of her nose, as if he had committed a
medium-sized faux pas like admitting that he hated TITANIC.  It's 
hard to believe that Bulworth's love affair with the truth is such a big
deal if he isn't creating an uproar.  This is Beatty the director's
fault - a more media-savvy filmmaker like Tim Robbins or even Barry 
Sonnenfeld would have brought BULWORTH's look and feel in line with the
Information Age, and imparted some comic verve to this satire that's too
self-important to be funny.
The subplot about Bulworth running from his own hit man doesn't pay
off.  Nina, a girl whom Bulworth picks up at a black nightclub, is a
particularly rickety construct.  She's a revolutionary descendant of
Black Panthers posing as a nightclubber, which is just this side of
plausible, but having her at the center of the assassination plot is too
much for the thin characterization to bear.  Her two-minute academic
treatise on the problems in America's inner cities is just painful.  It
doesn't help that she's played by Halle Berry, an uninteresting actress
to begin with who's too refined for a part like this.  Only someone who
has been in Hollywood as long as Warren Beatty could mistake her for a
girl from the 'hood.
The movie's an aging white boy's idea of cutting-edge (and it's
disappointing to see some other aging white boys in the press praising
the film).  The satirical targets are dusty, offensive stereotypes -
Jewish Hollywood suits, Chinese businessmen, crooked insurance
executives.  This filters all the way down to Nina's tag-along friends,
who improbably add gospel harmonies to a church hymn.  Meanwhile, Beatty 
plays it safe and scores some cheap points off special interest groups
without faulting the voters who elect their puppets (and pay to see
movies, by the way).  Well, Bulworth does tell the black voters to "put
down your fried chicken wings and malt liquor and get behind someone
else besides a running back who stabs his wife."  The fact that this is
the movie's only challenge to the electorate only deepens the movie's 
racism.  I'm sure that was hardly Beatty's intention, but there it is.
Beatty has been praised for taking the unprecedented step of making fun
of himself in this movie.  Yes, Bulworth's stilted rap and constant need
to ask the meaning of phrases like "nappy dugout" raises hopes that the
movie's derision will extend to white wannabe hipsters.  Sadly, though,
Beatty fancies himself down with the brothers in more important ways. 
He presents Bulworth as a hero for touting old-fashioned white liberal
attitudes, laced with some obscenities and a nastier attitude.  It isn't
that this thinking is bereft of good intentions, but BULWORTH only
proves how hopelessly simplistic it is as a take on race relations. 
African-American intellectual life is enriched by its diverse
viewpoints, and the movie, instead of seizing the opportunity to depict
that, uses its black characters to unquestioningly validate Bulworth's 
point of view.  By the end of the movie, Nina adoringly tells the
senator, "You my nigga."  (My immediate reaction to hearing that line: 
"Eww.") 
There are a few bright spots.  Don Cheadle's burdened with the role of a
drug dealer whom Bulworth converts to activism, but he works hard to
keep it real.  Oliver Platt's here, too, as Bulworth's coked-up chief of
staff, and he's a dangerous man to have in a supporting cast, because he
steals scenes so easily (he's been doing it for years, too - why hasn't
he gotten more work?).  He's the only one who lends any urgency to the
proceedings.
BULWORTH provides more evidence that Warren Beatty has succumbed to his
own ego.  What a shame that such an intelligent and committed artist
will probably go down in history with 1990's DICK TRACY as the pinnacle
of his film-directing career.  Bulworth's Robert Kennedyesque
assassination is the culmination of nothing except Beatty's own
martyrdom complex - he sees himself going over that hill with Abraham,
Martin, and John.  Warren, here's a tip.  You're still handsome at 61,
you're fabulously wealthy, you're happily married (I presume) to a
beautiful movie star, and you have three beautiful children with 
her.  Think twice before you ask us to feel bad for you.

Title
Review for Life Less Ordinary, A (1997)
There's still some time left, but I'm nominating A LIFE LESS ORDINARY as
the year's most unfairly bashed film.  You'd hate to think of a better
film getting worse treatment from the critics.  There have been some
good reviews, but the early negative ones have probably killed whatever
chance this movie had of doing much business.   That's too bad, because
A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is a true oddity with enough marvels in it to
gratify you.
This road film begins when a recently-fired janitor named Robert (Ewan
MacGregor) decides to kidnap Celine (Cameron Diaz), a spoiled heiress on
the outs with her father.  They're pursued by two angels (Delroy Lindo
and Holly Hunter) who are masquerading as hit men and whose real mission
is to make sure that Robert and Celine fall in love.
Most of the bad notices have taken an aggrieved tone of "How dare the
people who made TRAINSPOTTING do something as light as this?"  You'd
think that the reviewers would appreciate the adventurous spirit that
director Danny Boyle and writer John Hodge bring to this genre picture. 
Instead, though, they've criticized the filmmakers for going off the
rails, as if the Coen brothers or Quentin Tarantino never went too far. 
A LIFE LESS ORDINARY isn't a great film, and it certainly isn't fully 
realized the way TRAINSPOTTING is.  But the filmmakers seem relieved to
have turned from TRAINSPOTTING's bleakness to making this giant piece of
candy.  Yes, Boyle and Hodge lose their judgment in the last half hour,
and the movie's ending really goes splat.  That's more than compensated 
for by the number of ideas that take flight, like Robert serenading
Celine with a karaoke version of "Beyond the Sea."  The dance that
follows has an exhilarating lyrical joy that you won't find in any of 
Boyle's previous movies.  A LIFE LESS ORDINARY may be excessive, but
it's certainly preferable to the slick, soulless efficiency of Boyle and
Hodge's debut film, SHALLOW GRAVE.
In addition to the filmmakers' off-kilter point of view, A LIFE LESS
ORDINARY also boasts some old-fashioned movie-star glamor.  Early on,
Robert is accosted by a menacing redneck named Tod Johnson (a hilarious
Maury Chaykin).  Just when the scene seems to be building to a
hysterical climax, it goes in an entirely different direction, as Celine
defuses the situation by showing up wearing a bedsheet and spinning 
a story about Robert being a pop star who's hiding from the press with
his new wife.  The scene was obviously written with a disarmingly sexy
actress in mind, and could have easily fallen flat, but Cameron Diaz,
who proves what a nimble actress she is, brings it all.  Diaz, you'll
remember, put some teeth into a wimpy, underwritten part in MY BEST
FRIEND'S WEDDING.  Here, she's not afraid to emphasize Celine's
unattractive side, playing the character as bratty, impatient,
headstrong and dangerous to be around - she even points a gun at a
12-year-old girl's head.  Now how many actresses could get away with
that?  Diaz does, and it's because she finds the neglected child inside
the character and lets her find redemption when she falls in love.
So completely does she inhabit the character that she darned near
obliterates MacGregor, engaging and hugely talented fellow that he is. 
That's only appropriate, since Celine takes over her kidnapping, that 
Diaz take over the movie.  Nevertheless, he projects a genuine and
unobtrusive sweetness that's really likeable, and it's refreshing to see
the lead in a movie like this behaving unheroically.  One of the movie's 
funnier scenes comes when he's told he's going to be killed - and he
bursts into tears.  Still, even though Celine's attraction to Robert's
regular-guy charm is credible, MacGregor's overmatched by his leading 
lady.
Something similar happens with the angels.  Holly Hunter and Delroy
Lindo have been paired up not because of their chemistry (which they
have little of), but because of how they look together.  Lindo's a 
fine actor who has a nice understated moment when he reminisces about a
girl he once knew, but Hunter gets the better of this duo.  Her accent
goes from Cruella de Vil to a fearsome hillbilly drawl, she vamps 
madly when auditioning for the hit man job, and gets this terrifying
gleam in her eye when she menaces the lovers with a gun as she's hanging
onto the hood of their truck.  She can be bizarre and intense under 
normal circumstances, and here she's downright crazed, but the odd part
is that she's somehow cuddly, too.  It's possible that this is her
funniest performance to date.
To be sure, A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is definitely not for everyone.  A lot
of violence is played for laughs, which doesn't always work.  The
filmmakers really let their imaginations run amuck, and it results 
in a wildly uneven crazy quilt of a film.  But A LIFE LESS ORDINARY is
more than good enough to deserve a following, and the tremendous skill
and inspiration of Danny Boyle and John Hodge renders them as promising
as any other new filmmakers in the world.

Title
Review for Spanish Prisoner, The (1997)
I am resubmitting this review, which I originally submitted last month.
David Mamet's THE SPANISH PRISONER is yet another story where an
innocent man is beset by demons but defended by angels and ministers of
grace.  Movies like this usually depend on a passive central character
and are thus emotionally uninvolving no matter how intellectually
engaging they may be.  This one's no different, although it's told
reasonably well.
Joe Ross (Campbell Scott) works for a company and has discovered a
process.  Mamet intentionally leaves the nature of the business and
Joe's discovery vague; what's important is that the new invention will
make them lots of money.  He's sent to a Caribbean island where he meets
Julian "Jimmy" Dell (Steve Martin), a wealthy playboy with a propensity
for eccentric gestures like setting Joe up with a Swiss bank account - 
it only has 15 francs in it, but the Swiss will keep the balance a
secret, and Joe can impress people with his account.  But there's a
point to Jimmy's apparent whims, and Joe soon finds himself bilked out
of his discovery, with the police thinking that he has stolen it from
the company.  The only person he can trust is his secretary, Susan Ricci
(Rebecca Pidgeon), who believes he's innocent.
It's a nice little shell game that Mamet puts us through, though there
are a few holes.  When Joe discovers a friend murdered, he flees the
scene rather than face the cops who are hot on his heels.  By doing so,
he seems to play right into the hands of both the bad guys and the good
guys.  But why would they count on him running, especially when everyone
keeps testifying to what a straight arrow he is?  Why don't they figure
on him leading the cops to the dead body?  Such questions make Joe a
cipher, and Campbell Scott, accomplished actor that he is, can't get to
the bottom of the character.
There are other problems, too.  Mamet has been directing movies for 11
years, and he still hasn't even reached adequacy.  The overall pacing is
fine, but the movie looks drab, and he blows the big climactic moment by
drawing it out in slow-motion.  Mamet's dialogue, his great strength as
a writer, is off as well.  OLEANNA had too many broken sentences and
dramatic pauses in inappropriate places.  THE SPANISH PRISONER has too
many pronouncements on matters philosophical - Joe's friend George
(Ricky Jay) says, "Worry is like interest paid in advance on a debt that
never comes due."  When Susan responds to the simple query of "How are
you?" with, "The wolves are howling at my troika," you just wince at the 
artifice.
And then there's Rebecca Pidgeon, who is Mrs. Mamet in real life.  She's
been a constant in his stage plays, but (besides a small part in
HOMICIDE) Mamet has had the decency to keep her out of his movies until
now.  She's a flat, irritatingly fraudulent presence whose jocular good
cheer is transparently phony.  The rest of the cast, though, ranges from
good enough to excellent - worth singling out are Felicity Huffman as an
FBI agent and Ed O'Neill as her cool, brisk supervisor.  Best of all is
Steve Martin, who slips into Mamet's world with frightening ease, as he
keeps finding layers to this man with ulterior motives.  With much less
fanfare than Robin Williams or Tom Hanks or (most recently) Jim Carrey,
Steve Martin has made himself into a dramatic actor of considerable
weight.  Actually, he had that kind of heft before any of them - check
out his performance in the great PENNIES FROM HEAVEN (1981).  He has 
devoted more and more time to writing essays and plays and become very
good at them, but let's hope he gives us a few more performances like
this.

Title
Review for As Good As It Gets (1997)
At one point in DECONSTRUCTING HARRY, Harry's wife, Joan (Kirstie Alley)
has discovered her husband's infidelity with one of her psychiatric
patients.  She screams at him until her anger is temporarily spent, and
now she's lying on the floor in tears.  That's when Harry says, "You're 
overreacting."  He's not being intentionally cruel; Allen gives the line
in his patented irritated defensive whine.  Harry's in denial, but Allen
lets us know that Harry's response is somehow worse than deliberately 
crushing her with the admission.  He's not only being dishonest with
himself and her, but he's causing her even more pain.  You feel like
cheering when she gets up and tries to strangle the little bastard.
Since HUSBANDS AND WIVES, Woody Allen has been in a new and frequently
startling phase of his career.  With his latest film, his take on the
relationship between art and life appears to have gone baroque. 
HUSBANDS AND WIVES had its obvious autobiographical elements, but
BULLETS OVER BROADWAY played the difference between being a great artist
and a great person to wonderful effect.  EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU
demonstrated the artificiality of movie musical conventions (while
paying them tribute) by using actors whose musical talents were, ahem,
closer to those of ordinary people than those of characters in
musicals.  DECONSTRUCTING HARRY, though, is like a hall of mirrors, with
auteur and characters constantly interacting.  Somewhere, Pirandello and
Borges are having a good laugh over this one.
Harry Block (Allen) is a lousy human being who's revered as a great
writer.  He's recognizable as the Woody Allen persona, but with all the
ugly sides in full bloom.  He cheats on his wives and girlfriends, likes
to be beaten by hookers, and treats the women in his life so abominably
that they wind up hating him.  Moreover, he puts their exploits into his
novels and short stories and thinly disguises their characters so
they'll all recognize themselves.  The movie's plot revolves around his
trip to upstate New York to receive an honorary degree from a college he
was expelled from as a student.  Lonely, he asks a hooker (Hazelle
Goodman) to accompany them, forgetting that he has already invited a
friend (Bob Balaban).  He then kidnaps his son from day care to see Dad
get his honor.
For the first time since ZELIG, Woody Allen has written a compelling
role for himself.  Through his writing, Harry gives pleasure to millions
of people as long as they stay the hell away from him.  But they only
hurt the people they're based on - his sister Doris (Caroline Aaron) who
married an Orthodox Jew, is painted as a harridan (Demi Moore) who 
insists on following the Torah to the letter.  His adulterous escapade
with his ex-wife's sister Jane (Judy Davis) is fodder for a farcical
story that breaks up Jane's marriage.  He repeatedly tells his
girlfriend Faye (Elisabeth Shue) not to fall in love with him, then he's
flabbergasted when she doesn't.  Instead she runs off with his best
friend (Billy Crystal), and Harry gets revenge by casting him in a story
as Satan.
The women in Harry's life are continually furious with him, for which
you can scarcely blame them.  Aaron, Davis, and Alley all have their
turns blowing up at him, and they're magnificent in their anger.  I 
realize that sounds like the villain in a melodrama ("My dear, you're
beautiful when you're angry,"), but it's true.  They're painful, but
Allen finds their raging, wounded outbursts funny, and he invites us to
do the same.  Sexist?  No, because these episodes would be sordid and
unfunny if Allen didn't also invite us to empathize with their pain. 
Davis is fantastic when she's overwrought, and at one point
hyperventilates until she passes out.  Alley's even better - her
crash-and-bang style of acting has never been put to better use than
here.
DECONSTRUCTING HARRY is purposely ragged, with plot digressions and
filmed fantasy sequences.  Some of these are just funny stories that
Woody Allen wants to show us.  It takes a while to realize that 
the movie's form cagily resembles that of a literary anthology or a
short story collection, like one Harry Block might have written.  The
movie ends in impressive fashion, as we see Harry being saluted by all
the characters he has created.  We can imagine Woody in some similarly
exalted state, surrounded by Annie Hall and Leonard Zelig and Cheech and
Linda Ash, and being serenaded by dancing Grouchos.  But Allen doesn't
end the film on this note.  Instead, the dream fades, and Harry Block is
left alone, pounding away at his typewriter.
I suspect that even if DECONSTRUCTING HARRY weren't around, AS GOOD AS
IT GETS would still feel like the piece of Hollywoodized fabrication
that it is.  Melvin Udall (Jack Nicholson), like Harry Block, is a great
writer and horrible person.  He's not only obsessive-compulsive, but he
spews racist, anti-Semitic, homophobic and misogynistic insults at
anyone in his path.  His salvation arrives at the hands of Carol
Connelly (Helen Hunt), a thoroughly winsome waitress without whom Melvin
can't eat at the restaurant where he has to dine.  It also comes from
Simon (Greg Kinnear), a gay neighbor whose career as an artist is
paralyzed when he's brutally attacked.
AS GOOD AS IT GETS is directed and co-written (with Mark Andrus) by
James L. Brooks, and Brooks is in his movie-length sitcom mode.  All the
characters are here to win you over, and the minor ones like Cuba
Gooding, Jr.'s art dealer and Shirley Knight as Carol's mother are there
to provide spurious dashes of color.  The movie's supposed to be about a
misanthrope who emerges from his shell, but it's apparent from the
beginning that Melvin's an old softie - 15 minutes in, he has gotten
attached to the little dog that he originally threw down the garbage
chute (yes, this movie will stoop low enough to use a cute little dog). 
We may think it's daring to make a romantic comedy about a guy who says
such horrible things, but Melvin's bigotry doesn't manifest itself in
any deeper way, which makes the shock value of his insults seem
calculated and cheap.
The casting, though, seems to be a deeper problem.  You can understand
why Nicholson's here.  He's always had this great ability to make an
audience understand his motives - we wouldn't have sympathized with
McMurphy's attempted murder of Nurse Ratched if he'd been played by
Pacino or De Niro or Beatty or any of Nicholson's other brilliant
contemporaries.  Brooks must have felt that he'd need all the famous 
Nicholson charm to counteract Melvin's sourness.  The problem is that
while Jack has the right attitude for delivering his outrageous
dialogue, he never finds the character's essence.  He was a plausible
man of letters in WOLF, but he's too busy investing all his energy into
getting in people's faces to give off the proper writerly aura.  If
Melvin had had Dustin Hoffman's less showy and more neurotic egomania,
it would have improved matters.  Regardless, Nicholson never settles
into the part, and he's left to fuss and leer his way through the
picture.  His problem spreads to Greg Kinnear, who looks uncomfortable
even before his character is thrown into physical and mental anguish.
Worse off is Hunt, that incredibly deft and irresistible comic actress. 
I've seen episodes of "Mad About You" that left me in awe of her skills,
but as a working-class single mother in a dead-end job, Hunt is too
perky, too young, too beautiful, and way too polished.  With her crisp
diction and appearance, I didn't believe her when Carol needed help
spelling the word "conscience."  The part needed Susan Sarandon's 
brainy middle-aged sensuality.  Or, if they wanted someone younger,
Minnie Driver or Anne Heche could have provided their brands of
unconventional beauty and keen wit while looking convincingly careworn. 
Michelle Pfeiffer would have brought the whole package.  As welcome as
it is to have Helen Hunt starring in a romantic comedy, she's wrong for
this part.
Woody Allen has taken criticism from some quarters for becoming morose
and isolated in his post-SHADOWS AND FOG years, but DECONSTRUCTING HARRY
still feels far more real than AS GOOD AS IT GETS.  Harry Block is a man
whose artistic flame burns everyone around him, and there's no 
redemption for him, even if he is a great writer (nor does Harry have
the saving grace of Melvin's mental illness).  Such a dedicated artist
may have a lighter side, but inevitably he's hell to deal with.  Of
course, it's possible to be a great artist and a semi-decent human
being, but when it comes to depicting this kind of person, we know we're
in the presence of the genuine article with Woody Allen.  AS GOOD AS IT
GETS is only Woody's vision domesticated and made safe for consumption
by sitcom audiences.  It gave me a good idea, though.  Maybe Jack
Nicholson should replace Paul Reiser on "Mad About You."  Instead of 
Paul's hypochondria, let's see how Jamie Buchman deals with a guy who
makes Jerry Seinfeld look like the world's biggest slob.  There's the
new cornerstone of Must See TV.

Title
Review for Man in the Iron Mask, The (1998)
The Man in the Iron Mask is bound to disappoint many people who go to a
swashbuckling film to see lots of swordplay.  Writer/director Randall
Wallace wants to do more, but unfortunately he winds up doing less.
It's 1661, the musketeers have all grown into middle age, and their
exploits have become legendary.  Athos (John Malkovich), Porthos (Gerard
Depardieu) and Aramis (Jeremy Irons) have all retired, and only
D'Artagnan (Gabriel Byrne) has stayed on in the king's service.  He now
leads the musketeers.  But their retirement comes to an abrupt end when
Louis XIV (Leonardo DiCaprio) is crowned king of France.  He's a naughty
boy who seduces and casts off women, lives in luxury while Parisians
starve, and casually orders people executed when they displease him. 
Thus, Aramis hatches a plan to switch him for his long-lost twin
Philippe (DiCaprio), whose resemblance to the king has caused his
imprisonment in the Bastille, where he's forced to wear an iron mask.
The main source of fun is seeing DiCaprio defile his newly-won image as
a dreamboat.  We were all hoping his considerable talents wouldn't be
entrapped into a bland leading man's career, and his work here is a
reassuring sign that DiCaprio is more than just a standard-issue
Hollywood heartthrob.  He does a nice job subtly differentiating between
his two roles.  As the bad twin, his smooth self-confidence from 
Titanic now spills over into the smug self-absorption that we all
secretly suspect movie stars of possessing.  DiCaprio's Louis is a
narcissistic phony, and he's intensely amusing to watch.
Nevertheless, the acting honors go to Gabriel Byrne, and after seeing
him get eclipsed by the ensembles in Little Women and The Usual
Suspects, it's nice to see him come out on top here.  He has the right 
combination of gravity and flair for the conflicted D'Artagnan,
especially in the scene where he placates an angry mob.  Depardieu hams
things up, and Malkovich and Irons never find the right tone, but Byrne 
projects his character's romantic frustration and his crisis of
conscience.
Blame the performers' unevenness on Randall Wallace, who betrays his
inexperience as a director.  He fails to balance the movie's humorous
and serious parts and doesn't know how to film the action sequences. 
Perhaps he felt he had to cover up for his older actors (of course, the
aging of the musketeers is the point of the story), but the editing
during the fights makes it hard to tell what's going on, or even who's
who.  Compare this with Disney's 1993 version of The Three Musketeers,
directed by Stephen Herek.  It wasn't a great film, and the younger,
more athletic cast didn't have anything on these actors (though Oliver
Platt was an enjoyable Porthos), but it sure was readable.  This movie
seems destined to be a footnote to the careers of DiCaprio and Byrne. 
It's not enjoyable enough to be anything else.

Title
Review for Career Girls (1997)
He had his big success with SECRETS AND LIES, and now everyone has gone
back to ignoring Mike Leigh.  We shouldn't be surprised.  He's not the
kind of filmmaker who'd parlay his Oscar nominations into a big-time
transatlantic career.  Maybe that's too bad - it'd be interesting to see
which American actors would flourish under his direction, and what kind
of movies he'd make on a Hollywood budget (what would MY BEST FRIEND'S
WEDDING have been like with him directing?).  Nevertheless, Leigh 
keeps doing what he does best:  small, intimate, sharply observed
slice-of-English-life movies.
His new film, CAREER GIRLS, takes place during a weekend when Annie
(Lynda Steadman) returns from Yorkshire to London to see Hannah (Katrin
Cartlidge), her roommate and best friend from college.  Hannah complains
that the men she meets don't last a weekend with her, but Annie makes
the grade with her.  They haven't seen each other in six years, but they
have little trouble reconnecting.  They're like ex-lovers who still turn
each other on (in fact, they're twice mistaken for a lesbian couple). 
The movie recognizes that there's a sexual charge to any close
friendship, be it these two or Thelma and Louise or Agent Mulder and
Agent Scully.  There's little in this movie besides extended
conversation between these two, in flashbacks to their college days and
in the present day.  In this respect, the movie's like Richard 
Linklater's 1994 magnum opus BEFORE SUNRISE, and the fact that CAREER
GIRLS can stand the comparison is high praise indeed.
We see the two of them as social misfits in their student days who band
together for companionship.  Hannah is a rather alarming piece of work. 
She's a motormouth who talks in a Robin Williams-like
stream-of-consciousness deluge.  She's an English major, which is just
as well, since her mind runs frenetically in literary circles.  Her
bizarre and highly original sense of wordplay grabs at anything that 
presents itself - outrageous puns, metaphors, allusions, and
off-the-cuff impressions of Marlon Brando and Robert DeNiro.  She's also
prone to fits of rage, with a nasty attitude to go with her steel-trap
mind - witness her ruthless destruction of a psych major who
good-naturedly tries to analyze her.  No wonder people keep away from
her; aside from giving off the appearance of some kind of dementia, her
wit is so sharp that she frequently cuts herself and people she cares
about.
But if Hannah has a soft spot for Annie.  Annie touches Hannah deeply,
in fact, and it'd take a cold heart not to be moved by this pathetic
creature.  As a collegian, her hair is dyed some shade of orange, she
chain-smokes despite her asthma ("Isn't that a bit kamikaze?" erupts
Hannah), and she has a shambling walk from carrying a bag that's too
large for her.  She also has a severe case of dermatitis on her face,
and she can barely lift her eyes from the ground during a conversation. 
Hannah says, "You look like you did a tango with a cheese grater," which
is enough to send Annie to the bathroom in tears.  But Hannah's able to
sense the gentleness and resilience in Annie's heart, a quality that
comes to the forefront when Annie makes her present-day appearance as a
well-adjusted, warmly radiant presence.
Hannah, for her part, has morphed from a gangly, scowling misanthrope
into a cool, fashionable business executive, though she's still rough
around the edges.  Her nervous tics have now been replaced by the self-
consciously theatrical gestures of a woman who hasn't lost her desire to
act out, just refined it.  Nor have her verbal idiosyncracies
disappeared; she explains Annie's fear of heights by saying, "She's got
a touch of the Hitchcocks."  Annie's enthralled by her, and so are we,
as she continues to thrust herself, insecurities and all, in people's
faces.  In a Hollywood movie, a character like this would be required to
have a tearful breakdown at some point and reveal her innermost fears -
audiences want to see such a hard-shelled person (especially a woman)
exposed and made vulnerable.  It doesn't happen here, and the 
characterization is richer for it.
If Kristin Scott Thomas is a Britisher who acts like a French actress,
Katrin Cartlidge is a Britisher who acts like an American actress. 
She's unstudied, content to be unpolished, loose with her body and at
ease with herself (though this could be just simple relief at playing a
character so different from her roles in BEFORE THE RAIN and BREAKING
THE WAVES).  At the movie's end, when Annie asks her if she'll 
meet anybody exciting on the train, Hannah says, "Maybe you'll meet the
man of your dreams."  The end of this line is accompanied by a hand
gesture which, we have come to learn, is one of Hannah's trademarks. 
Cartlidge puts her whole being into it, and yet it's a delightfully
self-deprecating jab at her way of expressing things.  The effect is
terribly charming; you couldn't imagine it coming from another 
British actress (or even most American leading ladies), so ladylike and
self-possessed are they.  It's something out of the Julia Roberts
repertoire.  Hey, here's a comparison - Roberts is similarly tall, with
an excess energy that keeps pouring out of her in the form of tiny,
illuminating gestures.  But anyone can see that Cartlidge isn't Roberts
- with her severe, angular features and a cerebral ferocity that shows
even in this light comedy, Cartlidge's presence in a movie is strong
stuff indeed.
Of course, it takes two (and not a cheese grater) to tango, and the
newcomer Steadman, while overplaying the navet a bit in the
present-day section, is an effectively soft counterpart to Cartlidge's
hardness.  We don't see too many movies about women forming close
friendships.  We see even less of them done so convincingly.  It still
dips into clichs like Hannah telling Annie, "You're the only person
who's ever appreciated me," but the chemistry between the actresses
redeems the movie's occasional talkiness and overexplicitness.  In this
respect, CAREER GIRLS is like a down-to-earth English version of ROMY 
AND MICHELE'S HIGH SCHOOL REUNION.  It doesn't have the silly comic
highs of its American counterpart, but when you're watching the latter
movie, you're always aware of two funny actresses clicking together.  In
CAREER GIRLS, you're aware of two characters finding strength in the way
they complement each other instead.
Mike Leigh designs his movies to be unformed, with stray stories poking
out from the edges.  There's a funny house-hunting scene where the two
girls meet a bathrobe-clad stockbroker who lights up a joint 
while showing them his apartment and clearly wants to have sex with
them.  (Hannah spots an open girlie magazine on his bed and asks, "Going
through your family album?")  On the flip side, there's the boyfriend
that Annie rejected who turns up six years later homeless and insane. 
This vignette lacks the tragic power of a similar scene in FARGO - it
takes too long without really going anywhere.  But Leigh's films acquire
their richness from hinting at the lives that are lived offscreen and
only peripherally touch on the movie we see.
Hollywood likes movies about bland people, and does its best to smooth
out interesting actors.  Only minor characters are allowed to be
eccentric, and they tend to be grotesque caricatures.  There seems to be 
no middle ground - a movie like MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING, which allowed
its protagonists some mild oddities, amounts to a blast of fresh air. 
On the other hand, some American independent filmmakers strain mightily
to create characters who talk, act, or think in original ways.  Mike
Leigh always gives the impression that he's just found these people and
treasures them for being the way they are.  At one point, Hannah credits
her first boss with saving her sanity.  How?  She says, "He let me be
myself."  We never meet that boss, but I'll bet he was Mike Leigh.

Title
Review for Return to Paradise (1998)
RETURN TO PARADISE is about three American tourists who meet and
befriend each other in Malaysia:  Brooklyn limo driver Sheriff (Vince
Vaughn), clean-cut Harvard grad Tony (David Conrad), and hippie activist
Louis (Joaquin Phoenix), all carousing in a land of sunny beaches,
sexually submissive women and cheap hashish.  Sheriff and Tony leave for
the States, giving Louis what's left of their hash.  Two years later, a
lawyer named Beth Eastern (Anne Heche) turns up in Sheriff's limousine. 
She explains:  the day after their parting, the police busted Louis, and
all the hash he had made him a trafficker in the eyes of Malaysian law,
and subject to the death penalty.  Louis's life will be spared only if
Sheriff or Tony or both return to Malaysia to claim their share of
responsibility for the drugs and serve prison time.
What to do?  The dilemma is supposed to give its characters
opportunities for courage, cowardice, or redemption, but this dull,
self-important movie only shows up how successfully SAVING PRIVATE RYAN
covers the same ground.  The story takes too long to set up, and the
movie goes limp despite its eight-day time frame that's supposed to
create tension.  The plot twists are cheap and arbitrary, as in the 
revelation of Beth's real relationship to Louis, or the contrived
courtroom climax that no amount of good acting can redeem.
The acting is good, though.  Joaquin Phoenix steals the show.  His two
set pieces from his prison cell are horrifying glimpses of a gentle man
brought close to psychic ruin by his isolation and impending death. 
When Louis tells Sheriff, "There is no God in this place," you feel the
terrible force of the words.  Jada Pinkett-Smith is saddled with a plot
device instead of a character, but watching her play her scene with 
Anne Heche made me think that THE NEGOTIATOR would have been even more
interesting with them in the leads instead of Samuel L. Jackson and
Kevin Spacey.
Vince Vaughn looks appropriately lumpish for the part (so much so that
he bears a disturbing resemblance to Diedrich Bader from "The Drew Carey
Show"), and nicely underplays his change from moral weakling to hero. 
Heche is in fine, anguished form, too.  The romance plot between them is
a problem, though.  Hollywood watchers have been scrutinizing Heche's
career to see if she'll make a credible romantic lead now that everyone
knows she's gay in real life, which is ridiculous and grossly unfair to
an actress who has more than once proven this kind of thinking wrong. 
That having been said, however, she's lucky that SIX DAYS, SEVEN NIGHTS
was viewed as the test case for her viability as a romantic lead rather
than this movie, because there's no chemistry going on between her and
Vaughn.  It doesn't make sense that the dedicated Beth and the
vacillating Sheriff would be attracted to each other.
The whole subplot is shoehorned in.  Even worse, it's used as the hook
for Sheriff's redemption - at the end, he tells her that doing time
would be better than losing her love by not going back.  Director Joseph 
Ruben and writers Bruce Robinson and Wesley Strick vitiate their own
moral drama because they don't trust us to believe that Sheriff is doing
the right thing.  For all its ambitions and gritty atmosphere, RETURN TO
PARADISE is as phony as any Hollywood action-thriller or comedy, and a
good deal less fun.

Title
Review for Smoke Signals (1998)
"How do we forgive our fathers?"  That line, spoken by a voiceover
narrator, comes toward the end of SMOKE SIGNALS, an accomplished and at
times remarkable film.  It's meant to be the movie's epigraph, but it
could serve the same purpose for several other recent movies.
The movie starts when Victor Joseph (Adam Beach), a Coeur d'Alene Indian
who lives on the reservation in Idaho, receives the news that his
father, Arnold, has died in Phoenix.  His nerdy friend Thomas
Builds-the-Fire (Evan Adams) offers him the money for the trip from
Idaho on the condition that he let Thomas go along with him.  Victor
doesn't like Thomas all that much, but he needs the money, so he
reluctantly accepts.  Arnold once saved the infant Thomas's life, and
Thomas now idolizes him as a brash, colorful, bigger-than-life
character.  Victor, on the other hand, remembers him as an abusive,
unpredictable drunk who abandoned his family.
SMOKE SIGNALS began as a book of short stories by Sherman Alexie.  When
Hollywood expressed interest in filming his screenplay adaptation, he
held out for a Native American film director.  With Chris Eyre, he made
the right choice.  The pacing is deliberate, providing the properly
relaxed, open-road atmosphere that lends itself to Alexie's tiny, sharp
insights.  He isn't afraid to take stylistic chances, but he finds a
nice balance between fantasy scenes and the movie's smaller-scaled
moments.
Hollywood often uses Native Americans as symbols, or occasionally as
slyly comic figures who play on white people's ignorance of them.  It's
sad, though, that we needed Native American filmmakers to portray 
Native Americans who don't behave as if they're from another planet. 
These characters are firmly placed in American pop culture, even as
they're given a bemused, detached attitude towards it.  Victor and
Thomas's worm's-eye point of view makes their references to Michael
Jordan and the DEATH WISH movies so breezily amusing.
SMOKE SIGNALS is like GOOD WILL HUNTING in that both movies are best at
depicting the banter of guys hanging out.  Critics have already given
their dues to the chant of "John Wayne's teeth" and Thomas's praise of
Victor's mother's frybread, but there's also stuff like the story of
Arnold getting his picture in the paper, or Thomas's shirt that reads
"Frybread Power."  Evan Adams, in particular, deserves some credit - he 
seems carried away by his own narrative sense when he gives voice to the
stories.
But it isn't just the tone that these movies share.  Like Will Hunting,
Victor's a strong, silent type who's crying on the inside because of his
father's abuse.  SMOKE SIGNALS, though, tops GOOD WILL HUNTING in that
the father isn't just a shadowy, fairy-tale monster.  He's a complex
character who's carrying around his own pain.  Seen in flashback (and
played brilliantly by Gary Farmer), Arnold is a troubled shell of his
former fun-loving self.  He's still capable of real warmth and inspires
the love of his neighbor Suzy (an incandescent Irene Bedard).  His
telling a story of Victor's performance in a basketball game results in
a bravura scene that's worthy of the inspired heights of Spike Lee's HE
GOT GAME.  Arnold's pride in his son infuses the whole screen with an
electricity that results in a great, thrilling moment.
Eyre's film also dares to suggest that exorcising one's demons is a
somewhat complicated process.  Will Hunting achieves catharsis because
his therapist keeps telling him, "It's not your fault." (Hell, if that's
all it took to cure him, "Saturday Night Live's" Stuart Smalley could
have done the job.)  Eyre and Alexie leave Victor's healing incomplete
at the movie's end.  Neither film reaches the level of HE GOT GAME -
Spike Lee takes things a step further by daring to make Jesus
Shuttlesworth emotionally functional in spite of his father's neglect -
but Eyre's movie is mostly and refreshingly free of the self-pity that
pervades GOOD WILL HUNTING.
SMOKE SIGNALS boasts a veritable all-star lineup of Indian actors.  As
Victor's mother, Tantoo Cardinal has the soft radiance and authority of
a Susan Sarandon.  Michelle St. John and Elaine Miles (from TV's 
"Northern Exposure") are a daffy pair of girls who cruise the
reservation in a car that's apparently stuck in reverse.  It goes to
show that there is a talent pool of Native Americans that has been
scandalously underused by Hollywood casting directors.  Anglo actor Tom
Skerritt also gets a spicy cameo as a local sheriff.
In the end, SMOKE SIGNALS is a film that reinforces what we should
already know - everyone has a story to tell.  I was planning on ending
this piece by expressing the hope that this movie would spur Native 
Americans and people from other minorities to film their experiences.  I
still have that hope, but a movie this good doesn't need that kind of
hook.  It's a highly enjoyable road picture told from a different point
of view, and that's reason enough to make it out to your art-house
theater to see it.

Title
Review for Emma (1996)
        It's great fun finding out that a dramatic actress (which
Gwyneth Paltrow has been heretofore known to us) has an unsuspected
comic talent.  As a con artist and grave robber in FLESH AND BONE, she
gave a dose of self-assurance in a meandering film filled with aimless
characters.  As Brad Pitt's wife in SE7EN, she was a welcome source of
light amid the gloom of a pseudohip SILENCE OF THE LAMBS knockoff.  Now,
her richly funny performance in EMMA promises to be the first in a long
career as a leading lady.
Adapted from Jane Austen's novel, EMMA is set in Regency
England.  Emma Woodhouse (Paltrow), the daughter of a member of the
landed gentry, plays matchmaker for her younger adoring friend, Harriet
Smith (Toni Collette).  When Emma isn't busy believing that the wrong
man has fallen for her, she's busy believing that the wrong man has
fallen for Harriet.  She tries to pair off Harriet with the vicar, Mr.
Elton (Alan Cumming), only to find that he's more interested in her.
Meanwhile, she flirts with Frank Churchill (Ewan McGregor), the dashing
stepson of her best friend, but doesn't see that her lifelong friend Mr.
Knightley (Jeremy Northam) is in love with her.
Paltrow has been criticized for being too transparent an actress
to project the schemer in Emma Woodhouse, which is true.  Emma's
plotting is motivated by an innocent desire to do good, a quality that
Alicia Silverstone nailed in CLUELESS, the updated version of EMMA.
Paltrow's inability to convey this does mar her performance and the
film, though not as much as others have claimed.  It robs Emma of an
extremely appealing character flaw, leaving us with her more unpleasant
ones. However, it doesn't severely drag down the whole film, which
testifies to her strength as an actress.
She has a pretty sure grip on everything else about the
character: Emma's quickness of mind growing into complacent superiority
at the beginning, then the ensuing confusion followed by her spiritual
growth (of all Jane Austen heroines, Emma Woodhouse is the best role for
a comic actress because Austen subjects her to so many unpleasant
surprises).  When Silverstone tries to look puzzled by her mistakes, she
essentially squints.  By contrast, Paltrow's eyes register everything.
It leads to hilarious scenes like Mr. Elton's proposal to her in the
carriage, where her brain simply locks up, leaving her only enough
composure to fend him off.  It also leads to affecting moments such as
her realization of how she's insulted Miss Bates (Sophie Thompson).
Paltrow's a smart actress with a sense of fun and a way with a joke,
but she's also capable of expressing deep emotions.  This is a born
romantic comedienne.
It's too bad, though, that she completely swamps Jeremy Northam.
Mr. Knightley does come off as rather drab in the novel, and Northam has
a raffish appeal to compensate for it.  He also catches fire when he
becomes jealous of Frank Churchill.  Compare, though, Alan Rickman's
similar role in SENSE AND SENSIBILITY (that performance looks better and
better over time) and you'll find Northam lacking in the gravitas that
perhaps only age could provide.
If Jane Austen hadn't been English, the British theater might
well have had to invent her, as the last three films of her novels,
PERSUASION, SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, and now EMMA have all been
distinguished by great supporting casts.  No other country's actors
could match Austen's detailed portraits of minor characters with the
Brits' technical exactitude.  Chief among the role players here is
Thompson, who has done excellent work before, particularly as the
hypochondriacal Mary Musgrove in PERSUASION.  Here she creates a
compelling and wholly realized personality.  Her tiny, bespectacled
Miss Bates gradually pulls all your attention toward her as her nervous,
self-effacing manner continually apologizes for whatever it is that
compels her to talk so much.  And then, when Emma makes fun of her and
her satirical wit cuts too deep, Miss Bates's chatter dies into a
bewildered silence that's devastatingly effective.
McGregor is an immensely likable Frank Churchill and has a
glorious moment when he joins in a song.  Cumming and Juliet Stevenson
are a well-matched pair of Eltons, while Greta Scacchi's Mrs. Weston
strikes the right attitude of benevolent wisdom.  Less well off are
Collette and Denys Hawthorne as Mr. Woodhouse; perhaps because of the
writing or the direction, they fall into caricature.  I wish Polly
Walker hadn't been such a drab Jane Fairfax.  Jane's virtues are meant
to come off as dull next to Emma's brilliant wrongheadedness, but even
so, the character should have some luster of her own to give Emma
something to dislike.
This film is the directing debut of screenwriter Douglas
McGrath, whose previous scripts include a co-writing credit with Woody
Allen on his marvelous BULLETS OVER BROADWAY.  Jane Austen is so subtle
a writer, you hate to fault anyone else for falling short of her
standards, but McGrath stretches her finely nuanced humor into some
unAustenlike broad gags - Emma misses an archery target and sends
Knightley's dogs scattering, while Mr. Elton compliments Emma's sketch
of Harriet when she's only finished the outline of Harriet's head.  The
filmmaker seems afraid that Austen's humor is too delicate for modern
audiences.  It isn't necessarily inappropriate to have Mrs. Elton talk
with her mouth full of cake, but Jane Austen conveyed the character's
vulgarity without resorting to this unimaginative touch, and we feel
McGrath could have done it, too.
Tonally, EMMA most closely resembles the 1940 MGM film of PRIDE
AND PREJUDICE, though it doesn't commit any sin as egregious as the
latter film's sympathetic portrayal of Lady Catherine de Bourgh.  It's
still fun, but we devotees of the novelist's dry, incisive social
commentary will find the bright-hued farce a poor substitute (in this
regard, Roger Michell's PERSUASION, the least amiable of the recent
Austen adaptations, is also the most faithful to her spirit).
Nevertheless, EMMA has much to recommend it, not the least of which is
seeing a major actress in the making.

Title
Review for Thousand Acres, A (1997)
I haven't read Jane Smiley's novel "A Thousand Acres," but the movie has
pretty much scared me off.  The story attempts to turn a variation on
"King Lear," where powerful Iowa farmer Larry Cook (Jason Robards)
decides to divide his estate among his three daughters Ginny (Jessica
Lange), Rose (Michelle Pfeiffer), and Caroline (Jennifer Jason Leigh). 
The youngest dissents and is exiled from the family, and then family
tensions drive the remaining members apart.  The twist is that Larry
sexually molested Ginny and Rose as girls, and he, not his eldest
daughters, is the movie's monster.
I guess the best thing about this movie is the rapport between Lange and
Pfeiffer.  Ginny is virtue under siege, while Rose (who, unlike Ginny,
remembers her father's sexual abuse) is full of poorly repressed rage. 
The actresses have played these characters before and better ("Rob Roy"
and "Batman Returns," for instance), but they seem happy to be working
together.  The chemistry between them and their obvious dedication to
this project give the film its low level of interest.
Other than that, Robards overplays the patriarch going insane.  If
you're a fan of Jennifer Jason Leigh (like me), you'll be really
frustrated at the way her character is given no arc.  The dialogue is
flat, the men in Ginny and Rose's lives are ciphers, and Rose's
daughters are hardly there at all.  Jocelyn Moorhouse's filmmaking is
static; long conversations have the feel of a tepid evening at the
theater.  Cliches abound; lightning streaks at dramatic moments, a
deathbed scene, a courtroom scene.  Hollywood has turned out great
"women's pictures" (a categorization I disapprove of), but Moorhouse is
the worst director in this genre.  When they're done like this,
touchy-feely dramas are no improvement on Hollywood's usual
testosterone-laced fare.

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
Warning: This review gives out crucial plot information.  Do not read
further if you wish to be surprised.
I ha't.  It is engendered.  Hell and night
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.
I think ALIEN: RESURRECTION might have been more easily understood (if
not necessarily better liked) if more moviegoers were familiar with the
filmography of director Jean-Pierre Jeunet.  Jeunet remains a cult
figure due to his surrealistic, nightmarish, darkly funny French films
such as DELICATESSEN and THE CITY OF LOST CHILDREN.  For its own
reasons, 20th Century Fox tapped him for the fourth film in the ALIEN
franchise.  The result is a mixed bag that's bound to turn off some 
Jeunet fans and action-movie nuts, but I find it fascinating.
The film begins when Lt. Ellen Ripley (Sigourney Weaver), or at least a
facsimile of her, wakes up in a laboratory.  She's part of extralegal
weapons research conducted by the U.S. military, which has cloned her
200 years after her death and cross-bred her with the aliens that in an
attempt to create a new weapon.  Alas, the aliens get loose and eat the
army people, and Ripley must lead a team of smugglers that had been
helping the project to safety.
What we should understand about Jeunet is that, like Terry Gilliam, he's
a futuristic visionary poet rather than a nuts-and-bolts action-film
director, although ALIEN: RESURRECTION works well enough on that level. 
For better and worse, Jeunet is more interested in throwing weird,
psychedelic visuals up on the screen than he is in forming tightly
constructed narratives.  This isn't to say that his movies are plotless, 
but rather that they obey their own logic the way nightmares do.  That's
why the spaceship's cooling tanks open up directly on to the kitchen -
the water from the tanks floods the kitchen and creates a dreamy but 
terrifying De Palma-esque underwater chase.  So who cares if it's
architecturally implausible?  Jeunet's visions also have their own
poker-faced sense of play, like the cube of whiskey or the death of Gen.
Perez (Dan Hedaya), which references the villain's death in
DELICATESSEN.
Screenwriter Joss Whedon shares Jeunet's taste for gallows humor, but
that's about it.  With this film, TOY STORY, his uncredited work on
SPEED, and the movie and TV versions of BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER, Joss
Whedon is now one of Hollywood's top screenwriters.  Of course, we said
that about another promising Hollywood black comedy writer, Daniel
Waters (HEATHERS, BATMAN RETURNS), and he's disappeared.  Whedon and
Jeunet are a strange pair, and it's too bad that the collaboration
doesn't find either of them at their very best.  Jeunet resorts to a few
cheap tricks like the old it's-not-sex-it's-only-a-foot-massage gag. 
His willingness to let things go unaccounted for leads to
miscalculations like Call's reappearance after being shot.  How she
survives the shooting is explained, but her materialization on the other
side of a locked door stretches credibility too far.  Whedon, for his
part, is cut off from the pop-culture references that make "Buffy the
Vampire Slayer" such fun to watch.  He comes up with a few clunkers like
"No human being is that humane," but the script has many more zesty
lines, most of them well served by Ron Perlman as Johner, the crew's
muscleman and jokester ("I'm not a mechanic.  I just hurt people,
mostly," he snaps).
Nevertheless, Whedon creates an interesting character in Call that holds
out great potential for the series's promised fifth installment,
whenever that may be.  She turns out to be hiding her identity as one of
a line of defective androids recalled for its problems with authority. 
Call is a technological freak whose mere existence renders her an
outlaw.  That shapes her agenda; she knows about the government's
illegal research and means to single-handedly sabotage it.  Her anger,
though, isn't only directed at the authorities.  She also hates herself,
like some minorities who encounter such widespread prejudice among 
larger society that they internalize it and see themselves as deviants
("Look at me, I'm disgusting," says Call).  Except for Ripley and the
wheelchair-bound Vriess, the other characters react with amused 
condescension when they discover Call's secret.  "Can't believe I almost
fucked her," sneers Johner, and you can't help but feel his reaction
would be similar had she turned out to be a lesbian (her situation 
strongly resembles that of some closeted homosexuals).
Having given Call such a background, it's puzzling that Whedon can't
think of anything interesting to have happen to her.  It's suggested
(mainly by the actresses) that Ripley's show of toughness has directed 
Call's energy toward more constructive ends.  It's an intriguing idea
for a feminist action flick, but Jeunet's imagination doesn't run that
way, and the movie never gets more specific on this point.  As one of
the few Hollywood actresses who can project genuine self-loathing,
Winona Ryder's certainly the right choice to play Call.  She's strong in
support, which is hardly surprising, but given the lack of a character
arc and the actress's near-impeccable taste in roles, I have to conclude
that she picked this one less for the scripted part itself than for its
future possibilities.  We can only hope there will be a fifth film to
explore them.
No, ALIEN: RESURRECTION is all Sigourney Weaver's show, and she gives
the performance of her career.  Ripley was human in the three earlier
installments, but Weaver's now playing a being that's part alien.  She
responds by raising her alertness to a stratospheric level.  She's
coiled, like a lioness on the hunt.  She seems to be hearing frequencies
nobody else can hear, and her brain and muscles work in startling sync. 
At first she's slightly taken aback by her new powers, but she comes to
revel in the fact that she's now like Michael Jordan amid a grade-school
basketball team.  Maturity has given Weaver the ability to command
situations and scenes effortlessly, and nowhere else has this quality
suited her better.  Even when Ripley's human emotions break down her
composure, she retains her queenly dignity; she recognizes the deformed
Ripley clone on the operating table, and we see a strong woman whose
sense of self has been profoundly violated.  This performance is unlike
anything Weaver has ever done, and she's glorious.  So powerful is her
presence that it holds together a movie that would otherwise be a huge,
sticky mess.  Jeunet has his visions to pursue, and he makes ALIEN:
RESURRECTION as big and noisy as you would expect, but Weaver stays calm
even as her electricity fills the screen, and she carries the day.

Title
Review for Scream 2 (1997)
Warning: This review gives out crucial plot information.  Do not read
further if you wish to be surprised.
Director Wes Craven and writer Kevin Williamson are B.S. artists.  But
they're great B.S. artists, and they're getting better at it.  I'm one
of the minority who found much of the cleverness in the original SCREAM
to be pseudoclever and self-congratulatory (although, I admit, I enjoyed
it all the same).  I enjoyed SCREAM 2 even more, although I have some of
the same mixed feelings.
The sequel follows Sidney Prescott (Neve Campbell) to college, where she
has moved from Woodsboro (where the original movie's murders took place)
and now majors in theater.  Movie geek Randy (Jamie Kennedy) is there,
too, studying film.  So is a copycat killer, who strikes at the premiere
of a movie called "Stab," which is based on the account of the Woodsboro
murders by Gale Weathers (Courteney Cox).  Sure enough, Gale shows up
looking for her next story, as does Dewey (David Arquette), who wants to 
protect Sidney.
The killer's first three victims are college students played by Omar
Epps, Jada Pinkett, and Sarah Michelle Gellar.  This totally wiped me
out.  At least the black couple gets an entertaining conversation about
the absence of African-Americans in slasher movies (Pinkett watches
Heather Graham playing Drew Barrymore's part in "Stab" and says, "Bitch,
hang up the phone and star 69 his ass.")  But the incisive, dewy-eyed
Gellar doesn't even get a chance to register.  Fortunately, some
compensation comes from the other actors.  The brawny Jerry O'Connell
proves unexpectedly light on his feet as Sidney's boyfriend, and he gets
to serenade her in a cafeteria with "I Think I Love You" ( la Rupert
Everett in MY BEST FRIEND'S WEDDING).  Liev Schreiber only had a cameo
in SCREAM as Cotton Weary, the man wrongly accused of Sidney's mother's
murder.  The role is considerably expanded here, and he disturbingly
suggests that Cotton might be guilty of something after all.
But all these new faces only drew my attention to the old ones, and I
made some observations that escaped me when I saw the original.  Then
again, maybe it was just Neve Campbell's hair that made me think about
her acting.  Her hair, long in the original, is bobbed here.  The new
'do leaves her face more exposed, and it makes her look leaner, as if
the various tragedies in her life have scraped her down to the bone. 
But it also drew my attention to her facial expressions, and she only
uses a few in the SCREAM movies.  She has the one scared look, and then
she adjusts it slightly for her tough look, when she faces down the
killer.   Then she has that toothy grin that she occasionally flashes. 
I'm not a "Party of Five" watcher, so I might be missing something.  But
the SCREAM plots seem to be limiting her range - as she's written,
Sidney Prescott is a normal young woman who just happens to have had
four people in her life murder 11 other people.  Sidney's seen so much
death, you wouldn't blame her if she snapped and started slashing up
victims herself in SCREAM'S inevitable third installment.  And beyond
that, I don't know who she is.  This isn't all or even half Campbell's
fault.  But she doesn't suggest any more about the character.
Character problems hamper Courteney Cox, too.  Not that she has the
wrong attitude - on the contrary, she seems relieved to indulge the
nasty side that her Monica Geller frequently represses on "Friends." 
But Gale Weathers really needed an actress who could be mean in broader
strokes, say, Kelly Preston.  Cox's subtler skills fit the TV screen and
would probably do really well in smaller movie roles, but in a part like 
this, she doesn't fill the bill.  Further, Williamson tries to
complicate Gale by showing her concern for Dewey - her one redeeming
feature.  It's an admirable impulse, but the writer doesn't make it jibe
with the rest of the character.  Cox, a smart actress, seems unsure of
the precise boundaries of Gale's bitchiness.  I'm not sure myself.  The
part was smaller in the original, but it's only going to expand, and it
needs to be fixed.
I came out of SCREAM 2 feeling energized by its cleverness but also with
the same oddly depressed feeling I got from the original.  It isn't that
I have Gene Siskel's prejudice against serial killer movies - they're as
formulaic as any other film genre, and I think THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS
may still be the decade's greatest film.  That movie boasted a literate,
rational, superintelligent killer fully capable of assessing situations
and analyzing other people.  Killers in these movies tend to be mute
death machines who kill people without distinction.  Well, but what
about the monster in the ALIEN movies?  OK, that killer isn't
interesting, but its potential victims are fully developed people
(especially Ripley, of course, and her shipmates in the first movie). 
The victims in most slasher movies are just as much cardboard figures as
the murderer.  That's less the case in the SCREAM movies - the
characterizations are still thin, but at least they're somewhat
defined.  The problem is that they're all helpless in the face of this
killer, which annihilates dramatic possibilities.  The great cast in
SCREAM 2 only highlights this; you can't help watching the demises of
Epps, Pinkett and Gellar without lamenting the waste of perfectly good 
actors.  These movies are fun, but wasn't the final confrontation in THE
SILENCE OF THE LAMBS all the more nerve-wracking because you knew who
Clarice Starling and Jame Gumb were?
My favorite moment in SCREAM 2 is when Randy strikes back at the killer
during their phone conversation.  He starts off sarcastically, saying
that his favorite scary movie is SHOWGIRLS.  Eventually, though, he
turns insulting.  "Why are you imitating a couple of high school
losers?" he yells into the phone, and he starts casting aspersions at
the original killers, particularly Billy Loomis, whom Randy
characterizes as a repressed homosexual mama's boy.  Randy is killed a
moment later, and his verbal outburst is his final blaze of glory.  His
smart-ass attitude makes him a marginally more deserving candidate for
death than the others, but he also hits the killer's psychological weak
spot.  It's like Dennis Hopper goading Christopher Walken into killing
him in TRUE ROMANCE.  Randy's victory is only a moral one (and, like
most moral victories, an empty one), but he does what no one else in the
two movies manages to do.  Sidney and Gale stop the killers, but only
Randy makes him lose control.  It's one moment where the SCREAM
franchise touches greatness.

Title
Review for Wag the Dog (1997)
Director Barry Levinson shot WAG THE DOG in 29 days, which was smart
strategy.  The film doesn't feel slapped together, but captures the
feverish pace of a presidential campaign's waning days.  Levinson's 
filmmaking hasn't had this much energy since his early career.  He
seemed to be in an irreversible decline, turning out dreck like
DISCLOSURE and SLEEPERS.  But his artistic talents have only been
hibernating.  With his fellow-travelling scriptwriter Paul Attanasio, he
has been an unseen power behind some of the decade's most thoughtful
movies (QUIZ SHOW, DONNIE BRASCO) as well as one of TV's best shows 
("Homicide: Life on the Street").  WAG THE DOG reveals that he has been
a guerrilla filmmaker all along.
When the President is caught in a sex scandal shortly before an
election, his aide Winifred Ames (Anne Heche) hires political consultant
Conrad Brean (Robert De Niro), who brings in Hollywood producer Stanley
Motss (Dustin Hoffman).  Their idea is to divert attention from the
President's misbehavior by faking a war between the U.S. and Albania.
Most of this movie's juice comes from the teaming of De Niro and
Hoffman, who both turn in their best work in years.  De Niro knows that
the other part's the showboat, so he plays the straight man to great 
effect.  His cool, low-key style hides an unflappable authority that
makes him the rock amid the campaign's welter of activity.
Hoffman's performance, though, is the real marvel.  Stanley Motss is a
natural at politics: he's always responding to the latest crisis with a
jolly "This is nothing!"  Hoffman gives us an egomaniac who's seen 
everything, but also homes in on the relish with which the movie
producer does his job.  Motss is no artist, but he's a creative genius
of a hasty, improvisatory sort who's always bubbling over with ideas.  I
wish we could have seen the kind of movies he makes - is he Saul Zaentz,
Harvey Weinstein, or Jerry Bruckheimer?  (My guess is the latter.)  This
is the most compelling portrait of a Hollywood suit since Tim Robbins's
Griffin Mill in THE PLAYER.  They may both be soulless money men with a
deep contempt for audiences, but Motss is far more likeable than the
paranoid, humorless Mill.
The problem is the movie shares his contempt.  It assumes unthinking,
monolithic response from the people and the media.  WAG THE DOG would
have been more interesting exploring the ways in which different
segments of the culture react to media hype.  It's uncharacteristic of
writer David Mamet to be so shallow (he shares script credit with Hilary
Henkin, but there's some dispute as to her contribution, and this movie
plays as a Mamet script anyway).  The movie's cynicism is cheap,
arrogant, and almost succeeds in being a real turn-off, especially at
the end, when they try to create a war hero out of a psychotic rapist
(Woody Harrelson).  It could have worked if the movie had had some of
the sheer comic lunacy of DUCK SOUP or DR. STRANGELOVE to leaven
things.  The Coen brothers could have done that, but it isn't Mamet and
Levinson's game.
Heche's character is a third wheel (the usual situation for a woman in a
Mamet production).  Ames's purpose in the story is to fret when the
situation gets tense and then gape at the old pros' public-relations
wizardry, but Heche makes both states of mind watchably funny.  Willie
Nelson and Jay Leno are great as a drug-addled folk balladeer and a
standup comic who tells bad jokes, respectively.  And William H. Macy 
gives the movie a jolt as a starchy CIA agent who knows what's going
down ("When the fit hits the shan, someone's going to have to stay after
school," he chirps).  WAG THE DOG is too glib to be a great political
satire, but it's a sign that Barry Levinson hasn't lost his filmmaking
skills.
