Authors
Cindy Bale
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Meet Joe Black (1998)
This review is adapted from my comments to the Internet Movie Database
(www.imdb.com) on November 13, 1998.
"Meet Joe Black" is well written, gently paced, very funny and very touching
with tremendous performances from Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani
and Brad Pitt.
Yes, I said Brad Pitt gave a tremendous performance as Death-Joe
Black/Young-Man-in-Coffee-Shop.  He plays the part of Death using Brad Pitt's
classic body as if he has never been in a human body before.   As an actor
playing this role, Brad Pitt chose to walk stiffly with virtually no mannerisms
as if he were a spirit (`Death') inhabiting an unknown organism (a human body).
I enjoyed watching him act out the consequences of this decision.  He is also
very funny throughout the movie acting in ways unlike any of the other
characters.  He especially stands out from the crowd in the boardroom scenes.
He is amazing in scenes with a hospital patient who has recognized him for what
he is.  I enjoyed his Jamaican accent.
Anthony Hopkins is marvelous as William Parish, head of Parrish
Communications.   Parrish finds out a few days before his 65th birthday that
Death will take him as soon as Death is done experiencing life on earth.  He
knows the penalty for arguing the Death-Joe Black is instant death,
and yet he stays true to himself to the end.   This is seemingly casual
performance by Hopkins is very strong.  His heart attack sequence early in
the movie is gut wrenching.  He is tender with his daughters, decisive with his
board of directors and mystified by his relationship with Death.
Claire Forlani is a find as Parrish's favorite daughter.  There is a cool,
reluctant and yet trusting chemistry between her character, Susan, and
Joe Black.  Their body language is enhanced by close camera work in tender, slow
moving, emotion-filled scenes.
The movie is long.  I looked forward to spending 174 minutes with Brad Pitt.
But I hated his last movie with Anthony Hopkins ("Legends of the Fall") so was
instantly wary when I heard about the running length.  Watching the film, I
loved the care the directory takes with each scene, each line of dialogue, each
nuanced use of the word "yes".  The script is excellent.  The ending was very
satisfying.  The film requires thought from the moviegoer.  Some folks may not
get the nuances, and may miss one of Brad Pitt and Anthony Hopkins best movies.
I hereby nominate Claire Forlani for best supporting actress.
There was one thing I didn't like about the movie.   Brad Pitt's makeup looked
heavy and dark in several scenes, especially in the hospital.   I kept wondering
what was being covered up.
Summary:  9.5 on a scale of 1 (lowest) to 10 (highest).
Comments may be sent to cbale@flash.net.

Title
Review for I Love Trouble (1994)
Starring Julia Roberts and Nick Nolte.
     I tried hard not like this movie without succeeding.  It contains
parts of BRINGING UP BABY, any Hepburn/Tracy film, part of the plot of
WAR GAMES, Cary Grant and Rosalind Russell in HIS GIRL FRIDAY, elevator
shaft action, train action, and murder.  It is cute, funny, suspenseful
(a little bit), sexy (a little bit).  One of the bad guys was a
surprise.  The pace is fast enough, there are some "action" scenes.  I
think that this is a reasonable family summer movie for families with
older kids who have already seen MAVERICK.
     Julia Roberts and Nick Nolte are fine separately and together.  I
really identified with the Julia Roberts character (wishful thinking, I
know!), but I do have better hair!  Her hair, a very dull dark brown,
has no color.  She could use some highlights.   They both do fine with
their roles:  he's a bored columnist with the Chicago Chronicle and
she's a hotshot "cub" reporter with the Chicago Globe.  They have great
fun trying to out scoop each other to solve one case throughout this
movie.  I like the one story focus.
     Other actors include Charles Martin Smith as Roberts' boss,
Olympia Dukakis as Nolte's coworker, Nora Dunn also with the Chronicle,
and Marsha Mason as a congresswoman.
     Basically this movie is reasonably fun.  There is a serious
mystery to solve, and I enjoyed following a fun couple solving the
mystery.  It is a pleasant change of pace from movies that take
themselves seriously.  I do give successful comedy high marks.

Title
Review for Wyatt Earp (1994)
     WYATT EARP details thirty-five years in the life of same from
around 1865 to 1900.  After seeing the movie SPEED twice recently, I
kept thinking that I was seeing Wyatt's life pass before my eyes in
real time.  This movie was boring, slow, boring, and slow.  There were
a few scenes that tried to be great scenes that tried too hard and just
fell flat.
     The script happily woman-bashes but also tries to sound like an
80s movie.  They cannot have it both ways.  "I now pronounce you
husband and wife."  Sure, they said that in the 1800s.
"Entrepreneur."  Sure.  Every bit of male-ego-stroking dialogue that
Wyatt's third wife speaks to him made me sick to listen to it.  "Oh,
the script was written by two men?"  "No kidding!"
     The movie is torture to sit through.  The scenery is boring.  The
fades were either awkward or cliche or to self important.  Can you say
poor editing?
     Everyone looks ugly in this movie.  When you shoot people from
under their chins, they look like they have double chins.  Kevin
Costner has never looked worse.  He should sue.  He looks like he
gained the 43 pounds that Dennis Quaid lost.
     Dennis Quaid is marvelous.  If you have to see this movie just for
his performance, go into the theatre at the movie's halfway mark.  Doc
Holliday (Quaid's character) shows up at about the 90-minute mark.
     Gene Hackman is very good.  Is he in the credits?  I don't
remember seeing his name.
Mare Winningham makes the best of a small role as Wyatt's second wife.
Annabeth Gish is good as Wyatt's first wife.  I though that Jamie Gertz
played Wyatt's third wife, but I later heard that her name is Joanna
Going.  She looks great but her dialogue sucks.  She also seems way to
young for Costner.  Costner seems way to old for 90% of this movie.  In
his first scene he is supposed to be about 19 years old.  Yeah, right.
Catherine O'Hara and JoBeth Williams are always good and totally wasted
here.
     This is the worst movie that I have seen in years.  THE LAST
ACTION HERO was better that this.  Go see MAVERICK if you want to see a
Western.
Rating:  1 out of 10 bullets for Dennis Quaid's performance only.
