Authors
sun!megatest!jao (John Oswalt)
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Last of the Mohicans, The (1992)
2 hours, R (violence)
Writers: Michael Mann, Christopher Crowe
Director: Michael Mann
Cast: Daniel Day-Lewis, Madeleine Stowe, Wes Studi, Steven Waddington,
      Jodhi May, Eric Schweig
     About twenty years ago I saw the Masterpiece Theatre series "The
Last Of The Mohicans," and loved it.  I went straight to the library and
read the book.  The current movie, which is a much looser adaptation of
James Fenimore Cooper's 1826 novel, suffers in comparison both to the
book, and to the PBS series.  (Or at least to my twenty-year-old
memories of them.)
     However, THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS, 1992 style, is not all that
bad.  It is generally entertaining, and contains some beautiful scenery.
After the movie, my companion, having watched two hours of action set in
verdant forests with waterfalls at every turn, figured that the movie
was filmed in Hawaii or New Zealand.  Actually, it was filmed in North
Carolina.  It is good to know that there are such beautiful places left.
I am afraid that the West Coaster's view of the East coast is of
factories, endless cities, and acid rain denuded forests.
        I have a lot of quibbles with the movie.  The plot is very 
predictable.  When you see a party of red-coats marching through a
clearing in the forest, you just know that some Indians are going to
massacre them, as the European's ritualized formation fighting is
hopelessly outclassed by the guerrilla tactics of the Indians.  Just as
certainly, you know that the main characters will miraculously be
spared.
     I found myself frowning at a lot of the dialogue, which is full of
snappy one-liner comebacks common in today's films.  This is fine for
Dirty Harry, but is the antithesis of Cooper's flowery, wordy style.
(The San Jose Mercury News reviewer, Glenn Lovell, whom I generally
respect, approved of this change.  I suspect that does not have the fond
memories that I have of James Fenimore Cooper's books.  He describes the
book THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS as one which "many of us waded through in
high school and college.")
     It is amazing how clean the main characters' clothes and hair
remain considering all that they go through.  Natty Bumppo always has a
gun ready when he needs it, but we never see him reload.  The women in
the movie don't do much besides cower and swoon.  The fight scenes, of
which there are plenty, are toned down to preserve the R rating.  There
are scenes in which dozens of people get tomahawked, but no guts and
very little blood is shown.  Most of the movie takes place sneaking
around in the dense forest, or at night, or both, and things are a
little hard to see.
     This brings up a pet peeve of mine.  I have seen many Technicolor
movies made in the 30's, 40's, and 50's, and the color in them is far
superior to that in the movies made today.  I recently saw a restored
print of LEAVE HER TO HEAVEN, which was made in Technicolor in 1945.
When I compare that movie, which contains a lot of upstate New York
scenery, with this one, I just shake my head.  Why, Hollywood, did you
abandon a process which produces such beautiful true-to-life colors, for
the washed-out look of today?  With all the millions spent on movie
production you would think that they could use good film.
     However, these are all only quibbles, and considering the current
movie-making conventions and context, THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS is
pretty good.  It even overcomes a few trends.  It is an action picture
with no car chases.  Despite PC, the main bad guy is an American Indian.
There are no product placements.

Title
Review for Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992)
2 hours, 10 min., R (violence, nudity, adult situations)
Director: David Lynch
Cast: Sheryl Lee, Ray Wise, Kyle MacLachlan, Moira Kelly, plus various
      famous people in cameos.
     TWIN PEAKS: FIRE WALK WITH ME is a terrible movie.  I was quite
fond of the television series, but this movie has none its charm I
always suspected that all the mysterious little phrases (e.g., "the owls
are not what they seem") and weird symbolic objects in the series didn't
mean much, but I didn't care because there were so many great characters
to watch.  The subplots were interesting.
     In the movie, there are no subplots.  It is the story of how Laura
Palmer died, and we already know how she died.  The bulk of the movie
consists of Laura Palmer acting weird, crying, snorting cocaine, running
around with her good boyfriend James and her bad boyfriend Bobby, and
turning into a prostitute.  Her friend Donna tries to stop her by going
along with her.  Has David Lynch jumped on the war-on-drugs bandwagon?
     If this were done well, depicting the gradual degradation of
Laura's life due to drug use, the pressures of adolescence, and living
with a nutty father, and showing the parallel development of the evil
forces which eventually kill her, TWIN PEAKS: FWTM could have been a good
movie.  A lot of Stephen King's best stuff is like that.  But there is
no character development.  The scenes follow each other in no logical
order.  Mix them up and you would have the same movie.  Laura acts
pained.  Her father, Leland, acts possessed.  Laura gets over it and
seems okay but meek.  Leland smiles and seems ashamed of his outburst.
Laura hangs out with the wrong crowd.  Shea cries a lot, a weird kid
jumps around in a mask, there is a lot of meaningless, empty symbolism,
etc, etc, and when it becomes time for the movie to end Laura dies.  And
about that title: "Fire Walk With Me."  It comes from an utterance by
Laura in one of here pained periods.  She says, slowly, as if each word
were loaded with significance, "Fire ... Walk ... With ... Me."  It
means nothing.  She could just as well have said "Elvis ... Ate ...
My ... Left ... Foot," and then the title would be "TWIN PEAKS: ELVIS
ATE MY LEFT FOOT."
     Many of the characters from the television series put in an
appearance: the Log Lady, the One-Armed Man, the Midget, the folks at
the diner with the damned good coffee, the bellowing Gordon Cole (played
by Lynch himself), and the young man who never leaves his house.  But
they contribute nothing.  They are in the movie just so we can point at
them and say "look, there's so and so."  Remove them and you have the
same movie.  David Bowie walks on for no apparent reason other than to
be able to advertise that he is in the movie.  I doubt that he spent
more than five minutes on the set.
     Even special agent Dale Cooper, played by Kyle MacLachlan, doesn't
look like he belongs here.  His role is more than the walk-on that the
others I mentioned are, but his part makes no sense, and could easily
have been left out.  It should have been.
    The first reel or so of the movie has some new FBI agents
investigating the murder of Teresa Banks a year before Laura Palmer's.
This gives them a chance to insert Kieffer Sutherland and Harry Dean
Stanton.  But then, abruptly, the words "One Year Later" appear, the
familiar "Twin Peaks" theme music wells up, and all that early stuff is
forgotten, except for the characteristic empty symbolism of a ring.
    What's good about the movie?  Well, as somebody said, "No movie with
Harry Dean Stanton in it is all bad."  He does fine as a trailer park
manager.  In fact, all the performances are good, considering what they
had to work with.  The script is really, really bad.
     We have the usual David Lynch offbeat camera angles and scene
cutting.  When Laura and Donna walk out of her house, the camera follows
them to the door.  One naturally expects a quick cut to them walking
down the front steps.  But the camera stays in the empty room a couple
of beats longer than normal, just long enough for you to get a sense of
unease, of other-worldness, without really knowing why, before cutting
to the outside shot.  I like this sort of thing, but I would rather the
movie was interesting enough so that I could just experience their
effect, and not be reduced by boredom to watching for them.
     Rainier Ale (brewed in Seattle, but I think they've been bought by
Miller or one of the other big brewers) is very visible in one scene.  I
doubt that they paid any product placement money for this.  If I were
president of Rainier Brewing, I would have paid to keep my logo out of
this movie.
     I visited Snoqualmie a couple of months ago to ride the historic
train (one of my hobbies), and it was fun to look for places I
recognized.  Most scenes could have been anywhere, though.
     I rate it 3 on the 0-10 scale, which to me means "Poor.  Not
totally hopeless.  I wouldn't have seen had I known more about it."
Probably about a -2 on the Mark Leeper -4 to +4 scale.  You don't have
to worry about paying full price, because this movie won't last long in
the theater.
