Authors
Kent Johnson
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Lake Placid (1999)
Of all the films in which TV shows have graduated to the big screen,
this left-handed spinoff of ALLY McBEAL, which might be better entitled
ALLY GOES TO THE LAKE, has to be the oddest.  The film is written by
ALLY McBEAL writer/producer David Kelley and the premise is, What would
happen if Ally, that neurotic, abrasive city girl (here a paleontologist
rather than a lawyer and named Kelly [sounds like "Ally" and is also the
writer's last name...]) had to camp out in the woods and interact with
the local sherrif, game warden and an eccentric millionaire mythology
professor?  Kelly is played by Bridget Fonda, who acts like and is
costumed to look like Ally McBeal.  While Bridget was very good and very
sexy, one wonders why the part wasn't played by Callista Flockhart.
(The possible answer is that Fonda was Kelley's first choice for the
Ally McBeal TV series, but she turned it down in order to stick with
feature films, so this was his chance to have her play the role.)
Oliver Platt (who was Kelley's first choice for the lead in THE
PRACTICE, but also turned it down to stick with feature films) is
excellent as the eccentric millionaire mythology professor and Brendan
Gleeson (I WENT DOWN, THE GENERAL) and Bill Pullman are very good as,
respectively, the sheriff and the game warden.
LAKE PLACID reminds me of the Dashiell Hammet novel THE THIN MAN, in
that while ostensibly a mystery novel, the mystery is actually the least
interesting part of the book.  The interaction between the characters
Nick and Nora is the interesting part and the mystery actually
interrupts it -- yet, the mystery is the hook that gets the reader to
pick up the novel in the first place.
In LAKE PLACID, ostensibly a monster movie, the interesting part is the
witty sniping between the four disparate main characters.  The dialogue
is artificial and not very believable, but it's clever, original and
hilarious.  The crocodile hunt, the excuse for these characters to be
together in the first place and the hook that gets the viewer into the
theatre, is actually the least interesting part of the film.  In fact,
once the characters know what they're up against, it's obvious that the
croc is outmatched unless the characters behave stupidly.  The beginning
and particularly the middle of the film, the parts with the most
character conflict, are the most entertaining.  The film cools down
rapidly in the last third when it has to concentrate on the croc hunt
and character reconciliation.  Since it's only OK as a monster movie,
some viewers may be disappointed, but those who can appreciate witty,
well-written comedy will enjoy it tremendously.
Sample dialog (paraphrased from memory):
[The professor is setting traps which the local sheriff objects to]
Professor [yelling]:
"These traps might just save your life and you should be concerned about
saving your life because it will give you that much more time to fuck
your sister!"
Note:  The characters don't know what they're up against until the
middle of the film and the theatrical trailers were similarly designed
to give no hint of what the monster might be.  The film might have been
more effective if viewers had gone in without that knowledge, but of
course the two-month barrage of giant croc TV ads (which the characters
in the film somehow incredibly managed to miss) spoiled any chance of
that.
David Kelley's next projects are the movie MYSTERY, ALASKA and the
private eye TV series SNOOPS, starring Gina Gershon.

Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
Well, I did know better, but I was curious, went anyway and I got what I
deserved -- the reaffirmation that I'm not eighteen any more.
For adults, while there are funny moments in this film about four high
school guys who vow to end their virginity before their impending
graduation in three weeks, overall the jokes and dialog are not sharp or
clever enough and the movie just rates an OK.
But this isn't a movie for adults.  It's a comedy for teenagers and as
such, it's a good one.  Teens can see and identify with their real
non-idealized selves up there on the screen and will find the
over-obvious, gross, embarrassing and sexual humor to be hilarious.  The
dialog is dumb, but realistic, since real teens aren't exactly fountains
of wit.  And contrary to most teen films, the six male characters don't
break down into simplistic good and bad guys -- they're all pretty much
clueless dweebs (which certainly echoes my high school experience) and
the worst ones are jerks, but those can still be part of your social
circle.
The film's R rating is one of those ironies that occurs frequently in
the American censorship system -- it makes it difficult for a large
portion of the film's target audience to actually see the film.  (It's
not exactly a film you'd enjoy watching with your Mom.)  Perhaps it will
reach its intended audience on video.
One scene that adults *can* totally enjoy is when Alyson Hannigan
(Willow from the TV series BUFFY, THE VAMPIRE SLAYER), who plays a
mousy, motormouth band dweeb constantly telling boring stories about
band camp, suddenly does a 180-degree turn and says to her prom date
"And then there was the time I stuck a flute in my pussy."  As her date
spurts out his beer, she tells him that band camp is really more of a
sex ed camp.  Then she says something like "Are we going to fuck soon?
I'm getting bored."  In the bedroom, she reveals she chose him for the
prom simply because he was a Sure Thing.  Now dominantly aggressive,
riding on top of him, she yells "What's my name?" slaps him and shouts
"Say my name, bitch!"
Another good one is when one girl is quizzing another about her lack of
orgasmic experience and says "Not even a manually-assisted one?  You
mean you've never double-clicked your mouse?"
Highly recommended for teenagers (particularly males).
Worth a video rental for adult Willow fans.
May or may not be worth a video rental for other adults.

Title
Review for Perfect Blue (1997/I)
This is an animated murder mystery suspense thriller from Japan about an
idol singer trying to become a serious actress.  The last third is so
wonderfully surreal that it seems an inconclusive "which world is real?"
ending is inevitable (but it isn't).  PERFECT BLUE is excellently
written and executed and except for one thing, would be moody,
suspenseful and shocking -- all the virtues of a good mystery film
combined with the beauty and poetry of an animated film.
The fact that PERFECT BLUE is *opening* at the dinky Opera Plaza theatre
(usually reserved for second-run art films) tells you how marginal this
release is, so it's great that it made it into the theatres at all.
Unfortunately, instead of being subtitled, the film has been dubbed in
English and although it's not that bad for an English dubbing effort, at
every turn the dubbing undermines the effectiveness of the film.  The
voices don't sound right, the dialogue is awkward because it was
rewritten to match the animated mouth movements and Japanese concepts
are slaughtered in the Americanized dialog.
It's disturbing to watch a movie which you constantly have to mentally
filter ("Well, would have been a good scene if it was subtitled...),
especially since Japanese voice-acting is generally really good and adds
a lot to the animated films.  I don't feel like I'll have really seen
the film until I see a subtitled version.

Title
Review for Red River Valley (1999)
This is the story of the British attempt to conquer Tibet in order to
invade China, and although they had superior technology and treachery on
their side, how they were defeated by the honest, simple Tibetans.
Although on the surface it has its heart in the right place, the film
feels like Chinese propaganda in defense of their occupation of Tibet
and is so relentlessly corny and unconvincing that the last half was
pure torture.  All the voices are badly dubbed (in Mandarin and
English), lending even more of a feeling of falseness to the film.  The
only pluses are some impressive scenery and Ning Jing as the chieftain's
daughter (a self-proclaimed goddess), who is beautiful, capricious and
beguiling.
Evaluation:  Run Away or show it at an MST3K party.

Title
Review for Deep Blue Sea (1999)
Tagline:  "You'll believe a shark can suck."
DEEP BLUE SEA is a monster movie about sharks whose brain size and
intelligence are accidentally quintupled by genetic experiments (by
those darn do-gooder scientists who just won't leave well enough alone)
terrorizing an ocean research facility.
The film has great visuals, great underwater photography, great sets,
reasonably convincing animatronic sharks, a good soundtrack, and a lead
actress (Saffron Burrows) with a gorgeous face and a deliciously throaty
British accent.  The filming must have must physically grueling for the
actors and enough money seems to have been spent to support a small
country for a year (not to mention enough water to irrigate all their
crops).
Unfortunately, all of this is in support of an incredibly stupid story.
First there are the standard Hollywood flaws:  The plot is completely
lacking in logic, the characters have no depth and behave stupidly in
order to provide suspense and, the most disappointing for a movie about
smart sharks, the sharks are mere plot devices rather than characters,
possessed of incredible speed, unlikely physical abilities and
supernatural knowledge when convenient to generate suspense, mayhem and
gotchas, but suddenly lacking all these qualities when they're
inconvenient for the characters' survival.
On top of this, the film has several features that push it over into the
"actively offensive" category:
1)  An annoying, heavy-handed and insincere Christian subtext, seemingly
designed to deflect censorship groups who might otherwise protest the
film's violence.
2)  A heavy-handed and insincere pro-black stance.
3)  A heavy-handed anti-genetics-research message.
4)  And, in keeping with its appease-the-censorship-groups policy, a
near-complete lack of the female body.  (A difficult feat for a film
with beautiful women and this much water -- normally the province of
bikinis, wet t-shirts and form-fitting scuba suits.  In fact we see very
little of the actresses other than their faces.)
The film seems to have been custom-designed for censorship groups with
the intelligence of the average shark.  I hope they enjoy it , since no
one else will.
Not worth renting on video either, since the visuals are the film's only
virtue and won't be that impressive on the small screen.

Title
Review for Stir of Echoes (1999)
Hmmm...  Another good movie about a kid seeing ghosts, with a screenplay
written by the director.  Must be that Y2K bug...  Whatever the cause,
this trend of films written and directed by the same person seems to be
a bright ray of hope in current the murk of Hollywood.  The singleness
of vision seems to eliminate the repetitive cliches and allow a
genuinely good film to be created.
While I haven't read the 1958 novel by Richard Matheson that director
David Koepp's screenplay is based on, A STIR OF ECHOES feels like the
perfect on-screen representation of a Matheson novel, duplicating both
his strengths and weaknesses -- that is, a very well-executed story with
an overly-simple plotline.  You know what's going on long before the
characters do and are impatiently waiting for them to figure it out,
however, the film is so well-made that you don't mind knowing what's
going to happen and it's a pleasure to watch it play it out.
As far as its supernatural component goes, the movie has great
atmosphere, but is spooky  rather than scary -- like THE SIXTH SENSE,
it's a ghost story, not a horror movie.  The film makes complicated and
interesting use of the audio track to keep you confused and off-balance,
has good gotchas, and uses its CGI in restrained and effective ways.
Note that the baby-sitter is reading Matheson's THE SHRINKING MAN.
A very enjoyable film, with a lot of humor and little surprises.

Title
Review for Sixth Sense, The (1999)
THE SIXTH SENSE
USA, 1999
Written and directed by M. Night Shyamalan
Starring Bruce Willis, Haley Joel Osment, Toni Collette, Olivia Williams
And to think I saw it on Mulberry Street -- er,  at the cineplex!
This is an incredible film, which hit me harder than any film I've seen
this year.  Definitely not something I expected from Hollywood.
THE SIXTH SENSE is a supernatural variation on the story of the
psychiatrist called in to examine a troubled child, who discovers that
the child is hiding some terrible knowledge.  It's not a horror movie,
but rather a suspense film/ghost story on the surface and an emotional
tearjerker about personal redemption underneath.
Horror fans won't be disappointed, however, as the mood and atmosphere
are great and the moments of shock, though few and brief, have
tremendous impact.  Unlike some films which are spoiled by ad campaigns
that give away too much of the plot, knowing what's going to happen in
THE SIXTH SENSE doesn't hurt it at all -- in fact it heightens the
suspense.
The film is beautifully, sensitively and subtly made.  It achieves the
filmic ideal of combining the entertainment value of a Hollywood film
with the vision and quality of an art film.  Contrary to post-Speilberg
filmmaking trends, it assumes its audience is *intelligent* and the
entire film, moment by moment, is a sheer pleasure to experience.  It
does everything right, without a single a false or fumbled step and the
end of the film is a huge cathartic release with a cleansing and healing
after-effect.
The film has great visuals which rather than being a self-conscious end
in themselves are part of the story-telling as a whole and a lot of
information is conveyed visually rather than verbally.  The dialog is
sparse and when used is meaningful and effective.
An example of one of the film's pleasant visual touches (and its belief
in the intelligence of its audience) is the lock of bleached hair that
denotes supernatural powers, visible on two of the characters in the
film.  The camera points it out, but it's never mentioned otherwise.  If
you notice and understand it, it's a little bonus that adds to your
enjoyment of the film, but it doesn't hurt it if you don't.
Another example of visual excellence is when a sunrise is viewed in
time-lapse photography entirely through the reflection of light on a
statue, making the coming of day seem like an unbearably spooky event.
The soundtrack is also very good and is used very effectively as an
integral part of the story-telling.
The acting in the film is uniformly excellent.  Haley Joel Osment, who
plays the boy Cole, is the keystone of the film.  Even with all its
other virtues, the film wouldn't have worked as well as it does without
someone of his ability in this role.  I don't know if a child actor has
ever won an Academy Award, but Osment definitely deserves one.  I was
also intrigued by the fact that Olivia Williams, who plays the
psychiatrist's wife, bears a slight resemblance to Chinese film actress
Joey Wong (Wong Jo Yin).
A wonderfully perfect film.  My Highest Recommendation.
[Because of the strong story, the film will still be good on video, but
I recommend seeing it in the theatre for maximum impact.]

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
All the hype and its resultant backlash have destroyed the conditions
for the kind of pleasant surprise that caused initial reviewers to rave
about this film, but the idea is clever (the film is supposedly found
footage taken by a missing film crew that was investigating the legend
of the Blair Witch) and the execution is reasonably good.
I felt the atmosphere would have benefited from an inclusion of the
town's history, which I hear is what the "The Mythology of the Blair
Witch" program on the SCI-FI Channel is about, but simply showing a
chronology at the beginning of the film (which you can see on-line at
http://www.blairwitch.com/mythology.html ) would have intensified the
mood.  (You can simulate the effect by printing out the chronology and
reading it while waiting in line or sitting inside the theatre so it's
fresh in your mind when the film begins.)
I found the first half of the film better than I expected and my
interest was sustained by the touches of humor, mundane details of the
trip and the banter between the three principals.  In the second half,
since the story was limited by the movie's structure and the filmmaker's
budget, it was obvious there was only so much that could happen and I
started to get a little bored, a little claustrophobic (they're going
around in circles in the same featureless patch of woods) and annoyed by
the characters' constant bickering.  The final shot (or second to final
shot, if you will) *was* rather chilling and while the film didn't
actually scare me, my nerves were a little tense when I left the
theatre.  The film may play back better in your head than it does on the
screen as your imagination edits out the weak parts and intensifies the
creepy ones.
A nice effort for a small film and Worth Seeing.  (Just don't expect to
see "the scariest film ever made.")
[Note 1:  If you're trying to see the film at the Bridge in San
Francisco, get your tickets days in advance.  I had no problem getting
tickets to the Thursday 5:30 show an hour in advance, but the 7:40 and
9:50 shows were already sold out for both that night *and* the next
night .  Later that night I happened to pass the theatre and there was a
huge line for the midnight show -- on a weeknight!  As with any popular
movie in San Francisco, even after you have tickets, get there an hour
in advance in order to get a good seat.)
[Note 2:  If you sit too close to the screen, as I was tipped off by a
friend, the hand-held nature of the photography may make you dizzy and
nauseous.  I was quite a ways back and still had to close my eyes
frequently -- for reasons other than fright!]

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
"Eyes Wide Shut" also has a wonderful cast. Tom Cruise eschews his trademark
boyish smile (except for the opening scenes) for long stares usually at a low
angle (A Kubrick motif). His slow descent into anger is thrilling to watch, and
one of his most quixotic moments of his career is when he confronts his friend
Ziegler and discovers the true nature behind his own adventurous and nocturnal
activities. 
Nicole Kidman has become a first-rate actress, and her mood swings are
something to behold. I also liked her laughing fit at Bill's remarks that he
would not sleep with his patients - when was the last time that a character
laughed at Tom Cruise? Her final moment of realization about their marriage is
stunning - this woman should be nominated for an Oscar. 
Also worth mentioning is Sydney Pollack's quietly decadent millionaire
character Ziegler - he is more fierce and yet just as restrained as he was in
"Tootsie" or "Husbands and Wives." Vinessa Shaw displays a sweetness and
sexiness not often seen on the silver screen, and she plays a prostitute! Rade
Serbedzija ("Before the Rain") has one of the sole moments of comic relief as
the owner of the Rainbow, a costume shop, who asks the good doctor for advice
about his balding spot. Todd Field is also engaging as the piano player Nick
Nightingale who plays blindfolded at some musical events. 
If I have one or two gripes about Kubrick's long, difficult and splendid film,
it is the abrupt ending and the inclusion of a character that would have been
better omitted or replaced by a different actor. The ending is optimistic (a
rarity in any of his films) but somehow feels rushed. Still, this is among the
late master's finest films, preferable to the pretensions of "The Shining" or
"Full Metal Jacket." "Eyes Wide Shut" easily stands among such giants as "A
Clockwork Orange," "Paths of Glory" or "2001." It is a bizarre, strangely
moving and enlightening film guaranteed to provoke as much controversy as
anything he's ever done. Stanley, you may be gone, but we are glad you came
back with one of the best films of your career.
For more reviews, check out JERRY AT THE MOVIES at
http://buffs.moviething.com/buffs/faust/
E-mail me with questions, comments, concerns or complaints at Faust667@aol.com
or jerry@movieluver.com
