Authors
Daniel Saunders
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Clara Hakedosha (1996)
      There hasn't been a wakeup call this powerful since Trainspotting.
Saint Clara is a stunning, supercharged Israeli film about the
apocalypse and the world of young people. Let me write about my
reactions from the beginning.
      I went to see this at Cinecenta, my city's sole remaining
alternative movie theatre, and it was a real adventure. I didn't know
hardly anything about it. The theatre was darkened, and these
backwards hebrew characters come up on the screen. If you were watching
my face you would have seen a look somewhere between bemusement and
apprehension ("What have I got myself in for?"). The title comes up,
wiping from the right to the left.  Then the movie begins. You would
have seen my expression change to puzzlement, then amusement, then
slack-jawed admiration.
      It starts with a long backwards tracking shot down a highschool
corridor. Two boys, one with a shaven head and the other with long dirty
blond hair are running to class in slow motion, banging their bags on
the lockers they pass. There's some amazing music on the soundtrack -
rock and roll with what sounds like seagull cries overlaying it. In
class, the teacher, a bespectacled inneffectual looking man, and the
principal, who looks more like a mobster named Vito, are berating the
class for a "conspiracy": every single student got 100% on the recent
math test. These two frustrated staff members are determined to find an
answer. Through a series of hilarious interrogations, one of the movies
themes is revealed: the school as battleground, a la "If...". The real
answer is that one student, a shy Russian girl named Clara, can foretell
the future, and discover which questions out of the 1000 question book
will be asked.
      From that starting point, the movie moves off in many unexpected
and wonderful directions. Much of it is about the two boys at the
beginning, the skinhead and Tikken, two *extremely* troubled youths.
They take pills, smash lots of things, and burn the school's mascot, a
wooden statue of Israeli's woman President. Yet they turn out to be the
main characters. Meanwhile things are getting complicated for Clara,
with Tikken's father asking her for lottery numbers and the principal
trying to recruit her to be on their side.
      Anyways, as someone once said, writing about film is like dancing
about architecture. This is one movie you just have to see. There are
countless unforgetable images, amazing juvenile performances, and too
many effortlessly stylish and surrealistic touches to even begin to
mention here. There isn't a single character who isn't fascinating, not
a single moment where the creator's imagination flags. And the
soundtrack just has to be heard to be believed. Do what you have to to
see this movie.
-- 
Daniel Saunders, roving movie critic of no fixed address
"If god had meant us to look inward, maybe she or he  would have given
us completely swivelling eyeballs.  I think it's pretty easy to spend
far too much time thinking about yourself." Robyn Hitchcock 

Title
Review for Shichinin no samurai (1954)
     A week or two ago I had a chance to see my all-time favourite movie,
The Seven Samurai, for the fourth time, in a revival movie theatre.
Directed and written by Akira Kurosawa, it is the simple story of a tiny
farming village on the edge of starvation, threatened by a band of forty
brigands who intend to attack and steal everything once the grain has been
harvested. One of the farmers overhears their plans, and so the village
has time to prepare to fight back. On the advice of Granddad, the local
patriarch, they resolve to hire samurai, but they are so poor they can
only afford samurai willing to work for three meagre meals of rice a day
(while the farmers subsist on millet), so they end up with a rather motley
bunch. Nevertheless, they are victorious in their struggle against the
bandits. 
     An adventurous friend came along with me, somehow finding the
strength to relinquish exam preparation for the three hours and 42 minutes
it takes to watch the uncut version of the film. While he was waiting for
me, he managed to discover that the two women sitting behind us had seen
it six times before! Although it was released in 1954, in Japan, and was
filmed in black and white, it still has the power to hold a jaded North
American movie-goer's attention and interest to the last minute, whether
they're seeing it for the first time or the seventh time. To be sure there
are obstacles to enjoying it, such as the subtitles, extreme length, and
especially Japanese character names which are a challenge to remember.
Consequently once I've mentioned a character in this essay, I will
thereafter provide a one or two word reminder in brackets after the
character name. Despite all this, it remains rich and spectacular
entertainment. Why do I like it so well?
     First of all it has a wonderful set of characters. They seem like
real people you've known all your life, and you care deeply about what
happens to them. Each of the seven warrior characters is fascinating.
There's Kambei, the wise old bald-headed veteran of many wars, all of
them, he says, losing ones. There's Katsushiro, his innocent young student
who experiences both combat and romance for the first time during the
movie. Then there is Kyuzo, the grizzled, silent, highly skilled
swordsman, an enigma to the end. Most intriguing of all is Kikuchiyo, the
odd one out. Unforgettably played by Toshiro Mifune, Kurosawa's favourite
actor, Kikuchiyo is a mad-dog, impulsive, irresponsible wanna-be samurai;
he starts off tagging along behind the other six, and ends up fighting
bravely and sacrificing his life. There are also a number of memorable
farmer charactersManzo, an overprotective father who forcibly cuts his
daughter's hair when he hears samurai are coming, and Rikichi, who was
forced to hand his wife over to the bandits last time they came by and
still feels crippled by guilt. You feel sorry to leave these characters
behind when the movie's over.
     What makes the film really work despite its lengthy running time is
its strong structure. Each step of the way the action has a clear
direction. The first major section has the party of four farmers in the
big city, looking for cheap and strong samurai. They are almost ready to
give up when they meet Kambei (veteran), and part two, one of my
favourites, is about him recruiting the other six samurai, using the
testing device of Katsushiro (kid) trying to whack each one with a big
stick as they are invited in. Kikuchiyo (mad dog) makes his unimpressive
entrance, falling down drunk, and receives a mighty bump on the head.
     In the third part, Kambei (veteran) surveys the territory around the
village and plans defensive strategy. Each side must have protection
against the mounted invaders. In one direction there is a bridge that can
be taken down, in another they can build a fence, and in another there are
impassible mountains. Section four has general preparations for the battle
being made, including the farmers learning to handle bamboo spears and
harvesting the barley in record time so the fields can be flooded, sealing
off the village from still another direction. Part five is the samurai's
bloody pre-emptive raid on the bandit camp, and the last part, which takes
up most of the last half of the film, is the three day siege by the
bandits. The main characters always have a specific goal they are working
towards and even in the first two hours in which there is no fighting the
tension is kept up by the ticking clock of the bandits impending arrival,
tied to the ripening of the barley. This structure gives the film a strong
backbone on which to attach the myriad subplots and minor incidents, and
keeps the action moving along.
     The setting is the beginning of the 16th century, and Kurosawa spares
no expense in recreating the period down to the last detail. The credits
list four Historical Researchersone for folklore, one for fencing, and
two for archery. I am reminded of McCabe and Mrs. Miller, Robert Altman's
trail-blazing western, in that the setting is crafted with such integrity
and gritty realism that it feels like a peek into a real place in the
past, rather than the typical idealized technicolor period piece staged on
some backlot. It is dirty and cold and miserabledid I mention dirty?and
utterly believable. From the crudely but lovingly constructed wooden huts
and the primitive farming implements to the ornate clothing and weaponry
of the samurai, everything is perfect.
     The setting is more than just a backdrop for the story, however. In
some ways the scenario is dependent on that particular setting. The 16th
century was a chaotic transition period in Japanese history and was
especially hard on the farmers. There was a great deal of civil unrest, in
the form of large bands of looting and pillaging bandits, unchecked by
government action. In addition, new ways of fighting wars brought about by
the advent of gunpowder were making the samurai obsolete (in fact all of
the samurai who die in the film are killed by primitive rifles), and many
master-less "ronin" were forced to wander the countryside looking for
temporary jobs and extorting food from farmers.
     Samurai are not used to having a village full of farmers as their
master, and part of the fun of the film is watching the growing
understanding and interaction between the two classes as they are forced
to work together. At first the peasants are very apprehensive about the
warriors' arrival, although the samurai are their only hope. They are all
hidden away inside their houses when the seven arrive. Kikuchiyo (mad dog)
breaks the tension when he rings the village alarm and everyone streams
into the square. "You suckers!" he shouts at them, "You welcomed us as you
would a plague! But when you heard the alarmoh! Samurai!'you turned to
worship us! Fools!"
     Another revealing moment occurs when Kikuchiyo (mad dog) is angrily
rebuked by Kambei for bringing in some armour from one of the farmer's
huts, originally worn by samurai the farmers had hunted down. Kikuchiyo
delivers an enraged speech:
What do you all think of farmers? Saints? Bah! They're foxy beasts! They
say, "We've got no rice, we've no wheat. We've got nothing!" But they
have! They have everything! Dig under the floors! Or search the barns!
You'll find plenty!... They pose as saints but are full of lies! If they
smell a battle, they hunt the defeated!...But then who made them such
beasts? You did! You samurai did it! You burn their villages! Destroy
their farms! Steal their food! Force them to labour! Take their women! And
kill them if they resist! So what should farmers do?
     There is a silence and Kambei says quietly, "You're a farmer's son,
aren't you." Kikuchiyo stalks out, ashamed of his humble origin. The class
system was especially rigid in Japanese society at that time; children
took up their father's station in the social order along with his trade.
Kikuchiyo is one of the few with the spunk to flaunt tradition and try to
move up the ladder. 
     There is also a sweet "forbidden" love interest between Katsushiro
(kid) and Shino, the daughter of Manzo (farmer father). On the second
night of the siege the two have an intimate encounter in an old barn, and
Manzo is furious. He starts beating Shino. "What do you mean, falling for
a samurai?" Kambei (veteran) breaks it up, and Schichiroji, Kambei's
(veteran) old side-kick, delivers some sage words: "Manzo! Don't be so
angry! When a man sees death in his path he feels the need for a woman's
arms....Have some sympathy for youngsters."
     By the end of the last battle, the two groups have been through a war
together, and many have died on both sides. The fear and distrust evident
between them at the beginning is gone, but only briefly. As the farmers
sing and plant next year's crops, the surviving samurai stand to one side
looking on, silent and alienated. Now that they no longer need each other,
the gap between the two classes has widened again. The last line of the
movie is spoken by Kambei (veteran). "Again we are defeated," he says,
looking up at the four samurai burial mounds. "The winners are those
farmers, not us."
     I must say I was a little disappointed with my first experience of
The Seven Samurai in the theatre; the 16mm print was poor quality and not
widescreen as I'd hoped, and the subtitles were much worse than in the TV
version (didn't they notice you couldn't read them at all when they were
over something white?) Despite all that it was still a superlative evening
at the cinema, enhanced by an appreciative audience and the immediacy of
the big screen. Besides what I've mentioned, The Seven Samurai has
exciting action sequences, wonderful black and white photography, and just
the right amount of humour. This film is an example of how a simple,
big-battle-oriented story can be turned into an entertaining, complex and
rewarding treatise on the victory of compassion and humanity against
tremendous odds.

Title
Review for Ikiru (1952)
      You may not have heard of "Ikiru", but it's considered to be one
of the classics of foreign cinema, and one of the finest films ever
made. It is in black and white, 2 1/2 hours long, directed by Akira
Kurosawa, and set in contemporary Japan. It is a story about the
dehumanizing effects of bureaucracies, the power of the individual to
make change, and the importance of living a meaningful life. Watanabe is
a middle-aged petty bureaucrat, the chief of the Citizen's section of
town hall. As a rather intrusive voice-over tells us, "He has gastric
cancer, although he doesn't know it yet. In fact he's already dead. He's
been dead for the last thirty years." He shuffles papers on his desk and
looks busy.
        Meanwhile a group of women from a nearby slum area have come to
town hall to complain about a cesspool near their homes. Their request
is that it be drained and replaced with a playground. They are shunted
from one bureau to another, from Citizen's, to Public Works, to Parks,
to the Deputy Mayor, and then back to the beginning. The bureaucratic
techniques of passing the buck and stalling are well illustrated.
        Watanabe, experiencing stomach pain, goes in for an X-ray and
figures out (although the doctors won't tell him) that he has less than
six months to live. The first half of the film is all about his various
reactions to this death sentence. He tries to make peace with his son,
for who's sake he closed himself off after his wife died, and with his
daughter-in-law, but he doesn't tell them about the illness. He
withdraws his savings and spends a decadent night on the town with a
self-styled Mephistopheles, a writer he met in a bar. He forms an
attachment with a young woman in his office. None of these help in the
end, until he remembers the cesspool. The first half ends with him
pledging to build the playground at whatever the cost.
        The second half is told in flashback from his funeral, where all
the civil servants are gathered, swapping stories of Watanabe's almost
fanatical devotion to the project. They end with teary, alcohol induced
pledges to all behave like Watanabe. However the next day we find
exactly the same situation as the beginning of the film.
        This is not a light film. Most of my family had left by the time
it was over, finding it just too slow. I found, however, that if you
stick with it, you become involved in the plotline and stirred by its
humanistic message. One great strength is a masterful performance by
Takashi Shimura as Watanabe. He played the benevolent samurai leader
Kambei in "The Seven Samurai", and here he convincingly portrays a sad,
sick old man, looking back over his life and seeing only emptiness.
Actually one thing that made it especially enjoyable for me was spotting
actors from other Kurosawa films. Like some other great directors, he
has a "family" of actors that he uses frequently in his films, and
almost all of the seven samurai can be spotted in "Ikiru", as well as
some of the actors from "Rashomon". If you're in the mood for a slower
paced but powerful, life-affirming movie, "Ikiru" is an excellent
choice.
