Authors
Indra Moeljadi
Number of Reviews
13

Title
Review for Runaway Bride (1999)
Directed by Garry Marshall. Starring Richard Gere and Julia Roberts. What
first comes to mind when hearing those names is Pretty Woman. So, you'll
probably think it's Pretty Woman part 2. Well it's not, because this time
Julia Roberts isn't playing a prostitute but a country girl. The rest is
pretty much the same. What else do you expect?
The opening scene was Julia Roberts riding a horse, very fast, with her
wedding dress, while U2's I Still Haven't Found What I'm Looking For. From
the movie title, Runaway Bride, with that song (which Bono wrote about
God/religion, not about love!) you can guess. Julia Roberts is a Runaway
Bride.
The story: Ike Graham (Richard Gere) is a columnist for USA Today in New
York. That day he decided to write about man-eaters, if you know Hall &
Oates' song, after hearing some guy's story. And the victim is Maggie
Carpenter, a local girl from Hale, Maryland, who ditched her guys 3 times at
the altar. Maggie sends a complaining letter to the editor and Ike is out of
his job. But he doesn't give up. He goes to Hale to find out the truth about
Maggie, who is planning to give it a fourth try. So the story continues, and
you'll probably already knew the ending after 15 minutes.
For Julia Roberts, after she starred in Notting Hill, I was rather hoping to
see her in a better movie. Something like Conspiracy Theory. And Gere
shouldn't lower his level to this Pretty Woman-level again. But they did.
They probably did a good job in Runaway Bride, but the story was lousy. It
was a typical Hollywood story. I think Adam Sandler did a better version in
The Wedding Singer.
There was one time when I really laughed, and that was the part when they
were showing the crowd in the church for the wedding. Half of the church
filled with local Hale people, while the other half was filled with New
Yorkers, complete with their suits, sunglasses, and mobile phones. And a
joke about FedEx. But that's about it.
My last words, if you are planning to relax and get some laughs without even
thinking you can watch this movie. But if you prefer a real movie, don't go
to this one.

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
1999 has been a good year for the movie industry. We've seen some new
techniques (The Matrix, Fight Club), new style (Blair Witch Project),
virtual stories (The 13th Floor), even indie movies (Go). But only one film
is a real mixture of everything new and the surprises of 1999, Being John
Malkovich.
Directed by well-known music video director Spike Jonze (he directed
Weezer's Buddy Holly, one of my favorite clips) and written by Charlie
Kauffman, this movie goes deep into the question of identity from the eyes
of a real (and I mean real as in non-fictional) identity without losing the
humor and without being too educational.
Craig Schwartz (John Cusack) is a puppeteer. He likes being a puppeteer,
because he likes the idea of being somebody else, of controling something
else. But like any other puppeteer he doesn't have a job, because "who would
want a puppeteer in this wintry economy?". He lives with his wife, Lotte
(Cameron Diaz in baggy pants, oversized sweaters, and ugly hairdo) who works
in a pet store and has too many pets at home, including a chimp that can
experience flashbacks subtitled in English.
To support his family, Craig finds a job at Lestercorp, located at the 7 1/2
floor of Mertin-Flemming building. Low overhead means lower cost. There he
meets attractive Maxine.
One day at his job, Craig found a portal leading to the brain of John
Malkovich for 15 minutes, and then coming out on the New Jersey Turnpike.
Craig was fascinated with this experience of being someone else, especially
a celebrity, because in modern day society, everybody wants to be a famous
celebrity. He tells this to Maxine and Lotte. Maxine wants to sell it for
$200 per person, while Lotte went straight in it and became addicted. She
even felt transsexual after her experience, questioning the whole idea of
sexual identity.
The three are tangled in a bizzare love triangle, with John Malkovich being
the host. John Malkovich himself finally found out about this portal, but
Craig could manage to be longer than 15 minutes inside John Malkovich. As
Craig takes over John Malkovich, he and Maxine take the opportunity to
become famous. And as the end comes near, we see that being a celebrity
becomes a bit boring after a while.
The whole concept of being somebody else in this movie is so very well
portrayed, including shots from John Malkovich' eyeview. The choice of John
Malkovich as the celebrity to enter is perfect. He is famous, but not as
highlighted as other big stars such as Brad Pitt or Pamela Anderson.
Everybody knows him, but not at first sight.
A wonderful movie, this one will be remembered as a breakthrough movie. And
we can sure expect more from Spike Jonze.

Title
Review for Beach, The (2000)
This movie was full of controversy. The shooting was in a national park in
Thailand. Knowing that a Hollywood cast and crew was shooting their national
park, a bunch of environmentalists showed up to protest the shooting. And
things got worse when they found out that the leading role was Mr. Leonardo
DiCaprio. Hundreds of schoolgirls joined the environmentalist, in hope of to
catch a glimpse of Mr. DiCaprio. But then again, which teenage girl
wouldn't?
Another controversy concerns the leading role itself. Directed by Danny
Boyle, who directed Trainspotting, he has worked with Ewan McGregor on his
three previous films. So this one, being his fourth one, was also written
for Ewan McGregor. But the movie company wanted to make more money, and who
else can bring girls to the cinema just to watch his face over and over and
over again besides Leonardo? "Oooohhh, he's soooo cute." (Actually that is
quoted from the girl sitting next to me at The Beach). So Leonardo's in, and
Ewan can practice to be a better Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Richard (Leonardo DiCaprio) is travelling to Bangkok, Thailand on his own.
There he meets Daffy (Robert Carlyle), who gives him a map to a place, where
the beach is "paradise". Richard ask his two neighbors, Etienne and
Francoise (Virginie Ledoyen) to come. So the three of them are set of to an
adventure in the Thailand.
Fast forward a bit (otherwise I'll be spitting the whole story out), and
Richard is left alone in the jungle. First he was lonely, he was afraid, he
was feeling rejected, but then he became Rambo. Rambo in a video game, to be
more precise. Which is funny, because he only has the looks, not the body of
a jungle survivor. But then again, he is Leonardo, and that's enough for
three quarter of the audience.
After the whole adventure then it's back to the real world. A very nice
ending scene, where the director really shows the difference between
paradise and real world. How we communicate using tools, and not using
direct methods.
Think of Trainspotting, but this time they're not high on drugs, but on the
beauty of pure nature.
Indra Moeljadi
is hoping someone will give a map to The Beach, wherever that is

Title
Review for Talented Mr. Ripley, The (1999)
Everybody has one talent. Ronaldo's talent is scoring goals. Monica
Lewinsky's talent is smoking cigars. Jay Leno's is making jokes about Monica
Lewinsky's talent. Mine talent is unclear yet, it's somewhere between making
things to break up suddenly or writing these reviews. Tom Ripley's talent is
impersonating people.
Tom Ripley (Matt Damon) was just a regular guy. A toilet-cleaner, who loves
to play piano. But a Princeton badge on your borrowed jacket can do many
things. For Tom, it opened a way to go to Italy to find Dickie Greenleaf
(Jude Law) and to make him go back to New York, back to his parents.
So there he goes to Italy. In Italy, he's not the Tom Ripley he used to be.
He's just someone else. Most of the time he's Dickie Greenleaf. Then things
happen. Tom's talent seems to obsess him, and he goes great ways to fulfill
his obsession. All that to be a fake somebody than to be a real nobody.
What's wrong with this guy? Girls will love him, because Matt Damon is
playing that role, and he can play piano. I still wish I could play the
piano.
The movie is very slow. And the whole theme is basically the same as Single
White Female. But in SWF it's set in an apartment, while this movie is set
all over Italy in the late 50s. I got bored watching this movie. It was too
slow, too long, too obvious (you could know what would happen next), too
Matt Damon, and not enough chicks (just Gwyneth Paltrow and Cate Blanchett).
To tell you the truth, I'm still wondering why this movie could be nominated
for an Oscar. It would never get my vote.
Well, I don't know. I'm not a real movie critic. I'm just writing what I
think. And I know most of the people would disagree with what I'm saying
here, but maybe that is my talent.
Indra Moeljadi
just like every other person, would love to be a fake somebody

Title
Review for Insider, The (1999)
Smoking is bad for your health. Everybody knows it. But people still enjoy
it. And the tobacco companies are making big money. Worse, they even lie
about the fact that nicotine is addictive. So what if it's addictive? People
are still going to smoke it.
Too bad these tobacco companies keep on lying, and with their big bucks,
they can do whatever they want, create whatever lies they want. Jeffrey
Wigand (Russel Crowe) used to be a top executive at Brown & Williamson, the
third largest tobacco firm in the US. That was until he got fired by his
boss because of "poor communication skills". But from his time at B&W, he
knew a whole lot of information that could bring the tobacco business down.
So Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino), producer of CBS' 60 minutes, is looking for
Wigand and he tries to make Wigand confess in front of national television
about all these tobacco firms lies. But in doing that isn't easy.
Wigand has to deal with his ex-office. They have the money, he doesn't. And
with money, you can do almost everything. On top of that, he has to deal
with his wife, who can't support him, and keeps on whining about the money.
What a rollercoaster ride for Wigand, and Bergman can't keep up.
It's a fantastic investigative movie, based on a true story and true facts.
Although the movie exaggarated some facts, but at least they admitted it at
the end of the movie. No wonder that this movie is nominated for Best Film
at the Oscar. You can really feel the struggle that Wigand and Bergman have
to make during the whole process of being a whistle blower.
Russel Crowe's performance is outstanding, and he did just fine playing
alongside Al Pacino. Whenever Al Pacino is in a role that requires screaming
and confronting somebody, than he is the man.
Michael Mann is getting better. He made the bad guy the good one in Heat,
and he made everybody dressing up like Don Johnson during the Miami Vice
days. Here he put suspense from telephone conversations, not with fights and
gun shots all over the place.

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
Directed by David Fincher (Seven, The Game, Alien 3). Starring Edward Norton
and Brad Pitt. Just by looking at these three names, I knew that this was
going to be a absolute great movie. And it was.
The movie is all about Joe, or the Narrator, or whatever his name is. Joe
(Edward Norton) is a typical character from a Douglas Coupland novel. Thirty
years old, living on his own in his IKEA furnished luxurious apartement, and
is having a well-payed white-collar job at a car manufacturer. Picture
perfect for any Generation X. But he has insomnia and hasn't slept in 6
months. Just like a Coupland character! So this Joe is out to seek a cure
for his insomnia. He found it by visiting group-sessions who are talking
about their illness and phobia and other stuff. Here Joe finds all the
compasion he needs, so he can sleep.
But after a while, a Marla (Helena Bonham Carter) came to these sessions,
and Joe found out that she's just like Joe, not having a certain illness or
phobia. This drives Joe crazy, so he goes back again to the insomnia-days.
While in his insomnia days, he meets Tyler Durden (Brad Pitt) on an
airplane. The two talked, and after Joe's apartment blew sky-high, he stayed
at Tyler's place. Both in search for a meaning of life, and soon they were
starting this club, The Fight Club.
Even though the first two rules of The Fight Club are "You never talk about
The Fight Club", The Fight Club spreads across the nation so fast. And then
everything goes so fast, suddenly you'll see that The Fight Club has turned
into a revolution movement, because Tyler Durden said "The things you own
end up owning you."
The ending is amazing. You can choose whatever you like, because Fincher has
put it in a certain way so you can figure out the film as you like.
All and all, I think that this is the best movie since Pulp Fiction. It's
kinda like an answer for people asking what and who this Generation X are,
and what is really on their mind. And a lot of fighting with minimalized gun
shots (only 2 or 3 shots).
Indra Moeljadi
is looking for a Fight Club nearby his IKEA furnished apartment.

Title
Review for World Is Not Enough, The (1999)
The World Is Not Enough a.k.a. James Bond XIX
Well, another James Bond movie. Still with Pierce Brosnan, but this time
with Sophie Marceau and Denise Richards making it to the well-known
Bond-girls list. A James Bond movie isn't a James Bond movie without these
elements: explosions, beautiful babe, James driving a car, Q's gadgets,
casino scene, Martini "shaken not stirred", another beautiful babe, guns,
dangerous action, bombs, an a whacky villain. And it's the same with this
one. It has all those elements, so it's a complete JB-movie.
If you have seen the last JB movies, especially those with Pierce Brosnan,
than the plot is much or less the same. Only this time, M (James' boss) gets
involved personally. Actually I don't feel like telling you the plot,
because a James Bond movie always have the same plot.
The opening scene was cool, because of the shots of the Millenium Dome. And
a lot of other action scenes, but at some point I experienced some dejavu,
like I already saw that stunt in an earlier JB. Maybe I did, maybe I didn't.
In any case, the name is still "Bond, James Bond".
If you're a big JB fan then go. Why bother reading this review anyway? If
you're not a big fan, go see it if you have spare time and money, which most
of you have on Christmas anyway. But if you hate this guy, then don't go.
After I saw this movie, I was walking to my car. In the background Annie
Lennox was singing "Hey, hey, I saved the world today...". In my opinion,
that song would have been way way better than Garbage.
Indra Moeljadi
is saving all his money to buy a BMW Z8 after failing to buy a Z3

Title
Review for Vatel (2000)
The Cannes Film Festival always produces good movies. At least that's what
they say. So I went to Vatel, a non-Hollywood movie, first released in
Cannes.
Although it is a non-Hollywood movie, it has all the elements of Hollywood.
A big budget, a big set, and famous Hollywood artists (Uma Thurman, Tim
Roth). The only french things in it is Gerard Depardieu and the setting.
Set in 1671, the story is about the visit of King Louis XIV to the Castle of
Prince Conde. The Prince of Conde must prepare a set of festivities to make
sure that the King is happy, so he assigns his Master Steward, Francois
Vatel, (Depardieu) to prepare a three-day banquet.
The whole movie is set in the huge Castle of Conde. Very detailed
background, you can see the difference between kingdom and peasants in
seconds. I can't recall any other movie set in 17th century France with such
precise details. From the castle, to the clothes, to the props, to the food.
But with this good set comes a vague story. For the first hour I was still
guessing where the movie is going to. There weren't a lot of conversations,
and when there was one, it was short with high-class language. It looked
like a love triangle, but it wasn't. Actually it was just the Master Steward
preparing the whole party. And then the fish came too late, or he was just
too impatient.
It's worth watching only when you're interested in 17th century France. Or
Gerard Depardieu's big nose. After all, it is a non-Hollywood movie. If
you're looking for action or suspense, then just go to The Gladiator or MI-2
again.

Title
Review for Anna and the King (1999)
Thailand, 1862. Back then it was called Siam. A great monarchy ruled by the
powerful King Mongkut (Chow Yun Fat). He did everything his ways. Until Anna
Leonowens (Jodie Foster) came.
This movie is a remake of The King and I (which I haven't seen), and based
on a true story. Anna comes with her son Louie to teach the King's children.
All 68 of them, coming from 23 mothers. Surely makes me wish I was the King.
But instead of just teaching the kids, Anna also tries to "show" the King
the ways of the world, which is better known as the ways of the English.
Anna storms in as if she were a Spice Girl yelling Girl Power, standing up
in front of the King, while the whole country goes down on their knees,
saying things in to the King that even the closest advisors don't dare to,
and in the end even prevents a war. Wow, she must be related to either
Margaret Tatcher or Wonder Woman.
The scenery is absolutely great. Shot in Malaysia, it shows the beauty of
nature and the beauty of the Siamese kingdom. Too bad that the movie
concentrates too much on Anna's views, and not on the King's. The cultural
impact of an Anna seems too much, especially for a Monarchy who did survive
colonialism (Siam is the only South East Asian country who was never been
colonized by another country). The kingdom has is own way of doing stuff,
and Anna was forcing change upon it. No wonder that this movie is banned in
Thailand, because it was insulting them.
I feel the same way what the Thais are feeling. You cannot change a culture
by handing out copies of Uncle Tom's Cabin, or by teaching how an egg can
fit a bottle. The true story was probably during a long span, and the
moviemakers are putting that into a 2-and-a-half hour movietape. Not that
I'm saying that it was impossible to happen, but if you're going to show a
movie about culture, please show both sides of all the cultures. Not just
the bad ones and replace them by the good ones (which is always the Western
way).
Jodie Foster is as though as always, while Chow Yun Fat without his long
leather jacket and guns looked different. He did have the charisma of a
king, but at sometimes he didn't show the powers of a king. Or maybe this
girlpower is way too much for him. So guys, be careful. Even a king can be
helpless against girlpower.
A movie worth watching because of the scenery. Because of the Siamese
kingdom and culture. Because of the 68 kids from 23 wives. And to learn
another language, Siamese.

Title
Review for Stigmata (1999)
Stigmata: wounds similar to Jesus' wounds when he was crucified.
This movie is based on a real thing, and with something that happens in
reality among very religious people. If you know all that, then this movie
is pretty scary, because it shows the Stigmata, and it also tells about the
missing document of the church.
Frankie Page (Patricia Arquette) is a regular girl living in Pennsylvania.
She works and goes out and she doesn't believe in God. One day she gets an
rosary from her mother and then all the fun begins. Father Andrew Kiernan
(Gabriel Byrne) works at the Vatican as a scientist. So he was sent to see
what's happening to Frankie Page.
The setting is very dark and wet (it rains almost all the time in
Pennsylvania), and Frankie's being possessed by another Father is portrayed
as if it is a horror movie. Andrew Kiernan is more of a scientist than a
religious man, and the Cardinal looks like a mafia godfather, when in fact
he is one of the highest order in Catholic church. And most of all, the
movie lacks climax. The climax point was very obvious and it has a lower
intensity compared to other scenes.
This movie could have been a great movie, giving that ir was based on a true
story, with facts that happens, but the whole portrayal of it is just too
Hollywood, too unreligious. I'm not complaining that this movie offends or
misinterprets some religions, but if you're going to make a movie about
certain aspects of a religion, it is better to know the religion first.

Title
Review for Dogma (1999)
Ater I came out of the cinema to watch Dogma, my reaction was "Kevin Smith
is a genius!". Not for directing this movie and starring in it, but for
writing it. In Dogma, Smith questions the whole concept of faith and
religion, by diving deeply into one religion and coming up with the big
reality of what religion should be, in a unusual and comic way.
Bartleby (Ben Affleck) and Loki (Matt Damon) are two angels wanting to get
back to heaven after being sent away by God years ago. They found a heavenly
loophole in New Jersey where they could go back, but at the same time by
doing that, they will destroy all existence. Bethany (Linda Fiorentino) is
then send by The Voice of God (Alan Rickman) to stop these two buddies from
entering the loophle. She is accompanied by two stoner-prophets, Silent Bob
(Kevin Smith), who only spoke 5 words during the entire movie, and Jay
(Jason Mewes), who spoke 500.000 words, 499.995 being "fuck". They are also
accompanied by Rufus (Chris Rock), the 13th black apostle.
On the way to New Jersey, a lot of things happens, and a few deep
discussions occur, talking about religion. From these discussions, Smith
wants to point out how the normal society treats religion as an obligation,
not as a faith. Which is, in some kind of way, exactly the same what I'm
feeling. And in between a whole lot of movie jokes.
So they made it to New Jersey. But how do you stop two angels, desperate of
going home back to heaven? Well, maybe God can help.
This movie is being criticized heavily by the catholic community, but I
think that is a bit unfair. Smith did make some jokes about catholics,
Jesus, and even God, but in the end Smith is actually showing the reality
about religion. People who can look through the profanity and the
poop-monster will be thinking a lot about their faith and religion, and
Smith is showing the way to what these people should do, which is believe in
God and do something about it.

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
"Have you ever had a dream so real, that you wondered if this dream is
reality or not?." Morpheus (Laurence Fishburne) said that to Neo (Keanu
Reeves) in The Matrix (1999).
The story of this movie is mixing up reality and virtuality. After you seen
this movie, you'll probably be wondering what is real, what is not, and all
that stuff in between like hyperreality and surreality.
This is what the Wachowski brothers do with The Matrix. So many special
effects that make people think whether this movie is real or a
computer-animated creation. Well, a few things are real though, all the
Ray-Bans worn and the Nokias used.
So this Neo is a hacker, which is the most logical explanation of how he got
into this virtual, or real world. His main quest is finding Morpheus, who is
like a God-Hacker. With the help of Trinity (Carrie-Anne Moss) he finds him.
It turns out that Morpheus and Trinity are fighting for the human race, and
Neo is likely to be The One, the one that can save the human race. Just like
a reincarnation of Buddha (Hey, that was Keanu too!). Here, Neo will start
all his kung-fu lessons in becoming The One, if he is the one.
One thing leads to another, and then you'll see one hell of an action scene.
Neo and Trinity walking into a highly guarded building, shooting guards and
doing tricks in slow motion, both in black, without even sweating. This
scene is awesome, and I'm sure that it will be nominated for MTV's Movie
Award as Best Action Sequence.
That's all I can say about the story. Oh, and what is The Matrix? Go see and
find out yourself. It's worth it. At least you can choose one of the many
Ray-Bans for this summer.

Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
If you take a look at this movie's poster, then you will find this movie
probably not worth seeing. No big names and not an attractive title.
Probably another high school movie. But if you go and see this movie, all of
that will change.
This movie must be one of the funniest movies since There's Something About
Mary, but this time without a hot Cameron Diaz.
It's about four regular high school seniors, Jim, Oz, Finch, and Kevin. They
are not the studs of the school, nor the nerds. Just the average student,
which you'll probably forget after 5 years. At one party they made a pact to
have sex and lose virginity, after they hear that Sherman (the nerd a.k.a.
The Sherminator) brag about sex. And what better time to lose virginity than
on prom night?
So the story goes on, with each character using their own method of getting
laid, or at least a date to prom night. What makes it very real is the
reality of this condition. Regular guys not being able to "get some" during
high school years, and with peer pressure this becomes very obsessive to
some of us... eh... them.
In this movie you'll find funny but very real things: watching scrambled
adult movies on television when his/your parents suddenly walked in (most
probably at least once happened to you guys), father gives son adult
magazines (luckily that didn't happened to me), parent find condoms in
his/your drawer, and premature ejaculation.
This movie is as real as it can get, and with the R-rating it gets better.
Not because the audience can see some tits, but also because teenagers these
days live in a R-rated society. The cast also portraits the average high
school senior, not too cocky or too nerdy or even too beautiful.
Will Jim, Oz, Finch, and Kevin score on prom night? American Pie is just not
about the quest for sex, but also about relationship, friendship, safe sex,
love, and offcourse home made American apple pie!
for more reviews, visit Indra's PopCulture Reviews
http://www.geocities.com/anakzaman
