Authors
Umar Khan
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Hsi yen (1993)
     I just saw the movie THE WEDDING BANQUET thanks to a local NPR
station which was giving away tickets to a special showing.  This is
advertised as the first Taiwanese film shot in the US (Manhattan to be
precise).  It is about 60% in Chinese (with large subtitles) and 40% in
English (no sub-titles, strangely enough).  It was one of those films
which is done so well that I forgot I was having to read subtitles;
they became almost subliminal.  And the audience, which was about 30%
Chinese, 50% gay (for reasons which will become obvious later in this
article), and the rest everything else, couldn't stop laughing.  There
was barely a five-minute period of time to be found when the audience,
as a whole, didn't break up laughing at least once.
     The story resembles the GREEN CARD film by Gerard Depardieu a bit
and has been compared to LA CAGE AUX FOLLES by some reviewers, though
I don't personally see any resemblance to LA CAGE other than a very
superficial one which comes from both having gay characters and gay
situations in their plots.
     The story is of a young, prosperous Taiwanese gentlemen (Wei Tung,
played by Winston Chao) who lives in New York and is something of a
slum lord (though a personable one).  He is also gay.  The movie opens
with Wei Tung working out with free weights while listening to a tapes
letter from his mother (played by Ah-Lea Gua).  This sets the theme for
the movie.  Wei Tung's mother is pressuring him to get married so she
can be a grandmother.  His parents have been enrolling him in
expensive computer match making services, too.  To get his parents (who
are en route for a visit to America with the single ambition of getting
him married off to anyone) off his back, Wei Tung is convinced by his
lover, Simon (played by Mitchell Lichtenstein) to marry his artist
tenant, Wei Wei (played by May Chin) who needs a green card.  So the
plot thickens.  What ensues is a comedy of errors leading up to a
marriage before a justice of the peace in a municipal wedding factory
and a wedding banquet forced on them by an old family retainer whose
son just happens to own the fanciest restaurant/hotel in Chinatown.
The banquet is a blast.  Everyone, especially the groom, gets zonked.
Then when the bride and groom finally reach their room to collapse
after the festivities, their room is invaded by a throng of returning
wedding guests armed with mah-jong tables, Chinese lanterns, and the
like.  The guests set up shop in the couple's hotel room and refuse to
leave until Wei Wei and Wei Tung get under the covers together and pass
out *all* of their clothes.
     As a result, Wei Wei discovers that Wei Tung can be aroused by a
woman after all.  She gets pregnant and mom and dad (who *still*
haven't left for China) are ecstatic.  But the pressures on the trio
(Wei Wei, Wei Tung, and Simon) have obviously multiplied.  Fights
ensue.  Feelings are hurt.  Lifestyles are cramped.
     I won't tell any more of the plot, because you *must* see this
film.  The "solutions" are not original but they are well done and
always inspire audience laughs.  There are touching "coming out"
scenes, reconciliations, bon voyages, and the like.
     There is enough seriousness (such as when Wei Tung's father, a
retired general who fought with Chiang Kai Chek, played by Shihung
Lung, has a stroke on the day of the big breakfast fight between a
frustrated Simon and father-to-be Wei Tung).  Some seriousness is
necessary because the whole theme of "coming out" to the family and
deciding where one draws the line between duty to parents and honesty
to one's self are all necessarily part of the "gay experience."
     I highly recommend everyone who likes good fun, isn't totally
turned off by gay themes tastefully handled, and who can forget that
s/he is reading subtitles to make immediate reservations when this film
comes to town!
