Authors
Anthony Horan
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Rapture, The (1991)
Written and Directed by Michael Tolkin.
Stars Mimi Rogers, David Duchovny, Patrick Bauchau.
Rated M, 102 Mins.
Screens at the Valhalla from October 2.
[This film has already been available on video in the US for a couple of
months; however, it's just (!) gained a theatrical release here in
Australia, and I was sufficiently intrigued about the film to want to
post this review I wrote originally for Beat Magazine, a Melbourne
street paper.  Everyone I've spoken to has a different take on this
film, so here's mine....]
     Writer Michael Tolkin has already made a big splash this year with
his hilarious and incisive attack on the Hollywood studio system, THE
PLAYER.  But just prior to that film, he made his directing debut with
another one of his scripts, and the resulting film has finally made its
way to Australia.
     Sharon is a telephone directory assistance operator who balances
the mundanity of her job with a hedonistic lifestyle that encompasses
group sex in all its permutations.  But even the most creative sexual
encounters are becoming as unsatisfying for her as her job, until one
day at work when, on a break, she overhears some of her co-workers
talking about a shared dream, a dream which is intended to signal the
second coming and with it, armageddon.  With the sort of routine
coincidence that only happens in Tolkin's screenplays, two door-knocking
religious evangelists appear at her door, and she lets them in, more out
of boredom than anything else, and listens to what they have to say.
Soon after, when Sharon is on the verge of suicide in despair at her
empty life, she turns to the book the evangelists gave to her, and finds
safety in religion--a religion that looks forward to armageddon, as
prophesied by a young boy.
     Many have criticised this film as being too earnest and
fundamentalist.  Where that comes from is anyone's guess--THE RAPTURE
is, in fact, a strange, bitter and caustic cautionary tale about the
dangers of total surrender to organised religion, and the truly extreme
lengths to which believers will go on their path to their long-awaited
salvation.  Tolkin's script seems totally straight on the surface, but
has an underlying weirdness and menace that rivals the best of David
Lynch's work.  Make no mistake, this is an unnerving tale, but it's also
rich in humour and wry observation.  
     As Sharon, Mimi Rogers delivers the performance of her career, in a
role that will polarise audiences; the scene in which Sharon--desperate
for a manifestation of her beliefs--takes matters into her own hands in
the film's penultimate scene, is the most riveting and terrifying piece
of cinema seen this year.  
     The low budget of this New Line produced film results in a
relatively special-effect free ending that still works thanks to the
fact that it's totally unexpected.  Despite money limitations, the film
looks great, thanks in no small part to the excellent work of cameraman
Bojan Bazelli.
     This is one of the most unique films, not only about this subject
but *any* subject, seen in a long time.  It's intelligent, witty, moving
and compelling, and is not to be missed.  Superb.
