Authors
John Locke (John Locke)
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Boyz N the Hood (1991)
     I'm baffled by the acclaim shoveled upon BOYZ N THE HOOD.  It
wasn't even film school quality.  It's more like a B+ in Sociology 1.
Each scene makes its blunt, bludgeoning point about life in the ghetto
(we know it's a ghetto because there are artfully placed heaps of
garbage here and there).
     Many of these points are the utterances of the characters.  There
are a number of "characters," but most of them are the same person, the
director, John Singleton, who uses his characters as mouthpieces for his
own ideas.  When young Tre points to the map of Africa and says that's
where the first man came from, it's Singleton talking.  When the
football recruiter makes a speech on the improbability of making the
NFL, it's Singleton talking.  In one of history's worst lines of
dialogue, Tre's father asks Tre how the SAT went, then casually notes,
"of course those tests are culturally biased, except for the math
parts."  Yep, it's Singleton talking.  We don't get to actually hear one
of the "culturally biased" questions.  We're supposed to take
Singleton's word for it, I suppose.  (Didn't Singleton see STAND AND
DELIVER?  "Those people" pass "those tests" when they study for them.
Oops, I forgot--"those tests" were all math parts.)  When that line is
dropped with a dull thud, I realized that the whole minor thread about
taking the test was a set-up for that one lousy line.  The piece de
resistance of pontification occurs under a billboard in a vacant lot.
Tre's father's lecture on gentrification attracts a variety of
neighborhood regulars, from dope dealers to the perpetually unemployed.
But their discussion sounds like a MacNeil/Lehrer roundtable on urban
issues.  Where's the m*th*rf*ck*n' verisimilitude?
     This last is representative of the pervasive illogic of the film.
There's a barbecue, the host says the food is ready, and 50 people stand
up in unison, like so many robots, and crowd the table.  There's no
guile to the direction.  You can picture Singleton instructing the
ensemble: "on 'ready,' rush the table."  At times, the amateurishness is
laughable, like when young Tre is delivered to his father to undergo
"manhood training."  Dad is so glad to see him he immediately puts him
to work raking up a thick deposit of Autumn leaves from the front yard.
But here's the kicker: there are no trees in front of the house!  Where
did all those mysterious leaves come from?  Not only that, the raking
appears to take Tre hours (can't learn manhood in twenty minutes).
Someone glued those damn leaves to the lawn.  Add to that the
sociological illogic: Tre learns manhood by performing the work his
putative post-manhood father neglects.
     The whole film ends up with a staged, faked feel.  I never felt I
was watching real characters acting spontaneously.  We get a football
player who never plays football, or even talks about it; we get drug
dealers who never deal drugs.  BOYZ N THE HOOD is like an updated
version of those right-way-and-wrong-way-to-ask-a-girl-for-a-date films
they occasionally showed us in high school.  Now they show us films
illustrating sexual harassment in the workplace.  Snore...non-actors
making obvious points.  Somehow these films always end up
unintentionally funny, and so does BOYZ N THE HOOD.  In the
heart-assaulting finish, the football player is victim to a drive-by and
his homeboys take his blood-drenched corpse home and dump it on the
sofa.  I know I'm supposed to be sad during this scene but instead I'm
yelling, "so that's why they"--er, "they"--"cover the upholstery with
plastic."
     BOYZ N THE HOOD is well-intentioned, like the behavior training
films, but that doesn't redeem it as film art.  The first obligation of
a director is to tell a story; intellectual statements can only flow
from the story as an indirect effect.  I couldn't mourn the murder of
the football player because he'd never been given human dimensions.  The
power of film as a salve for our prejudices is that it can show the
common human links between people of different cultures.  BOYZ N THE
HOOD fails on this very basic level by not developing its characters and
making them or their world realistic.  The characters rarely breath as
real people because they're too busy demonstrating the director's
sociological agenda.  I didn't see any special insight into the
characters or their situations by the director.  Nothing rang true
because there was no originality to offset the predictableness.
Ironically, this film could just as easily have been made by a white
director or anyone else as unacquainted with the ghetto as John
Singleton.

Title
Review for Bugsy (1991)
     As it happened, I saw BUGSY the day after seeing THE ROCKETEER on
laser disc.  (The disc envelope quotes Siskel & Ebert: "Two thumbs up!"
I suspect both thumbs belong to Gene.  Either that, or Roger was extra
tickled by his performance on THE ROCKETEER's "test your 1930s IQ"
stuff.)  The two films have superficial similarities.  They're period
pieces set in the same era.  They also suffer from the same overall
defect of yawn-daring pacing broken up unredeeming thrills.  But at
least THE ROCKETEER isn't pretending to be film art.
     BUGSY ends with a tribute to kitsch, but the film itself is laced
with bad poetry.  Worst of all is the "death of Bugsy" scene.  Bullets
come flying through the window.  Zing!  Bugsy takes it right through the
pump.  Then we get a series of errant, albeit artistically profound
shots.  One takes out the cosmic chimney on the Flamingo Hotel model.
Another blasts a hole through the screen playing Bugsy's lousy screen
test.  A third hits Virginia Hill's photo, shattering the glass.  P.U.
     Tearing a page from the book of amazing coincidences, Bugsy admits
to his wife he wants a divorce as WWII has ended.  Outside the
celebrants are going crazy.  The problem with the scene, besides its
obvious cheap juxtaposition, is that it gets the order backwards.  We
find out Bugsy is ruining his wife's life, then we find out he's ruining
V-J day for her.  It mutes the effect of her sorrow.
     Perhaps the worst scene, though, was the one in which the mob
chieftains pay a visit while Bugsy is fixing his daughter's birthday
cake.  He bounces back and forth between his blood family and his crime
family.  The blood family quietly abandons hope and goes off to sulk.
The problem is first their overreaction to a minor disturbance.  Second,
it's the screwed up pacing of the scene which prevents you from
evaluating their reactions realistically.  He only seems to be with the
crime boys for a few minutes, but when we see the wife and kids it seems
like hours are wiling away.  The wife and kids are just puppets of the
scene's requirement to illustrate Bugsy's neglect of his family.
     The character of Virginia Hill is a major problem.  What is she?
She seems to be appalled by Bugsy's humiliation of Jack Dregna (stealing
a famous scene from DELIVERANCE he is made to "oink like a pig").  But
a minute later we find that she has gotten a giant sexual charge out of
it.  The film flatters her at every turn, so are we supposed to admire
her strength in tolerating Bugsy's psychopathic temper?  Or is she a
psychopath, too?  Later she is a virtual witness to Bugsy's murder of a
mob informant that she has some affection for.  She apparently keeps
quiet about it, because when she remarks on it much later, it sounds
like it has never been brought up before.  Her silence in the face of
evil is not admirable--she should have left Bugsy, at least--but the
film struggles to keep her a sympathetic character by concentrating on
her love and her loyalty to Bugsy, as if that was enough to define her.
We buy into it, of course, and so when Bugsy is tipped off that Virginia
has embezzled two million dollars, we know they are wrong.  We can see
that the purebred paranoia of these thugs is going to break up a great
romance, against all justice.  But then when we find out she did swipe
the money and, even more unsettling, that she lied quite convincingly to
Bugsy (and to us), the rug is pulled out from under her entire
character.  Was she ever more than an opportunist?  What we bought into
now looks more problematic.  Yet the film, falsely, maintains the
fiction, the touching parting scenes in which she says she embezzled the
money for the both of them.  Uh-huh.
     Bugsy, apparently, is to be admired as a guy that gets things done.
If that means cracking a few heads, so be it.  We know that timid people
never get anywhere.  The carrot the film dangles before us is the
Flamingo Hotel, being built in the Nevada desert by Bugsy's raw vision
and a few carpenters.  But there's no story there.  We see Bugsy's
superior judgement at work.  The impractical architect does not even
realize the pool will be shaded until Bugsy straightens him out.  But
then the pool is moved in the actual construction and another problem is
created.  You have to wonder whether Bugsy looked at the design, said
"move the pool," and never looked at the design again.  It's a fake
predicament though more dramatic than attributing the cost overruns to
the price of lumber.  When the hotel opens we get another fake
predicament.  No guests show up.  It's a bad piece of scripting.  Our
worst fears are perfectly, conveniently realized.  Like Bugsy wouldn't
have paid a crowd of extras to mug for the press.  In the end, we're
shown the contemporary Las Vegas skyline and told how much the Flamingo
is now worth.  The confirmation of Bugsy's brilliant vision.  This must
be pretty thrilling for the Sinatra worshippers.  Is anyone under the
age of sixty supposed to give a damn?
