Authors
Donn B. Parker
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Sneakers (1992)
*SPOILERS* *SPOILERS* *SPOILERS* *SPOILERS* *SPOILERS*
    [The following review was prepared by Donn Parker for distribution to the
    members of the International Information Integrity Institute (known as
    I-4), an organization consisting of something like 60 companies with 
    significant interest in improved computer security and integrity, which 
    is managed by SRI -- with Donn as one of its key players.  This review is 
    reproduced here with his permission, and is authorized for further 
    distribution, with appropriate attribution.  PGN]
    -Moderator]
     SNEAKERS (released September 11, 1992 by Universal Studios, owned
by Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd., and promoted in association
with CompuServe, owned by H&R Block) starring Robert Redford, Dan
Aykroyd, Ben Kingsley, Mary McDonnell, River Phoenix, Sidney Poitier,
and David Strathairn; directed by Phil Alden Robinson (Field of Dreams
director); and produced and written by Walter F. Parkes and Lawrence
Lasker (writers and producers of WARGAMES in 1981).
     The new computer crime movie, SNEAKERS (as in hackers who wear
sneakers and sneak into computers) was previewed in a San Francisco
showing sponsored by Universal Studios and Mondo 2000 Magazine (a
slick-cover psychedelic publication of the Timothy Leary genre appealing
to hackers) and attended by a large segment of the Bay Area hacker
community including Cap'n Crunch.  I had assisted the writers, Messrs.
Lasker and Parkes, with their first movie, WARGAMES--much to my chagrin
because the technology was so distorted.  This time they had the
technical assistance of Len Adelman (the A in RSA Crypto) from UCLA and
Robert Abbott, an information security consultant of long standing.
This "Mission Impossible," PG-rated (only three "God damn"s and almost no
sex) film is mostly technologically believable, unlike WARGAMES.  We can
forgive them for showing a Cray computer with a terminal displaying
Windows 3.1.
     All information security professionals should see this film and use
it to promote security awareness.  Some critics may pan it, but it has
all the ingredients for financial success.  It has:
     Universal has uniquely teamed up with CompuServe and CompUSA
computer stores to promote the movie.  A chat board has been set up to
fire questions about the movie at Mr. Robinson, the director, who has
been using CompuServe for 8 years.  Anagram and secret password games
can be played, with prizes including trips to Hollywood and Robert
Redford's jacket worn in the film.  The film is sure to be a big hit in
Europe and Japan as well as in the United States and should appeal to
the juvenile hacker culture throughout the world.
     One unbelievable item is the skimpy $175,000 accepted by Redford's
security penetration (read "tiger team") consulting company for a
record-breaking information security project.  Redford's team plus all
the high-priced technical equipment were worth much more than that.
They had to steal the universal decryption black box-the Maltese Falcon
of the movie-and then steal it again from the bad guys posing as NSA
types who steal it from Redford.  There is a neat shoulder-surfing
password pickup by video recording.  There are hacker antics such as a
transfer of President Nixon's net worth to the National Organization for
the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), credit record and license plate
registration privacy invasions, trashing of the NSA, CIA, and FBI, and
liberal-politics slams at President Bush and the Republican Party
well-timed for the upcoming national elections.  However, this is all
tolerable since it is done by Redford's character and his team who all
have serious criminal and other highly unethical practices in their
backgrounds.
     A tiger team attack on a client bank that has relatively good
security is excessively elaborate and would have left the bank guard in
a good position to sue his employer for aggravated assault and mental
anguish.  We will probably have to assure our company management people
that we don't do things like that-but the time to justify your budget
and staff is soon after they see this movie.
     The film ends with the rather patronizing and simplistic advice
that whoever controls the information, controls the world.  Just the
straightforward action and technology without all the liberal politics
and moralizing would have made it even better.
     You and your teenage children and your computer users and
management should all see and enjoy this much-to-be-talked-about film.
