Authors
David Eschatfische
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
No, it's not any amount of excessive violence that will turn your
stomach.
No, it's not even Robert Downey Junior's disgustingly pretentious
accent.
It's the 45-degree camera angles.  If you get even slightly seasick,
you probably won't make it 10 minutes into the dizzying camera work,
the jump cuts, the different film stocks, the discrete stereo effects,
the endless back-projecting and the color tinting.  I guarantee it will
make you at least slightly physically ill.
     Oliver Stone has been trying for years to become Hollywood's
premier mainstream "avant-garde" director.  But face it, JFK and Wild
Palms were just too NORMAL, too well regarded, too typical and, dare
say it, dry.  It looked as if Stone would never be able to wrest the
belt away from David Lynch, even with Lynch's recent failures.
     Then Stone had an idea: re-make WILD AT HEART.  Put in a hint of
what appears on the surface as media satire (so the media will love it,
of course), and stir the whole brew up with more cuts-per-minute than
the average MTV promo.  What we're left with is a bad remake of Wild At
Heart, a very, very weak attempt at satire, and a style of directing
that will batter you with images so quickly and furiously that you
won't have time to think.
     Stone throws in so many purely-for-show elements, the main
offender being relentless back-projection, that you won't notice that
the film doesn't have a plot.  A typical scene from the film featured
Mickey (Woody Harrelson) and Mallory (Juliette Lewis), the celebrated
mass murderers, looking for snake-bite ointment.
     The drug store is lit entirely in lime-green neon, with pink
glowing skeletons at the end of every shelf.  Each aisle's contents are
also labeled in Asian lettering, for no apparent reason.
    The store's HUGE "snake-bite ointment section" is out of ointment.
     So, they kill the store's sole worker when he realizes who they
are and alerts the cops.
     Then, when police show up, an Asian film crew arrives, the female
reporter spouting vaguely phallic comments like "He has a very big
gun!" and "He has been rendered impotent!"  Juliette Lewis sings a few
bars of These Boots are Made for Walking, a copy joins in on the "bew,
bew, bew" part.  Signs in the background sport witty comments about
barbiturates and other drugs, the most puzzling being a sign that says
solely "PATRICIDE: DARKNESS"
     It doesn't make the slightest bit of sense, kids, but it all comes
rushing at you so fast you won't care.  Media pundits have spouted off
about how much NATURAL BORN KILLERS is a scathing satire on the
American media preoccupation with serial killers: the final few shots
of the film (of Tonya Harding, OJ, the other easy targets) would have
you think that's what Stone had in mind.  But the film's philosophical
centerpiece, a head-to-head interview between the host of "American
Maniacs" (Robert Downey Junior) and Mickey.
     It attempts to make a statement about either the "media feeding
frenzy" of public morals, or about the fact that humans are predisposed
to kill for their livelihood (to the level of animals and vegetation
for food).  But it's only a shouting match between two lame-brains, both
of whose ideas are totally idiotic.
     Possibly the most puzzling aspect of the film is its attack on
egoism.  The script attacks two of the supporting characters, the
"American Maniacs" host and the cop who arrests Mickey and Mallory, for
having unrelenting egoism, wanting to have their names on everything.
Is Stone trying to redeem himself, or doesn't he realize his
hypocrisy?
     The constant diarrhea of images is no clue as to what Stone was
thinking either.  The images seem to have a small amount of meaning
based in the context of the film, but that's it.  I mean, for
chrissakes, a little subliminal guy in a devil outfit pops up in jump
cuts throughout the film.
     The only people who manage to maintain their dignity throughout
this mess are Woody Harrelson and Rodney Dangerfield--Woody's
controlled demeanor offsets the glut of overacting in the rest of the
film, and Rodney Dangerfield is just, well, perfect in his role (at
least that's how I always imagined him).  Everyone else seems to react
to the film's amateurish overproduction with glee, and they all ham it
up.
     Oliver Stone is living out a film-school fantasy.  He's made a big
budget picture full of images, ideas, and commentary that add up to the
same sort of absolutely nothing that most student films display.  Stone
wants so bad to be innovative that instead of using film production
technology to make a point, he uses it purely to show what film
production technology can do.
     Out of 10: I'm going to be nice, simply because the film didn't
*bore* me.  Stone was obviously working hard at creating an interesting,
innovative picture, which is much more than you can say about most of
Hollywood.  It's a pity that he can't make a *good* picture.  I give it
a 4.
