Authors
Chris T. Dias
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Dark City (1998)
STARRING: Rufus Sewell, William Hurt, Kiefer Sutherland, Jennifer
Connelly, Richard O'Brien WRITTEN BY: Alex Proyas, Lem Dobbs and David
S. Goyer DIRECTED BY: Alex Proyas.
 Dark City is a great visionary achievement, a film so original and
exciting, it stirred my imagination like no movie has in a long time.
It opens with a narration by Dr.  Schreber (Kiefer Sutherland) who
tells of a dying race known only as The Strangers.  They came down
from a distant world to examine humanity.  Their experiment and their
subjects inhabit a city of rumbling elevated streamlined trains, dank
flophouses, scurrying crowds and store windows.  A city of night and
shadows, but it goes far beyond "Batman" in a richness of ominous,
stylized sets, streets, skylines and cityscapes.  For once a movie
city equals any we could picture in our minds.  A true clash of
futuristic style with a gothic metropolis thrown into the soup.  This
city can't exist in reality...unless it is not reality.
 Here, the sun never rises and midnight falls every 12 hours.  When
the clock strikes twelve, everyone sleeps, and the Strangers emerge.
They run their experiment, change things, and sink back into the
depths to observe.  The people have no idea.  They awake and continue
their lives, oblivious...until something goes wrong.
 On occasion, a person awakes during this frozen time.  They learn the
truth that something bizarre occurs in this town, and they start
asking questions.  One such person is John Murdoch (Rufus Sewell) who
awakens in a strange bathtub beneath a swinging ceiling lamp, to
blood, fear and guilt. The telephone rings; it is Dr.  Schreber
(Kiefer Sutherland), gasping out two or three words at a time, as if
the need to speak is all that gives him breath. He warns Murdoch to
flee, and indeed three Strangers are in the corridor, coming for him.
There is a dead girl at his feet.  Did he commit this crime?  If he is
an evil man, why did he take a moment to save a dying fish?
 He flees.  Without any knowledge of who he is, John wanders through
the town, trying to piece together his past.  He remembers the woman
he loves, or loved--his wife, Emma (Jennifer Connelly), who is a torch
singer with sad eyes and wounded lips. And he remembers ... Shell
Beach?  Where was that? He sees it on a billboard and old longings
stir.
 On top of the billboard, he is attacked by a group Strangers.  They
are as confused as he is.  Why isn't he sleeping like the rest?  The
answer shocks them all, he might be developing their power...the
ability to "tune"-the art of altering matter at its basic level.  This
ability is revealed in its most shocking form when midnight strikes
again and John witnesses the populace falling into comas.  What is
more shocking is how the town changes.  Buildings grow and melt away.
Rooms expand.  A couple in the ghetto is dressed in nice clothes, the
building mutates from a run down apartment block into a mansion.  To
finalize the picture, the couple and anyone related have their
memories implanted by good doctor Shreber.
 John joins with his wife for the search for the truth.  But more than
the Stranger's pursue him.  Lest we forget that Robert was found in a
room with a dead girl.  Apparently this could by his sixth victim.  Is
he a murderer or has he been set up?  The investigator on the case is
new to this precinct, Inspector Bumstead (William Hurt).  He replaces
his predecessor, who apparently, went mad.
 The Strangers have gotten nervous.  To help hunt down Murdoch, one of
their own, Mr. Hand (Richard O'Brien)-They all have names like that.
Their leader is known as Mr.  Book-has Murdoch's own memories
implanted in him so he can think like the human subject.
 Murdoch's problem is that he has no way of knowing if his memories
are real, if his past actually happened, if the women he loves ever
existed.  Those who offer to help him cannot be trusted.  Even his
enemies may not be real. The movie teasingly explores the question
that babies first ask in peek-a-boo: When I can't see you, are you
there?  It's through that game that we learn the difference between
ourselves and others.  But what if we're not there, either?
 Dark City is a glorious marriage of existential dread and slam-bang
action.  From the start, I got somewhat disillusioned from a couple
less-than-spectacular model shots of the city.  The movie seems loose
in its first act.  Only when certain questions are answered about
setting, do we start to fully understand what is going on.  Luckily,
this happens almost immediately...but the story does not open itself
up.  In fact there were surprises I had no idea were coming until the
very end.
 It seems that every year, a low budget sci-fi film comes out that
sweeps the critics.  Somehow, these low-budget flicks aren't seen by
many people.  They slip into obscurity...that is, until word of mouth
gets out and it becomes a cult hit.  Richard O'Brien should be aware
of cult hits (those who know what I am talking about can smirk an
little smirk and continue).
 Two years ago, it was The Arrival, a brilliant film by writer
extrodinaire', David Twohy.  It opened between Mission: Impossible and
Twister and promptly got killed.  Last year, it was Gattaca.  Now, it
is Dark City...too bad there is usually only one of these per year.
Dark City came out too quickly.  For one reason is the little boat
movie that never sinks.
 Dark City is one of the most original science fiction films I have
ever seen.  Please note I use the word "film."  This is the kind of
fiction we see often in novels and comics.  They always have a real
sense of original energy that so many movies lack.  In fact, upon
looking back, there were many elements in this film I that I
remembered in books like Ringworld, comics like Akira, and even the
Final Fantasy computer game.
 However, Dark City plays above them all with a fantastic story.  It
never lays it out in your lap, but unlike some other films, it does
make sense.  So many movies are so confusing, you have to think about
it for hours just put your mind at ease at the plot holes.  Dark City
makes you think but explains just enough that you understand what is
happening.
 The single best part of this film is the ending...It has one.  So
many high budget films of the past year have no third act (see Men in
Black and The Fifth Element).  The energy of the last act is enough
for two films.  Everything comes together with a great irony and
fantastic apocalyptic ballet that made me doubt the budget of this
film.  Alex Proyas is a stylistic director with a great imagination.
I was glued at the visuals of this movie.  The set designs are
unbelievable (reminiscent of Terry Gilliam's Brazil) and the music was
amazingly epic.
 The effects got better and better.  The sequences in so many films
can be switched with other films.  Take the cable car chase from
Metro, The Rock, and Heaven's Prisoners and juggle them around...you
wouldn't tell them apart.  Here, the sequences are very unique.  In
one amazing scene, the Stranger's are tuning the city.  Buildings rise
and fall.  Towers assemble in seconds.  Murdoch is pursued by flying
strangers.  After leaping across rooftops that move up and down, he
finds himself trapped between two buildings which are colliding.  He
then runs through one, out a door, only discover the rest of the
building hasn't been constructed yet.  He hangs for dear life and
saves himself by jumping on a chimney that rises up beside him.  Just
imagine it.
 Dark City is a film that begs repeat viewing because of the amount of
intelligence it shows.  There is so much to see and think about that I
walked away constantly jabbering about its good points.  Dark City is
a great film and I plead to everyone to consider it as an alternative
to the Titanic juggernaut.
GREAT POINTS: SET DESIGN IMAGINATION STORY
DEMOGRAPHIC: There is little language and little blood.  We have
nudity and some dead bodies.  The one thing that will turn off younger
viewers is the same complaint about LA Confidential (complaint?!).
The story is not simple and most kids won't have the foggiest what is
happening.  Dark City is a movie of intelligence.  Unless you have
some, keep away.
-- --- Chris T. Dias --- "The man who runs with scissors."

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
STARRING: Matthew Broderick, Jean Reno, Hank Azaria, Maria Pitillo,
Michael Lerner, Harry Shearer
WRITTEN BY: Dean Devlin & Roland Emmerich
DIRECTED BY: Roland Emmerich
 There are two things I realized that are different with this
Godzilla...let's get it out right now.  No Firebreath is one thing.
This could prove very useful to those pesky helicopters.  The other is
his legs, not erect like a man's but more like a chicken's.  Because
of that, he walks sloped over, unlike the man-in-the-rubber-suit of
the original films.
 So...let us begin with Godzilla.  After a very clever introduction, a
Japanese fisher gets sliced in half.  Then reports from the
Philippines point that a creature took a troll across an island and
dove back into the water.  The military soon calls upon the
government's top nuclear research agent to investigate the strange
residue left behind the creature's imprints.  This is where Nick
Tatopoulos (which no one-can pronounce), no doubt named after the man
who designed the new creature, Patrick Tatopoulos, enters.  He
believes this creature has mutated from a previous reptilian species
by fallout from a French nuclear testing site nearby.  This mutation
soon destroys a trio of fishing boats.  The path points towards a
destination: The city that never sleeps...
 Okay, Manhattan for those not paying attention to the trailers.
 The creature jumps the pier and rides into the island, causing mayhem
and grief for all, including its Mayor, Ebert.  Okay...first of all,
he looks like the guy (played by Lerner).  He has that goofy "thumbs
up" slogan, PLUS his aid is named Gene...the whole joke is as subtle
as a 2x4 in the face...let's move on.
 In an amazingly short time, all of Manhattan is evacuated.  Even the
death count here seems very minor and virtually no one is seen on
screen getting killed but we are assuming some get stomped.  Course,
the media jumps on it...A cameraman, nicknamed "Animal" (Azaria in a
scene stealing performance) gets a shot and fear spreads quickly.  By
nightfall, all of Manhattan is more or less clear.  Now, I don't care
but if they could do that, call up those Deep Impact people, you would
probably save a lot more in that movie.
 Night--and the place is deserted--a fantastic battleground for a ten
story tall monster...without firebreath.  Another figure trying to
cash in the popularity is Audrey Timmonds (Pitillo).  She happens to
be an ex girlfriend of Nick.  She meets up with him in the military
quarantine and steals his information for a story break, which is then
promptly stolen by Audrey's mean boss, Charles Caimen
(Shearer...that's two from the Simpsons...Azaria being the other one).
She is bummed, and very depressed since Nick lost his job with the
military because of the leaked story.  Out on his luck, he moves to
leave town, but is kidnapped by the enigmatic Phillippe Roche (Reno as
great as ever).  Roche is a man who claims to be from the insurance
company when he first appears but is eventually revealed to be from
the French Secret Service, trying to clean up the mess his country
began.
 He believes Nick's latest finding, a finding that the US military
doesn't endorse: That this creature (named Godzilla for the totally
inept) was born, and currently is, pregnant.  Perfect, above all
things, this creature is a tribble as well.  They decide to venture
forth into the deserted Manhattan to locate the Lizard's nest.
Course, as Nick and Phillipe sneak back into town, A pesky reporter
and her freaky reporter follow them in...
 Did I mention there was a big lizard In this movie...Oh yes, and the
army sends everything they got against this thing...That includes
seemingly a hundred attack choppers, jets, submarines, tanks and lots
of expendable soldiers with machine guns.  All they have to believe in
is what Arnold said once in a movie, "If it bleeds, we can kill it."
 Its just too bad they couldn't get access to the Z-1000 Attack
Hovercraft from Godzilla 1985.  Could have taken care of this creature
early.
   I loved the opening of this film.  It was craftily made with
cleaver old fashion photography of French nuclear testing under the
observing eye of some Iguanas.  It then moves into introducing its
characters, some of the best the Devlin / Emmerich have made.  The
film doesn't focus on four or five groups, just one.  Unfortunately,
they can't seem to put that much skill into writing that one plot.
When the film discusses the creature, the town, or the major plot
points to resolve problems, the film works well.  However when the
film lowers itself to discussing the personal problems of its
characters, the films stalls.  I mean who cares.  The writing is so
immature when dealing with the romance of two characters as a ten
story tall creature destroys New York.
 I felt that Timmonds and Tatopolous to be very boring.  Just get back
to the action.  I wasn't interested in Sam Neil's relationship with
Laura Dern in Jurassic Park.  Who cares?  The other characters are
great.  I love Reno's character and Azaria steals his scenes.  They
make sense and if the film concentrated on them reacting rather than
dealing with their personal lives, the film would work a lot
better....  But when the action starts, it totally powers the simple
script.
 The first appearance of the creature is simple.  I must admit, I miss
the erect rubber suit creature.  This new one looks too much like an
oversized raptor...and thus spawns the only real problem with e
action.  The film has some great scenes as choppers race down the fast
moving Godzilla through the streets at night.  And there are some
submarine sequences that really caught my eye.  And the climax is to
die for, but near the end of the film, as the group searches for the
rest, there are some sequences that seem taken right out of Jurassic
Park.  I have seen these before and didn't really care to see them
again.  We only care about the big destruction, and I am happy to say
the film delivers, kudos to the advertising campaign that kept so many
scenes out of the commercials.  It left so much more to see.  I really
enjoyed this thrill ride of a film.
 Is it better than ID4?  I have to say yes.  It is not as funny
(because of the lack of Will Smith) but the action is much more
exciting with more screams and yelps from the audience.  I found
myself following along the fun and clapping at the destruction of the
town.  Godzilla was an exciting film and worth seeing twice, just as
long as you don't mind the petty love story...and no
firebreath...jeez...
DEMOGRAPHIC: Godzilla has very little onscreen violence but there is
wall to wall destruction.  People get crushed but you don't seem them
after.  There is not hefty violence beyond that.  Honestly, Godzilla
has probably the lowest body count of all the creature flicks of the
same name.  In those films, the town is not luckily deserted when the
mayhem begins...I still think that is very peculiar...
-- --- Chris T. Dias --- "The man who runs with scissors."

Title
Review for Deep Impact (1998)
STARRING: Robert Duvall, Tea Leoni, Morgan Freeman, Elijah Wood, Vanessa Redgrave
WRITTEN BY: Michael Tolkin and Bruce Joel Rubin.
DIRECTED BY: Mimi Leder.
**OVERVIEW**
 Leo Biederman (Wood) studies the stars with his astronomy class.
During his studies, he discovers a small bright spot.  His teacher
sends it off to be studied.  He discovers that Leo has found a new
comet.  That, in of itself, is a career-making discovery.  It quickly
gets dashed when the astronomer realizes this comet is heading
directly for Earth.  But, as he leaves the tell the world, a runaway
semi mows down his Jeep, preventing the world from knowing of the
approaching comet.
 Fast-Forward one year later, with a major Clinton-esque controversy
arising.  The president just might be having an affair with woman
named in files simply as Ellie. Tea Leoni plays a reporter for MSNBC
who suspects there's more to the story of a cabinet official's
resignation.  She accuses him of having an affair with this woman and
he gets to say, "I know you're just a reporter, but you used to be a
person."
 Soon she discovers her error; he is resigning not because of Ellie
but because of an E.L.E., which is jargon for "Extinction Level
Event." He wants to spend more time with his family, and has stocked a
yacht with dozens of cases of vitamin-rich Ensure. He must not have
been invited to the briefing where it was explained that all surface
life would be destroyed by the comet, or the other briefing about the
1,000-foot-tall tidal wave. My guess is, the president wanted him out
of the Cabinet.
 The president, played convincingly by Morgan Freeman, goes on TV to
break the bad news to the world, and talks of the Messiah Project,
which will send a manned U.S.-Russian space craft to plant nuclear
bombs in the comet and blow it up. We meet the Messiah crewmembers,
including old Spurgeon Tanner (Robert Duvall), called out of
retirement because he once landed on the moon and might be able to
land on the comet.
 The younger crewmembers resent him, we are told, although dissension
onboard is never followed up on. The veteran has a nice line about the
youngsters: "They're not scared of dying.  They're just scared of
looking bad on TV."  There's another good line at the high school
assembly where the Leo who also discovered the comet is honored. A
friend tells him, "You're gonna have a lot more sex starting now.
Famous people always get more sex."
 So, within 30 minutes of the film, the Messiah is launched...and 40
minutes in the film, they bounce along the surface.  The first hour of
the film runs like wildfire.  By the end of the first hour, the
Messiah pulls away from the comet and attempts to destroy it.  The
plan fails and instead of shattering, the comet breaks in two small
parts.  The 1.5 mile splinter will smack the Atlantic and cannot be
avoided.  However, if the larger 7-mile long one hits, there goes all
life on the Earth.
 So, to make sure life will go on, each country is constructing
underground caves that a select few will live until the disaster
passes.  Then they will emerge to repopulate the globe.  A lottery
will be held and those lucky enough will be able live on.  The others
can only pray.  As the time ticks down, Earth holds its breath.
 Deep Impact could have been really bad...thankfully it wasn't.  It
takes itself very seriously and never tries to be campy.  It does this
by trying its best to make things believable.  This stems from making
the Messiah ship realistic.  It looks prefabricated, thrown together
quickly in a year with an engine system I actually read about many
years ago in a Carl Sagan book.  But before I started liking this
ship, the crew is on the comet, bouncing around 1/10 gravity and ready
to plant the bombs.  I wish this film was longer because then it would
allow us to enjoy the epic scale of this movie.  Instead it rushes
into its drama of who would live and who will die.
 And they do die.  There are four major character in Deep Impact:
Leoni, Duvall, Wood, Freemen.  Then there is about six to eight
characters surrounding each of them.  Of those 30 plus speaking parts,
about six survive.  Morgan Freemen's role, if replaced by a no name,
would be totally unimportant.  He is delegated to simply sitting in
front of a camera and reading off a teleprompter.  Easy job.
 The biggest role comes from Leoni and Duvall, two good actors in good
roles.  Obviously Duvall steals all his scenes and Leoni wasn't as bad
some made her out to be.  I couldn't find really any bad acting in the
film, so what's left is its effects and story.
 As for the story the film does teeter precariously on that tight rope
between ID4 and Mars attacks where there are four or five totally
different stories and you really only care about one or two,
everything else is just boring.  Luckily, Deep Impact only has three
major pots running and you like them all, even though the Messiah
mission was the leader for me.
 When the first comet strikes, the effects are startling, but
familiar.  The initial tidal wave is amazing and jaw dropping but when
it starts sweeping through Manhattan and Washington, its reminds me of
the fireball sequences in Independence Day with the cars flipping and
buildings falling.  The best of these is an underwater sequence of
Manhattan showing the head of the Statue of Liberty floating to the
bottom.
 Could Deep Impact be better?  Yeah...there were some strange actions
by some people and I think that some of the solutions people had to
some problems were tossed aside.  One example is that the President
announces they launched nukes to take out the big rocket but then
announces that they failed.  No effects, no suspense, like this plot
point was just tossed away.
 I liked Deep Impact.  It seems appealing to both disaster fans and
science fiction nuts.  I enjoyed it and the ending was very
satisfying.  As for that big rock...
 ...Well...I was sitting in my chair as Freemen announced the landing
site.  I mean here we are, in Prince George, high up, far in the
continent.  We should be okay.  Then he says the second big rock will
impact in Western Canada...Everyone in the audience just threw their
arms up, "Well, we're screwed!!"
DEMOGRAPHIC: Deep impact has a high fatality rate but no one dies on
camera.  Millions die in the disaster but luckily, we don't see any.
Language is minor and film can be very downbeat in its climax.  Makes
you proud to be a human being.  Too bad there aren't any aliens to
blast away...

Title
Review for Big Hit, The (1998)
STARRING: Mark Wahlberg, Lou Diamond Phillips, Christina Applegate,
Avery Brooks, Bokeem Woodbine, Lainie Kazan, Elliott Gould WRITTEN BY:
Ben Ramsey DIRECTED BY: Che-Kirk Wong.
 Melvin Smiley (Walhberg) can't stand anyone not liking him.  This is
strange considering Melvin is a professional hit man.  He has a Jewish
fiancée, Pam (Applegate) and a mistress.  The stress of these
radically diverse lifestyles clashing forces Melvin to drink Mylanta
out of the bottle daily.
 He really wants to close down many of these problems but that would
mean hurting people he doesn't want hurt.  Course, you would think of
all the people he killed, most of their families probably don't like
him very much.  Now consider his partners, all of which take advantage
if easy-going demeanor.  One is Crunch (Woodbine) who has just
discovered masturbation.  In fact, he loves it so much, he has decided
to swear off women.  As a running joke, we constantly see him with
some hand gripper, continually pumping up.
 Melvin's best friend is Cisco (Phillips), who uses his friends
vulnerabilities against him, even to the point of getting the bonus
from the last mission from their employer, Paris (Avery Brooks).
 However, Cisco next job is personal.  He devised a plan to seal the
daughter of a famous Chinese millionaire and then ransom her for his
fortune.  Cisco cons his friends into joining, not knowing that this
kidnapping is unauthorized.  Complications further ensue when the
group discovers not only is the millionaire broke, swindling his money
on a film about himself, but that his daughter is the goddaughter of
Paris.
 Soon, favors are pulled and without knowing the truth, Paris calls
upon Cisco to find the kidnappers.  Meanwhile, the daughter, Keiko
(China Chow), was held up at Walhberg's mistress's place but she soon
dumps him and the girl and his place, as Melvin is hosting a dinner
with his fiancée and her two very old-fashioned parents.
 To cover his own rear, Cisco decided to frame his own group.  Melvin
also seems to have a crush on his kidnapped victim.  Keep downing that
Mylanta.
 The Big Hit is more a comedy than an action movie, as the tries to
make fun of itself as it tries to still maintain its own cliché's.
Meaning it seems to know the problems with today's action films but
does them anyway.  Melvin's character seems too one-sided; you can't
understand why he refused to tell some of these people off.  The
script tries to be funny, and it succeeds in many fields.  As an
action film, it doesn't fare well.  The action scenes are good except
there are infrequent and every stunt is in the commercial.  This
leaves very little left over for us to enjoy.  Luckily, the humor kept
me occupied.
 Walhberg is convincing in his role and I especially liked Lou Diamond
Phillips.  In fact, there was no real bad acting in the film.  Yes,
Even Christina Applegate proved her worth.  I especially liked Avery
Brooks as a villain in comparison to his heroic Captain Sisko on Star
Trek: Deep Space 9.
 The directing was good to, with interesting camera work in many
scenes.  One stand out shot shows Cisco smoking a cigarette.  As the
smoke falls from his fingers, the camera move up and past him
surprisingly fast-the cigarette still falling.  It moves right past
him, and follows another Paris.  It stayed in my memory as being very
clever.
 Besides one or two scenes, The Big Hit is forgettable.  In one ear
and out the other.  The acting is good and the film tries, but it
still cannot break free of its own mold...even though, unlike other
films, it knows its fit and enjoys the comfort.  I jus wished it broke
out and explored new things in the genre.  The Last Action Hero was an
action film that poked fun of Hollywood action but it couldn't break
out of its own cliché.  The Big Hit is the same way, forced into
the creaks and crevices of the Hong Kong action-fest.  It acknowledges
its problems, but doesn't fix them.
MINUSES: -LACKLUSTER PLOT -CORNY CLICHES
