Authors
Choo Eng Aun, Jack
Number of Reviews
20

Title
Review for eXistenZ (1999)
Directed by David Cronenberg
Starring : Jude Law, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Don McKellar
Running Time approximately 1hr 40mins
The movie starts with a rather se7en-ish opening sequence, rather cool and
sets the mood for things to come. The story propels the audience into a
neo-reality; somewhat very close to conscious reality but laced with weird
tinges of blue and red. eXisTenZ is actually the name of a new
virtual-reality game. Supposedly, VR games are highly popular as is
considered a legal-drug in this neo-reality. **** (Leigh) is the ultimate
game creator and introduces her ultimate game-experience in the form of
eXisTenZ. Players are required to have bio-ports embedded in their spine,
which plugs to a game-pod in order to enjoy the immersive experience.
During a secretive beta-testing-cum-teaser meeting for this new game, an
assassination attempt on *** life occurs and she runs off with fellow
bodyguard *** (Law). *** is more of a realists than anything else, afraid
that he'll lose reality if he begin to play these games but *** requires his
help to immerse together with her into eXisTenZ to check if the program is
still functioning properly after the assassination attempt. As they soon
discover, they are transported between realities within eXisTenZ  uncovering
more than they initially expected.
eXisTenZ has all the Cronenberg-gore that is expected of him. Even so, this
film is no-where near his cult classics such as Videodrome or Scanners. Not
even half as suspenseful as the commercially successful The Fly. eXisTenz
can probably be looked upon as his 90's version of Videodrome, even so, it
is a poor follow-up. While in most of his famed films, his penchant for gore
always hit the right note with theme of the film and plot. In eXisTenz, the
gory sequences are no more attached to spirit of the film and seem to be an
act of over-indulgence than anything else.
Jennifer Jason Leigh and Jude Law, both commendable actors, looked aloof and
miss-directed throughout the entire film. The scripting and acting barely
pulls the film out of the B-grade category. It was obvious that Cronenberg
worked on a really tight-budget and it seems that he handled that pretty
well in the production design and values created for this film (the opening
sequence, though, probably formed a considerable portion of the budget!)
which is actually quite good.
eXisTenZ is too predictable and cliched in these times. 10 years ago, it
would have been another classic for Cronenberg. Cronenberg fans however,
(those people who enjoy seeing friends getting queasy over mutilation on
film) should not give this film a miss as some form of appreciation can
still be offered by you.

Title
Review for Horse Whisperer, The (1998)
A veteran returns to the helm, this time directing probably his best =
effort ever. Even though Robert Redford's time as a box-office star in =
his younger days are long gone (in the likes of Paul Newman and Steve =
Macqueen, in the eary 70's), his progress in the art of American Cinema =
never did cease.  Departing the indulgence with complexities in modern =
human lives (QUIZ SHOW), THE HORSE WHISPERER, wonderfully merges scarred =
lives in a beautiful tale of spiritual and emotional healing.
The film opens into a cold harsh winter sequence followed by a shot of =
Grace (Johansson) getting out of bed cheerfully to meet up with her best =
friend, obviously a routine but enjoyed by both. Grace looks forward to =
this meeting as it involves her other best friend, a horse named =
Pilgrim.  As both of them rode their horses through the snow, gossiping =
on boy topics, an unexpected accident occurs. The result; the death of =
her best friend and the loss of part of her right leg. Pilgrim survived =
the accident, heavily scarred and injured. Deeply shocked with the =
incident, Robert (Neill) and Annie (Thomas) struggled to come in terms =
with the trauma which had obviously devoid Grace of any form of hope in =
life. Pilgrim's entire persona too, has changed. Wild and violent, =
Pilgrim is no longer the same horse which embraced Grace's love and =
care.=20
Knowing how much the horse meant to Grace, Annie put her ladder-climbing =
career as a magazine editor on hold to drives both Grace and Pilgrim to =
the wild-west to a well known `Horse Whisperer', Tom Booker (Redford). =
The `Horse Whisperer', like Booker is known to have a special talent in =
being able to relate to the emotion of horses.  Annie hopes that by =
bringing healing Pilgrim, which to her, personifies an icon of hope to =
Grace, will ultimately heal her daughter as well. Little does she know, =
Booker will heal just a bit more than Pilgrim.
THE HORSE WHISPERER merges Pilgrim, Annie, Grace, Booker and Robert, =
each with their own personal in-bound demons and liberates them; =
providing a solution to all but one. While I will no tell you the =
ultimate outcome of it all, I will tell you that Booker's character is =
probably one of the greatest `hero' to embrace the screen. Redford and =
Thomas both give Oscar-nominate-able performances as Booker and Annie =
respectively. Two other performances worthy of mention comes from =
Johansson as the out-of-hope Grace and of course, who cannot fall in =
love with that Brown Wonder, Pilgrim.
Redford's ability as a director may as well earn him some sort of =
recognition here. Even though most will find the pace a tad too slow, =
THE HORSE WHISPERER never falters in term of story progression and =
character development. The wonderful cinematography and landscapes =
formed the formula for a remarkable visual experience but it too served =
in many ways to belittle its characters, making them seemingly powerless =
to their surroundings, hence increasing their vulnerability. Smart move, =
Mr. Redford.
THE HORSE WHISPERER is definitely one of the best films I've seen this =
year.

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
THE MATRIX is possibly one of the most imaginative Hollywood film of this
decade. This kung-fu laced sci-fi fantasy has the enough action to drive any
action fan crazy (even put to shame many kung-fu based movies from Hong
Kong) and one of the most imaginative yet surprisingly believable plot ever
conceived for commercial film. This review contain spoilers that may ruin
your enjoyment of the film by knowing too much but this is one film which is
so hard to review without giving away too much. Do discontinue your reading
now and watch the film immediately! I guess by now, word-of-mouth would
generated on this movie would have seep through the crevices of every
movie-goer in this world. So does it matter really? Oh well.
The story brings us the revelations concerning `The One' Thomas Anderson
(Reeves), a computer-geek who when not working in his white-collar computing
job in a big firm, he will be spending time at home, in front of his
computer, grabbing `contraband' information from the net for sale. Call it a
bit of `side-income' but Thomas is indeed onto something when he is
mysteriously led to the man he has been seeking for so long; the elusive yet
almost godly Morpheus. Thomas's obsession is fueled by his curiosity on THE
MATRIX and it this inner obsession that inadvertently led him, almost by
fate to Morpheus, the guru on the subject.

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
When I first heard of CONTACT, the hype was building it up as a sci-fi
blockbuster. Now, with that in mind, coupled with the knowledge of Jodie
Foster's involvement in the project, I thought "What in the world is Foster
doing in a sci-fi blockbuster???". As it turned out, my expectations were
completely nullified and turned topsy-turvy. Robert Zemeckis, back from the
euphoria created by his last film, FORREST GUMP, once again proves his
mastery in fusing tales of adventure with along the endearing lines of
human spirit. 
Don't get me wrong, CONTACT is sci-fibut with a definite difference. Based
on the late Carl Sagan novel of the same name, the story delves itself in
questions on science and god; fact and faith. Allie (Foster) is a radio
astronomer. She spends her time listening to the stars, via ultra-huge
communication dishes in search of intelligent life beyond the Solar System.
Her passion for `long-distance communication' is the result of her younger
days being spent avidly in front of a ham-radio system (a hobbyist radio
communication device) which her late-father bought for her. A scene which
particularly strengthens the audiences' view of the passion is when she
asked her father whether she could contact her late-mother through the
ham-radio system in which her father replied "Not even the most powerful
radio in the world can do that, now".
Allie's research is based on the SETI project (Search for Extra Terrestrial
Intelligence), in which she listens to radio emissions from other galaxies
in the hope of finding one which would suggest intelligent manipulation.
Her work has never been off the scrutiny of the US government, which
considers it a waste of taxpayer's money and politically unviable, her
supervisor (Tom Skerritt) pulls the plug on SETI. Undaunted, Allie managed
to gather a loyal group of `believers' and eventually found funding from a
large private corporation. The following months were treacherous to their
hopes and research as they are contantly pressured by the government but
all that changed when one day, she caught an emission of a seemingly
intelligent repeating sound-wave. The news of her find attracted hordes of
alien believers, cultist, the media and of course, the government. The
situation became intense upon her discovery of pictorial plans on building
a form of transport which were embedded within the repeating sound
emission.
As the world join forces to build this transport, Allie is desperate to be
the one to go. She enrols herself among a few hopefuls, to represent the
world when the transport is ready for operation. Her eligibility for the
spot failed when she is questioned on her beliefs in the existence of god
by the President's spiritual advisor (McConaughey); Allie, being an
atheist, a result of her belief in fact and science, refuses to budge upon
questioning. At this point the movie plot thickens considerably as she is
romantically involved with the President's spiritual advisor. 
A strong point which propelled the movie is the depth of its main
characters played by Foster and McConaughey. From the very first meeting
scene, it is obvious that the two of them was sort of kindred spirits but
they were worlds apart in almost all aspects, Foster being a person drawn
to science and facts and McConaughey being one who believes in faith, hope
and the power of the unseen. The meeting of their worlds, added with the
situation which they are put into makes the entire storytelling process
near flawless. Many people who read the synopsis of this film would find it
a tad too ridiculous, but by actually immersing yourself in it, gives you
an entirely different perspective; one which is free from bias and
pre-conceptions. Zemeckis and his team of screen writers have done a
remarkable job in telling this tale through film. 
CONTACT works by NOT delving in controversy but rather, touches the
thinking audience, urging them to ponder upon the questions raised in the
film concerning fact and faith; whether one can actually find compromise
within. I consider CONTACT as one of the must-sees for this year. 

Title
Review for Deep Impact (1998)
METEOR THREAT SET TO BLOW AWAY ALL VOLCANOES & TWISTERS!
Summer is here again! This season could probably be the most ambitious =
season this decade with Hollywood churning out films like DEEP IMPACT, =
GODZILLA, THE X-FILES, ARMAGEDDON, THE TRUMAN SHOW, all of which has but =
one main aim, to rock the box office. Leading the pack this summer is =
DEEP IMPACT, one of the first few film releases from the =
Spielberg-Katzenberg-Geffen's Dreamworks production company. Following =
the rather dismal showing of their previous two releases; MOUSEHUNT and =
AMISTAD, DEEP IMPACT shines with elements which could just make it one =
of the biggest movies of the year.
DEEP IMPACT begins with the discovery of an Earth bound comet during a =
school astronomy outing by Leo Beiderman (Elijah Wood) which =
subsequently stirred up the political community of the world. Keeping =
the information under wraps to prevent widespread panic, President Beck =
(Morgan Freeman) took it upon himself and his subordinates to execute a =
highly secretive space project to destroy the comet before it hits =
earth. While pursuing a sex-scandal story amongst the presidential =
ranks, ambitious up and coming reporter, Jenny Lerner (Tea Leoni) =
unfolds the wool that President Beck has pulled over the citizens of the =
world. As if the knowledge of the imminent annihilation of mankind is =
not enough, Jenny has to come to terms with her father (Maximillian =
Schell) leaving the mother for a younger woman.=20
President Beck announces the discovery and preparations to destroy the =
comet exactly one-year later, with so much confidence that it left no =
trace of panic within the American community. Achieving fame from =
announcement of the comet Wolf-Beiderman en-route to Earth (the name of =
its discoverers), Leo Beiderman continues life in his small town as a =
young celebrity. A team of astronauts, led by the ageing veteran =
astronaut Spurgeon Tanner (Robert Duvall), was secretly trained to carry =
out the mission to land on the comet and create and explosion with a =
nuclear device, with the hope of blowing it out of its current path =
towards Earth. Despite him being the most experienced in the team, the =
younger generation of astronauts in the team doubts Tanner's ability due =
to his age. But these are just problems of individuals. Life on Earth =
goes on as any other day, confident that the comet will be destroyed.
When the attempt to avert Wolf-Beiderman's path failed and caused the =
comet to split into two: Comet Wolf and Comet Beiderman, the President =
unfolds his contingency plan to evacuate part of the population, leaving =
the rest to die. Citizens are randomly chosen to live underground for 2 =
years prior to impact, when the dust due to the impact around earth have =
settled, by then all life on the surface would have died. Jenny and Leo =
were picked but many of their loved ones were not, only a handful of =
Earth's population will be saved from destruction. =20
DEEP IMPACT's moving moments occur in the least special-effect laced =
scenes. While the effects are fantastic, they only form a small part of =
the film, which indulges itself in the development of its main =
characters; Leo, Lerner and Tanner. Leo's struggle when he learns that =
his girlfriend is not part of the population to be saved, Lerner's =
dwindling relationship with her father and her pain for the mother's =
loneliness, Tanner's strive to gain the respect he deserves from his =
crew and his ultimate sacrifice, all form the backbone of DEEP IMPACT's =
moving moments. DEEP IMPACT smells suspiciously like the previous year =
release CONTACT despite vivid differences. I think its probably because =
they both delve in a story of global proportions and indulges in the =
premise of hope, faith and life itself. Both do not depend heavily on =
eye-candy in the form of CGI effects.  Director Mimi Leder (who won =
numerous awards directing television series, and made her debut with =
PEACEKEEPER last year) is definitely a director to watch.=20
Despite this being the first of the two meteor movies this summer (the =
other being ARMAGEDDON), I think there will be stark differences in the =
approach to the subject matter. While the premise of both may be the =
same, execution and focus of the films will in fact show that DEEP =
IMPACT has more focus on human elements than ARMAGEDDON, which is done =
by the team which brought us BAD BOYS, CRIMSON TIDE and THE ROCK. =20
DEEP IMPACT should be able to satisfy a variety of audiences; from the =
most action-craving to those who just want to immerse into its =
manipulative but nonetheless dramatic premise.

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
If I were to plot a graph of year against movie-plot-ridiculity for =
Hollywood movies, you'll probably see a line with constant gradient. =
Now, if I were to plot that same graph for the movies that the Michael =
Bay/Jerry Bruckheimer has made over the last 4 years, that line would be =
exponential in growth. The team started out with the Will Smith vehicle =
BAD BOYS which was no more than a 2hr long action-music-video, =
nevertheless entertaining. Then came THE ROCK, where audiences flocked =
to see NICHOLAS CAGE team up with SEAN CONNERY against some terrorizing =
general fighting over some stupid cause. CON-AIR was ridiculousy dumb in =
its premise but it did have fun moments, and who can forget the nursery =
rhyme sang by that psycho killer played by STEVE BUSCEMI. While these =
movies worked because there was something better to cover-up the dirt, =
ARMAGEDDON does not.
Very much like DEEP IMPACT, a meteor is heading towards Earth and they =
didn't realize it until 18 days from impact. DEEP IMPACT settled with =
the modest meteor size as large as the city of New York but ARMAGEDDON =
just had to be BIGGER....well about the size of Texas (that kinda meteor =
whould probably knock Earth out of its orbit!). The panic of this =
sighting spurs the idea of landing people on the meteor, drill it then =
nuke it (sounds familiar) and who better to do such a job than Harry =
Stamper  (Bruce Willis), your very own oil-driller extraordinaire and =
his team of macho-misfits, nursing the tagline `there ain't nothin' on =
this planet that Harry can't drill!'. In that 18 days, Harry's group was =
split into 2 teams, trained for deep-space flight and finally blasted =
into space in with special drilling vehicles on 2 new space shuttles.
The main relationship drama of ARMAGEDDON is formed within the =
relationship of Harry, A.J. and Grace. To give you an idea, A.J. works =
for Harry, and loves Grace, Harry's daughter.  The problem is, Harry =
hates to see his daughter hanging around some scruffy grunt like himself =
for the rest of her life. So while A.J. and Harry struts it out, Grace =
is place in a position where she is unable to take sides, so she remains =
seated in the NASA control tower, crying over both of them in about 80% =
of the movie.
The human elements this movie tries to inject proves to be nothing more =
than just an excuse for more slow-mo's and gold-tinted photography. The =
anguish of the world is potrayed with scenes of people praying, running =
for their lives or just sitting still staring at the sky, sounds fine =
right? I know, but it looks too out of place on screen, too staged. If =
you were to ask yourself, `What's the difference between ARMAGEDDON and =
a R&B music video?" you'd probably just said `The music.". Not =
surprising since Michael Bay is a child of that industry and has =
actually managed to transpose his MTV skills to screen successfully. His =
foray into ARMAGEDDON just proves that he doesn't when to stop.
Well there's really nothing much to sum up here. The =
Stock-Aitken-Waterman of Hollywood Movies have projected their art-form =
into ridiculity, beyond the plane believability, where people still =
accept even if they didn't believe. DEEP IMPACT was ridiculous in most =
aspects and I believe the makers know this. The thing is, they decided =
to shroud myth and fantasy with a purely believable human tale of =
suffering and coming in terms with ones problems, which ultimately =
brought it above the ashes which it had initially put itself in. =
ARMAGEDDON, is an overcrowded, loud, messy, preposterously manipulative =
waste of money and deserves to remain in that same pile of ash..=20
If you have planned to watched this over DEEP IMPACT because of Liv =
Tyler, Bruce Willis or the tagline "From the makers of `THE ROCK'!!". =
Please catch DEEP IMPACT before it finishes its run, it may be the only =
meteor worth watching in long-long time. If you have to see it, please =
bring ear-plugs and some aspirins (for the vertigo). Expect ARMAGEDDON =
LD's to retail at S$19.90 at CarreFour come release time. Gee......even =
that's not worth it!

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
No, it is not a bad film, in fact it is so good in achieving its =
purpose, I actually wished for the film to end itself quickly. EVENT =
HORIZON is not your run-of-the-mill sci-fi film, I'm sure many who have =
watched this will agree with me. It is not even original in that sense, =
and it does borrow heavily from films like ALIEN, HELLRAISER and even =
BLADE RUNNER. The magic of this film lies in its unorthodox setting and =
methodical build-up that makes it wonderfully horrifying.
The story brings us to the year 2050, where space travel have since =
enormously progressed. The EVENT HORIZON is actually a ship built for a =
secret experimental purpose; it has the ability to fold time and space =
thus making it possible for travelling distances not reachable in a =
man's lifetime. The ship disappeared as soon as it went into operation =
but after 7 years, it reappeared again within the orbit of Neptune. A =
search and rescue team led by Miller (Fishburne) is given the task to =
check for survivors of the EVENT HORIZON. The designer of the ship, Dr. =
Weir (Neill) follows along to satisfy his curiosity on what actually =
happened to his otherwise technologically impressive ship.
EVENT HORIZON is a sci-fi horror film, much truer to the word than say, =
ALIEN would ever be. While in ALIEN, the crew has to cope with a =
ferocious creature while encased within tight spaces, in EVENT HORIZON, =
the forces which goes against the crew is undefined but yet so powerful =
and horrifying. The story unfolds itself slowly and the suspense buildup =
is superb, up till the point where I really felt like saying out loud =
`enough! I can't stand this anymore!'. There are more than enough jolts =
to send your adrenalin pumping overtime. The story in itself is not =
exactly something very exciting and also, the acting is only at most, =
average by most commercial standards. Even so, the essence of horror is =
carried out very well in this film, thanks to its well-paced =
storytelling, disturbing set designs and some really gory sequences =
(which incidentally, has been quite generously removed by our censorship =
board).=20
Director Paul Anderson (who did MORTAL KOMBAT) and his team of =
`atmosphere' creators have done well in keeping EVENT HORIZON within the =
bounds of the term `horror'. This picture did not do very well in the US =
box-office most probably for the dread-factor impact it has on most =
audiences; people will not see it again and not many would recommend =
their friend to watch this. Although on the face of it, EVENT HORIZON is =
mostly molded for mass-entertainment; many thrills, spills and suspense =
to keep audiences in focus. However, the offbeat horror element which it =
ultimately convey audiences is very disturbing. My friend and I could =
not say a word to each other for quite a while after going through the =
`experience' of EVENT HORIZON. I guess it was just the immense feeling =
of dread which the film had cast upon us.
Be forewarned, this film is not for the faint-hearted nor for pure =
entertainment. Be prepared to be disturbed if you should decide to watch =
this film! EVENT HORIZON is highly recommended=85=85but at your own =
risk! It has been a long time since good-horror embraced the big screen, =
and EVENT HORIZON is one.
------=_NextPart_000_01BDB37A.450CF120--

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
TITANIC carries with it the hype of being the most expensive film ever
made. With a whopping US$200 million price tag on it, the hype surrounding
the movie was immense. Like WATERWORLD, people would like to see it; mostly
to see how bad it would sink. It proved otherwise. Rather than sinking with
its immense budget and hype or merely floating along with most mediocre
Hollywood films, it jumped straight out of the water and flew beyond
expectations.  People who watch this movie with or without a pre-set
thinking will be pleasantly surprised with what TITANIC has to offer, in
terms of a well-balanced movie.
I could not begin to agree that it was money well spent. After all, US$200
million is a LOT of money for a movie. Too much in all aspects of
movie-making. James Cameron commissioned ILM (Industrial Light and Magic),
which did all those superb effects in THE LOST WORLD, STARSHIP TROOPERS and
MEN IN BLACK to re-create the ship in computer graphics and mixing them
seamlessly with live-action footage. The set designs were very good, and so
much money was spent that there are rumours going about that they auctioned
the sets off after the movie was shot to cut back this over-budgeted movie.
Even the carpets used in the film was made by the original manufacturer for
those in the real Titanic way back in the early 1900s.
TITANIC revolves around the love-story between two characters; Jack Dawson
(DiCaprio) and Rose Calvert (Winslet). Jack, a care-free drifter who seizes
life by the day, wins a 3rd class ticket for the maiden voyage of the ship
over a hand of poker. Rose, on the other hand, hates everything about her
life although she is to wed a rich aristocrat (Billy Zane). Rose's feeling
of being contained is only reinforced with all the pressures put upon her
by her mother, so as to save their family name and status. Her unorthodox
meeting with Jack presented her with the opportunity to run away from her
emotional predicament and to allow herself to discover what she really
needs out of life. 
This film does not possess the complexity in terms of style and
story-telling like say, L.A.CONFIDENTIAL but ironically so, this is also
one of its greatest merits which actually makes this film highly watchable.
The idealistic love-story between Jack and Rose crosses into the `fantasy'
region almost all the time throughout the film and the dialogue exchanged
during such moments are not quite easy to swallow as real-life situations.
It is the innocence and pureness in their relationship which actually make
tragedy more enthralling and extreme. With all the special-effects and
great action surrounding the film, audiences will definitely feel that
TITANIC is close to the ultimate tragedy love-story. This sets TITANIC much
higher than other `disaster' films due to this central focus on their
relationship.
Director James Cameron has come a LONG way since his first movie, a
well-forgotten low budget flick called PIRANHA 2 : THE SPAWNING. Since
then, he has moved on to direct box-office hits like THE TERMINATOR,
TERMINATOR 2, ALIENS and TRUE LIES, making him one of the most bankable
action movie directors of all time. We can still see him flexing those
well-respected skills in action sequences in TITANIC. What really impressed
was this action-based director was actually using his skills to support a
love-story rather than to allow action to be the central-focus of the film
and best of all, how he managed to pull it off successfully. Watch out for
this film in the upcoming Academy Awards. James Cameron may be on of the
top contenders for best director. 
Despite its long running time (over 3hrs!),  audiences will not feel that
it was draggy or slow. The last film which I felt the same for the running
time was for BRAVEHEART. The film was never a moment uninteresting nor
slow; there is always something to keep audiences `occupied'. Highly
Recommended.  

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
STARSHIP TROOPERS is a US$100++ million action film. I can't say if
Hollywood is wasting money on such films because at the end of the day, the
business part of film-making rules in Hollywood. The trailers have probably
given you the idea that this film is a special-effects laden piece of work
and in this department, it does not disappoint at all. Perhaps if we look
into the direction of Paul Verhoeven, we can understand why STARSHIP
TROOPERS is what it is. He gave us the violent ROBOCOP (his US film debut),
then onto the sexual-thriller BASIC INSTINCT, the clever TOTAL RECALL and
most recently, his infamous work on the violently illicit SHOWGIRLS.
Violence is a recurring thing in all his films, not action and in STARSHIP
TROOPERS, he has shown his love for mayhem yet again, this time with a lot
of money. 
I have not read the Robert Heinlein book in which it is supposed to be
based on but from what I hear over the internet, fans of the book are
running amok, burning down theatres showing the film. Of course I was
joking but you get the idea. Verhoeven has interlaced STARSHIP TROOPERS
with media inspired propaganda advertisements of the military in conveying
this film. This is perhaps the more interesting feature of the movie and
they are almost always very funny. Audiences who feel like they are
watching bits and pieces of SWEET VALLEY HIGH and BEVERLY HILLS 90210 are
advised not to worry, it has been obviously intended but intention does not
necessarily coincide with preferences, thus the feeling of being cheated
out of the $7 that you paid. The actors and actresses were actually from
the above mentioned shows. The story has a group of teenagers living in an
almost sterile, militarized society and inspired to join the military.
Johnny Rico enlists himself in the military in his quest to win Carmen's
love, who incidentally is fanatical whn it comes to flying starships. Rico
ends up with a ground-based grunt squad while Carmen gets to pursue her
dreams of commanding a starship. 
When the city of Buenos Aires was devastated by an asteroid sent from the
Klendathu system, a system infested with primal bugs the size of elephants,
Earth unites and sends their brave your men and women to rid our planet
from this threat. The bugs are not as primitive as we may expect, they have
special bugs for special purposes. We have the standard grunt-bug which
goes around stabbing people, the giant-cannon-bug which fires plasma blasts
from its abdomen at starships hovering above and of course the flying-bug,
their version of our fighter planes. The CGI effects are amazing, not so
because they are anything new but rather the sheer numbers and fluidity in
movements when they swarm across the landscape of Klendathu. Verhoeven's
conveyance of violence is at-your-face level. He does not use hints of
terror or gore, he shows them in full glory, in widescreen. Singapore
audiences may not be able to `enjoy' fully the action because of censors
here and there but to give you an idea of what to expect; heads fly off,
bodies dismember and brains are sucked. 
Many people I know hated the film. I can't say I loved it myself but I did
like it for its satirical view of the future and also of course, the CG
effects. Plot and scriptwise, STARSHIP TROOPERS is no better than any
normal B-grade film. Verhoeven's direction was such that the movie did not
try too hard at all; the parameters for the film have been more or less
laid out in the beginning and audiences should be able to tell whether they
are gonna hate it or love it right from then on. It is more of an
alternative-mainstream movie, very much like MARS ATTACKS!, released a year
ago.
Bottom line: watch at your own risk, do not bring children, not so much
because of its violence but more of how it is potrayed (I'd prefer the
world `glorified' actually). Go for the special effects and action. And if
you can actually tell yourself that you can enjoy a cheesily written and
scripted action film, by all means, it should do you some good.

Title
Review for Bacheha-Ye aseman (1997)
I actually watched this little gem at the Singapore Film Festival in 1998.
It was just a random pick from the massive list of films that were shown
during the festival. Well, it turned out to be the best I saw in the
festival and I daresay one of the best ever in my lifetime. CHILDREN OF
HEAVEN is showcases maverick yet masterful film-making, dealing very little
with dialogue, allowing the visuals to sweep the hearts of audiences all
over. This is the way films were initially made to excite the human soul.
How can a simple story of a little boy, Ali who loses here sister Zahra's
tattered shoes mean so much to me? Its the simplicity of the entire plot
that really stole my soul while watching this film. The tattered pair of
shoes which meant so much and caused much dilemma to the two young
protagonists seem too trivial to be significant yet hold so much importance
in reminding us what we people are really made of. The surmounting dilemmas
which the two had to endure were never life-threatening but nonetheless
remain a very important situation to them both; well, at least for that
period of time. The film climaxes wonderfully with every knot tied and every
injury healed, leaving the audience a sense of satisfaction; mentally and 
spiritually.
After this film, I rushed to catch a few other Iranian films in this year's
festival. Though they were all similar in many ways (simplicity, bare
minimum film-making) all never did measure up to CHILDREN OF HEAVEN. The
director Majid Majidi did a wonderful job in visual storytelling with his
tight close-ups and well-placed slow-mos as well as silent film treatment in
various sequences, simply classic stuff. The lead children actor/actress
were wonderful in their roles, manipulative in their expression but highly
believable!
Unlike films that try to achieve heart-warming effect on audiences with
heavenly thespians and massive production budget, CHILDREN OF HEAVEN will
manipulate our minds but one thing for sure, we won't leave feeling cheated.
This film was awarded best film in the Singapore Film Festival and the
Montreal Film Festival. It was also one of the nominees for best foreign
film.
Be sure to catch this film, you won't be disappointed and I'm pretty sure we
won't be seeing a film like this for a long-long time.

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
No, it is not a bad film, in fact it is so good in achieving its purpose, I
actually wished for the film to end itself quickly. EVENT HORIZON is not
your run-of-the-mill sci-fi film, I'm sure many who have watched this will
agree with me. It is not even original in that sense, and it does borrow
heavily from films like ALIEN, HELLRAISER and even BLADE RUNNER. The magic
of this film lies in its unorthodox setting and methodical build-up that
makes it wonderfully horrifying.
The story brings us to the year 2050, where space travel have since
enormously progressed. The EVENT HORIZON is actually a ship built for a
secret experimental purpose; it has the ability to fold time and space thus
making it possible for travelling distances not reachable in a man's
lifetime. The ship disappeared as soon as it went into operation but after
7 years, it reappeared again within the orbit of Neptune. A search and
rescue team led by Miller (Fishburne) is given the task to check for
survivors of the EVENT HORIZON. The designer of the ship, Dr. Weir (Neill)
follows along to satisfy his curiosity on what actually happened to his
otherwise technologically impressive ship.
EVENT HORIZON is a sci-fi horror film, much truer to the word than say,
ALIEN would ever be. While in ALIEN, the crew has to cope with a ferocious
creature while encased within tight spaces, in EVENT HORIZON, the forces
which goes against the crew is undefined but yet so powerful and
horrifying. The story unfolds itself slowly and the suspense buildup is
superb, up till the point where I really felt like saying out loud `enough!
I can't stand this anymore!'. There are more than enough jolts to send your
adrenalin pumping overtime. The story in itself is not exactly something
very exciting and also, the acting is only at most, average by most
commercial standards. Even so, the essence of horror is carried out very
well in this film, thanks to its well-paced storytelling, disturbing set
designs and some really gory sequences (which incidentally, has been quite
generously removed by our censorship board).
Director Paul Anderson (who did MORTAL KOMBAT) and his team of `atmosphere'
creators have done well in keeping EVENT HORIZON within the bounds of the
term `horror'. This picture did not do very well in the US box-office most
probably for the dread-factor impact it has on most audiences; people will
not see it again and not many would recommend their friend to watch this.
Although on the face of it, EVENT HORIZON is mostly molded for
mass-entertainment; many thrills, spills and suspense to keep audiences in
focus. However, the offbeat horror element which it ultimately convey
audiences is very disturbing. My friend and I could not say a word to each
other for quite a while after going through the `experience' of EVENT
HORIZON. I guess it was just the immense feeling of dread which the film
had cast upon us.
Be forewarned, this film is not for the faint-hearted nor for pure
entertainment. Be prepared to be disturbed if you should decide to watch
this film! EVENT HORIZON is highly recommendedŕŕbut at your own risk! It
has been a long time since good-horror embraced the big screen, and EVENT
HORIZON is one.

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
No, it is not a bad film, in fact it is so good in achieving its purpose, I
actually wished for the film to end itself quickly. EVENT HORIZON is not
your run-of-the-mill sci-fi film, I'm sure many who have watched this will
agree with me. It is not even original in that sense, and it does borrow
heavily from films like ALIEN, HELLRAISER and even BLADE RUNNER. The magic
of this film lies in its unorthodox setting and methodical build-up that
makes it wonderfully horrifying.
The story brings us to the year 2050, where space travel have since
enormously progressed. The EVENT HORIZON is actually a ship built for a
secret experimental purpose; it has the ability to fold time and space thus
making it possible for travelling distances not reachable in a man's
lifetime. The ship disappeared as soon as it went into operation but after
7 years, it reappeared again within the orbit of Neptune. A search and
rescue team led by Miller (Fishburne) is given the task to check for
survivors of the EVENT HORIZON. The designer of the ship, Dr. Weir (Neill)
follows along to satisfy his curiosity on what actually happened to his
otherwise technologically impressive ship.
EVENT HORIZON is a sci-fi horror film, much truer to the word than say,
ALIEN would ever be. While in ALIEN, the crew has to cope with a ferocious
creature while encased within tight spaces, in EVENT HORIZON, the forces
which goes against the crew is undefined but yet so powerful and
horrifying. The story unfolds itself slowly and the suspense buildup is
superb, up till the point where I really felt like saying out loud `enough!
I can't stand this anymore!'. There are more than enough jolts to send your
adrenalin pumping overtime. The story in itself is not exactly something
very exciting and also, the acting is only at most, average by most
commercial standards. Even so, the essence of horror is carried out very
well in this film, thanks to its well-paced storytelling, disturbing set
designs and some really gory sequences (which incidentally, has been quite
generously removed by our censorship board). 
Director Paul Anderson (who did MORTAL KOMBAT) and his team of `atmosphere'
creators have done well in keeping EVENT HORIZON within the bounds of the
term `horror'. This picture did not do very well in the US box-office most
probably for the dread-factor impact it has on most audiences; people will
not see it again and not many would recommend their friend to watch this.
Although on the face of it, EVENT HORIZON is mostly molded for
mass-entertainment; many thrills, spills and suspense to keep audiences in
focus. However, the offbeat horror element which it ultimately convey
audiences is very disturbing. My friend and I could not say a word to each
other for quite a while after going through the `experience' of EVENT
HORIZON. I guess it was just the immense feeling of dread which the film
had cast upon us.
Be forewarned, this film is not for the faint-hearted nor for pure
entertainment. Be prepared to be disturbed if you should decide to watch
this film! EVENT HORIZON is highly recommendedbut at your own risk! It
has been a long time since good-horror embraced the big screen, and EVENT
HORIZON is one.

Title
Review for Deep Blue Sea (1999)
Directed by Renny Harlin
Starring : Samuel L. Jackson, Saffron Burrows, LL Cool J
Running Time : 1hr 50mins (approx)
Rating : ***1/2 out of *****
Now, lets first look into the history of Shark films. There was the
unforgettable JAWS. The exciting JAWS 2. The rather flaky JAWS 3D and
sometime in the late 90s another film of the same genre that I can't seem to
recall (about the son of JAWS returning to wreak revenge or something like
that). Now, with the magic of CGI, one shark is simply not enough; in DEEP
BLUE SEA, there are 3 big, mean and really smart ones!
Russell Frankiln (Jackson) visits Aquatica (a sea-bound research center),
where a research is being conducted on the extraction of a hormone substance
found uniquely within the shark brain that can cure and reverse the effects
of Alzheimer's disease. The substance is small in quantity and because of
this, lead researcher Dr. Susan MacAlaester genetically alters the shark DNA
and grows them twice the size with brains as big as humans, naturally
producing more of the much treasured hormones.
As sure as the sun sets in the west, a shark breaks lose and wreaks havoc
within the facility during a hormone extraction procedure. With the
flexibility offered by CGI, the sharks get more full-length screen time as
their predecessors did in those remote-controlled rubber suit days. Gone are
the days of people getting pulled under the water with the water turning red
right after. This time, we get to see the entire gobbling action, with
floating limbs and all.
So-so acting, expected in most of your average action film. Jackson (fresh
from his Jedi Master role in THE PHANTOM MENACE), takes on the dark-side
force of a different kind and fits well with his wise-cracking lines. LL
Cool J's cook role as Preacher, does for this film what Steven Seagal's cook
could only dream to achieve in his two UNDER SIEGE films.
DEEP BLUE SEA does not offer any of the psychological thrills that JAWS has
to offer. It does however, prove to be a refreshing follow-up within the
genre, full of visual thrills, suspense and believe it or not  humour! Its
like JURASSIC PARK under water.
Nothing too stressful, pure entertainment. Renny Harlin, you are forgiven
(for making CUTTHROAT ISLAND).
Visit my film reviews site ! http://members.tripod.com/jackchoo

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
Back from the immensely successful INDEPENDENCE DAY, director ROLAND =
EMMERICH and producer DEAN DEVLIN (both collaborated in earlier moderate =
hits, UNIVERSAL SOLDIER and STARGATE) are back with yet another =
eye-popping, effect-laced excuse of a movie. GODZILLA has nothing going =
for it other than its CGI effects, which forms nearly 90% of the film! =
And what effects! As yet again, EMMERICH and DEVLIN has opted to go for =
lesser hit-movie actors as in their films pre-dating GODZILLA. The =
teasers for GODZILLA started hitting screens and TV more than a year ago =
and rumours has it that the budget is close to a whopping US$200 =
million.=20
The story brings us to the pacific where the French have been conducting =
nuclear tests, inevitably harming the wild life and setting them off =
from their predestined path of evolution. GODZILLA was thus born, =
standing as tall as the Empire State Building, GODZILLA is no more than =
a gargantuan mix between a Komodo Dragon and a T-Rex. It sets off from =
the pacific, walked across Mexico (without being detected!) and swam its =
way to Manhattan, New York to make it into a nesting place. Sounds more =
like an excuse than a story right? Well, I don't blame you. After all, =
this is Hollywood!
Broderick is the ever-zealous Nick, who leads his field of study in the =
effects of radiation on the evolution of animals. Trailing the creature =
to New York, he bumps into ex-girlfriend, Audrey (Maria Pitillo), an =
aspiring reporter who find herself lacking in the nasty skills required =
in achieving her dream. When the military falsely dismisses Nick from =
their research team with the accusation that he has been leaking =
information to the public, he is picked-up by French secret agent =
Phillippe Roche (Jean Reno). Incidentally, the French has sent a team of =
secret operatives to destroy the creature, an effort to undo what they =
have indirectly done through the nuclear tests. Jean Reno once again =
reprises his role as `The Cleaner' (as in his roles in Luc Besson's LA =
FEMME NIKITA and THE PROFESSIONAL aka LEON), apparent to his words in =
the film, `we are here to clean the mess we have made'. Hank Azaria =
plays Animal, the crazy cameraman who would do anything for a good =
camera shot.
In GODZILLA, the creature takes centrestage. True to the original =
Japanese GODZILLA movies, we get to see gratuitous lack of respect for =
public property as it tramples through landmarks of New York. The CGI =
effects are impressive, imagine JURASSIC PARK with a few thousand =
percent more worth of CG creatures. One cannot help but notice the =
resemblance of this creature to the previous two dinosaur movies and =
though it may not deliver the landmark quality to outshine the realism =
of JURASSIC PARK and THE LOST WORLD, it sure has the magnitude and =
destruction to significantly numb audiences, forcing them to immerse =
into the fast paced action and loud sound effects.=20
EMMERICH's direction flows with unoriginal ideas, regurgitated from =
landmark action sci-fi movies of our time. Each scene an excuse to flex =
yet another muscle of his CGI team. Definitely the special effects movie =
of the year. Not quite memorable stuff, but it was highly entertaining =
while it lasted.=20

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
TBWP is probably the single most profitable film ever. Not surprising,
considering its tiny US$100,000 budget, to date it has earned in excess of
US$130 million. That's a shocking 100 times profit! Rumours have it that a
smart internet `marketing' ploy was so successful in gaining cult-like
fanatics, by word of mouth coupled with strings of excellent reviews, the
film just exploded in the box-office, raking in millions on its opening
weekend.
Shot in 16mm and video (I suspect.), the film chronicles the forays of 3
students who go in search for the legendary Blair Witch. Audiences are put
in the first-person perspective in the entire mis-adventure, often wobbly
and blurry at times, it takes a bit of getting used to in the beginning.
This is supposed to be the material they discovered in the woods where the 3
disappeared; edited and put onto the screen for the benefit of our
audiences.
TBWP is simply smart. Filmed to look as if it was really a stock-shoot by a
bunch of students in search of the Blair Witch as a school project, one may
suspect (like yours truly) that its simply a lazy but smart approach to
film-making. Simply amazing in that respect, I must say. Talk about impact,
oh yes, TBWP does have quite a bit, in fact most audience will find it
deeply disturbing. I did, especially the last bit but I'm not revealing
more. You have to see it for yourself.
I can't help but feel a tad cheated after knowing how commercially
successful this film has become. Could it be that finally, an indie-film has
unwittingly found a formula for commercial appeal? Or was it all simply a
ploy by the big players right from the beginning?
Well, I guess the fact stays; TBWP is highly original, clever and will most
definitely leave most with something dreadful to talk and think about for
weeks prior to watching this film. No gore, no special effects, I just can't
get over how terribly smart this film is!

Title
Review for Full Monty, The (1997)
Trailing the success of brit humour in the movie industry with the likes of
the semi-dramatic THE COMMITMENTS and the nearly slapstick A FISH CALLED
WANDA, THE FULL MONTY is one film which delivered the depth of the former
and the humour magnitude of the latter. The film opens with a narrated
documentary reel showing the improving economic and living standards of
Sheffield in the 60's, then cut to the harsh reality of the present.
Sheffield has become some sort of a semi-slum with the only visible
increase in anything was the amount of layoffs from steel-factories; a once
flourishing industry.
Gaz (Carlyle) spends most of his time in the Worker's Club, a sort of place
where jobless people sit around to wait for job offers. He and his `plump'
friend Dave (Addy) as well as their former foreman Gerald (Wilkinson) have
been sitting around the club for months without any `call for duty'. What
seemingly was just a passing hard time for Gaz suddenly transformed itself
into desperation when he cannot afford the 700 pounds of child-support
money to his ex-wife. Suddenly finding himself facing the possiblity of
losing custody of his son, he goes on to concoct an enterprising wild-idea
to get the money he desperately requires. 
Dave and Gerald too have problems of their own. On top of his lack of
employment, Dave is also faced with the paranoia of his wife leaving him
because of his current financial state as well as his`plump' appearance
while Gerald have been cheating on his wife by not telling her of his
layoff for as long as 6 months, leaving home for `work' when he was
actually a long-standing member of the Worker's Club. There we have it;
people with real problems and a not-so-practical solution for them. Gaz
manages to get the support from them and sure enough they managed to get a
few other poor jobless blokes to join in their gag : to perform a strip-act
at the local pub. In Gaz's own words while looking at an add for a
strip-act featuring hunky `beautiful' men, `If women are willing to pay for
this, they sure as well will pay for REAL-men'.
THE FULL MONTY is very simple in nature and not a trace ambitious at all.
It is a small film which delves in the harsh-reality of unemployment and
the desperation it drives people to. It also is a very light movie to watch
despite the theme it delves in because it has a lot of human-factor going
for it. Never for once, was it trying to be manipulative at all, THE FULL
MONTY was true to itself all the way. While the hilarity level of this film
soared unexpectedly high, audience will find that they are in no way being
cheated of a laugh, something lacking in many comedy films (wannabes?) from
Hollywood. 
Other than Carlyle, who acted as the psychotic Begbie in TRAINSPOTTING, the
rest of the actors were definitely very new to me on-screen. However, the
acting presented in this film is more than satisfying. Carlyle's work here
is a stark contrast to his character in TRAINSPOTTING, implying real acting
skill and flexibility on-screen. Kudos to the people involved in this film,
especially to director Peter Cattaneo for being able to put together an
excellent film which is has so much potential in ending up as your
just-another-STRIPTEASE. 
Already a critical and financial success for such a small film, THE FULL
MONTY is a humble film which deserves applause throughout. While TITANIC
managed to feast the eyes and soul in an epic way, THE FULL MONTY gives one
the same satisfaction.in half the time.

Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
With storytelling this compelling, who needs books? 
Based on the book by author James Ellroy, L.A. CONFIDENTIAL is probably one
of the best piece of work produced by Hollywood in recent years.  Together
with director Curtis Hanson (The Hand That Rocks The Cradle, The River
Wild) whom Ellroy corroborated closely throughout the shooting of the film,
resulted in a movie with a plot and and script so tight, an atom would have
to squeeze itself through.
Set in the 50s, the story revolves around 3 policemen of vivid
personalities. Jack Vincennes (Spacey) is the cop who is more concerned on
busting with fame and stardom ala Hollywood style, concentrating heavily on
work which will attract him media attention. There is also the young
hot-shot rookie, Ed Exley (Pearce), fresh out of the academy and all-out to
carve a name for himself in the footsteps of his legendary cop father. The
tough and unnerving Bud White (Crowe), a cop who believes in justice, the
swift and violent way. 3 policemen, distinct in their characters and paths
but all of them working in a place where there is no real distinction
between good and evil. 
When his partner is murdered on the day of his resignation, Bud sets out to
find the people responsible but unwittingly delved himself into something
more than just a simple robbery murder. Even after Exley receives a
promotion for his work on the murder case, happenings began to link itself
to the murder. The 3 eventually reach a point of convergence when what
actually began as a personal investigation turns out to be an uncovering of
a complex web of organised-crime in Hollywood.
The last time I remember a film so clever and compelling was when I watched
THE USUAL SUSPECTS. In L.A. CONFIDENTIAL, you do not get the shock and
cleverness as the former but it has a lot more of `story' going for it.
There is not a single moment in the film in which I felt was slow at all.
Surprisingly, though Spacey did a very convincing job as the street-wise
Vincennes, the movie was carried mostly by the two rather `unknowns',
Pearce and Crowe. Pearce's Exley is cool and calculative in his actions and
there is a slight hint of Val Kilmer in his appearance. Crowe's Bud White
is the most impressive of all; head-strong and temperamental, he should
obtain some sort of recognition for his work here. 
Superb acting., wonderful storytelling and one of the best climaxing
gunfights ever. Easily the best Hollywood piece for 1997. 

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
STARSHIP TROOPERS is a US$100++ million action film. I can't say if
Hollywood is wasting money on such films because at the end of the day, the
business part of film-making rules in Hollywood. The trailers have probably
given you the idea that this film is a special-effects laden piece of work
and in this department, it does not disappoint at all. Perhaps if we look
into the direction of Paul Verhoeven, we can understand why STARSHIP
TROOPERS is what it is. He gave us the violent ROBOCOP (his US film debut),
then onto the sexual-thriller BASIC INSTINCT, the clever TOTAL RECALL and
most recently, his infamous work on the violently illicit SHOWGIRLS.
Violence is a recurring thing in all his films, not action and in STARSHIP
TROOPERS, he has shown his love for mayhem yet again, this time with a lot
of money. 
I have not read the Robert Heinlein book in which it is supposed to be
based on but from what I hear over the internet, fans of the book are
running amok, burning down theatres showing the film. Of course I was
joking but you get the idea. Verhoeven has interlaced STARSHIP TROOPERS
with media inspired propaganda advertisements of the military in conveying
this film. This is perhaps the more interesting feature of the movie and
they are almost always very funny. Audiences who feel like they are
watching bits and pieces of SWEET VALLEY HIGH and BEVERLY HILLS 90210 are
advised not to worry, it has been obviously intended but intention does not
necessarily coincide with preferences, thus the feeling of being cheated
out of the $7 that you paid. The actors and actresses were actually from
the above mentioned shows. The story has a group of teenagers living in an
almost sterile, militarized society and inspired to join the military.
Johnny Rico enlists himself in the military in his quest to win Carmen's
love, who incidentally is fanatical whn it comes to flying starships. Rico
ends up with a ground-based grunt squad while Carmen gets to pursue her
dreams of commanding a starship. 
When the city of Buenos Aires was devastated by an asteroid sent from the
Klendathu system, a system infested with primal bugs the size of elephants,
Earth unites and sends their brave your men and women to rid our planet
from this threat. The bugs are not as primitive as we may expect, they have
special bugs for special purposes. We have the standard grunt-bug which
goes around stabbing people, the giant-cannon-bug which fires plasma blasts
from its abdomen at starships hovering above and of course the flying-bug,
their version of our fighter planes. The CGI effects are amazing, not so
because they are anything new but rather the sheer numbers and fluidity in
movements when they swarm across the landscape of Klendathu. Verhoeven's
conveyance of violence is at-your-face level. He does not use hints of
terror or gore, he shows them in full glory, in widescreen. Singapore
audiences may not be able to `enjoy' fully the action because of censors
here and there but to give you an idea of what to expect; heads fly off,
bodies dismember and brains are sucked. 
Many people I know hated the film. I can't say I loved it myself but I did
like it for its satirical view of the future and also of course, the CG
effects. Plot and scriptwise, STARSHIP TROOPERS is no better than any
normal B-grade film. Verhoeven's direction was such that the movie did not
try too hard at all; the parameters for the film have been more or less
laid out in the beginning and audiences should be able to tell whether they
are gonna hate it or love it right from then on. It is more of an
alternative-mainstream movie, very much like MARS ATTACKS!, released a year
ago.
Bottom line: watch at your own risk, do not bring children, not so much
because of its violence but more of how it is potrayed (I'd prefer the
world `glorified' actually). Go for the special effects and action. And if
you can actually tell yourself that you can enjoy a cheesily written and
scripted action film, by all means, it should do you some good.

Title
Review for Full Monty, The (1997)
Trailing the success of brit humour in the movie industry with the likes =
of the semi-dramatic THE COMMITMENTS and the nearly slapstick A FISH =
CALLED WANDA, THE FULL MONTY is one film which delivered the depth of =
the former and the humour magnitude of the latter. The film opens with a =
narrated documentary reel showing the improving economic and living =
standards of Sheffield in the 60's, then cut to the harsh reality of the =
present. Sheffield has become some sort of a semi-slum with the only =
visible increase in anything was the amount of layoffs from =
steel-factories; a once flourishing industry.
Gaz (Carlyle) spends most of his time in the Worker's Club, a sort of =
place where jobless people sit around to wait for job offers. He and his =
`plump' friend Dave (Addy) as well as their former foreman Gerald =
(Wilkinson) have been sitting around the club for months without any =
`call for duty'. What seemingly was just a passing hard time for Gaz =
suddenly transformed itself into desperation when he cannot afford the =
700 pounds of child-support money to his ex-wife. Suddenly finding =
himself facing the possiblity of losing custody of his son, he goes on =
to concoct an enterprising wild-idea to get the money he desperately =
requires.=20
Dave and Gerald too have problems of their own. On top of his lack of =
employment, Dave is also faced with the paranoia of his wife leaving him =
because of his current financial state as well as his`plump' appearance =
while Gerald have been cheating on his wife by not telling her of his =
layoff for as long as 6 months, leaving home for `work' when he was =
actually a long-standing member of the Worker's Club. There we have it; =
people with real problems and a not-so-practical solution for them. Gaz =
manages to get the support from them and sure enough they managed to get =
a few other poor jobless blokes to join in their gag : to perform a =
strip-act at the local pub. In Gaz's own words while looking at an add =
for a strip-act featuring hunky `beautiful' men, `If women are willing =
to pay for this, they sure as well will pay for REAL-men'.
THE FULL MONTY is very simple in nature and not a trace ambitious at =
all. It is a small film which delves in the harsh-reality of =
unemployment and the desperation it drives people to. It also is a very =
light movie to watch despite the theme it delves in because it has a lot =
of human-factor going for it. Never for once, was it trying to be =
manipulative at all, THE FULL MONTY was true to itself all the way. =
While the hilarity level of this film soared unexpectedly high, audience =
will find that they are in no way being cheated of a laugh, something =
lacking in many comedy films (wannabes?) from Hollywood.=20
Other than Carlyle, who acted as the psychotic Begbie in TRAINSPOTTING, =
the rest of the actors were definitely very new to me on-screen. =
However, the acting presented in this film is more than satisfying. =
Carlyle's work here is a stark contrast to his character in =
TRAINSPOTTING, implying real acting skill and flexibility on-screen. =
Kudos to the people involved in this film, especially to director Peter =
Cattaneo for being able to put together an excellent film which is has =
so much potential in ending up as your just-another-STRIPTEASE.=20
=20
Already a critical and financial success for such a small film, THE FULL =
MONTY is a humble film which deserves applause throughout. While TITANIC =
managed to feast the eyes and soul in an epic way, THE FULL MONTY gives =
one the same satisfaction=85=85.in half the time.

Title
Review for Ringu (1998)
THE RING is probably one of the creepiest movies I've seen in years. But
then again, I've always had this phobia of Asian born horror films. I
remember when I was a kid I was scared as hell with those green faced,
long-haired floating ghosts donning their white gownseuuugh. THE RING
really brings back those memories and its grips me long after the movie has
ended. Unlike the horror films coming from the west, I'm pretty much used to
the gore and visual effects, so much so, they become rather bland nowadays.
There's really no scary movie from the west for a long time. If you have
something in mind, please tell me.
This Japanese flick is supposed to be based upon stories written by `The
Stephen King of Japan', which is also (I heard) televised over the air in
Japan. The film revolves around a mysterious videotape which will bring
death for sure to the person who watches it, one week prior to viewing. A
journalist and her husband, stupid enough, tests the so call `urban legend'
and ends up having a week before she meets her doom. She and her husband
then goes on a search for the origin of the videocassette, to get to the
root of the whole curse with the hopes of freeing themselves.
THE RING plays on the senses like no other horror film today. Visual
subtlety, minimal music and an intriguing plot puts the audience within an
aura of suspense throughout the entire film. Very well done indeed,
especially for a film that does not have a single trace of violence and
gore. Now, thats something budding horror film-maker wannabes should
consider looking into. Just an idea of how visually powerful the film is, it
is in Japanese and subtitled in Chinese; both of which, I can't understand
at all (OK, I had a friend who gave me a gist prior to watching, but he
revealed very little!).
The twists in the plot, leading to an unforgettable climax (will definitely
leave an impression on the audience) will have you at the edge of your seat.
Visit my film reviews site ! http://members.tripod.com/jackchoo
