Authors
Magus
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Braveheart (1995)
OK.  I just saw this movie a few days ago.  Why so late?  I missed it in the 
theatres mainly cause I was worried about its length.  I have missed it on 
video for a while since there is never a copy at the local Blockbuster.  But a 
few days ago, and after my friends convincing me to see it, good old 
Blockbuster had a copy.  So was the movie spectacular enough to win the 
numerous Oscars it did?  Read and find out...
Braveheart has a lot good things going for it.  One is the surprising fact 
that the 3 hours go by relatively quickly.  Another is the wonderful scenery 
and the stirring music in the background.  Yet another is the solid acting.
So what WAS the problem with the movie?  A generally ho-hum plot.
OK.  I know that Braveheart was "based on a true story".  I have never read 
anything on William Wallace (Mel Gibson's character).  But the plot has no 
surprises in it.  Nothing is very original about it.  But the stuff that is 
there is watchable at least.
The plot basically begins when William Wallace is a kid and his father is 
killed in an attack on the English.  William Wallace lives in Scotland and the 
evil King of England is ruling over Scotland.  The Scotland peasants want 
their freedom.  William Wallace then gets a visit from his uncle who tells 
Wallace to come with him.  William basically has no choice since he only lived 
with his father, so he goes with his uncle and it is implied that he learns 
sword fighting skills as he grows up.
Then the film continues on to when William Wallace is grown up.  The rest of 
the film deals with Wallace gathering more people in his army of peasants and 
engaging them in huge epic war battles.  It has your standard lost loved-one 
and double crossing along the way.
Overall I would reccomend Braveheart to Mel Gibson fans or to people who loves 
battles where thousands of people charge against eachother and fight on huge 
fields.  Or if you want to see a violent war epic with some drama thrown in.

Title
Review for Joe Versus the Volcano (1990)
Joe Versus The Volcano is really one of the worse movies made in very recent 
memory.  The strangest thing is that you would think nothing would go wrong 
with it.  It has a solid cast with Tom Hanks & Meg Ryan as the lead roles.  
But you can never judge a movie by its cast...
If there is one good thing about Joe VS The Volcano, it is that the plot is 
original.  Unfortunately, it is also incredibly stupid.  The movie begins with 
Joe (Tom Hanks) going to work.  This opening sequence is very boring and slow. 
It shows Joe walking to his office.  But on the way, he has to wait in a long 
line passing by strange and slightly depressing scenery with obnoxious 
lighting.  A sequence like this should take 2 minutes.  Here, it takes over 
5...
It is obvious that Joe hates his job.  At his office, one of his co-workers is 
Meg Ryan.  Oddly enough, she plays 3 different roles in this movie!!  Joe 
leaves to go to a doctor's appointment.  His doctor informs him that he has a 
"brain cloud."  This means that in a few months, he will die.  So what does 
Joe do?  Quit his job, of course!!
When he arrives home, Joe meets an old man named Graynamore (Lloyd Bridges).  
Graynamore tells Joe that in order to get some important mineral for his 
company from an island, the natives need someone to sacrifice to their volcano 
to please their Fire God.  By a startling coincidence, the boat trip to the 
island takes a few months.  By the time he reaches the island, he will almost 
be dead from the "brain cloud" anyway, so Joe agrees.  
Graynamore gives Joe a credit card to buy everything he needs to go on this 
"great adventure".  Joe goes on a date with Meg Ryan, his co-worker.  The day 
before the boat trip, Joe meets one of Graynamore's daughters.  She is also, 
surprise, Meg Ryan.  Except she looks more hippyish.  They both have dinner 
and the next day, Joe gets driven over to his boat.
The lady that sails the boat is another one of Graynamore's daughters.  And, 
wonder of wonders, she is also played by Meg Ryan.  As they sail to the 
island, Meg Ryan tells Joe that the natives of the island have a craving for 
orange soda.  After some stupid talking scenes, they also deduce that 
Graynamore had his doctor be the one that Joe went to.  And that the "brain 
cloud" thing was made up!!
They do plently of cheap special effects on the boat voyage.  Joe goes fishing 
and catches a hammerhead shark.  This is a cheap gag that has been pulled off 
many times.  But, to top it off, the shark is obviously rubber and fake!!  One 
night there is a storm.  A cheap-looking lightning bolt strikes the boat and 
everything is cast overboard.  Fortunately, Joe and Meg Ryan manage to find 
some of the luggage that Joe brought to sail.
By pure luck, they get to the island.  Since the natives like orange soda 
, they wear soda cans as attire!!  Stupid or what?  ;)  Before Joe leaps in 
the volcano, he gets fed.  Right before he jumps, Meg Ryan pleads him not to.
When Joe decides to, she goes in with him because "she loves him".  Now this 
is where the movie should end.  But, unfortunately, the "cheesy ending" bug 
comes in.
The volcano blows the couple out and into the ocean where they land on Joe's 
luggage.  They float to another part of the island as they watch lava pouring 
out of the volcano towards the villagers.  I give this movie a * out of ****.  
See it only if you're a film buff that enjoys a bad movie every now and then 
or if you REALLY like Tom Hanks or Meg Ryan...
(Any comment or disagreements on this review can be e-mailed to 
magus@mindspring.com)

Title
Review for Emma (1996)
Starring Gwyneth Paltrow, Jeremy Northam, Toni Collette. 
Produced by : Patrick Cassavetti, and Steve Haft.
Based On The Jane Austen Novel By : Douglas McGrath.
My Recommended Ages : 10 and up (Don't worry, your kids won't want to
go see this one.)
        As I watched Alicia Silverstone walking around Beverly Hills
acting flirtatious and coy in the movie CLUELESS, I was stunned
that about 4 months later I had learned that CLUELESS had been based on
a novel by Jane Austen called EMMA. I later read EMMA to see if they
had any relation whatsoever. My final conclusion : Yes. EMMA(Miramax,
PG) is basically FRIENDS is corsets. The movie CLUELESS was just way
out and trendy, where the movie EMMA is surprisingly touching and
romanceful.
        As in most Jane Austen novels, women, specifically sisters, are
the main characters, and their soon to be husbands are the targets.
Usually there is one nice guy turned bad guy, and one bad guy turned
nice guy i.e. Hugh Grant and Greg Wise. The reason EMMA works is that,
unlike its 1800-esque predeccessors, SENSE AND SENSIBILY and
PERSUASION, is that it doesn't mind being sexy and sensual. The
writer-director Douglas McGrath, famous for helping Woody Allen riff
off in BULLETS OVER BROADWAY, has gone into unexplored waters here, and
unexplored waters oft mean unexpected things, such as holes in the
coral reefs. The characters, and for that matter, the plot in EMMA can
go too far joyous, and then the next moment down in the ditches. But
still, with wonderful writing from McGrath, whose script doubles Emma
Thompson's SENSE AND..., pulls this movie away a winner.
        SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, one of the Austen adaptations, and by
far the most successful at the awards of golden naked men. It's first
time writer, Thompson, had acted before in such horrifically
sentimental movies as HOWARD'S END, and REMAINS OF THE DAY. She here
puts all she has into a very well done screenplay. The directing
however, done by Ang Lee, is pushed off and not well done. He never
creates any sort of contact between Hugh Grant and Emma Thompson ; they
seem so much alike that it's a marvel Lee couldn't put anything between
them. The best performances come from the couple of Kate Winslet and
Alan Rickman, although there is not romance there, either.

Title
Review for Dune (1984)
Dune was first a book written in the early 1960's.  It did so well that its 
author, Frank Herbert, continued to write two more books and another trilogy 
after that.  A total of 6 Dune books.  A movie based on the first book, called 
Dune, was released in 1984.  I saw the movie after reading the book.  So let's 
get down to the point here- How is the movie?
First of all, Dune makes a lot more sense if you had read the book.  If you 
had not read the book, the movie is much more confusing and boring.  But 
anyway...
The plot of the movie Dune is fairly faithful to the original book.  It leaves 
out a few characters, but the basic point is made: Dune is a desert planet 
that has Spice.  Spice is used to fold space- travel without moving.  
Therefore Spice is valuable.  Spice is only on Dune.
Emperor Shaddam the IV is sending the Atreides to Dune and is moving out the 
Harkonnens at the same time.  The reason for this is that both "clans" are 
feuding.  The Atreides are supposed to go and live on Dune for a short bit, 
while the Emperor gives the Harkonnens extra troops to destroy the Atreides 
so there is no more feuding and fighting between the two.  The Atreides do not 
know this however...
That is basically the beginning of the plot of Dune.  I don't want to spoil 
any of the surprises, but other parts of the plot involve a traitor and the 
local people of Dune called the Fremen.
The actors they picked for this movie are ho-hum.  They have Patrick 
Stewart (Star Trek: Generations) as Gurney Halleck, the man who trained Duke 
Leto Atreides' son.  They have Sting as the son of Baron Vladimir Harkonnen.  
They have a lot of no-name actors as well.  Some do a good job, but the 
majority of the script focuses on Paul Atreides and his mother Jessica.  They 
do an OK job.
The special effects for this movie are definitely dated.  The sets are very 
good.  The music score mainly by Toto is also excellent.  
But the movie itself drags on at 2 hours and 20 something minutes.  Even at 
that length, Dune fails to describe the characters and flesh them out as well 
as the book does.
So what is my reccomendation?  Watch this movie if you wanna see a slightly 
technical sci-fi movie or if you have read the book.
