Authors
Greg Goebel
Number of Reviews
12

Title
Review for Honey, I Shrunk the Kids (1989)
     I spent the entire Spring waiting for the blockbuster Summer, but after
the first month of it I feel like I've been blockbustered once (or twice) too
many.  INDIANA JONES!  (A crisp production of more of the same of what never
did a lot for me in the first place.)  STAR TREK V!  (Aren't you folks getting
a little old for this sort of thing?)  GHOSTBUSTERS II!  (An amiable curtain
call.)  BATMAN!  (Like DUNE: somewhere in this darkness there is a great movie,
trying to escape but lost and confused.)
     I feel like Morris the cat:  Hollywood dishes out its treasures to please
me and I stifle a yawn -- ungrateful, jaded, and spoiled wretch that I am.  (I
couldn't even have the satisfaction of reviewing these movies, since everyone
is going to see them anyway and all I would accomplish by writing reviews is to
enmesh myself in time-consuming arguments.)
     But maybe I'm not so jaded after all.  Maybe way down deep I still am that
little kid, holding his mother's hand as he walks into a movie house (in the
days when theatres had only one screen and almost always ran double features)
to watch an absent-minded professor floating through the moonlit sky in a Model
T that went faintly "glub, glub, glub."  Why do I think this?  Because of
Disney's latest effort:  HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS.
     Absent-minded professor Wayne Stylinski (Rick Moranis) is working in his
attic on a device to shrink things down to microscopic size.  Unfortunately,
his single-minded attention to his work is causing family strains:  his wife
spent the night at her mother's, and his two kids -- pretty teen-aged Amy and
her genius kid brother Nick -- are a little worried.
     Stylinski's next door neighbor, Big Russ Thompson -- who is still coasting
on his past glories as the supreme jock in his high school class -- thinks
Stylinski is pretty strange, but he has other worries:  Why is his lackluster
teenage son, little Russ, so indifferent to football and fishing and all the
other measures of true manhood?  (Brings back memories.)  After all, his
younger son, Ron, is keen on sports!  Why, just watch Ron go into the back yard
with a bat and ball to knock around a little ... though his aim is a little
lousy, since the ball goes through the Stylinski's attic window ... where it
activates the unattended shrinking machine ... which sweeps back and forth and
waits, patiently, menacingly, for someone to walk through the door....
     Okay, you know what happens next.  And since you do, the question comes
up: why bother to see this film?
     Yes, it's a familiar recipe, but even the oldest recipe is tasty if
prepared with the proper attention to the fine details.  The script is neat,
and so is the acting (thank God, for once Rick Moranis is not playing a moping
super-nerd), the action moves along nicely, the extensive special effects range
from acceptable to downright impressive ...  and even the Stylinski's
obligatory cute little dog, Corky, is adept in his role.
     Most pleasant is how this film takes an old Disney format and brings it up
to date with little awkwardness.  Spielberg stole the Disney format and
populated it with gimmicks and widgets; in HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS Disney
steals that infatuation with gadgets in turn and manages to use it with more
wit and cleverness than Spielberg can normally manage.  The parents are modern
parents -- I couldn't imagine watching a mom in Walt's lifetime realizing that
her pretty teenage girl is lost along with a flakey teenage boy and muttering
in apprehension:  "They *better* behave themselves!"
     There are so many other deft touches; subtle jokes like the endless stream
of junk Big Russ loads into his RV as he's preparing to take his family to
"rough it," or the strange way that whatever happens to little Nick, his big
four-eyes glasses make it without a scratch.  One of the fine delights is the
soundtrack, which has that precise timing and calculation of the soundtracks to
the best Warner Brothers cartoons (and which in fact steals its main theme from
those soundtracks).  Even the opening credits are a pleasure, framed by a
little cartoon that draws deeply from the best animation of the Fifties.
     Given all this praise, you might think I'm saying that this film is the
greatest thing in entertainment since the Walkman, but that would be going way
too far.  This is a little, corny, fairy-cake movie, not far removed from a
Disney Sunday Movie, based on an old format, built on a familiar premise; what
makes it work is that almost everything in it is done *right* -- and that fact
is the greatest pleasure in the entire thing.  Take the kids; if you're a big
kid -- go yourself.
     Oh, almost forgot -- HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS is preceded by a new Maroon
Cartoon: Roger Rabbit, Baby Herman, and Veronica in "Tummy Trouble."  They *do*
make them like they used to -- thank God!

Title
Review for Hot Shots! (1991)
     Somehow I visualize that when the ZAZ team was a gang of kids they
were sitting around in a bedroom all with their faces buried in copies
of MAD magazine.  "Hey, gimme that one."  "Nah, already read this one."
     And now that they have gone their separate ways we are facing a
glut of cinematic MAD-magazine humor.  Whether that is a blessing or
curse probably depends on how *you* spent your dull afternoons when you
were a kid.
     So, okay, HOT SHOTS is TOP GUN as reinterpreted by MAD.  Is it a
laugh-a-minute?  Not really.  Does it get its yuks?  Certainly.  So a
recommendation is hard to make, other than you might catch it at a
matinee or wait until it comes out on video.
     I did have one major problem with this movie in that parodying TOP
GUN is hard because a movie that had such an agonizingly predictable
script as TOP GUN was lethally close to being a parody of itself, and
simply because a movie uses lame pathetic obnoxious dialogue as a source
of humor makes said dialogue no less lame pathetic and obnoxious.  To
successfully reduce that to excess means really going over the top and
HOT SHOTS only succeeds at that intermittently.
     But it does have its moments and I would say stays one step ahead
of (if not fly rings around) NAKED GUN 1/2 (not the correct title but
the appropriate one).

Title
Review for Pink Cadillac (1989)
     Like them or not, the one thing you have to admire about an Indiana Jones
movie is that much great care and effort goes into them.  But it's hard to say
much more, since by my lights there isn't any good reason to write reviews
about them.
     Those of us who play at being reviewers (as well as, I suspect, those who
do it for a living) must occasionally ask ourselves:  "Why am I doing this?"
Obviously different people have different reasons.  The good Mr. Leeper and
Mr. Meyer seem to have rationales somewhat unlike my own:  they are very
analytical and take their efforts seriously.  (I am not being sarcastic -- I'm
always like this -- and I concede without hesitation or embarrassment to the
true enthusiasts, as opposed to the mere dabbler such as myself.  Besides, I
*LIKE* reading their reviews.)
     So why write reviews?  Myself, I look at it as something like Consumer
Reports: Can I give the reader some recommendation as to how to spend his or
her hard-earned money and precious time?  Nobody has limitless money or time,
and, except for the true enthusiasts (see above), few are inclined to see
almost every movie that comes out.  (In this way I get the opportunity to help
those  moviemakers who have blessedly enlivened my dull life -- as well as
punish those who have ripped me off.  Besides, it's fun: such is vanity.)
     To this end, I try to give you, gentle reader, some idea of what the movie
is about, the level of effort that went into its production, the target
audience, and (if I dare) some indication of my personal inclinations toward
it.  (With the full knowledge that this is not only highly subjective but
invariably modified by such factors as the time of day, the weather, and my
somewhat variable physical well-being.)
     Given this, there's absolutely no reason for me to review INDIANA JONES
AND THE LAST CRUSADE.  All of you know what an Indiana Jones movie is like; if
you like that sort of thing, you'll go see it no matter what anyone says; if
you don't, a team of Clydesdales won't be able to drag you there.  (As far as
my own opinion goes, I sat through it enjoyably and forgot about it the instant
the door slammed behind me.  However, I had the same reaction to the previous
two -- with the modification that TEMPLE OF DOOM also gave me at least the
illusion of bruises, abrasions, lacerations, and an ever-so-slight concussion.)
     But I'd gone all primed to write a review, and there I was, my motor
spinning, with nothing to take up the slack.  So the next day I went and saw
Clint Eastwood and Bernadette Peters in PINK CADILLAC.
     In this film, Clint plays Tom Nowak, a highly professional "skip-tracer":
a sort of bounty hunter who works for a bail-bond agent to "trace" those who
have "skipped" on their bail.  He's good at his work, but otherwise not a
highly motivated guy:  Doesn't want to take things very seriously, doesn't want
to get involved.
     Cut to a trailer park, where LuAnn McGuire (Bernadette Peters) finds
herself with an 8-month-old baby and a worthless husband who has become
involved with a Sunday-soldier-fascist-racist gang of ex-cons known as
"Birthright."  Their current scam is passing bogus currency.  "Don't worry,
this is idiot-proof,"  her husband says.
     The next thing LuAnn knows is that she's standing in front of the judge
taking the rap.  Enough is enough, she figures, so she posts bond, grabs her
baby, hops in her husband's big pink Cadillac (with the turbojet tailfins) and
jumps the state.
     Now the plot directions from this point become obvious (although I should
add that there was something important *in* the caddy when LuAnn took off) and I
need say nothing more on this score.
     Saying more about a Clint Eastwood flic poses similar problems to those
posed by an Indiana Jones flic.  If you like Clint, you go see his movies; if
you don't, you won't.  (I count myself among the faithful, though nowhere near
to the level of the family friend who named his son "Clint" in Eastwood's
honor.)  And it's a little like buying a Big Mac -- you know you're not going
to get something really bad or very good:  you can expect, and will get, a
more-or-less consistent, competent, mediocre product.
     Truly I have no superlatives for this film.  There is nothing in it that
seems particularly exciting; the acting is nothing special, the story is
nothing special, and there isn't a lot of tension, because despite their
nastiness the bad guys seem more stupid and comical than really dangerous, and
have no doubt attended the Imperial Storm Trooper School of Marksmanship (*) --
since they can't hit the broad side of a protagonist with an assault weapon set
to "rock and roll."
     But that didn't really matter, because the I found the whole effect
pleasing.  The story may be mechanical but clicks along nicely, and Peters and
Eastwood achieve a good chemistry (please, nobody tell me what the difference
is in their ages, I don't want to know); I very much enjoyed Peters, a young
woman who I could not describe as beautiful or even pretty, but who nonetheless
possesses a proverbial "smoldering sexuality," with her cupid pout and her
live-wire/little-lost-girl personality.
     Another thing I have to say about this film is that it is clearly a
blue-collar film for a blue-collar market:  blue-jeans and beer, pick-up trucks
and bars.  I like this myself, since -- although I couldn't kid myself to say
that I fit into that scene -- my family runs a construction company and that is
the landscape within which I was raised, to which I occasionally return, and
which I deeply respect.
     But, thinking about it, I know the real reason I enjoyed this movie:  Been
hanging around with programmers too much!  And can I recommend this film?  I
guess if you like Clint and can relate to shit-kickers, you might find this a
good time.
(*) Thanks to Linh Tu for this remark.  Too good to pass up.

Title
Review for Bill & Ted's Excellent Adventure (1989)
Misadventures in Time & Space: BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE
* BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE is a low-budget, derivative, silly film
that shamelessly panders to its teen-age target audience; it represents nothing
new in film-making; and is blatantly commercial.  
     The plot is simple enough.  Bill and Ted are two California kids who want
to become famous rock stars.  There's only one problem: they can't play their
instruments.  Well, actually, there's two problems: they're both complete
boneheads, and their hardnosed history teacher tells them that if they *don't*
pass their oral history report, they *will* flunk out of school!
     This oral report involves imagining what historical personages would've
thought of the present day and the local environment.  Not too demanding, but
it's still above the ability of these two -- and if they flunk, Ted's sourpuss
dad intends to send him off to a military academy in Alaska -- and the two
friends will be separated, probably forever.
     Fortunately, the society of Earth 700 years from now has a special
interest in them, and an agent (George Carlin) is sent back in a time machine
(shaped like a phone booth -- a normal one, not a British police box) to help
out.  So Bill and Ted have in their hands the best possible tool for conducting
historical research ...
     This sounds silly, and it is; and all the unkind things I said above about
this movie are true -- which leads to the question: What saves it?
     Simple enough: Bill and Ted.  These two guys don't look like they have
the collective mental energy to make a nightlight glow: they don't actually
have to *do* anything to be funny.  You laugh at them even if they're just
*standing* there!  
     Though when push comes to shove, it turns out they're not inherently dumb
by any means -- like a lot of teenagers, they just need to get motivated.  It's
hard not to like them -- they're about as good-natured kids as you're likely to
find.  Bill has the initiative; he takes risks without hesitation (because he
doesn't realize what he's getting into).  Ted is a born romantic, a sweet-faced
kid who all the girls think is really cute; any time he sees a good-looking
girl his heart leaps into his throat and stars flicker in his eyes.
     The story, like I said, is silly -- but silliness is hardly a critical
term when applied to a comedy -- and it does have its moments (Napoleon at the
water slides, Genghis Kahn ...  well, I won't say any more).  It certainly does
pander to teenagers -- nearly all the adults are creeps or morons, and the kids
turn the tables on them in the end -- but it also made me feel wistful.  I
didn't enjoy being a teenager; this film reminds me, in its own bizarre way,
that it could've been more fun than it was.
     The only thing I can seriously say against this film was that by the time
it was over I was glad I didn't have to listen to "PARTY ON, DUDE!" and
"EXCELLENT!" one more time.
     BILL AND TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE will not win any awards -- in fact,
nobody in their right mind would recommend it for one.  Some movies are like
expensive dinners; others are like Big Macs.  But as Big Macs go, BILL AND TED'S
EXCELLENT ADVENTURE is pretty tasty, and I hope they make a fortune on it.
     Oh, yeah, the usual cautions: No noticeable bad language, overt sexual
activity, or graphic violence (unless you are the sort of person who feels that
the Three Stooges are a bad influence on kids).  Not for people who only go to
serious films [author shakes his head sadly, then shrugs] ... they should go
to something with subtitles.

Title
Review for See No Evil, Hear No Evil (1989)
     I'm slowly reaching a point of total desperation.  I mean, when the most
memorable film I've seen all year is BILL & TED'S EXCELLENT ADVENTURE, I know
something's not right with the movies I'm seeing.  (I was taken in for a while
by DANGEROUS LIAISONS' glossy production, but Moriarity was right:  It would
have been much more interesting if Bill had been in there along with Ted!)
     In such a state one has nothing to lose by taking chances.  So when I
heard of Richard Pryor and Gene Wilder together again in a new comedy, SEE NO
EVIL, HEAR NO EVIL, I said to myself:  Why not?
     I've been a fan of Pryor's ever since I had the enforced opportunity --
while sweating in a barracks bay in the middle of Texas during 1974 -- of
virtually memorizing every word of Pryor's album THAT NIGGER'S CRAZY [I'm
quoting Pryor.  Right?  Got that?  Let me say it again in case you didn't see
it the first time:  I'M!  QUOTING!  PRYOR!]  while other members of my platoon
played it several times a night for a period of months.  (Actually, except for
the monotony, I didn't mind:  Pryor's skewering of hopelessly square white
people was not without justice, and was balanced by a no-less-unjust and much
more brutal skewering of his brethren ...  but I digress.)
     In SEE NO EVIL, HEAR NO EVIL Pryor plays Wally, an excitable blind man,
who becomes extricated with Dave, a cranky deaf man played by (of course) Gene
Wilder.  Through a series of coincidences, the two are implicated in a murder,
and must cooperate to clear themselves and bring the real killers to justice.
     Now, anybody who has ever studied the least amount of statistics (which
roughly describes the level of my knowledge on that score) knows that the
distribution of almost anything follows what is called a "normal" curve:
there's a few things on the low end, there's a few things on the high end, and
there's a big bulge in the middle.  
     This movie falls clearly into the bulge.  What can I say about a movie
that I can't have the pleasure of getting excited about or the satisfaction of
taking an axe to?  There's only one conclusion:  A short movie review.
     To be sure, SEE NO EVIL has its fine moments -- a lunatic fistfight scene
is good for some very big laughs -- but there are slow moments as well -- a
most improbable impersonation tries to be funny but merely seems stupid.  Pryor
occasionally reaches a pitch of lunacy, but while his foul mouth (which
actually seems a little tame since we've all gotten used to Eddie Murphy) is
sometimes good for a laugh, at other times it seems ...  well, foul.  The plot
is a thrown-together contraption that adds no interest to the movie.  (I think
they must have a computer program that generates such plots.  Probably runs on
an old Timex-Sinclair ZX-80.)
     In summary, what can I say about this movie?  The HITCH-HIKER'S GUIDE TO
THE GALAXY had the right description in a single word:  HARMLESS.

Title
Review for Wild at Heart (1990)
     I walked into David Lynch's BLUE VELVET without much in the way of
forewarning or familiarity with Lynch's earlier films, and had my head
totally twisted around for the better part of a week as a result.  So
when I went to see his latest, WILD AT HEART, I was better prepared.
This time I was only mildly confused and distressed.
     WILD AT HEART concerns the adventures of two dedicated lovers, Lula
and Sailor, who are on the run from Lula's mom, a woman who is roughly
similar to the Wicked Witch of the West and is portrayed very
specifically as such.  Mom is a truly evil character, made no less so by
the mind-shattering guilt she feels over her crimes, but nothing can
stand in the way of Lula's and Sailor's love.
     If this sounds vaguely like THE PRINCESS BRIDE -- you know, "true
love will always find a way" -- well, it is, if you can imagine THE
PRINCESS BRIDE with very graphic (and moderately imaginative) sex,
EXTREMELY graphic violence, a vision of human beings that does not
exclude their bodily functions, villains so evil that they literally
invoke a sense of fear and revulsion, a large supporting cast of
psychoes, freaks, and weirdos -- some dangerous, some not -- and a
general air of sleaze, corruption, and kitsch.
     If this sounds strange, it is, but Lynch fans understand; if you
don't understand, watch out.  Like BLUE VELVET, being asked the
question:  Is this a good movie?  -- causes confusion.  Some people will
like it, some people will hate it, but everyone will admit that it is
DIFFERENT.
     Next question:  Did I like it?  Well, there were certainly things
to like: Lynch has a way with visual imagery, and his use of flame as a
recurring image in this film is riveting.  Laura Dern as Lula is a
stunning heartbreaker, and Nicholas Cage as Sailor is a sympathetic
character ...  and the VILLAINS!  MY GOD!  Darth Vader is a silly
fantasy -- these people are sick, cruel as snakes, and vividly REAL --
not merely remorseless but actually amused by inflicting pain and
wreaking destruction.  (In this context, William Dafoe gets to play a
character about as far removed from JC as possible -- Dafoe has been
somewhat typecast as a saintly type, I wonder if Lynch found it amusing
to play him against that -- and Isobella Rosellini gets a small part in
which she shows that even the sleaziest style cannot hide what a
knockout she is.)
     Lynch also has a way of generating passions, too, a sort of way of
getting underneath the characters' and the audience's skin that I'm not
sure if I care for or not -- it's vivid but seems a little like
voyeurism at times.  I remember a colleague saying how unreal it was
when at the end of a TV show all the characters would be sitting around
chatting after being through enormous turmoil as if nothing had happened
-- when in reality they'd be carrying the weight of the events for years
or the rest of their lives.  In Lynch's universe that's what happens,
and we see into the character's deepest nightmares -- as in Lula's
heartbreaking memory of a childhood assault.
     There were things to outright dislike, though.  The film tended to
drag a little, and it could've stood to have had a few scenes cut that
detracted from its dramatic build -- particularly the little
side-stories about one psycho or another.  And sometimes it goes too
campy, also undermining its build -- and Lynch's preoccupation with
weirdness sometimes goes beyond his unusual sense of aesthetics into
something like affectation, too self-consciously and "traditionally"
avante-garde, as if he is throwing these things out just to confound the
sort of film analysts who like to reduce stories to pointless
meanderings about meanings and symbology.  Granted they're more than
fair game, but it also seems somewhat dishonest, like playing games with
the viewer.
     So, as far as recommendations go, you pays your money and you takes
your chances.  There's only one recommendation I would make:  Don't take
the kids or someone who is squeamish.

Title
Review for Black Rain (1989)
* I've always had ambivalent feelings about Ridley Scott's movies -- they
always seem to be more style than substance, but, then again, they usually have
a LOT of style.  (As another critic said of BLADE RUNNER:  "The package is so
pretty that you don't really care there's nothing inside.")
     And so it is with his latest effort, BLACK RAIN.  In this film, Michael
Douglas is Nick Conklin, a tough and abrasive NYC cop who is under suspicion of
having skimmed off some of the loot confiscated in drug busts.  By chance he
happens two witness a pair of murders; he captures the murderer, who turns out
to be a Japanese Yakuza gangster who is wanted in Japan.  The Japanese request
extradition, and Conklin and his partner take the gangster back to Japan, where
they are immediately bamboozled by fake  Japanese police who spirit the
gangster away.  Humiliated, Conklin sets out to recapture the gangster.
     Okay, except for the Japanese element, this sounds pretty much like a
standard cop flick, and that's precisely what it is.  The story line has an
indifferent predictability, and the dialogue in places is so hackneyed that
it's embarrassing -- particularly as the movie evolves into the classic "buddy
cop" scenario, as the bad-mannered Conklin develops a rapport with a
tight-assed Japanese cop.
     The movie tries to draw strength from culture clash, but unfortunately,
while I have little doubt that technically its depiction of Japan is correct,
the Japanese seem not to be humans that you can understand, like, or hate, but 
simply latter-day oriental stereotypes that may not be as offensive as those of
WWII propaganda films but aren't any more interesting.  (I have to admit,
however, that it might prove difficult to give any depth to characters in the
short time of a movie when the cultural barriers are so high.  Then again, all
the American characters hardly seem to have much more dimension.)
     If all this nitpicking makes BLACK RAIN sound like a terrible film,
forgive me, since it would be a gross exaggeration to say it was.  In some
scenes, Scott demonstrates that sharp sense of cinematic style that is the
saving grace of his pictures -- his depiction of Japan at night are BLADE
RUNNER for real, showing off his ability to turn reality into science fiction.
I would say that your expectations should be set properly:  BLACK RAIN is
nothing extraordinary, but it is reasonable light entertainment if you are in
need of such.

Title
Review for UHF (1989)
     I always have a certain fear when I make recommendations for a movie.  I
fantasize that one day I'll be sitting at my computer, tapping away on the
keyboard, mumbling to myself, when suddenly I'll be snatched out of my chair by
two meaty hands and lifted up until my feet are dangling in the air (which is
even more frightening than it sounds, considering I'm six-foot-four), with my
nose pressed into the face of some pre-hominid who has a face like a Rottweiler
with a complexion problem.  I hear the voice of doom in my ears:  "ARE YOU DA
GUY WHO TOLD ME TO GO WASTE MY TIME AND MONEY ON DA STUPIDEST MOVIE I EVER SEEN
IN MINE LIFE?!"
     And I'll forthrightly answer:  "Well ...  no ...  I'm just sitting here
because he got a job in Piscataway and nobody's bothered to change the name
plates on the desk yet ..."
     Consider, for example, Weird Al Yankovic's new film, UHF.  Let me explain
what it is about first before I make any further comments on it ...
     George Newman (Weird Al hisself) is a chronic daydreamer who likes to
create perverse fantasies from popular cinematic scenarios -- which results in
some interesting footage for the viewer, but also gives him a problem with
holding down a job.  Fired from a long list of menial jobs, George is getting
ready to give up hope, when his gambler uncle wins a run-down UHF station,
Channel 62, in an idle game of cards.  He doesn't know what to do with it, of
course -- 62 is the worst station in the known Universe, and probably in most
parallel dimensions as well -- but George's lively aunt has an idea:  Let
George run the station!
     George is a little discouraged in his work at first, but after a few lucky
breaks, manages to bring Channel 62 to the top of the charts (with the help of
some slightly unconventional programming).  This draws the wrath of RJ
Fletcher, owner of Channel 8, the network affiliate station -- and RJ is immune
to cancer because everything in his body is malignant to begin with.
     Okay, 'nuff said, you got the idea.  Now for the comments:  UHF is a
thrown- together film, working on a low budget, with little in the way of
acting (Weird Al is certainly not Oscar material) or story (the plot is like a
watered-down version of Mel Brook's SILENT MOVIE).  However, the only important
criteria for judging a comedy is:  DID YOU LAUGH?  And the answer is: YES ...
sometimes.
     Make no mistake, UHF "dares to be stupid", and keeps it up from start to
finish; it's like Weird Al is taking blind shots at you in hopes of hitting
your funny bone -- and succeeding on occasion, though never to the point of
getting on a roll.  Still, when there are yuks, they're good ones.
     I liked this film, though I can't say I feel extremely enthusiastic about
it.  Will you like it?  The answer to that question is probably the same as the
answer to this one:  Do you enjoy reading a MAD magazine from cover to cover?
     And if I steered you wrong, don't come looking in Corvallis -- I'll be in
Piscataway ...

Title
Review for Tremors (1990)
     To some people, the term "B-movie" translates as: low quality
film-making.  If "quality" translates as high budgets, big-name actors, and
grand themes, then that equation would seem to be true; but as any progressive
quality-assurance person will tell you, that's a somewhat arbitrary definition
of "quality."  A more useful definition is: "Conformance to specifications."
Or, more simply:  "Does it accomplish what it is trying to do?"
     Using such a definition, it would seem likely that there are more
"high-quality" B-movies than A-movies, since B-movies rarely (and almost never
successfully) have any higher ambition than to entertain -- which should be a
relatively simple goal.
     TREMORS begins in the back-of-beyond in Nevada -- a gritty little
country-store town with the name of "Perfection" -- with two handymen, Earl and
Val, who do the dirty and dusty work for the region's few inhabitants.  They're
a couple of tough fellas, but they've had enough; they pack up their belongings
in their beat-up 4x4 and are heading out of town when STRANGE AND DEADLY
OCCURRENCES block their way and lead them and the inhabitants of Perfection in
a struggle for survival against ...  THINGS ...  
     I don't really need to say any more about the story than that; you
undoubtedly get the general idea.  Which leads to the next question:  Well, is
this movie any good?  The answer to this question relates directly to the
discussion of "quality" above.
     I cannot describe TREMORS in terms of any superlatives -- there is nothing
original about this film, there is nothing in it that stands out as
exceptional, and there is nothing particularly memorable about it.  But I don't
dare say anything unkind about it either, for if one accepts the premise that
this is a B-movie and isn't intended to do anything but give the viewer a good
ride for an hour-and-a-half, it absolutely succeeds on those terms.  In fact,
it is so competent and deft that it could be used as a textbook case of "HOW TO
MAKE A GOOD B-MOVIE."  (One wonders if the credit "CAROL ANNE HURD -- EXECUTIVE
PRODUCER" has something to do with it.)
     We have a plot that clicks along nicely with few false moves; the story is
developed intelligently and resolved equally intelligently.  The dialogue makes
few false steps and the acting is competent throughout.
     The characters drive the film; TREMORS avoids the twin traps of either
making them comic-book heroes or condescending to them as rustic clods; they're
ordinary people who are reacting sensibly to a survival situation.  Val and
Earl may be uneducated and unwashed shit-kickers, but they're decent people and
not stupid or cowardly; and even the local survivalist couple, while the butt
of a few jabs, are doing the right things when the situation gets rough.
     And TREMOR's biggest asset is that it hits EXACTLY the right tone:  It
takes itself JUST SERIOUSLY ENOUGH to keep the viewer going, without collapsing
into outright comedy.
     Okay, this isn't a great film, and I know those who want something a
little more innovative and artistic will probably hate it.  But those who are
less particular will find their time and money well spent, and may even want to
give a little restrained applause while they sit there with a smile on their
faces in appreciation of this good-natured horror flic.
     Oh, yes, the caveats: moderate foul language -- a little gore; whether
gratuitous or not is arguable.

Title
Review for Red Scorpion (1989)
[Moderator's Note: I am in the process of changing machines for news.
My old address will still work, as well as my new one. -ecl]
     Every time I go strolling through the paperback section of the Corvallis
Fred Meyer department store -- I do this mostly out of habit, since I lost
interest in novels a long time ago -- I notice one section is devoted to what,
for want of a better term, I would call "male Harlequins".  Women (apparently)
like to read slushy romances; men, on the other hand, like to read violent
action novels.
     These violent action books have titles like MIA HUNTER or SAIGON COMMANDOS
or whatever.  There's a whole rack of 'em, and they're usually numbered as
elements of a series.  Mind you, I'm not criticizing these books.  People write
them and make a living.  People buy them and kill some time with them.
Everyone's happy.  (Some may claim that such books have a pernicious effect on
the character of those who read them, but as a concern I personally have to
place that somewhere below the potential toxicity of my tooth fillings.)
     There are movies that seem to fall in this category as well, and there I
would solidly place RED SCORPION.
     In this film, Scandinavian hunk Dolf Lundgren plays a Soviet SPETSNATZ
commando, sent to some mythical African nation (Mombassa or Mikubu or ... what
the hell, something like that) to help suppress a rebellion.  He eventually
realizes that he's fighting on the wrong side and helps the rebels.
     "And?" you ask.  "And what?!" I reply.  That's really all there is to
it.  It's sort of like a WWII-vintage propaganda flic, with the sadistic and
brutal Russians and Cubans oppressing the noble African freedom fighters.  It's
all pretty much by-the-numbers:  violence, combat, torture, fistfights; lots
and lots of fiery explosions.
     I didn't mind, myself.  I had a frustrating week, and I wanted to go park
my brains for a while before I blew a fuse and bit the mailman.  I knew what I
was getting into and got exactly what I expected.
     RED SCORPION has zero pretensions of being anything but what it is, and
makes no false claims in its advertising.  Anybody who goes to see this movie
with high expectations will be disappointed, but I would have to say that would
be like picking up a paperback like DELTA FORCE RAIDERS and expecting to read
WAR AND PEACE.
     Still, it would be nice to see some movies that I don't forget the instant
I walk out the door.  But BARON MUNCHAUSEN hasn't made it to the provinces yet,
so I guess I'll just have to satisfy myself by writing reviews.

Title
Review for Abyss, The (1989)
     Given the skills of the Cameron-Hurd team (which has already brought us
the memorable TERMINATOR and ALIENS), it would be a shame to say that they let
us down with their latest film, THE ABYSS -- so it is pleasant to say that THE
ABYSS is one of the more worthwhile films of the summer.
     A nuclear submarine has a disastrous accident in the waters of the
Atlantic; the Navy sends a SEAL team to commandeer an undersea oil rig in the
vicinity to perform, if possible, a rescue operation.  Of course, nothing is
goes right -- if it did, would there be much of a story?  -- and everyone
involved finds themselves in an ever-widening predicament that tests their
ability to survive.
     I am told $45 million was spent on producing this picture.  Large budgets
don't always translate into impressive productions -- sometimes they're the
result of mismanagement -- but in this case, the special effects are so
spectacular that one wonders how they managed to do it for that small a sum!
     This is fortunate, because if THE ABYSS had to rest on the virtues of its
story line, it would most likely sink into a financial abyss even deeper than
the watery canyon which threatens the heroes of this underwater epic.  While it
is hard to be unkind to a team which has done their level best (and then some!)
to give the customers their money's worth -- not only is the production
superlative, but all the actors (Ed Harris in particular) put in good
performances -- the script is, alas, almost as mechanical as the special
effects, resembling nothing so much as the kind of story Irwin Allen might tell
on a good day; it punches all the right buttons, sometimes very effectively,
but never with enough subtlety to make the viewer fail to realize that his or
her buttons are, indeed, being punched.
     But I will not be cynical; while this film does fail to reach the margins
of greatness, it is very definitely on the high side of good; and I suspect
there are some less jaded and finicky than myself who will be absolutely blown
away by it.  As for myself?  I count myself satisfied.  My compliments to the
chef.  

Title
Review for Home Alone (1990)
     I am a little leery of John Hughes films ... Hughes' movies seem
to be exclusively devoted to the topic of comfortable-middle-class-
white-American family life--not that there's anything inherently wrong
with that, it's just that when it's not properly handled it's about as
interesting as Wonder Bread.  But good reviews tempted me to see HOME
ALONE--and I didn't regret it.
     Okay, in praising this film I have to throw out a number of
warnings:  This is a "feel-good" Christmas film with a nice neat homey
message; it's a candy-cane and Christmas-tree-ornament sort of movie ...
"great" it "ain't."  But that said, it is fairly impressive that Hughes
and Chris Columbus could piece together such a movie with such craft
that it not only avoids nauseating the audience but actually gets them
rolling in the aisles at times.
     The premise is simple:  two families with hot-and-cold running kids
are taking off for Paris for Christmas.  One of the boys--eight-year-old
Kevin--gets everybody mad at him the night before they leave, so he's
sent up to the attic bedroom to cool off.  There's a power outage during
the night, the clocks are all knocked out, a mad scramble follows in the
morning, and due to the confusion (and a slight case of mistaken
identity) they all drive off ... without Kevin.
     Well, more than that I will not say, but the resulting story deftly
weaves together a plot with a number of subplots--a mean-looking
neighbor, a tarantula, a very bad old videotape, and two nasty burglars
who not only like stealing everything in sight but trashing everything
when they leave--with considerable economy into a smooth-running whole.
The boy who plays Kevin is very good, starting out as a peevish brat and
then evolving to a new self-reliance and even a little Gizmo-Rambo
militancy.
     Okay, entirely plausible it's not, but this is the movies, right?
When HOME ALONE gets rolling it achieves a Looney Tunes sense of timing,
and there is a fairly good sense of wit through the entire film.  Call
it John Hughes / Chris Columbus as Steve Spielberg / Joe Dante.  And
even if there is a message it is administered gracefully enough so that
at the very worst you won't mind it too awfully much ... and maybe if
you're corny enough in your heart of hearts you will nod your head and
smile.
