Authors
E.H. Goh
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Bacheha-Ye aseman (1997)
Like "White Balloon", it focuses on the lives of ordinary children.
Unlike "White Balloon" which stretches over one incident in realtime,
"Children...." involves a string of events and problems encountered by
them. It was very interesting to see how they go about solving it.
These solutions, funny or ineffective they might be, exude innocence,
which is the very soul of this masterpiece.That untainted innocence is
unattainable by conventional city dwellers, both young and old. Like
almost all Iranian productions, everything was done in the most
authentic way, more real than dramatic.It would have easily taken the
dramatic turn by exploiting the hard lives the kids are having to gain
sympathy. Fortunately, that fact was downplayed so as not to get in the
way of storytelling or perhaps, what I perceived as hardships might be
a common sight in Iran ( I hope not).
Iranian productions like to end on a pondering note but that does not
always mean open ended endings. I guess with all  the loose ends tied
up there's no need to go any further by including a most probably corny
conclusion.   So they left the obvious to imagination and fired off a
last burst of lingering creativity, then subtly the curtain fell.
If you have not seen any Iranian films and wonder what's the big fuss
about? This will be a very good one to start with because of its
accessibility, in other words, it's of relatively high entertainment
value for an arthouse fare. But if you adore Iranian films, then this
one could be a little less intriguing. Nonetheless, it's still as
endearingly heartfelt.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Title
Review for Jenseits der Stille (1996)
Countless films have been made involving triumphs of the physically
handicapped or the parents of handicapped children in accepting their
kids. This well made German film turned it the other way round,
chronicling the tale of one with handicapped parents and the
complications involved, or rather, to show how uncomplicated some
things can be when there's understanding, patience and determination.
Lara, a sensible but headstrong girl grew up under the guidance of her
deaf-mute parents. Dysfunctional it may sounds but she had  a
fulfilling family life even if one of her tasks is translating the
dialogues of romantic movies to sign language for her mother. Being the
only ears and voice of the family, she easily took advantage of her
ability much to the disapproval of her equally stubborn father. Their
tension started building when Lara started learning the clarinet and
ultimately excelled in it. Without the ability to appreciate music,
there's difficulty for her parents to understand her dream and share
her success.
Primarily, it is very much a movie exploring the father-daughter
relationship with sibling rivalry in the sideline. The "language
barrier" just invoke various complications which made the resolving of
tensions more difficult. Instead of letting coincidences be the
solution, we get to witness the struggles the characters went through
to understand and forgive one another.
Somehow, the ending do came across a little abrupt as it ended just
after the father took his first step in understanding his daughter. I
just felt that it would more satisfying to affirm his sincerity. Then
again, knowing how stubborn that father was, it must have taken him a
lot of effort to do that. Taking that first step was indeed very
significant and may be all we ever need to know.
Caroline Link's  painstaking research paid off as she manage to paint a
more or less accurate picture of the deaf-mute community. Their
sometimes extraordinary method of doing things does not make them less
human than us, a message gently and effectively put across.  More
painstaking would be the making of the movie as the main players were
required to learn the German sign language. There was also some
communication problems since some of the main cast were deaf-mute by
nature, like the pair playing the parents.
In spite of all that, they still managed to deliver a powerful and
heartfelt piece of drama with quite some occasional and timely humour,
winning worldwide accolades from both the audiences and critics.
-------------
reviews archive http://www2.cybercities.com/~taff/"
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
