Authors
Steve Baumgarten
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Cliffhanger (1993)
     Although a two-word review would be nearly sufficient for this one
("Climb Hard"), it wouldn't be nearly as much fun to write, and it
would be a tad misleading.  I should say at the outset that if nothing
else, CLIFFHANGER proves how difficult it is to make a top-notch action
film, no matter how much money or how many digital effects you throw at
it.  It also shows quite convincingly why Arnold Schwarzenegger is the
biggest box office draw of his generation, while Sylvester Stallone is
quickly becoming an embarrassing curiosity, someone who apparently
cannot be convinced to settle for his decade worth of fame and fortune
and fade gracefully into the background.  (In fact, Stallone's
performance in CLIFFHANGER does more than that:  it really forces us to
think about which other action/adventure star has done so much to ruin
a film so promising.  None come to mind, though perhaps as I get
further into this review I'll suffer a DOUBLE IMPACT / UNIVERSAL
SOLDIER flashback and decide upon Jean-Claude Van Damme.  Though at
least Van Damme is still cheap.)
     Stallone is not cheap; in fact, nothing about CLIFFHANGER is
cheap.  Unfortunately, nothing about CLIFFHANGER is all that good,
either; as a virtual clone of DIE HARD, it hardly merits a mention in
the same paragraph, though on the surface it's not immediately clear
why.  After all, CLIFFHANGER is chock full of nasty, sneering European
terrorists; high-tech explosions; graphic violence; hundreds of
thousands of dollars that can be accessed only through the use of a
computer code; and a bare-chested, steroidal hero who wreaks havoc on
the terrorists and single-handedly saves the day.  Even the altitude of
the two films is nearly the same; although come to think of it, Bruce
Willis never seemed to be suffering from oxygen deprivation -- and yet
oxygen deprivation is the only thing that could reasonably explain
Stallone's unrelievedly awful dialogue.
     Yes, Stallone wrote the screenplay (or should I say, "rewrote" it,
since however execrable it seems in its current form, it was apparently
even worse before Sly "improved" it).  And CLIFFHANGER's terrible
screenplay is its Achilles heel, for although director Renny Harlin
(who did a respectable job in the similarly implausible DIE HARD 2)
does what he can to keep our minds off of Stallone's dialogue,
inevitably the film slows down and we find ourselves stuck on a ledge
with nothing between us and a perilous fall into unintentional hilarity
but the thin rope of Stallone's wit.  Rope?  Better make that
thread...
     There are also other, more subtle problems with the film.  One
that looms particularly large is the sheer unoriginality of the
screenplay -- as I mentioned, the writer(s) seemed to want to remake
DIE HARD on a mountain instead of inside a skyscraper.  That they did,
though in doing so they missed many of the elements that made DIE HARD
so successful (putting aside clever dialogue and a hero who didn't make
the audience cringe every time he appeared on the screen).  Primarily,
they missed DIE HARD's single-minded, pared-down focus.  We never got a
lot of background or human interest stories in DIE HARD; in fact, one
of its best qualities is that it went from civilized Christmas party to
Bruce Willis running bare-foot through broken glass in an astonishingly
short amount of time.  Yes, much of DIE HARD was silly; much was
entirely implausible; much was downright maudlin.  But because its
pacing was so superb, the filmmakers were able to trick us into
overlooking all its flaws and instead see only the film's central
vision.  At heart, DIE HARD was little more than a high-tech spaghetti
Western, with Bruce Willis as -- quite literally for most of the film
-- The Man With No Name, who against unbelievable odds must save the
town and the woman he loves from death and destruction at the hands of
sinister bad guys.
     But I defy anyone who has seen CLIFFHANGER to tell me what this
film's vision is.  Actually, I'll settle for a conference call with
Harlin, Stallone, and anyone at all at Carolco willing to admit to
paying Stallone what amounts to $2 million for each of his unbroken
string of duds since RAMBO to star in, rewrite, and ruin this one.
     CLIFFHANGER is, in fact, three films, two of which star Mr.
Stallone and only one of which is particularly interesting.  The first
film provides background for Stallone's character, Gabe Walker, who
loses his confidence as a rescue ranger when he lets an inexperienced
climber slip from his grasp and plunge to her digitally enhanced doom.
That Walker could have done little to save her and that in fact he did
nothing at all to put her life in jeopardy is treated by the screenplay
as one of those small, unimportant details that only sticklers for
plausible motivation will care about.  Since the filmmakers assume that
their audience will be comprised, for the most part, of unthinking
dolts, it hardly matters what happens in the scene, as long as Stallone
gives himself a reason to look disheartened and forlorn for the next
half hour.  (Not to give anything away, but in a surprise twist
Stallone ceases looking disheartened and forlorn when he learns that
his best friend is in trouble -- rendering the whole of the film's
first sub-plot entirely pointless.)
     After its breathtaking opening sequence, the film crashes back to
earth for what seems like an eternity as the second of the three
sub-plots is laboriously set up.  Here we are introduced to us the
terrorists, lead by John Lithgow in predictably over-the-top,
sociopathic style, and their own plot to hijack a Treasury plane
transporting three suitcases filled with thousand-dollar bills.  I
won't go into the details of their plan here, as its execution is
surely the high point of the film and provides CLIFFHANGER with a much
needed -- though meager -- dose of originality.  It also keeps Stallone
and his inability to act off the screen for 20 minutes or so, which
certainly doesn't hurt -- though it does make us wonder whether
CLIFFHANGER could have been further improved by eliminating Stallone's
character entirely and allowing Michael Rooker to share in the heroics
with Janine Turner.  Both are accomplished actors, and both are just as
qualified as Stallone to allow stunt doubles and digital compositing to
handle the action part of this action-adventure film.  As for running
around in snow-covered fields waving automatic weapons, well, anyone
can do that.  The real question is whether CLIFFHANGER would have been
as much of a draw without Stallone; I'd argue that it might have been
even more of one without his ham-handed presence both in front of the
camera and behind the scenes.
     As long as the hijacking is in progress, the film seems fresh,
fun, and original.  But once the terrorists crash-land and begin trying
to find the suitcases, things take a decided turn for the worst.  This
happens in two ways: first, although there is a surfeit of running
around, shooting and hiding, there seems a remarkable paucity of
mountain climbing.  Perhaps this is because Stallone looks nothing at
all like a mountain climber (and in fact looks absolutely ridiculous as
he pulls his way up the side of a cliff in one of the rare climbing
scenes); perhaps it's because the filmmakers decided that mountain
climbing -- being a slow and deliberate process that can't be quick-cut
edited into random places in the film -- just wouldn't be exciting
enough for their supposedly jaded audience.  If so, they made a
terrible mistake.  One need only sit with an audience watching the IMAX
film TO THE LIMIT to realize the profound effect real mountain climbing
can have on people who rarely take the stairs at their places of work,
let alone set out to scale the side of a cliff.  Certainly we've all
seen people shooting at each other with automatic weapons; given the
choice between a clever (but relatively bloodless) cat-and-mouse chase
up and across perilous cliffs, and the usual mindless Hollywood
violence, I suspect people would much rather pay to see the former.
     What we get, however, is the latter.  The "running around and
shooting" portion of the film is CLIFFHANGER's third sub-plot, and it
is without a doubt the weakest, if only because it is the least
original and most mean-spirited of the three.  I mentioned above that
once the terrorists crash-land, things take a turn for the worst in two
ways, and as this third sub-plot unfolds, we quickly discover that as
lively and as fresh the first half of the film seemed, the second
becomes just as mean-spirited and vicious.  I thought this incredibly
unfortunate, partly because I'd believed we'd left such inane violence
and cruelty behind us in the films of the late eighties, and partly
because it seems so much at odds with the film's beautiful natural
surroundings.  It's one thing for Bruce Willis to pump dozens of rounds
of automatic weapon fire into a terrorist in a high-tech office
building in 1988; it's another thing to watch this same scene unfold
beneath delicately snow-capped trees and in front of breath-taking
natural vistas.  Nature is not without its own kind of violence and
cruelty, but Wild Kingdom this is not.
     This third sub-plot is also greatly weakened by some of the
sloppiest editing I've seen this year.  To be honest, much of the last
half-hour of the film simply doesn't make sense -- it seemed to me that
CLIFFHANGER had been hacked down to its 118-minute running time from an
original film of much greater length, and given that the screenplay (at
any length) was never a paragon of logic, this editing rendered the end
of the film nearly incomprehensible.  Too many scenes simply exist in a
vacuum -- we often have no feeling for how Stallone or the terrorists
got from one cliff to another, or where any individual location is in
relation to any other.  The film does feature one character who walks
around with an electronic suitcase-finder; too bad he doesn't also have
a continuity-finder, for at times we feel about as lost and abandoned
as those suitcases.
     This lack of continuity reaches its nadir when Stallone attempts
to follow the terrorists across a foot bridge between two cliffs.  The
scene is featured prominently in the film's advertising, and those of
us who saw the ads expect Stallone to make it most of the way, trigger
an explosion, and then leap to safety at the last moment.  At least we
expect a stunt double to do this.  Or $5 million worth of T2-style
computer animation.  Something, anyway.  But in fact what happens is
that Stallone jumps *back* to the cliff whence he came.  While this may
seem marginally more plausible, it does pose a small problem: sans a
telephone booth nearby (into which Stallone might run to don his
Superman outfit so as to fly across the chasm), it's not clear how the
pursuit of the terrorists will continue.
     But continue it does, of course, logic be damned.  That kind of
contempt for an audience's intelligence really bothers me, since it's
so unnecessary.  It's one thing to ask us to believe that Treasury
planes fly around with suitcases full of thousand-dollar bills; perhaps
they do.  But how can we be expected to buy a chase scene set in the
mountains that -- somehow -- never involves any mountain-climbing?
Putting people on a ledge is inherently dramatic; having them run
around shooting each other (or worse, beating each other up in ways
that make the ROCKY films look tame in comparison) is not.
     That said, it's clear that much of the action is diverting and
generally entertaining, especially if you can turn your brain off after
buying your popcorn and soda.  (My feeling is that something like this
happened as soon as Stallone rolled blank paper into his typewriter.)
The scenery upstages everything, even Stallone's lovingly photographed
and scantily clad body.  The special effects are usually very good, but
often they don't look particularly convincing, perhaps because the
two-dimensional characters, awful dialogue, and incoherent plot keep us
from fully suspending disbelief.  Or perhaps because they're just not
consistently good (as the special effects in T2 were).  Scenes that
were shot indoors look like they were shot indoors, especially one in
which Stallone chases the film's plausibility out on to thin ice.
(Hint: only he survives.)  The situation might have been helped had
Stallone himself ever gone near a step ladder, let alone a mountain;
less optical printing and more actual rock climbing might have left
more money for better special effects used less frequently.  As it is,
all of the scenes set on cliffs -- and that were actually filmed
outdoors, rather than simulated on a sound stage -- utilize stunt
doubles, and most are filmed from quite a distance.  A nice close-up or
two of Stallone actually on a cliff might have helped lend some
authenticity to the proceedings.  But as he's afraid of heights, that
wasn't a possibility, so the burden of making a realistic-looking film
was pushed off on to the many special effects houses involved with the
production.
     Rooker and Turner are largely wasted; in fact, it wasn't clear to
me why their characters were written into the screenplay in the first
place.  Remember that John McClane's wife in DIE HARD served no purpose
other than to be taken hostage; yet although Turner plays side-kick to
Stallone throughout much of the film, she's allowed to do little more
than dilute the film's focus.  And when it comes to focus, CLIFFHANGER
seems more than a little astigmatic -- the last thing Stallone needs
are two other "good guys" getting caught up underfoot, doing little
more than showcasing his inability to act.
     CLIFFHANGER opened when it did for a reason: faced with
competition from JURASSIC PARK and LAST ACTION HERO, Tri Star wisely
opted for an otherwise action-adventure-free weekend, at least three
weeks before the two biggest summer draws were scheduled to open.  With
competition coming only from a handful of light spring comedies,
CLIFFHANGER is bound to do well at the box office.  But come August,
when people may well be seeing the best of this summer's blockbusters
for a second and third time, I doubt if anyone but Carolco's bankruptcy
attorneys will remember this strictly-by-the-numbers film.

Title
Review for Jason Goes to Hell: The Final Friday (1993)
     Anyone who goes to see a FRIDAY THE 13TH film at this point is
either a hopeless fan or a hopeless idiot; either way, he deserves
exactly what he gets.  I've enjoyed the FT13 concept--if not always
the execution, so to speak--since the first installment over a decade
ago (13 years ago, to be precise); so I like to consider myself a
hopeless fan.  But truth be told, most of the rest of the Times Square
audience with which I saw JGTH last Friday night did their best to
qualify for the other category.  Participatory audiences are fine with
me--in fact, most horror films are so lousy that they're only
improved by a constant stream of catcalls, smart-aleck remarks, and
general wising off until it's time for the next killing.  But this
audience was a little much; needless to say, I now know what 500 people
thinking out loud sounds like.  Listening to 90 minutes of "she's going
to get killed" and "yeah, she's going to take it off" was enough to
make me think that I'd reached *my* final Friday, and that I was now
paying for my life of movie-going sins (like slinking off to FT13 PART
V when I really should have been seeing THE COLOR PURPLE).
     Making things worse was the film itself, which seems to have been
assembled from a jumble of pages from the scripts of other, better
horror films.  It's a little beyond me: why on earth would anyone mess
with success at this late date?  Here we'd all just been relieved of
$7.50, supposedly so that we could see Jason go to Hell--or at least
kill a few scantily-clad teenagers and then retire to Miami Beach,
where he could reminisce about the good old days, back in the early
eighties when the horror film was king and direct-to-video hadn't yet
been invented.  And all we wanted to see was Jason--not an
unreasonable expectation, considering that his billing is even higher
than the day of the week this time around.  But instead we got a very
strange plot, filled with an unpleasant bounty hunter, an unpleasant
tabloid TV personality, an unpleasant yuppie, an unpleasant proprietor
of an unpleasant roadside diner, and an unpleasantly confused idea:
that Jason isn't really beyond explanation, that in fact he's just been
possessed all these years by the spirit of ALIEN.  Sort of.
     I'd like to say that this premise is so lame-brained that the
audience was left speechless, even momentarily.  But alas, they
weren't, although my feeling is that for 90 minutes we were all
subjected to Confuse-A-Cat therapy.  And the sad part of it is
that--briefly, oh so briefly--JGTH looked like it was actually going to
be a rather clever finale to the FT13 series.  I was especially
heartened to see two very witty visuals early on--but two was
apparently the limit for the filmmakers, who after about 10 minutes
managed to drag the film and our expectations--if not Jason
himself--straight down to Hell.  So I'll give away the two visuals,
just to give you a taste of what might have been.  The first came very
early on, when a Standard Issue Beautiful Teenage Girl appeared to be
moving into an abandoned cabin in the beautiful Camp Crystal Lake area,
known the world over for its relaxing atmosphere and plentiful
gardening implements, ever at hand.  As she enters, the light
immediately burns out, and she finds she has to go to an even darker
woodshed to find a replacement.  She does, in fact, find one: an
economy bulb in a package marked "Twice the Life."  I liked that.  I
also liked the insignia on the shoulder of one of Crystal Lake's police
officers: it indicated that they were all in Cunningham County--an
insider smile for those of us who remember the name of Jason's
cinematic godfather, Sean S.  Cunningham, who has made a small fortune
on the character he helped create in the very first FT13 and has since
gone on to make one lousy exploitation film after another.  Including
this one, which he produced.
     The very first scene, is in fact, terrific, as it sends up all the
horror cliches that the FT13 series helped spawn.  And yet they
remained quite effective, even as the S.I.B.T.G. stripped and stepped
into the shower.  Unfortunately, nothing much comes of all this, as the
filmmakers quickly toss aside any thoughts of making a conventional
(read: intelligible, sensible, entertaining) horror film.  Instead we
find that Jason is finally, once and for all, killed, dismembered, cut
up, and generally, well, sent to Hell.  (Pay no attention to the
spoilsport behind the curtain who in a loud and obnoxious voice points
out that Jason dissolved at the end of the last installment in the FT13
series: JASON TAKES MANHATTAN.  On the other hand, that was actually a
very decent film, one of the best in the series, and by the time JGTH
had ended, it had gone up another notch or two on my personal
Respect-O-Meter.  At least it knew what it wanted to do and did it,
which is more than I can say of JGTH.)
     What happens here is very disheartening.  Jason's dismembered
corpse is taken to a hospital morgue and placed on a table so that we
can look at it for a while.  It's in pretty bad shape, all right, but
we have confidence that he'll be able to pull himself together and get
on with it.  You know: JASON TAKES ON AN HMO--something that would
really get the audience into it.  Wonder of wonders, his heart starts
beating, and just as we're all set for the fireworks, the unexpected
happens.  The unwanted, in fact, but what happens is very central to
film's incredibly lame plot.  What happens is that the coroner takes a
big bite out of Jason's heart.  Yum!  And, naturally, becomes Jason in
some undefined way.  In fact, in one of the very few cool scenes in the
film, he passes in front of a full-length mirror, and lo and behold,
there's Jason, in all his hockey-masked glory.  But in real life, all
we have is a wimpy-looking coroner on the rampage.  Hoo ha.
     This was a big mistake.  However, there's nothing anyone can do
about it FOR THE NEXT 75 GOSH-DARN MINUTES!  Instead of Jason, what we
get is a succession of wimpy-looking characters, each of whom seems to
be on the wrong end of a game of tag that requires the poor soul who's
"it" to transfer a slimy-looking thing that looks like it came straight
off the set of PARASITE (which, by the way, is an excellent rip-off of
ALIEN, made in 1982 in audience-pleasing 3-D, and one of many films
that Demi Moore is none too proud of) into someone else's mouth.  That
part seems to have been stolen from LIFEFORCE, an even worse film, but
one which at least had the saving grace of featuring incredibly goofy
dialogue and Naked Female Space Vampires.
     The dialogue in JGTH is just as lame as the plot, which gets more
and more convoluted as we rush headlong toward the promised Final
Friday.  (Actually, I have no idea what day all this was happening
on--shows you just how sloppy the filmmakers were--but to be honest
the whole thing felt like Monday morning.)  And there are no Naked
Female Space Vampires--just coroners, policemen, and tabloid
television journalists on various murderous rampages.  And this
ALIEN-like thing, which really doesn't make any sense, but it's in
there anyway.  Especially as we reach the tail end of the film, when
all is revealed whether we want it to be or not.  By this time we've
heard from the bounty hunter (who doesn't really get to hunt anything,
though he does get to break the yuppie's fingers in a puzzlingly cruel
and rather sour scene) and discovered that Jason wants to be reborn,
but that this can only happen if he manages to transfer the slimy
ALIEN-like thing to his sister or her daughter.  And the sister--who,
to be honest, I wasn't aware of until this installment and who here
seems to be a refugee from Plot Convenience Playhouse--used to be the
wife of the yuppie.  And her daughter doesn't do anything at all in
this film, though in one scene she looks very cute and the whole
audience goes "Awwww!"
     Have I left anything out?  Mind you, this film is exactly 88
minutes long, and if it seems that there's already enough plot for
three lousy horror films--or, more to the point, three much better
horror films that have already been made--you may be shocked to learn
that there is still quite a bit more plot that I haven't even bothered
to mention.  Late in the game we get a smattering of EVIL DEAD ("Wrong
movie!" came the cry from the by now quite actively involved audience)
and a magic letter opener which is the only thing able to permanently
kill Jason once and for all.  Permanently, like.  Forever, this time.
Not ever to return again.  Honest.
     Just to ease your minds and relieve the unbearable tension this
review has no doubt created, Jason does, in fact, get sent to Hell; at
least he gets buried in the backyard by a lot of hands that spring up,
CARRIE-style, though in fact we never do get to see the low-budget Hell
to which he's been consigned.  So you can't sue anyone for false
advertising: after all, this is JGTH, not "Someone Finally Makes A
Great Jason Movie Instead Of Completely Wasting One Of The Best Horror
Movie Characters Of All Time Yet Again."  Whether he'll remain there is
another question, one that I certainly hope no one bothers to answer.
But the signs are bleak: stick around for the surprise finale to see
just how low New Line can sink now that they aren't making mega-bucks
off the Turtles anymore.  Clever horror fans might guess, if they
remember what other properties New Line owns; as for the audience
Friday night, well, they were pleased as punch and looking forward to
the next installment of, well, something.  Anything, really.  We're not
a choosy bunch.  As apparently Mr. Cunningham and New Line have
realized.

Title
Review for Menace II Society (1993)
[ Phans -- After some thought, I've decided to write some non-horror
reviews as myself, rather than as the Phantom.  It's likely that the
majority will be about action and/or exploitation films, from
CLIFFHANGER (in the works) to SLIVER (which I took a pass on).  It's
also likely that since many of these films won't be as downright awful
as LEPRECHAUN, the reviews probably won't be as funny.  I may get tired
of semi-serious reviewing, in which case I'll switch to direct-to-video
releases or something like that, since there aren't going to be many
horror releases this summer.  Happy reading, and I'll try to live up to
the high standards set by my alter ego.  SBB ]
     I don't know who the Hughes Brothers are, but I sincerely hope
they continue to make films as good as MENACE II SOCIETY, the latest in
a series of impressive debuts by new black directors.  Like many
low-budget filmmakers, they chose to write (with Tyger Williams) and
direct an urban coming-of-age film, part drama, part exploitation, and
part "message" film.
     When making an urban "message" film, you walk a fine line between
producing little more than a big-budget ABC After School Special, or an
exploitation film that's ultimately as unsatisfying as it is
entertaining.  Recently, we've had both: John Singleton's BOYZ N THE
HOOD and Ernest Dickerson's JUICE played out as entertaining, well-made
urban dramas that deal with the challenges black youth face growing up
in a city like Los Angeles.  Singleton proved that he was a capable
filmmaker and benefited greatly from a standout performance by the
rapper Ice Cube; Dickerson showed us why Spike Lee has used no one else
as his cinematographer.  On an emotional level, BOYZ N THE HOOD was
quite powerful -- partly because it was the first mainstream Hollywood
film to deal with these issues in a serious way, and partly because of
the performances Singleton was able to get from his young cast.  JUICE
was entertaining for as long as it remained on the screen, but after
that it became instantly forgettable.  It ultimately failed because
Dickerson didn't know whether he wanted to make an exploitation film
(in the mold of NEW JACK CITY) or a "message" film that would at least
help redeem the film's violent tone.  In attempting to make both, he
really made neither, though his cinematographer's eye was largely
responsible for the film's glossy and very attractive look.
     (As a pure exploitation film, NEW JACK CITY was hampered only by
the occasional bout of moralizing; it seems that either black
filmmakers are not yet comfortable making films as mindlessly violent
as those of white filmmakers, or they feel that mainstream audiences
won't feel as comfortable with such films.  Either way, it's a recent
development, as we are not yet too far removed in time from the heyday
of the "blaxploitation" film, when the only goal filmmakers had was to
churn out entertaining product as quickly as possible, before the fad
collapsed.)
     MENACE II SOCIETY comes to us with an award from Cannes, which
indicates that the Hughes Brothers (as they bill themselves) are as
lucky as they are talented, this being a time when violent films are
held in high esteem at that august festival.  It's been my opinion for
a while that the judges at Cannes wouldn't know a good film if it
leaped at them out of their popcorn boxes, but then again my definition
of "good" is closely tied to my definition of "entertaining".  I'm much
less interested in getting "messages" from the films I see than I am in
being entertained in ways that novels, plays, and television cannot
duplicate.  Films without messages are hard to come by these days, but
again, that's a recent development:  just two decades ago the silver
screen was awash in graphic violence for the sake of violence, and
films like A CLOCKWORK ORANGE and THE WILD BUNCH were considered
mainstream.  That RESERVOIR DOGS -- a film very much in the Peckinpah
mold -- would cause the uproar it did, now 25 years later, shows you
just how far we've regressed since the glory days of filmmaking freedom
in the late sixties and early seventies.
     But under the cloak of The Message, the Hughes Brothers have
assembled a film that's as entertaining as it is well-crafted, and one
that has much more depth to it than any other recent urban film.  Its
story is familiar, following as it does the life of one black teenager
as he grows up in a family, a neighborhood, and among friends who do
all they can to force him into making one bad decision after another.
That some of these decisions will have lethal consequences is a
foregone conclusion, but the genius of MENACE II SOCIETY is that it
does not allow us to fall into the comfortable trap of complete
identification with a totally sympathetic protagonist.  As disturbing
as BOYZ N THE HOOD was, we never had to deal with the possibility that
Cuba Gooding Jr.'s character would turn out to be something other than
he was on the surface: a bright, well-intentioned, likable kid who gets
caught up with a crowd of "bad" friends.
     But that possibility lies at the center of the Hughes Brothers'
film; what keeps MENACE II SOCIETY interesting is its ability to keep
us off balance as it presents us with several inter-connected slices of
life.  Although it has all the trappings of another coming-of-age film,
there's more going on in MENACE II SOCIETY than meets the eye.  It is,
at heart, a darker film than BOYZ N THE HOOD; it is also in a number of
ways a better made film.  (This is true especially in the mechanics of
filmmaking, where the Hughes Brothers' background as directors of
hip-hop and rap music videos occasionally shines through and keeps
their film as interesting visually as it is on other, deeper levels.)
     MENACE II SOCIETY starts on a jittery note: after a brief title
sequence, we're pulled into the middle of a situation in a Korean
grocery that seems about to go very wrong.  Any violent scene can be
used to shock an audience out of its complacency, but where other
filmmakers have used urban violence to do little more than show us how
terrible such violence is, the Hughes Brothers use it as well to ground
us in the everyday life of Caine (the story's protagonist and the
character with whom we'd most like to identify) and his volatile
side-kick O-Dog.  Too, the scene is used to show us how such violence
affects Caine and his friends, because as compelling as the scene is
initially, it only gains power as the Hughes Brothers return to it,
time and again, as the film's touchstone.
     Although the film seems at first to be constructed as a running
narration by Caine about the events he experiences as he approaches the
end of his senior year in high school, the documentary style is just
one of many the Hughes Brothers use throughout the film.  In fact, the
most powerful scenes are those that provide background for the events
that unfold in Caine's life; in particular, a flashback to Caine's
troubled childhood works on several levels: it is so well done it
nearly stands on its own as a movie within a movie, yet by giving us a
chance to live Caine's life as he did, it allows us to see why many of
his actions as a young adult make sense to him, even if we'd like to
believe that he is simply responding to recent events in his life in a
way that society finds unacceptable.  There are also scenes in this
film that reminded me of another of my favorite slice-of-life dramas,
though one of a very different kind.  On more than one occasion, the
Hughes Brothers' ability to present shocking events as hardly out of
the ordinary recalled John McNaughton's brilliant horror film HENRY:
PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL KILLER.  These scenes -- most involving the very
unstable O-Dog -- each have relatively little impact on us, but
collectively they paint the kind of portrait that straight exposition
cannot.  It's a very effective technique, but one that is rarely used
in mainstream films, both because it requires a sure and subtle touch,
and because its use implies that the filmmakers respect their audience
-- all of which is sadly lacking in Hollywood these days.
     Such scenes also point out the only real flaw in this film: that
while we're given a certain amount of insight into Caine, other
characters exist as mere ciphers.  We really don't know why O-Dog is
the way he is; perhaps that's the Hughes Brothers' point -- that for
every Caine who might be reached and turned away from self-destruction,
there will always be others who can't be.
     It's a hard lesson to absorb, for Caine and for us.  By the end of
the film, we're still unsure whether Caine will be able to change his
life and escape from the consequences of his past.  Endings are always
the most difficult part of a film to get right, and it's to the Hughes
Brothers' credit that they are able to tell a story that neither leaves
us bereft of hope nor expecting a fairy tale ending.  They are almost
always in control of their tightly constructed, 90 minute film -- one
of the few films I've seen recently that was exactly the right length,
a rarity in an age of bloated running times when "more" is often
mistaken for "better" -- and its brief tour of one troubled young man's
life not only leaves us entertained, but gives us something to think
about without patronizing us.  The screenplay (such as it is -- it's my
understanding that the excellent cast improvised large portions of many
scenes) is as pared down and well-crafted as the direction.  We're
spared maudlin soliloquies, montages, and all the other cinematic
crutches used by filmmakers who, lacking a central vision, a good
screenplay, talented actors, or all three, must fall back on overused
dramatic techniques to move the film along.
     (One note about the graphic violence in the film: I've seen
reviews that claim that MENACE II SOCIETY contains some of the
bloodiest and most unsettling violence ever shown in a commercial
film.  It does not.  It does, however, attempt to portray violence in a
realistic fashion -- something that is all too rare in a commercial
film.  To me, films like TOTAL RECALL and ROBOCOP 2 are far more
unsettling, if only because they couple graphic violence with an
unrelenting mean-spiritedness and place it all in a comic-book context
that's designed to appeal to children.  I personally find it sad that
reviewers would comment unfavorably on the violence in a film like
MENACE II SOCIETY -- one in which violence is used only to advance the
story, not *as* the story -- and remain largely silent when they have a
chance to condemn films that not only glorify graphic violence, but
revel in scene after scene in which one character inflicts pain on
another.  While there are graphic scenes in MENACE II SOCIETY, the film
itself never once depicts it as anything other than unfortunate result
of generations of unfortunate decisions.)
     MENACE II SOCIETY is easily one of the best films to be released
this spring, and as summer's deluge of big-budget, sloppily-made and
violence-glorifying films draws nearer, it would be a shame if anyone
overlooked a film as intelligent and well-made as this one.  We can
only hope that the Hughes Brothers achieve some measure of success and
recognition with their fine debut effort; although it's rarely the
case, this time it's true: MTV's loss is very much our gain.

Title
Review for Super Mario Bros. (1993)
     Kiddie films are doomed to be dismissed by us professional film
critics almost regardless of how good they actually are.  And because
it's so easy to categorize a kiddie film as something that couldn't
possibly be worth seeing -- regardless of what the critics say -- a
vicious circle is set up: because you don't see it, you don't recommend
it to your friends, who themselves haven't seen and recommended it to
you.  So I expect that no one but eleven-year-old boys will wind up
seeing this summer's first big-budget kiddie film, SUPER MARIO BROS.
     As it happens, I'm entirely undiscriminating when it comes to
films that might, in some way, prove entertaining.  After all, I"m a
horror buff, and I've learned to sit through dozens of lousy horror
films on the off-chance that one of them might prove worth watching.
This is the "panning-for-gold" theory of movie-going, a technique
responsible for the success of an appalling number of truly awful
films.  How otherwise can we understand the success of the obviously
lousy film SLIVER, if not because people assume it will be just like
BASIC INSTINCT and so probably worth taking a chance on?  When it comes
to Hollywood films, far too many of us are willing to take our chances,
critics be damned.
     Yet whereas most people are willing to take a chance on a film
that's similar to one they've seen before, they're resolutely unwilling
to consider one that doesn't seem "suitable."  We want the "right" kind
of action, violence, sex, and story lines, so while we warmly embrace
insanely violent and graphic films like TOTAL RECALL and soft-core
exploitation films like BASIC INSTINCT, we'd never go see a really good
horror film.  And while CLIFFHANGER opened to a $20+ million box office
its first weekend, SUPER MARIO BROS. managed only $8 million, much of
which I suspect was tendered in nickels and dimes from smashed piggy
banks and horded allowances.
     But the eleven-year-olds have the right idea -- sometimes it's
best to be a little undiscriminating and take a chance on a movie that
might prove entertaining in a thoroughly unpredictable way.  As SUPER
MARIO BROS. does, consistently, with good humor, intelligence and wit.
It is as well-made, thoughtful, and respectful of its audience's
intelligence as CLIFFHANGER and SLIVER are mechanically assembled and
insulting -- and yet it is, first and foremost, a film for
eleven-year-olds.
     Quite a trick, and one rarely seen in the world of live-action
kiddie films.  But it's not as unusual as you might think: after all,
it's only recently that Disney has been making (and, more important,
marketing) their cartoons for an adult audience.  Before THE LITTLE
MERMAID, only animation fanatics suggested a trip to the cinema to see
SLEEPING BEAUTY or DUMBO; yet today no adult would bat an eye at such a
suggestion, and truth be told, most of us over the age of eleven await
the next Disney cartoon almost as eagerly as those who still get carded
at lemonade stands.
     That no one but the Nintendo-set was eagerly awaiting SUPER MARIO
BROS. made it all the more amazing to find that a silly, sloppy, poorly
made kiddie film was nowhere to be found.  In its place is a
well-directed and -edited film, featuring a top-drawer score by Alan
Silvestri; the best production design since BATMAN; enough special
effects to keep any eleven-year-old's (or even thirty-year-old's)
attention; and a truly goofy story line that's backed up with enough
Bullwinkle-style humor to keep everyone smiling.
     The story has little to do with the film's video game namesake;
although the instantly recognizable name reportedly cost the filmmakers
$2 million, it's obvious that the license was picked up purely for
marketing reasons.  The "Super Mario" name is enough of a hook to
attract attention and draw in the film's target audience, but beyond
that it doesn't play an important role in the film.  (In fact, Bob
Hoskins -- who plays Mario Mario -- claims not to have known what Super
Mario Bros. was before one of his children pointed to a squat,
mustachioed animated character jumping around on his television screen
and exclaimed "Dad!  That's you!".)  It's probably just as well, given
how limiting such a literal translation would be; instead, the
filmmakers felt free enough to devise their own story, and to a great
extent, their own world.  And it's this that makes SUPER MARIO BROS.
so successful and such a consistent joy to watch.
     Let me run through a few of the things I liked a whole lot about
this film.  First and foremost, the storyline has a certain resonance
for me.  It starts with a short prologue and the tag line "Brooklyn --
65 Million Years Ago"; in no time at all we've heard about the meteor
that crashed to earth and caused it to split into two dimensions: one
in which the dinosaurs became extinct and man eventually evolved to
take their place as rulers of the world; and another where the
dinosaurs themselves evolved into human-like form and run their own
slightly off-kilter society.  As a long-time resident of Brooklyn, I
found this to be entirely plausible -- I personally don't understand
why some critics found the storyline incomprehensible.  It's all very
well explained as the film goes along, and at the very least it's
internally consistent -- once you buy the premise, everything makes
sense.  (Contrast this with a film like CLIFFHANGER, which has a
premise only slightly more plausible, but doesn't make a whole lot of
sense once things get going.  At least once you've convinced yourself
that there might in fact be a parallel dimension ruled by the
descendants of dinosaurs -- and by Dennis Hopper in particular -- SUPER
MARIO BROS. doesn't insult your intelligence.  Even eleven-year-olds
have their self-respect, though Sylvester Stallone may not.)
     Hopper, who seems to be having an immense amount of fun in his
role as King Koopa, the ruler of the alternate dimension, is bent on
getting his claws on Princess Daisy and her magic amulet, which
contains a piece of the meteor that originally caused the split.  Once
the meteor is made whole again, the dimensions will be rejoined and
he'll be able to achieve his dream of total world domination.  (And let
me tell you:  if he decides to start by running for New York City
Council, he'll have no problem at all getting himself elected this
year.)  Standing between him and the culmination of his life-long dream
is Bob Hoskins as Mario Mario and John Leguizamo as Luigi Mario, two
small-time Brooklyn plumbers who -- just by the purest of coincidences,
mind you -- get to know Daisy and then do what they can to save her
when she's taken captive by Koopa's exceedingly silly henchmen.
     There's plenty more plot in this film, but what surprised me is
how the film itself only rarely got bogged down in the mechanical
aspects of moving the plot forward.  From beginning to end, this film
flows very smoothly from one entirely implausible situation to the
next, and it's rare that the filmmakers content themselves with a
generic chase scene, filmed over a backdrop of generic pop music.
Often the backdrops themselves are more diverting than the action in
the foreground: from the alternate Brooklyn, which is obviously a fond
take-off of BLADE RUNNER's Los Angeles; to Koopa's reelection posters
(Koopa on the environment: "Don't worry -- we'll get more."); to the
police cars involved in many of the film's chase scenes -- all powered
by an overhead electric grid.  It took me a while to realize that the
police cars were little more than glorified bumper cars, straight out
of an amusement park, and as such represented for eleven-year-olds the
coolest possible design for police cars you could have in an alternate
dimension.  Small touches like this either make or break a film;
putting aside SUPER MARIO BROS.' always striking production design (by
David Snyder), it's obvious that the police cars could have been
designed as little more than the kind of souped-up police cars you'd
expect to see in any city, regardless of dimension.  That someone sat
down and thought about what kind of police car would be absolutely
*right* for this city impresses me no end.
     The film deftly avoids any serious violence; likewise, there
aren't any cloying or maudlin scenes to suffer through.  Both Hopper
and Hoskins revel in their roles, and each manages to make what might
have been an ordinary villain or hero into a truly memorable character
(I particularly liked Hopper's attention to detail -- look carefully at
how he holds his hands as he walks around to see clearly the influence
of his great-grandfather the Tyranosaurus Rex).  I found it heartening
to see the very large number of alarmingly goofy touches scattered
throughout the production, from the exceedingly small-headed security
guards (the aptly named "Goombas") who chase the Mario brothers but
aren't too mean-spirited to get all silly and start dancing when they
hear the love theme from DR. ZHIVAGO; to Hopper's evolution /
de-evolution machine that can turn people into Einsteins or balls of
slime at the flick of a lever; to the mistakenly kidnapped Brooklyn
girls who, confined as they are in a sub-basement, sit around, smoke,
do their nails, and in every way act in perfect, stereotypical Brooklyn
girl fashion; to Koopa's henchmen, who trade lines like "You tried five
times and failed five times -- what percentage is that?"; to the street
food of choice, salamanders-on-a-stick.
     As a physical production, SUPER MARIO BROS. benefits greatly from
Alan Silvestri's outstanding score -- something missing from all too
many "adult" films these days; excellent 6-track Dolby sound design;
and some of the best special effects I've seen in a while, including
the much-maligned "morphing" process, which here isn't nearly as
annoying and trite as I expected it to be.  There's also the matter of
Yossi, Koopa's pet dinosaur, which is rendered through a combination of
stop- motion model, puppet, and computer-enhanced special effect well
enough to satisfy the dinosaur-lover in all of us.
     I can only think of one other kiddie film that had significant
appeal for adults: Mike Hodges' FLASH GORDON, which also featured a
striking production design, a fine score (by Queen), and a good amount
of tongue-in-cheek action.  But FLASH GORDON, fun as it was, played
every scene for maximum irony; the genius of SUPER MARIO BROS.  is in
its ability to play everything straight -- on the surface.  But it only
takes a moment or two to realize how much intelligence and wit are
backing up such a straight-faced production.  As Mario Mario says to
his brother Luigi: "Sure there were dinosaurs in Brooklyn.  There were
even Dodgers in Brooklyn."
     I fully intend to see this film again; my feeling is that for
every three sly references and witty asides I caught, there was
probably one I missed.  If you think any film with a name like SUPER
MARIO BROS. is beneath your adult sensibilities, all I can say is that
while when it comes to Hollywood films, it's usually "something
ventured, nothing gained", in this case it's just the opposite.  Much
to my surprise, I found this film to be one of the most enjoyable I've
seen all year, and I especially recommend it as an "antidote" to the
predictable, intelligence-insulting, mean-spirited and overly violent
CLIFFHANGER.  If you must see that film, see it first, then see SUPER
MARIO BROS.; you'll find that you enjoyed CLIFFHANGER a lot less in
retrospect, but at least you'll have seen one thoughtful and finely
crafted film out of two.
