Authors
Jeremiah "Spassvogel" Rickert
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Civil Action, A (1998)
Starring: John Travolta, Robert Duvall, Kathleen Quinlan, William H. Macy,
Tony Shaloub, John Lithgow.
     Successful and arrogant lawyer Jan Schlichtmann (John Travolta) seems
poised to refuse to pursue the case of eight families, whose children died
apparently as the result of pollution, only to discover that the culprits'
companies are owned by a multi-million dollar conglomerate.  Seeing dollar
signs before his eyes, he puts himself and his law firm wholeheartedly
into the task.  He is so convinced he will
win that he eventually bankrupts his firm, and his partners seeking a
gigantic settlement.  His motivations and ego are put to the test by a
grizzled, but cunning lawyer played by five-time oscar-nominated actor
Robert Duvall (Godfather, Deep Impact, The Apostle), and by the parents of
the dead children, one of whom, played by Kathleen Quinlan (Apolla 13,
Breakdown) only wants an apology.  
     Our first scene with Jan shows him representing the case of a man who
will have to live his life in a wheelchair.  One by one he helps the
crippled man do all of the simple things that
most people take for granted; drink some water, wipe his mouth, all in
plain sight of the jury.  This act convinces the defense team to settle
for 25 million.  When the judge in the latter case, played by John Lithgow
(3rd Rock from the Sun,
Buckaroo Banzai) grants the defense motion to keep the victims' parents
from testifying, Schlichtmann's biggest weapon is taken away from him,
he's forced to rely on facts, and thus begins his desperation to win this
case.
     The film would have you believe that Schlichtmann starts out as an
ambulance chasing over-paid court-room pirate, and by the end, he is a
humbled by his defeat and now understands the moral side of his job.
However, I was not convinced that
he goes through such a change.  Perhaps it is just Travolta's natural
aura, but I found myself unable to subscribe to his humility.  In a way,
he is becoming a sort of Kevin Costner-esque actor.  No matter what part
he is playing, you can't
seem to ignore the fact that its Kevin Costner.  Sometimes this is all
right (Untouchables) and sometimes this is inane (Robin Hood: Prince of
Thieves).  Travolta as a drugged out hit man (Pulp Fiction) worked for me,
Travolta as (take your pick) a super-cop (Face Off) and a Lawyer (A Civil
Action) just doesn't allow him to quash the image that is naturally
associated with the name John Travolta.  Besides, who can't look at that
big face and small blue eyes and not think Chewbacca?
     Robert Duvall plays Jerome Facher, the wizend lawyer who defends one
of the MNC's.  He is also a professor of law and there are snippets of him
teaching his class all of the courtroom "don'ts" just as Jan is committing
them. Duvall seems to fall into what amounts to a "Matlock" sort of
crotchety-old-wisdom routine.  His talents seemed a bit wasted.  Having
recently seen the Apostle, I kept waiting for him to show some of that
intensity, but alas, it never came.
     There is a top-notch supporting cast that doesn't have much to do
other than to be a Greek chorus of warnings to Jan and his ego-crusade.
William H. Macy (Fargo, Air Force One) and Tony Shaloub (Wings, The Siege)
are Jan's partners and they incessantly remind him of the realities of
what he is doing, but he thinks he is indestructable, and in that obvious
hubris, he finds his downfall. The talented actors are as wasted here as
Robert Duvall was.
     Casting choices aside, the script doesn't do much to convince the
viewer that Jan has gone through some change either.  Adapted for the
screen by director Steven Zaillian from the book by Johnathan Harr, it is
quite ambiguous whether Jan's motivation is justice or the replenshing of
his depleted bank accounts.  Is he fighting for those grieving parents, or
his he fighting for his survival as a lawyer? that question is never
clearly answered.  
     The advertising associated with this film misleads you into thinking
he goes through this change of heart, where dollar signs don't matter as
much as redeemed lives, but when you see the clips from the trailer in
context, that message simply isn't there. 
     Zaillian who also directed last year's Amistad, again crafts a film
that wants to be about a larger issue, one that is settled finally in a
courtroom, but doesn't take place exclusively as other films in the genre
have.  In this post-OJ trail culture, people aren't necessarily thrilled
by courtroom antics anymore, especially ones that in the wake of the hours
and hours of procedure, paperwork, cross-examination, and redirects of
that trial, make the Hollywood version seem, well, glamorized, more like a
gladiator fight than the esteemed pinnacle of culture that our system is.
      This film avoids the courtroom for the most part, focusing on the
whirlwind surrounding the trial.  For that I believe that Zaillian
deserves some kudos. The film is a little on the long side, in pace if not
minutes, padded with far too many gratuitous shots of either running water
or glasses of water, or people sipping water. I wanted to shout "all right
we get the picture!" but managed to restrain myself.
     The film has an epilogue of the now virtually penniless Jan
Schlichtmann soliciting some mystery group to take up the case of the
poisoned water and what seemed like five minutes of text on the screen
telling us what all happened in the end, something I won't spoil here.
Twice, however, just when you think the film is over, it keeps going and
going, finally clocking in a just under 2hrs...but what long hours they
seemed, and even a Hollywood ending would have been better than reading
paragraphs of exposition.
     Overall, I found the flim to underlit and overlong, with fairly
weakly drawn characters and an overabundance of water metaphors.  Of the
$4 economy time that I paid for this film, it was worth $1.


Title
Review for Simple Plan, A (1998)
Starring: Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thornton, Bridget Fonda
Directed by Sam Raimi
Synopsis:
     Three men discover 4.4 million dollars in a downed plane that has
been hidden in a wildlife preserve.  They decide to stick to a simple
plan: hold onto the money until the springtime, when the plane is sure
to be discovered, and tell no one about it, not even wives. Once they
can be sure that no one is looking for the money they plan to split it
three ways and leave town.  They figure the money is most likely
drug-money and therefore it's "not really stealin'."  The three men are
Hank Mitchell (Bill Paxton), a basically straight-up family man, his
brother Jacob Mitchell (A totally immersed Billy Bob Thornton), who is
unemployed and a bit slower than his brother Hank, and Jacob's drinking
buddy Lou (Brent Briscoe), another beer-swilling good ol' boy.  Little
by little, their simple plan becomes more and more complicated until it
starts consuming people one by one.
     This film's biggest asset is the screenplay.  Written by Scott B.
Smith, adapted from his own novel, the film has nearly perfect pacing
and as the tension surrounding the plan begins to wind up, the plan
itself begins to unravel, slowly at first, and then in torrid gasps.
All of the resolutions of the plan that the three men come up with:
don't tell anyone, even wives, everyone has to agree to leave town, and
so on, are violated one by one by one.  The first thing that Hank does
when he gets home is dump the money on the table and tell his wife
(played with a very subdued cunning by Bridget Fonda) everything.  She
then gets involved, and suggests taking some of the money back to the
plane to when it is found, they'd think that it fell out or something,
for no one would leave behind $100,000 if someone had found the cash,
would they?  Her complication of the plan leads to the death of a farmer
who happens to be in the area when they're planting the money on the
plane.  It's only downhill from there, as more and more people are
killed for the sake of the plan.  Sooner than they hoped, an FBI man
comes to town with information on the plane, but there are doubts to
whether he's really an FBI agent, or one of the people who lost the
money.
     Most of the performances are top-notch, especially that of Billy
Bob Thornton as the slower brother Jacob.  Jacob is almost a foil for
Hank, the upstanding straight-arrow family man.  He may be slow, but his
motivations are the least greedy of the bunch.  At one point in the
movie, after so many have died and the money seems to be an imminent
reward, Jacob asks Hank "I'm gonna be happy now, right?"  Really all
Jacob wants to do is to remodel their father's farm, but that means he's
not going to leave town as was part of the plan.  Jacob ends up being
the most observant one of them all.
     Sam Raimi had a lot to prove with this film in many ways.  As he's
most well known for his comedy/horror films and his hyper-kinetic camera
work, this film was in a way a make it or break it for him as a
mainstream filmmaker.  For the most part, he avoids his camera-tricks
and lets the characters carry the film.  There are number of
Hitchcock-ian references, from Psycho's crows, who are an omnipresent
witness to the crimes that are concealed for the sake of the plan, and a
Birds-esque scene where Hank is seemingly attacked by some startled
birds in the fuselage of the downed plane.  The cinematography has a
definite Fargo-esque pedigree to it, but considering the locales of the
film and of Raimi's long associations with the brothers Coen, that does
not seem surprising.  The film starts off with what appears to be a
reference to "It's A Wonderful Live" when Hank walks through the town
wishing everyone a happy new year.  Just as the audience begins to think
of him as George Bailey, he soon begins to look like Norman Bates.
     The film is really a downward spiral of desperation, on the part of
just about every one of the characters who have a relationship with the
4.4 million dollars.  A lot of filmgoers will probably be put off by the
rather un-hollywood ending, but hopefully it won't overshadow the
wonderful performance by Billy Bob Thornton and the great screenplay by
Scott B. Smith.  It's perfectly paced and both Smith's script and
Raimi's direction precisely control the tension of the film, winding it
tighter and tighter as the plan begins to unravel.
Of the $4.00 I payed for the film, it was worth every penny, $4.00


Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
     This movie was doomed, or assisted by, depending on how you
look at it, to be a political hot potato.  Its release followed closely
the Columbine shooting, and the alleged "crackdown" on childrens' access
to R-rated movies by the Cinema industry.  Ironically, Parker and Stone
claim that the MPAA was more concerned about profanity than violence.
Another humorous aside was a quote I heard from a parents' rights group
that yearned for the "innocent" satire of Beavis and Butthead.  
     The basic plot of the film involves our heroes, Kenny, Kyle, Cartman,
and Stan sneaking into the R-rated film starring Canadian TV stars
Terrance and Phillip, and emerging with a whole new vocabulary of
extremely profane phrases that they of course think are cool.  This comes
after the opening musical number that waxes poetic on the virtues of the
small, quiet, virtuous, little mountain town.  Their parents and teachers
are shocked by their language and Kyle's mom, who is known for getting
into just about every cause possible, starts a snowball of anti-Canadian
sentiment that ends with Terrance and Phillips arrested and sentenced to 
death and the U.S. declaring war on Canada.   The children also discover
that Satan and his boytoy, Saddam Hussein will unleash the apocalypse if
the blood of Terrance and Phillip is spilled.  It's up to the boys to
prevent the end of the world and save Terrance and Phillip from the
anti-Canada crusade spearheaded by Kyle's mom.
     I'll wager that the primary draw of South Park for most fans is
merely the toilet humor, and yes, this film has a *lot* of toilet humor.
The profanity is frequent and un-bleeped, unlike the television series.
There is just about every kind of offensive phrase and image that you can
pack into a film, however for some reason they didn't really directly
insult any religious groups, which was a slight surprise to me.
Underneath all of this nastiness, however, is a very good message, one
that I wish was more of a part of all of the Columbine fallout: That
parents need to parent their children.  Rather than be outraged that such
a film was produced, they need to tell their kids, hey, this is wrong.
The parents in this film see nothing wrong with starting a war, but never
actually talk to their kids about why they shouldn't have seen the R rated
film in the first place.
     The script does peter out a bit in the 2nd half.  The first half had
me laughing repeatedly and uncontrollably.  The jokes have three levels.
There's the 1st level that most people probably expect from south park,
and that is the toilet humor.  Secondly, there's a gift of parody that
Parker and Stone possess that references a number of other films and
aspects of pop culture.  Third, there is the overall irony of people
thinking that violence is less harmful to children than nasty language.
The 2nd half, in my opinion, had too much Saddam Hussein.  I think it's
funny the way they portray him, but his antics got old very quickly.  The
thing I liked most about this film were the musical numbers.  The music
and lyrics were written mostly by Trey Parker and he truly has a gift for
lyrical humor, and the music was top-notch.  I believe that Trey Parker
has the juice to actually write a sucessful musical-comedy on Broadway if
he wished.  
     Overall the film is extremely funny, creative, and has a better moral
message than most so-called serious films and television programs.  I also
think that the film had a better message that anything spewed forth by
politicians on both sides of the aisle.  It is not meant for children, and
I would hope that very few parents allow their children to see it.  Stone
and Parker themselves have said that it's intended by adults, and it's up
to parents to keep their children from watching it if they don't approve.
Just as it was with Beavis and Butthead, people have knee-jerk reactions
and are incapable of looking past the 1st level humor and appreciate grand
satire.  
Of the $4.75 I paid for the film, it was worth $8.00


Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
Starring: Liam Neeson, Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Jake Lloyd
Written and Directed by George Lucas
     Hype hype and more hype! After a while soon the large amount of hype
itself became a news story, in essence they hyped the hype.  Would it...
could it live up to the hype?
     George Lucas has been teasing, hinting, and out and out whetting our
appetites for this film for the last twenty years.  It's been believed
that he has written a nine part story and that someday we'd see the other
six parts.  Recently his tune has changed and it's now a six part story,
and we're two-thirds of the way there.  I waited until this film had been
open a while before I reviewed it, mostly because I wanted to insulate
myself from the hype, which I think was a good idea.
     First of all, I wanted to watch this film with perspective.  This is
the first part of what Lucas calls his six-film epic.  Just like the
prologue to a book, I knew right off that the groundwork for a variety of
plot threads was going to be laid down, most of which would not come to
fruition until 2005 when the final film in the prequel trilogy is
released.  Most people expected the same sort of whizz-bang here it comes
feeling of the original Star Wars.  You have to remember that the first
film was written without the expectation of sequels, so George had to pack
as much as he could into it.  The Phantom Menace on the other hand was
written with the thought that pretty much barring his death, the other two
films are going to be made.  As a writer, that leaves him a lot more time
to develop plots slowly and carefully; good for film fans, bad for the
casual movie-goer perhaps.  The other thing that I noticed about the film
is that most people, especially fans, were dissing the film after only
seeing the trailer.  People wondered why Natalie Portman's accent changed,
for example, and were saying that George was sloppy.  Of course, that is
all explained in the film.  Finally, people complained that the ships and
such looked like they were "higher-tech" than the later films, and that
again George was sloppy.  It's obvious that the Republic was about at its
apex during the film, the height of its power and scientific advancement,
and that after the wars of the 2nd and 3rd films, things are in a bit of a
dark age.  These are things that most film goers didn't get.
     The plot is very Machiavellian.  A greedy Trade Federation is
illegally blockading the small planet of Naboo, taking advantage of the
endless bickering and bureaucracy in the Galactic Senate.  We soon learn
that someone referred to as Lord Sideous, who looks and talks like a
certain Emperor from the later films has put them up to it.  The Senate
Chancellor (Terrance Stamp) sends Jedi Master Qui Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson)
and his apprentice Obi Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) to force a settlement,
but they are soon attacked.  As the Federation starts their invasion it's
up to the Jedis to protect the Naboo Queen (Natalie Portman) from attack.
After fleeing the planet with the Queen, they end up on Tantooine with a
damaged ship and are forced to enlist the help of a slave boy named Anikan
Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) who also happens to be very strong with the force.
Can this motely crue stand up to the droid armies of the Trade Federation?
What of Lord Sideous and the mysterious Sith who seem to be behind the
attack?  Stay tuned...
     Lucas has again taken "the next big step" in film.  He's created a
virtually photo-realistic computer-generated universe, which basically
means he is now only limited by his imagination as to what he can create.
Are there times when you can easily tell it's a computer effect?  Well,
yes, but not very often.  I was slightly disappointed with the sound.  I
was told before the film's release that Lucas was going to use the new
Dolby Surround EX sound system, and demand that theaters showing The
Phantom Menace upgrade if they want to show it, however that doesn't seem
to have happened. 
     The acting in the film was not as bad as many had reported it to be.
McGregor's Obi Wan was a great precursor to Sir Alec Guinness' more
experienced character that we meet later.  Pernella August as Anakin's
mother Shmi Skywalker was paticularly good, conveying an incredible array
of emotions in her face and eyes.  Reviewers who said this film was cold
and sterile must not have paid attention to her performance.  This was
George's first trip behind the camera since 1977's Star Wars.  For the
most part he was all right, but at times traded a little directorial
artistry for technological artistry.  I thought this was most apparent
during some of the various fire-fight scenes, when it looked like he was
pretty much reusing shots and camera movements from the original Star
Wars.  I'm almost sure it was intentional that he aped the first film, but
it did come off as a bit obvious.  
     Jar Jar Binks is a character who has inspired some rather heated
words from fans.  Speaking as someone who bought the toys, read the
comics, and played the video games, I didn't think he was that bad.  I do
agree that at times he was difficult to understand, particularly when he
is explaining why he was expelled from Gungan City.  I do, however, agree
that instead of making new races, more familiar ones should have been used
for the main villains and creatures we see in the film.  This would have
not disturbed the story any, and would have made the film have a slightly
more familiar look to it.  I realize that George probably has a back story
written where a certain race would be seen on a certain planet, but it is
information that we just don't have.
     This was an infinitely detailed film, with small little touches that
I didn't even notice without repeated viewings.  The score by John
Williams is again very effective particularly during the big Jedi
Lightsaber Duel.  His song "Duel of the Fates" compliments the action so
well it almost seems as if they were created in some sort of symbiotic
fashion.  
     Once people are able to put their expectations and their
prejudices behind them, they will be able to appreciate The Phantom Menace
more.  Also, when viewed in the context of the other two films in the
trilogy, I'm sure that for most people, their questions will be answered
to their satisfaction.  
Of the 4.75 I paid for this film, it was worth $8.00
(c) 1999 Jeremiah Rickert
--

Title
Review for Quest for Camelot (1998)
     When I first had heard of this project, about a year ago 
or so, the first thing I thought of was poor animation.  I am not 
totally sure why. Warner Bros. Of course has a long tradition of making
animated shorts, starring charicatures and animals, but I couldn't see
them attempting to do realistic humans.  Now logically, no matter who
produces a film, the art is going to depend on the animator.  In this
case, however, I turned out to be correct.  Disney has set a high standard
and Quest For Camelot cannot compete.  Anastasia was at least a bit
original in some of its animation sequences.  (The impressionist paintings
as set scenes during the Paris number, for example) and featured songs
that actually moved the plot along.  
     Quest for Camelot opens with what looks just like the beginning of
Disney's  most successful animated movie, the Lion King, complete with
what sounds like  an African chant and a big rock. That immediately set
the tone for the whole movie,  grasping at Disney.      The thin plot
concerns a young girl's yen to be a knight like her father, Sir Lionel
(Gabriel Byrne) who is killed defending Arthur from the vicious  Ruger
(voiced by Gary Oldman).  Arthur (Piers Brosnan) tells her widowed mother
Lady Juliana (Jane Seymour) that she's always welcome at Camelot. (which
looked a big pile of rocks, rather than a grand castle, so who'd want to
go there anyway?)  The now grown up little girl, Kayley (voiced by
Jessalyn Gilsig)  is a real corker and acrobatically jumps around her
mother's farm training herself to be a knight.  Ruger shows up with a
magic potion (that we never find out the source of) and starts to make an
army of odd mechanical soldiers to help him overthrow Camelot, he kidnaps
Kayley's mother to take advantage of her all-access pass to Camelot.
Ruger sends a Gryphon to steal Excalibur from Arthur, which he does,
because the knights all holster their swords on the backs of their chairs,
and Arthur isn't the quick draw he used to be.  (a 6yr old in the seat in
front of me said --mommy, why didn't he just draw the sword when the
ceiling broke open?-- He was right, Arthur just sat there until the thing
was right next to him before he went for it...but it was too late. Merlin
(who has  practically no bearing on the plot at all) voiced by Sir John
Gielgud send a special falcon after the Gryphon (voiced by Bronson
Pinchot) who is able to disrupt things  enough for the sword to be dropped
in a magical and forbidden forest.  Upon returning to Ruger, Kayley hears
of the loss of the sword and her mother tells her that she is Camelot's
only hope.  The quest is on!
     The songs in this film have a rather high-quality pedigree, but still
don't quite measure up.  David Foster, the king of power pop, who
contributed greatly to the 80s sounds of the likes of Toto and Chicago,
and Carol Bayer Sager have penned a collection of power ballads that seem
like music videos rather than musical moments.  They also enlist pop
uber-diva Celine Dion and former Journey front-man Steve Perry to warble
these over-produced pop creations, and that hurts because the singers
sound very little like the people they are portraying,   particularly the
singing voice of Garret, Bryan White.  Another beef, that the six year old
in front of me noticed as well, was the fact hat on half the numbers, it
seems they changed the lyrics at the last moments, because their lips do
one thing and their voice says another.  It's a bit disoncerting.  My
final beef with the music is the horrid attempt at injecting
Riverdance-esque step-dancing into the film.  My skin crawled.  
     The best aspect of this film was the comedy.  I found myself
chuckling fairly often in this film.  The token comedy relief, in the form
of a two-headed Dragon, voiced by Monty Python's Eric Idle and Hockey Puck
Don Rickles, is pretty darned hilarious at times.  Unfortunately, the
humor kinda gets lost in the shuffle, particularly the one-liners muttered
by Pinchot's Gryphon.  
     They put together an awesome cast, no bones about it, Jane Seymour,
Gabriel Byrne, Gary Oldman, Piers Brosnan, Cary Elwes, John Gielgud, the
songwriting team was top notch, responsible for millions of records sold,
but it all doesn't quite come together.  Perhaps the story wasn't enough
to hold the rest, or perhaps the studio just isn't experienced enough to
handle a project like this yet.  Warner Bros. may have a long tradition of
animation, but not of animated movies.  Fox you'll noticed drew on the
talents of Don Bluth and Gary Goldman, both of whom have a lot of
experience when it comes to animated feature films. (Rescuers, Secret of
Nimh, Land Before Time, American Tail, Pete's Dragon, Robin Hood) to name
a few.  Comparing the two films is natural, considering they're both
competing to cut in on Disney's market. Anastasia outshines Quest for
Camelot in every way.  
Of the $3.25 I paid for it, it was worth about $1.00

