Authors
Rodney Hoffman 
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Longtime Companion (1990)
     Monday night I attended the benefit premiere of the new film LONGTIME
COMPANION.  You may have read about it in the ADVOCATE, the Los Angeles Times
or elsewhere.  It's the one that follows a small group of friends from 1981 to
1989, as they learn of and battle AIDS.
     From the promotional material:  "LONGTIME COMPANION is a tale of courage
and personal heroics; a chronicle of people who face an unknown and frightening
opponent with love, hope and friendship.  The film is the fictional story of a
small circle of friends and changes in their world beginning from that fateful
day in 1981 when the first New York Times article noted the outbreak of a 'rare
cancer' in the gay community, known today as AIDS."  (Directed by Norman Rene,
written by Craig Lucas, starring Bruce Davison and others, produced by Stan
Wlodkowski and Lindsay Law, distributed by Samuel Goldwyn Co.)
     This is an important and difficult movie -- the first big-screen attempt
to tell the story we all know.  It is a true-to-life, unsparing chronicle of a
generation of gay men.  There's a lot there: Gay Men's Health Crisis, ACT UP,
Louise Hay, hospitals, home care, friendship, love, anger, despair, and the
full panoply of awful AIDS acronyms -- PCP, KS, Toxo, CMV, HIV, ....
     It's not fully representative; how could it be?  It does an outstanding
job of portraying what has happened in the lives of many gay white men in the
last decade -- those of us who "grew up" (metaphorically speaking) in the wild,
exhilarating 70s only to crash into AIDS in the 80s.
     Despite the subject matter, there are many funny moments.  Some of them
are brief lines, often alluding to some part of gay life.
     And the final scene, which hit me unawares, is just right.  It gave me
chills.
     I can't imagine how this movie will fare at the box office outside of the
gay community, although anyone concerned about the world around us should see
this film if only to learn about a story that's been largely ignored except for
sensationalized accounts.
     If you care about honest media treatment for lesbians and gays, if you are
gay and you want to see all of our other stories equally well covered, support
this one!
