Authors
berardin@buttercup.cybernex.net
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Shine (1996)
Cast: Geoffrey Rush, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Noah Taylor, Lynn Redgrave, 
      Googie Withers, John Gielgud, Sonia Todd, Alex Rafalowicz, 
      Nicholas Bell
Director: Scott Hicks
Producer: Jane Scott
Screenplay: Jan Sardi based on a story by Scott Hicks
Cinematography: Geoffrey Simpson
Music: David Hirschfelder; piano played by David Helfgott
U.S. Distributor: Fine Line Features
     SHINE is a deceptively simple title for an amazingly powerful 
motion picture.  Based on the life story of Australian pianist David 
Helfgott, director Scott Hicks' (SEBASTIAN AND THE SPARROW) film touches 
on themes as diverse as the nature of genius, the triumph over 
adversity, and the destructive power of love.  And, while there are few 
obvious similarities between this film and MY LEFT FOOT, there is an 
undeniable kinship, if only in the way both portray the extreme courage 
of an individual.
     Long before its American theatrical debut, SHINE had already 
attained the status as one of 1996's few "must see" films.  At Sundance, 
where it was among the hottest properties, the war for distribution 
rights exploded into a public confrontation between Harvey Weinstein of 
Miramax and Bob Shaye of New Line (Weinstein accused Shaye of "stealing" 
the picture from him).  The movie has also earned 12 Australian Film 
Institute (AFI) Award nominations, including one for Best Film.  
     SHINE has its roots in 1986, when director Scott Hicks read a 
newspaper story about David Helfgott, a pianist who performed a flawless 
classical repertoire at a Perth restaurant.  Hicks' interest was piqued, 
and he arranged to see Helfgott in concert.  For the better part of the 
next year, he worked to earn the man's trust with the goal of presenting 
his story in a motion picture.  That tale, which is admittedly 
fictionalized to some degree (Hicks is emphatic that this is not a 
straight biography, although it does include real people and events), 
became SHINE, one of 1996's most stirring and inspirational tales.
     To fully comprehend David Helfgott's story, it is necessary to 
understand his father, Peter Helfgott (powerfully portrayed by Armin 
Mueller-Stahl), a Polish Jew who settled in Australia after surviving 
Hitler's purge.  He's a soul-sick man whose ongoing battle with private 
demons makes his personality erratic and his actions unpredictable.  He 
lost his parents and sisters-in-law to the Holocaust, and the anguish of 
those losses impels him to keep his family together at all costs.  When 
we first encounter him during the 1950s, he is still rebelling against 
his long-dead father's influence.  Peter's drive to teach his children 
to play instruments is a direct reaction to his own father's dislike of 
music (he once smashed a violin that Peter bought).
     SHINE follows David's life from childhood (where he's played by 
Alex Rafalowicz), through adolescence (FLIRTING's Noah Taylor), to 
adulthood (respected Australian stage actor Geoffrey Rush).  When we 
first meet him, he's performing at a school recital.  There, a music 
teacher, Ben Rosen (Nicholas Bell), notices his obvious talent, and 
offers to teach him.  Eventually, after winning several competitions, 
David is invited to study music in the United States.  His father, 
determined not to "let anyone destroy this family", refuses to let him 
go.  Soon after, David's talent begins to languish as his musical 
progress stagnates.  When he receives a scholarship to the Royal College 
of Music in London, an elderly writer friend (Googie Withers) encourages 
him to take the offer, whether his father objects or not.  In following 
that advice, David sunders his relationship with Peter.
     In London, he studies under the guidance of Cecil Parkes (John 
Gielgud, in what's easily his best feature performance in five years), 
attempting to reach his potential.  But, on the night of his crowning 
glory, when he plays a perfect rendition of Rachmaninoff's Third Piano 
Concerto (accepted as one of the most difficult pieces for even a master 
pianist), the cumulative pressure overwhelms David, and he suffers a 
nervous breakdown.  The next time we see him, more than ten years older, 
he's a pathetic, jittery individual given to incoherent, babbling 
monologues.  Public piano performances are long behind him... until he 
enters a small restaurant. 
     Love can have many faces, and SHINE shows two of the most extreme.  
The first is Peter's obsessive, domineering love.  Mueller-Stahl's 
performance defies us to label Peter as just another abusive father 
trying to live vicariously through a son.  At times, Peter can be 
comforting and gentle, and there's no denying that his feelings for 
David are genuine.  But there are instances when the violence of his 
outbreaks has cruel results.  The other face of love is the healing, 
undemanding one, as embodied by a middle-aged astrologer named Gillian 
(Lynn Redgrave).  She offers her strength and understanding to David, 
helping him to rebuild his life.  The film's final scene directly 
contrasts Peter and Gillian's approaches, as David attempts to bring 
closure to one of the great, unresolved issues of his life.
     SHINE would not be as powerful or affecting without the tremendous 
performances of Noah Taylor and Geoffrey Rush, both of whom were 
nominated for AFI Awards.  Although the two actors worked together to 
perfect certain shared mannerisms, each brought a unique interpretation 
to the role.  Taylor's version is young, energetic, and highly-strung.  
Rush gives us a mending David, who, while still hyperkinetic, is 
gradually learning to face the world rather than hide from it.
     Hicks elected to tell the story in a non-chronological fashion.  
While the structure isn't as irregular as that of PULP FICTION, the 
choice to loop through flashbacks then move linearly into the future 
gives the movie a unique dynamic.  Thankfully, there is no voice-over 
narrative -- events are allowed to speak for themselves without the 
crutch of a disembodied voice adding "helpful" comments.  Hicks has made 
few, if any, mistakes with SHINE, and the manner of presentation is just 
one example of a perfect choice.
     SHINE is about building strength from weakness.  Early in the film, 
Peter gives a "tough love" pep talk to David in which he declares, "Only 
the fit survive.  The weak get squished like insects."  This, along with 
the belief that "everything will let you down except music", forms the 
creed by which Peter lives.  When David attempts to follow his father's 
advice, he is nearly destroyed.  The inspirational aspect of SHINE is 
that David fights his way back.  He never gives up, and, ultimately, his 
triumph becomes ours.  
     The film also presents its own inimitable impression of genius, 
arguing that even the greatest talent needs to be nurtured, not turned 
loose like a weed.  Through the power of Helfgott's virtuoso musical 
performances, SHINE illustrates that there are other, more effective 
ways of self-expression than mere speech.  
     In fact, there are more themes and sub-themes here than any 
reasonable-length review or essay could possibly cover.  This is 
unbelievably rich material, and I can say without reservation that Scott 
Hicks' work deserves the highest recognition.  SHINE truly does what its 
name says.
- James Berardinelli
e-mail: berardin@bc.cybernex.net
ReelViews web site: http://www.cybernex.net/~berardin 
"We go away from our parents in youth and then we gradually come back to
them; and in that moment, we have grown up." -- Ingmar Bergman
