Authors
Cooper Redwine
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Evita (1996)
Starring: Madonna, Antonio Banderas, Jonathan Pryce, Jimmy Nail. 
Director: Alan Parker. Screenplay: Alan Parker, Oliver Stone. 
Music: Andrew Lloyd Webber. Lyrics: Tim Rice. 
Producers: Alan Parker, Robert Stigwood, Andrew G. Vajna. 
MPAA Rating: PG (adult themes, mild profanity). 
Running Time: 135 minutes.
To my way of thinking, EVITA is a good, but not a great, film in which 
Madonna gives a good, but not a great, performance. The movie looks 
very corporate to me. It's as though, after the major roles were cast, 
every artistic decision was made based on the criterion of least risk, 
and the result is a work of high craft with a muted emotional impact. 
However, considering that the film stars a controversial leading lady 
and is based on a popular stage musical about a controversial 
historical figure, it is no small feat that the makers of EVITA have 
produced an entertaining and inoffensive movie. Perhaps the outcome is 
the best that could have been expected under the circumstances, but 
somehow I had hoped for more.
Many people have seen some stage production of EVITA over the past 18 
years, and it seems to me that the sort of review of the movie such a 
person would like to read is not at all the sort of review desired by 
someone who hasn't seen the stage show. Hence, I'll break the rest of 
my review into two parts, with each part tailored to a specific 
audience.
I found the movie version of EVITA to be highly entertaining, although 
I enjoyed it slightly less than any of the three stage productions I 
have seen. It seemed to me that the music was better in the film than 
in any of the stage productions, but the drama was not so engrossing.
The music is extremely well done in the film. Madonna, with her 
wonderful voice and graceful moves, is ideally suited to play Eva 
Peron. Antonio Banderas, in the role of the narrator Che, has an 
excellent singing voice and gives what I thought was the most 
appealing performance. Jonathan Pryce is fine as Juan Peron, and Jimmy 
Nail is adequate as the tango singer who takes the 15-year-old Eva to 
Buenos Aires.
Considered as drama, however, the film is very uneven. On the one 
hand, there are some powerful scenes, such as when the big screen 
shows huge crowds of people and the digital sound system fills the 
theater with music. On the other hand, most of the interior scenes 
where individual characters sing are not particularly involving. 
Somehow the music and drama are not consistently smoothly integrated, 
and this significantly reduces the overall emotional impact of the 
film.
The film version of EVITA makes only a few minor changes to the 
stage show, the most important of which combine to present a kinder, 
gentler Eva Peron than is usually depicted in stage versions. I went 
to the movie expecting to see a conniving spitfire who would stop at 
nothing to acquire fame, wealth, and power. But Madonna's highly 
restrained portrayal softens Eva's rough edges and left me with the 
impression of a psychologically needy woman desperately seeking 
acceptance. This impression is strengthened by the interpolation of a 
scene early in the film showing how the 7-year-old Eva had been 
forbidden to attend her father's funeral because of her illegitimacy. 
And the impression is further reinforced late in the film by having 
Madonna sing "You Must Love Me," a song not present in the stage show. 
For me, these changes make Eva Peron a less compelling character and 
weaken the overall dramatic structure of the story.
There are other minor changes as well, but they don't affect the 
fabric of the story much. One of these is to take the song "Another 
Suitcase in Another Hall" away from Peron's mistress and give it to 
Eva, presumably to better showcase Madonna, who, as with all of the 
musical numbers, performs the song extremely well. Another change, 
perhaps motivated by an inability to find a suitable cinematic 
equivalent, is the deletion of the memorable stage scene where 
Peron and other military officers are seen in rocking chairs, one of 
which is removed every time the music stops, until there is only one 
chair left, occupied by Peron. Finally, in the original stage 
production, it was claimed that the narrator Che was based on the 
Latin American revolutionary Che Guevara, but this claim appears to 
have been dropped in the movie version. 
EVITA is a musical drama where almost all of the dialog is sung, 
making it a form of opera. However, nearly everything is sung in 
English, even though the story is set in a Spanish-speaking country. 
The style of the music might be described as combining elements of 
1970s rock, pop Latin rhythms, Broadway show tunes, and folk songs. 
It's important to understand that for 2 hours 15 minutes the movie 
EVITA bombards its audience almost continuously with the music of 
Andrew Lloyd Webber, a composer whose best tunes have been enjoyed by 
millions, but whose music is thought by a sizable number of people to 
be insufferable.
EVITA is based on a true story. The major events take place in the 
1940s and early 1950s in Buenos Aires, the capital of Argentina. The 
central character in the story is the historical figure Eva Peron. (In 
Spanish, "Evita" is a familiar form of the name "Eva.") Eva was an 
illegitimate child who was raised in humble surroundings in an obscure 
town in Argentina. By age 15 she had become the lover of a tango 
singer named Magaldi, whom she cajoled into taking her to Buenos 
Aires. In the capital she used her good looks and willingness to 
establish sexual relationships to achieve success as a model, radio 
personality, and film actress. Eva eventually became the mistress, and 
finally the wife, of Juan Peron, a powerful man in Argentina's ruling 
military regime. When Eva was only 26, Juan ascended to the 
presidency, and she became a highly visible and politically active 
First Lady. Adored by the poor and the working class, but hated by the 
aristocracy and the army, Eva presided over a period during which 
Argentina regained national pride and enjoyed renewed optimism. But 
after seven tumultuous years as First Lady, she died of cancer at age 
33, plunging the nation into deep national mourning.
Madonna sounds terrific singing the Lloyd Webber music, and her acting 
in the role of Eva Peron is convincing enough that I was often not 
conscious of the fact that I was watching Madonna. Yet when I think of 
great singer-actresses in great roles, I think of Liza Minnelli in 
CABARET and Barbra Streisand in FUNNY GIRL, but I don't think of 
Madonna in EVITA. The shortcoming appears to be unrelated to 
Madonna's capabilities, but rather seems to reflect a decision about 
the way that Eva Peron should be played. Madonna gives us a 
restrained, not-very-fiery, not-very-sexy Eva, a sort of an 
Evita-lite. However, it should be kept in mind that this movie will 
presumably be shown in Argentina, where part of the population still 
thinks of Eva Peron as a saint while another part thinks of her as 
"La Gran Puta" ("The Great Whore").
Aside from the title character, there is only one other major role in 
EVITA, and that is Che, a student living in Buenos Aires during the 
Peron regime. This character is essentially a ubiquitous floating 
theatrical device, at times acting as narrator, at times serving as 
cynical observer, and at times directly confronting Eva with 
criticism. In the film Antonio Banderas steals the show by playing Che 
with Latino swagger and snarling cynicism, and it turns out that 
Banderas has a pleasing singing voice as well. However, I should 
perhaps mention that Banderas is a Spaniard whose English is 
accented, and experience leads me to expect that some Americans will 
complain that he is hard to understand, although I had no trouble with 
this.
Except for Eva and Che, there are only two other characters of any 
consequence: Jonathan Pryce's acting and singing in the supporting 
role of Juan Peron is excellent, and Jimmy Nail is good enough in the 
minor role of the tango singer Magaldi, Eva's lover when she was 15 
years old.
Although the movie is not completely successful in its portrayal of 
individual characters, its skillful presentation of visual spectacle 
almost makes up for this shortcoming. The pageantry surrounding Eva's 
state funeral is powerful, and the scenes of huge crowds around the 
Casa Rosada (Argentina's Presidential Palace) are stunning. Yet EVITA 
does not reach its full potential because of its failure to better 
integrate the slick music and images on the screen with the natural 
operatic drama of the story.

Title
Review for Surviving Picasso (1996)
Starring: Anthony Hopkins, Natascha McElhone, Julianne 
Moore, Joss Ackland, Peter Eyre, Jeanne Lapotaire, Diane 
Venora, Joan Plowright. Directed by James Ivory. Screenplay 
by: Ruth Prawer Jhabvala. Adapted from: "Picasso: Creator and 
Destroyer" by Arianna Stassinopoulos Huffington. Running 
time: two hours, three minutes. MPAA rating: R.
WARNING: This review contains spoilers!
Although SURVIVING PICASSO is a good-looking, easy-to-
watch film, I found it to be more like a good cable-TV docudrama 
than the big screen character study I was hoping for. It seemed 
more concerned with lovingly recapturing the details of period 
costume and setting than probing the depths of the 
characters' psyches. It even goes so far as to recreate the look 
of old photographs of the characters from the popular 
magazines of the day. In addition, the actresses seem to have 
been picked more for their physical resemblance to the people 
they are playing than for their acting ability.
I think that the script is the film's weakest point. Rarely 
lingering long enough on any one scene to explore anything in 
depth, the choppy and heavy-handed script relies on an 
intrusive voice-over narration to keep the story from falling 
into chaos.
I expect a lot from Merchant-Ivory, and in some ways this film 
does deliver. It has high production values, wonderful settings, 
and a fine performance by Anthony Hopkins that almost 
overcomes the script. But the film lacks the sensitivity and 
complexity that I have come to expect from Merchant-Ivory. 
However, I base my expectations on their earlier films adapted 
from literary fiction, while the credits for SURVIVING PICASSO 
claim that it was adapted from "Picasso: Creator and 
Destroyer" a best-selling biography by Arianna 
Stassinopoulos Huffington.
SURVIVING PICASSO is actually a Merchant-Ivory-Wolper 
production, and so it is not surprising that it has that big-
budget biopic feeling. I think that fans of Merchant-Ivory will be 
disappointed that the main characters, Francoise Gilot 
(played by Natascha McElhone) and Pablo Picasso (Anthony 
Hopkins), have been dumbed down to comic-book level. The 
performance of Hopkins is strong enough to give the character 
of Picasso some resonance. However, McElhone's portrayal of 
Gilot consists mainly of projecting an aura of sad grace and 
giving a resigned smile once in a while. It could have been that 
McElhone needed better direction or that the material she was 
given to work with was simply intractable. In this connection it 
should be mentioned that even though Gilot is the point-of-
view character, she is delineated even more sketchily than 
Picasso. 
The movie focuses on the period from about 1943 to the early 
1950s when Picasso shared his life with Gilot; it also takes 
brief excursions into his romantic relationships with other 
women. However, instead of fully developed characters like 
those in HOWARD'S END and A ROOM WITH A VIEW, I never 
gained much insight into any of the characters in SURVIVING 
PICASSO, including Picasso and Gilot. Also, I didn't perceive 
any chemistry between Hopkins and McElhone, which made 
their whole relationship seem not quite believable.
When I heard that Merchant-Ivory was making a film on 
Picasso and Gilot, I was excited, recognizing the rich dramatic 
and emotional potential a story about these two people has. I 
was disappointed to see that Merchant-Ivory opted instead to 
present these dynamic people as one-dimensional 
stereotypes. Picasso's artistic oeuvre shows him to be a multi-
dimensional man whose emotions ran the full spectrum, 
ranging from the tenderness and serenity of his Rose Period 
to the chaos and violence shown in his portraits of weeping 
women. Instead, in SURVIVING PICASSO we are presented 
with an overemphasis on only one facet of Picasso--he was an 
"enfant terrible" who saw it as his privilege as an artistic genius 
to selfishly use people in general and women in particular. 
I am starting to re-read Gilot's memoir "Life with Picasso." 
>From it I can gather that she was more complex than the 
woman portrayed in SURVIVING PICASSO and her 
relationship with Picasso had more nuances than this film 
even hints at. In the film, Gilot is presented as little more than 
a long-suffering angel who eventually awakens to what a cad 
her man is.
There are good scenes in the movie, but their strength is often 
undercut by the overall heavy-handedness. For example, there 
is a scene where Picasso shows pictures to his dealer, 
including work on what critics now call his Weeping Women 
Series. (Although the paintings used in the film are not actual 
Picassos, they are close enough to be effective.) The scene is 
used to reinforce the unrelenting theme of the film--Picasso's 
self-absorption eventually turned all the women he loved into 
the living, breathing equivalents of his portraits. The scene 
isn't bad in and of itself, but the point it makes is made too 
many times and in too many ways in the film, and it is made at 
the expense of creating fully-faceted characters.
Another strong, yet heavy-handed, scene also illustrates 
Picasso's "enfant-terrible" persona. Picasso forces Gilot to 
watch as a bird of prey swoops out of the sky, takes a scrawny 
cat in its talons, and carries it away to its death. I found this to 
be a powerful visual metaphor that draws parallels between the 
predatory bird and Picasso, the predatory man. Again, the 
scene taken by itself is good, but in the context of the rest of 
the film, it becomes trite because it is yet another didactic 
episode.
There are some films that merely entertain, while others go 
beyond that and take us to a deeper understanding of the 
human heart. This film doesn't get beyond the point of mere 
entertainment, and while there is nothing wrong with 
entertainment, I was hoping for something more given 
Merchant-Ivory's reputation and the rich subject of Picasso 
and Gilot. I think this movie is worth seeing, but I wouldn't 
blame anyone for preferring to wait for it to come out on 
videotape.

Title
Review for That Thing You Do! (1996)
Starring: Tom Everett Scott, Liv Tyler, Johnathon Schaech, Steve Zahn,
Ethan Embry, 
Tom Hanks, Bill Cobbs, Rita Wilson. 
Director: Tom Hanks. Screenplay: Tom Hanks. 
MPAA Rating: PG (for some language). 
Running Time: 108 minutes.
THAT THING YOU DO! is a good-natured, simple-minded movie that has a
few magic moments. I really wanted to like it, but I couldn't. It's too
boring. Despite the presence of charismatic screen personalities like
Tom Hanks and Liv Tyler, the film is not very funny, not very dramatic,
and not very romantic. And for a movie about youth, the film is
surprisingly lethargic. There may have been enough material here for 88
minutes, but the movie drones on for another full hour beyond that, and
even the music eventually becomes tedious.
The basic story is a promising basis for an entertaining film: In 1964,
four charming young men from Erie, Pennsylvania, form a rock group.
Luck is with them for a while, and their signature song "That Thing You
Do!" becomes a big hit. But success brings internal dissension that
finally causes the group to break up.
In my opinion, the best thing about the film is its evocative sense of
time and place, which I suppose should be credited to Tom Hanks as
director. On the other hand, the music in the film is disappointing
since it relies too heavily on playing "That Thing You Do!" over and
over. The song is fun the first couple of times, but it started to
grate long before its eleventh playing near the end of the film.
The actors who play the young rockers are fine in their roles, and Liv
Tyler is well cast as the pretty and sweet girlfriend of one of the
musicians. Tom Hanks plays the supporting role of the record executive
who becomes the rock group's manager, and I must say that I found this
usually reliable actor rather unconvincing here.
However, my main criticism of Hanks is in his capacity as
screenwriter.  There is too little conflict in the film for it to be a
good drama, and there is too little that is funny in the film for it to
be a good comedy. The maddening thing is that the core of a very good
movie appears to be present in THAT THING YOU DO!, but what seems to be
needed to bring it out is more pathos, faster pacing, and less
monotonous music.
Even though I didn't like this movie, I recognize that people who think
Tom Hanks can do no wrong, people who are nostalgic about the early
1960s, and people who enjoy fantasies set in the recent past will
probably think that THAT THING YOU DO! is pretty good.  However, for
those not falling in any of the above categories, this film is at best
something to have running off videotape in the background while doing
unpleasant chores.
