Authors
Jason Allen
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Election (1999)
The dark comedy ELECTION presents a scathing look at the harsh world of
politics.  While occurring in a teenage setting, this quality script fleshed
out on screen through skilled acting deals with themes older generations will
find relevant. 
Meet Tracy Flick (Reese Witherspoon).  This girl involves herself with every
possible school activity she can enter, allowing for a busy schedule and no
friends.  With an over-achieving attitude, she sweet talks administrators and
staff and arrives in the spot of teacher's pet with ease.  Striving to attain
the highest rank in everything she does, the apparently innocent young blonde
will crush anyone who opposes her.  
The time has rolled around at Carver High School for the student body to choose
their new class officers who will represent them for the upcoming school year. 
The film follows the race for the esteemed position of president.  Tracy,
always spotting the opportunity for a good college resume booster, enters the
race unopposed. The bubbly, cute persona she puts on in public only stands to
further her inner desires of domination.  She endlessly campaigns with banners,
pins, and free chewing gum, even though she certainly holds a lock on the win.
The events he sees transpiring upset history teacher Jim McAllister (Matthew
Broderick), the Student Government Association sponsor.  Having firsthand
experience of the underlying schemes Tracy uses in achieving her goals, he
comes to despise the constant perkiness and know-it-all mentality she conveys. 
As a result, McAllister decides he cannot let her easily win the race without a
fight, so he secretly pushes the football team's star quarterback to run for
president as well.  
Paul Metzler (Chris Klein), the dumb jock urged to enter, reluctantly accepts
his favorite teacher's proposition.  With this he begins plastering posters
throughout the school and issues a full-blown campaign.  Of course, an outraged
Tracy demands to find out who put the athlete up to this, and a full-scale war
ensues.  She now endlessly muscles her way around spreading her messages of
"Pick Flick" and "Vote for tomorrow today." 
Adding to the melee, Paul's lesbian sister Tammy (Jessica Campbell) becomes
entrenched in the race as a surprise third candidate when she believes she can
use this attempt to get back at an old girlfriend who supports her brother. 
Yes, it admittedly sounds a little screwy, but she comes off as the only
competitor with a truly earnest spirit and lack of self-serving motives.  Her
crowd-pleasing speech to the assembly of jeering students earns her the place
as the favorite because of her honesty, while the snobby Tracy and sweet but
goofy Paul merely give bland promises of the future.
The movie offers a biting portrait of the political process which runs
throughout elections from high school all the way to Washington.  The tactics
employed to assure victory by the nominees, especially Tracy, depict the
do-whatever-it-takes mentality so prevalent in today's officials.  By stepping
on anyone in the way, the representative may eventually fulfill the road to
power, but the public often does not view the high costs and dirty tricks
applied in reaching the status.  
The film's funny tone gives a lighthearted feel to a mature message of sticking
to morality rather than regressing into lies to gain an objective.  No one
escapes suffering from the consequences when vigorous plots suppress the truth.
 Witherspoon portrays the venomous Tracy with a wonderful performance, and
Broderick's McAllister shows how simply a nice guy can suddenly find himself
trapped in a bad situation.  Election delivers the goods for insight into the
ruthless political game while supplying laughs along the way at every turn.  B
