Authors
Scott J Gorcey
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for 1492: Conquest of Paradise (1992)
[I apologize for the delay in this and subsequent reviews.  I was on
vacation for three weeks and they piled up.  I will get them out as fast
as possible.  -Moderator]
     Christopher Columbus did not discover America.
     He discovered the Bahamas, built the first Club Med there,
extended his hand in greeting to the Natives, and proceeded to kill
every last one of them.
     Was Columbus the romantic visionary, who struck a deal with  Queen
Isabella to sail beyond the sunset--and return with a secret shortcut to
Asia?  Or was Columbus the vicious technocrat, who chanced upon Eden in
the 15th Century, bled it dry and razed it to the ground?
     "For a long time, there was the cliche of the hero," says  Roselyne
Bosch, the French journalist who wrote 1492.  "Now I'm  afraid there is
the cliche of the genocide.  The truth is in  between."
     Director Ridley Scott seems to think the two are not mutually
exclusive--and it's a good thing.  In all the controversy surrounding
the 500th anniversary of his Landfall, what people arguing on both sides
of the issue have forgotten is this: Columbus was a man.
     1492 is a remarkable two-and-a-half hour epic character study
examining that "in between."
     Perhaps for the first time, Columbus is put in his place:
Inquisition-Era Spain, a place where people were burned as heretics for
eating meat on Good Friday.  A place where Moors and Jews were being
slaughtered or deported in Christ's Name.
     "He was a Renaissance Man looking for a renaissance," says Scott.
He found one across the sea, and planned to built Utopia as envisioned
by Leonardo da Vinci there.
     Ridley Scott brings both the Paradise and the Hell--and the
environs of 15th Century Spain, from monasteries to cathedrals to royal
palaces--to gorgeous, captivating life on the screen.  But visual
ecstasy is just par for the course from the director of ALIEN and
BLADERUNNER.  It's expected.
     Here's the unexpected: 1492 is Scott's most beautiful film to date.
Perhaps this is only because these locations are real--as opposed to the
gothic corridors of the space freighter Nostromo, or a hundred-mile high
Los Angeles "twenty minutes into the future"--but to think so undercuts
the director's greatest achievement: the portrait of the man.
     Ranging from culture clash to class conflict, to the political
climate that both forced Columbus to make the voyage and ensured its
failure, Scott has brought a substance and complexity to 1492 that is
notably absent from most of his previous films.
     As on his last project, THELMA & LOUISE, Scott seems to have become
as obsessed with painting a picture of the person, and his personal
voyage, as he is with painting a picture of the world that person lived
in.
     Bringing that painting to life is Gerard Depardieu, who took the
Best Actor prize at the 1990 Cannes Film Festival for CYRANO DE
BERGERAC.  Depardieu can summon fire to his eyes and ice water to his
veins; he can age twenty years in two hours without the benefit of
prosthetic makeup.  He makes us feel as if we know Columbus without
making us choose which Columbus to know.
     If Depardieu doesn't present a definitive Columbus--how could
anyone even try?--1492 does present a man who fits Columbus' 
description--all the descriptions.  1492 does carry us to the heights of
his hope and inspiration, and it does drop us into the puts of his
tragedy and genocide.
