Authors
Chong Yu
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Wolf (1994)
10. THE FLINTSTONES
     Too much hype, but not enough originality.  Although reusing jokes
from the original cartoon may bring back nostalgic memories in some,
they are still the same repetitive jokes, fresh and original decades
ago, but not today.  Not a complete waste however.  Reminiscent of
Jurassic Park.  Slick presentation (especially Rick Moranis), but
didn't leave time for a real screenplay.
9. CITY SLICKERS 2
     Comparisons to the first are inevitable, but can stand alone.
While the first concentrated on the ineptitude of the vacationers well,
this was not as successful.  But still a lighthearted comedy worth
watching as long as you don't seriously try to enjoy it.  The corny
ending was nearly a let down, but created a possibility for a sequel
with a nice little final scene.
8. THE CLIENT
     Tommy Lee Jones just is not the intelligent law official he was in
THE FUGITIVE, working too much off his reputation from the previous
movie.  Although acting overall was excellent, the implausibility of
three sides in a two-sided conflict often gets in the way.
7. WOLF
     Hailed as another Jack Nicholson triumph.  Although he does put
forth a polished performance, he does not have the same bite of earlier
roles such as Joker in BATMAN.  Poor special effects, but otherwise
superbly done, except for the climactic battle scene.
6. THE CROW
     Violent.  Nihilistic.  Destructive.  Rides on the death of its
star with almost a suicidal urgency.  Nearly flawless, save for the
discovery of hero's "weakness."  Although avoided the glorification of
drugs present in the original comic, it also missed out on the almost
heroic angst of Funboy's death.
5. THE LION KING
     Amidst the accusations of plagiarism and racism, manages to prove
that cartoons (a.k.a. animation) can succeed even with darker themes
(i.e., death).  However, it is still more a showcase of art, animation,
and (to a lesser degree) musical score, than of true direction and
story telling.
4. SPEED
     Solid entertainment.  Worth the hype.  With such a narrow concept,
manages to fill it with an intelligent plotline--a success in
itself--while still keeping the pace fast and exhilarating.
3. WHEN A MAN LOVES A WOMAN
     Too bad it opened too early to be remembered for the Academy
Awards.  Outstanding performances by all three stars.  On the surface
it may seem like a family broken apart by one woman's alcoholism, but
look deeper and you may see something else.  Worth watching again
(especially if you are single now and married later).
2. TRUE LIES
     Arnold Schwarzenegger has finally succeeded in comedy...  almost.
Tom Arnold (of all people) stole the show.  Combines all the best of
great action and great comedic films.  After the slump of THE LAST
ACTION HERO, Schwarzenegger has reproven himself.  Amazing (and
obviously expensive) specal effects, marred only by unfortunate
stereotyping of the Arabic people.
1. FORREST GUMP
     Of all the films thus far this year, deserves Best Picture.
Lighthearted, serious, hilarious, and tragic--uplifting.  A minor
epic.  One of the few films where uncanny special effects blend almost
seamlessly into the scenes.  Excellent cinematography.  Rewrites
history, literally--takes a healthy suspension of disbelief.
Oscar-calibre performance by Tom Hanks despite a few slips.
