Authors
Christina Gross
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Addicted to Love (1997)
The astronomer Sam (Broderick) and the teacher Linda (Preston) , a
blonde angel, are the perfect American small town couple. He watches
the stars and everyday at noon his love in a nearby park. He could go
on like this forever. She escapes to New York City.
Sam goes after her and discovers that meanwhile she is living with
Frenchman Anton (Karyo). So he moves into an abandoned house across
the street and waits for her to come back.
Then Antons crazy ex-fiancée Maggie (Ryan) moves in with him. Her
intentions aren't quite as innocent as his. She wants to vaporize her
ex.
To seperate the faithless lovers is only the first step. Anton has to
suffer much more. He looses his restaurant, his furniture is
reposessed and finally he is disfigured by the effects of a strawberry
allergy.
Of course the story ends well, mainly because Sam is so incredibly
GOOD.
But before we get there we can have a few hearty laughs.
I don't know what I like best: the wild couple Ryan/Broderick or the
idea to use the Camera Obscura.
Teddy bear Broderick collides with hard drinking leather wearing biker
girl Ryan.
Both are excellent. You buy both the funny and the more serious parts
of their roles.
They make the other couple fade out. Especially Linda. She is blonde
and sweet. Besides we owe her two zany appearances of her father who
alway has to deliver the 'Dear John'-letters to her ex-lovers.
Anton is the cliché Frenchman. In the end you almost sympathize with
him, when even his furniture is taken away, his skin itches and he
breaks both his arms. But not quite.
The Camera Obscura Sam uses to bring Linda's picture into his run-down
apartment provides us with beautiful images. One scene where Maggie
and Sam sit on the couch with a bag of potatoe chips and watch their
exes like a TV program reminded me of "When Harry met Sally".
I have to mention the set design. Everything is perfect: Ryans
outfits, the abandoned house and especially the collage Maggie makes
in the course of the movie.
One thing I did not like was the timid attempt to justify Maggie's
revenge.
It didn't fit into the comedy and wasn't pursued consequently enough
to lend some depth to the story.
Gesehen und Gelesen: Buch- und Filmkritiken
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin

Title
Review for Kolya (1996)
Cellist Frantisek Louka (Zdenek Sverak) is an aging playboy. Since he
was thrown out of the National Philharmonic Orchestra because of
"subversive remarks" (the movie takes place before the communist
regime in Czechoslovakia came to an end), he only plays at funerals
and makes some extra money re-painting gravestones.
Because of his pressing financial needs he agrees to a fake marriage
with Nadeschda (Irina Livanova), a Russian woman who wants to obtain
czech citizenship.
According to their agreement they shouldn't see each other again till
the divorce, but she escapes to the West and thus draws the attention
of the police to him. To make things worse her mother suffers a stroke
and the paramedics leave Nadeschda's five-year-old son Kolya (Andrej
Chalimon) with Louka.
Louka doesn't know what to do with the frightened child who doesn't
even speak his language. His mother refuses to take care of him
because she hates the Russians. So Louka is stuck with Kolya and even
has to take him to work. Kolya is fascinated with the crematory. He
keeps drawing coffins that go through doors and once even re-enacts
the scene with his puppet theater.
Louka tries to hand the boy over to the authorities, but they are too
busy and tell him to wait. After a while Kolya starts to fit into his
bachelor's life. When finally a social worker shows up and tells him
that Kolya will probably be sent back to the Soviet Union he and the
boy hide with a friend in the countryside.
After the communist regime in Czechoslovakia crashes Nadeschda comes
back to get her son.
Jan Sverak has made a movie that's neither kitschy nor exessively
cute.
Andrej Chalimon is a real treat. The chemistry between him and Zdenek
Sverak is great. Kolya is no precocious boy wonder and Louka doesn't
become an unbelievable super-dad.
KOLYA concentrates on telling the story of the two protagonists, but
doesn't neglect the important events of 1989 and shows in an
unobtrusive way details from daily life in Czechoslovakia.
Louka goes to Prague with his friend Houdek to celebrate their new
freedom - and meets the two policemen who questioned him after
Nadeschda disappeared. Now the wave czech flags like all the others.
There are more charming minor characters. Louka gets his girl friends
to help him care for Kolya. The teacher Susie reads a Russian fairy
tale to the boy over the phone while her husband is next door taking a
shower. The singer Klara helps him to take care of Kolya when he is
sick.
Another highlight is the grave-digger's crazy family. He is
Nadeschda's cousin and the fake marriage was his idea.
All in all a great movie. Please give us more of that.
Gesehen und Gelesen: Buch- und Filmkritiken
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
With Michael Douglas, Sean Penn, Deborah Unger, Jim Feingold and
others
We've all been there at some point: a brother's birthday approaches
and you've no idea what to give him. They guy has got everything.
Including more money than you have. So you buy a nice tie. Or you hand
bro a gift certificate. 
Conrad van Orton (Sean Penn) give his brother Nick (Michael Douglas) a
certificate from Consumer Recreation Services. Nick is supposed to
play a mysterious game. All he knows about it is that it will change
his life.
And his life needs changing. Nick has money galore, but he's been
divorced for a long time and instead of friends he has business
partners whom he doesn't treat too well (WALL STREET revisited).
So Nick hands in his certificate. Suddenly he finds keys everywhere,
his TV starts talking to him and a mysterious blonde enters his life,
but not the kind that giggles and screams.
But there's more. He looses everything he owns, shoots his brother by
mistake and like his father many years ago sees only one way out of
his dilemma: suicide. He jumps off a roof - and lands on a giant air
cushion in the middle of his birthday party. After all, it's just a
game.
When his brother walks up to him with a big bloodstain on his breast
and a big smile on his face Nick doesn't punch him but gives him a big
hug, celebrates with his guests and even picks up the check.
I found that much harder to believe than all the strange things that
happened to Nick during the Game.
The movie is well made and features some superb acting especially by
Deborah Unger and Michael Douglas, but the ending ruined it a bit for
me. 
David Fincher cleverly made Nick van Orton a believable character
without slowing down the pace of the movie. In the end I just expected
more than a big grin plastered on Michael Douglas' face.

Title
Review for Arlington Road (1999)
With Jeff Bridges, Joan Cusack, Tim Robbins, Hope Davis
History professor Michael Faraday (Jeff Bridges) meets his new
neighbors Oliver and Cheryl Lang (Tim Robbins and Joan Cusack) in a
very dramatic way: he picks up their bleeding 10 year old son Brady in
the street and takes him to the hospital. Brady makes friends with
Michael's son Grant while Michael and his girl-friend Brooke (Hope
Davis) cultivate neighborly relations with the Langs. But the idyll of
barbecues behind picket fences starts to crack all too soon. Suddenly
Michael notices inexplicable discrepancies about his friendly
neighbors. What are those strange blueprints in his office, that
Oliver seems eager to hide from Michael, how was Brady injured and why
did Oliver change his name?
Michael believes Oliver to be a terrorist, but his theories seem so
far-fetched that his friends don't want to believe him. Maybe he spent
to much time studying terrorism. Maybe he simply hasn't gotten over
the death of his wife, an FBI-agent who was killed in a shootout with
alleged terrorists. Or maybe he is just jealous of Oliver, because
Grant will rather talk to him than his father. 
Mark Pellington tackles a hot issue with his story of the friendly
neighborhood terrorist. In the USA and elsewhere people prefer to
believe in threats from outside, and if it has to be „one of us` then
some half-crazed loner who acted on his own. But please, not an
organization working in the dark with frightening efficiency and able
to hit anywhere and any time. A decent family man who builds shopping
malls and takes his daughters to their ballet lessons can't be a
member of such an organization, or can he? And what about his wife,
the pillar of the comunity who looks as if she never does anything
more dangerous than bake cookies in her spare time? Tim Robbins and
Joan Cusack are our worst nightmares. A brilliant casting decision.
Jeff Bridges however is rather disappointing. His main task is yelling
and breathing heavily as he sprints across the set. He can do better.
Hope Davis, the token blonde, isn't worth mentioning. 
ARLINGTON ROAD could have been one of the best movies of 1999, but the
makers relied too heavily on the gullibility of the audience. A little
poetic license is granted, and there may be situations where an absurd
coincidence is the only way out, but this movie features too many
miraculous turns. But even if there are some plotholes still to be
closed the ending is spectacular, unexpected and made me leave the
theater with a queasy feeling in the pit of my stomach.

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
  With Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Vince Vaughn, Pete Postlethwaite
The lights are on but nobody's home. This is a movie without any
storyline worth mentioning, a bunch of good actors who aren't allowed
to act and marvelous dinosaurs. Let's start with the good things. The
computer generated dinosaurs as well as the animatronics seem even
more real than in 'Jurassic Park'. I also liked the way they were
used, exept for the T. rexes who had to be the typical small family.
It was for the sake of the dinosaurs that I don't regret having spent
more than two hours in a movie theater. I didn't even care that the
dinos were shown off without any story worth mentioning to wrap them
up in. Let's hear it for progress. Too bad that so many movie makers
think they don't have to care about anything else
if only they creatively play with their special effects .Why worry
about something like a good script, for example. The few strings of
story David Koepp wove to connect the dino scenes can only be called
annoying.
Cynical, serene Ian Malcolm as we know him from the books and the
first movie has changed into a chauvinist jerk. Even Jeff Goldblum
can't save the part. The script condemns him to save his seemingly
stupid girl friend Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore) from the dinosaurs.
She allegedly is a paleontologist familiar with predators. Still she
breaks even the most simple of rules like don't touch the young, don't
walk around in bloody clothing. Apart from that she utters cool
speeches, stares into the camera and screams.
Oh, well, as we all know women only watch this kind of movie only for
their boy friends' or husbands' sakes. So why create a credible female
lead that women in the audience can identify with and rob the guys of
this cozy "Women!" -feeling.
Isla Sorna, the dinosaur island, is a paradise for real men. On the
good guys' team apart from  Malcolm we have Nick Van Owen (Vince
Vaughn), radical environmentalist, lovable on-duty macho and
one-man-backup-plan and nice Eddie Carr (Richard Schiff) who ends up
being the only good guy eaten by the T. rexes.
On the bad guys' team there are Roland Tembo (Pete Postlethwaite), the
Great White Hunter with the noble heart who is looking for the
ultimate trophy and psychopathic dino-torturer Dieter Stark (Peter
Stormare) who first meets a swarm of compies and then his maker
because his pal prefers to listen to his walkman instead of Dieter's
cries for help. Morale: evil always is punished justly.
For a negative role model the men are presented with wimp Peter Ludlow
(Arliss Howard) who may be rich but no real man. Even his own men
rather follow Nick Van Owen. Tsk, tsk.
Michael Crichton could have saved himself the trouble of writing a
sequel to 'Jurassic Park'. All that is left of it in David Koepp's
script is the trailer scene and some names. My favorite dinosaur
scenes are taken from the first book. The rest is stolen from other
movies - oops, sorry, that's called hommage. John Wayne certainly
would have loved the technical advancement of animal catching in the
'Hatari'-scene.
About half way through the movie I reached the point when I didn't
want to see another face staring open mouthed into the camera or
another vibration in a puddle. But there was no mercy... In spite of
all this I cannot help but admire Steven Spielberg. How he could keep
a straight face in various interviews as he claimed to have focused on
character developement is beyond me. Maybe he should take up acting.
And once more the dinosaurs are not wiped off the face of the Earth,
as Michael Crichton had planned in his first dinosaur book. John
Hammond (Richard Attenborough) suggests to maintain a dino reservation
on Isla Sorna. I see another sequel coming up. Money can keep rolling
in when real men want to measure their strength against the
prehistoric giants. 
Who needs Marlborough Country...
Gesehen und Gelesen: Buch- und Filmkritiken
http://www.inka.de/sites/darwin
