Authors
Jim Moody
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Bandit Queen (1994)
     Shekhar Kapur's BANDIT QUEEN is a stinging attack on the way
low-caste women are regarded and treated in India.  From her
marriage at age eleven, Phoolan Devi, the main character resists,
however.  She comes back against her tormentors, learning as best she
can in the school of hard knocks.
     The real life Phoolan Devi, upon whose dictated story this film is
based, has just agreed a claim against the production company; she
objected to her depiction on two grounds: showing her character being
multiply raped and then her gang taking vengeance on those
responsible.  But this is not a rape/revenge film in the style of
Michael Winner--or anyone else.
     Phoolan Devi becomes a bandit, India's nationally notorious Bandit
Queen of the title, through a painful succession of rejections.  These
are pains that Kapur ensures the audience shares, rather than just gaze
upon.  Her degradation in her parents' village is taken further at the
hands of the police, when she is wrongly accused of theft; we are there
with her in the prison cell.  This experience pales when the higher
caste Thakurs who want her to knuckle down to their rule and arrange
for her to be kidnapped and tormented further by local bandits
(dacoits).
     But Phoolan's strength of mind carries her through.  A young
dacoit, Vikram, who becomes her second lieutenant and her lover, and
they lead a band of outlaws.  Later, following capture by her Thakur
enemies, Phoolan is subjected to multiple rape and even further
humiliation.  Kapur apparently shut himself up in a small, dark room
and tried to imagine himself being raped in order to get his depiction
of this scene to express the horror of rape as violence to a woman,
rather than the salacious way Hindi films sometimes show it.
     Phoolan forms her own gang, becoming notorious throughout the
Indian state of Uttar Pradesh.  Audaciously raiding towns one step of
the police, the state government launches a massive operation to catch
her and her mainly Muslim gang members following a massacre of those
Phoolan holds guilty of her multiple rape.  Her gang is whittled down
in numbers until she has no option but to surrender, which she does in
a glare of publicity.
     The real Phoolan and her supporters have managed to stop this film
being shown in India; the Indian High Court has even tried to stop it
being considered for an Oscar.  But whether it tells Phoolan Devi's
story exactly as it happened or not, the wider truths of BANDIT QUEEN
are powerful.  Indomitability of the human spirit in deepest adversity,
reaction against injustice, and the struggle to keep oneself true are
all here in this film.  Be seared by it.
     BANDIT QUEEN opened in London on Friday 17 February.  A US
distributor has still to be found.
