Authors
Phil Lochner
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1969)
I recently had the pleasure of catching Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
in true widescreen, digitally enhanced color format on the American Movie
Classics cable channel. As I have not seen the movie in many years
beforehand, I figured I'd work on a quick review/retrospective of this
excellent movie.
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid redefined the American expectation of the
Western. Shunning the stereotypical John Wayne classics of years before,
BC&SK showcased two of the greatest outlaws of the American West in a
gritty, humorous, realistic fashion. To this day (with handful of
exceptions, such as the now-corny extended bicycle riding sequence) this
movie stands up to the 90's in terms of wit, realism, violence, and humor.
It's all all around entertaining movie made perfect with the flawless
performance of Paul Newman as Butch and Robert Redford as the Sundance Kid.
Displayed afresh in stunning digitally perfect, color-enhanced DVD, BC&SK is
the paramount Western. Forget the old washed out video store rental VHS
pan-and-scan. This latest widescreen release is more vibrant and spectacular
than ever. Subtely is in the form of Redford's excellent, yet wry facial
expressions, as well as Newman's charming eye-brow raises when he delivers
the perfect wit, and the beautiful southwest landscapes. The viewer believes
they are watching a classic Western epic instead of the late 1960's tragic,
yet humorous escapades of the last two American anti-heroes as they try to
substain their way of life while avoiding both The Law and their own
inevitable last stands in the desolation of South America.
The one-liners are classic, and the characters are both realistic and
genuine. From both character's situationally inappropriate confessions,
(Sundance: "I can't swim"; Butch: "I never shot someone") to their equally
witty responses (appropriately, Butch [laughing as they attempt to jump off
a huge cliff]: "Why you CRAZY? The FALL will probably kill you.", Sundance
[utterly sarcastic when they are surrounded by Bolivian banditos]: "One HELL
of a time to tell me!") to the general unattached yet professional attitude
the characters display in their situations, the movie paved the way for the
cool, root-for-the-bad-guy response the 90's audience has been expected to
see. Forget the fact that Butch is the leader of a gang who is going to rob
a legitimate 19th century railroad of a huge sum of money; instead, laugh
when they underestimate and level of explosive they use when blowing up the
same railroad's safe and the blast skewers the outlaws to the ground.
Instead of a classic hero shooting off innumerable bullets with his trusty
6-cylinder relvolver, you have genuine outlaws panting as they reload and
fleeing from a mysterious unstoppable force made up of the greatest bounty
hunters of the West. It's incredibly satisfying.
The movie was created with realism in mind - showing the audience both the
real names of the two outlaws as well as their inaccurate (yet humorous)
expectations of South America, in Bolivia. Added to the mix is the love
triangle of Butch (as the eternal friend/confidant/womanizer), Sundance
(dedicated yet realistic of his profession) and Etta (Katherine Ross'
excellent portrayal of a pre-feminist-movement caught between feeling for
her two best friends who break the law). It was created specifically to be
historically accurate (the mysterious trackers, the destruction of the
infamous Hole In The Wall Gang, their flight to South America), although
embellished to provide a certain amount of comedic relief.
BC&SK is a wonderful, funnny, almost-family rated adventure/Western flick
rated PG for a couple of swear words and general implications of violence.
The 60's/70's playboy-icons of Robert Redford (sporting a quiet,
side-burned, exasperatted sense of humor) as well as Paul Newmann
(blue-eyed, charming, over-involved intellecutal wit) makes this a film from
two of the most decorated actors in Hollywood not to be missed.
Unfortunately, seeing this movie on the regularly circulated circa 1980,
blue-tone balanced, washed-out VHS is a bad idea - rent it on a digitally
remastered Laserdisc or DVD for the best experience.

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
http://us.imdb.com/Title?Truman+Show,+The+
(no, it's not an ad for the Internet Movie Database, it's just easier than
typing up all the specifics)
Disclaimer: This is my first post to rec.arts.movies.reviews - so read at
your own risk... :)
You've probably seen the trailers on television, on the theater screens, and
in the magazines and newspapers. Hailed as the "best movie of the summer" as
well as the "movie of the year", it's a story about Truman Burbank (Jim
Carrey), a seemingly normal guy living in a scenic coastal town with his
beautiful wife (Laura Linney) and his gang of neighbors and friends, led by
Marlon (Noah Emmerich).
Truman Burbank, for all his normal-ness, is actually the only real-life
character in a huge, fictional television show, directed by the mysterious
Christof (Ed Harris). Morning, day, and night, Truman is filmed from
thousands of different cameras throughout the picturesque town. His house,
his friends, his workplace, his wife, his car, and everything around him are
'bugged' with microscopic cameras which capture every nuance of his actions
which are then broadcast around the world to cheering hordes of 'The Truman
Show' fans. They celebrate his victories, cry with him and his problems, and
emphasize with the way he deals with his day-to-day existence. Truman is
naturally unaware that his life is being witnessed by millions (and possibly
billions) of other people; he is actually unaware that everything
surrounding him is one, huge, scripted soap opera. As Christof tells an
interviewer in the movie, Truman is the only character in the show who is
truly original and spontaneous. Truman has been in this television show
since he was born, and every part of his life: from first steps to his
boating accident with his fictional father to his marriage have been
recorded and broadcasted to the entire world.
In a huge dome outside of Hollywood ("Other than the Great Wall of China,
the only other man made structure visible from outerspace"), Christof
directs the pageant, narrating to the other 'actors' in Truman's life and
selecting dramatic camera angles as well as 'cueing' natural things such as
sunrise, storms, and various interventions when he suspects Truman is
getting too 'close' to unmasking the fabrication.
The plot of the movie involves Truman discovering his 'real' place in his
'life' he lives. It begins with a normal day, with Truman smiling, greeting
his neighbors in a very typical Leave-it-to-Beaver fashion, before getting
in his suburban car and driving to his average job as an insurance salesman.
An unscripted accident happens: a light from the television set falls from
the sky and smashes into his driveway, and although he suspects something, a
quickly-scripted radio broadcast in his car assures 'all the residents' of
the town that nothing is wrong.
The rest of the movie concerns Truman discovering (in sometimes humorous
ways) that his life isn't everything he thinks it is. Convienent 'solutions'
to the facades he accidentally reveals are amusing (especially the obviously
thrown-together Nuclear Power Plant accident), but inevitably cliched and
pretty unbelievable. There's a true deux-ex-machina involved whenever Truman
gets too 'close' and law enforcement officers (or security guards) expel him
from a scene. Of course, this is the nature of the beast, but if Truman
finds it unbelievable, you can count on the audience (err, the theater
audience, not the Truman Show audience..) finding it unbelievable by a
factor of ten. But perhaps that's the charm of the movie.
I suppose in a way I was blinded by the endless advertising claims of The
Truman Show being the "Movie of the Summer" and the "Best of 1998". I
expected a Forrest Gump or a Titanic, instead, I got something more in the
line of Primary Colors or Men In Black. Not mind blowingly awesome, but not
bad, either. I expected Truman's character to completely break free of the
scripted-everyman-in-a-bad-soap-opera role, but instead, he thrives on the
situation and doesn't seem to make any truly original or completely
spontaneous decisions.
The supporting characters are believable, until you find out that they are
mere husks controlled by Christof. Marlon (who reminds me unseemingly of
Biff Tanner from Back to the Future, for some reason) has a few
heartwrenching moments with Truman, which are shatterered when you learn
that he truly is just an actor reciting the words Christof narrates in his
earpiece. Likewise for Truman's wife, who seems to break down 'in scene'
during a tense moment of the film, pleading with the show's directors to
'get Truman off of her', when in retrospect nothing was shown first of her
lack of 'professionalism'. It's just a little bit of a slap-in-the-face for
each of the supporting characters. One day, they are the serious,
role-orientated characters who inhabit The Truman Show, and when Truman
shows the first signs of rebellion, they are suddenly blithering and
confused - even though most of them have supposedly spend 15+ years of their
life around Truman.
I found Truman's fantastical love interest with a two-bit character played
sullenly by Natascha McElhone odd and unfounded. As an extra in the early
parts of the 'show', Truman sees her right before he meets his wife-to-be
and is fixated by her looks and smile. For some reason, she throws away her
(obviously) great paycheck and tries to convince Truman of his real identity
(which is foiled ASAP). Truman then spends the majority of his life trying
to piece together a bizarre (and vaguely serial-killerish) scrap-book like
montage of this one-time dream girl using portions of fashion magazine
photographs. And yet, for some reason, Truman remembers this woman his
entire life and it's the basis for his complete unbelief of everything
surrounding him.
Perhaps I'm being too critical, but I just didn't find Truman's disbelief of
his surroundings too believable, if that makes any sense. The lights falling
from the skies, his discovery of sets and extras not acting correctly and
things of that nature add realism to his disbelief, and I suppose the
director anticipated the theater audience believing that Natascha McElhone's
character is the one thing to piece it all together - but then why the
sudden reappearance of his 20-year dead father? Why the continual defiance
towards the radio explanations, his wife's pleadings, and his best-friend?
It just doesn't add up to a 100% believable situation, which of course is
moot because The Truman Show is about fiction. But still, I felt empty
handed.
I was also disappointed with Christof's character. He turns out to merely be
another power-hungry Television Network Executive, instead of the father
figure/God/conscience voice you first sense he is. Further adding to the
unbelievable complications of the scene, the other
producers/directors/whatever of The Truman Show (err, the Truman Show in the
movie, that is) seem incredibly lax and inattentive. You'd expect for a
billion-audience member, multi-trillion dollar live-production extravaganza
the staff would be 100% sure of whatever Truman was doing at 100% of the
time. People will be people, of course, but the pivotal event which makes
Truman figure out who he really is seems contrived with 'typical
stressed-out producer' syndrome.
I had the opportunity to view the movie with a friend of mine who was truly
unaware about any of the hype surrounding The Truman Show, and to be honest,
he was kind of confused. The opening credits run like the beginning of the
(fictional) Truman Show, and it isn't until halfway through the movie that
you see the much advertised 'interview' with Christof which 'explains' the
concept behind the movie Truman Show (including the hilarious line, "Was
Truman was the first baby adopted by a corporation?"). Perhaps the movie
would be more believable and entertaining if this interview was shown
earlier in the picture, or if you had a few more minutes of Truman
interacting with his surroundings instead of the almost-instant suspicion
you end up viewing. That way, you can view the movie as a harmless observer
instead of trying to figure out what's going on along with Truman.
Jim Carrey gives an excellent performance as Truman, branching out
completely from the semi-slapstick antics of Liar, Liar and removing himself
forever from the laughing stock of Ace Ventura fame. Although at times it's
a comedic performance, you sense that it's more of Truman's humorous
personality than Jim Carrey yukking it up in The Mask or Batman frivolity.
Although rumors persist of a Dumb and Dumber sequel, I can't imagine Jim
Carrey performing as another mindless dolt again.
Ed Harris as Christof retains the serious roles he fashioned in movies such
as The Rock. He's humorless and serious as the money and ratings-hungry
producer/director of The Truman Show, and shows off his devotion to his
creation in the final scenes with more heartwrenching sincerity. The
combination beret/glasses look as well as the close-up shots of his face and
reactions bring a new, dramatic side to the actor which hopefully will be
exploited in his upcoming roles.
The remaining supporting characters are just that: supporting actors in both
the true theater Truman Show and the fictional Truman Show. Neither
outstanding nor average, they simply fill the void of hundreds of extras
which populate the movie. I personally never found Truman's wife too
believable - she seemed far too June Cleaverish and Truman seemed far too
cynical for any love interest to exist. Perhaps this is the source of his
infatuation with Natascha McElhone's role? The same goes for Marlon - he
comes off as completely too blue collarish and too "Let's go drink and
everything will be OK"-ish for white-collar salesman Truman to associate
with him. Of course, we must all keep in mind that Truman's entire life has
been scripted and performed, and certain things just have to be accepted.
On a rating on one to ten, I'd give The Truman Show a seven.
