Authors
Carl Miller
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
     Opening scene: Mickey and Mallory Knox arrive at a remote cafe.
Mallory turns on the juke box, while Mickey orders some kee lime pie.
Already, we see the bizarre editing style which will pervade the
movie--short clips of odd camera angles, often in black and white, as
if Stone is trying to give meaning to such innocuous conversation as
"You ever had key lime pie?"
     One of the truckers starts dancing with Mallory.  Mallory says,
"Are you flirting with me?" and starts punching him.  Pretty quickly,
Mickey and Mallory go from fists to knives to guns, killing the
occupants one by one.  At one point, a waitress cries and tries to
shield herself with a coffee pot.  She dies, of course--if there's
one thing that can be said about this movie, it's that everyone whom we
expect to die dies.  Having killed all but one customer (left behind,
"to tell the tale"), Mickey and Mallory hop in their car and drive
away.
     As you can expect, you're going to see quite a few more murders
just like these.  Each one, though, is a new twist--a new and more
disgusting way to die.  Mallory beats one man and then breaks his neck
while Mickey knifes another.  Mallory cuts a man's throat, then shoots
him in the head.  Really, much more focus is given on graphic death
scenes than characterization of the victims or the killers.
     Now, a lot of ultra-violent movies are good.  A CLOCKWORK
ORANGE and RESERVOIR DOGS were great.  But as the viewer may begin to
realize as the film progesses, there isn't much more to the film than
violence.
     Of course, the film tries to delve into the reasons why Mickey and
Mallory enjoy killing so much.  Both were abused as children--in fact,
in one of the film's many laughably overblown scenes, we have Rodney
Dangerfield abusing Mallory on a sitcom called "I Love Mallory".  It's
somewhat confusing how this sitcom fits into the story--like much of
the film, there's no separation between fantasy and reality.  One
minute Rodney Dangerfield is talking about molesting Mallory to a
laughtrack, and the next minute Mickey walks in with a crowbar to
liberate Mallory.  As for Mickey, we only have a few black and white
clips of him as a child, saying, "Please, don't hit me." These are
stuck in with clips of Mickey with blood running down his face, dragons
breathing fire, and animated comic book characters.  These clips have
no meaning--they only serve to annoy and confuse the viewer.
     Tommy Lee Jones does what he can with his role, which isn't much.
Robert Downey Jr. overplays a bit, but the viewer should be used to
that by the time he comes on screen.
     To top it all of, the story just doesn't work.  When Mickey is
surrounded in a convenience store, he surrenders, only to knife a
policeman in the face.  But no one thinks to shoot him--instead seven
or eight policeman beat him with batons, for an unrevealed length of
time.  (When seen a year later, he has suffered no lasting damage
whatsoever.) No one ever thinks to shoot them--the warden even says
"every time we're ready to put them to death, they go and kill someone,
and we have to start the whole thing over again," as if policemen were
not permitted to shoot mass murderers in the act of killing.  And the
end--which I won't reveal--just doesn't make sense.
     This film is not a total disaster, probably because of Quentin
Tarantino's original screenplay.  But whatever he wrote is buried under
Stone's sensationalism--this film bears virtually no resemblance to
PULP FICTION or RESERVOIR DOGS.

Title
Review for Abyss, The (1989)
        A submarine carrying nuclear warheads is sunk off the American 
coast.  The action begins when a crew goes down to investigate the crash 
-- they are not alone.
The Abyss is one of the best science-fiction thrillers I have 
seen.  Director/writer James Cameron builds suspense perfectly as the 
movie progresses, involving the audience in every scene.  It's successful 
for the same reasons as ALIENS -- it makes the viewer feels as though 
they are part of the story.
Bud (Ed Harris) and Lindsey (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio) are
the battling spouses who lead the crew's descent.  It's interesting to
compare Harris's appearance in this movie to his role in JACKNIFE, where
he played an alcoloholic war veteran.  Without the beer gut, he looks six 
inches taller.  Also among the crew is Michael Biehn from THE TERMINATOR 
and ALIENS, both directed by James Cameron.  Biehn does a good job as the 
psychotic crew member, though it is not a particularly challenging role.
Except for a few scenes at the beginning and at the end, the 
entire film takes place underwater, giving the viewer a good idea of the 
claustrophobic effects the characters feel.  As the film goes on, major 
complications arise -- Lt. Coffee (Biehn) succumbs to pressure-induced 
psychosis, and some very strange things start happening.  The water rises 
up into the cabin as if it were alive.  There's something else down there.
When Coffee and a few other crew members attempt to take over the submarine 
and detonate the warheads, the story really gets going.
There were two scenes in movie I found particularly memorable -- 
the first was Coffee falling down the trench in an undersea capsule, as
the water pressure increases.  The capsule cracks, Coffee screams, and
the vehicle implodes.  Silence.  That was a great effect.  The second was
Lindsay gasping for air as the cabin filled with water.  Cameron is one
of the few directors who could make that scene as effective as it was.
The film climaxes with Bud going down to the bottom of the trench 
in a fluid-filled suit to disarm the warheads.  Unfortunately, the final 
ending is disappointingly abrupt, which is the only thing that keeps this 
from being a four-star movie.  It's still a terrific movie, and one which 
I'm sure all science-fiction fans will not want to miss.
