Authors
John Panago
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Frank and Jesse (1994)
My rating: four and half stars out of five
        While looking for a video to rent, I found Frank and Jesse.  I never 
heard of this movie before (just like many you find in the new releases 
section) and took a gamble on wether my $3.98 would be worth the trouble.  As 
luck would have had it I picked a winner.
        Whenever you hear about the Frank and Jesse James gang you tend to 
think of a bank robbing and cold blood murdering gang that should be put to 
jail and the key thrown away.  History books may tell you this but as usual 
there are two sides to every story.
        The movie stars Rob Lowe and Bill Paxton.  These guys may not be in 
the same class as Al Pacino or Gene Hackman but they are perfect in this 
movie.  They were believable and they seemed to suit their characters well.
        The movie ends at the end of the American civil war and a Chicago 
railroad company is trying to buy up Missouri land.  In this process the 
company kills many innocent people.  Most of these people include the 
Confederate side of the war.  One man killed was the father of the then young 
Frank and Jesse James.  The brothers seek revenge and this starts their epic 
life of crime.
        The brothers assemble a gang which inlcudes their former mates from a 
guerilla band from the civil war.  Their gang is good with the steel and have 
the look of being tough guys.  Also in the gang is Cole Younger who is played 
by country music star Randy Travis who surprised me with a fairly good 
performance.  
        The gang emerges as a powerhouse and became heroes by the media for 
stealing from the rich and giving to the poor (a la Robin Hood).  As the boys 
become more and more famous the railroad company (who is being robbed by the 
gang) have had enough and hire Allan Pickerton to lead the charge to bring 
justice to the land by putting the gang behind bars.  I will leave the plot 
here as to not give away too much.
        The one thing that I paid attention to in the movie is the part of the 
rivalry and hatred that existed in the USA during the frontier years and what 
it made.  Watching this movie took part of the James brothers evil side away 
and brought them the hero side as it shows that they were fighting a losing 
cause against people who wanted to walk all over them but they just would not 
give up.  
        Furthemore this movie showed that the James gang were real people with 
families and lived basically normal lives.  The family theme really shines as 
it shows how the two brothers, Frank and Jesse, depended on each other and 
cared.  They were alwasy there for each other.  This is something that we 
rarely see in movies these days that the family is always there to support and 
that is one thing that society need to take a closer look at these days.
