Authors
Nick Schaden
Number of Reviews
25

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
    "The Game" is an unbelievable experience. The entire movie feels like a
roller coaster ride combined with an acid trip. From the opening moments to
the final credits, you go from moments of slow compassion to sheer terror
like the drop of a hat. For this and other reasons "The Game" makes for an
absolutely wonderful movie that this reviewer never, ever got sick of.
    "The Game" tells the story of Nicholas Van Orton (Michael Douglas), a
multi-millionaire investment banker. For Nicholas's 48th birthday party his
brother Conrad (Sean Penn) gives Nicholas a gift that "even someone with
everything would love". It's a trip to Consumer Recreational Services to
play some sort of game. After enough prodding by Conrad, Nicholas decides to
give this game a try. The rest of the movie I leave to you the viewer, as
going through the twists and turns that Nicholas goes through are half the
fun. Director David Fincher creates an experience so surreal half the time
the audience doesn't know whether Nicholas's experiences are reality, or all
part of the game.
    To truly make the plot of "The Game" as engrossing as it is for the
audience, the cinematography, becoming almost a trademark of David Fincher's
work, is simply stunning. It's all lead by Harris Savides, who is an expert
at making the audience see through Nicholas's shoes. Sudden camera jerks and
pans are made to create a sense of urgency. Moments of Nicholas's childhood
are played with old home projector clips and piano music in the background
to create a somewhat quaint yet eerie experience.
    As much as plot and cinematography are huge strengths, quite possibly
the biggest plus "The Game" has running for it is the acting. Michael
Douglas plays one of his best performances I've ever seen, he brings
Nicholas's character to life and still makes him believable the entire way
through.
    All in all, "The Game" is a movie that grabs you and won't let go. The
direction, plot, cinematography and acting all make for a movie that in my
humble opinion, has been, and likely will be, the best movie that I've seen
this year.
    Nick's Rating: +4 (Highly Recommended)

Title
Review for Cop Land (1997)
                Sylvester Stallone can't act.   Sylvester Stallone can't act.   I've
had that phrase drilled into my head in every Stallone movie I've ever
watched for the notable exception of "Rocky".   Finally, I'm pleased to
announce that after watching "Cop Land" Stallone CAN act, and act
wonderfully.   Furthermore, "Cop Land" plays out well in almost every
aspect, making for a very fine movie.
        "Cop Land"'s plot involves a corrupt set of NYPD cops who live across
the river in a fictional small town.   Stuck in the middle is Freedy
Heflin (Sylvester Stallone), an overweight sheriff who finds himself
torn between his dirty cop friends (Harvey Keitel, Ray Liota) and
revealing the truth to Internal Affairs' Mo Tilden (Robert De Niro).  
As much as the trailers may suggest it, "Cop Land" is by no means any
action/adventure/thriller movie.   Instead, it's more of a methodical &
dramatic psychological movie.   We don't see shoot-out after shoot-out,
as most of the action is centered around Freddy and the struggles he
goes through.   In a way I enjoyed this change of pace, it makes the
movie original and more thought provoking.
        However, to make a true "drama" succeed in the movies, you need good
acting.   Luckily the talent just flies in, De Niro, Keitel and Liota
all do (as always) superb acting jobs.   The big question I'm sure
you're asking is: How is STALLONE?   Stallone is great, and has possibly
the best performance of the movie.   His body movements, speech and eyes
all work together to paint the near perfect picture of a sheriff in
sorrow and doubt.   Hopefully, with any luck Stallone will continue to
take acting roles like this, he's much better here then playing Rambo.
        In conclusion, while flicks like "Face/Off" were fun summer
entertainment, the movies just "skim the surface". I walk out of the
movie theater enjoying the ride but I don't really give the movie much
thought afterwards.   "Cop Land" is a much deeper picture - you can't
walk in and expect guns blazing.   However, you can expect just as, if
not more bang for your movie buck.   To see Stallone light up the screen
is almost worth the price of admission alone.   

Title
Review for Murder at 1600 (1997)
    "Murder at 1600" is a movie that starts with promise but ends in
disappointment. It's a candy that initially tastes sweet but has a horrible
aftertaste.
    It isn't necessary for me to ramble on and on about "Murder at 1600"'s
plot, in its most simple form it's an investigation of a murder inside the
White House. In the opening scenes that introduce the audience to the
characters and story line director Dwight Little takes us for a fascinating
ride. I couldn't help but be swept away by both the plot and the strong main
character of Wesley Snipes. Luckily, the plot doesn't attempt to show some
"hidden past" or tough background detective Harlan Regis (Wesley Snipes)
has. Instead, "Murder at 1600" jumps quickly into the movie's main plot. The
movie smartly doesn't dwell in any subplots, which would only hinder and
slow down this kind of picture.
    After roughly a half hour into "Murder At 1600"'s plot, slowly but
surely things turn for the worse. Of chief importance, the movie's once
strong plot drops like a rock with unrealistic and head scratching
situations. Why is the President's son determined (and starting to succeed)
at having sex in "every room in the White House"? Why would a sane person
commit murder to change foreign policy? How does the White House have a
secret "back door" and passages seemingly everywhere that can lead to any
portion of the building? How could a cop-impersonating-janitor get himself
within ten yards of the President?
    However, it must be stressed that not all is bad in "Murder at 1600".
Dennis Miller makes a great partner/sidekick for Snipes's character. In
addition, the other major actors save the movie, Wesley Snipes, Diane Lane
and Alan Alda have solid performances.
    In conclusion, if you're looking for a great story of corruption in
government, don't pick up this movie or the dud "Absolute Power". Even with
some solid acting, "Murder at 1600"'s horrible plot destroys any hope this
movie had of being above average.

Title
Review for Trees Lounge (1996)
        Steve Buscemi.   The name instantly brings breathtaking scenes from 
"Fargo" and "Reservoir Dogs", always playing the same kind of fast
talking style that I've come to love.    Admittedly, if it weren't for
this talented actor I doubt I would have ever rented "Trees Lounge",
mainly due to the somewhat offbeat plot that the movie appeared to
contain.   However, I went out on a limb and gave the movie a shot - I'm
very pleased I did.
        "Trees Lounge" follows the life of Tommy (Steve Buscemi) in his day to
day life.   As we learn, Tommy doesn't have stable employment, has
broken up long ago with his girlfriend and much of the rest of his
family.   Most of his time is spent drinking in the rotting Trees
Lounge, a burned out bar mostly filled with other
"losers" like Tommy.   Interestingly enough, while the plot has a few
twists and turns, it stays very simple, just showing us the slow
downward spiral that Tommy has fallen into.
        No, while many of you out there have the image of "Leaving Las Vegas"
in your head, this is not that kind of movie.   Director Steve Buscemi
(his first time in the director's seat) throws plenty of straight and
black humor in the mix.   Scenes with Tommy's father having a heart
attack or watching Buscemi driving an ice cream truck are portrayed
wonderfully and add to plenty of laughs.    It's almost as though
Buscemi wants us to cry and laugh at Tommy's burned out character
simultaneously.   That, in a sense, is what made me like "Trees Lounge"
so much.   The plot is very original, and while slow (a problem at
times) the movie draws the viewer in.   I don't think I've ever cared
more about some burned out man's life as I did about Buscemi's
character.
        To boot, Buscemi does a wonderful job in fulfilling his role.   The
final scene of the movie comes distinctly to mind.   If you watch Tommy
closely, you can see him really pondering his life's direction.   Will
he just give up all hope and continue in self-pity and loathing until
death?   Or, will he pick up the pieces of his life and start anew? 
Either way, it's a thought provoking question that stayed in my mind.
        Overall, while the plot gets a little too slow and ambiguous at times,
it's very original and captivating.   Check "Trees Lounge" out, it's a
winner.

Title
Review for Relic, The (1997)
What is with the horror/thriller genre of today?   Either we have
movies that try to spoof horror (i.e. "Scream") with moderately
enjoyable results, or the countless number of movies that actually try
to freak us out, with for the most part, far too predictable and almost
laughable results.  "The Relic" throws us an interesting plot and pretty
sweet special effects - big potential.   However, by the end of the
movie, all the glory that "The Relic" tries to achieve nose dives.
The plot of "The Relic" (contrary to all the scientific mumbo jumbo you
hear throughout the movie) is rather simple:  A mutated monster that
kills humans to stay alive has been accidentally sent to the Field
Museum in Chicago with disastrous results.   An attractive evolutionary
biologist (Penelope Ann Miller) and a veteran homicide cop (Tom
Sizemore) both work apart, then together to stop and destroy this
monster.   The plot actually stays intact pretty well for a horror
flick, and I enjoyed it, it was quite original.   To boot, the
"scariness" of the movie starts slow and picks up speed gradually, with
satisfying results.   In addition, a few of the "nail biting" hooks work
relatively well, and the cinematography does these sparse scenes
justice.
Unfortunately, about halfway through the movie when the tension really
heats up, the movie tanks.   First problem: the acting.   Penelope Ann
Miller turns suddenly from a good role as bad boy biologist into yet
another stereotyped "woman-victim", meaning she spends the rest of the
movie screaming and running in high heels and a tight black dress.   The
other star, Tom Sizemore hits rock bottom too.   Sizemore starts as the
hard-boiled cop he seems to play well in many movies (i.e. "True
Romance") but soon goes WAY over the top, reduced to doing little but
barking orders and using the "f" word a lot.   Second problem: the
people in the movie are just too stupid.   Naturally, when all hell
breaks loose nobody except Ann Miller and Sizemore have any strategy,
the people just run around and become puppy chow for the monster.  Even
the two stars don't exactly have a winning formula: Instead of just
trying to escape right away from the museum, they decide that "this
f**king thing has to be DESTROYED first" and spend much of the movie
trying to find the origin of this monster.   It all seemed quite trivial
to me, just a pretty lame plot excuse to have some more "near-miss"
thriller scenes.   Last problem:  The ending. After what seemed to be a
very confusing and overblown "special effects extravaganza" final
showdown, in what seems a matter of seconds the entire movie wraps
itself up far too quickly.
In the end, "The Relic" seemed like a horror/thriller movie almost
ready to crack out of its shell, but unfortunately became another
heavily flawed flick that dies half way out of the starting gate.
*** Movies rated from -4 (worst) to +4 (best), 0 = average movie ***

Title
Review for Absolute Power (1997)
        Ever notice how too many movies are getting geared for the "young"
audience?   You know what I mean, little substance, too little plot,
just fast action, violence and sex that make millions at the box
office.   Amazingly enough, "Absolute Power" seems like a movie geared
for people in their 70s, with a great plot and great acting, but
atrociously slow and devoid of any excitement.
        "Absolute Power" tells the story of Luther Whitney (Clint Eastwood), a
cat burglar who, while pulling off a robbery, gets in a hairy
predicament:  The supposedly "empty" mansion that Luther is robbing from
has visitors.   Luther hides, and sees a young women enter the room with
an older man; we can see from the expressions on Luther's face that he
vaguely recognizes the face.   The couple start to perform rough sex,
when things get too rough, the two start to fight, climaxing in a
violent struggle where the woman nearly kills the man when BLAM!   A
Secret Service agent has shot and killed the woman, and this mysterious
man is none other than: the President (Gene Hackman)!   What a great and
original plot!
        To boot, Clint Eastwood and Gene Hackman do a great job acting their
respective roles.   So you ask, why does this picture get a -2?
        First of all, the movie is SLOW, and in many ways boring.   For
example, there is only one action piece in the entire movie, which
starts and ends quickly.   In addition, too much time is spent with the
sub-plot showing the relationship between Luther and his daughter (Laura
Linney).   Simply put, there is too much time in the
movie for interviews and talking, not enough for true suspense, plot
development, and action.   Even the opening robbery draws out for too
much time.   To put the nail in the coffin, the movie and plot wraps up
far too quickly and easily.
        Maybe it's my young mind at work, but "Absolute Power" crawls at a
snail's pace.  Only the strong acting by the two leads Eastwood and
Hackman save the picture from further punishment.

Title
Review for Looking for Richard (1996)
        In "Looking For Richard", director Al Pacino successfully captivates
"Richard III" - one of Shakespeare's most famous plays - to the
screen.   Yes, while many of you out there are probably now emitting an
audible yawn from your mouths, listen closely.   This isn't just the
play reenacted on the big screen ("Julius Caesar"), nor a hip 20th
century spin on it ("Romeo & Juliet").  Instead Pacino vouches for a
fresh new viewpoint, via documentary.   The movie essentially shows the
making of the play itself, with actual scenes from the play (in addition
to quick interviews with famous actors such as "Kevin Kline") spruced in
for flavor throughout.
        What makes "Looking For Richard" so great?   Al Pacino realizes that
90% of the American public doesn't understand and couldn't care less
about Shakespeare's plays.   Thus, to play the major roles (Richard
III,Clarence,Buckingham,Lady Anne) he recruits famous top name actors,
such as Alec Baldwin, Kevin Spacey, Winona Ryder, and of course, Al
Pacino himself.   In addition, Pacino narrates the documentary himself,
carefully explaining the play each step of the way, so we understand at
all times what's going on (a common pitfall with other Shakespeare
movies).   Furthermore, the documentary format makes for a fresh, fun
movie, with interesting discussions and interviews to keep
the audiences attention.  All these elements make for a movie that's
entertaining even for Shakespeare haters.
        However, for you Shakespeare buffs a likely question is: "Is the actual
PLAY good?".   Happily, with the high quality of actors in the roles and
the wonderful setting, I can say a resounding "yes".   The documentary
format never hinders what's going on in the play, and rather strengthens
it.
        However, as with nearly all movies, "Looking For Richard" has it's
problems.   Ironically, the largest problem is also it's largest
strength: the documentary format.   While the format is fun, at times it
can be slightly confusing to the audience.   All in all however,
"Looking For Richard" is a great movie, not just for Shakespeare fans,
but for everyone.

Title
Review for Scream (1996)
     Aren't we all sick of those classic cliches in horror movies? Take
the annoying habit of grossly disproportional female victims to run upstairs
or downstairs when they should be running out the door. It's a weakness that
destroys the horror in far too many horror flicks. "Scream", directed by
horror master Wes Craven, makes a refreshing twist by poking fun at the
genre Craven's worked with so much in previous years. Unfortunately, while
good ideas surface, the movie stumbles too much for a recommendation.
    A series of high school murders have shocked a community. An attractive
young high school student, Sidney (Neve Campbell) gets several threatening
calls and later gets viscously attacked by the murderer. Does this mean
"Scream"'s plot will follow right in line with all the other slasher movies?
Heavens no. Instead, the movie concentrates on a mystery and makes the
audience try to guess which one of the many teenage suspects is the
murderer. While Scream is light years away from "The Maltese Falcon"
material, Wes Craven amazingly makes the plot moderately interesting. I
actually cared for Sidney's plight, and I thoroughly enjoyed the many jokes
the actors and the movie makes toward previous horror movies.
    In other small doses we see Wes Craven's mastery of the horror genre.
For example, in the beginning of the movie Drew Barrymore is threatened and
attacked by the movie's murderer. It's done expertly well, the
cinematography and sound makes for a great introduction to the movie.
    However, after this well made intro, suddenly the rest of the movie
falls into several weaknesses. First, the acting leaves something to be
desired - the far majority of actors are new to the acting scene and it
shows. For example, Campbell's acting falters in certain scenes, her attempt
to portray a young woman deeply in fear is largely reduced to widening eyes
and breathing hard - it isn't that convincing. In addition, ironically the
movie falls much into the same cliches of many horror movies - the victims
and cops are just too stupid and the murderer is just too smart. Finally,
after all the twists and turns the audience goes through, I was really
hoping for the movie to wrap up nicely. Unfortunately, the logic free twist
in the movie's end combined with the lame motive of the murderer's crime
make "Scream" end on a sour note.
    In sum, I'll remember "Scream" as an original spin upon the horror
genre. Unfortunately its weaknesses cut this movie below recommendation
material.

Title
Review for Face/Off (1997)
        "Face/Off" is the story of Sean Archer (John Travolta), a member of an
elite secret FBI team attempting to hunt down and catch Castor Troy
(Nicholas Cage), one really vile and over the top terrorist (of course,
who ISN'T in today's action movies). In the opening of the movie we
watch as Sean gets nailed from Castor Troy with a sniper's bullet.
Unfortunately, while Sean barely survives the attack, his son doesn't,
and thus sets Sean on a  life-long pursuit after the evil Castor.  
        Normal action movie right?  Wrong.   Flashy action director John Woo
(somewhat unsuccessfully) throws the audience a curveball.   To better
infiltrate Castor's crime syndicate, mainly in attempt to stop a bomb
going off in the middle of LA, Sean uses "modern day technology".   What
technology you ask? It's not just rubber noses: Sean literally exchanges
his own face with the face of Castor (who at this point has been brought
into justice and is resting peacefully in a coma).  Sound moderately
corny?  It is, and no matter how many special effects John Woo brings
into the mix, the switch still seems awkward to me.
        While this is in some ways a pitfall of the movie, fortunately it turns
around to make the movie more enjoyable.   As suspected, Castor gets out
of the coma, and takes the original face of Sean Archer. Thus for the
majority of the movie, you have literal role reversals, Sean appears to
be Castor, and vice versa. More importantly however, the audience gets
to see John Travolta acting like the wild Nicholas Cage we've come to
love, and Cage play the more straight-shooting Travolta.  You can see
the actors are having a good time in their roles, and the actors play
wonderfully off each other.
        Now the real question: how's the ACTION?   Fortunately, it's the other
major strength of the movie, with incredibly original sequences, from
speed boats to planes on runways.   John Woo is a master at this art,
and succeeds in creating exciting and invigorating shoot outs.  On that
same note however, I was disappointed in that what I believed to be the
best action sequence - where Sean is attempting to intercept Castor at
the airport - is the first sequence of the movie!  Consequently, while
the movie opened with a bang, I was a little let down by the remaining
action sequences.  And on a minor point, while most of the slow motion
touches are nice, Mr. Woo seems to be a little too obsessed with this
movie making quality.
        All in all, if you allow yourself to be wrapped up in Face/Off's
vortex, you may look back at a few parts (the face swapping scene comes
instantly to my mind) with skepticism, but you'll certainly enjoy the
two hour ride.

Title
Review for Mother (1996/II)
    Albert Brooks is a funny guy. Whether he's cracking jokes about food
products or relatives his timing and wit always make you at least chuckle,
and it's what makes "Mother" such a fun movie.
    "Mother" tells the story of John Henderson (Albert Brooks) a writer who
just got divorced. John feels he can't connect with women, and feels the
only way to make himself whole again is to move back in with his mother,
Beatrice (Debbie Reynolds) and try to regain his "feelings" during
childhood. It makes for a simple yet effective plot.
    The far majority of the movie is spent with John and his mother arguing
and fighting about different issues, many times with hilarious results. For
example, upon John's arrival to his mother's home, his mother starts by
offering him incredibly old and freezer-burned meats, cheeses, and dessert
for something to eat. Soon we see John and mother squaring off in an
argument about meat, use of the freezer, childhood, it's all quite funny.
    What makes "Mother" superior in some ways to other comedies is that the
movie doesn't try to push the limits of reality - while Brooks's character
is a mess he can be believable. In other comedies many times the plot calls
for incredulous situations (Clark Griswold flying through the air at Hoover
Dam in "Vegas Vacation" comes to mind) just so the audience can laugh a
little. This movie doesn't need fancy props or elaborate jokes - Brooks is a
master of comedy, and knows what makes the audience laugh.
    However, there are a few complaints I have with Mother. First and
foremost, the movie wraps itself up far too quickly and neatly. It's almost
as though actor/director Brooks said to himself: "Enough comedy...let's
finish with a good ending". Furthermore, for me as a viewer, to be laughing
and chuckling through most of the movie and then to switch gears to a happy
wrap up was a disappointment for me. Don't get me wrong, I expected the
happy ending - it's just that the movie needed a slower transition from
comedy to conclusion. Second, I wish that Jeff's (John's brother, played by
Rob Morrow) slight obsession with his mother could have been developed more
as a side plot.
    However, in conclusion, "Mother" is a fun movie. While you won't likely
want to sit and see this movie again and again, it made this reviewer laugh
the whole way through, and thus achieves its purpose as a comedy.

Title
Review for Vegas Vacation (1997)
        Midway through "Vegas Vacation", Clark Griswold (Chevy Chase) looks
out his car window and sees Christie Brinkley in a red Ferrari.   This
is an obvious nod toward an near identical scene in the now famous
comedy "National Lampoon's Vacation", which started the entire Vacation
movie series.   A small tear nearly formed in my eye, remembering how
funny Chevy Chase and "Vacation" was, and how far downhill both the
actor and the series have become.   While in my opinion "Vacation" was
one of the funniest movies of the 20th century, "Vegas Vacation" is only
mediocre, and the series is showing its age.
        "Vegas Vacation" is the story of Clark Griswold, his wife Ellen
(Beverly D'Angelo), and their son Rusty (Ethan Randall) and daughter
Audrey (Marisol Nichols).   It's vacation time once again for the
Griswolds, and this time their destination is Las Vegas.   As expected,
the vacation is a humorous disaster.
        One on hand, like the other movies in the "Vacation" series, it
succeeds in several key points.   First, the movie successfully
satirizes much of the real problems for Vegas travelers, from gambling
traps to cheesy entertainment and nightlife.   In addition, while Chevy
Chase and Beverly D'Angelo stumble through a few portions of the movie,
for the most part they fill their respective roles as Clark and Ellen
well.   Finally, the Griswolds' cousin, Eddie (Randy Quaid) always
results in a few laughs, keeping the movie on its two feet.
        However, what "Vegas Vacation" falls short in (which frankly should be
a strong point of any good comedy) is the humor.  Put bluntly, "Vegas
Vacation" isn't incredibly funny, with mostly only chuckles coming from
my mouth while watching it.   This occurs mainly because of the one
prevalent joke throughout the movie: Clark's gambling problems.   While
watching Clark lose big time on the blackjack table is moderately
humorous the first time, seeing it again and again with little
variations in style or substance just plain isn't.
        In the end, "Vegas Vacation" has a few high points, but for the most
part is only a blatantly average movie. While there are several comedies
that are quite worse than "Vegas Vacation", there are many that prove to
be much better - I'd suggest seeking those out before watching this
movie.

Title
Review for Saint, The (1997)
    After watching both "Mission Impossible" and "The Saint" the
similarities are striking. Both are Paramount films, both are
action/adventure/thriller movies, both have an overrated sex symbol as the
main character, both were taken from TV to the movie scene, and both were
hyped as "blockbusters" before release. Sadly, the difference in quality is
also striking. "Mission Impossible" was an enjoyable movie to watch, while
"The Saint" is an easily forgettable dud.
    Problems with "The Saint" emerge barely out of the starting gate.
Instead of throwing the audience headlong into the main plot as most good
action/adventure movies do, director Phillip Noyce instead dwells in a
yawner of an introduction to Simon Templar's (Val Kilmer) childhood.
    This example nails the largest problem with "The Saint" - the plot. In
essence, the movie tries to pull itself in too many directions at once. It
has action, romance, drama, and adventure - all with unsatisfactory results.
First, what should have been the greatest strength of "The Saint" turns into
its biggest fault, the action/adventure. Most scenes tended to lack
intensity and tension, never once did I feel Val Kilmer's character was ever
in severe danger. Further dissolving what's left of the movie's plot is
casting Elisabeth Shue as Dr. Emma Russell (the brains behind creating cold
fusion, a currently impossible task), while Shue's beauty glows throughout
the film she is hardly convincing. Finally, what really blows this movie out
of the water is the incredibly weak motivation for our hero's character.
Simon Templar is essentially a high tech mercenary/thief that works for
almost anyone for a price. Why does Simon do it? Incredibly lame comments
like "I've always broken out of things" and flashbacks to Simon's horrific
Catholic childhood attempt to fit the pieces together with little
comprehensible fashion.
    After "The Saint"'s largely predictable ending, I'm praying Paramount
doesn't have the balls to release a sequel. Even with other passable
elements, the movie's horrible plot destroys any hope "The Saint" had of
getting off the ground.

Title
Review for Hoodlum (1997)
    At one moment in "Hoodlum" Laurence Fishburne holds a switchblade to a
gangster's throat. About to finish him off, Fishburne pauses. A tear rolls
from his face. Whether you think Fishburne's emotions are appropriate or
not, you can see that Fishburne is trying - trying with all his might to
captivate the audience. This intensity that "Hoodlum" pushes throughout
makes for a high quality and sometimes stunning movie.
    "Hoodlum" is set in the 1930s during the era of the Great Depression.
For much of the impoverished, working for and betting on an underground
lottery, nicknamed "numbers" is the only way to bring food to the table.
Mobster Dutch Schultz (Tim Roth) had decided to increase his numbers
boundary to Harlem, which would throw many blacks out of jobs into the
streets. The main force which runs numbers in Harlem is determined to stop
Schultz's plight. Bumpy Johnson (Laurence Fishburne), a leader of the Harlem
force, decides to take Schultz head on - which results in betrayal, deals,
and war between the mobsters and the Harlem force.
    We've seen this kind of plot before ("The Untouchables") and none of the
audience is surprised when plenty of bloodshed results. Instead what makes
the movie so good is the intensity, the effort shown by the actors and
screenplay to make the movie work. Shoot-outs are shot with strong visual
intensity and little or no music, illustrating the horrors of war between
the mobsters and Harlem. The emotional scenes have good cinematography and
many times booming music for the viewer to really feel the characters'
emotions. To boot, the movie doesn't try for too many subplots and thus
keeps the movie simple yet clear to the viewer. Finally, Laurence
Fishburne's acting is superb, I loved many of the small emotional touches he
imprints in "Hoodlum".
    The movie still falls short in a few areas. Tim Roth, a great actor of
our time, at certain points can get old spewing "f" words as though he's
reenacting that famous coffee shop scene from Pulp Fiction again and
again. While Vanessa Williams acts much better in this movie than in the
dreadful Eraser, at times of extreme emotion she stumbles. Finally,
the movie seemed a bit too long - I enjoyed the movie but certain scenes
seemed to continue longer than necessary.
    While "Hoodlum" can't measure near the greatness of Martin Scorcese's
mobster movies ("Casino", "Goodfellas") it's still a strong film and was
definitely worth my $5.50 admission.

Title
Review for Liar Liar (1997)
   Jim Carrey's career catapulted onto the movie scene with  the powerhouse
"Ace Ventura: Pet Detective", "The Mask", and "Dumb & Dumber".  He's the
kind of guy that you tend to either love or hate.   For this reviewer, I've
gotten sick of Jim Carrey's humor - he can't break out of his shell of
sophomoric, repetitive gags.   However, Carrey has greatly improved since
his major start in 1994.   While "Liar Liar" doesn't make for a higher
quality comedy, it certainly is passable entertainment and has its high
moments.
   "Liar Liar" has a standard comedic plot: it breaks the rules of reality
for humor.   Fletcher Reede (Jim Carrey) fits the definition of "sleazy
lawyer" perfectly: he ignores his son, he rather would sleep with the
company boss (to become a partner of the firm, no less) than spend time with
his family, and sleazes and deceives people to get further up the corporate
ladder.   In frustration, his son makes a wish at his birthday party that
Fletcher wouldn't lie for just one day.   Thus lies one of the larger
weaknesses of this movie - the humor is largely a one gag trick.   Every
joke in the movie ties in how Fletcher simply can't lie, and it the gag gets
old rather quickly.
   Furthermore, Carrey has to learn that more isn't necessarily better - his
goofball over the top antics ruin many of the jokes running throughout "Liar
Liar".  Carrey has to learn that more doesn't mean necessarily better.
   However, "Liar Liar" certainly does have its strengths.   For example,
Carrey for, is more controlled in this movie than others.   In addition, the
movie is can be fun at times, several of the courtroom jokes in the latter
half of the film make for some good entertainment.
   By the end, I left "Liar Liar" with a smile on my face - Jim Carrey
actually had starred in a watchable and moderately funny movie.  However,
largely due to the one-horse plot and Carrey's outlandish acting style - the
movie falls slightly below average.
    *** Movies rated from -4 (worst) to +4 (best), 0=average movie ***

Title
Review for Devil's Own, The (1997)
        "The Devil's Own" has plenty of good movie elements: smooth acting,
reputable actors & well orchestrated action sequences.   It's almost a
crime to see "The Devil's Own" fall so far flat on its back with it's
sappy, predictable and harshly failed plot.
        Frankie McGuire (Brad Pitt, complete with long hairdo and phony Irish
accent) as a young child watches his daddy get blown away by British
supporters.   Naturally Frankie devotes his life to revenge and becomes
a terrorist working for the IRA.   Suddenly (apparently to show how
tough Frankie is) we see a huge shoot-out sequence where IRA terrorists
blow away around 30 cops during an ambush, with much of the carnage done
by Frankie himself.   Such is the most inherent problem with the movie:
it tries to be something it isn't.   Through much of the drama it seems
that director Alan J. Pakula is shooting for the audience to feel
sympathy for Frankie, to really put a personality behind the cold
blooded IRA killer, to show reasons and motivation (good or bad) for
Frankie's actions.   But as noted above, seeing the cold blooded work
that Frankie does and continues to do throughout "The Devil's Own" makes
the audience have no sympathy for the man.   Maybe Frankie could have
been in the IRA but not a trigger man, maybe we could see more footage
of horrible acts that we're inflicted upon Frankie to "justify" his
savageness.  Nevertheless, no matter how much "sappiness" and
dramaticism that director Pakula throws at us, I can't feel sympathy for
a person that in return for his father's murder turns around and murders
thirty of the enemy in cold blood.
        Major plot problems aside, the movie has a few aces up its sleeve.   
Brad Pitt fulfills his acting role well, and Harrison Ford (as Tom
O'Meara, a "Ward Cleaver" honest NYPD cop that fights within himself
over Frankie's plight) does an excellent job.   In addition, the tension
and plot does have its bright spots.   However, by the somewhat
predictable end to "The Devil's Own" I had a rather sour taste left in
my mouth, seeing yet another movie fall from being a winner to simply
being average.  

Title
Review for Swingers (1996)
Don't you love it how low budget independent movies absolutely amaze
you every so often?  "Swingers" is that kind of movie.   With a
hilarious witty plot, and great acting, I fell in love with this little
gem.   Not since watching "Reservoir Dogs" have I ever seen a low budget
independent (and under hyped) flick that I enjoyed this much.
"Swingers" tells the story of young L.A. twenty something guys, who,
among other activities, cruise for dates and love.   They hit on women
at bars, they swagger and act tough.   They constantly talk to each
other (in rapid fire Woody Allen talk no less) about the art of picking
up women.   The irony of "Swingers" though, is that these guys are a
hopeless case in finding love, women are usually repelled away from
their machismo, not attracted to it.   It's a great and witty plot, and
watching these guys stumble over themselves is wonderful.
In addition, the male stars of the movie, Mike (Jon Favreau), Trent
(Vince Vaughn), Rob (Ron Livingston) and Sue (Patrick Van Horn) all act
wonderfully.   Whether it's Mike ranting and raving about his
ex-girlfriend, or Trent comparing the directors Scorcese and Tarentino
to each other, or Sue playing far too competitively in a video game,
it's hilarious.
Finally, little touches in the movie made it even more interesting to
me.   For example, in one of the funnier scenes of the movie, we watch
Mike completely blow a potential date by leaving message after message
on her answering machine late at night.   Later on, when Mike gets
another lucky phone number, if the audience pays close attention they
can see that the camera angles, music, etc. is EXACTLY the same as in
the earlier scene botched by Mike. It's a great idea, as the audience
can't help but cringe at the possibility of poor Mike screwing up his
chance for love again.   In addition, we see several nods to Tarentino's
"Reservoir Dogs", whether a poster of "Mr. Blonde" in the background, or
a spoof of "Reservoir Dogs"'s famous slow motion intro sequence.  
Finally, the movie wraps up neatly with a cool and well done ending.
All in all, "Swingers" blows away the far majority of any
"blockbusters" that have come out this summer.   I highly recommend it.
Nick's Rating: +4 (Highly Recommended)
*** Movies rated from -4 (worst) to +4 (best), 0 = average rating ***

Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
        I have to admit, I'm always wary of big budget, "blockbusters".  From
the previews, "Con Air" did look a little too polished.   However,
mainly because of the star power, I went, and I'm glad I did.   But
first:
        "Con Air" is the story of a nice young US Army Ranger Cameron Poe
(Nicholas Cage) who gets in a drunken brawl protecting his wife (Monica
Potter).   Poe kills a man during the brawl, and gets hauled off to jail
for several years.   Finally, Poe is released on parole, but to get back
home he has to hitch a flight with the absolute most meanest, sickest
criminals in the world (hence the name "Con Air").   As you can probably
guess, the plane is overtaken by the evil criminals (played notably by
John Malkovich, Steve Buscemi and Ving Rhames), and of course, the only
man that can stop it? Bad boy Cameron Poe.
        If you notice a sense of cynicism in that last paragraph, you're
right.  In short, the biggest weakness of "Con Air" is that the movie is
just too polished and too predictable.   Poe seems to get out of
situations in the usual "just missed that explosion" kind of fanfare,
and as always (a classic action movie cliché) the bad guys are too evil,
too smart, and the guards and cops are just too stupid.  To boot, the
film's final sequence (a crash in the middle of Las Vegas) pushes the
boundaries of reality more than most action movies.
        But wait!   All is not lost.   What puts this action movie above much
of the pack?  First, the acting and characterization. While the southern
drawl does sound fake, Nicholas Cage easily fulfills his role as action
hero, and the supporting cast (while canned as "sell outs" by many other
critics) works wonderfully.   Furthermore, in many other action  movies,
we get characterization of only the main villain, with the rest of his
henchmen playing  little more than cannon fodder.    However, in "Con
Air", director Simon West fleshes out not just  Malkovitch's character
(the leader of the cons) but also takes time for the supporting cast too
(Buscemi, Rhames and others).
        Second, the movie is so slickly put together that the action seems to
naturally fall into place, and the movie has a fast pace that seems to
allow my previously mentioned problems to be less of a burden.  All in
all, while I know the movie suffered through one too many action movie
clichés, and a not-so-original plot, "Con Air" flies with finesse and
style, a quality that can't be found in many other action flicks.

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
        "Men In Black" had everything going for it: hype, some favorable
reviews, even plenty of original and good movie elements as I watched
it.   Unfortuately, while "Men In Black" is better than average,
considering the real potential of this movie, it was a disapointment.
        "Men In Black" tells the story of Agent K (Tommy Lee Jones) and newly
recruited ex-cop Agent J (Will Smith) attempt to save the earth from
aliens, in an elite covert private organization.   All members wear
black suits, ties, watches,
etc. hence the name of the movie, "Men In Black".   The movie's plot is
as simple as other summer blockbusters, yet far supasses them by having
a completely original screenplay.
        Plot is just one of the strengths of "Men In Black".   In addition, the
acting is well done by both Tommy Lee Jones and Will Smith.  The movie
is moderately funny and witty, with "aliens" not neccesarly being those
huge evil things we're use to seing from the likes of Ridley Scott's
"Aliens".   Instead the extra terrestials have a human form/disguise
while down on Earth, allowing for plenty of wise cracks about Dennis
Rodman, Sylvester Stallone and Newt Gingrich all as "aliens".
        Unfortunately, these smart ideas fall quickly to several major problems
with the movie.   For example, the really funny humor for me only lasted
until Will Smith is inducted into the MIB orgainzation (relatively early
in the movie), much of the wit and ingenous of the movie seems to fall
into place during that period.   From there unfortunately, the humor
went downhill, which was incredibly frustrating considering how well
"Men In Black" started out as.   In addition, for all the money spent on
that picture the special effects didn't jump out at me as much as I had
hoped for or expected.   Furthermore, the movie's too short, 90 minutes
wasn't enough time to develop a sound or more complex plot.   Finally,
it should be noted that Linda Fiorentino's character (Dr. Laurel Weaver)
suprisingly large supporting role is relatively 
pointless: She isn't integral at all to the main plot (rather
distracting from it), and her character seems to be doing little rather
than flouting her legs to the male audience.
        In sum, "Men In Black" starts with a bang: fresh plot, good acting,
funny script, everything you could ask for.   However, part way through,
the picture loses steam and grinds to a halt somewhere marginally above
average.  This is sad considering
with some tweaking and reworking "Men In Black" could have been one of
the wittiest and funniest movies of the year.

Title
Review for Ransom (1996)
    Mel Gibson is an actor that's made his career by playing bad
boy/heartthrob in action movies ("Lethal Weapon"). Even in his deeper movies
("Braveheart") we see some serious spin off his original I'm-a-little-crazy
super cop Riggs character from the "Lethal Weapon" series. In "Ransom" while
Gibson is enshrouded in a softer character, the audience largely sees the
Mel Gibson we've come to know. Is this bad? No, as "Ransom" succeeds at
everything it attempts to be: a solid movie.
    Mel Gibson is Tom Mullen, the rich owner of a large airlines company,
and a devoted husband and father. The whole world comes crashing down
however when the Mullens son Sean (Brawley Nolte) is kidnapped for ransom.
Even though Tom's wife Kate (Rene Russo), the FBI agent (Delroy Lindo) and
almost everyone else wants Tom to give in to the kidnapper's demands, Tom
refuses. Instead, he goes on TV and offers the millions demanded for Sean
release as a reward for anyone who bags the kidnappers. Obviously this plot
gives plenty of breathing room for Mel Gibson and director Ron Howard to
throw in some clichéd action. As nearly demanded by the audience, we get to
see Gibson leap over cars, dive in pools, shoot at things, and run a lot.
    The movie has plenty of strengths. Luckily the action sequences are well
directed, and have many more traces of realism then 99% of the movies out
there: It's a lot better than watching Gibson blow away forty bad guys
without a sweat a la "Lethal Weapon". The plot is relatively original and
keeps the blood pumping like any good thriller should. Furthermore, director
Ron Howard ("Apollo 13", "Backdraft") is an expert at making us feel for the
movie's protagonists, and "Ransom" is no exception. Many scenes are devoted
to showing the love between Tom, Kate, and Sean and how the ransom
emotionally tears the family apart. It's a smart move, as it made me care
more about Tom's plight and drew me more into the story line. Acting (for
one notable exception I'll point out later) is another strong suit: Gibson
fills his role adequately, and Gary Sinise does a surprisingly great job
playing an ice cold villain.
    Not all is perfect in "Ransom". The biggest let down luckily isn't
incredibly crucial to the movie: Rene Russo. Most of the movie she's reduced
to gushing into over the top hysterics, it's almost laughable at times.
While on the subject of emotion, at times the dramatics get too high, in one
notable scene Tom and Kate cry and whimper over their son for what seems
forever.
    All in all, "Ransom" walks with a fresh perspective on the
drama/thriller scene. It's well directed, well acted, it's fun, and all
these elements make for a strong movie.

Title
Review for Blue Velvet (1986)
        "Blue Velvet" opens with images of the perfect "Beaver Cleaver" town:
painted white fences, open blue sky, a friendly waving fireman in slow
motion.   Nothing could be farther from the truth.   That is the
underlying theme in David Lynch's "Blue Velvet", one of the most
controversial and critically acclaimed movies of the 1980s.
        "Blue Velvet" paints the picture of Jeffrey Beaumont (Kyle MacLachlan),
a young college student returning to his hometown as a result of his
father's illness.   On a walk through the woods on the way to the
hospital where his father resided, Jeffrey finds a human ear in the
grass. The human ear is somehow connected to Dorothy Vallens (Isabella
Rossellini), a singer in a local bar. Jeffery decides to investigate,
with help from a high school girl (Laura Dern).   Their adventure goes
through many twists and turns, eventually meeting one of the most
hideous, evil villain in movie history, Frank Booth (Dennis Hopper).
        I don't talk more about the actual "adventure" because doing so would
reveal the full plot of "Blue Velvet", one of the most disturbing and
innovative in film history, in my humble opinion.   In sum, while the
plot on the surface may seem quite simple, the underlying theme director
David Lynch is trying to show is much deeper.  Lynch works hard, winking
to emphasize the irony of an idyllic American
town with perversity and darkness beneath it all.
        Now the big question: why is "Blue Velvet" one of my favorite movies?  
I think the greatest strength of the movie is the art.   Director David
Lynch pulls into the movie, using visuals and sound unlike any other
movie, magnifying the mystery and horror of the movie's nature.  
Second, it's bold, horrific, and probably the most original (and
shocking) drama/mystery I've ever seen.   Finally, the theme is deep and
thought provoking, with many scenes from "Blue Velvet", imbedded deep
into my mind.
        With all my praise, I highly recommend this movie with a very serious
warning: this movie is VERY disturbing, and not for everybody.   It has
very graphic portrayals of violence, sex, and other bizarre subjects,
let the viewer beware.   However, for those who can handle it, it's a
wonderful and captivating movie.

Title
Review for Romeo + Juliet (1996)
    "Romeo + Juliet" is the ultimate traditionalist English teacher's
nightmare. It's Shakespeare's classic tale in modern times, with guns,
modern rocking soundtrack, and starring two hip young actors in the key
roles. Is this the destruction of true Shakespeare as we know it? No. Does
"Romeo + Juliet"'s youth and hipness destroy the movie's purpose? A little
of yes, more of no. The movie's MTV like approach is both its largest harm
and greatest strength - but in the end "Romeo + Juliet" is a satisfying
movie.
    We all know the basic premise of "Romeo + Juliet": Romeo (Leonardo
DiCaprio) and Juliet (Claire Danes) are lovers, but they are also members of
rival families...you know the rest. Obviously the biggest question is: does
the transition of Shakespeare's play from past to present times work?
    First: the bad. One of the largest problems is that the ancient prose
has stayed intact in this modern version. No matter how hard Leonardo
DiCaprio & Claire Danes try, hearing the original prose ("but why must thou
quarrel?") just doesn't cut it, it feels incredibly awkward. Furthermore,
the first acts of the original play are far too quickly speed through, the
movie instead dwells heavily on the more romantic and violent later acts. In
addition, at a few times the movie screams of cheap MTV fare, with the
soundtrack getting distracting at times.
    However, in the end I enjoyed this modern transition. While skipping
many parts of the play are a weakness, it also results in a greater
strength, as the movie is thus more accessible to a mainstream audience - it
makes the play simple to comprehend. Furthermore, movies need to be FUN. As
much as I enjoy Shakespeare, watching another classic remake of the work
could get quite boring, and the fast paced modern version kept me interested
the entire way through.
    The movie has several other strengths too. I personally thought the
acting was wonderful, especially by DiCaprio and Danes. Their acting in the
famous conclusion of the play/movie was breathtaking, it's amazing how the
couple seemed to convey their love and sadness to the audience.
    While I warn Shakespeare traditionalist die hards that your experience
may not be great, for the rest of us, "Romeo + Juliet" successfully brings
one the most famous stories of all time to the screen.

Title
Review for Everyone Says I Love You (1996)
     In "Everyone Says I Love You", Bob (Alan Alda) is devastated that his
son is a conservative Republican. Joe (Woody Allen) is using his charm to
hit on Von (Julia Roberts). It's the kind of stuff we're use to expecting in
Woody Allen movies, with generally satisfying results.
    I won't reveal the plot, as watching out what turns up is one of the
best parts of "Everyone Says I Love You". Many of the conversations during
the movie are absolutely hilarious, in many cases I could barely contain
myself.
    Possibly the best moments in this movie are the little ones. Watching
Woody Allen and Goldie Hawn dancing in Paris was wonderful. The maid of
Bob's home does a great job of playing a despotic role: In one notable scene
after discussing why Italian pasta needs sauce, the maid exclaims "They're
weak!". Even though the musical scenes can get tedious at times, you can see
Woody Allen is poking fun at the genre. However, possibly the greatest
moment of "Everyone Says I Love You" is when Charles Ferry (Tim Roth), an
ex-convict, comes to Bob's house for dinner. At this point in the movie we
see Tim Roth at his tough guy "Reservoir Dogs" best - it's a memorable
scene.
    "Everyone Says I Love You" is another Woody Allen movie that succeeds in
making the audience laugh. It's a solid, well made movie and is definitely
worth a rental at your local video store.

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
    Making film in the science fiction genre is a risky proposal.  Not only
must a sci-fi movie hurdle over standard movie obstacles (acting,plot,etc.),
it also has to create a believable future that toys with both fantasy and
reality. "The Fifth Element" scores big in the latter, creating a movie with
dazzling special effects and costumes that would make Ridley Scott proud.
Unfortunately, a slightly muddy plot and other annoying quibbles keep this
film from achieving true sci-fi greatness.
    Korben Dallas (Bruce Willis) is a cabbie/ex-military hero living in
23rd century New York.   Naturally, he's the only man that can save the
world from total destruction by recovering the "fifth element" (a "perfect"
woman) and  several other assorted stones.   Sound a little fishy?   It is.
During the first third of "The Fifth Element", little makes completely
comprehensible sense, director Luc Besson rather decides to impress the
audience with high quality special effects.   While the effects and design
are likely this movie's strongest point, this reviewer wanted a bit more
substance than flair.
    Two other elements detract from the quality of this movie.   The first -
Bruce Willis.   While Willis acts adequately, unfortunately he sticks to his
rock hard "Die Hard"-like persona (complete with tough attitude and cute
one-liners) a bit too much.   In addition, this reviewer never cared for
Chris Tucker, who plays a rather large role in the final third of this film.
His constant barrage antics soon became much more annoying than humorous.
    Even with these problems, "The Fifth Element" remains ahead of the
sci-fi pack.  The special effects, costumes (Gary Oldman's strange outfit
comes to mind), and other elements make for a captivating and wonderfully
detailed future.   In addition, the humor throughout the film was quite
entertaining.
 In sum, while "The Fifth Element" is centuries away from being the next
"Blade Runner", it's an entertaining and solid film that is worth the price
of admission.
    *** Movies rated from -4 (worst) to +4 (best), 0=average movie ***

Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
        I have to admit it: I'm a man who doesn't trust Tom Cruise movies
anymore.   With a few notable exceptions, it's tends to be either a
testosterone driven ego trip ("Top Gun", "Days Of Thunder") or an
utterly ridiculous role for Cruise's capability ("Interview With A
Vampire").   I'm sure many of you will be pleased to learn that my faith
in Tom Cruise has at least been moderately restored, "Jerry Maguire" is
a high quality film.   It's fresh, funny, and original, and for a movie
that doesn't attempt to be anything but a solid comedy, it's very
successful.
        Now the story: Jerry Maguire (Tom Cruise) is a sports agent of the 90s,
he lies, deals million dollar deals with no end, and is sleazy as
hell.   As you can probably guess, Maguire is thus a SUCCESSFUL agent,
with an attractive fiancee (Kelly Preston) , big career, big money, what
more could you want?   Part way through  the movie, Maguire doesn't by
into his lifestyle.   He wants sports agents to deal the old fashioned
way, with more attention to clients, less money, less sleaze.  Late at
night he types up his ideas, prints several copies and sends it to all
the agents in the firm.   Sure enough, Maguire's life soon falls apart,
his fiancee leaves him, he gets fired from his job and ends up with only
one client (Cuba Gooding Jr.).   However, soon things look better.   He
falls in love with his hired help (Renee Zellweger)...you get the
picture.   Thus lies one of the inherent strengths of the movie, it's
has a witty, invigorating, and wonderfully original plot.
        To boot, the acting is great by the supporting cast (we'll get to Mr.
Cruise later).   Cuba Gooding Jr. plays the perfect, ego-driven football
player.   Renee Zellweger is a fresh new love interest on the movie
scene.  Also worth a mention is Kelly Preston,  while having a very
under-developed and two dimensional character she plays a great role as
the gold-digging power driven ex fiancee of Maguire.
        Also, most importantly, the movie is funny and romantic.   Watching
that famous "show me the money" sequence is just a riot, and many other
scenes come off pretty well in the laughs department too.   To boot, as
much as I sometimes hate Tom Cruise, you really can feel the passion
between Cruise and Zellweger during the movie, and I really felt wanted
to see the couple together.
        However, the movie does has problems, the most notable being none other
than Tom Cruise himself.   Cruise gets a relatively easy role as Jerry
Maguire (being a power hungry sports agent) and for the first part of
the movie, where the sleaze and that trademark grin of Cruise's really
falls into play, Cruise works Maguire like a charm.   However, whenever
Cruise leaves the comfortable zone and tries playing more demanding
character roles (emotional, passionate, frustrated, etc.) he falls
apart, generally acting like retreads from his previous movies -
incredibly artificial on the surface.   Through much of the movie he
doesn't have HEART in the movie, you see that flashy grin, the man may
look cool on the outside, but Cruise just can't seem to touch me with
the right emotion.
        Overall, while every so often the movie does skip and stumble a bit,
the great acting and fresh plot make "Jerry Maguire" a big hit in this
reviewers' mind.

Title
Review for Lost Highway (1997)
        David Lynch's movies have always been an eccentric, bizarre take upon
life and society.   Ever since Lynch's masterpiece, "Blue Velvet" came
out in 1986, Lynch's pictures dropped in quality dramatically, with both
"Wild At Heart" and "Fire Walk With Me" being below average pictures.  
Luckily, David Lynch has bounced back with a great mystery/noir film,
"Lost Highway".
        I won't dig deep into the plot of this movie, because frankly, I'm
still having trouble piecing the whole thing together.   The movie
starts with a married couple Fred (Bill Pullman) and Renee (Patricia
Arquette).   The couple get a series of videos, and then BANG, we're
suddenly getting into metamorphosis, mirror images, double lives, time
going backward and forward.   By the end of the movie, I was left with
plenty of unanswered questions, and while the plot line seems to ravel
together in a bizarre, "Vertigo"-like fashion, the knot is not even
close to fully tied by the end of the movie.
        As is a trademark characteristic of Lynch's films,  the movie is
breathtaking, with amazing visual and audio art, which pulled me into
the movie.   The movie is original, fresh, and incredibly scary and
disturbing.  I'm usually not the kind of person that gets spooked, but
"Lost Highway"'s visuals, and  sounds (especially in the first third of
the movie) were absolutely haunting to me.
        The cinematography by Peter Deming pushes the limits of this film's
motif.   Not only are certain scenes dark but people appear to vanish
and suddenly appear out of the darkness as though they materialized from
thin air. In certain first person perspective camera angles, the camera
jars, blurs, and shakes, as though the audience is on some strange
hallucinogen. It's unbelievable.
        "Lost Highway" has to be taken at it's full visual and artistic impact,
the movie isn't made to be fully comprehensible.   Other critics have
blasted the movie, blowing off the bizarre plot.   However, to truly
enjoy this movie, you can't expect warm, fuzzy and wrapped up endings as
in most mainstream movies, as Lynch refuses to provide answers for any
of the many mysteries deep in "Lost Highway"'s plot.   We may get clues,
but no answers. To me, this bizarre approach worked, I was fascinated by
the plot, and still many days afterward I'm still trying to piece this
movie together in some sensible fashion.   On that same note, it's my
belief that some of the audience will be more frustrated by the plot
than satisfied.   If it weren't for that large percentage of viewers,
I'd probably give this movie a +4.   Thus I warn fans of definite and
linear plot lines (i.e. people who hate movies like "Pulp Fiction",
"Reservoir Dogs" because non-linear plot) that you may be disappointed. 
However, for the rest of you, "Lost Highway" is a captivating and
wonderful movie, Lynch's best since "Blue Velvet".
