Authors
SESSMAN@ibm.mtsac.edu
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Crow, The (1994)
NO PLOT SYNOPSIS OR CAST/CREW LISTING, BUT INSTEAD A CRITICAL ESSAY:
     Having been fairly well scorched by other reviews on this post,
I'd like to say a few words on behalf of THE CROW, recently released
amid due controversy.  While it is true that the film is limited and
justly scrutinized as a result of the death of BRANDON LEE, the final
film which appears on the screen is tight, suspenseful, craftily
composed and thoroughly realized by director Alex Proyas.  It's lack of
story element is fluidly complemented by it's wealth of interesting
visuals, performances and conceptualization.
     First off, yes, the story leaves one less than fully intrigued,
given its fairly simple execution of a revenge story, most reminiscent
of ROBOCOP, more so than BATMAN.  Once the origins sequences have
passed and the Ernie Hudson character is firmly established (the
renegade cop), THE CROW falls into its familiar plot of seeking and
destroying those which are responsible for the Lee character's death.
At this point, the film comes down from its early energetic cycle, and
we are left with lowered expectations.
     However, what accompanies the remainder of the film is as boldly
compiled and sequenced a comic-book rendering as has come onto into
movies.  Lee is physically an impeccable image every moment he is on
the screen, and Proyas has shot him in such a way as to captivate and
stimulate you as the film flows.  Lee's emergence from the grave,
followed into his old apartment and his inter-cut discovery of his own
murder is shot with grace, style and unique motion.  I don't recall
such an undeniable entrance into a film for a main character, in terms
of both presence and dynamic framing.  Other examples, such as Bruce
Willis' tracking entrance in THE BONFIRE OF THE VANITIES, or Harrison
Ford's trek through the jungle in RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK pale in
comparison.  I found myself glued to every nuance and length of his
amazing figure each time he carried himself within that character.  He
successive elimination of his murderers each were visually stunning and
most economically effective; I hardly found an excessive, uninteresting
or superfluous shot in Lee's sequences.
     Proyas has outdone both Ridley Scott and Tim Burton at their own
games.  It is certainly true that he is borrowing heavily from the
precedents that they set for dystopian urban underworlds, but in both
BLADE RUNNER, and BATMAN, the visuals overwhelm, if not supersede
the story.  In THE CROW, Proyas is seamlessly letting his visuals *fit*
the story that he is telling.  The notion of finding your own killers
and exacting the grim treatment upon them that was done to you and your
beloved fiance is a dark and ringing one, and Proyas has dictated that
mood without letting his ambience crowd his theme.
     With his editing, Proyas could have handled the confrontation
between the evil urban overlord/sidemen thugs and Lee's Crow with the
same sharpness, verve, and quick poignancy as his other scenes.  But
the point during that pre-climactic shoot-out was mayhem, and the
editing reflected that, though it was a difficult scene to follow
closely.  It is a tribute to the stimulating pace of the first 2/3 of
the film that one *expected* and *wished* to see more during the
massive shoot-out, and I found myself *wanting to see more* during that
scene.
     A last gracious touch in the film, one so lacking in other studio
pictures, was the color, ethnic and gender-blind casting, on both the
"good" and "evil" sides.  While Lee and the femme fatale character were
Asian-based, there were African-Americans, Anglos and Latinos all cast
in key roles throughout the film.  This equivocal approach was
refreshing and added a significantly unique perspective to the picture,
which has been missing in so many major films.
     Thus, I would recommend the film to those who wish to see a very
intelligent fantasy, shot with passion and energy, and featuring a
truly *star* performance by Lee, an individual who would have certainly
been destined for great things.  My immediate reaction as the end
credits rolled was a sadness that we will see no further work from
Mr. Lee; it puts an eerie pall over the film that could not have been
foreseen, even by fans of the late actor's father.
--- Please forward comments/reactions to:
--- SESSMAN@ibm.mtsac.edu
