Authors
Ron Hogan
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Malcolm X (1992)
1)  The film begins with an invocation, a call to prayer which summons
Malcolm X to speak to the congregation.  And then the screen is filled
with the American flag.  Remember that the most significant film to
begin with that image was PATTON, and you're on the right track as to
what's at stake in MALCOLM X.  This film is nothing short of the first
black biographical film epic.  Most biographical films begin with some
sort of testament to their authenticity, usually in the form of a title
that says that the events are based on reality, sometimes through
voice-over.  PATTON had its subject directly address the film audience.
JFK relied on an extensive documentary-like overview.  MALCOLM X has
Malcolm address an audience, that might very well be us (on the symbolic
level, which is what I meant with PATTON as well), but significantly,
Malcolm X isn't seen.  Could it be that his words are more important
than his image?
2)  As the American flag burns, the film keeps returning to the
videotaped footage of Rodney King being beaten by LAPD officers.  I was
wary of this material before going to the film, wondering how it would
be handled, if it might just be in for inflammatory purposes.  This is
not the case.  It serves to underline the words of Malcolm in a way that
simply seeing him speak would not have done.  And, when Lee later shows
the violence against blacks that took place during the civil rights
movement, the viewer is struck by the similarities.  Spike Lee's point
is that things haven't changed for the black people since Malcolm X's
time, and the Rodney King footage is a very persuasive argument.
3)  After the overture, the film proper begins with a sweeping track
shot that eventually finds Spike Lee, and follows him down the streets
of Roxbury.  In a sense, the camera never really stops moving until the
film is done.  Oh yes, there are several static shots, probably more
than half the shots in the film, if one bothered to count.  But the eye
is drawn to the way the camera swoops and glides and revolves around its
subject.  Lee has always made the most of the incredible talent that
Ernest Dickerson possesses as a director of photography, and MALCOLM X
is Dickerson's highest accomplishment yet.  While the dance numbers in
SCHOOL DAZE seemed stagy and artificial, in MALCOLM X they overflow
with energy and exuberance.  Lee and Dickerson's control over the film
medium shows in every image.
4)  Malcolm X at one point states that he chose the name X because in
mathematics, it represents the unknown; as a black man, his past had
been taken from him so that he didn't know who he really was.  In the
broader sense, any life is unknown.  The biography or biographical film
can show the outward events, and surmise the inner life of the subject
from those events, but no matter how convincing, we have to remember
that it's only an inferential hypothesis.  In some of the ways the
camera moves around Malcolom, swooping in from different angles,
spinning around him, never staying in one place for very long, there may
be a suggestion of the kind of probing that goes on in the biographical
effort, the attempt to dig into Malcolm X's life and find out what was
at his core.
5)  The flashbacks into Malcolm's childhood, and the life of his
parents, are disjunctive at first.  They come abruptly, with no warning.
In the overall scheme, though, they establish an effective psychological
and symbolic link between Malcolm and his father.  The juxtapositions
become more meaningful each time they occur; the pieces fall into place
with each scene.  And the voice-over narration that accompanies some of
those flashbacks, and many other scenes, ground the film in Malcolm's
identity, making it the center of the picture.  Many of those
voice-overs seem to be straight out of the autobiography; as I mentioned
in step one, Malcolm's words appear to be his legacy.  The image, as
close as it is to the original, is not an icon to be worshipped, but a
reference point to what *is* important.
6)  While MALCOLM X is the history of Malcolm X, it's also the history
of black America.  Malcolm is there as a center around which the history
revolves, a focal point.  So it is through him that we learn about Joe
Louis, about zoot suits, about Jackie Robinson, and other key events.
7)  And through him that we get a history of black music.  Music has
generally been a strong suit of Lee's, but in MALCOLM X it improves
along with the rest of his talents.  The highlights include Lionel
Hampton, Ella Fitzgerald, Billie Holiday, and more.  Special attention
should, however, be called to the use of John Coltrane's "Alabama" for a
montage of the civil rights violence and Junior Walker's "Shotgun" as
the conspirators stake out the dance hall where they plan to kill
Malcolm.  And the full orchestral score that Terence Blanchard has
written for the film is as epic in scope as the subject demands.  The
music over the confrontation with the police is one of the most
effectively scored scenes of any film in 1992.
8)  I've already mentioned that the Rodney King footage is used in a
strong comparison with the civil rights violence of the '60s.  The use
of media footage from the period illustrates the conditions against
which Malcolm X was fighting.  It also works as a way to ground the film
in historical reality.  The 'imagined' life of Malcolm X is given
credibility not only through Denzel Washington's strong physical
resemblance, but through the art of surrounding that imaginative
material with footage that we already accept as the real thing.
9)  This technique was employed very effectively in JFK, and Lee has
taken some very useful lessons (and some graciously donated footage)
from that movie.  Like Oliver Stone, Spike Lee uses several different
types of film stock in the film.  Black and white film is used to
suggest television newscasts, no doubt recreating broadcasts that did
take place.  (In JFK, it was easier to tell, because we'd all seen
Oswald getting shot in reruns; we knew what it looked like, and we knew
that it was recreated accurately.  I rather doubt the majority of the
public is equally familiar with the media coverage of Malcolm X).  Then
there's the use of what looks like Super-8 in some scenes, and the
setting of most flashbacks in paler hues than the bulk of the film.
Film is a medium waiting to be manipulated, and Spike Lee is rapidly
becoming one of our best experts.
10)  The film began with an invocation.  It closes with a eulogy--and
the documentary footage of Malcolm X that had been missing until then.
Ossie Davis repeats the same words he spoke at Malcolm's funeral, and in
his words (and a special scene that follows), we are reminded that
Malcolm X is dead, but his legacy remains.  His life, like any life
deemed worthy of biography, serves as an example for all of us.  Much of
the talk around the film centers on Malcolm's separatist positions, but
MALCOLM X does present the tolerant Malcolm X that was emerging before
he was snuffed out.  It shows where Malcolm was heading--the footsteps
in which today's generation of black Americans would, it is implied, do
well to follow.

Title
Review for Muppet Christmas Carol, The (1992)
1)  This is the third ten-step review that I've produced so far.  The
first two were for MALCOLM X and BRAM STOKER'S DRACULA.  What I've tried
to do in each of those reviews is not so much to write a "go see this"
or "stay away from this" review, though those have a certain value.  I
want to take the critical apparatus I've acquired in my years of film
study (undergraduate at Notre Dame, currently in the master's program at
USC) and apply it to contemporary film.  Most film criticism at the
academic level tends to be about the "classic" cinema, the great works
of the auteurs or the avant-garde.  In the brand new anthology FILM
THEORY GOES TO THE MOVIES, a number of academic critics (edited by some
of my Notre Dame faculty) break away from this trend in sixteen essays
on films from PRETTY WOMAN to THE LITTLE MERMAID.  The reviews I present
here are sketches of a similar approach, tentative outlines of ways to
look at contemporary film.  They are by no means meant to be definitive.
2)  Of course, the first two reviews I did were for films by Spike Lee
and Francis Ford Coppola.  It's very easy to write in an academic mode
about them--they're accepted as auteurs, directors worthy of serious
study.  This is a Muppet movie; how is one supposed to expect to be
taken seriously writing about a film starring puppets?  Well, let's face
it.  The Muppets are part of our popular culture, and have been for
decades.  Many of the people who cruise through the net grew up on the
Muppets through SESAME STREET and THE MUPPET SHOW, myself included.
Whether we choose to acknowledge their cultural significance or not, it
does exist, and it can be talked about.  So I'll try.
3)  The first thing that struck me about the film was the corporate logo
of Walt Disney Pictures that came before everything else.  It had
slipped my mind that just before he had died, Jim Henson had closed a
deal with the people at Disney, and that the Muppets were now a
semi-independent subsidiary of the Disney empire.  I was disturbed by
the deal at the time and I still am to a certain extent.  The Muppets to
me had always been oppositional to the control that Disney tried to
exert over the popular imagination, especially that of the young.  The
Muppets were cute and cuddly, sure, but they also had a sharp satirical
side that undermined the cuteness if you knew where to look.  And then
they became part of the very hegemony that they opposed.  At least they
haven't been totally absorbed into the Disney universe.
4)  And their edge is definitely present in the film, most noticeably in
Gonzo's portrayal of Charles Dickens.  His role has an extreme amount of
self-consciousness, and the film plays it up for all it's worth.  Rizzo
the Rat confronts Gonzo as to why he knows everything that happens
before it happens, and Gonzo replies that he's the narrator, he's
omniscient.  When the issue of whether or not the ghosts are appropriate
for small children arises, Gonzo says, "It's okay, it's culture."  The
film knows that it is tampering/playing with an established classic, it
knows that the audience knows this, and it decides not to pretend
otherwise, letting everybody in on the fun.  Hey, Bob Cratchit is a frog
in this movie, so let's run with it, and not expect this to be the
Christmas Carol we'd get from anybody else.  Dickens' tale has been
updated to modern America (with Henry Winkler), given a black cast
(Robert Guillaume, I believe), and even turned into a commentary on
television (SCROOGED, one of the better variations).  Why not a frog as
Cratchit?
5)  Of course, one of the consequences of giving the Christmas Carol
over to the Muppets is that it profoundly warps the meaning of the
original text.  Dickens' novels had an element of social realism; the
accumulated details of 19th century London were there to make a point
about and a critique of the society in which he wrote.  Dickens' worlds
of fiction had a political agenda to them.  In the Muppet version, 19th
century London is divorced from its meaning and becomes a playground for
the Muppets.  A very detailed playground, but still only a simulation--
which has absolutely nothing to do with the real London.  And it makes
the few touches of social statement that do appear disturbing.  There's
no depiction of the real poverty of the time, except for one shot of a
homeless bunny rabbit.  Which is disturbing at one level because you see
a cute little creature suffering, and at another level because the only
way that suffering can be expressed through the film is through cute
little creatures--real homeless people have no place in the Muppet
London.
6)  So the Muppets have this nice world in which they can play and do
the things that make them the cultural icons they are.  They have some
ice-skating penguins and the baby chorus and the boomerang fish thrower
and so on....  And they sing.  It wouldn't be a Muppet film without
songs at some point.  Unfortunately, the songs aren't all that great,
either standing alone or in comparison to other Muppet songs.  Every
number tends to be a shiny, happy Christmas song--understandable given
the nature of the film.
7)  Of course, one would expect that the Christmas Carol would center
around Ebeneezer Scrooge.  His initial appearance justifies that, but I
suspect that he's not as important to the film as the Muppets.  And
Michael Caine, I suspect, knows this.  His performance is perfunctory
and adequate to the role, but has very few qualities that would make him
a memorable Scrooge.  It's as if he realized that his main role in the
film is not to learn the meaning of Christmas, though he does do that,
but to talk to the frog in a way that doesn't seem totally ridiculous.
His scenes with the Spirits, the closest thing in the film to the
original, do have some power to them, though, especially the Ghost of
Christmas Future.  Of course, this is the only section of the film which
is not undermined by Gonzo....
8)  And Michael Caine isn't the only human in the film, though there are
considerably fewer humans than Muppets.  And, in line with this being a
Muppet playground, the interaction of human and inhuman is totally
natural.  It goes unquestioned throughout--we totally buy into this
simulated 19th Century, Muppets and all.  I suspect that Jean
Baudrilliard's SIMULATIONS and Umberto Eco's TRAVELS IN HYPERREALITY
might have some interesting points on the subject of accepting the
unreal recreation as the real, but I'm not going to push it.  It's hard
enough to get people to accept talking about the Muppets; talking about
the Muppets with regard to Eco is bound to drive people away.  The main
point is, the Muppets are everywhere, and it's so natural that nobody
notices it, because there isn't anything to notice--rather like the
Toons in WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT?
9)  What separates this Muppet film from other films is the subject
matter--Christmas.  They aren't the first imaginary figures to do a
Christmas film--or a Christmas Carol for that matter.  Apart from the
Mr. Magoo version, the "older cousins" in the Disney stable have taken
their shot at it.  (And if a big-eared mouse can do Cratchit, why the
hell not a frog?)  But like many Christmas texts, and contrary to the
original, there is very little Christ in this Christmas Carol; I only
found one oblique reference, the line about "remembering who it was that
made the lame walk" or something like that.  Instead, the film focuses
on the warm, fuzzy feelings that we're all supposed to have, regardless
of religious affiliation.  Inspiring this kind of historical amnesia,
corporate hegemonic aspirations aside, is another consequence of
replacing the real with a fantasy recreation.  Heck, if we're going to
rebuild the past, we can rebuild its *meaning* just as easily--and
maybe even more so.
10)  Okay, jargon aside, it's time for one personal note.  Kermit the
Frog.  Obviously, you can't do a Muppet film without Kermit, which means
that you have to confront the issue of Jim Henson's death.  This is
acknowledged in the film's dedication.  And Kermit's voice is a bit
deeper than it used to be.  He's adequate, I suppose, and Steve Whitmire
is better than Mel Blanc, Jr., is at Bugs Bunny, but the sense of loss
is real and palpable for me still.  The innocence is gone, and the
Muppets will sadly never be the same for me.  Or, I guess, for anyone,
except those too young to remember--except even they have access to the
"real" Kermit, through SESAME STREET, MUPPET SHOW reruns, and the videos
of the first movies.  So maybe they'll notice the change, but will they
appreciate the context of that change?  Who knows?  Not me.  This isn't
the Muppets of our youth, but maybe they're still adequate to the tasks
their predecessors accomplished.  For the sake of the next generation, I
hope they are.  (And on that pretentious note...)

Title
Review for Bad Lieutenant (1992)
1) "There is no 'film culture'...just an awful lot of films."
   Orson Welles, THIS IS ORSON WELLES
Okay, I'm pissed.  I just spent an hour typing up the first version of
this review, and emacs decided to eat it rather than save it.  So I'm
not in a good mood, and I don't necessarily feel like retyping the long
justification I had of lumping these two films together.  Let's just say
that I don't feel like writing full reviews for both of them, and that
they each address a point that I have made passing reference to in
previous reviews.  Rather than spread that point too thin, I'd like to
deal with it a bit more fully in one posting.
2)  First, let's clear away the stuff in VAN GOGH that isn't relevant to
THE BAD LIEUTENANT: the biographical issues.  I've dealt with those
before, too, and will again when I get around to seeing CHAPLIN.  What
makes VAN GOGH different from any biographical film I've previously
reviewed for rec.arts.movies.reviews is the conciseness of its scope:
"the last 67 days of the great painter's life."  Both HOFFA and MALCOLM
X tried to provide the "big picture" to one degree or another--VAN
GOGH's scale is smaller on purpose, probably in the view that the clues
to Van Gogh's condition, the factors that led to his violent end, would
be found in concise form in those sixty-seven days.  It's important to
keep in mind that in what we've falsely called a "film culture," the
subject of Van Gogh is not new, and so VAN GOGH must be considered not
only in comparison to other biographical films, but also in comparison
to other Van Gogh films.  Most prominently, there is LUST FOR LIFE,
starring Kirk Douglas, which combined the biopic with the genre at which
its director, Vincente Minelli, most excelled--the melodrama.  More
recently, Robert Altman released VINCENT AND THEO, which focused on the
relationship between the two brothers.  Both of those films place a
high degree of importance on the paintings--Minelli holds them up as
signs of Van Gogh's genius, and of the film's authenticity; Altman uses
them as objects of value and exchange, economic objects (most notably in
the beginning).  VAN GOGH has its obligatory moments of painting, but
seems to care more about the artist than the art.
3)  Van Gogh is not a pleasant person.  "You're cranky to everyone," one
character berates him, and in fact he is, often violently so.  But it's
not that Van Gogh is an asshole on purpose.  He's sick.  As Dr. Gachet
outlines it, Vincent suffers from overexhaustion and hysteria, and other
complications brought on by his lifestyle, which includes liberal usage
of absinthe.  Van Gogh leads a destructive life, so much so that at 37,
he is (in the words of one friend) "burned out."
4)  That's an interesting anachronism--I assume it's an anachronism--
to use to describe Van Gogh, because it is loaded with modern resonances
that I picked up on throughout the film.  The life of a creative genius,
struggling to create a new art form in the face of harsh criticism ("the
colors are like puke"), living a self-destructive lifestyle, and then
embarking on an affair with a girl who can't be more than 15, 16 tops.
If it weren't in French, I'd have thought I walked in on GREAT BALLS OF
FIRE instead of VAN GOGH.  (Note--Alexandra London, who plays
Marguerite, has a rough similarity in style to Winona Ryder.  Note 2--
Jacques Dutronc is a French rock star.)  Or if you want to stay in the
19th Century, a film about Edgar Allan Poe.
5)  "For the psychopath is better adapted to dominate those mutually
contradictory inhibitions upon violence and love which civilization has
exacted of us, and if it be remembered that not every psychopath is an
extreme case, and that the condition of psychopathy is present in a host
of people...it can be seen that there are aspects of psychopathy which
already exert considerable cultural influence."--Norman Mailer, THE
WHITE NEGRO: superficial reflections on the hipster
From which we also get a definition of the psychopath: "If the fate of
twentieth century man is to live with death ... why then the only life-
giving answer is to accept the terms of death, to live with death as
immediate danger, to divorce oneself from society, to exist without
roots, to set out on that uncharted journey into the rebellious
imperatives of the self."  Hence the scenes of Van Gogh debauching
himself in a Paris bordello, complete with can-can dancers, attempting
to get his teenage mistress to take part in a menage a trois (she later
becomes the recipient of pseudolesbian affections while he watches),
drinking absinthe, plunging himself into the river in a spontaneous
death wish, etc.  And the most intense scene of the film: Vincent alone
in his room, staring down the barrel of a gun, repelled and fascinated
by the options that it presents.
6)  Not every psychopath is an extreme case.  But the Bad Lieutenant,
played by Harvey Keitel, is.  This New York cop snorts, shoots, buys and
steals drugs, extorts from thieves--the litany of his sins can go on
for more lines than I care to type.  Yet every depraved act that he
commits has a purpose; "the drama of the psychopath is that he seeks
love.  Not love as the search for a mate, but love as the search for an
orgasm more apocalyptic than the one which preceded it."  This is
literalized in a scene in which the Lieutenant pulls over two teenage
girls--in his review, Peter Travers of ROLLING STONE (I don't usually
quote PopCrit, because most of it is banal and endlessly pursuing the
quickie blurb for use in advertising--Travers is especially guilty of
this, but this time he's on to something, despite the usual PopCrit
hyperbole) says, "the obscene horror of exploitation has never been so
searingly rendered."  Which is close enough to the truth for practical
purposes--this was a scene which drove about three people out of the
theatre.
7)  Travers is also the source of BEST BLURB 1992: "Harvey Keitel whacks
you like the business end of a Louisville Slugger."  This became my
mantra for November and December, as the trailer was shown every time I
went to the Nuart in Santa Monica, which was the exclusive venue in the
Los Angeles area.  It got to the point where I would recite the trailer
as it rolled yet again ....  But the main point is that the Lieutenant
also whacks himself.  I don't mean that in the vernacular, though that
happens too.  I mean that in his search for the perfect orgasm, the
Lieutenant commits violence upon himself, through drug use and
injudicious gambling among other acts, as much as he commits violence
upon others.  The Dead Kennedys said it best: "I don't need your fucking
world / this world brings me down / I look forward to death."
8)  Contrasted to the Lieutenant is a good nun, whose rape serves as the
cynosure for the total desecration of moral civilization implied by the
film.  The amazing thing is that she forgives her assailants: "Like many
of the poor, they were rude, and they took what they needed...I ought to
have turned bitter semen into fertile sperm, turned hate into love."
She refuses to name the rapists; the Lieutenant is astounded.  "Get with
the program," he pleads with her.  Vengeance is all he knows; the idea
of forgiveness is completely alien to him.  She suggests that he talk to
God.
9)  God comes in for a good bit of abuse.  "Where the fuck were you?"
the Lieutenant screams, and it isn't an entirely unreasonable question.
Getting past that rage, though, is impossible--the Lieutenant is
reduced to the howls of a beast in pain.  Most of the time, Keitel
stares death in the face and bluffs it.  "I can't die ... I'm
blessed ... I'm a fucking Catholic."  He invites his bookmaker to come
after him, knowing that he can face any danger down.  But at a gut
level, the Lieutenant knows that his actions are self-destructive, that
his quest for the perfect high leads to doom.  Vampires have the luxury
of feeding on others, one of his suppliers muse, but "we gotta eat away
at ourselves until there's nothing left but appetite."  And nothing can
save the Lieutenant--not even Jesus.  "I try to do good," Keitel
screams.  "I'm too fucking weak!"
10)  There is no direct equivalent in THE BAD LIEUTENANT of the scene in
VAN GOGH where Vincent stares into the barrel of the gun (which in
itself seems close to a scene from LETHAL WEAPON I in which Mel Gibson
goes so far as to swallow the barrel), but there are countless rough
equivalents, including a relentlessly slow scene of Keitel shooting up
into his veins (five people walked out on that), and a scene in which
two women engage in light bondage while the Lieutenant drinks himself
into oblivion, with Johnny Ace music blaring (note--Johnny Ace died
playing Russian Roulette, the psychopath's solitaire).  The level of
their psychopathies was different, but Vincent and the Lieutenant are
two sides of the same coin--the former was able to channel his rage
into art for a while, the latter channels his rage into pure violence.
Neither one can have ultimate control over their rage, or their
inevitable destiny--at least on the terms offered within the films.
For related texts, see WHITE JAZZ by James Ellroy, which is to the LAPD
what THE BAD LIEUTENANT is to the NYPD, and Bret Easton Ellis' AMERICAN
PSYCHO, which deals with the psychopathy of upscale New York.
Van Gogh related material is too vast to mention.

Title
Review for Glengarry Glen Ross (1992)
1)  The LA WEEKLY capsule review on this film describes David Mamet,
author of the original play and the screenplay, as a "goombah Pinter."
I like it.  The great thing about this screenplay, or any of Mamet's
best work, is the poetry of simplicity.  Like Pinter, Mamet deals in
terse dialogue, people who may not *do* anything spectacular, but who
reveal themselves gradually through what they say.  The minute that a
character opens his mouth in this film--and Alec Baldwin is a good
example of this--you know *exactly* where he's coming from.  Very few
writers could get as much out of a simple line like, "Will you go to
lunch?"  Mamet can use those words to say more about a personality than
most films reveal in entire scenes.
2)  If I was going to search for a parallel to this movie, I might say
RESERVOIR DOGS.  The significant difference between the two films is, of
course, which side of the law the group of men in each film is on.  But
both films feature a group of men who specialize in "dirty" work, who
define themselves by incessant talking about that work and how they do
what they do, and have vocabularies that would put Marine DIs to shame.
Take away the Reservoir Dogs' guns, age them about twenty years, stick
them behind desks, and you're heading towards GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS.  If
you were interested enough, I suspect that Norman Mailer's essay "The
White Negro" would provide some insight into these characters--but then
so would THE WILD BUNCH.
3)  GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS takes the goombah mentality and brings it into
the world of real estate.  Legitimates the capitalist warrior ethic that
is an undercurrent in RESERVOIR DOGS and THE WILD BUNCH.  In those
films, the dark aspects of the ethic are acknowledged by placing the
characters on the wrong side of the law--but the Reservoir Dogs still
wear suits.  Another example might be WALL STREET--Michael Douglas'
character is the high-price example of the powers that the real estate
agents "have" to have if they want to succeed.  "Always be closing" is
one of the mottos of the film--and "Salesmen are born not made."
Either you can make it in the capitalist market or you're dead weight.
As Baldwin says, "You're a good father?  Fuck you, go home and spend
time with your kids."
4)  Make no mistake about it, either--this is a man's world.  There was
a woman in the opening credits; if you look closely, you *may* see her.
But for the most part, women are off-screen, at the other end of the 
phone line, the ones that the agents have to exploit to make their deal,
or the ones who screw the deal for them.  They are something with which
to be dealt as men go about the important task of being men and making
their money.
5)  Jack Lemmon plays Shelly Levine, the one who doesn't seem to be able
to hack the business any more.  He isn't on the board, he can't close,
he is on the verge of losing it all if he doesn't get back in shape.
The role is a man on the edge, but still not ready to admit that he has
had it, still trying desperately to make a deal, either selling the
property or cutting an arrangement with his office manager, anything
that will let him keep his job.  He thinks he can still control the
situation, can still come up with the angle that will make everything
come his way--it's goombah desperation, and Lemmon makes it work.
6)  At the other end of the scale is Al Pacino as Ricky Roma.  While the
other agents (Lemmon, Ed Harris, and Alan Arkin) are scrambling through
the rain trying to score, Pacino sits high and dry in a bar and
virtually plays at being a philosopher-king, offering discourses on the
nature of morality and of capitalism.  All of which, naturally, is just
smooth talk on the way to getting his mark, Jonathan Pryce, to sign on
the line that is dotted.
7)  But let's look at one of those statements, the idea that property
isn't just the material object, but the potential events that object
represents, especially (in this context) the opportunity to generate
capital around the property.  In a way, it's the lesson of FERRIS
BUELLER'S DAY OFF (shiny cars aren't meant to be stored in the garage;
they're meant to be *driven*, dammit) and the nature of the capitalist
beast.  Money's value has always been symbolic--the cash is not as
valuable as what it represents, what you can do with it.
8)  That's what makes the Glengarry leads so damn important.  From an
outside perspective, it's a stack of cards with a bunch of names on
them.  Big effing deal, right?  Wrong.  Those names are information, and
information that can be used as capital.  Names that can generate sales,
sales that can rake in money.  That stack of cards becomes as valuable
as stocks or bonds because what can be done with it in the hands of the
right capitalist warrior.  That's why nobody likes the leads they've
been given--they're lousy capital.  They don't score.
9)  So it's urban capitalist soldiers of fortune, cruising the streets
and the bars and the office trying to make the big deal.  What film
style is going to work here?  *Noir*.  The shadows of Venetian blinds,
the rain that never stops coming down at night, the harsh glow of red
and blue neon shining in everybody's face, even the style of dress.
10) And the music: jazz.  Wayne Shorter, primarily.  And a soundtrack
that doesn't have to propel the film along its narrative path, since
Mamet's words are more than enough to keep you locked into the film.
The music is a background complement, reinforcing the tone without
overpowering it, and subtly adding to the noir nuances.

Title
Review for Guncrazy (1992)
1)  CLAIRE OF THE MOON is the first film from director Nicole Conn.  It
is the story of two women who become roommates at a writer's retreat.
Claire is the author of "Life Can Ruin Your Hair," a woman who hates
therapists and "fucks strangers" in a search for intimacy.  She is
paired with Noel, an author/therapist and a lesbian.  The film's setup
is pretty obvious--it doesn't take a genius to figure out that by the
end of the film, Moel and Claire are going to wind up having sex.  But
it isn't a case of the lesbian seducing the straight woman.  It's a case
of two women, in a developing process of dialogue, discovering hidden
facets of each other, and of themselves, and coming together as a result
of their mutual discoveries.  It is a meditation on intimacy--what it
is, how people think it can be achieved, and what they will do to
achieve it.
2)  The location of this film at a writer's retreat allows for a
literary or academic focus on issues of intimacy and sexuality, while at
the same time allowing for representatives from multiple discursive
positions.  So in addition to Claire and Noel, there's a Southern Gothic
romance writer, an academic feminist, a New Ager, a housewife who wants
to write, and the lesbian couple that runs the retreat.  While the
film's primary focus is on Claire and Noel, each of these characters has
something to contribute to the debate.
3)  Films of a political nature such as this often have one problem--
they are strong on politics but weak on film technique (witness the
recent thrashing of RAIN WITHOUT THUNDER).  They serve as propaganda
pieces, but without artistic, particularly cinematic, flair.  This can
often be traced to a rejection of the political values considered to be
inherent in Classical Hollywood Cinematic technique, though this is of
course not only the case.  A very few films are capable of challenging
both the form of mainstream filmmaking as well as the content.  I am
pleased to say that CLAIRE OF THE MOON is one of these films.  I was
struck several times in watching the film of the resemblance of certain
stylistic tropes to ones in the Cuban film MEMORIES OF UNDERDEVELOPMENT,
which include the insertion of "imaginary" scenes, or those which are
intended to represent the thoughts or fantasies of the characters, with
no marker of transition between filmic reality and filmic fantasy.  And
a remarkable scene on the beach, shot in slow motion to accentuate the
patterns of wind which blow sand and Claire's jacket, with no sound but
the music and the heightened sound of the wind.  A hyperreal scene that
is all the more powerful for not being objectively realistic, or even
pretending to be as is the case with mainstream films, but to highlight
certain aspects of reality to give the scene a powerful effect.  The
unreal takes on a psychological reality of its own.
4)  The same can be said for the way in which the sensual/sexual scenes
of this film are handled--especially in a sequence in which the two
women tell each other their sexual fantasies.  By establishing a rhythm
of editing out of a very few shots (somewhere around 5-10), Conn creates
a lyrical effect to Claire's fantasy that has to be seen in order to be
fully appreciated.  The film does not skimp in its sensuality--both in
a scene in which Claire has sex with a man she picks up in a bar, and in
the eventual culmination of Claire and Noel's process of intimation.
These scenes--well, to me they seem to capture more of the real feeling
of sexuality, without breaking it down into a set schema of erotic
moments as usually seems to take place in the Hollywood film.  It's hard
to describe.
5)  I do think I can say, however, that the lesbian scene in this film
is handled much more erotically than the corresponding scene in DESERT
HEARTS, which does strike me more as a tableaux of sexy moments rather
than an act of sexual intercourse.  Which leads me to comment on the LA
TIMES review, which calls CLAIRE OF THE MOON "the best lesbian drama
since DESERT HEARTS."  Which it is, to be sure, but the remark is a 
fairly insipid one.  After all, how many lesbian dramas have there been
since DESERT HEARTS?  Not avant-garde films like Su Friedrich's DAMNED
IF YOU DON'T (1987), but mainstream or at least art-house release?  I
can't think of very many--and FRIED GREEN TOMATOES does not count for
the purposes of this debate.  I think the film should be commended for
its achievement--it is an incredible film for a a first time director,
and an incredible non-mainstream film with a definite political view.
But such films are rare, and glib reductions by newspaper critics which
neatly file these films into types (i.e., the lesbian film) serve to
keep these films in alienated positions within the film spectrum as much
as they single those films out for acclaim.
6)  The second film I want to discuss in this review, like CLAIRE OF THE
MOON, is a film about a woman directed by a woman, and a first film:
Tamra Davis' GUNCRAZY.  It is the story of Anita (Golden Globe nominated
Drew Barrymore), a teenager in a California desert town, who is
surrounded by peers who think Japan is in Europe, and who is called
"sperm bank" by several people--in reference to her promiscuity, which
stems from a desperate craving for affection, some way to escape the
emptiness of her life.  And her landscape *is* bleak--living in a
rundown trailer with her runaway mother's ex-boyfriend, surrounded by
mindless youth, dead husks of automobiles and refuse, with the only
nonmundane character in town (besides her best girlfriend) being a
slightly insane fundamentalist preacher and snake handler.
7)  Until she becomes the pen pal of Howard, a convict in a California
prison.  She find herself falling in love with him through his letters,
especially when it turns out that they both share a fascination with
firearms.  While she waits for him to be paroled, she learns how to
shoot, and turns out to be a damn good shot at that.  Their courtship,
once Howard does arrive, focuses on guns--which she supplies for him as
tokens of her love--"I remember how you wrote in your letter that
.9mm's were your favorite," she says, handing him a gun.
8)  But guns aren't only the thing that brings their lives together, in
place of sex.  Guns end up becoming the means by which their lives will
unravel, going off at the wrong moments and plunging them into a course
that has to end in gunfire and death.  At the same time, though, they
seem to be a means for Anita to take charge of her live--to make shit
happen instead of having shit happen to her.  But she soon learns that
her desire for the power that guns can provide is not strong enough for
her to attack the innocent--she only uses them in desperate acts of
survival.
9)  Howard and Anita are two alienated people in a hostile landscape.
As Howard's parole officer tells them, "As far as I'm concerned, you're
both trash."  The film works to tell us that this is not the case, that
as Anita says, they "*are* nice people."  The conditions of Anita's life
are a fault of her circumstances, not her character.  Howard knows this,
knows that Anita is a good person, and so he takes every step, once they
know that the law is closing in, to ensure that Anita has a chance to
become the good person she is capable of becoming.
10)  I wish I could come up with some insightful comparison between
these two films, something along the lines of "women's pictures" or some
other Critspeak.  But all I can come up with is that these films are
both about journeys of self-discovery, and of the creation of bonds of
intimacy.  That one is a variant on an action film, and the other is an
intellectual art film, that one couple becomes intimate through words
and ideas and the other couple through guns and desperation are surface
differences.  Underneath the genre distinctions, films deal with the
same basic types of issues (see Robin Woods writing on genre); only the
means by which those issues are addressed differ.

Title
Review for Dracula (1992)
1)  The film's overture is set in the Middle Ages, during the Crusades.
Note that the setting is Eastern Europe, the porous region where the
East and West intermingle, where Europe gets its tastes of Eastern
exoticism, such as the Turks.  Dracula exists in this turbulent
middle ground and is profoundly changed by it.  It's not just God that he
rejects, but Western civilization.  He gives himself up entirely to the
mysterious Other that the East often represents.
2)  Much has been made about the degree to which this film is faithful
to Bram Stoker's novel.  Of course, the very heart of the text is
completely reversed, but in superficial form, the film does come closer
to the novel than any previous adaptation I can recall.  The multiple
points of view and forms of text are recreated in an effective, if
slightly disjunctive, style.  By the way, isn't it an interesting point
that the two major novels which lay the foundations for the horror genre
(the other being Mary Shelley's Frankenstein) are both epistolary and
from multiple points of view, and focus on the issue of knowledge of the
nature and identity of the Monster and ways to control it?
3)  I'd like to suggest that part of an explanation is that Frankenstein
comes out of the birth of English Romanticism, which leads by the end of
the century to Modernism, which is where I propose to situate Dracula.
This historical position is expressed in DRACULA through the
highlighting of the emerging technology: typewriters, phonographic
recorders, the cinematograph.  Also the tentative steps towards
psychology.  Another modernist touch is the emphasis on the text--not
only the diaries, but the maps, especially that map that hangs in
Dracula's castle, and the ancient manuscripts.  Look at the way that
these documents interface with the events of the film.  DRACULA has a
lot more in common with, say, PROSPERO'S BOOKS than most people would
notice.  It doesn't have as high a level of information density, and
it's more accessible, but the connection is there.
4)  It came up in conversation that this film, more than just about any
other in the last year or so, is screaming for an analysis through the
philosophy of Michel Foucault.  I'm not prepared to do such a reading of
DRACULA at this time, but I will suggest that the following books would
lead towards interesting elaborations: MADNESS AND CIVILIZATION, THE
HISTORY OF CIVILIZATION, DISCIPLINE AND PUNISH, and THE ARCHAEOLOGY OF
KNOWLEDGE.  This could probably give anybody enough of a start.  Maybe
I'll get around to it someday in the future (yeah, right).
5)  Well, I can at least mention sexuality.  It's a cliche that vampires
represent sexual desires, so I'll steer away from that and simply say
that the control of sexuality implied by the control of vampires is
evident in two particular scenes.  Van Helsing's lecture shows sexuality
as a subject of scientific investigation, a subject which can be
identified and regulated.  The illustrations in the Burton edition of
the Arabian Nights are another way in which sex becomes a classifiable
object; i.e.  these are the different types of sexual intercourse,
identified and categorized.  Keep in mind that Burton's interest was
more thn prurient--it was 'anthropological', to use a slightly
anachronistic term.
6)  Back to the vampire:  Gary Oldman was excellent in this role.  I
have to admit, though, that having recently rewatched JFK for a class
paper, I was seeing Oldman as Oswald more often than as Dracula.  It's
not entirely farfetched--Oldman, especially in his biographical roles
(Sid Vicious, Joe Orton, Lee Oswald, and arguably Dracula), portrays the
alienated outsider, the man cut off from and rebelling against his
culture, very well.  Dracula's destructive rage is much sleeker than
Oldman's other roles, but it ultimately draws from the same energies.
7)  Dracula is also the most recent member of a lineage of Coppola's
tragic protagonists, tainted and condemned by their struggles against
the dominant culture.  Michael Corleone's an obvious example, and one
that also reunited with God at the end.  Kurtz in APOCALYPSE NOW is
another potential; he also rejected civilization and retreated into pure
animalist, instinctual action and lust.  You could even make an argument
for Tucker, who is hunted down and destroyed by the auto industry and
the government (read: the vampire hunters) because of the threat to
their dominance over culture that he represents.
8)  While I'm drawing parallels between Coppola films, here's one: the
wedding of Jonathan and Mina and the scenes intercut with it (which I
don't identify so as not to be a complete spoiler) and the baptism of
Michael Corleone's son in THE GODFATHER.
9)  Cinema is quite possibly the modernist medium.  A movement that was
emphasizing mastery over the world through identification and awareness,
the act of seeing with one's own eyes, out of which emerges a medium
that (until sound was added) relied entirely on the visual.  According
to many early film theorists (especially Siegfried Kracauer, later Andre
Bazin, see also Bela Belasz), film's greatest power was its ability to
stand in for reality, to offer reality to the audience as a controlled
subject, but controlled in such a way that its inherent reality was not
violated.  As cinema grew, a language of cinematic forms emerged:
dissolves, silhouettes, etc., forms which reinforced a linear, rational,
narrative structure to film and to reality.  DRACULA reproduces much of
the early language of cinema, a language that has for the most part been
replaced by the rapid fire blitz of images for which we can thank
television, the post-modernist medium.  DRACULA is a deliberate
throwback to what cinema was, which is undoubtedly why so many critics
think the film is overblown.  (Well, it is in spots--but then, DRACULA
isn't an old film--it's the 1990s recreation of what Coppola thinks old
film were like)
10) Dracula rejected God and civilization.  Nobody specifically refers
to him as the Antichrist, at least not that I recall, but he's clearly
meant to fulfill that role.  And his final words with Mina, lifted from
an obvious source (again not revealed to prevent too much of a spoiler)
bring that point home.  Dracula's death (I don't really think of this as
a spoiler; I think we all know he dies) is not a defeat, in the same way
that the guilty verdict against Tucker was not a defeat, or that
Patton's death isn't a defeat (Okay, Coppola didn't direct PATTON, but
he co-wrote it).  I think of the end of DRACULA in much the same way
that I think of the end of Coppola's RUMBLE FISH and THE OUTSIDERS--the
king is dead, long live the king.  The cycle begun in the overture is
brought to the appropriate end.

Title
Review for Crying Game, The (1992)
1)  Excerpted from an interview with David Cronenberg in INNER VIEWS, a
collection of interviews with seven contemporary directors:
     Because in a cinema you are abstracting yourself from
     your daily life to have this special moment, this
     sacrament... But the very fact that you have abstracted
     yourself from you everyday life means you have disinvolved
     yourself, the process, from your life (235).
One of the things about growing up in what Jack Nicholson referred to in
a recent interview as the "post-literate generation" is that, from the
age of nine or so onward, film and cinema ceased to hold as much of that
sacramental mystique for me.  First through cable television, and later
and more powerfully through the VCR, the breadth and depth of cinema
became available in my home.  Cronenberg again: "It's almost unthinkable
now, that you did not have access to films except when they came out in
the cinema and then disappeared forever..." (236).  Through the process
of overfamiliarization, perhaps even saturation, I came to recognize the
conventional patterns around which films are organized--so individual
films rarely hold any suspense for me.  It seems that about one film a
year can come up with a plot twist that genuinely shocks me.  In 1991,
it was the true nature of Branagh's "I'm not Roman" line in DEAD AGAIN,
and in 1992, it is THE CRYING GAME.
2)  Since my film reviews have centered around what's in a film and what
can perhaps be extracted from its contents, rather than whether or not
you should go out and see it, I have been pretty casual with regards to
spoilers.  It helps that all the films I've previously reviewed have not
had any major surprises.  This is not the case with THE CRYING GAME.
Two of my ten points revolve around the genuine surprise contained
within the film.  That makes this review a genuine spoiler, so I've
decided to put a control-L after this paragraph.  If you haven't seen
the film, don't spoil it for yourself by reading the rest of this
article.
3)  The girl that isn't a girl: that genuinely surprising moment for me
is, of course, that beautiful tracking shot that starts from her head
and slowly goes down her body, soaking up her nakedness, culminating in
a full set of testicles.  I dare anybody to see that coming beforehand.
It's interesting that the film places her as one part of the only true
functional relationship, the unseen relationship between her and Jody.
The point being that love/trust isn't something that necessarily takes
place between a man and a woman, and that being a man or a woman isn't
necessarily related to having testicles or a vagina.  The bond between
Jody and Fergus, for example, is a strong bond, which has nothing to do
with the fact that both of them are men.  Placing a character in the
film who "is" simultaneously male and female emphasizes that this is a
film about relationships between *human beings*.
4)  Jaye Davidson does a fantastic job as Dil, probably the most
difficult film role of 1992.  One wonders if she were to be nominated
for an Oscar--AMPAS members could have a real puzzler on their hands as
to whether or not somebody with testicles can be nominated for Best
Actress or not.  This is a largely rhetorical question, of course--if
nothing else, the Academy will bend over backwards to find five people
with vaginas to throw into consideration--probably Emma Thompson and
Susan Sarandon included.  But in general, I don't think this has been an
especially good year for women's roles in film.
5)  Stephen Rea will not get nominated for Best Actor for Fergus,
because there's a glut of actors to choose from this year.  Which is a
shame, as he does a fantastic job playing a man trying to cope with all
the things that life throws at him: coming to respect a man and then
having to shoot that man; falling in love with a woman who turns out to
be a man; getting pulled back into a life he's trying to escape.  And on
his looks alone, especially after he gets his haircut in England, he has
the potential to be at least a minor sex symbol for the 90s if he plays
his cards right.
6)  Good to see Neil Jordan making a film for himself again--that seems
to be what he does best.  Though even his Hollywood films don't feel
like complete sellouts, and HIGH SPIRITS showed some genuine
potential--plus he never got a chance to supervise the cutting of that
film.  But it's in a situation like this, when Jordan is in control of
the vision, that he truly excels as a filmmaker.
7)  I had something to say about terrorism here, but I can't remember
what it was.  Only that it had something to do with a psychological
condition--the Stockholm syndrome--in which the hostages come to
identify with their captors.  An opposite process looks to occur within
this film, partly because Fergus isn't really cut out for
terrorism--he's got the skills, but not the heart.  As I said before, a
genuine bond takes place between Jody and Fergus, but I add now that
it's purposefully cultivated by Jody as a straw at which to grab when it
comes time to make the escape attempt.
8)  That bond is rooted in the fact that although one man is black and
the other white, one English and the other Irish, they are both men.
There are certain qualities that transcend national and ethnic
boundaries: the need for respect and self-respect, the love of a good
woman, the need for the sort of dignity that comes from being able to
take your own penis out of your boxers when you need to urinate.  It's
the search for those self-qualities that Fergus takes up even after
Jody's death--they are brought into the forefront when the two men are
talking, but they remain throughout the rest of the film.
9)  So the films about people's natures--a point brought home by the
telling of the parable of the frog and the scorpion *twice*.  Since the
best known source of that parable is Orson Welles' CONFIDENTIAL REPORT
(also known as MR. ARKADIN), I was trying to build up a connection
between the two films, at least in my mind, and it is this--the stories
of men who, in the midst of violent situations of intrigue, struggle to
discover the true identity of themselves and of their adversary--after
all, Fergus' affair with Dil is part of his attempt to understand what
Jody was really like, why he affected Fergus so.  Also, as in Welles'
TOUCH OF EVIL, nobody is who they appear to be in this film--only in THE
CRYING GAME, the differences become much more divergent, rooted in the
character's own bodies.
10) For a British film, there's a lot of American pop music, the two
main selections of which are used quite ironically, though the true
irony of "When a Man Loves a Woman" only becomes apparent halfway
through the film.  Lyle Lovett's cover of "Stand By Your Man" was so
perfectly suited to the ending of the film, though--the good humor with
which Fergus has sardonically adjusted to Dil's maleness really comes
through in his aloofness, and the song is the culmination point of the
ironic way Jordan deals with the revelation once it has been made.  As
for the song "The Crying Game," I had never heard it before, so I don't
honestly know if it's British or American, but Boy George's version
isn't half bad--and how appropriate to have the title song sung by the
one pop star of the eighties who most successfully embodied androgyny.
Heck, for the first month or so of "Do You Really Want to Hurt Me," I
thought he *was* a woman.  So it was a genuine surprise much like the
one provided by this excellent film when the truth came out.

Title
Review for Hoffa (1992)
1)  Readers of my review of GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS know about how I took to
a description of David Mamet as our "goombah Pinter."  We're somewhat
fortunate to have two Mamet-scripted films released so closely together,
but even a Mamet fan such as myself has to admit that this isn't his
strongest work.  Though I think that part of the reason that this is the
case is that Mamet is either writing against his best qualities or that
those qualities were ignored during the transformation from script to
screen.  As I noted before, one of Mamet's best assets is the ability to
show character not through grand action, but naturalistic dialogue.  And
while some scenes of HOFFA display that asset, most notably the framing
sequence outside the diner on the last day of Hoffa's life, there are
many other cases in which characters prove themselves through speaking
not as a natural outflow of the situation, but as mouthpieces for some
position or standpoint.
2)  In his book ON DIRECTING FILM, Mamet calls for the same minimalism
is film technique that he does in writing.  He describes film as "a
succession of images juxtaposed so that the contrast between these
images moves the story forward in the mind of the audience," and argues
that "you should always be striving to make a silent movie."  He
directly acknowledges his debt to Eisenstein for this notion of film
art.  Which becomes relevant to the discussion of HOFFA not only because
of Mamet, but because HOFFA, like Einsenstein's best films, is about the
politics of labor and class struggle (which I'll address more fully in
#7).  On the stylistic level, Danny DeVito does seem to borrow some
visual tropes from Eisenstein, especially in the strike scenes.  I'm
thinking of the trial sequence in particular, told primarily through
overlapping close-ups and other purely cinematic flairs: dissolves et
al.  Getting the story told through the way that the shots are
connected, rather than having everything explained.  As Mamet says, "the
audience requires not *information* but *drama*," and HOFFA provides
more of the latter than the former.
3)  But since this is a biographical film, information is required.  I
have noticed a very strong resurgence in the biographical film within
the last few months.  Early in the fall, of course, we had the Columbus
films, then MALCOLM X, now HOFFA and CHAPLIN.  As these films, and the
biographical films of Oliver Stone (to pick another recent example)
show, a biographical film is *always* a political film.  Of course, any
film is a political film in that it presents an ideological position,
but this is especially true of films that make a claim to represent
history.  They are equivalent to saying "this *is* the way the world
is."  Because of film's powerful mimetic qualities, the images in
historical/biographical films attain a certain level of reality within
our culture.
4)  In my review of MALCOLM X, I mentioned that the film was positioning
Malcolm as a role model, a positioning that is fairly standard within
the biographical film.  If a film doesn't call for direct emulation of
its biographical subject, it generally calls for appreciation.  I caught
some flak for this from one reader, on the argument that Malcolm X isn't
his idea of a great role model.  I imagine that if I were to make the
same claim in the same way for Jimmy Hoffa, I would receive the same
kind of complaints.  So I'll have to say that while the historical Jimmy
Hoffa leaves a lot to be desired as a role model, the protagonist of
HOFFA is clearly meant to have heroic qualities that the audience is
intended to appreciate.  He's a tough guy, a nobler version of the
characters I was talking about in earlier reviews--capitalist warriors.
5)  And not just a warrior, but a general, an organizer of the army of
workers.  In this respect, I see a very strong parallel with MALCOLM X:
both protagonists organize a disenfranchised group in the struggle to,
as Hoffa puts it, "get what we came down here for."  The scene in which
Hoffa makes his, "In every conflict there are casualties" speech feels a
lot like the scene in MALCOLM X in which Malcolm organizes the show of
force outside the police station and the march to the hospital.  In both
cases, it's an issue of "what has been lost?  what has been gained?"
And, as the police officer says of Malcolm, Hoffa is dangerous precisely
because of the amount of power he holds--"that's too much power for one
man."  Odd that both men had to be deposed from their positions of
power, and then silenced by assassination.
6)  The thing about Hoffa is that he "a man who isn't afraid to get his
hands dirty."  His particular claim to power in HOFFA is that he is a
working man, like the working men that he represents.  But even more so.
"I'm gonna do what I gotta do"--takin' care of business isn't just a
job for Hoffa, it's the core of his being.  Arguably, he is not only the
leader of the forces of labor, but the archetype of Labor itself.  As I
said, though, this point is open to a lot of debate.
7)  Now, on to the issue of class struggle.  The banquet speech in which
Hoffa claims that the Teamsters have brought the workers into the middle
class is one of the most telling of the film.  It starts with the riot
outside the factory, where the capitalist overlords look down on the
rabble from the top floors of their "castle."  (By the way, one of the
most classically Eisensteinian sequences of the entire movie)  At that
point, the workers *are* just the rabble, but Hoffa and the Teamsters
struggle to raise the class level of labor.  Pensions for laborers and
so on, culminating in visions such as retirement villages for Teamsters.
8)  Robert Kennedy makes a very interesting statement with regard to
this point: the statement that there is a danger of "co-option of the
field of labor" by Hoffa and his cronies.  So what Hoffa sees, and the
audience is supposed to see, as the liberation of the working class, is
characterized by its opponents as a "co-option."  RFK becomes a figure
representing the "ruling classes" holding the workers in ideological
bondage, and becomes a quasi-"bad guy" within HOFFA because of his
opposition to the methods in which Hoffa attempts to liberate the
working class--or is that opposition not just to the methods, but to
the very concept of a liberated field of labor?
9)  Politics enters into play again with Hoffa's pardon by Nixon, and
the special deal worked out between Teamster leaders and Charles
Coulson, Nixon's special counsel.  I don't have enough of a background
in Nixon history to comment too much on this, but the power dynamics--
further connection between government and labor--point in interesting
directions.
10) I've saved the ending of the film for the end.  Since this is a 
biographical film, and everybody knows Hoffa is dead, I don't consider
that revelation a spoiler, though I will refrain from revealing the
means posited within the film.  I will say, however, that any historical
film has to deal with the issue of portraying that which is known and
that which is not known about its subject, and the creation of an
effective (i.e., narratively seamless, in the Classical Hollywood Cinema
tradition) union of the two.  By that nature, all historical films are
conjectural, as is all history for that matter.  Interesting historical
criticism on these points includes Hayden White, Michel de Certau, Simon
Schama, and Carlo Ginzburg.  As for specific discussion of biographical
film, I'd recommend George Custen's BIOPICS.  A useful introduction to
the issues at stake in biographical motion pictures, though it limits
itself to the heyday of the studio system, and makes the (in my humble
opinion) mistaken claim that the biographical film has since diminished
in importance.  As I said in point #3, it's very strong now, and I feel
it's here to stay.
