Authors
Andrew Abramson
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Dumb & Dumber (1994)
Starring: Jim Carrey and Jeff Daniels
     DUMB AND DUMBER was pretty good.  It wasn't as good as Jim
Carrey's first movie, ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE, but it was better
than his second, THE MASK.  Carrey plays Llyod Christmas, a really dumb
person who is poor, and goes across the country to return a suitcase to
a woman who he brought to the airport, but little does he know, the
suitcase was meant to be left there because it was full of money that
the woman put there to pay off someone who kidnapped her husband.
Daniels (Speed) plays Carrey's friend who goes across the country (to
aspen) with him.  They bring the suitcase, not opening it because Carrey
doesn't think that's polite.  By the time they reach Aspen, there poor
and out of money.  So Daniels is so fed up that he decides to open the
suitcase.  But Carrey jumps on top of him trying to stop him, but it
flies open and they see all the money.  So Carrey says "Let's just
borrow a little."  Well, they borrow just a tad bit more than they said.
They take the whole thing.  After that, there living large!!  An awesome
car, the richest hotel around, weird suits, about the best they can
get.  So they find the girl, but little does she know they have the
suitcase.  Until finally Carrey tells her and when she opens it, there's
no money.  Just little papers that say I.O.U. 1 thousand dollars, or
I.O.U. 20,000 thousand dollars.
     What keeps the money going, is the dumb things they do.  It's
about the dumbest humor you can get.  Toilet humor!!  If you thought
some of the thing's Carrey did in ACE VENTURA was stupid or sick, DUMB
AND DUMBER is *not* the movie for you.

Title
Review for Brady Bunch Movie, The (1995)
     On September 26, 1969, the most annoying TV theme song of all
times aired.  The theme song to the Brady Bunch.  The show was sure to
be a bomb.  Who would have known, that twenty-five years and five
months later, the show would still be going strong, and a movie would
be made.  Yes the Brady Bunch remained on the air for five years, and
did great on syndication, and finally a movie was made.  The movie was
up to date for the rest of the world, but it was still the same old
Bradys.  The movie took place in 1995.  All of Califorina had evolved
into the 90's, except for the Bradies who still wore bellbottoms, and
listened to Davy Jones on 8-Track.  It was funny to see to see the rest
of the world, react to this time-warped family.  The family was as
great as the television family.  Shelly Long played Florence
Henderson's old role as Carol, and Gary Cole played Robert Reed's old
role as Mike.
     Much of the humor in the movie, was seeing the rivalry between
the middle-child Jan, and the oldest-child Marsha.  Marsha has all the
glamour, and everyone loves Marsha, and Marsha this, Marsha that.  As
for Jan, she thinks that she is left out because everyone thinks Cindy
(the youngest) is so cute, and Marsha is so beautiful.
     Many of the scenes from the movie, are taken from actual
episodes, just updated.  The movie makes fun at the episodes, and
exaggerates them extremely.  Some of the best parts in the movie, is
seeing Marsha say how beautiful she is, and Jan's "voices" in her
head.  Watch for Cindy's lisp, and Greg's "far-out, groovy" music.
     The movie also revolves around an interesting plot.  The man next
door has to sell every house in the neighborhood, so he has to somehow,
stop the Bradies from earning 20,000 dollars.
     Watch for some cameo appearances by the original Carol, Peter,
and of course, who could forget maid Alice.  If you watched the orignal
TV series, and enjoy humor, this is the movie for you!!
