Authors
David Pimmel
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Matinee (1993)
-- comedy, rated PG, runs about 1:40
-- starring : John Goodman, Kathy Moriarty, and a bunch of teenagers
-- directed by Joe Dante and written by Charles Hass
-- **** out of *****
SUMMARY:
     Lawrence Woolsley (John Goodman) brings his new horror film MANT!
to premiere in Key West during the height of the Cuban Missile crisis.
He hopes to capitalize on the tense moment by providing an escape for
the town.  We see most of the events through the stories of four
teenagers and how life affects them.
QUICK AND EASY REVIEW: 
     I really enjoyed MATINEE.  The mixture of comedy and tension
blended nicely.  Unlike many comedies this film tries, and succeeds, in
getting past the stage of doing anything for a laugh.  The makers of
the film also cared about telling an intelligent story.  The
performances of all the principals are right on the mark, particularly
John Goodman as the schlock master.  So I would definitely recommend
this film to anyone looking for a light hearted, yet interesting way to
spend a couple of hours.  
LONGER, MORE DETAILED REVIEW: [beware of spoilers]
     The primary reason I enjoyed this film was, that while being a
comedy, the film also had an intelligent story to tell.  Too many
comedies today subscribe to the the notion that a comedy need only make
you laugh.  You watch the movie, laugh a lot, leave the theatre and take
nothing with you.  MATINEE is not like that.  I left the picture
thinking about what I would do faced with the Cuban Missile crisis.  I
found myself wondering what would happen to the characters of the film.
But most importantly, I found myself caring about what would happen to
the characters.  
     The comedy of the film centers around Goodman, his character, and
the film he brings to Key West.  I believe that Goodman is one of the
finest comedic actors in the business today.  He is highly expressive
both physically and vocally.  I felt he at least deserved an Oscar
nomination for his work in  BARTON FINK.  The other characters are often
lost in a scene with him due to his commanding nature, however, while
the star, Goodman is actually not at the center of the film.  
     The movie is really the story of the four teenagers, discovering 
who they are and what they want, against a background where at any
minute it could all end.  I thought the kids reaction were highly
realistic.  They tried to block it out, they tried to escape from the
concerns of their world.   Unfortunately it kept creeping back in,
particularly with the fear, and the chaos of the time.  
     While the comedy centered on Goodman, and the drama on the teens,
there was a great deal of overlap.  Several aspects of the panic are
shown in a humorous light.  One example is a scene where people are
fighting each other for the the last cans and boxes of food in a
grocery store.  If you think about it the threat of nuclear annihilation
seems hardly to be the backdrop for a comedy, but it works here.
     Another reason I like this film is that I like B- science fiction 
movies.  One of my favorite films to go watch is PLAN 9 FROM OUTER
SPACE.  (Note I did not say it was one of my favorite movies, but one of
my favorite to see.)  While MANT! never got made, many films like it
were, and MANT! serves mostly as Dante's homage to the B-films he
loves.
     So again I would like to recommend MATINEE to anybody looking for a
good, humorous story.  This isn't a gag film like many other comedies
but an intelligent, well-thought out, film about real people with real
problems told in an often hilarious way.  Enjoy!

Title
Review for Opposite Sex and How to Live with Them, The (1992)
Starring Arye Cross, Courteney Cox, Kevin Pollack, Julie Brown
Rated R for language and adult humor
Arye Cross and Courteney Cox star as a pair of Bostonians who meet in a
bar, go to the movies, fall in love, move in together, etc.
     Well, if you haven't seen WHEN HARRY MET SALLY or HE SAID, SHE
SAID, or if you don't watch LOVE & WAR on television, you might think
this is the most inventive film to come along in ages.  However, if
you've seen any of these, than you have seen most of this film.  This
of course doesn't mean its bad.  Some of it is amusing, but overall, I
just had to ask what's the point?
     Arye Cross is the stereotypical single male who falls in love.
Kevin Pollack is the stereotypical female-fearing best friend who make
a lot of rather sexist and vulgar jokes, most if which weren't very
funny.  Couteney Cox is the stereotypical career-minded woman who falls
in love.  Julie Brown is the stereotypical bizarre best friend of said
woman.  (Notice the frequent use of the word stereotypical.  This film
uses a lot of formula, the plot is basically known from the opening
credits.)
     So what is good about the movie?  Well as I said there are a few
amusing moments.  Surprisingly, Julie Brown, who I usually find just
plain goofy, was the best thing in the film.  Also there are several
very funny sequences involving analysis of the human mating ritual.
     Gee, this is really short.  Not much to say about the film
really.  It is just kind of there.  Watching it on video might not be a
complete waste of time, but I wouldn't recommend hiring a baby sitter
or spending a lot of money to see it at the theatre.

Title
Review for Amos & Andrew (1993)
Starring Nicolas Cage, Samuel L. Jackson, Dabney Coleman
Rated PG-13 for language, adult humor
     Andrew Sterling (Samuel L. Jackson) is mistaken for a burglar in
his own home and is shot at by the police.  Upon discovery of the
truth, Sheriff Tolliver (Dabney Coleman) brings in Amos O'Dell
(Nicholas Cage) for spin control, putting him up as an armed assailant
who really did the shooting.  Of course, all good plans go astray.
     This film seems to suffer from confusion about what it is trying
to accomplish.  It drifts between slap stick, dark comedy and social
satire.  The end result is that it doesn't seem to get anywhere.  There
are some real funny bits and also some real interesting serious parts,
but in the end I was left wondering what was the point.
     Nicholas Cage is one of my favorite performers because he seems to
always pick likable losers to play.  Here he steps into the same role
again and brings very little new to it.  He seems to be going through
the motions more than giving it his all.  Jackson is much the same
way.  Coleman provides some of the best parts of the film while
simultaneously providing some of the most unoriginal and uninspired
work of the film.  Don't get me wrong there are some very interesting
parts to the film.
     Now that I've said what is wrong I would like to mention some of
what is right about the film.  The parts dealing with social satire
work very well.  At its core this is a film about a supposedly liberal
white community not wanting to integrate.  The scenes involving the
stuffed shirt local couple were my favorite in the film.  Here the film
is a success.  The slap stick humor doesn't work nearly as well, being
on one occasion, painfully uninteresting.  But the social satire is
dead on target.
     In summary, while the film is very uneven, at certain points it
hits very strong highs.  Unfortunately the pendulum swings both ways
and there is an equal number of things that don't work or are
uninteresting.

Title
Review for Mad Dog and Glory (1993)
Directed by John McNaughton
Starring Robert De Niro, Bill Murray, Uma Thurman
Rated R for language, violence, brief nudity, simulated sex
     Robert De Niro plays reclusive police evidence technician/
photographer Wayne, who is called "Mad Dog" because he is anything
but.  One night he walks into a robbery and saves mobster/ loan shark
Frank Milo (Bill Murray)'s life.  After a night of friendship Frank
gives Wayne a present, Glory (Uma Thurman), a bartender who is
basically in hock to Frank.  Trouble and romance bloom.
     The strength of this film is in its characters.  All three of the
leads bring forth personalities with depth and consistency.  The plot
line is a little awkward and several scenes seem unnecessary, but the
leads carry the film admirable.  I was particularly impressed with Bill
Murray.  He seems to finally be developing into an actor rather than a
comedian who acts.  His performance here and in GROUNDHOG DAY are a far
cry from his smug laugh at the world performances in MEATBALLS and the
GHOSTBUSTERS film.  He is finally playing characters with depth and
interest.  Robert De Niro has been handling the tough roles his entire
career.  This is not his best performance, but as always, he portrays
another solid and believable character.  However, after seeing TAXI
DRIVER recently, it was a bit hard to adjust to De Niro's character at
the beginning.  Finally Uma Thurman as Glory gives a fairly strong
performance.  Unfortunately, her role provided the least substance so,
occasionally she seemed lost.
     This film was originally scheduled for release about six months
ago.  This is usually a sign that something is wrong.  Here we don't
see it as much.  The one scene that seemed out of place was the second
love scene of the movie.  The first was actually a very powerful scene
for plot and character development.  The second seemed gratuitous and
more like a five-minute filler and a chance to show a little skin.
Also the end of the film seems a bit strained.
     In summary, MAD DOG AND GLORY works because of the strong
performances of its leads, despite a less than wonderful script and
plot line.  Particularly strong, as always, is De Niro, but Murray
surprisingly strong as well.

Title
Review for Point of No Return (1993)
     Maggie (Bridget Fonda) is a very bad woman, killing a cop in a
drugstore robbery.  She is sentenced to death, but is rescued from this
fate by Bob (Gabriel Byrne).  He turns out to be a recruiter for a
covert government organization of assasins, who offers the choice of
join or die.  Always the pragmatist, Maggie joins up.  She is trained
to be a killer and then let out into the real world, to perform kills
on call.
     I have not seen NIKITA, the film this is based on.  So this review
is of the film POINT OF NO RETURN as a stand alone film.  I don't
really want to go into a debate about whether or not this film should
have been made or not.  I also don't want to argue about which is
better.  As a stand alone film, I would recomment this film with some
reservation.  It has several very strong aspects, but also several that
don't seem to work very well.
     Bridget Fonda's performance is definitely the highlight of the
film.  I really didn't like her in SINGLE WHITE FEMALE, but here I
think she taps into her genetic actor's roots.  Particularly in the
beginning, during her bad stage, her performance is very strong.  In
fact I thought that was the strongest part of the film.  After she was
fully trained and left the nest, I felt the quality of the film went
down.
     The primary reason for the drop was the Dermot Mulroney
character.  I found him to be an annoying bore who detracted from what
was interesting to me, the relationship between Bob abd Maggie.  He
also seemed like a plot gimmick to show Maggie what life could be like
if she weren't a professional assasin.

Title
Review for Far Off Place, A (1993)
Starring Reese Witherspoon, Ethan Randall, Salek Bok, Jack Thompson
Directed by Mikael Salomon
Written by Robert Caswell, Johnathan Hensleigh, and Sally Robinson
Based on Laurens Van der Post's books
Rated PG for language, mild violence
     Two teens and a bushman guide are forced to cross the Kalihari
Desert in order to escape from the ivory poachers who killed their
parents.  Along the way they discovery themselves.
     Okay I'll admit that this film is riddled with formula.  And I'll
admit several key aspects are highly predictable.  However, this is my
favorite 1993 film to date.  Granted, we aren't very far into the year,
and I've only seen a half dozen or so '93 films, but this is at the top
of the list.  Herein I would like to outline several of the key reasons
I liked the film.  This will be hard to do with out giving something
away, but as I said the film is somewhat predictable.
     First, the story is interesting.  The struggle of the two teens
and the bushman against the Kalihari gets right at the core man's
existence.  For all their nastiness, the evil men never come close to
being as menacing and dangerous as the disinterested nature.  The real
antagonist in this film is Mother Nature, not the poachers.  Of course
the poachers are some of the most despicable people I've heard about.
The opening sequence to the film, where a band of poachers attacks a
herd of elephants with submachine guns  and then takes power saws to
their tusk is one of the most horrifying images I've seen on film
because it is so very real.  Also the story is paced very well.  The
kids spend a long time in the desert, but we never get tired of desert
scenes.  Each is fresh and reveals new information about the characters
and the environment they are moving through.
     The second reason I like the film was because of the solid
performances by the three leads.  The first of three we meet is Nana.
Reese Witherspoon is outstanding in this role of the free spirited,
determined young girl.  Ethan Randall's character Harry  is the next we
see.  At first his character is stiff and uninteresting, however, over
the course of the movie, as the character changes, the actor brings
more and more life into him.  The final major character is Habo (sp?),
played by Salek Bok, the bushman who leads them into the desert.  His
character is probably the primary reason I liked the film.  Many will
find the bushman voodoo magic to be a poor plot device, but having
studied the bushman some, I find it fascinating.  The bushman as a
people are so in tune with nature and the world around them that they
see and feel things we can't.  I really believe that.  Their dependence
on nature is complete, and they must be completely in touch with it in
order to survive.
     A third strong characteristic of this film is the cinematography.
I'm not going to get into an in-depth analysis of camera angles and
such.  What matters is that the filmmaker does an excellent job of
catching a very striking landscape.  While this doesn't paint a
portrait of the Kalihari as a vacation spot, it shows one of the last
remaining areas of the world that man hasn't destroyed.  Of course
Mother Nature hasn't made it real hospitable for man to go to either.
     The one major flaw with the film is the highly predictable
poacher/bad guy story that spurs the much more interesting desert
journey.  In fact wrapping that story up nearly ruins the end of the
film.  But I guess the end was necessary for narrative closure.
     In summary, I would strongly recommend this film to anyone.  Small
children might lose interest, but older kids should like it.  Most of
the kids around me seemed to be enjoying it for the most part.  The
poacher story line is fairly predictable, but the desert journey was
simply fascinating, particularly if you are interested in non-Western
cultures and ideologies.
     The new Roger Rabbit cartoon, "Trail Mixup," before the film was a
little disappointing.  The animation was excellent, particularly during
the wild flying about scenes, but it just wasn't that funny.  Maybe I
would have enjoyed it more, if I hadn't been expecting so much.
