Authors
Steve Lipson
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for For Love of the Game (1999)
        When one thinks of typical plots for movie romances, the love triangle 
frequently comes to mind. It would seem to be the perfect story line for 
whatever genre the filmmakers aim for: the tension in a romantic drama over 
which couple ends up together, the merriment in a romantic comedy as the 
main characters try to one-up the other to win the affections of their 
object of desire. Kevin Costner obviously knows the inherent appeal of this 
scenario, as two of his most popular romantic comedies ("Bull Durham" and 
"Tin Cup") fit comfortably into the conventions of the love triangle. In a 
way, Costner's latest film falls into this same tradition. The romantic 
comedy/ drama "For Love of the Game" stars Costner as a man forced to choose 
between the two main loves of his life. Only this time, one of these objects 
of affection is not a person but a concept. This twist in the typical love 
triangle scenario elevates the motion picture and enables it to easily 
compensate for the predictability which all too often permeates romantic 
comedies.
        At its heart, "For Love of the Game" features a romantic triangle between 
Billy Chapel (Costner), Jane Aubrey (Kelly Preston), and the game of 
baseball. Costner stars as a major league pitcher near the end of an 
illustrious 19-year career. It would seem that Billy enjoys the ideal 
life--a beautiful girlfriend, tremendous wealth and popularity, the 
opportunity to work doing what he loves--but his stability and happiness 
suddenly becomes uprooted on the second to last day of the season. The owner 
of his team approaches Billy in his hotel room and informs him that he plans 
to sell his team, the Detroit Tigers; worse, the new owners intend in the 
off-season to trade Billy away from the organization he has given his heart 
and soul to for the past two decades. Billy now faces the option of 
retirement rather than appearing disloyal to the fans and team he loves. But 
thoughts such as these quickly become secondary in his mind to potentially 
worse news: his girlfriend of five years, fashion writer Jane Aubrey, 
announces that she plans to leave him to accept a position in London. She 
has finally realized that baseball means far more to Billy than she ever 
could. All these troubles weigh on Billy's mind as he takes the mound that 
night, determined to do his best in what may be the last game of his career.
        The bulk of the story alternates between Billy's pitching performance 
against the New York Yankees on this momentous yet troubled evening and 
flashbacks to events in the last five years that show how Billy reached this 
low point in his life. The baseball scenes are very well-done, with 
play-by-play by real life baseball announcers Vin Scully and Steve Lyons 
increasing the realism. (Although the filmmakers seem to have conveniently 
ignored the "five-and-ten rule," which would make some of Billy's troubles 
moot. See below.) But the game itself ultimately takes a back seat to the 
unique love triangle, and fortunately it is in the more emotional scenes of 
the film where superb acting and directing combine to overcome the 
limitations of the subgenre.
        It would be unfair to single out either Sam Raimi's inventive direction or 
the performances of Costner and Preston for the movie's success. "For Love 
of the Game"'s best scenes invariably blend both of these elements for their 
considerable power. Raimi is best known for his unconventional direction of 
thrillers and horror movies like "A Simple Plan" and "Evil Dead," and his 
skill shows here especially through his fascinating use of subjective 
visuals and sound. For the movie to work at all, it must be clear that 
Costner's character feels intense love for both Jane and the game. 
Initially, Billy's love of baseball stands out much clearer in the viewer's 
mind. Raimi's scenes of Billy on the mound cut between two different shots: 
closeups of Costner's face exhibiting intense concentration with full-body 
low-angle shots of Costner making the pitch. Most significantly, all sound 
disappears as the ball is thrown; Billy fails to even notice the background 
noise as his whole mind is focused on achieving success in the game. These 
subjective uses of sound and camera angle cast Billy as he sees himself: a 
heroic loner proud to take his team on his shoulders and give his all for 
the game. Costner's penetrating gazes and impressive physique complement 
Raimi's direction perfectly.
        Nevertheless, a flashback scene most clearly emphasizes Billy's apparent 
conviction that his love of baseball exceeds his love of Jane. Following an 
incident at his mountain home in which Billy seriously injures his pitching 
arm, the audience sees him rushed to a helicopter. Jane is most concerned 
for Billy's safety and well-being; Billy's only worry appears to be how this 
accident will affect his pitching career. As Billy is being lifted onto the 
helicopter, we see the emphatic, determined look in Costner's eyes as Billy 
tells Jane that his trainer is the most important person to him right now. 
Preston's face immediately registers a deep sense of hurt, and this 
isolation is given concrete expression by Raimi as the transparent 
helicopter doors immediately slam shut between the camera and Preston. As 
this memorable scene continues, we see the gulf between Billy and Jane 
metaphorically get wider as alternating point-of-view shots show the 
helicopter taking off and Jane staying mournfully behind. Shots such as 
these which depict separation between characters are not uncommon in movies; 
nevertheless, Raimi invests this scene with added force by his unique camera 
movement. As the camera in the helicopter travels up and away from Jane in a 
diagonal direction, we sense Billy's apparent abandonment of her all the 
more palpably.
        Given this attitude of Billy's, it is not surprising that Jane decides to 
leave him. Only after he learns the news does he finally realize how much he 
needs her. Again, strong direction and acting allow Billy's transformation 
to appear convincing. As he pitches what may well be the final game of his 
career, Raimi shows the aforementioned heroic shots of the pitcher. But 
alone in the dugout, a far different Billy emerges. Frequent close-ups of 
Costner reveal an anguished expression, as Billy painfully reminisces back 
on the unfortunate course of his relationship with Jane via memories that 
spark the flashback sequences. I am probably not giving too much away to say 
that Billy wins the game, a glorious conclusion to his illustrious career. 
But Billy does not feel happy. One memorable shot takes us back to his hotel 
room, but unlike the considerable camera movement earlier in the film, this 
shot is entirely static. It depicts the enormity of the room, with Billy 
just a small pathetic figure sitting on the bed. Again, Raimi makes 
impressive use of subjective sound. We witness total silence and 
motionlessness for a long stretch of time, until finally a sound starts to 
swell up on the soundtrack. It is the sound of Billy crying. Without Jane, 
and despite his incredible success at baseball, Billy feels as isolated and 
alone as ever.
        "For the Love of the Game" adheres to most of the conventions of romantic 
comedies, but because of the unique nature of the love triangle, they do not 
feel forced. Of course, we all know the typical outline of romantic comedy 
in which boy meets girl and then boy and girl break up. But unlike most 
movies of this genre, where the separation between the two lovers is caused 
by a silly contrivance, here the events surrounding the breakup are entirely 
believable. We are entirely convinced of Costner's deep love of the game of 
baseball, so his choice that his career is more important to him than his 
girlfriend (in the helicopter scene) does not seem unreasonable. Rather than 
silly misunderstanding, the drifting apart of Billy and Jane comes from 
heartfelt emotion.
        And, finally, lest I mistakenly leave the impression that this movie is a 
downer, let me hint at the conclusion. Again owing to the unique nature of 
this romantic triangle, the object of desire does not need to decide between 
two flesh-and-blood suitors--thus disappointing one of them and perhaps 
leaving audience members unhappy with the choice. Because one of the figures 
in this triangle is an intangible idea, it is possible that Billy can keep 
his devotion "for love of the game" without sacrificing his human love in 
the process.
        Note: "The five-and-ten-rule" states that any major league baseball player 
who has served in the majors for ten years, the last five of which were for 
the same team, has the right to veto any trade in which he would be 
involved. Thus, since Billy meets these qualifications, he need not have 
worried about being traded away by the new owners in the real world of 
baseball. But given the emotional power of this film, I would suggest that 
even a committed baseball fan should have no problem suspending their 
disbelief in this manner.


Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
Justice Remains Elusive in Excellent `L.A. Confidential'
It is Los Angeles in the 1950's, and the LAPD has just launched a campaign
to root out corruption in its ranks and make the police department `a force
you can be proud of.' This climate provides the backdrop for Curtis
Hanson's excellent new film `L.A. Confidential,' a crime drama which
examines the lives of three LAPD detectives as they attempt to unravel the
mystery of a massacre in the Nite Owl cafeteria. What seems in the first
hour of the movie as a largely open-and-shut case soon reveals itself as
just one small element of an elaborate conspiracy, but such a
transformation should surprise no one familiar with the works of James
Ellroy, on whose novel this movie is based.
Ellroy, an acclaimed author of crime fiction, specializes in stories with
deeply-flawed protagonists, and the detectives of the LAPD prove no
exception. Each sees the duty of a police officer as the promotion of
justice, but each cop's understanding of the term is as complex as the
characters themselves. To Lt. Ed Exley (Guy Pearce), justice entails doing
consistently what is right, but his nemesis Sgt. Bud White (Russell Crowe)
believes that an officer fulfills his duty as long as the ends justify the
means. Some cops use the word as a cover-up for their nefarious schemes,
while others--like Sgt. Jack Vincennes (Kevin Spacey)--have become so jaded
that justice no longer has any meaning for them at all. But as the three
main characters delve deeper into the Nite Owl Massacre, they soon find
their cherished values tested more than they could ever imagine.
`L.A. Confidential' is thus at its heart focused on character development,
yet it is to the great credit of director Curtis Hanson that his movie can
be appreciated on many levels. The frequent gun battles should please any
action fan, while admirers of suspenseful crime dramas will find that
Hanson keeps the tension level high through effective and sinister use of
music and lighting. But in a movie based on characterization, it should
come as no surprise that the acting is what stands out most. In a large
ensemble cast, Pearce, Crowe, and Spacey prove particularly effective in
their challenging roles, which require that subtle transformations in
personality be conveyed chiefly through body language and facial
expressions. In the end, the three detectives have changed considerably,
but they remain as morally ambiguous as ever. Many in the audience, though,
will accept that justice has been served. Perhaps our own cherished beliefs
remain just as conflicted as those of the LAPD.

Title
Review for Iron Giant, The (1999)
Upon reading the poster tagline for "The Iron Giant," the latest animated 
feature from Warner Brothers, one may be forgiven for assuming that the 
movie is intended strictly for children. After all, what more should one 
expect from a movie that attempts to grab audiences' attention with such a 
sensationalistic headline as "It came from outer space!" Only upon watching 
this highly-accomplished film does one realize how unfair to Brad Bird's 
debut picture this tagline really is; I was even reminded of the injustice 
done to "Citizen Kane" by its similarly-worded slogan: "It's terrific!"
While I do not mean to put "The Iron Giant" in the same league as Orson 
Welles's classic, I nevertheless feel that the advertising campaign for 
Bird's film trivializes its serious intentions. For "The Iron Giant," though 
vastly entertaining for anyone in the audience, possesses themes and lessons 
as meaningful for adults as they are for children. The depth of the movie 
should come as no surprise given the film's pedigree: it is based on the 
book "The Iron Man" by the late British poet laureate Ted Hughes. And as is 
to be expected from such auspicious beginnings, the great strength of the 
film lies in its story.
Admittedly, the basic plot of "The Iron Giant" sounds simple enough: In 
1957, at the height of the competition between the Americans and the Soviets 
in the Cold War, a meteorite crashes in the ocean near the quiet Maine town 
of Rockwell. Some locals speculate that the debris came from the Russian 
satellite Sputnik, but what actually fell to Earth was a 100-foot tall alien 
robot. The adventurous local boy Hogarth Hughes (voice of Eli Marienthal) 
discovers the giant in the woods, saving his life in the process. The two 
overcome the language barrier to become friends, although this period of 
bonding is made more difficult by the need to find metal to feed the Iron 
Giant (Vin Diesel)  and the desire of Hogarth to keep his large new friend 
secret from his mother Annie (Jennifer Aniston). More ominously, Hogarth 
soon discovers that he must hide the robot from Kent Mansley (Christopher 
McDonald), a government agent sent to Rockwell to investigate the crash of 
the meteorite and the mysterious sightings by townspeople. To ward off any 
possible threats to the security of the United States, Kent has the entire 
arsenal of the U.S. Armed Forces at his disposal. Hogarth's only ally in his 
efforts to save the Iron Giant from imminent destruction is the beatnik 
artist Dean McCoppin (Harry Connick, Jr.), who reluctantly allows the robot 
to hide out on his property.
At first, this plot outline with its youthful hero and dastardly villain 
may seem like it resembles the descriptions of countless other animated 
films released over the years. But what distinguished "The Iron Giant" from 
other fare are the serious issues raised and stressed in the screenplay. 
Brad Bird and Tim McCanlies, who adapted Ted Hughes's book for the screen, 
wisely chose not to update the story to modern times. Keeping it in 1957 
allows them to explore the ramifications that these incidents in Maine would 
have on a country and a people frightened by the Cold War. In the process, 
"The Iron Giant" delves into themes still highly relevant to today's times: 
the danger of guns, the folly of nuclear war, the difficulties of 
communicating across cultures. And the great achievement of this film lies 
in its ability to make these issues meaningful to people of all ages. On the 
topic of nuclear war, adults will find themselves uneasily laughing at a 
recreation/ parody of those "Duck and Cover" videos of the 1950's that 
explain how to survive a nuclear attack; children will be struck by a line 
during the climax that succinctly encapsulates the utter destructiveness of 
nuclear weapons and how not even the people that launch them are spared. And 
the movie does not pull punches, either, at another problem as pressing 
today as it was in 1957: xenophobia. Kent and many others in the movie feel 
that anything alien is dangerous and must be destroyed; this fear of 
foreigners extends not just to extraterrestrial beings, but to foreigners on 
our own planet. Like most of the other important issues raised in "The Iron 
Giant," Bird does not treat this point in a heavy-handed manner; in fact, 
Kent most explicitly reveals his xenophobia in a line as humorous as it is 
ominous.
This sense of humor is a facet of the film that should not be neglected. In 
addition to being very effective in its action and dramatic scenes, "The 
Iron Giant" is a very funny movie. Comic highlights of the film include 
Hogarth's efforts to hide the robot from his mother, especially as he tries 
to say "Grace" at dinner, and the attempt of the Iron Giant to imitate his 
friend doing one of his favorite summertime activities. Never does Bird 
allow the important messages of his film to undermine its basic 
entertainment value.
"The Iron Giant" delivers what audiences have come to expect from most good 
animated features this side of "South Park": a story that captivates both 
children and adults. The term "animation" has unfortunately come to pick up 
negative connotation in some quarters, from people who deride animated 
features as kiddie cartoons. But Hughes's book virtually cried out for 
animated treatment. By filming the movie in such a way, Bird avoided the 
pitfall that plagues so many summer movies: having the special effects 
overwhelm the story and characters. Instead of directing a movie that 
basically forces the audience to marvel at the latest advances in 
computer-generated imagery, Bird has created a film in which the marvel of a 
100-foot robot walking on Earth can be experienced, but then the audience 
moves on, to focus on the relationship between Hogarth and the Iron Giant 
and the issues that the screenplay explores. And it cannot be denied that 
the use of animation allows for some undeniably impressive effects, as in a 
neat scene where the robot reassembles himself after being separated into 
pieces. But never do such images seem as if they are inserted for their own 
sake, rather than to further the story.
Brad Bird, formerly a director for the television show "The Simpsons," has 
fashioned a movie that combines the best aspects of both animated and 
non-animated features. In fact, Bird's film, aside from its screenplay, 
possesses artistic merits that rival those of most any motion picture. 
Admittedly, the animation in "The Iron Giant," while quite good, is not up 
to Disney standards. But Bird compensates for this minor flaw by a mastery 
of the visual and story-telling techniques universal to success in the 
medium of film. His use of light and shadow in particular stood out for me. 
Throughout the movie, one observes impressive lighting effects that add to 
the mood of a scene: the mother's angry look emphasized in the car 
headlights she stands in front of, a flashlight beam swooping through the 
dark, hazy patches of light filtering through the trees in a mysterious and 
idyllic forest setting. Later, in the Hughes house, the menace represented 
by Kent Mansley is rendered very clear as he emerges from the dark to 
confront Hogarth in his room. Seeing the very sharp contrast between light 
and shadow on Kent's face made me think nostalgically back to black and 
white film-making, when such high-definition lighting effects could be 
created with ease and effectiveness. But color animation can create such 
ominous scenes at times when their live-action counterparts cannot.
With his use of sound, too, Bird demonstrates an awareness of the lessons 
learned from non-animated settings. In the typical Disney animated movie, 
one's enjoyment of the film is often marred if one does not like the songs 
in it. But "The Iron Giant" is no musical; like most live-action films, the 
songs  are played in the background of the action. And Bird even improves on 
the way most directors employ their soundtracks. Too often in non-animated 
features, the director adds a popular song as filler or as a transition 
between scenes. Bird does not fall into this trap; in one notable scene, for 
example, Kent's investigation into the mystery of the robot does not stop 
though a song that is not part of the action is playing. The audience still 
understands what is going on and we still laugh; the movie continues 
unimpeded despite relying for its effect on silent comedy and drama. By 
merging the freedom and creative potential of animation with the time-tested 
techniques of live-action film story-telling, Bird has fashioned a truly 
memorable picture.
Perhaps best of all, one's satisfaction with "The Iron Giant" is not 
hampered by a disappointing conclusion. The film ends as it should: somber 
enough so as not to trivialize the important issues it raises, yet happy 
enough to please children. And after the end credits roll, the movie leaves 
one with a lot to think about and talk over with one's family. "The Iron 
Giant" leaves unresolved such issues as the robot's origin and purpose, and 
the religious intentions of the film. At first, I considered such ambiguity 
to be one of the few weaknesses of the film. But upon further reflection, I 
realized that leaving us with such uncertainty may have been just Bird and 
McCanlies's intention. The movie raises a lot of points for discussion in 
which the film-makers' message is clear, as in their attitude to nuclear 
war. But many questions remain open for us to come to our own conclusions: 
If extraterrestrials exist, why might they want to visit Earth? Does the 
Iron Giant (as a sentient robot) have a soul? In the end, "The Iron Giant" 
is a thought-provoking motion picture that provides solid entertainment for 
all ages; perhaps this is the highest compliment one can give to a family 
film (or any movie for that matter). But I cannot resist one more 
commendation. Because I was not pleased with the original advertising slogan 
for the film, I have come up with my own tagline: "It's terrific!"


Title
Review for Grass: A Nation's Battle for Life (1925)
  In categorizing "Grass" (1925), the Merian Cooper-Ernest Schoedsack
documentary on the annual migration of the Bakhtiari people of Iran,
most modern assessments identify it as an example of realism, a
movement counter to the conventions of classical Hollywood
cinema. This review will analyze the extent to which "Grass" can be
considered a realist, anti-Hollywood motion picture. But perhaps I
should state at the outset that I really enjoyed this film, especially
once it actually started following the migration of the Iranian
tribe. I found the last half of the movie suspenseful, engrossing, and
fascinating in its depiction of an unfamiliar culture.
  In terms of its realist content, the most obvious difference between
"Grass" and the films of classical Hollywood is that "Grass" is a
documentary--it purports to tell a true story, not a fictional or
fictionalized account. As a documentary, it does not adhere to many of
the cinematic conventions we've grown accustomed to in Hollywood
films. Most notably for me, it does not keep consistent screen
direction. Characters or the migratory band often enter the frame from
the same location they left in the previous scene, going in opposite
directions. Nevertheless, this did not hinder my understanding of the
movie and is probably not something I would normally have noticed;
after all, it was obvious from the context of the movie that the
tribes were headed in the same steady direction throughout their
migration. But this lack of following this convention can even be
forgiven the film-makers in any event: they were filming real life,
far outside the comfortable confines of a studio set, so they had to
set up the camera wherever they could find a good place.
  Another aspect of the filming that I observed was the relatively
limited camera movement.  There were no tracking shots at all that I
can remember; panning and tilting were limited to the purposes of
highlighting a landscape or slighting moving the camera to follow the
action. Of course, filming on the move and in hazardous or unfamiliar
conditions hinders one's ability to employ elaborate camera movement;
nevertheless, I found myself wishing for a shot taken from the back of
a cow or a camel. But even if this were technologically possible, I
can see why the film-makers might have chosen not to use it.  Their
purpose in this movie was to film real life, to capture the intrinsic
interest of the true story of the Bakhtiari, not to show off the kind
of cute shots that can be done using the camera.
  In the absence of camera movement, the film-makers had to employ
other techniques to keep the film visually interesting. In this goal,
they admirably succeeded. There was constant movement through the
screen: the migrating of people, the rushing of waters, etc.  Also,
the film-makers knew how to employ editing techniques like analytical
editing to keep the story interesting; for example, they showed
several close-ups of the hunter loading his gun to complement the
hunting sequence. But the shots that I most enjoyed were the many
shots that employed the entire screen space, those that showed the
50,000 migrators and a half-million animals stretched from the
foreground all the way to the edge of the horizon in the
background. In many of these scenes, all the people appeared to stay
in focus no matter how far they were from the camera. The grandeur of
these scenes, and how they conveyed so well the enormity of the
migration these tribes were attempting, constantly left me awe-struck
as my eyes following the seemingly-endless line of people all the way
back until they were but specks in a far-distant horizon. But even
here, the interest of these scenes lies in part in the sheer
impressive nature of the true events they are depicting.  The
film-makers have succeeded admirably in their main realist goal: to
show how fascinating are the real lives of these people.
  Nevertheless, the film-makers don't fully succeed in making a truly
naturalistic movie. The story they craft and the intertitles they
employ follow very closely the narrative conventions established by
Hollywood. Instead of having confidence in the innate interest of the
events they depict, the film-makers believe they have to fit their
narrative into the familiar conventions of a Hollywood fiction
story. For example, they feel the need to include recognizable heroes
who the audience can identify with and root for: the chief of the
tribe and his son. They decide via the intertitles to artificially
inject humor that doesn't come naturally from the events on screen,
like for example the crack about the cow not raising her calf to be a
sailor. They even choose to artificially inject suspense, not
realizing the events on screen are suspenseful enough, by stopping a
shot to show a rather long intertitle before we get back to the
visuals to see the result. One time this occurs is in the
river-crossing scene, where an intertitle warns of danger, waits for a
rather long time, then finally shows the young animals going under the
water.
  Most conspicuous of all, though, is how the film-makers try to
create interest by addressing the audience and invoking in them
uncertainty that would not have been felt by any of the
participants. For example, when the tribe reaches a sheer rock face,
an intertitle implies that this is the end of their journey, as they
have reached a mountain "impossible to climb."  The film-makers pause
to show us the tribe and the mountain again before revealing an
intertitle: "Impossible? Never!"; this is followed by shots showing
how the Bakhtiari succeed in scaling the sheer rock face. The problem
with these narrative conventions that the film-makers employ is that
the tribes have presumably made this migration many times. They have
seen this mountain and have scaled it before, and while they may
regard it as difficult, it wouldn't generate in the tribesmen the fear
and hesitation the film-makers try to convey. Instead of trying to
realistically depict the true thoughts and feelings of the subjects of
their documentary, the film-makers decide to manipulate the audience
by telling the story of the Bakhtiari as if it were a Hollywood
fiction story. They try to artificially build up suspense for the
viewers, not allowing themselves to accept that the actual events
portrayed on screen are nerve-wracking enough.
Don't get me wrong; I still like this movie for its visuals and the
innate interest of the story.  But what I am trying to show is that
while the film-makers are willing to set aside certain cinematic
conventions in order to make a documentary, they did not succeed in
achieving a realism that is independent of the Hollywood style or in
accomplishing what was presumably their goal of truly depicting the
Bakhtiari as they really are. Like in the Hollywood movie, the
film-makers' ultimate aim was to shape the events to cater to the
supposed desires of their intended audience. But this should not be
surprising. After all, the first title screen of the movie reveals
that "Grass" is a Zukor/ Lasky production, distributed by Paramount
Pictures. No matter what may have been the film-maker's realist
intentions, "Grass" ultimately is a studio picture!
Postscript: As stated in my original review, there appears to be a
tension between "Grass"'s realist intentions and the classical
Hollywood framework in which the story is told. But Cooper and
Schoedsack should not be blamed for the film's seemingly-contradictory
aims. Originally, the two directors edited their movie in France
without intertitles, for the purposes of taking it on the illustrated
lecture circuit. But Cooper and Schoedsack's traveling around
presenting their movie to public audiences proved so popular that
Lasky picked it up for Paramount Pictures. Only then did Terry
Ramsaye, a title writer for Paramount, compose the intertitles that
dominate the final print and in so doing cheapen the documentary's
realism.

Title
Review for Black Pirate, The (1926)
 When many people think of silent movies today, they think of archaic films
whose narrative and stylistic techniques would be completely foreign to
modern audiences. But this opinion reflects ignorance far more than
reality. As early as 1915 with the release of D.W. Griffith's "The Birth of
a Nation," the vocabulary of the modern feature film had become
well-established. The ensuing decade saw still more refinements of
cinematic technique; by the end of the silent era, one would be
hard-pressed to point out any major story-telling conventions that had not
yet been discovered. What distinguishes most silent films is not their
strangeness but the remarkable closeness with which they match today's
expectations; truly, the only foreign aspect of a silent film is the
"silence" itself. Even the typical action movie of the silent era--like the
Douglas Fairbanks vehicle "The Black Pirate" (1926)--reflects this
unmistakable modernity.
I was very impressed with the technical accomplishments of the Albert
Parker-directed film "The Black Pirate"; they clearly show how far the
cinema has advanced in only a couple decades. Almost immediately, one can
notice--at a basic level--cinematic devices that we would consider modern.
"Black Pirate," for example, begins with an extensive list of opening
credits, unlike most of the short films that only provided a title card
without identifying the talent involved in their making. Also, the film
frequently uses intertitles; after the first 15 minutes, the vast majority
of these titles give us dialogue as opposed to exposition of the plot. This
again distinguishes this movie from films made a couple decades earlier,
and in so doing allows us to identify more with the characters. On a
similar note, the camera has noticeably moved closer to the actors; using
3/4 and medium shots most of the time, the audience can recognize the
characters and understand their emotions. Again, this is a big distinction
with the proscenium arch shots of earlier movies, in which the actors'
faces are barely visible. I should stress that "The Black Pirate" obviously
did not innovate any of these techniques; however, they
  stood out to me as reflecting how quickly cinema had advanced out of its
early and transitional periods (1895-1915).
  But what may be the most surprising "modern" feature of this movie to
recent audiences is the fact that it is filmed in color. "Black Pirate",
according to a review I read, is in fact one of the few surviving movies
from the silent era that was shot in Technicolor. The two-color Technicolor
process involved was very primitive, so that the color will probably look
disappointing to modern audiences. Also, the process involved was quite
elaborate and expensive, so that "Black Pirate" took a lot longer to film
than comparable B&W movies. The Technicolor process (according to the
"Making of" Documentary at the end of the laser disk) required a very large
amount of light, and in other ways impeded with the
  art direction and cinematography. Thus, many of the criticisms I am about
to give can
  perhaps be forgiven because of the extreme difficulties involved with
filming in color in
  1926. 
  Though many of the editing traits and acting styles of the movie would
appear to us as
  modern, there are some problems that may be leftovers from a previous
era, or
  innovations that are not followed through. For example, one of the first
dialogue intertitles
  shows a pirate speaking in dialect, with a kind of accent. This seemed to
me as if it would
  be a worthwhile attempt to add additional personality to the characters,
but these dialogue
  intertitles with non-standard English were almost entirely abandoned
after the first one.
  Also, slight problems still remain with narrative continuity. The
director and editor
  understand how to use implicit editing and time compression; we cut from
Fairbanks on
  the island offering to capture a ship single-handedly to his beginning
efforts of doing so
  without having to show him sailing away from the island and spending time
on the pirate
  ship first. Nevertheless, I can think of one incident at least where the
time and especially the spatial
  compression goes too far and is confusing. The last we see of Fairbanks
after he has
  walked the plank, he is hanging out in the ocean at the side of the boat.
My assumption
  was that he would try to surreptitiously get back on. In our next shot of
him, we see him
  climbing up onto dry land and meeting some horses. How long it took him
to get there and
  where he was confused me at first. The movie could have perhaps been made
clearer by
  inserting an intertitle where he explains his plans, or at least
introducing a shot that shows
  him swimming away from the boat, in the open sea or in the direction of
land. 
  Also, the movie often has a too stagey feel. Again, the shooting of it in
color may have
  made this inevitable. But the island is clearly a set, with fake (perhaps
painted) backdrops
  and most of the action taking place at the front of the frame. Perhaps
one cannot blame the
  director for this, for--just as there are scenes that seem too
stagey--there are some scenes
  that take full advantage of the space in the frame, for example the shots
of the soldiers
  leaping from behind and above the camera into the frame as they attack
the pirates. (This
  is a point made in the "Making of" documentary.) Also, the action set
pieces, while
  spectacular, often can be confusing because they're usually filmed too
close-up for the
  audience to follow clearly what's happening. Somewhat ironically, given
my comments earlier in this review, occasional long shots may have been
nice so as to more easily see the perspective in which the action is taking
place. But again, the necessary use of sets (and the limitations in special
effects) may have made my wish unrealistic. Perhaps the film-makers did as
good as they could in 1926. 
  So far, I have pointed out the non-modern problems still evident in the
movie. But to some
  extent, any confusion these may have generated is reduced via the modern
cinematic
  conventions that the movie does very well, for example in parallel
editing, analytical
  editing, point-of-view editing, and audience identification with the
characters. The parallel
  editing to create suspense (in which the movie cuts between rescuer,
tormenter, and
  person in need of rescued) is probably the most obvious and, since it had
already been
  close to perfected by D.W. Griffith as early as 1912, I will not comment
further on it here. 
  More noteworthy is the frequent employment of analytical editing, in
which the film cuts
  from a scene to a close-up of a specific detail of that scene to show to
the audience the
  importance of the item in the close-up to the plot. Examples include the
close-up shots to
  understand how Fairbanks escapes from his ropes before he walks the
plank, and
  especially the frequent close-ups of the ring he is wearing. At first,
the audience may be
  unsure as to its meaning. But the importance of the ring soon becomes
clear, and the
  director repeatedly afterwards focuses on it perhaps to foreshadow how
the identity of
  Fairbanks which it implies will help him in his final victory. 
  Also, the movie knows how to develop its characters so as to give them a
personality and
  elicit audience sympathy or disgust. Character differentiation has
obviously had a long history in the cinema by this point, but here clearly
the process is used to further the plot and
  audience identification with the characters. It is important to early on
identify the pirate
  leader as evil and Fairbanks as the definite hero. Audience dislike of
the pirate leader is
  quickly accomplished by his revealing of his desire to kill his men to
receive more of the
  money. Thus, the audience can definitely root for Fairbanks, whose
essential nobility is
  also revealed early on by his permitting the pirate leader to get a new
sword after he
  dropped his during the fight. The rest of the movie provides further
examples of
  Fairbanks's inherent goodness, as well as character traits which allow
the audience fairly
  quickly to decide which pirates to root for or against. 
  What impressed me most about "The Black Pirate," though, was its
point-of-view editing.
  This could be the subject of a whole other review, especially those shots
when we see
  from the perspective of one character looking down on another, or vice
versa. (The scene
  is shot from a high angle representing the viewpoint of one of the
characters.) In all these
  instances, the character looking down is located in a superior position
to those in his view,
  and we can easily see the vulnerability of those other people. Depending
on the
  situation, these point-of-view shots either fill us with a sense of
menace and fear for the
  safety of the people in sight or provide us hope that a bad situation can
be fixed. In one
  key situation, a point-of-view shot of this type even resolves some
confusion created by
  the excessive close-ups in action scenes. As Fairbanks tries to capture
the Merchantman,
  the audience is unsure where Fairbanks is in relation to the people he is
trying to capture.
  But all uncertainty is resolved by the shot where we see (from a low
angle) the sailors of
  that ship look up and see Fairbanks's smiling face as he stands high
above them pointing
  two guns straight at them. Fairbanks's superior position (and their
vulnerability) is clearly
  established, and this point-of-view shot enables the audience to readily
understand what
  has happened in a key action scene. I remember seeing at least four
angled point-of-view
  shots in the movie, and all of them are very effective in provoking
audience reaction and
  getting them involved with the plight of the characters in the story. By
1926, the cinematic
  conventions designed to make movies a "cinema of narrative integration"
have been
  firmly established.

Title
Review for M (1931)
M: A warning against totalitarianism?
  Fritz Lang's M was made in 1931, in a Germany witnessing the rapid
growth of the Nazi party. When I first saw the movie, I took it to be
an ominous foreshadowing of the dangers of a totalitarian state, where
mob violence against undesirables is rampant and the authorities
ruthlessly put the supposed good of society over people's individual
freedoms. The incredibly bleak view of Berlin which Fritz Lang depicts
in the movie could let me see it no other way.  It was clear, at least
at first glance, that the audience was to react with disgust at the
oppressive tactics the police employ to catch the child murderer,
measures that make the city of Berlin a most unpleasant place to
live. I thought the movie perhaps may even have reflected Lang's
horror at the Nazi party--a disgust reflected in 1933 when, after
Goebbels offered to make him head of the German film industry, he
chose to flee the country instead.
  But my certainty of this interpretation as an accurate meaning of
the film began to change somewhat on second viewing. My earlier
attitude was in part shaped by my perception that the police's
high-handed and dictatorial tactics to investigate the murders were
getting nowhere, and that their obsessive search of one particular
house was barking up the wrong tree. But on second viewing, I changed
my mind and began to believe that the house they had under close
surveillance was in fact that of the killer (Peter Lorre). A check of
the Internet Movie Database character names confirmed that. Now,
suddenly, my original views of M as a warning against totalitarianism
came into question; after all, one could make the claim from the movie
that the police's oppressive tactics were effective and ultimately for
the good of society.
  My uncertainty as to M's meaning was heightened when I started to
think more of the creative forces behind the movie. Clearly, its
director Lang (whose mother was Jewish) held strongly anti-Nazi
views. But the screenplay of M was co-written by Lang's wife Thea von
Harbou, who herself was (or would become) a dedicated Nazi and would
divorce Lang over the matter. Thus, the question was raised in my mind
over whether it would be legitimate to believe a Nazi would have
written a story with anti-totalitarian overtones, as I had first
though M was.
  Maybe then the answer to my question ultimately has to do with the
different roles of the director and the screenwriter. Von Harbou may
well not have intended her original screenplay to reflect negatively
on the tactics of Nazism; thus, she portrayed the repressive methods
of the police as ultimately effective. But in handing in the
screenplay, she turned over control of the final direction of the
movie to the director; M as we have it now thus reflects Lang's, not
von Harbou's, ultimate vision. And by Lang's claustrophobic directing
and heavy use of shadows, he may have in fact intended to undercut the
message of the screenplay and make Berlin of the 1930's in fact to
seem ominously sinister and oppressive. For this reason, my initial
impression of the movie may have been correct: no matter what minor
points may cast the impression otherwise, Lang had succeeded--via the
overall tone and message of the movie--to make M a warning against the
totalitarianism into which Germany was threatening to descend.
