Authors
Randall Rhea
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (1991)
[I am posting five reviews of STAR TREK VI.  I could easily swamp the group
with reviews of this movie, so I will probably not post any more unless
they say something very different than those posted here (e.g., a review
of the fashions in STAR TREK VI :-) ).  Followups are directed to
rec.arts.startrek to keep the discussion in the appropriate group.
-Moderator]
     The latest (and perhaps the last?) chapter in the Star Trek saga
stars the usual crew of the Starship Enterprise, along with a notable
performance by Christopher Plummer as a Klingon war general, and even a
cameo appearance by Christian Slater as a starship crewman.  Of all the
Star Trek films, this one is the most like a plot from the 1960's
television series, and will probably be the most interesting and
exciting of the six films to "Trekkies" and the general public.
     With the recent collapse of the Soviet Union, the topic of the film
is very timely.  Due to the upcoming destruction of their own planet due
to environmental mismanagement, the hated Klingon empire decides to make
peace overtures to the Federation.   Thanks to the naive instigation of
Spock, Captain Kirk is sent on a diplomatic mission to escort the
Klingon chancellor to a peace conference.  The story then unfolds like
a Sherlock Holmes murder mystery (Holmes is quoted by Spock during the
film) as a plot to sabotage the peace process is uncovered by Spock,
Scotty, and the usual crew.  
     The special effects are spectacular as usual, but they are not as
important to the film as the interaction of the characters or the
message of the story.   The acting is superb throughout; this is
probably Shatner's best and most believable performance ever, and
although they may be getting a bit old, the rest of the crew's
performances are fresh and lively.  The screenplay is very well done,
and it is spiced with intriguing philosophy and humor, particularly when
the Kingons and humans conflict in an expected clash of cultures.  ("You
haven't read  Shakespeare until you've read it in the original Klingon
language.")
     I found myself enjoying the film and getting quite wrapped up  in
it; unfortunately, it ends rather abruptly and expectedly.  It was as if
someone said, "Well, we've got to get this move finished by Christmas,
so we'd better wrap it up now."   After such a good buildup, the ending
was a bit disappointing because is was not as well thought-out as the
rest of the film.
     I do, however, highly recommend this enjoyable and intriguing film.
I recommend seeing it at a 70mm theater with a good sound system, as the
special effects are more exciting.  

Title
Review for Hot Shots! (1991)
     HOT SHOTS is a slapstick comedy film in the tradition of such
movies as AIRPLANE! and THE NAKED GUN.  
     The fact that this film is one of the season's top grossers is
ample evidence of how dismal this summer has been for the movie
industry.  HOT SHOTS provides only an occasional gut-laugh; its bad
jokes outnumber its good ones.  AIRPLANE!, AIRPLANE 2, and THE NAKED GUN
are all funnier films, and anyone who has seen and enjoyed them is bound
to be disappointed by HOT SHOTS.   I am particularly surprised at the
large number of good reviews that this film has received.
     The film's premise (an attempt to spoof TOP GUN) is weak,
considering that TOP GUN is filled with such stereotypical plots and
characters that it is something of a parody already.  Scenes from other
films, such as the hungry wolf from DANCES WITH WOLVES, are thrown in at
random, and are only occasionally funny.
     Charlie Sheen is reasonably good in the starring role as a pilot
who is called back to the Navy after being discharged for mental
incompetence.  He had already done some effective comedy (FERRIS
BUELLER'S DAY OFF), and this film should lead him to more work in that
area.  However, Sheen is not naturally funny like Leslie Nielsen or
Robin Williams--he strains to get the humorous lines out.
Unfortunately, there are few if any other decent performances.
Particularly weak is Lloyd Bridges, who is embarrassingly bad as a
senile old admiral, positioned throughout the film as a constant source
of stupid toilet jokes.
     Wait until this one appears in the video stores ... and then rent
it only if the store is out of AIRPLANE!
