Authors
Pierce Dalton
Number of Reviews
15

Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
 But, definitely a 10 on the cheap shock scale.
 An overly hyped film by the director of the equally trashy Alien 3, and the
future director of the Michael Douglas thriller The Game, Seven is what a cheap
knock-off of Silence of the Lambs looks like.
 If you haven't heard the tale, it's about two cops tracking down a serial
killer who kills by the way of the seven deadly sins: sin, greed, lust, etc.
 Brad Pitt and Morgan Freeman offer good performances, but, poor Kevin Spacey
is reduced to slasher-flick-madman gimmicks.
 Worth a look if you like gruesome make-up effects.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Title
Review for Volcano (1997)
 Even before the opening credits are done, we have seen ominous rumbling
underground and an earthquake that rocks Los Angeles.
 Plus, the film isn't very believable, as disaster films should be.
 Tommy Lee Jones stars as an ex-EMS who is called back into action (a la Sly
Stallon's character in Daylight [1996] ) when motlen rock starts pouring out of
the Lar Brea Tar Pits.
 Anne Heche is also on board as a scientist, and, lo, she is pretty darn
wonderful. And very believable.  So is Jones, who is always great.  He'd make
paint drying look exciting.
 It's too dramatic and nonstop.  Not that volcanoes aren't dramatic.  Volcano
just trys too hard to extend its action from one scene to the next.
 It is said Volcano cost a lot more than Dante's Peak, another volcano film
that came out about two months before.  Peak, which I thought was a thrilling,
intelligent, stunningly scary film, looks very realistic and was more apt in
the brains department.
 Volcano looks cheap and not very sure of itself.
 Enjoyable turf, it looks like a poor man's Irwin Allen.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix  pierce80@aol.com

Title
Review for American History X (1998)
 American History X is one history lesson I enjoyed.
 I have never been a big history fan.  Yet X displays its history of skinheads
in a powerful, haunting tale of hate vs. love.
 Derek Vinyard (Edward Norton) is sent to jail after he kills a black man in
his neighborhood after Derek catches him trying to steal his car in southern
California.
 With a tatooed Swatstika on his left peck, Derek is the image of hate,
specifically the hate of different races, color.
 But, while in jail, he learns the error of his ways.  Maybe this Derek isn't
the bad-ass he pretends (he thinks) to be. 
 And, I'm sure it helps when Derek is raped in prison by a bunch of white
inmates he befriended.
 The title of the film is the title of a school assignment given to Derek's
little brother, Danny (Edward Furlong).  He must report why it is wrong to say
Hitlar was, well, a good guy, so to speak.
 The moral point of X is, or course, that being a racist is wrong.  Yet,
Norton's acting in this movie are very good, his best to date, I think.  His
Derek is an evil, scary man who's morals are a screwed up as Hitlar's.
 He makes his psychotic character in Primal Fear (1996) look reasonible.
 The rest of the cast, including Beverly D'Angelo and Fairuza Bulk, are, also,
good.

Title
Review for Little Voice (1998)
 Little Voice is a dramedy about the rise, and fast fall, of LV (Little Voice),
a painfully shy girl who rarely speaks, but mostly imitates her favorite
musicians, notably Judy Garland.
 A small, UK feature, Little Voice is a mostly enjoyable film, with a grand
cast, including the mighty Brenda Blethyn, who's performance in 1996's Secrets
& Lies was phenomenal.
 She plays, basically, the same role in this movie:  a druken, chain-smoking
fool who is very distant from her daughter.
 Jane Horrocks plays LV.  She is most notable for Bubble on the BBC's fab show
Absolutely Fabulous.  In Little Voice, she is also good.
 Ewan McGregor and Michael Cain round out the top cast.
 The basic plot is Cain "discovering" LV and trying to make her a star.
 But, the real reason to see this film is Blethyn and Cain.  They both feature
remarkable performances, especially Cain, who, in the film's last reel, has a
show-stopping scene in which he drukenly sings about his career.
 Little Voice could have used that extra zing, but, as an acting feature, it is
a masterpiece.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Title
Review for Velvet Goldmine (1998)
 Velvet Goldmine works in two ways.  You can see it as either a tribute to glam
rock, or as satire.
 I saw it as both.  But, the results aren't that satisfactory.
 Set in flashbacks in the `70s, the film follows the life of legendary rocker
Brian Slade, who had himself "assassinated" as to get out of the business. 
When his fans find out it was a set-up, they go beserk and trash him.
 Told through the eyes, and memory of persons associated with Slade, of a
British reporter (Christian Bale), Velvet Goldmine reminded me of Boogie Nights
(1997).  They both feature fame, drugs, sex, careers that go down hill, and
lost love.  
 Not as good as Nights, Goldmine is a nice try at bringing back the memory of
glam rock.
 But, it just doesn't do the era justice.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Title
Review for Great Expectations (1998)
 What the hell happened to Great Expectations from the way of Charles Dickenson
to the Hollywood screenplay?
 This was not what I was forced to read in 9th grade.
 This version is about two twits falling in and out of love from their
childhood in Florida, to their adult lives in New York City.
 The only resemblence, aside from the young love, is the escaped convict who
befriends a boy in Florida.  The con is played by Robert De Niro, who, in his
total of four scenes, steals the entire picture under Ethan Hawke and Gwyneth
Paltrow's feets.
 In the `60s, a boy is forced to do housework for an aging drama queen at her
old, decaying mansion.  There he meets her niece, I believe, and they fall in
love, I believe.
 They go in and out of lust as teens,  til they both bump into each other in
NYC later on, he a rising artist, her, a business women.
 This film is under Paltrow's talents, while, it is basically just right for
Hawke.  De Niro, on the other hand, is great, but, the film is also below his
surface.
 A `90s, speeded up version of Dickenson, Great Expectations dashed all my
expectations of the film out the window.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Title
Review for Primary Colors (1998)
 President Clinton not withstanding, Senator Jack Stanton has an issue.
 It is only two weeks til the Presidential Primary, and he is being accused of
something he did not commit.  So we assume.
 A very close friend says his daughter is pregnant, and Stanton is the father.
 And you thought the Monica Lewinski deal was major.
 A political satire that isn't, Primary Colors is a viciously funny, very real
comedy/drama about the ups and downs of Stanton's run for President.
 Based on the novel by "Anonymous" (later revealed as a Newsweek writer),
Colors is a mirror image film: a film that is so real, it doesn't even play for
fiction.
 John Travolta is so go as Stanton, I forgot that I wasn't watching Clinton
himself. Stanton is a dead ringer for Clinton.
  Emma Thompson is no Hilary.  Her Susan is a warm, kind person who wants to
win the primary for, not just herself, but for her and Jack.
 The rest of Stanton's team includes Henry (British newcomer Adrian Lester),
who narrates the film, Richard (Billy Bob Thornton), Daisy (Maura Tierny) and
the investigator Libby (Kathy Bates - who's excellent.)
 Colors is a brilliant, hystarical political comedy that is almost as good as
the classic Wag the Dog.
 Its not only satire, but an important film that could very easily play for
history classes, aside from the R rating.
 It doesn't just make Stanton look like a womenizer.  It makes him look human.

Title
Review for U.S. Marshals (1998)
 I would even say that I liked it better than The Fugitive, the 1993 Harrison
Ford vehicle for which Marshals is a sequel, or spin-off, of, so to speak.
 Tommy Lee Jones stars again as U.S. Marshal Sam Gerard, the ruthless,
unstoppable cop who tracked down and help find innocent Dr. Richard Kimble
(Ford) the first time out.
 Here, he is back in top form, tracking down another fugitive, played by Wesley
Snipes.  He is framed (?) for the homicide of two FBI agents in New York,
transfered in a plane for convicts, but escapes after the plane is forced to
make an emergancy landing in an exciting crash sequence that tops, even, the
bus crash in Fugitive.
 Marshals is a very well-made thriller.  Director Stuart Baird has captured the
style and essence of Andrew Davis (who directed the original), and, I think,
added his own extra special hand.
 There is a literally edge-of-your-seat scene at a cemetery, during a funeral,
which has an assassin on the roof top of the church shooting as our hero Jones
as he trys to flee for his live.
 U.S. Marshals is brainy fun, and visually spectacular.  And seeing Jones in a
giant chicken costume is worth admission alone.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
 The comet-disaster flick is a disaster alright.  
 Directed by Tony Scott (Top Gun), it tells the story about an asteroid the
size of Texas caught on a collision course with earth.
 And you thought that dinky little comet in Deep Impact was trouble.  Jeez.
 After a great opening, in which an American spaceship, plus the city of New
York, are completely destroyed by a comet shower, NASA detects the said
asteroid and go into a frenzy.
 They hire the world's best oil driller (Bruce Willis), and send him and his
crew up into space to fix our globel problem.  That's like sending a mouse into
a cat carrier, isn't it?
 The action in Armageddon are so over the top, nonstop, and too ludicrous for
words, I had to sigh and hit my head with my notebook a couple of times.  I was
not alone.  Plus, to see a wonderful actor like Billy Bob Thornton is a film
like Armageddon is a waste of the actor's talents.
 The film is just a reel to show off a bunch of snazzy FX shots.  The only real
reason for making this film was to somehow out-perform Deep Impact.  
 Producer Jerry Bruckheimer fails with Armageddon.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix  pierce80@aol.com

Title
Review for Antz (1998)
 Its a stupid little movie that trys to be clever and sophisticated, yet trys a
bit too hard.
 With the voices of Woody Allen, Gene Hackman, Jennifer Lopez, Sylvester
Stallone, and Sharon Stone, this computer-animated yak-fest (think Toy Story
[1996] filled with used merchandising) is one for the ant-eaters.
 The main story is the independence of a worker named Z (Allen).  He wants more
to life than just digging away underground for the colony.  When he finds out
about ``Insectopia," a mythical place where all insects can run free, Z, along
with his colony's princess (Stone), journey out into the world to find a
meaning for life.
 About 15 minutes into the picture, I began to wonder what the point of the
film was.  Halfway through, I still didn't have an answer.
 Antz is a mindless mess of poor writing and even poorer voice-overs.  Allen is
nonchalant, while I would have guessed, if I hadn't seen her in The Mighty and
Basic Instinct, Stone can't act, even in a cartoon.
 This film is one for the bugs: unfunny and extremely dull.
 Hey, A Bug's Life may have a good time doing Antz in.

Title
Review for Elizabeth (1998)
 A costume drama set in the 1500s, England, Elizabeth is a lush, romantic,
political masterpiece about the upset over the crossing of a Protestant Queen
from a respected Catholic one.
 When the court and country are a whole after the passing of the queens, the
royal family, so to speak, are upset that a Protestant should be crowened, and
not another Catholic, plus, the new queen, Elizabeth I (Cate Blanchette), was
the bastard baby of the previous Queen Mary's father.
 The persecution over Catholics and Protestants isn't the only majority in
Elizabeth.  Elizabeth I must face the decision to give up personal pleasures,
and her lover (Joseph Fiennes of Shakespeare in Love), in order to rule,
successfully, the country, which she did for 40 more years.
 Both Elizabeth and Shakespeare in Love are set in the Elizabethian era, and
both feature a Queen Elizabeth I (Judi Dench plays her in Love), or course. 
Yet, I found Elizabeth more stimulating and involving than Love, not just
because Elizabeth features a great deal more of Elizabeth I, but because I
found Blanchette a more powerful, hypnotic sense for the role.
 Elizabeth, also featuring Geoffrey Rush and Richard Attenborough, is my pick
for the best picture of 1998 award.
 It's a dynamic, important, breathtaking film of loyalty, power, greed, and
trust.
 Shakespeare would die for the book rights.

Title
Review for Perfect Murder, A (1998)
 A Perfect Murder is about the unhappy marrige of Steven Taylor (Michael
Douglas) to filthy rich Emily Bradford Taylor (Gwyneth Paltrow).  Steven's
business will be wiped out soon, leaving Steven broke.  Emily is secretly
sleeping with a wannabe artist (Viggo Mortensen) on the side.
 All of this leads to a murder, but I will not tell who does it and who ends up
laying in a pool of blood on a kitchen floor.
 Based on the play Dial M for Murder, which was adapted by Alfred Hitchcock
into one of his lesser movies, Perfect Murder is crisp, stylish, seductive, and
oozing with suspensful surprises.  I would rank it as one of 1990's most
accomplished thrillers, next to Silence of the Lambs (1990) and Copycat (1995).
 The film is far more involving than Douglas's Fatal Attraction (1987) and
Basic Instinct (1992), but just as good, if not more so still, than 1997's The
Game. 
 It's beautifully shot and directed by Andrew Davis (The Fugitive).  I
recommend the DVD, for it features the alternative ending and history of the
original play.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Title
Review for Sliding Doors (1998)
 Slidings Doors just misses its case and locks-out fast.
 It's a fantasy about Helen (Gwyneth Paltrow) who is fired from her job, goes
home early to discover her boyfriend in bed with an American girl (Jeanene
Triplehorne), and changes her life.  She cuts off her long, brown hair and dyes
it blonde.
 But, that's when Sliding Doors takes another course.
 Helen No. 2 continues her life as a blonde, while Helen No. 1 misses her train
home, and doesn't know about the other women.
 An interesting premises that has its moments, but flattens out near the end.  
 Paltrow is great as Helen, and does a great British accent.  But, the film
could have covered so many things about parallel lives instead of featuring a
romantic subplot.
 John Hannah, as Helen No. 1's new beau, ranges from charming, to just
annoying.
 Sliding Doors is a nice time-passer, but, slaps you on the ass on the way out.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
 The new motion picture experience about Godzilla is as flat as the city of
Tokyo after Godzilla rampaged through it in 1958.
 A big budget, under written, overly hyped piece of boredom, Godzilla was
written and directed by the same team as 1996's Independence Day.
 Now ID4 was not great movie.  It wasn't even a good one.  But, it did have a
sense of awe and wonder, not found in Godzilla.
 The story, if I can remember the crucial parts, is about the creation of a
giant lizard mutated after years of radiation near a nuclear power plant.  The
lizard grows, leaves its footprints in the ground at various villages (which is
the best scene of the film), and swims its way to New York City.
 I really don't have to say what happens next.  All I can do is ask questions. 
(a) Why did Godzilla pick NYC out of all the Atlantc? (b) Can the beast really
swim thousands of miles within a couple of days? (c) Will this film sink the
careers of Roland Emmerich and Dean Devlin?
 That last question isn't that important to the film's view point.  But it is
important for the film's grounds.  ID4 was crap, but made a lot of money. 
Godzilla, only slightly worse, is crap, but dropped like a rock at the box
office last spring after a mediocre opening of $55 million.
 Oh, I forgot the actors.  Matthew Broderick, Jean Reneo, Hank Azaria.  They
are all wasted.
 The reason I give Godzilla two stars is because of its style.  The film is
much more visually spectacular than ID4 in the cinematography department, yet
ID4's special FX were better.  That may not make much sense, but, it does to
me.
 This Godzilla needs to be put to sleep.
1999 (c) Quick Flick Pix    Pierce80@aol.com

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
 It is also a very slick, imaginative, thrilling film from director John
Frankenheimer, whose 1996's film, Island of Dr. Moreau, left little to be
desired.
 The plot involves a bunch of international operatives (some ex-KGB) joining
together to steal a briefcase away from a very powerful and wealthy man.
 What's in the briefcase we don't know.  Neither does Sam (Robert De Niro), the
so-called leader of the operative group.
 If you're thinking that bit resembles Pulp Fiction, you're not alone.
 Tailing the briefcase all over Europe, Sam and his elite group (including Jean
Reno) set up all kinds of booby traps and whatnots to trap the man and
briefcase. The film has a sort of James Bond feel to it, yet, generates more
energy from its action sequences than any 007 film I have seen, including
1997's Tomorrow Never Dies.
 De Niro and Reno work great together.  They have that rare flare for acting
that never goes stale, even in the midst of a film like Ronin, which, if you
get right down to it, is very intelligent, atmospheric, and dopey.
 One thing that really heightens the film to intensity are its spectacular car
chase scenes.  They are among the best I have seen.
 A long drawn-out one, featured in the now-famed tunnel where Princess Diana
died in Paris, is a dizzying, frenzied, pure rush or energy.
 Director Frankenheimer has abandoned Moreau's Island and created a very sassy
thriller, and some breathtaking views, in Paris and Rome.
 Do Sam and the gang capture the briefcase?
 You'll never look at a car the came again.
