Authors
Kevin Takahashi
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead (1990)
Written and Directed by Tom Stoppard
Cast: Tim Roth, Gary Oldman, Richard Dreyfuss
     What we have here is a case of an excellent adaptation of a
brilliant stage play.  Tom Stoppard has done a fabulous job of both
adapting and directing his play for the screen.
     I believe this is Stoppard's directorial debut (at least in film),
although his screenwriting credits include BRAZIL, as well as screen
adaptations of J. G. Ballard's EMPIRE OF THE SUN and John LeCarre's THE
RUSSIA HOUSE.
     For those of you unfamiliar with R&G, think back to Shakespeare's
HAMLET.  Remember those two guys who hang around with him for a little
while and then are gone?  Those are Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  Minor
characters in Shakespeare's play.  Now imagine this: Watching HAMLET
through the eyes of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.  This is what R&G ARE
DEAD is all about: having HAMLET happen around the bewildered and
confused R&G.
     To be glib, R&G ARE DEAD can be described as an intellectual "Who's
On First?".  Indeed, there is much verbal fencing and witty dialogue,
that I almost would recommend that those unfamiliar with the text rent
it first ... (or read the play) ... so as not to miss a lot of the
texture.  I'm not going to dwell upon plot anymore, because I've said
all I'm going to say about it.  That's the general outline, and to say
any more would be a foul and hideous deed, indeed.  
     Another thing that makes R&G ARE DEAD a real treat are the
performances of Tim Roth (last seen in Robert Altman's not-so-good
VINCENT AND THEO) and Gary Oldman (STATE OF GRACE, etc.) as the
befuddled, bewildered duo.  They pull of their roles with grace,
savoir-faire and charm ... (seemingly) effortlessly portraying R&G.
Definitely tour-de-force performances, with few histrionics, and with
much subtlety.  This is what I believe makes R&G ARE DEAD a superior
adaptation ... the fact that subtlety comes across much easier on film
than on the stage.  A subtle facial expression which may not make a
great impact on stage (due to the scale) can make all the difference in
a film, and it does here.  There are times when both Roth and Oldman
make a scene so funny just by a slight change in facial expression.
Richard Dreyfuss is also wonderful as the Player, the leader of a
travelling theatre troupe that plays at Elsinore.
     Tom Stoppard does a fabulous job of directing, as well.   He has
created an Elsinore like no other Elsinore ... to quote another review
"... an Elsinore by way of M. C. Escher...."  Don't take it
literally ... but Stoppard's Elsinore is a wild and wacky place.  He has
made some textual changes to accommodate the transition from stage to
screen and, I believe, added some material.  The sight gags are
plentiful enough and a sight to behold, neither staid nor cliche, but
fresh and witty.
