Authors
Nick Amado
Number of Reviews
27

Title
Review for Next Stop Wonderland (1998)
Starring: Hope Davis, Alan Gelfant, Victor Arag, Jon Benjamin
There are some truly funny lines in Next Stop Wonderland that are caught
up in a battle with forced, trendy screenwriting. It is hard to tell
which comes out on top, and it only manages to provide some likable
characters in an all-too-familiar situation. Erin (Davis) is a young
woman who is shattered when her goofy, activist boyfriend leaves her
because she doesn't support him. She then goes on a quest to meet Mr.
Right by way of her mother placing a personal add against her will. Erin
reluctantly ventures out into the singles world, makes headway, and
eventually starts making sport of the situation. 
The film bounces back and forth between two characters who never meet.
Alan, a plumber who is working his way through school to become a marine
biologist, is also not burning up the dating scene. The film is utterly
predictable. We know all along that these two lonley souls are meant for
each other, though they seem unable to meet. Sadly, most of Alan's
screentime is dedicated to the film's subplot of political muscle,
trying to destroy the local aquarium for its prime real estate. It
involves the plans for a mausoleum and killing a balloonfish. Pretty
silly.
The film reminds me quite a bit of Sliding Doors in a number of ways.
Primarily, it deals with fate, Who are we supposed to spend the rest of
our lives with? and, How will we meet this person? There is also some
artsy but jarring camerawork and editing, but it dies down about a half
hour into the film. Strangely, that is when the dialogue perks up.
Next Stop Wonderland is not a very intriguing film, though it has a step
up on the more unique Sliding Doors in that the characters are more
likable. Hope Davis is really a joy to watch. She has a very accessable
beauty that makes the audience care about her, even if she is not being
particularly charming each moment. There are some truly funny lines, but
they are few and far between. Its a story of two people looking for
romance in the wrong places. It has been my contention that Hollywood
has done a poor job with romantic comedies in recent years, with, of
course, a few exceptions. The indie film world has done only slightly
better, but neither side has managed to produce a gem. Next Stop
Wonderland falls short of the mark too.

Title
Review for Avengers, The (1998)
Starring: Ralph Fiennes, Uma Thurman and Sean Connery
Though at times I wasn't sure what to make of The Avengers, I must admit
that I came out pleased. I don't really know why, but I just enjoyed the
film. It's due in great part to the costume and production design. The
Avengers is a stylish, vibrantly colorful and opulent picture.
I don't think I'd do very well in capsulating the story. The writer
didn't do a very good job with it either. Basically, Sean Connery is a
villain bent on world domination. He threatens every country in the
world with his weather controlling device. If they don't pay him 10
percent of their GNP, he freezes their country. Special agent John Steed
(Fiennes) works on stopping him, with the aid of Dr. Emma Peel (Thurman)
who has only a short time to clear her name of heinous wrong-doings.For
some reason (that I either didn't get or that wasn't explained clearly)
there is a duplicate Emma Peel running about. She looks like Uma, only
colder. And she is, of course, the one responsible for being bad. I
don't think I've done a very poor job of explaining this, the story just
isn't that good.
But there is something likable about the cheesey dialogue. And how could
you not like a film that has people in huge colorful teddy bear costumes
at a board meeting? There is also a spiffy "locust" attack, orchestrated
by British rising star comedian Eddie Izzard, who's only line comes at
the end of the film. One of many lines that made me chuckle, I might
add.
Some films make it difficult to tell if they take themselves seriously.
With Congo, they certainly did not, but that didn't work for so many
reasons. With Godzilla, I'm not sure whether or not they took themselves
seriously, but really, no matter how they took themselves, they couldn't
have made it palpable. But The Avengers puts a modern, spunky twist on a
campy 60's TV series. True fans probably won't much care for the new
version, they seldom do. But as a viewer who has seen episodes, but was
never die hard fan (and honestly can't remember much about them) I was
able to enjoy The Avengers for what it was worth. Admitedly, it could
have been made MUCH better than this. Fiennes and Connery are
forgettable, and so is Thurman (who has never looked better). But for
some reason, I didn't care about that as much with this one as I do with
so many others. I think there is enough splash and style, enough pretty
photography, enough cool effects and funky characters (shallow though
they may be) that I can recommend this film for some light-hearted,
thuroughly predictable fun.

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon 4 (1998)
Starring: Mel Gibson, Danny Glover, Joe Pesci, Rene Russo, Chris Rock,
Jet Li
It seems that in each of the films that have made up this series, there
has been at least one over-the-top but enjoyable action sequence. Riggs
jumping off a building handcuffed to a suicidal business man, Murtaugh
being pulled off an exploding john by his buddy, Riggs cutting the wrong
wire and blowing up a highrise.
Lethal Weapon 4 opens with Riggs and Murtaugh crouching behind a car
trying to avoid bullets being sprayed by a maniacal flame throwing one
man destruction force. You and I probably wouldn't be able to think of a
way out of a situation like that. But if Riggs were by your side, he'd
have you take off all of your clothes and cluck like a chicken so that
the perp might be distracted which would allow Riggs to fire at the fuel
pack on his back, thus blowing him into the air and sending him directly
into a gasoline tanker truck. That would probably work.
Sadly, Lethal Weapon 4 doesn't get much better after that. There are
some funny moments in the film. It is one of the few action film series
that has genuine belly-laughs and not just cheap one liners. But those
occasional chuckles can't hide a lame and uninspired plot; one in which
a ring of Chinese "bad dudes" smuggles in slave labor from China. Guns,
kung fu and counterfeit cash all manage to work their way in.
But what is more annoying in this fourth and hopefully final installment
of a once great movie franchise is the recurrance of an impending
fatherhood theme for two of the main characters. Rene Russo's sole
purpose in this film is as a breeder for Mel Gibson. The character that
she portrayed in 3, tough as nails, sarcastic and sexy is nowhere to be
found in 4. She is in a few paltry scenes and has nothing to do with the
film's crime plot. Though her character seems written in to cash in on
her popularity as an actress and her success with the previous sequel,
Joe Pesci's presence is even MORE obvious. He serves absolutely no
purpose and has forgotten how to make the character of Leo Getz
enjoyable. On top of that, throw in the always annoying Chris Rock and
some run of the mill, truly evil Chinese villians with zero personality
and you have Lethal Weapon 4.
There are some exciting action sequences that go way overboard (because
it's summertime, right?) And, when the jokes aren't busy blatantly
hitting you in the face, humerous sequences that remind you of the good
old days sneak their way in. But the bottom line here is that there is
nothing new in LW4. The characters border on obnoxious, the bad guys are
just plain bad, and the plot is inexcusably mundane.
It isn't so bad as to recommend that fans of the first 3 not go see it,
but for those that aren't Riggs and Murtaugh buffs, save your money.

Title
Review for Return to Paradise (1998)
Regardless of the critical response to this film, few would debate that
Return To Paradise is one of the most thought provoking films of the
decade. The story asks two main characters, Sherrif and Tony, if they
would spend three years of their life in a third world prison in order
to save a friend from execution. But from the get go it is clear, at
least to me, that the filmmakers are asking the audience to think about
it as much as they are asking the characters to.
Sherrif, Lewis and Tony meet each other for the first time in Malaysia.
They are three young men who are experiencing life, sharing hash, beer
and babes. Sherrif and Tony decide to return to New York to continue
their lives. Lewis stays put, planning to head off to Borneo to work
with mistreated apes. The three friends realize that they've bought too
much hash and toss most of the remainder in the trash outside their hut.
The story picks up two years later in New York City as a lawyer tries to
track down Sherrif and Tony. She informs them that Lewis will be
executed because of the sheer volume the officials found in his
posession. That amount makes anyone in Malaysia a suspected drug dealer,
the penalty for which is death. But if one man goes back for his friend,
he spends six years in prison but accepts half of the responsiblity,
thus half of the drugs. If both go back, three years each.
Most of the film tugs at our morality. We know what we SHOULD do, but
what we would actually do if faced with the situation is a different
story. The filmmakers make no bones about it, the characters ping pong
back and forth with their emotions, as do we. Conscience, the "right"
thing to do is not always the easiest, nor necessarily the best. The
conflict is firmly implanted early on. After that, we just wait to see
what they would do.
Return To Paradise is a well-crafted picture. It is dark, it is
depressing, and there are probably a lot of things in the film that you
might question, as I did. There were some things I just didn't buy. But
they are also intentional choices made by the men and women behind the
camera, and that was something I was able to accept. The film looks as
though every scene was shot using the one available light on the set.
Every shot is drenched in thick shadows. Reasonably, there arent' a lot
of moments of bright color in Return to Paradise, once the men part ways
early on. The decisions they have to make are grave. The situation their
friend faces is grave.
Like last year's pitiful Red Corner, this film tackles the issues of
Asian judicial systems, though the real story here is the morality of
man, a true "what if". But, the choice by the filmmakers is to make the
"enemy" (the Malaysian government) faceless for the most part is a good
one. A faceless enemy in the movies is always much easier to sell, and
it is easier for the audience to accept. But we do see the faces at the
end, and it is a matter of personal opinion whether or not what we see
really works.
Perhaps the most surprising amidst the fine performances in Paradise was
that of Joaquin Phoenix. He has a rather small part, playing the
imprisoned Lewis. But he makes the most of his limited screen time and
may, in certain circles, be considered for an Academy Award nomination.
(Are we talking about this already?) Vince Vaughn, as Sherrif, sells his
character well. We are pulled every which way with his character. Anne
Heche gives a good sentimental performance as Lewis' lawyer, who shows
grit and perserverance as a fighter who is always patient with the two
men who face the ultimate decision.
Return to Paradise is certainly good enough to recommend, but try not to
watch it with sharp objects in the vicinity. Be prepared to question
yourself, your morals, and for god's sake, don't go after a really fun
afternoon.

Title
Review for Prince of Egypt, The (1998)
Directed by Brenda Chapman and Steve Hickner
Voices of: Val Kilmer, Michelle Pfieffer, Danny Glover, Steve Martin, Jeff Goldblum, Martin Short, Sandra Bullock and Ralph Fiennes
Perhaps the best thing about The Prince of Egypt is that it was
directed as if the characters were tangible, and the camera was
actually moving through the film's dazzling landscape. Modern
technology has afforded animated films the luxury of looking just like
live action films in the way the camera is free to move and focus. Not
only is The Prince Of Egypt pretty to look at, well acted (by the
voices, of course) and well animated, but it is really well directed.
This story comes from the Book of Exodus. It takes us through the
discovery of Moses as a baby as he is taken in by the Pharoah. He is
raised as Egyptian royalty (along with future Pharoah Ramses) even
though he is born Hebrew. As an adult he discovers his true heritage
and exiles himself from Egypt. As a Hebrew shepard, God speaks to him
through the burning bush. The second half of the film is Moses'
journey back into Egypt to confront Ramses and free the Hebrew
slaves. With some artistic liberties (as the begining of the film
claims) the story is faithful. The blood in the water, the plagues,
Passover, the parting of the Red Sea all make their appearance.
Perhaps the only flaw in this film (aside from the abrupt musical
numbers, which are a flaw in ALL musicals) is the set of Ramses'
goons. They are voiced by Martin Short and Steve Martin (the latter of
which is so recognizable that it is extremely distracting). Their
characters simply do not fit, neither thier physical appearance nor
their personalities. Thankfully, they play a rather small
part. Perhaps what makes them flawed is that they seem more fit for a
Disney movie, and Dreamworks clearly wanted to separate themselves
from the notion that they are like thier animation counterparts.
The new digital age really makes its impact in animated films. Digital
effects just don't look real in live action pictures, but they make
animation astounding. There are numerous scenes in The Prince Of Egypt
which were unachievable five years ago. The parting of the Red Sea is
perhaps not the most amazing (as wonderful as it is.) The early
chariot race, the plagues and the burning bush are all equally
powerful.
It is unique to see an animated film tell such a story. There are no
fairy tale elements to this story. What you see can be found in the
bible. And yet as Moses reaches the top of the mount to present to his
people the ten commandments of their god, it is as powerful as Simba's
birth and eventual return to Pride Rock in The Lion King (to me, the
most wonderful animated film of all time.) With Disney's latest turn
for the worst in terms of animation style and weak story and weaker
characters, The Prince Of Egypt stands out as a destined classic. It
has a beautifully unique cinematic style, physically interesting
characters and music that, though unnecessary, does not detract from
the picture. The Prince Of Egypt is one of the year's best motion
pictures.

Title
Review for Spanish Prisoner, The (1997)
No one is what you think they are. That is the basis of The Spanish 
Prisoner, a new film by Pulitzer Prize winning playwright and sometime 
director David Mamet. This psychological thriller has the makings of a 
big-time, whamm-o production, but still comes off as a rather small, soon 
to be forgotten picture. Which is too bad because it has a lot of bright 
spots. Belive it, Steve Martin is a bad guy, a rich guy, and not too 
funny. He is the mystery man who charms his way into techno-inventor 
Campbell Scott's life, and attempts to ruin it.
Scott's character, Joe Ross, has made a brilliant invention for his 
company (the details of which we never learn) but begins to feel slighted 
that he will not be monetarily rewarded for it. As his disappointment 
grows he becomes entangled in a web of mystery that is spun by enigmatic 
millionaire Martin (Jimmy) and a secretary for the company, Susua, played 
by Rebecca Pigeon (writer/director Mamet's real-life bride).
The Spanish Prisoner begins to take on the feel of David Fincher's The 
Game, as the lead characters from both are surrounded by uncertainty (as 
is indeed the audience) and they lose control of the events in their 
lives. But Michael Douglas portrayed a sense of frustration and 
helplessness that Scott was either unable to, or instructed not to convey 
to the viewer. As things get more and more out of hand, I never saw pain, 
frustration or terror in Scott's face. Though it is a good performance, 
the strength of The Spanish Prisoner is found in the extremely "Mametian" 
script, the refreshing performance by Martin, and the suspense 
and mystery that I, personally, could not help but fall into.
There are, of course, a number of coincidental happenings that allow the 
story to continue, and they, as much as anything else, make the film 
completely unoriginal, but it still mangages to deliver. The devices are 
just crafty enough to make it work. But I have a feeling that you will 
need to go out and see The Spanish Prisoner rather soon if you want to 
catch it on the big screen. It just has that feel.
Comments, complaints, questions, email me at namado@concentric.net

Title
Review for Phantoms (1998)
Though "Phantoms", a current horror, sci-fi release, has nothing to do 
with th 1987 comedy "Planes Trains and Automobiles", I am struck with a 
line from the latter that really sums everything up. When Steve Martin is 
berating John Candy, he says, "Oh, and when you're telling these stories, 
here's an idea....have a point! It makes it so much more interesting for 
the listener!" Apparently, Mr. Koontz wasn't listening.
"Phantoms" spends its first thiry minutes confusing the hell out of the 
viewer, making us ask, "what could possibly be responsible for all this 
grisly death?". Perhaps if anyone in Hollywood was creative enough to 
create a reasonable answer to that question, then this might be a 
worthwhile film, but deep inside, we know no one is good enough to write 
themselves out of this one. "Phantoms" has so many problems, plot holes, 
and inconsistencies that it is hard to know where to start. So I'll start 
with the lame characters. Two sisters (Rose McGowan and Joanna Going) 
wander into this town to find everyone mysteriously dead. The entire town 
has been wiped out, and yet they bump into the sheriff and two officers. 
I won't even ask why they're ok. They explore this town, becoming 
increasingly creeped out and realize that bodies are disappearing, 
strange noises are emenating from the phone, (why? No clue.) and nasty 
animals lurk outside, waiting to suck the life out of you. In 
desperation, Sheriff Affleck makes a radio call for help but the receiver 
says that they can't hear the message. Funny, then, how some mysterious 
task force shows up to this dinky town in their white ultra-protecto 
suits to solve the problem. Why these sisters have anything to do with 
the story is beyond me. They never contribute. Affleck is a former FBI 
agent who's haunted past is his ONLY reason for being a part of this 
story, and when Peter O'Toole comes in, you just know that no one in 
Hollywood remembers that this man is a professional and deserves better 
scripts. 
Of course, this is a mysterious being from the depths of the Earth's 
core, and there is one man who has studied it extensively. Apparently, he 
was laughed at by his colleagues, and now he is a tabloid writer. This 
underground superspeicies knows who he is and wants him to come 
investigate, so he shows up in his own white ultra-protecto suit. (The 
suits, by the way, don't provide any protection, but at this point, who 
cares?) This tabloid writer turned Earth Savior is played by Peter 
O'Toole. O'Toole fills in the gang that this is a creature that feeds off 
the life and intelligence of the humans it sucks down. It has been around 
since the begining of time, "this thing was responsible for the end of 
the dinosaurs!" he proclaims. It seems this super creature has consumed 
someone who has seen "Alien" and got the idea that popping out of corpses 
mouths and devouring other people is a cool monster move.
Why this creature is here, why it choses this tiny town to start it's 
Earth-conquering quest, why it has managed to elude the history books and 
scientists (EXCEPT for Mr. O'Toole), why one character keeps popping up 
as a living corpse controlled by part of this creature,  and why Koontz 
thought this would be an interesting film is beyond me. NONE of these 
questions are answered at any time. Director Joe Chappelle did a supreme 
job of showcasing his amaturish director devices. He builds tension with 
slow movements towards some door, has the music heighten, the close up on 
the character's face, the shot of the hand about to open the door and 
"bam!"...nothing there, but oooh. It was scary for a sec. When the girls 
first reach the town and find dead people, they think it is a disease. 
Reasonable at this point, so when one of them (a doctor) tells the other 
to try and use the phone, she grabs a tissue for her sister to use. We 
all know that kleenex will stop nasty airborne viruses from infecting us 
when we use the telephone.
Everyone who made this film owes themselves an apology. And if "Phantoms" 
doesn't make my year's worst list next January, then we are in for a real 
bad year in the theaters.
Zero out of four stars
Copyright (C) 1998 Nick Amado

Title
Review for Sphere (1998)
Review: SPHERE
Directed by: Barry Levinson
Starring: Dustin Hoffman, Sharon Stone, Samuel L. Jackson, Liev Schrieber, Petere Coyote
Approx Running Time: 135 min.
Based on the novel by Michael Chricton
Sphere, "Busy" Barry Levinson's latest project, dances between so many
genre's it's hard to keep up. But in the end, it is only the cast that
makes this a watchable, occasionally interesting film.
Hoffman, Stone, Jackson and Schreiber play a group of scientists, and
professionals who are chosen to explore an undersea, unexplained
extra-terrestrial phenomenon. An other-worldly ship apparently lodged
itself at the bottom of the Pacific ocean nearly three hundred years
ago.The group soon discovers that they aren't the first people to
explore the it, and they begin to wonder if it may be a man made
vessel. We are a bit curious too, as a matter of fact, but that
curiosity goes away when other things cloud the picture and lead us to
other unexplained events.
Though some of the screenwriting (by current Oscar nominee Paul
Attanasio) is witty and amusing (and some hackneyed and clichčd),
Sphere can't help but drown itself (you should excuse the pun) in
psychological, flat thrills. None of the bizzare events that unfold
are logical, and they don't have the punch of those you might find in
an episode of the Twilight Zone. Sadly, Sphere misses with it's
storyline.
This film could have been saved with a satisfying finale, but alas, it
will end up in the "Bad Ending Hall of Shame". Chrichton seemed unable
to find a suitable ending, so he came up with this one on a really bad
day.
What's surprising about Sphere is that it was directed by the
marvelous Barry Levinson, who brought us Good Morning Vietnam, Wag the
Dog, Sleepers and Rain Man. Here, he is totally out of his
element. The fact that he is trapped under water in a strange ship
really confines him -- he is a director who needs physical space to
explore. With Sphere, he is resigned to deal with special effects and
good actors to keep it afloat. (I'm sorry, I can't help it.)
Sphere is enjoyable in a few respects. Jackson is not in top form, but
Hoffman and Stone are. There are some amusing scenes, and nothing is
funnier than a group of talented actors in a small room, high on
helium. It's main fault, though, lies in its ill-conceived story and
never-explained developments.I couldn't help but ask, "but why....?"
Two out of Four stars
Copyright (C) 1998 Nick Amado
*******************************
Questions, comments? More water jokes? Email me at namado@concentric.net

Title
Review for Very Bad Things (1998)
Starring: Jon Favreau, Christian Slater, Cameron Diaz, Daniel Stern, Leland Orser, Jeremy Piven
There aren't many films which have such an appropriate title. Very Bad
Things is very telling of what you are going to see if you view this
picture. It starts off pretty bad, then gets VERY bad. Actually, it
gets worse. This is truly an evil picture. I kind of liked it.
Jon Favreau and Cameron Diaz are about to get married. He seems
aimless in life, she is set on only one thing, getting married, and it
doesn't really matter to whom. All she wants is to walk down the
aisle. Try and stop her. Favreau and his buddies head off to Las Vegas
for a rowdy and raunchy batchelor party which includes, among other
things, cocaine, pot, and a strippin' hooker. Once the Jeremy Piven
character accidentally jams her head into a bathroom wall hook while
having wild sex, the madness begins. The film's most despicable
character (Slater) pushes the group to cut her up into itty bitty
pieces and bury her in the desert. "No one knows she's here, I called
her personally," he reasons. Just as the group decides to forego
leagal action, a hotel security guard enters the room and finds them
out. Slater's character takes it upon himself to do away with him
(using nothing but a handy corkscrew). Now they are in deep
doo-doo. So they have two bodies to cut up an bury. Then they have to
"reassemble" the sawed up parts for religious purposes. It is after
this that the film gets nasty.
Yep, Very Bad Things is full of very bad things. In actuality, most of
the gore comes with what I've already told you. But everything that
takes place after that is just evil.
Though there are a few funny moments, Very Bad Things, despite what
you may have read, is NOT very funny. It is the definition of black
comedy. In fact, it may redefine the genre. The film is truly sick,
and snowballs into whatever is past sick. Much of the audience
reaction is nervous laughter. You can't believe what you are seeing,
so you laugh, much like seeing a close up of male genitals caught in a
zipper in There's Something About Mary, or male goo hanging off the
side of someone's face in the same film. It isn't funny in and of
itself, but you certainly aren't expecting it, so you laugh.
Favreau gives a solid performance, despite having a one dimensional
character. Slater is perfectly cast as the worst among a bunch of bad
dudes. Most surprising is Jeremey Piven, who does a great job of going
bonkers as the film progresses. Diaz is wasted in this very small
role. She plays a real bitch with very little character, and one
wonders if she just took the part because she liked the script aside
from her role.
The squeamish should avoid the bathroom dismembering scene. Those that
want a redeeming film, should go see something else. And those who
want to see just how whacked one mind can get (Peter Berg's mind, he
wrote and directed) should definitley see it.

Title
Review for Simple Plan, A (1998)
Starring: Bill Paxton, Billy Bob Thorton, Bridget Fonda
I know what I would do with $4.4 million if I found it in a previously
undiscovered airplane crash site, especially if I were with Jacob and
Lou. (Huh?) Well, in any event, that is the situation Hank (Paxton)
finds himself in. He and his dim-witted brother Jacob (Thorton) and
tubby friend Lou (Brent Briscoe) come upon a large bag of cash inside
a plane wreck. Against his better judgement, Hank decides to go along
with the idea of keeping it rather than going to the authorities. The
rest of the film is a question of who is going to die to keep this a
secret, and is it worth it? A Simple Wish lies along the lines of Very
Bad Things, Clay Pigeons and even Fargo, and is kind of wrapped all
into one little dark bundle. Oh, and its much better than any of
those.
Sam Raimi took a departure from his normal freak-show horror-monkey
films and made this stylish and intriguing picture. He really lets the
audience sit back and watch the events unfold rather than force them
down our throats as many directors prefer to do. I think Raimi knew he
had a winner on his hands and decided to direct the picture on a
natural flowing course.
One of the film's components can be linked to a recurring theme in
Terrence Malick's The Thin Red Line. In Malick's three hour
bore-a-thon, he makes an interesting attempt to link Mother Earth to
his war story. It seemed nothing more than an occasional pretty cut to
a field of flowing grass, a small bird, or a flowing body of
water. Sure, there were obvious metaphorical connections, but there
was no subtlty to his efforts. Raimi does a fine job of tying in a fox
in a chicken coop and birds of prey to signify the future of the
characters. I think most viewers may miss the comparison, but it is a
very intriguing ingredient in the film.
And then there's Billy Bob Thorton, who is proof that the independent
film industry is vital to the life blood of Hollywood. If it can
continute to produce people like Thorton, Hollywood will be ok. He
gives a fantastic and devastatingly deep performance here. It is not
as engrossing as his Carl Childers character in Slingblade, but is is
just as complex, if not more so. Jacob is slow and simple, and yet we
so often see him deep in thought. I wondered if he was thinking about
things that he would never say (or didn't know HOW to say) or if he
was just taking a long time to think about the thing he just
said. Here he really proves his worth as one of the best character
actors in the industry.
Though the plot is somewhat unoriginal, it has a very appealing new
twist in its characters. Paxton gives one of the better performances
of his career as the straight and serious leader of the group (a far
cry from Chet in Wierd Science). Perhaps Bridget Fonda is miscast as
his advice-giving wife, but she certainly doesn't do anything ruin the
picture. A Simple Plan can be included in the group of recent small
Hollywood films that is just dark and pretty un-redeeming. But at
least this one has an important message, unlike so many of its
counterparts.
* * * 1/2 out of * * * * stars
Š1999 Nick Amado       namado@concentric.net
check out my movie reviews at www.writerboy.com/nick
(or I'll come to your house and read all my reviews outloud in Miss Piggy's voice)

Title
Review for One Tough Cop (1998)
Starring: Stephen Baldwin, Chris Penn, Gina Gershon, Michael McGlone
Unfortunately it doesn't get much more formulaic than One Tough
Cop. There's the renegade cop with the loser partner who has to many
problems to explain. The renegade has to prove his good name and is
trapped between the good guys, the bad guys and some woman who really
has nothing to do with the story other than being there for the
purpose of providing sex for the hero in the middle of the film.
Bo Dietl (pronounced Deedle, Baldwin) is one tough cop, a guy who is
being investigated by hardass FBI agents due to his association with
the NY Mafia. On top of that problem, he has a drunk, gambling
addicted partner (Penn) who has a penchant for collecting parking
tickets (I guess cops aren't immune?). Then, throw into the mix the
femme fatale (Gershon). Right there you have plenty of ammo for a
decent cop drama. But right in the middle of the film, they throw in a
completely un-related plot point. Dietl and his partner Duke try to
solve a case that they have been warned to stay away from. The film
spends over half an hour tracking the case of a nun who was beaten and
raped to near death. Once the case is solved, the film shifts focus
back to the mafia issue. Whatever neat mesh the screenwriter wanted to
create between the two stories failed miserably.
Aside from being asked to accept Michael McGlone as a Mafioso (an
insult if you ask me) the performances were pretty good. Baldwin,
though he occasionally slips into an impression of his brother Alec,
does a fine job as one tough cop. Penn, who also slips into an
impression of HIS brother Sean, is even better as a loser tough guy
cop.
What One Tough Cop lacks is originality. This film offers nothing
new. Nothing that you can't get from any cop film. It screams Sidney
Lumet all over the place, perhaps because it was produced by Marty and
Michael Bregman, producers of Lumet's Dog Day Afternoon and
Serpico. But even the masterful Sidney would not have been able to
make One Tough Cop into a good film. Too much else is lacking.
I also saw the boom mic pop into the top of the frame twice early on
in the picture, something that I almost never notice. But once I saw
that, I had it in the back of my mind every time I saw a medium or
long shot. At times, I was hoping to see it.
One Tough Cop isn't laughable, nor is it a terrible film, but it just
isn't unique. It is a classic example of a film that didn't need to be
made. But one thing is for sure, it could really use a better title.

Title
Review for Mulan (1998)
Directed by Barry Cook and James Bancroft
Voices of Ming Na Wen, Eddie Murphy, B.D. Wong, Pat Morita, June Foray
It had seemed to me that the folks at Disney had a rather interesting pattern developing in their feature animation department. Every other year produced a good film. Since 1989, Disney Animation has (with the exception of 1993) produced a full-length feature. The Little Mermaid was superior to the following year's Rescuers Down Under. Beauty and the Beast was far better than Aladdin. Lion King vs. Pocahontas and the solid Hunchback over the stylish but silly Hercules. Mulan, Disney's latest feature has broken the pattern. 
Mulan is Hercules in so many ways. A scrawny young character musters up the courage, with the aid of a loud mouth dinky sidekick, to put evil-doers in their place. Add crossdressing to Hercules and make the unique Hades into a cookie-cutter boring villain and you have Mulan.
Mulan tells the story of a young Chinese woman (Mulan) who takes her father's place in the Chinese army so that she may save him from certain death. There are the usual gender change jokes and circumstances. Sadly, nothing creative is done with it. Strange that there were no snickers, though, from children in the audience when one character bared himself to his fellow soldiers and proclaimed that he was "the rock".
The central message in Mulan is a good one for children. Women can do what men can do and perhaps even better. But the Mulan character tends to do it the messy way. She gets the job done, but not without destroying everything in the area. So the message is muddled. She also goes from weakling to superior soldier in the space of one abrupt and annoying song. That one is also not a terribly clear message to children. What is it supposed to tell them, that success comes overnight if you just WANT it?
And then there are the sidekicks. You are familiar with them. In the past they have been clever as meerkats and raccoons, failures as yellow fish and monkeys. The folks at Disney created yet another loud and outlandish character whose sole asset is the person who provides the voice. Eddie Murphy is the mini-dragon Mushu who tricks the spirits and sets off to provide Mulan with support and help. With him he brings the slightly more clever cricket who provides almost as much humor withought speech as Murphy does with it. The only amusing moments in the film (and they are few and far between, at least for adults) do come with either the cricket or Mushu, but the dragon is merely a vehicle who fits well into the role of Disney sidekick. The writers and animators seem desperate to find another "Timon" and have as yet been unable to do so.
There are some moments of Disney magic to be found in Mulan. Primarily it is the battle scene in the snow, the formulaic middle plot point that is supposed to turn the story around. The digital effects do help in this instance and make for quite an awesome sight. There is also a clever little element added to clouds, smoke, water and snow, any thing that flows, really. The swirls, waves and puffs all have an asian accent, they twist and curve as they do in ancient Chinese paintings and it is quite a nice touch.
One would hope that the Character Animators at Disney have not forgotten how to create pretty characters. Everyone in Mulan looks like a Pocahontas extra. Square or pointy faces, sharply angled black hair, plain, black eyes. There is no depth to any of them, save for what the computer coloring can add. The production designers also went back and forth between Chinese and Japanese designs. Much of the picture had the rigid and simple beauty of Japanese culture invading the image,  and not much of the intricate Chinese detail.
What I suggest to Disney (as if they would listen) is to take a year off. The pictures they are producing now are falling back into the creativity-draining trap that only attracts children. It was magical when they made Beauty and the Beast and allowed adults some enjoyment for the next few pictures, both in theme and in art. But now, they have failed two years in a row and seem destined to do it for a third if they continue to be an animation factory rather than artists. The world did not end in 1993 withought a summer Disney blockbuster. And that hiatus allowed them to create the highest grossing Disney film of all time, The Lion King. I'm sure that the money from that picture more than made up for missing a year. The quality of these films would approve all around if they let the pencils rest and came back with a masterpiece to kick off the millenium. Because only Disney can do it.

Title
Review for 12 Angry Men (1997) (TV)
Starring: Jack Lemmon, George C. Scott, Tony Danza, Edward James Olmos,
Ossie Davis, Hume Cronyn, Mykelti Williamson, Courtney B. Vance, Armin
Mueller Stahl, James Gandolfini, William Peterson
In 1957, a young man by the name of Sidney Lumet ventured into the world
of feature film directing with 12 Angry Men, a taught and involving
drama about the events that unfold while a jury of a dozen men from
different worlds delibertate in a murder trial.
40 years later, a second attempt at the film is made, and the only
question this viewer could manage was `why?'
William Friedkin, no doubt one of the finer directors around assembled
one of the most impressive casts in modern-day movie history,
particularly when you consider that this movie was made for HBO. But the
rehearsal for these fine men was obviously to watch the film that came
before it. Each somehow manages to give sub-par performances that look
like lame regurgitations of thier thespian colleagues' work of 40 years
earlier. 
In 1957, Sidney Lumet worked with Boris Kauffman, one of B&W cinema's
finest cinematographers, to develop a `style' for the film. As the tense
afternoon turned into evening, the room seemed tighter, and the lenses
changed. The camera was tighter on each character as we got deeper
inside their heads. Each character had his own motivation which was
beautifully conveyed. Here, Friedkin picks a seemingly arbitrary camera
plot, one in which the frame is either at some funky dutch angle or
rather a jerky steady-cam. (In a confined space?)
Another fault of the modern-day remake is the dialogue. As great as it
is, the banter worked better when taken in context. This was written
nearly 50 years ago, and the expressions sound like it. But the script
is redone ver batim, though a few brief dialogue scenes are added, and
none of them need to be. James Gandolfini asks Mykelti Williamson if he
was a `Nation of Islam guy'. Courtney B. Vance `modernizes' his story
about coaching a league championship football game in the rain, and then
starts to cry. A few jurors talk behind other's backs while in the
restroom. But none of it means anything. Each actor re-performs the work
of another great actor, only it is blatantly obvious.
The original film dealt with a cultural problem that is no longer an
issue today. There were no black men on the jury in the original, and in
the remake there are four. Mykelti Williamson is the oddest choice to
play juror number ten, and his character is the most changed from the
original. The juror is a bitter racist, but Williamson plays him that
way. He talks of latino's as lesser people and talks about scum from the
ghetto, while he doesn't make any attempt to hide his urban slang, nor
does he hide the fact that he is a mechanic. When Ed Beagly played the
role, it was very fitting that he was a white racist, but Williamson's
re-invented character is just a mystery here. His extreme hatred and
ignorance really takes away the power of the group dynamic. When the
climax is reached, it is now very unsatisfying, because of how
dominating his character was. The story really ends with juror number
three, and the transformation he makes. But because of Williamson's new
edge (no fault of the actor) he becomes the focal point, though he is
not involved in the climax.
The best thing HBO could have done last year would have been to put the
money from this budget into digitaly re-mastering the original film and
presenting it in widescreen format. It would have been fitting, since it
was the film's 40th anniversary. Instead, a boatload of talent is wasted
on one of the most completley pointless remakes of all time. Lemmon
can't outdo his old friend Fonda. Williamson's character is way over the
top and even the Great Scott can't perform with the power that Lee J.
Cobb could. (Though Danza gives Warden a run for his money in a
surprisingly good performance.) Rent 12 Angry Men 1997 ONLY if you've
seen the original masterpiece and want to compare.

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
If you compared the basics of Aliens (the second installment of the series)
with Resurrection (the fourth) you would assume they were identical. Ellen
Ripley (Weaver) leads a group of gritty, mega-gun toting renegades through
the bowels of a ship, looking to destroy the queen alien, in an effort to
save themselves and mankind. Unfortunatley for the gang there is an evil guy
lurking about who's real intention is to save the alien species, even if it
means destroying the humans on board. I half expected Paul Reiser to pop out
and say, "Ripley, if they can clone you, then there's just a whole bunch of
"me's" out there." Eh. Not so much. Despite the core of similarities to
previous Alien films, Resurrection has enough slam-bang action, enough
surprises (and plenty of goo) that in my estimation, it is the best of the
sequels thus far.
What's different about Resurrection is that Ripley has had a complete
personality makeover. Her only similarity to the former Ripley is that she
looks astonishingly like Sigourney Weaver. The fourth installment takes place
approximately 200 years after she died in Alien 3. But those sneaky
scientists managed to find a strand of her DNA in some blood from the prison
compound and, combined with Alien DNA, create a new, more powerful and more
dynamic Ripley clone. One fascinating element about Resurrection is that
since Ripley (still the series' heroine) is part Alien, she has some
compassion for them. She has natural instincts that tell her where they are
lurking, ditching the computer tracers from all the earlier films. ("It's
right behind you man! Get out of there man!") There are some psychosexual
elements that I won't presume to ruin for you. Let's just say there's a lot
of goo involved. Pretty funky stuff.
Another thing that Alien Resurrection offers that the first three hardly
attempted were major digital effects, which make up most of the Aliens you
see in this film. Here's a tip; whenever you see an Alien in a close-up, it
is a slime-splashed animatronic, its really there. If you see an Alien
running or swimming or climbing, it's digital. I tell you this because you
may not be able to tell, they are done astonishinly well. 
For true Alien fans, Resurrection re-hashes some of the old tricks (not
everyone is what you think they are). There is a classic flamethrower which
gets quite a bit of use in one scene. Acid blood plays a big part in this one
too. But not everything is old hat. There are a few new Alien surprises in
this one, which, if you can get past the Grand Canyon sized plot holes, are
pretty creepy and cool.
This is indeed the most violent, gory and gooey Alien film to date. (No, it
ain't Flubber.) But Jeunet manages to make the grotesque somehow fitting and
almost appealing in this fourth installment. Very seldom did I get the
feeling that there was a disembowelment for no reason.  Everything seems to
have its place here. It kept me on the edge of my seat, it made me laugh
(appropriately, of course) and it made me glad that this was such a strong
rebound from the last sequel. What's more, who knows how long they can
continue this series now? After Alien 3, we were pretty dang sure it was
over. But ever since they cloned those sheeps in England, these Hollywood
people have a whole new arena to play with.
3 out of 4 stars
Copyright (C) 1997 Nick Amado

Title
Review for Negotiator, The (1998)
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Kevin Spacey, David Morse, Ron Rifkin, J.T.
Walsh, Paul Giamatti, John Spencer
The Negotiator opens with a tense hostage situation that is extremely
well-directed. A man is pressing a shotgun to the head of a little girl
as Danny Roman (Jackson) attempts to talk him down, risking his own
life. At the end of the ten minute scene, the audience lets out their
breath. You'd think they'd been holding it the whole time. After that
scene, we get the obligitory set up for the focus of the film. That calm
sequence lasts another ten minutes. Then hold on to your wigs and keys,
folks, because the next hour and fifty minutes takes you on one hell of
a ride.
Danny Roman is a top-notch hostage negotiator who has been accused of
killing his partner and embezzling funds from the department. In a last
resort attempt to clear his name, he takes hostages on the 20th floor of
the Chicago Federal Building. His demands are that in eight hours, the
informant be found, the muderer be found, and he be let off the hook.
The catch is that Chris Sabean (Spacey), a prime negotiator from
Chicago's west side, must act as the mediator. Roman knows the man's
strengths, and believes that since his friends have turned on him, that
only a stranger (one of equal mind) can be trusted.
F. Gary Gray, a student of the MTV style of movie directing, does a much
better job than most of his peers. Though The Negotiator occasionally
feels like a spinoff of The Rock, Gray does some fantastic work. His
greatest achievement is keeping the audience on the edge of their seats
for nearly two hours. Once the film gets going, it doesn't let up. There
is a constantly moving camera (which adds tension to any film), but it
is very subtle and takes small slow movements to build up tension.
Some of The Negotiator's best moments come from the dichotomy created
from having a major negotiator dealing with his contemporaries. One
scene early on is extremely funny, and it breaks the ice between
characters. In a sequence reminiscent of Jules' "What does Marsellus
Wallace look like?!!" interrogation from Pulp Fiction, Roman educates an
inexperienced cop on what NOT to say during negotiations.
Paul Giamatti, a two bit crook in the wrong place in the wrong time,
provides excellent comic relief as well. He has the film's best lines by
far. The two leads provide nothing less than their best as the two
strangers who know each other well. Jackson runs the gamut of emotions
and does them all well. Spacey, who seems to pinball back and forth
between psycho and good guy in his career, manages another fine turn as
a take-charge smart cop. J.T. Walsh, who died shortly after the film
wrapped, ends his filmography with another perfect scumbag. But he never
broke from that pattern, and he too turns in a fine performance. Who
better to play the loathesome heavy?
Though the ending is a bit anti-climactic, The Negotiator is as good as
any in its genre. It equals Die Hard and Lethal Weapon in it's strength
and originality. (Though there is a fair share of "borrowing" from
previous films.) And there is no doubt that we could use another
Spacey/Jackson pairing real soon.

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
As any reasonable human being would, I must admit that occasionally I am
befuddled by certain things. I am befuddled by Fight Club. Now sometimes our
favorite films are panned by critics and do not achieve critical success
until much later, sometimes as much as ten or twenty years later.  Perhaps
it is because these films are way ahead of their time. Perhaps it is because
they are so new and complex that only after years of allowing them to sink
in do we truly appreciate and understand them. Fight Club is either garbage
or brilliant, but, at least right now, I must lean toward the former.
Maybe I am subconsciously affected by word of mouth that has been slowly
leaking throughout the media for weeks that this film is pure gold. But if
it is, I sure donšt see it.
Edward Norton plays Jack, a field examiner for a major automobile
manufacturer. His insomnia, coupled with his compulsive desires to fill his
world with IKEA furniture to łcomplete˛ himself, make him a loser at the
game of life. But when all of his worldly possessions are blown out his 15th
story window, he seeks comfort in a stranger, Tyler (Pitt) whom he met on a
flight home. Once Jack is sucked into Tyleršs world, he canšt get out,
literally. They begin Fight Club, an organization based on brutal and bloody
fistfights that signify nothing other than to provide those that join a
sense of belonging. As the Fight Club grows, things get out of control and
take on cult status, beginning with one future soldier who proves his worth
by standing still outside Tyleršs house for three days. I dare not even
begin to bring up the last quarter of the film, since that contains the
twist that łexplains˛ the pointless journey.
Suffice it to say I was truly disappointed in Fincher, whošs previous two
films, Se7en and The Game put him in a very slim category of truly brilliant
young filmmakers of the next generation. This is not to imply by any means
that he is no longer a genius or capable of bringing more masterpieces to
the table. But with Fight Club, he has allowed his unique talent for
extraordinary vision to be distorted by silly digital experiments and
self-referencing film elements, such as talking to the audience about what
they are seeing, telling them that the little blips in the right hand corner
are signifiers that the projectionist is changing reels and that a slightly
altered recurring line is good łflashback humor˛.
Now, throughout the filmšs coarsely woven texture and over-extended plot
lines, Fight Club is obviously trying to make various social comments about
the state of the world today. Advertisements, inter-office politics,
corporations, you name it, itšs addressed. (Though the media are
suspiciously absent from the institutions that are referenced.) All of them
play an important role. How so? Well, I can kinda just tell. I canšt really
put my finger on it. To say that Starbucks and Barnes & Noble are taking
over their respective markets and kicking out the small business owner is no
big news. Is that bad for the world? Probably. Not much room for social
commentary there. We all know that inter-office politics are just
that...politics. So what was the point of all this? The film seems desperate
to make a point, or a number of points, but I couldnšt figure out what they
were.
All I saw was a very bizarre social satire that was woven with strange film
techniques, a bleak visual design and some fine acting. (Pitt, Carter,
Norton...all of them are good. Even Meatloaf is good.) When you get to the
end, you will most likely be filled with questions, many of which the
filmmakers wanted you to ask of yourself. Not them, because each of them
would likely give you a different answer. Fight Club means what you want it
to mean, I think Fincher just gives you the stuff to think about. But it
couldnšt be more bizarre and unappealing. Sure, it had shock value, but so
did Se7en and The Game, and they were significantly stronger films.

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
Starring: Robert De Niro, Jean Reno, Natascha McElhone, Stellan
Skarsgard, Jonathan Pryce
After all is said and done, as Vincent (Reno) walks up the steps of a
Paris sidestreet, he mutters to himself "No questions, no
answers. That's the business we're in. Accept it and move on." The
line fits the movie perfectly. As moviegoer, you may have
questions. It is the moviemaker's job to answer them. I had a lot of
questions in Ronin, and none were answered.
Ronin (meaning "masterless samurai") is a convoluted story about Sam
(De Niro) and a band of guns for hire who are asked by Irish
operatives to track and recover a mysterious metal suitcase. What is
in it? Those who know won't tell. Basically, Ronin lumbers on screen
like a large beanbag chair being kicked by a three year old. (I don't
know either, but I like it.) The audience is kept in the dark at the
begining, and remains in the dark through the end. Then the lights
come up in the theater. Ronin seems to be a 2 hour movie that was
constructed around two five minute car chases.
Director John Frankenheimer, a modest man, claimed that his films were
inspirational for Peter Yates's famous "Bullit" car chase and for
William Friedkin's The French Connection chase. The only thing is,
people remember those. No one will remember Frankenheimer's efforts in
Ronin. They are loud, boring chases occasionally interrupted by
gunfire.
In fact, the only things that will keep people from forgetting about
Ronin within the next two weeks are the performances. They are not
extrordinary, but De Niro does a fine job (has he ever been less than
good in a role?) and Reno, McElhone and Skarsgard each do a dandy
supporting turn.
What's more, Elia Cmiral presents a jarring score that reverberates
through the theater, occasionally preventing that dialogue from
getting through. Another contributor to the film is David Mamet. He
stepped in to help doctor the script. What I don't know is if he was
unable to do what he wanted with it, or if he feels he made a decent
screenplay out of it. One thing is for sure, and perhaps it will
answer the question, he used a psuedonym, Richard Weisz. Cant' say as
I blame him.

Title
Review for What Dreams May Come (1998)
Starring: Robin Williams, Cuba Gooding Jr., Annabella Sciorra
Anyone who has seen the ads for Dreams knows that it is a colorful and
visually stunning picture. But what the commercials show is merely a
small portion of the many "universes" seen in the film. That world of
wet acrylic paint flowers is part of Chris' (Williams) imagination in
the afterlife. Supposedly each person has their own world. But as your
mind changes, your world changes. Chris is remakably similar to his
human self, which the film points out is a choice on his part;
something that makes it easier for him to deal with. He can be
whomever he wishes, and other people can take on different faces as
well.
Chris and his family don't deserve the tragedy that befalls them. He
and wife Annie (Sciorra) lose their children in a car crash, an event
that sends Annie off the deep end. Four years later, things seemingly
patched up, Chris too dies in a car accident. His heavenly struggle
then comences. He goes on a journey to reunite with his children and
eventually his wife.
Unless you have seen the film, all you have seen are the bright colors
of what heaven is to Chris. It is every bit as beautiful and enjoyable
as you watch it flood the movie theater screen. What you have not
seen, however, is Art Director Christian Wintter's (yes, two 't's)
version of hell. Though the characters describe hell as different for
everyone, and not truly a "hot as hell" torturous existence, it is an
awful gruesome place.
For reasons I will not disclose to you, Williams must make a journey
to the netherworld, and what a journey it is. He enters the "general
area" and sees a somber but rather attractive world. One in which
people who look as though they've been snatched from a Dickens novel
float through the air over black lakes where streets should be. But
once Chris makes a lunge for something in his imagination, he falls
straight down to the opening of the gates of hell, a truly astonishing
cinematic sight. The gates are constructed from various shipwrecks,
and tormented pale bodies swim in the waters.
Dreams begins to take on a Terry Gilliam-esque feel. In a scene the
ex-Pythoner would have LOVED to have been a part of, Chris tries to
hop safely through a field of living but decaying talking heads. Truly
something that must be seen, not described.
At one point, Dreams becomes a truly dark and uneasy film. It his
sometimes hard to watch, not so much because of violence or gross-out
stuff, but because of the dark concept. It is clear that Ward wanted
to take the audience on an emotional rollercoaster. Whether he does is
up to the individual viewer. For me, it was more like the Teacups than
a rollercoaster, but it was still back and forth, and I suppose that
is sufficient. But I will say that I left the theater feeling
satisfied with the result. It is a film that could have gone off on a
most depressing turn.
There were numerous technical glitches and some amaturish mistakes,
but they slide right off the picture, leaving us with a well-directed,
if sometimes choppy, film. Williams is not the goofy one we've come to
know and love over the years. Nor is he the deep stretch that proves
him Oscar-worthy as Awakenings and Good Will Hunting. He is the
everyday emotional fellow that he plays so well. (There are an awful
lot of tears in this movie.) The cast does a terrific job, though
Gooding Jr. seems to disappear as quickly as he came.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
Starring: Tom Hanks, Tom Sizemore, Edward Burns, Jeremy Davies, Vin
Diesel, Adam Goldberg
As the small boats rock slowly toward the shore at Omaha beach Normandy
on D-day, the weary, seasick soldiers take a deep breath and open the
large protective shield at the back of the boat. They are unaware of
exactly what is going to happen. One man kisses the crucifix that hangs
around his neck. As the flap falls, the battle begins. They are trapped
like rats in a cage and proceed to be blown to pieces in the wake of
enemy gunfire. Amid the chaos of this massacre, stands a shot that, at
least for me, hangs in the air like the girl in the little red coat in
Schindler's List. A soldier, clearly missing an arm, wanders around the
body-strewn beach like a lost puppy. We are not invited to know what he
is searching for until he finds it himself. He bends over, picks up his
arm and starts to carry it, probably not bothering to ask himself; "What
now?"
Saving Private Ryan is a masterfully composed film. The direction is out
of this world, surely the type of command that can win Spielberg another
directing Oscar. The cinematography, by Janusz Kaminsky, is also
astounding. But be forewarned, this is the most violent and graphic film
I have ever seen. The articles you read and the warnings you see are
justified; Saving Private Ryan is visually as disturbing as a film can
get. The question is, "does the story and its realism justify the
excessive use?" The answer from my point of view is "no". 
Braveheart was a truly gritty, and, one would imagine, realistic battle
film. Ryan is ten times worse. Expect disembowelments, sucked in skulls,
heads blown to bits, arms and legs flying across the battlefield. Many
in the theater could not bear to watch.
And it is a shame, too, because this is otherwise by far one of the
standouts this year. But such graphic displays may turn away even the
most loyal Spielberg supporters (and Academy members).
Saving Private Ryan takes us from the attack at Omaha beach on D-day,
1944, through into the film's primary mission. Captain Miller (Hanks)
assembles an 8 man crew and sets off to find a missing solider, Private
Ryan, whose three brothers have already been killed on the battlefield.
The government goes to great lengths to make sure that Mrs. Ryan doesn't
recieve a fourth letter of condolences about her sons, that no person
should suffer such injustice. Miller's crew is not in favor of the
mission and they begin to harbor a secret hatred for Ryan, though they
don't yet know him. They resent having to trudge out to bring home one
soldier who doesn't have any more or less right to live than any of
them.
This film manages to keep up a rapid pace and, though there is a lot of
set up between battles, the story continues full speed to the end. The
pacing and dramatism of the extremely well choreographed battle scenes
is really in a league of it's own. Spielberg, though not a student of
the "quick cut" school of filmmaking, takes a stab at it here, and does
it better than Michael Bay or any of his MTV counterparts could ever
hope to do it. Bay should pay close attention, take copious notes. If
you want to jump cut every two seconds, do it the way Spielberg does it
in Ryan.
In the end, the extremity of the gory violence is not justified by the
"importance" of the film. Schindler's List taught many people the truth
about the Holocaust. It opened eyes, sparked debate and study. Though
the battle scenes in Ryan have never been portrayed as realistically
before, they don't amount to anything as serious or thought provoking as
the Schindler's List. Overall, this is just the truest depiction of the
old adage, "war is hell." But Braveheart-dosage would have fit this
movie much more appropriately, and would have made the difference
between me getting up the nerve to see it again some day and realizing
that this is something I doubt I could endure again. Masterful work
marred only by excessive gore.

Title
Review for Anastasia (1997)
Anastasia        
Directors: Don Bluth and Gary Goldman
With the Voice talents of: Meg Ryan, John Cusak, Christopher Lloyd, Kelsey
Grammar, Angela Lansbury, Bernadette Peters, and Hank Azaria
Approx Running time: 90 min.
The battle between ex-Disney animator Don Bluth and his former employers
began back in 1982 when Bluth's company created the marvelous "The Secret of
NIMH". At the time, Bluth hit Disney when it was most vulnerable; the
animation market was down, and cartoons were merely for children. As Disney
regained its prominence in the industry, Bluth was unable to compete, and
subsequent films failed both critically and at the box office. (With very few
exceptions.) Thanks to 20th century Fox (and a hefty budget) Bluth has
managed to combine state-of-the-art computer animation technology with a sort
of live-action feel that sends a loud and clear message to Disney; there's a
new kid in town.
Anastasia tells the story of a young princess separated from her family at
the age of 10. The evil Rasputin sells his soul in order to wipe the Romanov
family out of Russia. What he doesn't count on is the young girl being left
behind. She soon forgets her past and is raised by peasants, only to be given
hope by a couple of con-men who think they can pass her off to the queen as
the real princess.
Anastasia is replete with standard ingredients of an animated film. There is
romance, characters spontaneously bursting into song, and an evil bearded
character with gruff voice and a goofy sidekick. But Anastasia also offers
inventive storytelling, and some breathtaking sequences (one in which the
characters step into a Monet-like painting and continue to dance in front of
impressionist backgrounds)
Somehow, the "Magic of Bluth" created for me a feeling that I was watching
something real, something very human. There were few, if any, moments that
made me think that this absolutely had to be a cartoon. Of course there is
the fantastic element, and a talking albino bat, but the 3 years Bluth and
Co. put into this picture really shows that they wanted to capture something
important, emotion.
Anastasia is brimming with color and excitement. Plenty of computer razzle
dazzle, and some fun vocal performances. There couldn't have been a better
choice for the lead character than Meg Ryan. She brings her feisty attitude
(much like her character in French Kiss) and plenty of feeling to her
character. Christopher Lloyd follows the villain school of voice overs, rule
number one, "you must either be British or throaty." Since Rasputin was
Russian, he chose "throaty" but was menacing nonetheless as a living corpse
who's gimmick was that body parts fell off at random. (Eyeballs popping out,
hands falling off, lips sliding down his beard.) His sidekick, Bartok the
albino bat, was voiced by the marvelous Hank Azaria who really brings his
style of humor to the character. His adorable character is reminiscent of
Nathan Lane's fantastic "Timon" from the Lion King, though sadly, Azaria has
half the screen time.
Anastasia didn't have for me the power that Beauty and the Beast or The Lion
King did, but it is more than a "valiant effort" at dethroning the Disney
champs. If Bluth in his collaboration with 20th Century Fox can manage to
string together a few successes like Anastasia, the history of animation in
film will change forever.
3 1/2 stars out of 4
Copyright (C) 1997 Nick Amado

Title
Review for Payback (1999)
Review: Payback
Starring: Mel Gibson, Maria Bello, James Coburn, Gregg Henry, William Devane, David Paymer,  Kris Kristofferson
Directed by Brian Helgeland
Approx 110 min
Payback combines an interesting mix of 50's film noir and 90's
ultra-cool cinema. It has extreme anlges, strange lighting, slow
motion and that gritty true crime feel of the Pulp Fiction
generation. But there is also some carefully placed narration by the
lead and a near black and white feel achieved through lens filters
that makes the entire film look blue. Bright and colorful wouldn't
have made sense at all. There are no redeeming characters in the
film. The hero is a career thief who kills a number of people without
hesitation. The good guy of the group.
Payback is dark, violent and unredeeming, but it was very
exciting. Perhaps what was so great about it was the film's premise; a
fellow who will stop at nothing to take back the $70,000 that was
taken from him. (Stolen money of course.) In today's market, that's
nothing. Most crime films deal in millions, or at least hundreds of
thousands. It was a joke in Austin Powers that a maniac wanted million
dollars in ransom money. Here, Porter (Gibson) wants the money he was
cheated out of. (He and a partner pulled a $140,00 theft and his
partner turned on him. Tried to kill him too, but that's incidental.)
I felt that I always knew where Porter was going from scene to scene,
which was rather interesting. It sounds like that would make it
predictable, which, to a certain extent it was, but it also offered
something much more unique. There is nothing terribly deep to this
character, but he had a drive that I think many people, certainly
myself, could relate to. He wanted what was his, and even though his
life was ruined as it was taken from him, he wanted to make sure that
he got what he worked for, no more, no less. And so as he goes about
this journey, I was quite proud that I was "in" on the plan. Although
he was very clever, he wasn't dealing with some intricate system with
which one must be familiar in order to understand, he was just going
after some thugs who had his money. There is a primal urge kind of
charm to Payback.
It is also interesting to note that mega-star Gibson took ahold of the
film in the editing room. Apparently he was not happy with the
direction in which Helgeland was taking it, so he took hold of the
reins. I would like to have seen how this film was supposed to
unfold. I can only imagine it was rather confusing and convoluted,
perhaps read more like a mystery or susupense. In either event,
Payback was fulfilling enough for me, and if you like tough guy
movies, then you'll like Payback.

Title
Review for Next Stop Wonderland (1998)
Starring: Hope Davis, Alan Gelfant, Victor Arag, Jon Benjamin
There are some truly funny lines in Next Stop Wonderland that are
caught up in a battle with forced, trendy screenwriting. It is hard to
tell which comes out on top, and it only manages to provide some
likable characters in an all-too-familiar situation. Erin (Davis) is a
young woman who is shattered when her goofy, activist boyfriend leaves
her because she doesn't support him. She then goes on a quest to meet
Mr. Right by way of her mother placing a personal add against her
will. Erin reluctantly ventures out into the singles world, makes
headway, and eventually starts making sport of the situation.
The film bounces back and forth between two characters who never
meet. Alan, a plumber who is working his way through school to become
a marine biologist, is also not burning up the dating scene. The film
is utterly predictable. We know all along that these two lonley souls
are meant for each other, though they seem unable to meet. Sadly, most
of Alan's screentime is dedicated to the film's subplot of political
muscle, trying to destroy the local aquarium for its prime real
estate. It involves the plans for a mausoleum and killing a
balloonfish. Pretty silly.
The film reminds me quite a bit of Sliding Doors in a number of
ways. Primarily, it deals with fate, Who are we supposed to spend the
rest of our lives with? and, How will we meet this person? There is
also some artsy but jarring camerawork and editing, but it dies down
about a half hour into the film. Strangely, that is when the dialogue
perks up.
Next Stop Wonderland is not a very intriguing film, though it has a
step up on the more unique Sliding Doors in that the characters are
more likable. Hope Davis is really a joy to watch. She has a very
accessable beauty that makes the audience care about her, even if she
is not being particularly charming each moment. There are some truly
funny lines, but they are few and far between. Its a story of two
people looking for romance in the wrong places. It has been my
contention that Hollywood has done a poor job with romantic comedies
in recent years, with, of course, a few exceptions. The indie film
world has done only slightly better, but neither side has managed to
produce a gem. Next Stop Wonderland falls short of the mark too.

Title
Review for Clay Pigeons (1998)
Starring: Joaquin Phoenix, Vince Vaughn, Janeane Garofalo
Clay Pigeons is trendy not only in its casting of three budding stars,
but in it's flashy-to-a-fault construction. Dobkin interjects small
bits of MTV flair into what is otherwise a traditionally told story.
The film starts off rather originally. Phoenix plays Clay, an auto
mechanic who has an affair with his friend's wife. Clay's friend kills
himself and Clay disposes of the body. After another unfortunate
situation arises later in the film, Clay once again makes the corpse
disappear. Lester (Vaughn) pops up as a new fishing buddy, and they
encounter another corpse. The mystery (as well as some of the
screenplay's wit) drives the film for a good 40 minutes. But once the
FBI shows up, Clay Pigeons becomes extremely formulaic. The wrong man
accused, the dumb cop, the good guy, bad guy showdown; all is done as
a matter of routine, Screenwriting 101.
Perhaps one of the major faults lies with Lester. Vaughn (prepping for
his upcoming role as a psyschotic in the Psycho remake) overacts
throughout. Though he is frequently amusing, he is nothing more than a
bad guy. Screenwriters these days seem to know that bad guys are
needed, but they seldom have depth. There is nothing behind Lester,
nothing to let us know why he is who he is. Garofalo is also a bit
unbelieveable as an FBI agent. She isn't as compelling as Foster's
agent in Silence of the Lambs, nor as funny as McDormand's cop in
Fargo. But she can't be completely faulted either, for the character
she has to work with is not very robust.
Clay Pigeons is undoubtedly a dark comedy with some extermely macabre
elements. The film is paced very well, and one scene in particular is
as tense as any in a top-notch suspense film. But some flat
performances and a unique script turned ordinary make this an average
production. One interesting note, famed director Ridley Scott produced
it, and his director brother Tony executive produced it. Keep an eye
out for some self-serving references.

Title
Review for Waking Ned Devine (1998)
In these days of overlong movies (Meet Joe Black, The Thin Red Line,
The Mask Of Zorro) it is a shame that films like Waking Ned Devine
can't be longer than a paltry 90 minutes. This is just a cute movie,
even through its mildly risque subject matter.
Old friends Jackie (Bannen) and Michael (Kelley) try to find the
lottery winner (they deduce must live in their dinky town of about 60)
so that they might kiss up to him and share the winnings. Through
process of elimination, they find that it must be lovable old Ned
Devine, who they find sitting in front of his TV, clutching the
winning lottery ticket in his cold dead hand. What results is
thuroughly amusing, as Jackie tries to convince his wife that not
claiming it would be wrong, and that they could really benefit. After
all, old Ned won't miss it. Rather than divulge the later twists and
turns, I'll stop here merely pointing out that Jackie and Michael get
into all sorts of trouble in their little sleepy Irish villiage.
Bannen and Kelly are a perfect pair. One slightly stout, the other as
thin as a rail. Both getting on in years, they make such a cute pair
of old codgers. Waking Ned Devine may even be seen as a "Full Monty"
for the geriatric set, especially since Kelly gets buff-o for one
amusing scene.
Waking Ned Devine is by no means perfect, but it is so sincere and
touching that it looks so much better than most films. The
performances by everyone in the town are great, particularly the two
leads. There is one twist at the end which I find unnecessary, but it
hardly ruins the picture.
Writer/director Kirk Jones should be held up as an example to all
those Hollywood screenwriters. Scripts as creative and endearing as
this should be the norm, not the exception. Perhaps it makes us
appreciate this wonderful film even more. Had I held off on my year's
best/worst list for another day, Waking Ned Devine (officially
released in late November of 98) surely would have graced the short
group of the year's finest films. It is light, but thought provoking
and sweet. I can't think of anyone who shouldn't see (or wouldn't
enjoy) this film.

Title
Review for Drop Dead Gorgeous (1999)
Review: Drop Dead Gorgeous
Starring: Kirsten Dunst, Denise Richards, Kirstie Alley, Allison Janney, Ellen Barkin
Directed by Michael Patrick Jann
Well I just don't know what's wrong with this country. Drop Dead
Gorgeous is one of the funnier films I've seen this year. I guess
people get uptight about making fun of retarded people and killing
beauty queens. But all that aside, Drop Dead is dark and hilarious. It
is the ultimate anti-PC picture, an irreverant look at middle America
hicks and their "culture". The film is seen through the eyes of a
documentary film crew as they track the "Sara Rose Miss Teen Princess
America" competition in Mount Rose Minnesota. Becky (Richards) is the
favorite to win the pageant, she is pretty, perky and will cater to
all the anglo standards of womanhood (i.e. Christ worship and hospital
visits.) She also is the daughter of the wealthiest household in the
town of 5,000, a town whose hospital holds an eating disorder
wing.(One of its inhabitants is last year's winner.)  Becky's mother
Gladys (Alley) won 17 years earlier and will do anything to see to it
that Becky wins. The underdog and crowd favorite is Amber (Dunst). Her
mother (Barkin) is more interested in nicotine and beer and tips her
daughter to "get money up front if (the film crew) asks you to take
off your top".
All the girls in the town who even remotely qulify (or have any
interest in qualifying) for the pageant compete for the crown. Each is
their own whacky character. One is an adoptee of a Japanese-American
family who tries desperately to American-ize. Another is envious of
her beloved brother who moved to New York to impersonate Liza, Barbara
and Madonna. And one has an obsession with ceramic horses and carries
with her a large bolt that hit her in the head (if it had hit her
length-wise, she'd have died, lucky it hit her flat.) And then there's
Amber, who works as a makeup artist for a morgue and as a cafeteria
dish-washer. Her undying enthusiasm to be Diane Sawyer brings her into
the competition.
Drop Dead Gorgeous is full of gags, both visual and verbal. Much of
the added humorous components are amplified because of the documentary
approach. The realism of the documentary is totally outweighed by the
goofiness of the situations and characters. Director Jann did a lot of
double takes in an interesting fashion. He'd actually show you a joke
in a wide shot, before the punchline arrived, then go back to it for a
focus and punchline. In other words, if you were a sharp viewer, you
could see a joke coming before it actually got there, in essence
getting two laughs out of the same joke! Something that is rare and
risky is pulled off beautifully here.
Barkin is absolutely perfect as the trailer trash mother to Amber. She
plays most of the film with a beer can melted into her right hand as a
result of a trailer explosion which reeked of foul play. She is truly
a joy to watch as her Minnesotian/Dakotan accent is made funnier by
her little asides. Her best moment is during the actual pageant as she
sits doped up for the pain, she makes faces throughout that are
priceless. Dunst too gives a great performance and shows a real talent
for comedy. Drop Dead Gorgeous certainly deserves a wider audience and
will probably shock a lot of people, both because of its content and
because they probably didn't expect it to be this good.

Title
Review for Mask of Zorro, The (1998)
Starring: Antonio Banderas, Anthony Hopkins, Catherine Zeta Jones, Stuart Wilson, Matt Letscher
There are some moments in Zorro that make you feel like a kid
again. That is, if you recall ever liking Zorro. The duels, the
mysterious mask, the passion and the action all are present in Zorro's
latest reincarnation, The Mask Of Zorro. But these moments are
surrounded by nearly two and a half hours of really arduous
story-telling.
This story, starting in the early 1820's Mexico spans 20 years. The
first scene establishes that the Zorro of the time (Don Diego, played
by Hopkins) is a freedom fighter out for peace and justice. But when
his nemisis, the governer of Mexico, kills Zorro's wife and takes his
baby daughter for his very own, Zorro disappears. (Which is easy when
you're in prison.) After 20 years, he breaks out and takes on a lowly
but talented theif, Alejandro, played by Banderas, as a pupil. One of
the governer's captains killed Alejandro's brother. So now there are
two Zorro's who seek revenge.
There is a near-pointless side plot that involves the heavies
attempting to buy California with gold stolen from there. It provides
for a few James Bondian bad guy scenes (the head honcho standing
around a huge table addressing the other baddies, while standing in
front of a map, talking about world domination.) But really only makes
for a setting for the final showdown.
Zorro has as many highs as it does lows. First off, watching Antonio
Banderas is a delight. He is as funny as he is heroic and devilishly
handsome. He does some fantastic stunts with the sword, and still,
throughout his heroism, he manages to play the buffoon from time to
time.
Anthony Hopkins, sadly, phones in his performance. Though he too is
enraged at the evil-doings (and has more of a vendetta than Banderas'
character) his eyes never change. He never shows the passion that has
driven his character for 20 years. Aside from that, he is the only
Mexican (well, former Spaniard) that speaks with a British
accent. Which is a shame, too, since Hopkins is brilliant at masking
his voice.
And then there is Catherine Zeta Jones. This newcomer to American
cinema manages to steal every scene she is in. Partly because she is
one of the most strikingly beautiful women I've ever seen on the
silver screen. But there is a tenderness that she brings to her
character. She plays the love-interest for Alejandro, and is the only
person in the film that can out-do Banderas' fine performance in each
of their scenes together. The Welsh actress also hides her accent
quite well, adopting a Spanish one. (Strange, though, that she plays
Hopkin's daughter and yet...)
The action in Zorro doesn't disappoint, but it is sparce. The film is
so overlong that characters seem to pop up out of nowhere just to keep
it going. I kept asking myself, "now, why would she be there at this
time?" or "where the hell did he come from? And why is he here?" I was
never satisfied with the drive of the storytelling, the primary fault
of director Campbell. The cuts from scene to scene often left me with
a sour taste.
Aside from two of the lead performances, the big winner in Zorro is
the Art direction. The sets are out of this world, particularly
Zorro's training lair. The film is beautiful, no doubt, but it just
can't quite hit the mark, even if you do care about some of the
characters relationships in the film, as I did.

Title
Review for Elizabeth (1998)
Starring: Cate Blanchett, Geoffrey Rush, Joeseph Fiennes, Christopher
Eccleston and Richard Attenborough
Though it is a fine piece of filmmaking, there's something about
Elizabeth...that left me a bit cold, and I think it is something that
bugs me quite often in films, particularly these days; I just didn't
care about the characters. To me, the first and foremost job of a
filmmaker is to create characters (be they imagined or historical as
the case may be) that the audience gives a hoot about. And though
Elizabeth works well on many levels, it falls short of excellence
because of that very reason.
Elizabeth takes place in England in 1554, as Queen Mary, half sister
of Elizabeth and a monarch on the side of Catholicism is dying. Before
she dies, though, she cannot bear to sign a document which would
condemn her half sister to death because of her heretical Protestant
beliefs. As a result, amidst much anger within the council, Elizabeth
becomes the Queen of England. The film chronicles her rise to power as
she fights for a unified Church of England and tries to bring order to
her personal and political life.
Much of the film deals with Elizabeth's love for Lord Robert, a
mysterious man who thrusts his lordship onto many a woman as he
continues to proclaim his love for the queen. There is much ado about
her lack of a husband, and political pressures from Spain and France
enter into the equation. The problem with the film lies with this as
its centerpiece, as love interests are such a character driven
element. I didn't much care about the characters (perhaps aside for
Elizabeth who is played quite well by Blanchett) and so I didn't have
much interest in who would join her in her nuptials. The cast is
rounded out well with the marvelous Rush who plays the queen's most
loyal advisor, Sir Francis, and Attenborough as a well-meaning but
old-fashioned lead council.
Why then, you must be asking, do I recommend Elizabeth? Simply because
it is the result of a perfect pairing of director and
cinematographer. Kapur and his cinematographer Remi Adefarasin
(neither of whom I have heard) create a beautifully realized piece of
filmmkaing from the technical side. The light streams through each
frame as in any painting from the period and beautifully captures the
realistic light sources that would have been found in churches,
cellars and castles in 16th century Europe. Each frame is rich with
color contrasted with blackness or blown-out white light from
windows. The costumes by Alexandra Byrne deserve a mention as they are
such an inportant aspect of each shot. Indeed, Elizabeth is one of the
most visually beautiful films of the decade, ranking with Kundun and
Braveheart. Watch also for the incredibly "Godfather-esque" mass
murder scene. It made me think in retrospect of the similarities
between the two films.
