Authors
Eric Grossman
Number of Reviews
35

Title
Review for Crimson Tide (1995)
     Every summer, there are usually two or three "big" movies that
people just can't wait to see.  This summer, which is filled with
sequels and movies from television shows, the E-ticket ride I was
looking forward to was CRIMSON TIDE.  Why?  Well first off, it had a
great trailer that showed Denzel Washington and Gene Hackman, two of my
favorite actors.  It had a plausible and frightening premise: a Russian
radical gains control of nuclear missiles and threatens to launch
them.  Finally, to top it off, it took place on a American nuclear
missile sub, a place where many of us would love to visit but few
actually can.  Sure, it reminded me of a lot of other films and maybe
it should have been called, MUTINY ON THE HUNT FOR RED TOP SUB, but I
was hooked.
     Hackman plays the captain of the U.S.S. Alabama, Frank Ramsey, an
old seadog, warrior-without-a-war type who, when given the order to
launch his nukes, is contradicted by his executive officer, Lieutenant
Commander Hunter (Washington).  Hunter, a highly educated but untested
officer, tries to stop Ramsey until they can confirm a half-received
message fragment that may be a stand down order.   Ramsey will have
none of Hunter's doubts and continues to proceed to launch position.
With no other option, Hunter relieves  Ramsey of his command and then
it becomes musical mutinies.  Ramsey and certain sympathetic crew
members get their hands on some weapons and then they retake control of
the ship.  But wait, Hunter does not give up so easily.  He and his
mutineers grabs some guns and then....
     Produced by Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer and directed by Tony
Scott (the team gave us the frothy but entertaining TOP GUN),  I
expected CRIMSON TIDE to be, if nothing else,  a crowd pleaser that
would go like gangbusters and have an explosive climax.  I was right
about the first part, wrong about the second.
     There is a lot of excitement as we watch the superb performances
by Hackman and Washington.  Pulse raising side-plots such as an attack
by a renegade Russian sub and a scene where the Alabama nearly sinks
are the stuff that great submarine pictures are made of.  These give us
enough thrills to make up for the fact that there are some deep
problems in the hull of CRIMSON TIDE that eventually sink it in the
last twelve minutes.
     The producers, director, executive producer Lucas Foster and
screenwriter Michael Schiffer, created a great set-up, however, they
did not have the courage (a rare commodity in movies these days) to
make somebody the bad guy.  This is a film with no real villains.  Yes,
there is the mad Russian who wants to launch his missiles but he
doesn't count because we never see him except in a newscast and more
importantly, we know he isn't going to launch his missiles, so there is
no suspense there.
     The real conflict and source of tension is on the submarine and
the main question that has to be answered is: who is right, Ramsey or
Hunter.  The filmmakers essentially "wimp" out however and ultimately,
no man is completely wrong or right.  It is a good choice to give both
characters sympathetic qualities but this is not an art film, one of
them has to be the bad guy, or else there is nothing tangible to defeat
and we leave the theater unsatisfied.
     CRIMSON TIDE is worth seeing for the performances, hardware, and
stunning production values.   Tony Scott and cinematographer Dariusz
Wolski provide a tons of eye-candy and editor Chris Lebenzon keeps the
pace cracking.  The underwater effects by Dream Quest Images are far
superior to the last big sub picture, THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, (RED
OCTOBER was a much better story) and Hans Zimmer's score is effective.
The best part is the sound.  I saw it at the Cinerama Dome and that
deep base.  Wow!
     If you want a ride, CRIMSON TIDE delivers.  If you want a great
high-tech thriller, you might have to wait until next summer.

Title
Review for Heavenly Creatures (1994)
     If it were not true, HEAVENLY CREATURES would probably be
considered too unbelievable to be a movie.  Unfortunately, the story is
true.  In New Zealand during the year 1952, two bright, imaginative and
resentful fourteen year-old girls, Pauline and Juliet, became so
obsessed with each other they resorted to murder to stay together.
     New Zealand filmmaker Peter Jackson skillfully directs this
picture giving us the right balance of surrealism and reality that
allows us to both sympathize with the girls and realize how insane they
are becoming.  The story centers around the intelligent but withdrawn
Pauline Parker (Melanie Lynskey).  When Pauline meets the new kid in
school, Juliet Hulme (Kate Winslet), a worldly, upper-class young woman
who does not mind correcting her French teacher's grammar, the two
quickly find that they are soul mates.
     The girls become inseparable, sharing their love for movie stars,
famous singers and for each other.  As their bond increases, so do
their flights of fantasy, including a surreal, imaginary world called
Borovnia.  Borovnia is a medieval kingdom that the girls use to escape
Pauline's mother, Honora, who tries desperately to bring Pauline back
to reality.  Juliet's father, more concerned about his daughter's
apparent lesbianism than her bouts with tuberculosis, also tries to
separate the two.  The idea of separation is too much for the girls to
bear and that is what leads to the film's tragic ending.
     Lynskey and Winslet give powerful performances as does Sarah
Perise who plays Honora.  The film has an "independent" look but
 it is most effective.  Jackson and cinematographer Alun Bollinger make
great use of wide-angle lenses, warm lighting and moving camera to
keep a sense of kinetic surrealism.  The special effects used to create
the world of Borovnia are superb.  One of my favorite effects was the
life-size, clay-people who would dance and sing around the Borovnian
castle.  We see Pauline's psychosis deepen as she begins to imagine
these clay-people outside of Borovnia.  There is even a scene where she
imagines one of them slaying the psychiatrist her parents take her to
see.
     As strange as this all seems, nothing compares to the story's
coda.  Popular British crime-novelist, Anne Perry, recently revealed
that she was in fact Juliet Hulme.  After watching the film, this
reality seems incredibly perverse and ironic.  If any Anne Perry fans
were wondering why their favorite author could write murder so well, it
is because she herself has done it in very, cold blood.
     HEAVENLY CREATURES is a compelling story skillfully told.  Just
one word of advice.  Don't see it if you're depressed or do not wish to
become depressed.  This is a sad, tragic, painful story but it is
another potent illustration of just how dangerous obsession can be.

Title
Review for Erin Brockovich (2000)
 Despite being based on true events (key word there is based), "Erin
Brockovich" isn't about a story, it's a star vehicle.  Ostensibly, the film
is about people having their water polluted by an evil corporation.  A
well-endowed, twice-divorced mom named Erin Brockovich (Julia Roberts),
comes to their rescue by digging up the dirt on this corporation and then
she gives her eunuch of a boss, a lawyer named Ed Masry (Albert Finney), the
cajones to go after them.  As David Spade might say, I liked this movie more
when it was called, "A Civil Action," or "Silkwood" for that matter.
The film, which was directed by Steven Soderbergh, the man who helped put
independent film on the radar, is so irritating that I wanted to throw
something at the screen.  Unfortunately, the three people behind me who were
jabbering throughout the entire showing were too heavy.  Just as an aside, I
've must say that going to the movies has become oh so pleasant nowadays.
People put their feet on your armrest, kick your chair, talk through the
movie, answer their cell-phones and all of this comes complete for the low,
low price of nine bucks.
 Julia Roberts is considered America's sweetheart, but I guess here is where
I admit to being out of touch.  In movie after movie, she treats other
characters terribly.  In "My Best Friends Wedding," she is awful as she
connives and plots against Dermot Mulroney and Cameron Diaz.  She is
reprehensible in how she treats Hugh Grant's character in "Notting Hill,"
teeing off on him for no good reason and the worst part is, he takes it.
Wasn't the whole point of that film the idea that he was different and
unlike everyone else, not tolerant of spoiled-brat, movie star behavior.  In
"Runaway Bride," she keeps dumping men at the altar when she gets the
jitters.  Gee, let's make a charming little film about a guy who bails on
his brides to be and see how charming audiences find that.
And now she plays an obnoxious woman with horrible taste in attire that
attempts to cash-out on a frivolous lawsuit.  When she loses, she demands
her lawyer give her a job because he "owes" her and then she continues to
talk back to him whenever it suits her.  In addition, she goes off on her
fellow office assistants, in particular, making fun of an overweight woman
whose only crime was criticizing Erin for not properly doing her job.  And
when Ed, her boss, tells her that perhaps she ought to wear something other
than the micro-miniskirts and revealing tops with her gazungas hanging out,
her reply is, "as long as I have one ass instead of two, I'll wear what I
like;" Wow, what a role model.
 Instead of feeling bad for the people who were poisoned, I just began to
get more and more disgusted by Roberts' character since in this film, the
victims, like everyone else, are really just incidental to her.  Unlike any
other good legal drama, there is no compelling conflict created in regards
to the tragedy.  Soderbergh and his writer Susan Grant are more interested
in making Roberts look good by having everyone else look like a schmuck.
Finney comes across as a dolt as do all the other lawyers in the film.  The
office co-workers are all portrayed as fat and stupid.  The love interest,
George (Aaron Eckhart) seems like a decent guy but like Hugh Grant in
"Notting Hill," he takes so much trash from her that we can't care about him
either.   Even the poor folks who have been injured are portrayed as
pathetic which is upsetting because theirs is a sad story that should have
been told properly.  I feel terrible for what happened to them and I think
that Universal, Roberts, and the rest of the above-the-line talent should
donate their entire earnings from this film to make up for exploiting their
plight.
The biggest disappointment is that Soderbergh, after doing two good movies
("Out of Sight," "The Limey"), has so completely gone south here.  Maybe he
did it just so he could get a pet-project made or something lofty like that.
However, I think the reality is that all independent filmmakers, with a few
exceptions such as John Sayles, just want to sell out and make movies about
Julia Roberts' breasts.  That's fine, breasts are great, but let's cut the
pretense and the "I'm an artist" routine.

Title
Review for Ed Wood (1994)
     Transvestites, flying-saucers, and alien grave-robbers, how could
anyone ask for more?  Director Tim Burton's latest effort, ED WOOD
offers all of this and yes, far, far more.  Burton (BATMAN, EDWARD
SCISSORHANDS) has always been a director who is long on mood and
atmosphere but short on story skills.  For ED WOOD, Burton comes in
swinging not only with his usual arsenal of visuals but also with a
strong narrative to tell this story of a cross-dressing B, or make that
C-movie filmmaker.
     Johnny Depp, a good actor who does not mind risky roles, plays Ed
Wood, the director who is remembered for making one of the best, worst
films of all time, PLAN 9 FROM OUTER SPACE.  Depp's performance is a
caricature but he is successful in bringing out a deeper emotionalism
that makes us genuinely like Ed.  Struggling to make it in Hollywood as
an actor/writer and director, just like his idol Orson Wells, Ed is
able to convince a B-movie producer to allow him  to make a film about
a man who becomes a woman.  Ed believes he is the best for the job
because he himself likes to wear women's clothing, especially angora
sweaters.  Ed makes his first film, GLEN OR GLENDA?, in which he
stars with his girlfriend Dolores Fuller (Sara Jessica Parker).  After
giving Dolores the script, Ed confesses to her that he has an affinity
for wearing women's garments.  Shocked and confused, Dolores is at
least comforted when she learns why her angora sweaters always seemed
to be mysteriously stretched out.  As much as she tries, Dolores can
never accept Ed's non-conformist behavior and ultimately their
relationship does not survive.  However, Ed does meet Kathy O'Hara
(Patricia Arquette), a quiet, sweet woman who understands that Ed's
desire to cross-dress is not a perversion, but is instead a way for him
to express his deep love for women.
     The true treat of the film is Martin Landau who plays famous
DRACULA star, Bela Lugosi.  Delivering a performance full of warmth,
humor and sorrow, Landau once again proves that he is one of the best
character actors working today.  Long forgotten by the Hollywood
machine that "chews you up and spits you out," Lugosi's career and life
is on the rocks.  In a chance encounter, Ed meets Lugosi and a deep
friendship begins.  Their relationship is the backbone of the story as
they inspire and aid each other in times of need.  In addition to his
charm and other endearing qualities, screenwriters Scott Alexander and
Larry Karaszewski do not gloss over the fact that Lugosi was hooked on
morphine.  It is more than once that he calls Ed up in the middle of
the night, in a semi-conscious voice, begging for help.  For Ed, Lugosi
validates his "art" as well as being an important element in getting
his pictures made.  The friendship is a father/son relationship where
they each take turns being the father and the son.
     As we watch Ed try desperately to get his films made, we find
ourselves both laughing at him and admiring him for his courage.
It takes guts to make "your" film, especially when everyone thinks
it is garbage.  As bizarre and funny as it is, it takes guts to
admit you like to wear women's clothing and then walk out on the
set in a skirt, heels, and a wig while yelling "okay, everyone,
let's make this movie."  Finally, Ed is a portrait of pure
determination.  He is able to get PLAN 9 made by promising a Beverly
Hills Baptist church that their investment in a sci-fi/horror film
would bring enough profits to finance religious films.  As Bill
Murray's silly Bunny Beckinridge asks Ed, "How do you do it?  How do
you convince all your friends to get baptized just so you can make a
monster movie?"  The answer, charm and persistence.
     Like all of Burton's films, ED WOOD is pure eye-candy.  The
black-and-white cinematography is by Stefan Czapsky and the atmospheric
production design was created by Tom Duffield.  The serio-comic score
was composed by Howard Shore and the film was edited by Chris
Lebenzon.  Ed's angora sweaters and pumps as well as the other
character's outfits were put together by costume designer Colleen
Atwood.  Other cast members include Jeffrey Jones and Vincent D'Onofrio
in a small part as Orson Wells.
     As endearing as it is bizarre, ED WOOD is a very entertaining
movie that achieves what it aspires to be, an unconventional film about
an unconventional man.

Title
Review for Brady Bunch Movie, The (1995)
     How would the ideal Seventies family, the Bradys, handle life in a
world filled with carjackings, conniving neighbors and date-raping
boyfriends?  This is the premise behind THE BRADY BUNCH MOVIE, an
entertaining parody of the famous television show that ran  from 1969
to 1974.
     While the rest of the world has changed,  the Bradys have remained
exactly the same.  The loud clothes, out-of-control hairstyles, and
potato sack races are still the norm in their household.
     The screenwriters and director Betty Thomas have remained faithful
to the feel of the show while poking fun at it and the result is part
spoof, part tribute.  There is a plethora of inside jokes that the
Brady Bunch cultists (those people who know every line from every
episode) will get a tremendous kick out of.
     A perfect cast of unknowns (plus the talent of Shelly Long who
plays Carol) and plenty of cameos from the original cast are the keys
to this film's success.  Particularly good is Jan (Jennifer Elise
Cox).  Her obsessive anger towards her older sister Marsha (Christine
Taylor) is the movie's highlight.
     The film's look is true to the show.  Cinematographer Mac Ahlberg
matches the high-key, flat lighting and production designer Steve
Jordan remembered all of the details when recreating the sets, right
down to the avocado-green phone.
     While there are some squandered opportunities to go further with
the implicit conflicts and quirks of the characters, THE BRADY BUNCH
MOVIE delivers many laughs, especially for those who grew up watching
the series.

Title
Review for Immortal Beloved (1994)
     January may be the wet season for weather but it is the dry season
when it comes to movies.  Having fired the last of their big guns for
Oscar contention and still completing their new blockbusters for spring
and summer, January typically consists of movie dregs.  Fortunately,
there are leftover goodies from December.  Such is the case with
IMMORTAL BELOVED, an engaging new film about the life and loves of
Ludwig Van Beethoven.
     The movie begins just after Beethoven's death.  His trusted
friend, Anton Schindler (Jeroen Krabbe), discovers a cryptic letter
from the late composer stating that  all of his possessions and money
are to be left to his "Immortal Beloved."  Since the letter does not
state specifically who the beneficiary is, Schindler sets out to find
Beethoven's mystery woman.   In the course of his search, he discovers
several  of Beethoven's love interests and as they talk, the film fades
into flashbacks where Gary Oldman plays the famous figure at various
stages of his life.
     Part love story, part mystery, writer/director Bernard Rose
provides a great deal of atmosphere and passion in this movie.  Using
powerful visuals and highly effective sound design, Rose takes us into
the mind of Beethoven.  We hear what he cannot and see what the music
creates in his mind.  There is one shot in particular that I think
everyone who sees this film will remember.  During the Ninth Symphony,
we see a boy running through the forest until he reaches a lake and
lies down.  When the music climaxes, we pull away from the boy until he
is lost in an oblivion of stars.  The image fits so well with the music
that if there was a best shot award for last year, this one would be
the winner.
     Beethoven was a great composer, but as a human being, he gives Ty
Cobb a run for his money.  After his brother died of consumption,
Beethoven stole away his nephew from the widow.  He had a terrible
temper and was self-centered, although much of this can attributed to
the frustration of losing his hearing, a sense so important to him that
its loss was enough to push him over the edge.  Oldman plays the man
without judgment and we are left with the right balance of fascination
and disgust for his character.  His performance is one of controlled
ferocity, with rising fits of love and anger that captivate but never
fall into the realm of over-acting.
     A strong supporting cast includes Isabella Rossellini as the
beautiful, Hungarian Countess, Anna Marie Erdody, a woman who was in
love with the man as much as his music.  Valeria Golino plays Julia
Guicciardi, a former Countess who is the opposite of Anna Marie.  Julia
is completely enthralled with Beethoven's music, so much so that she
overlooks his faults.  Jeroen Krabbe does a fine job in his role as
Schindler, the character who leads the audience on their journey
through the film.   Other cast members include Johanna Ter Steege and
Marco Hofschneider as Carl, Beethoven's nephew.
     Shot in Prague which doubles for Vienna, the film is filled with
stunning locations.  Cinematographer Peter Suschitzky deserves extra
recognition for the outstanding lighting and shot design.  Film editor
Dan Rae finds the right pace and effectively weaves the images to Nigel
Holland's sound design.  Jiri Hlupy's production design and Maurizio
Millenotti's costumes are of the highest order.  Of course, the real
star of the film is the music, all taken from Beethoven's compositions
by music director Sir George Solti of the London Symphony Orchestra.
     Now in wide release, IMMORTAL BELOVED is the answer to the
January movie blues.  Bernard Rose has combined great filmmaking with
great music to create a film that both educates and entertains.

Title
Review for Just Cause (1995)
     A young girl is murdered in the Florida Everglades and the police
force the confession of the man they think who did it.  Eight years
later, Harvard professor Paul Armstrong (Sean Connery) must find the
truth behind the killing and set an innocent man free.
     With its weak script by Jeb Stuart and Peter Stone and Arne
Glimcher's uninspired direction, JUST CAUSE just barely manages to be
entertaining and it is due solely to the strength of its cast.  Dealt a
bland character, Connery is only able to peak our interest in Armstrong
because of his potent star-persona.  Laurence Fishburne also does his
best portraying the unorthodox cop, Tanny Brown, but poor writing
undermines him.  Ed Harris has the film's plumb role as the psychotic
Blair Sullivan, a poor man's Hannibal Lecter but in this film, we'll
take what we can get.  Blair Underwood is positively boring as the
innocent man accused and Kate Capshaw is downright bad as Armstrong's
wife.
     With the help of its Florida location and some alligators,  JUST
CAUSE has a few thrills sprinkled throughout its one hour forty-two
minute running time but it is hardly enough to make up the slow pace
and gaping plot-holes.  This one is a rental.

Title
Review for Great Expectations (1998)
 `Great Expectations,' which stars Ethan Hawke, Gwyneth Paltrow and Anne
Bancroft, takes Dickens' classic tale and presents it in a new milieu.
The names Pip and Havisham have been changed to Finn and Dinsmoor, and the
story now takes place in Florida, but the theme is the same.
 A young boy named Finn, who loves to paint, is lured into the world of a
rich, eccentric and vengeful old woman, Ms. Dinsmoor (Bancroft) and her
niece, Estella.  Ms. Dinsmoor, whose fiancé left her on their wedding day,
has sworn revenge against all men and Estella is her weapon.  Trained since
early childhood, the young girl knows every trick to manipulating a boy's
heart and despite a warning from Ms Dinsmoor that she'll break his heart,
Finn falls for her.
 As Finn grows older (now played by Hawke), he still makes his way once a
week to Ms. Dinsmoor's decrepit mansion so that he can dance with Estella,
now played by Paltrow.   Finn continues to paint while Estella keeps playing
mind games with him, leading him on and then giving him the cold shoulder
until one day, she leaves for Europe.  Finn, heartbroken, gives up art and
becomes a fisherman until one day, a lawyer mysteriously shows up and grants
him all of his wishes: an art show, money, and a plane ticket to New York,
where Estella now resides.
Once in New York, Finn finds that the woman he is infatuated with has grown
worldlier and more dangerous, but his love for her only increases the more
unobtainable she becomes.  He struggles to become her equal in the hopes
that perhaps then, he may finally have her.
As directed by Alfonso Cuaron, this version of `Great Expectations' is
filled with lush cinematography and production design.  Unlike the David
Lean version, which was darker and more moody, Cuaron fills his picture with
enchanting Gulf Coast scenery and New York kineticism; basically, Dickens
gets the MTV treatment.
 Hawke and Paltrow have the right look for this type of production, but
there is a superficial quality to Hawke's performance, making it difficult
to care about Finn as much as we should.    As Estella, Paltrow is
effectively icy but the real scene-stealers are Bancroft, who gives a fun
and wild performance as the deranged Ms. Dinsmoor, and Robert De Niro, as
the prisoner whom Finn helps escape.
 The best scenes in `Great Expectations' are the early ones, where young
Finn has his first encounters with the prisoner, Ms. Dinsmoor and her
mansion, and Estella.  There is a sense of charm, mystery and danger to
these moments, which is unrivaled in the later parts of the movie.
Overall, `Great Expectations' is not astonishingly good or bad.   Those who
feel compelled to see it because of its cast will most likely enjoy it,
however, for those interested in the story, Lean's version is still the one
to beat.

Title
Review for Interview with the Vampire: The Vampire Chronicles (1994)
     There is a scene in INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMMPIRE when the nefarious
Lestat (Tom Cruise) takes a rat, kills it and pours its blood into a
wine glass for his new, angst-ridden companion and fellow vampire,
Louis (Brad Pitt) to drink.  This scene is both revolting and silly and
is indicative of the film's dual nature.
     Adapted for the screen by Anne Rice from her best-selling novel,
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE is a story told in flashback by Louis to a
young interviewer (played by Christian Slater in a role originally
intended for River Phoenix) that begins with him as a rich, New Orleans
plantation owner who has given up on life after the death of his
family.  The lonely Lestat discovers Louis and gives him the choice
between death or eternal life.  Louis picks the latter and from there,
the story takes us on a trip through two centuries, from 18th Century
New Orleans to 19th Century Paris to the present.  Like the characters,
we live in the dark and are surrounded by blood, angst and suffering.
We watch as Louis struggles to come to grips with what Lestat, a
vampire who relishes his own evilness and who kills the unsuspecting in
large numbers, has made him.
     After sleepwalking through his last several roles, Cruise has
taken on a hefty challenge playing Lestat and the results, while not
disastrous, are not terrific either.  At times, his performance works,
the evilness and selfishness of his character is convincing and his
English accent isn't even that bad.  Other times his performance makes
you want to bust out laughing.  There are moments where, despite all
the make-up and fangs (created by Alien and Jurassic Park effect's
wizard, Stan Winston), Cruise's illusion falters.  The performance
weakens because we know its Tom Cruise and his movie star persona that
he carries with him from film to film lessens our fear of him.  In the
final analysis, however, Cruise is just fine, it's just that movie
isn't.
     Brad Pitt has the film's critical role and it is a difficult one.
He has to spend most of the time being terribly depressed, brooding
over his fate as he walks the dark, empty streets of Paris.  He also
must make a vampire, an evil being, sympathetic.  Pitt pulls off the
sympathy because his character loathes the taking of human life, but in
the area of the struggle to maintain his last few drops of humanity,
Pitt's performance comes up short.
     The toughest character to play actually comes off the best.
Kirsten Dunst must be commended for rising to the very difficult
challenge of playing the pre-pubescent vampire, Claudia.  The twelve
year-old actress (she was ten when she started filming) is able to find
the right blend of sadness, scariness, and even sweetness for Claudia
who is simultaneously innocent and evil.
     There are other vampires such as Armand (Antonio Banderas), a
400-year-old Parisian of the night who desires Louis and Stephen
Rea as the fiendish, clown-like Santiago.  There is quite a bit of
homo-eroticism amongst these vampires.  Their longings are surges of
desire for companionship, for mothers, for fathers and for lovers all
at the same time.  These moments are reminiscent of the old days of
cinema when filmmakers were forbidden to show a man and a woman in a
bed, even if fully clothed, much less anything more risque.  In those
days, the acts of love, lust and sex were suggested through looks and
gestures not all that different from the way the Lestat, Louis, Armand
and Claudia look and gesture to each other.
     For his part, Neil Jordan did an excellent job directing this
film.  There is a never-ending supply of stunning imagery and he was
able to get strong performances from each of his actors.  The film
pushes mood to the max with its outstanding costumes by Sandy Powell
and its period sets by production designer Dante Ferretti.  Academy
award winning cinematographer Phillippe Rousselot deserves another
nomination for this film's soft, yet dark look.  The score by Elliot
Goldenthal and the editing by Mick Audsley will make you jump out of
your chair, although, there were a few too many of these cheap
thrills.
     INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMMPIRE is well crafted but its lacking
narrative is often slow and just downright goofy.   It is successful in
de-mything the vampire, making them into real beings with real
problems.  Unfortunately, in humanizing the vampire, they become less
frightening and eventually, less interesting.  After watching Lestat
and Louis for over two hours, I understood why Count Dracula was the
prince of his kind.

Title
Review for Quiz Show (1994)
     In our cynical times, a rigged game show would probably have a
tough time making the front page of a newspaper, let alone throwing a
nation into shock.  However, it is substantial enough to make a
compelling film.  QUIZ SHOW, Robert Redford's latest directorial effort
is a thoughtful, extremely well crafted movie about the fixing of the
1950's game show, "Twenty One."
     John Turturro plays Herb Stempel, a smart but uncharismatic man
who, as someone in the film said, "has a face fit for radio."  Stempel
is the top- rated show's reigning champion, battling new-comers each
week as he heads towards the big win.  But when the ratings begin to
slip, the chairman of NBC and the show's sponsor, Geritol, tell the
producer, Dan Enright (David Paymer),to find a more charismatic
champion.  Enright quickly takes action and offers Stempel seventy
thousand dollars if he will take a dive to challenger Charles Van Doren
(Ralph Fiennes).
     A member of the aristocracy, Van Doren is a handsome college
professor who is at first wary of Enright's proposal but is soon
overwhelmed by the chance for fame and fortune.  To take over the role
of reigning champion, Van Doren is fed the supposedly secret questions
and answers before the show.  Richard Goodwin (Rob Morrow) is a bright,
young lawyer fresh out of Harvard LawSchool who begins investigating
for the Congressional Oversight Committee, Stempel's claim that the
show was rigged.  During the investigation, Goodwin becomes friends
with the charming Van Doren and he must then wrestle with the dilemma
of putting television on trial without destroying the lives of the
contestants in a McCarthy-like ordeal.
     A major theme in QUIZ SHOW is temptation.  The temptation to
violate the public trust for the sake of higher ratings, the temptation
to trade one's values for fame and fortune, and the temptation to look
the other way to be accepted by the Establishment.  As Jews, Stempel
and Goodwin are both outsider to society's elite.  However, Goodwin is
more polished, more acceptable with his educational background and last
name ("its Goodwin, not Goodman," he says) to the Charlie Van Dorens of
the world.  Goodwin wants to be Van Doren's friend so badly that at one
point his wife tells him that he is "the Uncle Tom of the Jews."  By the
end of the film, Goodwin learns that Van Doren does not have the
character he thought he had, but he still cannot help but admire him.
     John Turturro once again turns in an excellent performance as
Stempel, the man who blows the whistle on the show because he was
denied fame and fortune.  The tragedy of Stempel's character is that he
failed to realize that the public did not want someone like him, they
wanted a handsome, wholesome face.
     It will be very surprising if Ralph Fiennes does not receive a
second Oscar nomination for his performance as Charles Van Doren.
Unlike his character in SCHINDLER'S LIST, we feel sympathy for this
man who has done a great wrong but who is also a victim.  The primary
basis for the sympathy is that Van Dorenis a man living under the
shadow of his over-achieving uncle and father.  Desperately wanting to
carve out his own name and success, he succumbs to temptation.  It is
difficult to condemn him for taking the road to easy money and fame
which had eluded him, despite his high intellect and strong pedigree.
In addition, the network (NBC) and the sponsor (Geritol) are the ones
who were the were the most guilty and who got off with the least
punishment.  Goodwin does place television on trial but ends up hurting
only the contestants in the end.  The producers who were implicated
went on to do the "Joker's Wild" and Goodwin ended up being a
speech-writer for Kennedy before settling down as a writer.  Stempel
and particularly, Van Doren, went on to live a secluded life.
     The film's beautiful look created by cinematographer Michael
Ballhaus, production designer John Hutman and costume designer Kathy
O'Rear is as much of a treat to watch as the acting.  Redford's
direction is nearly flawless.  His choices of shots, grasp of the
conflict and use of subtlety is what makes the difference in this
film.  The screenplay by Paul Attanasio does drag in parts but overall
it is well written, particularly the scenes between Charles and his
father, played with powerful presence by Paul Scofield.
     QUIZ SHOW gives us an entertaining account of the genesis of
television's moral decay.  The film shows us a time when people were
not cynical and trusted that whatever they saw on the "tube," was
true.  Redford uses the rigging of "Twenty One" as a focal point for
the beginning of the end of that trust.  But far more sobering than the
rigging of the quiz shows is that even today, with all the talk-shows,
tabloid news, "Date Line" scandals and political commercials, is that
television influences our opinions more than ever.

Title
Review for Wild Bunch, The (1969)
     THE WILD BUNCH, Sam Peckinpah's magnum opus has returned to the
big screen.  The late William Holden stars as Pike Bishop, the
leader of an aging gang of outlaws who are trying for their last big
haul before they hang up their
guns.
     When it came out in 1969, the western appeared to be dying but
director Peckinpah created a film that was fresh stylistically and
thematically.  Today, with its honest depiction of violence and how it
effects men, women and children, THE WILD BUNCH is as relevant as
ever.
     Holden, with his mixture of bravado, humor and remorse, gave one
of his best performances in this film.   Bishop is morally ambivalent
but we find ourselves caring greatly for him and his bunch because in
the cruel, unlawful world they inhabit, they at least have their own
code of ethics.  Other members of the all-star cast include the late
Robert Ryan, Ernest Borgnine and the late Edmond O'Brien.
     Shot on location in Mexico, THE WILD BUNCH overflows with
atmosphere and realism which contrasts sharply with the westerns that
feel as if they take place on a movie set.   Production designer Edward
Carrere was so concerned with authenticity, he had 12,000 Red Harvester
ants and 12 gray scorpions flown in.  Peckinpah and cinematographer
Lucien Ballard beautifully capture the desert landscape in all of its
heat, dirt, and vastness.
     Editors Lou Lombardo and associate editor Robert Wolf  took action
sequences to new heights by juxtaposing slow-motion images with footage
shot at regular speed.  A revolutionary technique at the time, it made
the gunfights appear almost poetic.  This type of action editing is
copied all of the time today but the effect is generally nowhere near
as potent.
     In addition to a restored sound-track and color correction, THE
WILD BUNCH has about ten minutes of additional footage that was excised
from the director's cut before its initial release.  Time has told,
this movie is an American classic and the best way to appreciate all of
its, fun, gritty, bloody grandeur, is on the big screen.

Title
Review for Apollo 13 (1995)
     APOLLO 13 is a movie that tries very hard.  It strives with great
fervor to remind us of the grandeur of the space program and of the
patriotism that accompanied it.  It tries desperately to make us sweat
and bite our nails as we wait to see what happens to its heroic
characters.  But for all of its good intentions, APOLLO 13 is much like
the mission it depicts, it is a successful failure.  Director Ron
Howard (PARENTHOOD, BACKDRAFT) and his ensemble cast lead by Tom Hanks
but which also includes Kevin Bacon, Bill Paxton, Gary Sinise and Ed
Harris, have made a number of both good and bad choices and the result
is a film that reaches for greatness but must settle for just being
good.
     Based on the book LOST MOON by Apollo 13 mission commander Jim
Lovell and co-writer Jeffrey Kluger, APOLLO 13 tells the story of
NASA's near tragic mission to the moon.  A malfunction that occurred
enroute left Lovell and his fellow crew members Fred Haise (Bill Paxton)
and Jack Swigert (Kevin Bacon) with very little chance of survival.
The astronauts and the mission control staff headed by Gene Kranz (Ed
Harris) had to overcome one horrific event after another in the face of
overwhelming odds.
     The story of APOLLO 13 is so miraculous that perhaps no movie can
do it justice, although Howard and his crew look like they gave it
their best shot.  They even went through the trouble of building sets
and shooting scenes in NASA's KC-135, an aircraft that flies in a
parabolic trajectory to create weightlessness for up to 25 seconds.
The lunar and command module sets as well as the mission control room
created by Michael Corenblith look like the real things and Dean
Cundey's cinematography combined with Howard's direction gives the
audience a real sense of being trapped inside with the astronauts.
     Hanks plays his part with a lot of enthusiasm and we like his
character because of his persona; we want to see him live.  However,
Hanks, like his co-stars Paxton and Bacon, never seems convincing as an
astronaut.  People in the military, especially pilots have a particular
bearing that none of these capable actors seemed to have hit upon.
Only Gary Sinise, who plays Ken Mattingly, the mission pilot who was
supposed to go with Lovell and Haise but was replaced at the last
minute because of a possible case of the measles, is able to find that
particular presence.
     Ed Harris does a fine job portraying Gene Kranz but seeing him
begs a comparison to the THE RIGHT STUFF, (Ed Harris played John Glenn
perfectly) a film that is everything APOLLO 13 wants to be and a whole
lot more.  Kathleen Quinlan overacts in her role as Marilyn Lovell.
Her character is a person you heart has to go out to but it doesn't
help when screenwriters William Broyles, Jr. and Al Reinert give her
lines such as when she says in a quivering voice, "you can discuss that
with my husband when he comes back on Friday."
     Other problems with the film include Digital Domain's computer
generated shots of the spaceship zooming through space like it was
something out of STAR WARS and James Horner's music, where he once
again cannibalizes parts of his old scores almost verbatim and tries to
pass it off as something new.
     While it may not have been all that it could of, APOLLO 13
still manages to gives us some of the wonder of one of mankind's
greatest achievements.  Howard and Hanks felt strongly about the story
they were telling and that passion is what saves APOLLO 13 from near
disaster.

Title
Review for Clueless (1995)
     There really isn't much to say about CLUELESS except that its
title pretty much explains it all.  Alicia Silverstone plays Cher,
Beverly Hills High's most popular "betty."  Cher realizes that her life
is without meaning and she tries to find fulfillment by using her
popularity to help others.  She takes the new girl in town, Tai
(Brittany Murphy), under her wing and helps her avoid falling in with
the "loadies" (stoners) and gives her a makeover so she won't be a
"monet" (a girl who looks fine from far away but is really a mess up
close).  She also gets her two teachers to "hang" with each other so
that they will raise her grades.  In addition to of this altruism, Cher
has classes to attend, driving tests to take, and shopping malls to
frequent.
     Amy Heckerling wrote and directed this movie so I guess we have to
give her the lion's share of credit for the movie's great contributions
to the English language (although some of it is like so 1980's you know)
as well as the film's completely inane plot.  Unlike FAST TIMES AT
RIDGEMONT HIGH, (which was also directed by Heckerling but written by
Cameron Crowe) CLUELESS is devoid of any sense of underlying truth.
The situations feel about as real as a bad sit-com and the characters,
except for Silverstone and Paul Rudd who plays her ex-step brother
Josh, are about as dimensional as a piece of cardboard.  This movie is
a satire of an already satirical image of rich brats from Beverly Hills
and one gets the feeling that Heckerling researched her script by
watching BEVERLY HILLS: 90210.
     While I was watching this movie, I was fortunate enough, or
unfortunate enough, to have a running commentary by a group of young
high school girls sitting behind me.  Although I didn't really care for
the film, save a few good lines of dialogue such as Cher's dad telling
her date to bring her home safely because he has "a .45 [pistol] and a
shovel," the vociferous high school barometers sitting behind me
seemed to enjoy CLUELESS quite a bit.  However, one girl did complain
that Silverstone's thighs were fat and the girl next to her thought the
actress was too flat chested.   Everyone's a critic these days.

Title
Review for Cobb (1994)
     Given Hollywood's affinity for baseball movies, it was just a
matter of time until  they decided to tell the real story of Ty Cobb,
one of the game's most loved and despised players.  Unfortunately, the
film fails to do the baseball legend justice or even injustice.
     It didn't have to be that way.  Tommy Lee Jones tries his best to
create a complex character but he is limited by the film's aimless
direction.  Writer/director, Ron Shelton, a filmmaker who has made some
very good sports films (BULL DURHAM, WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP), misses
terribly this time.  His script is fragmented and he makes the critical
mistake of having the movie deal mostly with Cobb's relationship with
famous sports writer, Al Stump.  Cobb invites Stump (Robert Wuhl) to
his Lake Tahoe house to interview "the great Ty Cobb."  He wants Stump
to write a book so the world will remember the man, the myth, the
legend.   After hearing stories and spending time with his subject,
Stump finds himself struggling between writing the truth about the man
or safeguarding his greatness.  The truth is that despite Cobb's
athletic abilities, he was a racist and a womanizer who also had abused
his family.  Cobb drags Stump along with him to Reno and the film
becomes sort of a buddy/road picture.  There are some time-outs to
show  flashbacks of Cobb as a child, the death of his father, and a few
(very few) baseball scenes.  Most of the movie is spent with Cobb
running around as an old man, coughing and taking pills, insulting
people, trying unsuccessfully to rape a woman, shooting his pistol and
ranting, "I'm Ty Cobb, the greatest baseball player ever."
     Although Cobb is a completely nasty person, Jones' likability as
an actor is able to create some sympathy for him.  He gives his
signature southern, eccentric performance and the strength of his
acting is the only thing that is cohesive in this film.
     Wuhl's Stump is a different story.  He is supposed to be the
audience's surrogate, the person we identify with as we learn about
this hideous hero.  However, Stump's motivation for staying with Cobb
is very thin, even non- existent at times.  Their relationship is
contrived and after the tenth time I heard Stump say to the abusive
Cobb, "I'm leaving," I kept wishing he would because then the credits
would roll and I could go home.
     The production values are solid but there is not much of
particular interest to note.  Lolita Davidovich is wasted in her small,
thrown-in part as a cocktail waitress who receives too much sexual
attention from Cobb.  Elliot Goldenthal's score is solid and we will
probably be hearing it in the previews for Hollywood's next big
baseball epic.
     COBB is frustrating because it had most of the ingredients to be a
good movie.  A interesting subject, a great actor to play him and a
major studio producing it.  It is a bad film made by good filmmakers
and every time this happens, I always wonder why they didn't see the
mistakes sooner.  Oh well, nobody bats a thousand, not even Ty Cobb.

Title
Review for Don Juan DeMarco (1995)
     Don Juan DeMarco is the last of the great romantics.  Although he
has slept with exactly fifteen hundred and two women, it is his first
love that truly has his heart.  Without her, he does not wish to go on
living.
     Starring Marlon Brando, Johnny Depp, and Faye Dunaway, DON JUAN
DEMARCO is a small, romantic tale about love, sex, women and the
relationship between a doctor and his patient.
     Dr. Jack Mickler (Brando), a veteran psychiatric clinician who is
on the verge of retirement, is sent to talk down a suicidal man wearing
a mask who claims to be Don Juan DeMarco (Depp).  After succeeding in
talking him out of suicide, Mickler becomes Don Juan's doctor for a ten
day evaluation to see if the young man should be institutionalized.
     At first, all assume Don Juan to be disillusional.  However, as
Mickler listens to DeMarco's detailed, romantic stories, he becomes
unsure whether or not this is the case.  Don Juan's adventures include
sword fights and duels, pursuing a beautiful woman whom he met while he
growing up in Mexico, and his being sold into slavery where he was
mistakenly placed in a harem with fifteen hundred women.  Inspired by
Don Juan's passions, Mickler begins to rekindle the fire in his own
relationship with his loving but complacent wife, Marilyn. (Faye
Dunaway).
     Writer/director Jeremy Leven has chosen an understated tone for
this film which borders on being limp.  However, his dialogue is well
written and he gives Depp and Brando plenty of breathing room.
     What makes this role different for Brando is the tremendous
subtlety he uses in playing a normal guy.  Unlike Stanley Kowalsky or
Don Corleone, Dr. Mickler is not larger than life but is just a man who
wants to rediscover the "fire" that is now missing from his happy but
dull life.  Sub-titles are needed at times to understand him, but
Brando combines warmness with quiet desperation and the result is a
magnetic and surprising performance.
     In his role as Don Juan, Johnny Depp once again proves himself to
be a fearless actor who can handle almost any role.  His face still
looks too young for facial hair but his commitment to the part, as in
all of his work, is one hundred percent and his acting is devoid of any
self-consciousness.
     Romance takes two and Faye Dunaway and Brando work well together.
There is a feeling of chemistry between them and Dunaway has sufficient
screen presence to balance Brando where as many other actresses would
have been blown off the screen.
     DON JUAN DEMARCO is a pleasant surprise and shows that Hollywood
has not completely forgotten how to make romantic movies.  It offers a
gentle story with a heart, a sense of humor and superb acting.

Title
Review for Desperado (1995)
     Robert Rodriguez is living the dream of the independent
filmmaker.  His first feature, EL MARIACHI, made for $7000, was picked
up by a major studio and not only received tremendous critical acclaim,
but it made some money too.  From that success, Rodriguez, has now
written, directed, produced and edited his first, relatively big budget
($6 million) picture, DESPERADO, which stars Antonio Banderas as El
Mariachi, the guitar playing gunslinger from Rodriguez's breakthrough
film.
     It's not supposed to be a sequel but it feels like one, except
this time the picture is less grainy, the actors and production values
are much more polished, and the direction and editing far more slick.
The story is pretty simple, too simple in fact.  El Mariachi is out to
avenge the death of his family and he can't stop until he finishes off
Bucho (Joaquim De Almeida), the drug king-pin who is responsible.  In
the process, he meets a love interest, Carolina (Salma Hayek), who runs
a book store and gives El Mariachi refuge after he is shot numerous
times.
     He has a friend, Buscemi, named appropriately for the favorite
character actor of the latest wave of American auteurs (who's leader is
Quentin Tarantino of PULP FICTION fame), Steve Buscemi.  Buscemi's
relationship with El Mariachi makes absolutely no sense and one gets
the impression that Rodriguez put him in mostly because fans of the new
directorial breed expect to see him there.  And just in case Buscemi
wasn't enough, Tarantino, who figured out the best way to get cast in
a movie was to make your own and/ or become friends with other
filmmakers who would cast you, also makes an appearance.
     Rodriguez has talent, no doubt about it, although in his valiant
attempt to be at least one of the leading auteurs of the 90s, he has
spread himself too thin.  When making a low budget film, it is often
necessary to do everything yourself; after all, you are often the best
you can afford.  But Rodriguez has moved up to the big time and when
you run a bigger ship, you need to delegate and you need extra
perspective.  David Lean and Alfred Hitchcock did not do everything
themselves but no one doubts that they were the authors of their films
and even Francois Truffaut, the man most responsible for the auteur
theory (which, simply stated, is the idea that the director is the
author of the film and responsible for its personal and world views),
allowed others to fill key positions.
     There are moments in this film where Rodriguez shows remarkable
style.  The gunfights, the shots of El Mariachi as he enters the bar
with the deep bass and surround sound shaking the theater.  "Cool
stuff" as the film students who will no doubt notice this might say,
but to what end?  The script is thinner than the paper it was printed
on and that makes the film seem almost interminable between the fight
scenes.  Being an auteur is not about moving your camera around, it's
about moving your audience.
     The characters in DESPERADO are intended to be complex, but how
can they be in the cartoon world that Rodriguez creates?  Banderas has
presence and many women I know will see this movie just because he is
in it, but his character is neither mysterious nor very charming (and
if anyone really shot a pistol the way he does in this picture, they
wouldn't be able to hit a barn).
     The rest of the cast, Hayek and Almeida, are fine.  They don't do
anything wrong but the movie does not allow them to distinguish
themselves.  Although obviously talented, Buscemi, with his big eyes
and fast mouth, isn't much more than a sight-gag this film.
Ironically, one of the film's best performances was by Cheech Marin
(from Cheech and Chong), who finds a relaxed, humorous tone for his
role as the short bartender.
     Long on style but short on story, DESPERADO misses, but if you are
interested in following the early career of a promising filmmaker, go
see it.

Title
Review for Die Hard: With a Vengeance (1995)
     Back in 1988, I remember sitting in a darkened theater watching the 
preview for a new action movie called "Die Hard."  It starred Bruce 
Willis as a New York cop named John McClane who gets stuck in a 
skyscraper filled with terrorists.  At the time, Willis was known mostly 
from the hit show "Moonlighting" and less known for his unsuccessful 
feature outings in "Blind Date" and "Sunset." The audience booed and 
hissed at the screen and I shared their skepticism.  Well, as the say, 
the rest is history.  "Die Hard" turned out to be a seminal action film 
that made gobs of money and spawned a sequel which made even more.  
Countless imitators sprang including:  "Speed" (Die Hard on a Bus), 
"Passenger 57" (Die Hard on an Airplane), and "Under Siege" (Die Hard on 
a Battleship).  The latter, beat the third "Die Hard" to the punch since 
it was supposed to take place on a cruise ship.  The filmmakers were left 
with a dilemma.  First off, all of the good Die Hard concepts had now 
been taken.  Second, how do you justify the same character falling into 
another incredible situation.  
     The answer that director John McTiernan (who directed the original "Die 
Hard" as well as films like "Predator" and "The Last Action Hero") and 
screenwriter Jonathan Hensleigh come up with is a disappointment.  It was 
a good move to bring McClane back to the big apple to fight bad guys.  In 
this case, it is Jeremy Irons playing a sly, mad bomber named Simon, who 
likes to blow up department stores and subways.  But it was a horrible 
move to turn it into a buddy picture.  Samuel L. Jackson plays Zeus, a 
shopkeeper who McClane meets in a contrived scene in Harlem.  The 
Zeus/McClane relationship is a rehash of all the "Lethal Weapon," "48hrs" 
movies.  Not that Jackson isn't good, he's always good, but his character 
is unnecessary and cliche-ridden.
     Although weak, "Die Hard With A Vengeance" is not without its few 
eye-popping moments.  There are some amazing stunts and an 
edge-of-your-seat scene where McClane is trapped in a tunnel with a wall 
of water screaming towards him.  The audience cheered when McClane killed 
a bunch of baddies in an elevator but the climax, involving a helicopter, 
fell remarkably flat.
     The biggest problem is that the film is so over done with 
explosions, stunts, and sound effects that Willis becomes lost in the 
chaos.  He is not given enough snappy dialogue (no yippee-kai-yea line 
either) and his character appears less intelligent than he was in the 
other films.  Most important of all, he doesn't get to kick enough butt!  
     Perhaps the most interesting aspect of this film is that when the painful 
comparison is made to the first film, we can really see just how things 
have changed in seven years.  Pop culture is one the best mirrors our 
society has.  In the first film, McClane bonds over the radio with a 
black cop named Powell.   There was not one word mentioned about race 
between them.  In this film, it predominates McClane's and Zeus' 
dialogue.  "You think all black people can shoot" shouts Zeus.   McClane 
has accompanying dialogue about how Zeus hates him just because he's 
white.  The 90's are too preoccupied with things that have no place in a 
film like this.  I'm beginning to think that there won't be a truly good 
action film until the next decade.
     A few months ago, when I saw the preview for "Die Hard With A Vengeance," 
everybody cheered in anticipation.  We all got it backwards.  The stunts 
are great, but ultimately,  just like its explosions, this movie blows.

Title
Review for Beyond Rangoon (1995)
     John Boorman is a director who likes to take his audience on a
harrowing adventure to a place they haven't been.  Whether it's being
chased by hillbillies through the backwoods of Appalachia
(DELIVERANCE), following King Arthur as he fights for Camelot
(EXCALIBUR), or taking a trip back to his childhood during World War II
(HOPE AND GLORY), Boorman seeks out the exotic and pulls out all of the
stops to envelop us in his story.  BEYOND RANGOON, the director's
latest effort, is not as solid as many of his previous works but
despite its shortcomings, it is still an engaging picture.
     Set against the Burmese civil unrest of 1988, the story centers
around Laura Bowman (Patricia Arquette), a young American widower who
has traveled to Burma with her sister, Andy (Frances McDormand), to try
and put the recent murder of her husband and young boy behind her.
Despite playing tourist, Laura cannot get past her tragedy which has
left her in a state of emotional numbness.
     One night, while venturing through Rangoon, Laura witnesses a
protest led by Aung San Suu Kyi (the real life resistance leader played
by Adelle Lutz), who fearlessly faces down soldiers despite having
their rifles pointed at her.  This event ignites a spark in Laura and
she excitedly returns to her hotel where she unfortunately realizes
that her passport has been lifted.
     The situation in Burma quickly deteriorates and all tourists find
themselves expelled, except for Laura who cannot exit without her
passport.  With her sister forced to leave, Laura soon finds herself
alone in Rangoon.  Her adventure begins when she meets U Aung Ko (a
wonderful performance by a Burmese actor of the same name), a guide who
agrees to take her into the countryside.  There, through a series of
events, she becomes swept up into the anti-government movement and
through her struggles, finds the resolve to come to grips with her
past.
     The strengths of BEYOND RANGOON, are its interesting characters,
exotic locales and suspenseful action scenes.  Arquette gives a
surprisingly strong but restrained performance that is crucial in
keeping the film from becoming melodramatic.  The supporting cast
includes McDormand, who gives her usual credible performance, and
Spalding Gray in an small role as the tourist guide.  The real standout
is U Aung Ko, who with his mix of authenticity and charm, really hooks
us into caring about the warm-hearted ex-professor he portrays.
     Where the movie fails is in its aim to be a political statement.
Boorman, along with his co-screenwriter Bill Rubenstein, never
elucidate the Burmese political scene and they are content to leave it
at the level of army guys in green are bad, bald monks in robes are
good.
     While not one of his best films, BEYOND RANGOON still has many
of the qualities that have made other Boorman pictures so captivating.
We don't learn much about the reasons for Burma's problems but we
certainly learn that there is a problem.

Title
Review for Bridges of Madison County, The (1995)
     As one of the four or five people who actually did not read Robert
James Waller's hugely popular novel, THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, I
can't answer the "was it better than the book" question.  I can tell
you that the film adaptation, starring Clint Eastwood (who also
directs) and Meryl Streep, is a very moving, thought provoking story
that deals with the themes of love and choiceless choices.
     Eastwood plays Robert Kincaid, a photographer assigned by National
Geographic to shoot the covered bridges of Madison County, Iowa.  Meryl
Streep is Francesca Johnson, a wife and mother of two who is home alone
while her husband and children are at the Illinois state fair.  Robert
shows up at her house, lost, and she quickly finds herself intrigued by
this polite, solitary man-of-the-world.  After she spends some time
with Robert, showing him the bridges and inviting him for dinner,
Francesca begins to discover passion and romance, two elements that are
painfully missing from her adequate but dull life.  The romance turns
to a love affair and as the end of the four days draws closer,
Francesca must choose between Robert and her family, a new life filled
with excitement or her duty to the life that she already chose.
     Eastwood, with a superb screenplay by Richard LaGravenese, has
created a unique, romantic story that is more haunting than it is
sentimental.  There is an incredible feeling of emotional truth in
this film which essentially eliminates the fourth wall (the term for
that imaginary barrier between us and the what is up on screen) and
allows us to feel as if we were flies on the wall, watching a real
relationship unfold.  Cinematographer Jack N. Green, editor Joel Cox,
composer Lennie Niehaus (who all worked on Eastwood's Oscar winning
UNFORGIVEN) and production designer Jeannine Oppewall help Eastwood
create such an enveloping environment that the we are completely
engulfed into the picture.
     For those of you who are still skeptical about Eastwood acting
without a gun in hand, don't be.  His Kincaid character combines his
powerful presence with a deep sensitivity that was hinted at but not
seen in his previous work.
     As far as Streep's performance is concerned, why don't we just
give her the Oscar now?  Her Italian accent is perfect (big surprise
there) and her use of non-verbal looks and gestures brings a depth to
her character that cannot be written in any screenplay.  There is no
doubt about it, there are many great actors and actresses working today
but Streep is in a class by herself.
     THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY will stay with you long after you
leave the theater.  It forces us to not only think about the film's
characters, but of our own lives, choices and consequences as well.

Title
Review for Last Seduction, The (1994) (TV)
     A good thriller is increasingly hard to come by.  All too often,
filmmakers rely on tired genre conventions and clics that never raise
the audience's heart rate above resting.  Fortunately, THE LAST
SEDUCTION, playing at Laemmle's Sunset-5, does not fall into this
trap.  Director John Dahl, who has traveled the cinematic road of film
noir before with his two previous outings, KILL ME AGAIN and RED ROCK
WEST, does a superb job in creating subtle, powerful tension in this
simple but engaging story.
     Linda Fiorentino gives as a good of a performance that I have seen
this year as Bridget Gregory, a smart, sexy, nefarious woman who
decides to double-cross her seemingly clean-cut husband, Clay (Bill
Pullman), who has just received a large amount of cash from a
drug-deal.  Bridget takes off with the cash and leaves New York as
quickly as possible for Chicago.  On the way, she stops in the small
town of Beston where she meets Mike Swale (Peter Berg), a small town
guy who wants to be bigger than what destiny has planned for him. Mike
immediately falls for Bridget and hopes that her big-city attitude and
pedigree will rub off on him.  With the advice of her lawyer (J.T.
Walsh), Bridget decides to lay low for a while in Beston and she soon
seduces Mike to participate in her twisted schemes.
     The movie is simple enough, but what is interesting is how Dahl
and screenwriter Steve Barancik hook us in with essentially three
characters and a small town.  The movie works on a psychological level,
the place where all thrillers function best.  There are no big
car-chases, no big gun-fights, no buckets of blood, just an amazingly
well written, well acted set of characters, particularly Fiorentino.
She is so cold-hearted, so conniving, so mean, and unfortunately for
the men who get involved with her, so sexy that we cannot help but be
fascinated by her.  The movie takes the femme fatale to new heights and
while this may or may not be progress, we now have a movie where the
woman is truly more smart, more cunning and more dangerous than the men
around her.
     What also makes Fiorentino's performance so good is that Peter
Berg and Bill Pullman play so well against her.  Berg is able to find
the right balance of naive, neediness and suppressed anger for his
character.  Bill Pullman, with his wild facial expressions and
pseudo-calm dialogue creates a sympathetic character whose biggest
fault is that he is smart, but not smart enough to keep up with his
tricky wife.
     Besides allowing Bridget and Mike to meet, the small town setting
for the film was a crucial choice.  There is a scene where Bridget is
walking down a Beston sidewalk and she is taken aback when strangers
smile and say hello.  She is out of her environment but it is fun to
watch how quickly she masters and manipulates it as well as its
people.
     Fresh and original, THE LAST SEDUCTION has all that is good about
a small, independent film while having the production values of a
studio picture.  Linda Pearl's production design, Jeffrey Jur's
cinematography and Eric L. Beason's editing are all first rate.  If
you like film noir, good filmmaking, and suspense, go see this film.

Title
Review for Road to Wellville, The (1994)
     Here is a new topic for a talk show: why good filmmakers make the
wrong movies.  Alan Parker, a very talented director who is responsible
for such films as BUGSY MALONE, ANGEL HEART and THE COMMITMENTS, should
be the headlining guest so we can ask what possessed him to make THE
ROAD TO WELLVILLE.
     I'm sure it looked good on paper.  Based on T. C. Boyle's novel and
adapted by Parker, THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE takes place at the Battle
Creek Sanitarium where Dr. John Harvey Kellogg, inventor of the corn
flake and peanut butter, has developed innumerable, bizarre and mostly
quack methods to improve one's health.  As played by Anthony Hopkins,
Kellogg looks like a buck-toothed Teddy Roosevelt and to say he has an
anal fixation would be a gross understatement. A sample piece of
Kellogg's dialogue. "My own stools, Sir, are gigantic, and have no more
odor than a hot biscuit."  How you feel about that line will probably
give you an idea of whether or not you will like THE ROAD TO
WELLVILLE.  Hopkins is good in his role as Kellogg, but despite the
outrageousness of the part, this will not be one of his most memorable
characters.
     Bridget Fonda and Matthew Broderick also turn in decent but
forgettable performances as Eleanor and Will Lightbody, a couple who go
to the "San" to help save their marriage.  Will, who has a bad stomach,
is the film's guinea pig as he goes from one awful treatment to the
next.  Yogurt enemas, bath's with electric current running through
them, and intestinal surgery are just a few of the treats Kellogg has
in store to cure poor Will.
     John Cusack plays Charles Ossining, a young entrepreneur who has
taken his aunt's money to start his own corn flake company.  Problems
arise, however, when his business partner, Goodloe Bender (Michael
Lerner) turns out to be a con-man.  This subplot is completely
unnecessary to the film and slows it down.
     To round out the cast, Dana Carvey plays the mischievous George
Kellogg, one of Dr. Kellogg's forty-two children.  Some of the
film's best moments are the flashbacks of young George and his father.
For no apparent reason, George continually defies his father, driving
the household crazy.  Finally, Dr. Kellogg begs George to stop, which
he does, by dropping his coat on the floor.
     If it were not for these types of moments, THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE
would have been mostly intolerable.  The other saving grace is the
captivating time period.  Production designer Brian Morris and costumer
Penny Rose re-create turn of the century America with enough detail to
make us feel we are there.  We don't have time machines but this will
do for now.  The lighting by Peter Biziou and Gerry Hambling's editing
are top-notch, making this a film of the highest production value.
Parker's direction is as sharp as ever, however, his screenplay drags
and fails to pay off in a gratifying manner.
     The final redeeming attribute is the cinematic documentation of
the erroneous philosophies for good health in the early part of this
century.  When these absurd treatments are performed before our eyes,
we cringe with the thought of how the people of the time could have
been so foolish.  Then again, just recently, there was a book published
that dealt with the benefits of drinking one's urine.  Perhaps in the
next century, someone will make a movie showing how ludicrous many of
our current techniques for better health actually are.  I hope it is
better than this film.

Title
Review for Losing Isaiah (1995)
     "Who gets the baby?"  That's the first question everyone has asked
me about the new, socially conscious drama, LOSING ISAIAH.  Well, it
would be wrong for me to tell,  but I will say, the answer to the
question and the process of getting there are both under-whelming.
     Addicted to crack and living in the darkest shadows of the ghetto,
Khaila Richards (Halle Berry) takes her infant son, Isaiah, and leaves
him in a garbage can.  Isaiah is nearly crunched in a trash-truck
before being discovered and taken to a hospital where a social worker,
Margaret Lewin (Jessica Lange), finds herself particularly taken with
the baby boy.  When Isaiah is not claimed, Margaret and her husband
Charles (David Strathairn) decide to adopt him.  Meanwhile, Khaila is
arrested for shoplifting and lands in a drug-rehab program where she
begins to turn her life around.  Three years later, she is out of
prison and working as a nanny when she learns that Isaiah is alive.
Desperate to redeem herself and be the mother she meant to be, she
turns to an activist lawyer, Kadar Lewis (Samuel L. Jackson), to help
her get Isaiah back.  Margaret and Charles, who have developed their
own deep, loving relationship with Isaiah,  hire their own attorney to
fight Khaila.  Sounds really dramatic, right?  Well...
     Filled with topical issues right off of a radio talk-show and
powerful performances, LOSING ISAIAH will certainly spark conversation,
but not too much.  What is absent from this film is a point of view.
Stephen Gyllenhaal (A DANGEROUS WOMAN) and screenwriter Naomi Foner
(RUNNING ON EMPTY) attempt to placate everyone but in the end, they
satisfy nobody.  They should be commended for not succumbing to
melodrama the way an Oliver Stone or a Spike Lee would have, but at the
same time, at least these two filmmakers would have had a viewpoint.
     In its fear of offending, LOSING ISAIAH falls remarkably flat for
a movie with such volatile subject matter.  Lange and Berry keep the
movie afloat with their portrayals of the two mothers who desperately
need the child, however, the pacing is slow and the courtroom scenes
are filled with missed opportunities for dramatic tension.
     Not without its plus side, the film has a well rounded supporting
cast including Cuba Gooding Jr., Daisy Eagan, Regina Taylor and Marc
John Jeffries who makes his debut as Isaiah.  Good production values,
especially the score by Mark Isham, give this film a much needed boost.
     Who gets the baby?  I can't tell you, but instead of seeing the
movie, you should find someone who can.

Title
Review for While You Were Sleeping (1995)
     Test screenings for the new romantic comedy, WHILE YOU WERE
SLEEPING, which  stars Sandra Bullock (SPEED), Bill Pullman
(SPACEBALLS) and Peter Gallagher (SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE), received a
95 out of 100 approval rating.  At first, that number seemed high, but
since there are so few well-made, good-natured movies out there, the
score makes more sense.
     Bullock's career, which began before but really started with
DEMOLITION MAN, is going to get a big push from this film which should
launch her into the upper atmosphere of stardom.  She plays Lucy, a
lonely Chicago transit worker who gains a fian and a family when she
saves Peter Callaghan (Gallagher) from a speeding subway train.
     Unfortunately for Peter, he lands in a coma and a misunderstanding
leads his family to believe that Lucy and he are engaged.  Lucy's
quandary becomes worse when she falls in love with Jack (Pullman),
Peter's brother.
     Cute and nice, the two worst adjectives in the English language,
instantly come to mind when describing WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING.  Yes,
the plot is predictable but director Jon Turteltaub (COOL RUNNINGS) and
screenwriters Daniel G. Sullivan and Fredric Lebow create many "happy"
moments that pin smiles to our faces.  I looked around and saw people
grinning from ear to ear during the scene in which Jack escorts Lucy
across an icy walkway to her apartment, slipping and sliding, falling
into each others arms.
     Bullock doesn't show a great deal of acting chops, but her role
allows her to be adorable and endear herself to us.  WHILE YOU WERE
SLEEPING is what many in Hollywood have called, "the perfect vehicle
for her," which means it showcases Bullock in  a manner best suited to
her talents and makes her a big star.
     With his wackiness and facial expressions toned down, Bill Pullman
believably plays a normal guy and adds another solid performance to his
filmography.  Gallagher is fine, although he spends most of his part in
a coma.  Jack Warden, a great character actor, returns to the screen
and offers the film some needed weight.
     My score for WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING is more like an 85.  95 does
not give me much room to go higher and films can definitely reach
greater heights than this one.  Still, it is perfect for dates and
brings us some much needed cinematic water in what has been the
movie-drought of 1995.

Title
Review for Pocahontas (1995)
     While it may not be as classic as BEAUTY AND THE BEAST and while
it may not earn as much as THE LION KING, Disney's 33rd full-length
animated feature, POCAHONTAS, is an intelligent film that is
entertaining for all ages.
     Set in 1607, the story centers around two historical figures,
Pocahontas and Captain John Smith.  Much like Romeo and Juliet,
Pocahontas and Smith are from completely different cultures that will
not accept each other, yet they find what is common to all people,
love.  Through them, the Indians and the English colonists overcome
their hatred for each other and learn to live in peace.
     While it plays a little hard and fast with the facts, Pocahontas
is a captivating romantic adventure story with a level of
sophistication that will keep the adults as fascinated as the kids.  As
you would expect from Disney, the animation is first rate.  The colors
have a soft, subdued look that is reminiscent of some of Disney's older
classics and the detail in the character's faces brings animated
"acting" to a new level.  Mel Gibson supplies the voice of John Smith
and even sings a couple of songs (that marvel alone is worth the price
of admission).  Irene Bedard provides the voice of Pocahontas while
Judy Kuhn does the singing.
     The score by Alan Menken and songs by Menken and Stephen Schwartz
are not quite as memorable as some of the hits from other recent Disney
extravaganzas but they are still first rate.
     Wrapped inside an entertaining shell, POCHAHONTAS deals with the
importance of following your heart and respecting others.  Good lessons
for adults as well as children.  Bob Dole would approve.

Title
Review for French Kiss (1995)
     Lawrence Kasdan's FRENCH KISS starring Meg Ryan and Kevin Kline is
a charming romantic comedy that also doubles as a travelogue for
France.
     Ryan plays Kate, an obsessive-compulsive, lactose-intolerant woman
who is so terrified of flying,  she won't even accompany her
doctor-fiance, Charlie (Timothy Hutton), with whom she is madly in love,
to Paris.  "I get around the way God intended, a car" she says.
Charlie, who has a medical meeting, goes on by himself and then Kate's
worst nightmare happens, Charlie falls in love with a French beauty
named Juliette (Susan Anbeh).  Kate's phobia of flying is overwhelmed
by her fear of losing the man she loves and she journey's to France to
get him back.
     On the flight over, she meets Luc (Kevin Kline), a French thief
who feigns interest in helping her so that he can use her to smuggle a
valuable necklace into the country.  As Luc struggles to retrieve his
stolen property from Kate's bag, he begins to sympathize with her
plight and eventually, begins to fall in love with her himself.  At the
same time, Kate is falling for Luc and ultimately must decide which man
she really loves.
     FRENCH KISS is somewhat of a comeback for Kasdan whose last film,
WYATT EARP, starring Kevin Costner, was a certified bomb.  Although he
is a great writer and responsible for some of the most successful
screenplays of all time (THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK, RAIDERS OF THE LOST
ARK, THE BODYGUARD), Kasdan as a director (BODY HEAT, THE BIG CHILL)
has obtained many critical kudos but only a few hits at the box
office.  However, with the help of Adam Brooks' screenplay, Kasdan is
back on track with this film.
     A French person's worst nightmare, Ryan's Kate can be a real
whiner.  Despite this, the sweetness that caused audiences to fall in
love with her in TOP GUN and that made her a huge star in WHEN HARRY
MET SALLY is still there.  Kline, a superb actor with an equal gift for
drama and comedy (GRAND CANYON, A FISH CALLED WANDA) plays his
Frenchman with a delicate balance of humor, sleaziness, and warmth.
Most importantly, Ryan and Kline have chemistry.
     Hutton is fine as the not-so-nice-guy, Charlie, but the
scene-stealer is Jean Reno (LA FEMME NIKITA, THE PROFESSIONAL).  He
plays Jean-Paul, a French policeman who is both Luc's friend and
pursuer.  Reno has a wonderful face the overflows with character and
without a doubt, he has the finest accent in the film, mostly because
it's real!
     FRENCH KISS is a light, "feel-good" romp that slowly pins a smile
to your face.   Effective music and beautiful scenery are an added
bonus.

Title
Review for River Wild, The (1994)
     Actresses always complain that they are not paid as much as their
male counterparts.  Executives and producers explain that the reason
for the disparity is men make action movies that sell big overseas.
Women on the other hand have fewer choice roles and the ones that they
do get tend to be dramas that do not translate well in foreign
markets.  Meryl Streep, probably tired of seeing men who cannot act
their way out of a paper bag earn several times what she does, has
chucked her accents for muscles in the new river-adventure, THE RIVER
WILD.
     This story about a woman who must save her family while on a
white-water rafting trip is trite and pales in the obvious comparison
to DELIVERANCE.  However, Streep is very good in her role as Gail, an
expert river-guide whose marriage to the job-obsessed, wimpy Tom (David
Strathairn) is on the rocks, no pun intended.  Gail thinks the trip
will help bring her family together and boy does it ever.  They meet
some really nasty people that have picked a particularly dangerous
escape route and they mean to take Gail and company along.
     THE RIVER WILD has all the necessary components for a good
action/thriller.  There is the young boy, Roarke (played by JURASSIC
PARK's dinosaur bait, Joseph Mazzello) to make sure there is extra
danger.  Kevin Bacon is the antagonist, Wade, a ruthless thief who is
tough as nails, so tough in fact that he plans his escape down a
roaring river even though he can't swim.  Finally, there is the family
dog, Maggie, who is smarter than all the humans in the film.  All the
ingredients are ready, now we just have to add water, white water to be
exact.
     Unfortunately, something went wrong in the Hollywood blender.
Director Curtis Hanson who made the commercially successful but
mediocre film, "The Hand That Rocks The Cradle," whips up some fancy
aerial shots over the river and some decent action sequences but he
never creates enough credible tension.  Since the screenwriter, Denis
O'Neill, forgot to pack interesting surprises and twists in the script,
it is Hanson's job to find a way to make us think we do not know what
will happen.  Technically everything is perfect, but even Streep's
acting and Jerry Goldsmith's solid score can't sell us the danger.
Like most Hollywood films, we know everything will be fine.  The
difference with this film is that we never doubt that we know this.
     All said and done, the production crew deserves a lot of credit
for even getting the film done.  It was made under tremendous adversity
stemming from the unique problems of shooting a film on the rapids.
There was considerable danger for the actors and as the film shows,
Ms.  Streep did one hell of a job steering those rafts.  The
physicality of her performance and the risks she took allow us to buy
her all the way as the ex-river guide.  Somehow if I was stuck on a
wild river and she was there, I would feel a lot safer.  Will she
become the next action star?  No way.  However, she has proved once
again that there is no role she cannot do.

Title
Review for Higher Learning (1995)
     Bad roommates, rape, race wars, College life can be tricky,
especially if you are a  student at Columbus University, the fictitious
setting of the new film, HIGHER LEARNING.
     Directed by John Singleton (BOYS `N THE HOOD), HIGHER LEARNING
follows three freshmen for a semester as they struggle to find
themselves against a backdrop of racial tension and sexual
victimization.  The central character is Malik Williams (Omar Epps), a
hotshot track athlete who, with the help of his friend Fudge (Ice Cube)
and his professor (Laurence Fishburne), discovers there is more to life
than running.  There is also Kristen (Kristy Swanson), eighteen years
old and sheltered until she is date-raped by a fraternity guy and
becomes a beacon for campus activism.  Finally, there is Remy (Michael
Rapaport), a lonely, unstable kid from Idaho who is overwhelmed by the
diversity of campus life and falls in with a group of skinheads.
        HIGHER LEARNING begins on the right foot.  The first half-hour 
focuses on the three characters and their friends in a college world that 
seems quasi-realistic.  There are entertaining scenes of roommates and their 
problems, financial-aid offices and boring lectures.  Singleton begins with 
subtlety, revealing little hints of what is to come for our characters and 
the paths they are to take.  Malik resents his coach and professor while 
Kristen attempts to fit in with her sorority sisters but we see quiet signs 
of her unease with that group.  Remy never quite works as a character because 
he begins as a seemingly good, quiet guy who gets stepped on and then all of 
sudden, he's a lunatic, ready to kill every minority he finds.  
     After the first act, Singleton abruptly changes gears into the
Oliver Stone/Spike Lee school of sledgehammer filmmaking.  All of the
nuances of the first thirty minutes are thrown out the window in favor
of overbearing stereotypes and clics.  The rest of the film is a drawn
out race war between Remy and his psychotic skinheads and Malik and his
angry African-American buddies.  There are haphazard time-outs to show
Kristy as she becomes infatuated with Taryn (Jennifer Connelly), a
feminist activist and her other relationship with Wayne (Jason Wiles).
     One thing that can be said for HIGHER LEARNING is its solid cast.
Epps, Swanson and Rapaport rise above Singleton's good to mediocre
dialogue.  As Malik's friend and mentor Fudge, Ice Cube is one of the
movie's highlights.  A limited actor but possessing a powerful persona,
Ice Cube steals every scene he's in.  It is ironic that he gives a much
stronger performance than Laurence Fishburne.  Normally a superb actor
with tremendous presence, Fishburne is maddeningly weak in his
portrayal of Professor Phipps.  With an accent that is somewhere
between Jean-Claude Van Damme's and some other dialect, Fishburne's
magnetism is undercut and he is never able to rise above the material.
     The cast also includes: Regina King, Tyra Banks, Jason Wiles, Cole
Hauser and Busta Rhymez.  Director of photography was Peter Lyons
Collister and the editor was Bruce Cannon.  Keith Brian Burns was the
production designer and Stanely Clarke wrote the score.
     Full of good intentions but lacking the proper execution, HIGHER
LEARNING is sometimes a movie, most of the time a polemic.  Singleton
has a lot to say but the problem is that he forgot the first valuable
thing you learn in film school, that in movies, it is more powerful to
show, not tell.

Title
Review for In the Mouth of Madness (1995)
     An intelligent horror film is one of the most rare treasures a
movie-goer can find.  A genre with enormous potential to engage our
minds as well as manipulate our emotions is most often just an excuse
to thrill teenage boys with sliced organs and buckets of fake blood.
Fortunately, John Carpenter, the director of HALLOWEEN, ESCAPE FROM
NEW YORK, and THE THING, has once again given the horror film a much
needed creative infusion with his new film, IN THE MOUTH OF MADNESS.
     John Trent (Sam Neill) is a cynical private investigator who is
hired by book publisher Jackson Harglow (Charlton Heston) to find
Sutter Cane (Jurgen Prochnow), an hugely successful novelist whose work
is known to have a disturbing, psychological effect on some of its
readers.  Cane had disappeared only days before his latest novel was to
be finished and his frenzied fans have already begun rioting in the
streets.  Skeptical that he is being used as part of a publicity stunt,
Trent nevertheless decides to take the case.  After a few sleepless
nights reading Cane's previous fiction, he deduces that author has
hidden himself away in Hobbs' End, a village that is not on any New
England map.  Trent and Cane's editor, Linda Styles (Julie Carmen)
travel to the town where the true "horror beyond description" begins.
     Owing a great deal to the works of H. P. Lovecraft, an early
Twentieth Century author who, next to Edgar Allan Poe, is considered to
be the horror genre's most influential writer, MADNESS is about
indescribable terror.  Creating suspense and tension on a cerebral
level, Carpenter and screenwriter Michael De Luca have succeeded in
alluding to the horror more often than showing it, and when the
"things" in the dark are revealed, it is in such a way that enacts
genuine fright, not simple revulsion or laughter.
     Neill is perfectly cast in his difficult role as Trent.  He
employs the right amount of humor and sarcasm to create a likable
character who we care about as he leads us on a macabre journey where
the reality we take for granted is ever changing.  Julie Carmen gives a
sharp performance as Styles, Cane's tough editor who discovers that she
knows a little too much about the village of Hobbs' End.
     In addition to Heston and Prochnow, the supporting cast includes
fine performances from David Warner and John Glover.  Powerful imagery,
sharp editing and better than average special effects create moments
that are real nail-biters.
     This is the best horror film I've seen in years.  It's great to
see John Carpenter back in true form.  Movies like this should be seen
on a big screen with a good crowd.  If you like mystery and a good
scare, don't miss this one, or who knows how many years you'll have to
wait for the next one.

Title
Review for Walk in the Clouds, A (1995)
     Wow, what a surprise!  A WALK IN THE CLOUDS, starring Keanu Reeves
and directed by Alfonso Arau (LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE), is a magical
film with tremendous heart that offers a much needed change of pace for
summer movie-goers who are tired of Internet thrillers and over budget
action flicks.
     Set in Napa Valley, just after World War II, Reeves plays Paul
Sutton, an idealistic soldier who returns home only to find that what
he wants and what his less than faithful wife want are two separate
things.  A chocolate salesman before the war, Paul sets out for
Northern California with a suitcase and a box of sweets.  On the way,
he meets a beautiful, young woman, Victoria Aragon (Aitana
Sanchez-Gijon), who is pregnant and without a husband.  A tearful
Victoria tells Paul that she dreads returning to her father's vineyard
because he will "kill her."  Paul cannot believe she is serious but
Victoria stresses that her father is old fashioned and will not take
kindly to her not being married.
     Being the chivalrous type, Paul offers to act as her husband for a
day so that her father will not do anything rash.  As he spends more
time on the vineyard, Paul becomes seduced by Victoria's warmth and
beauty and he continues to stay, despite her father's protests.  What
follows is a charming story that emphasizes the importance of tending
to one's family, and of course, love.
     A WALK IN THE CLOUDS is filled with superb performances.  Reeves,
while he still has the taint of Bill and Ted, is restrained enough to
just let the picture sweep him along in all of its glory.  His lack of
range is more than compensated by his sheer likability.  Aitana
Sanchez-Gijon is enchanting as Victoria and plays her with a expert
mixture of strength and vulnerability.  Giancarlo Giannini portrays the
patriarch, Alberto Aragon with tremendous ferocity while adjusting
nicely for his few but crucial tender moments.  And of course, Anthony
Quinn once again gives a brilliant, eccentric performance as Don Pedro,
the grandfather who helps engineer Paul and Victoria's romance.
     Visually, A WALK IN THE CLOUDS is the most unique film of the
year.  Director Arau and cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki give us one
dazzling image after another.  Lubezki should certainly be nominated
for his work on this picture as there is not a single frame that is not
special.  Production designer David Gropman has created a rich
environment for Arau to place his action.  The Aragon house, the
vineyard, are so alluring that I wished I could go visit.
     A fine script by Robert Mark Kamen, Mark Miller and Harvey
Weitzman and another superb score by Maurice Jarre (LAWRENCE OF ARABIA,
DOCTOR ZHIVAGO) add the final touches to a truly special film.

Title
Review for Nell (1994)
You Tarzan, me Nell.  December is here and that means we have hit the
peak of the Academy Award hunting season.  The latest contestant trying
to grab some Oscar statues is NELL, the new movie starring Jodie
Foster and Liam Neeson.
     Deep in the forest, in a small cabin, hidden away from the rest of
society by a  reclusive mother, lives Nell (Jodie Foster).  When a
delivery boy accidentally finds her mother dead,  Dr. Jerome Lovell (Liam
Neeson) and the local Sheriff hike to the cabin where they discover
this mysterious woman who speaks in her own language and is terrified
of strangers.  Curious and anxious to help her, Lovell approaches Dr.
Paula Olsen (Natasha Richardson), a behavioral scientist, to help him
diagnose Nell's condition.
     Nell proves enigmatic at first and soon Olsen and Lovell are at
odds about what is the best solution for her welfare.  Interested in
advancing her academic career, Olsen wants Nell in a hospital while the
compassionate, slightly obsessive Lovell wants her left alone, afraid
that she will become the guinea-pig of the month and then forgotten
about in a little cell.  A court tells them to observe her for three
months in her natural environment to find more facts before a decision
is made as to whether Nell should be taken from her home.  The film
then moves back to the mountains where Lovell and Olsen learn about
Nell and come to terms with each other.
     Not afraid of challenging roles, Foster has given herself a tough
one in this film.  It is a fine line she must walk to make her
character mysterious and not laughable.  Indeed, there are times where
it is tempting to giggle out loud at her Nell-speak, but she overcomes
it with her sheer commitment to the character.  Her performance would
have been more effective with a less is more approach because it is her
non-verbal communication that is most expressive.  Foster has very
revealing eyes, a gift that all the best actors seem to have.  It is
through her eyes that we feel her happiness, her sorrow and her fear
the most, not the ga-ga-goo-goo Nell-speak.  While Foster doesn't hit
the bull's-eyes, her portrayal of Nell works overall and it is more
than likely that she will end up in the best actress category at
various upcoming award shows.
     Equally committed to his role, Neeson is proving once again that
he is a very powerful actor.  His Lovell character as written by
screenwriters William Nicholson and Mark Handley (based on Handley's
play "Idioglossia") is thin on the development and motivation side but
Neeson's warm-hearted performance fills in the gaps and allows us to
buy Lovell's gentle obsession with Nell.  Neeson may also find himself
with some nominations but the best-actor field is going to be far more
crowded this year than the best-actress competition.
     Natasha Richardson's Dr. Olsen feels more like a story device than
anything else.  The sub-plot of NELL (like most movies) is will the
leading man and the leading woman fall in love.  I won't answer that
although I bet you can guess, I'll just say that their relationship is
not that interesting.  Olsen has other story functions.  She is needed
so that Lovell and Nell's relationship will not be construed as
perverse and she is also vehicle that involves the film's antagonists,
the scientific community.      Richardson, with a decent southern
accent,  makes the most of what she has to work with but it is too bad
that her relationship with Nell and Lovell could not have been more
interesting.
     Director Michael Apted (GORILLAS IN THE MIST, BLINK) makes the
right choice of  not pulling too hard on the heart-strings and making
the film overly sentimental.  If anything, he erred a too much on the
subtle side.  He and cinematographer Dante Spinotti  show off the North
Carolina countryside with some beautiful mountain vistas.  Production
designer Jon Hutman's sets are full of character and costume designer
Susan Lyall dresses everyone authentically.  The editing is by Jim
Clark and the score was composed by Mark Isham.
     NELL is the type of movie that has high aspirations.  It wants
to make profound statements about defying categorization and the folly
of pre- judgment.  However, it is the imperfect relationships between
the characters that keep this film afloat, not its grand messages.
NELL aims high and even though it falls short of its goals, there is
enough good acting and picturesque scenery to keep it from crashing.

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
     Batfans, I have some good news and some bad news for you.  The
good news is that the new Batman film, BATMAN FOREVER, is definitely
better than the previous installment, BATMAN RETURNS.  The bad news is
that isn't saying much.
     In this latest outing, Batman is pitted against two arch-criminals
who are attempting to take over Gotham City and then the world by way
using television to manipulate people's brains.  In addition, he gains
a partner, Robin, and also finds a new girlfriend, Dr. Chase Meridian.
     In an attempt to freshen and lighten things up, director Joel
Schumacher and his band of filmmakers have made a number of changes.
Cinematographer Stephen Goldblatt and production designer Barbara Ling
make Gotham city a much more open, colorful place.  Costume designer
Ingrid Ferrin and her crew have created a new Batsuit (complete with
nipples) and composer Elliot Goldenthal has written a brighter, less
moody (and less interesting than Danny Elfman's compositions for the
first two films) score.
     The biggest change however is in the cast.  Val Kilmer, replacing
Michael Keaton, lightens up Batman, almost too much, to match the
film's new tone.  For the first time in the Batman series the Caped
Crusader is not overshadowed by the villains.  To Kilmer's credit this
was no easy task since his adversaries, Harvey Two-Face and the
Riddler, are played by Tommy Lee Jones and Jim Carrey respectively.
O'Donnell also holds his own against these sometimes overbearing actors
with his energetic portrayal as the Boy Wonder.  Finally, Nicole Kidman
manages to pump up her one dimensional role by making the most of her
goofy dialogue and by, well, by just looking damn good.
     Unlike the original film where Jack Nicholson's The Joker blew
everyone and everything in the movie away and in the second one where
Michelle Pfeiffer's Catwoman stole the show, the villains this time out
are pretty much duds.  Tommy Lee Jones is a superb actor but his
Two-Face character feels unnecessary and weighs down the film.  It
seems more like a marketing and merchandising decision to have him than
an artistic one (thin or frightening and of course a Batman villain has
to be both.
     BATMAN FOREVER delivers some laughs and a few thrills but
ultimately, like the other two films, it boils down to a great deal of
hype for a great deal of nothing.  The cinematic condiments (the
effects, the sound, the lightning) may make you feel as if you have
seen something special, but its all smoke and mirrors.

Title
Review for Junior (1994)
     What!  Arnold Schwarzenegger gets pregnant?  A high-concept movie
is typically defined as a film that has a premise which can be
described in twenty-five words or less.  As with his previous outings
with director Ivan Reitman, TWINS (what, Danny Devito and
Schwarzenegger are twins) and KINDERGARTEN COP (what, Schwarzenegger
becomes a kindergarten teacher), JUNIOR pushes the idea of
high-concept to the limit.  However, despite it's lack of story and
it's other assorted flaws, Schwarzenegger and company have managed to
create an entertaining movie.
     So how does Arnold becomes pregnant?  With a little bit of
science-fiction that has more science then one would expect,
Schwarzenegger plays Dr. Alex Hesse, a precise, European scientist who
along with his colleague, Dr, Arbogast (Danny Devito), is tying to
develop a pregnancy drug called Expectane.  Expectane eliminates the
problem of becoming pregnant and will yield millions for Arbogast and
Hesse. Trouble begins when bad guy, research administrator Noah Banes
(Frank Langella) sabotages the Expectane project so he can finance and
seduce Dr. Diana Reddin, (Emma Thompson) a cryogenic researcher.
Arbogast convinces Hesse to take a chance and experiment on himself.
The embryo is implanted and with a few female hormones and the
Expectane, Arnold quickly finds he has a baby in the oven.  Soon he is
experiencing all of the ups and downs of pregnancy and this is where
most of JUNIOR's humor emanates.  We get to see Arnold with morning
sickness, Arnold with cramps, Arnold becoming more emotional (he even
weeps at sappy commercials) and most of all, Arnold with a big, big
bulge in his normally lean torso.
     Schwarzenegger makes two types of films.  The first are the movies
such as TERMINATOR and PREDATOR where he exhibits his primary persona,
extreme masculinity.  The second are the Reitman comedies, where he
spoofs his primary persona by doing things that counterpoint his
"commando" mystique.  Schwarzenegger has the "A" version and the "B"
versions down to a science and as long as he does not try to mix them
(such as THE LAST ACTION HERO) he makes very successful movies.
However, how many more high-concept one-liners can Reitman and writers
such as JUNIOR's scriptors, Kevin Wade and Chris Conrad, come up with?
Actually, I'm afraid to ask.
     What really helps give JUNIOR some weight is it's supporting
cast.  Emma Thompson, who has proven herself adept at both comedy and
drama, is very likable and funny as the socially limited, Dr.  Reddin.
It was interesting to watch an actress of her wide range play against
the more limited mega-movie star.  They hold their own with each other
and there is actually some chemistry. Added to Schwarzenegger's already
established chemistry with the uncouth but affable Devito and you find
yourself with the ingredients that make JUNIOR more than just a one
line joke.  It's just too bad that Frank Langella (who played the
wonderfully wicked Chief Of Staff in Reitman's DAVE) did not have
much of a opportunity to stretch his wings in this film.
     Schwarzenegger surrounds himself with the best filmmakers he can
find.  Reitman is a top comedy director (ANIMAL HOUSE, GHOSTBUSTERS)
and he does his usual solid job with this film.  Cinematographer Adam
Greenberg who shot the monstrous TERMINATOR 2 and production designer
Stephen Lineweaver are conscientious in their use of color and light in
accordance with Schwarzenegger's arc from sterile scientist to pregnant
father. The film drags in the middle but I think this had more to do
with the screenplay than with Sheldon Kahn's and Wendy Greene
Bricmont's editing.  Finally, James Newton Howard's effective score
pulls all the right heart-strings.
     Although it's a lightweight film, JUNIOR actually deals with some
controversial issues.  I would not be surprised if I hear it referenced
in gender debates or abortion arguments.  However, all of this is
without design.  JUNIOR is an innocuous movie with some flaws, but it
certainly was funny to watch Schwarzenegger say, "I want to have my
baby."

Title
Review for Shawshank Redemption, The (1994)
     Hope and friendship, that is what lies at the heart of THE
SHAWSHANK REDEMPTION, a powerful and moving film based on Stephen
King's novella that stars Tim Robbins and Morgan Freeman.
     In a captivating performance, Robbins portrays Andy Dufresne, a
mild-mannered banker who, despite his ardent pleas, is convicted for
murdering his wife and her lover.  Andy is given two life terms and
sent to Maine's Shawshank Prison, a cold, inhumane place made of steel
and stone.  Morgan Freeman, in another Oscar caliber performance, plays
Red, the twenty-year veteran who can smuggle anything through the
prison walls for money and maybe a few cigarettes.  Red quickly notices
that Andy does not seem to belong at Shawshank, but he likes the young
banker and the two quickly become friends.
     More than prison brutality or prison escapes, both of which are
featured in the film, "Shawshank" is really about the bond that
develops between the inmates.  Andy discovers a group of people who
have buried their hope to maintain their sanity. "Hope is a dangerous
thing," Red explains, but Andy will not give in to Shawshank.  For
years, he writes the Governor twice a week to get funds to expand the
prison library from a tiny, dust-filled room to a place where inmates
can pass their high school equivalency tests.  Andy tries to resurrect
the dreams of those who have, or are becoming, "institutionalized." In
the film, the meaning of the word is intended for those who cannot live
beyond the walls of the prison.  The seventy-five-year-old Librarian,
Brooks (a superb performance by James Whitmore) is so afraid to leave
the prison that he threatens his friend with a knife so that he will
not make parole.  Brooks cannot face the idea of leaving Shawshank, a
place where he is known, respected and has a purpose, for a world that
has long since left him behind.
     While Andy gives hope to the others, he learns from them,
especially Red, to open up emotionally.  Although innocent of pulling
the trigger, Andy feels guilty nonetheless because he pushed away his
wife with his selfishness.  He confesses to Red that had he been more
open, more sharing, she would have neverhad the affair with the
golf pro and hence, would have never been killed Red disagrees, but in
any case, Andy has served his time for his sin.
     While in prison, Andy becomes indispensable to the prison
personnel.  After he saves the brutal Captain Hadley (Clancy Brown)
from paying taxes through the nose, Andy and his friends are given
three beers apiece.  Soon, all the guards are bringing Andy their 1040
forms and to top it all off, the Bible-thumping Warden Norton (Bob
Gunton) has Andy working as his personal accountant.  Red is shocked
when Andy tells him that the seemingly moral warden is as guilty as his
prisoners.  Norton takes money in the form of kick-backs from
contractors competing against his cheap, prison labor.  This adds a
level of irony to the story as the innocent man on the inside becomes a
slave to the criminal who holds the key.
     Writer/director Frank Darabont has made one of the best
adaptations of a Stephen King story to date.  His flowing camera-moves
and sure-handed nurturing of the performances appear to be the work of
a seasoned pro, not someone making his first film.  In addition to the
stars, the cast includes William Sadler, Mark Rolston, and Gil Bellows
as Tommy, the young, naive thief whom Andy takes under his wing.
     Production designer Terence Marsh creates one of the most
important characters in the story, Shawshank prison, and "Barton Fink"
cinematographer, Roger Deakins, gives the film its beautiful but stark
look.  Editor Richard Francis Bruce establishes a steady, deliberate
pace that makes the audience feel the "slow time" of the prison without
boring them.  The authentic costumes are by Elizabeth McBride and
Thomas Newman musical score is a key component to the movie's mood and
emotional impact.
     If it were not for the Academy Awards, we probably would not get
films like this.  Very heavy at times, but overall uplifting,
SHAWSHANK is certain to garner its fair share of Oscar nominations.
The only problem with the film is that with the exception of several
inmates, the Sisters, who like to rape certain inmates, is that it
paints most of the prisoners as decent, likable people.  The audience
is given no sense of their brutality and what they did to be sent to
Shawshank in the first place.  We feel sympathy for these inmates
because of the brutality and emotional starvation they face, but
perhaps we would feel differently if we saw the cold corpse of one of
their victims.
     However, this flaw is not fatal primarily because the film is not
as much about violence and crime as it is about hope and its power to
redeem the human spirit.  Shawshank is a metaphor for our own private
prisons that we trap ourselves in.  Like the prisoners of Shawshank who
have been "institutionalized," we often face the same dilemma of
leaving our private jail cells where at least, we know where we stand.
"Better get busy living, or get busy dying," Red says.  These are words
everyone can learn from, not just criminals.

Title
Review for Tommy Boy (1995)
     After graduating from seven years of college with a D+ average,
Tommy Callahan (Chris Farley) finds himself back in his hometown of
Sandusky, Ohio where a top job in his father's factory awaits him.
When Big Tom (Brian Dennehy) is struck by a fatal heart attack, the
family business falls in danger of being bought out by a rival.  It is
up to Tommy and Richard Hayden (David Spade), an uptight but efficient
company man, to keep Callahan Auto Parts from being cannibalized and
sending Tommy and the town of Sandusky to ruin.
     It has been a long time since "Saturday Night Live" produced a
big-screen star in the likes of a Bill Murray or Eddie Murphy.  Michael
Myers and Dana Carvey found success in the WAYNE'S WORLD series but
have never had a hit otherwise.  Chris Farley, however, may be a
different story.
     Large and likable, Farley has what it takes to carry a movie.
Whether he is struggling to change his clothes in an airplane lavatory
or demonstrating the advantages of auto parts by lighting model cars
on fire, his Tommy Boy is always fun to watch.  Add Farley's gift for
humor with his big-hearted sincerity and you have a comedian that
audiences will want to see more of.
     Spade is the opposite of Farley, deadpan and tiny, but he is
equally entertaining.  The two make an excellent team and if they can
find themselves a more substantial vehicle than this, a great comedy
might be born.
     Director Peter Segal (NAKED GUN 33-1/3) keeps the pace moving and
elevates the thin script by Fred Wolf and Bonnie and Terry Turner.  To
their credit, the filmmakers give Farley and Spade enough scenes to
allow them to shine but they waste time on unnecessary sub-plots
including one with Bo Derek and Rob Lowe as they try to steal away the
factory.
     TOMMY BOY is a mediocre movie but offers some good laughs because
of the talents of Farley and Spade.

Title
Review for Waterworld (1995)
     For its first half hour, WATERWORLD looked as if it might be a
decent movie.  Huge sets and big action sequences offered some hope
that this film would not be the total disaster many had predicted.
Then the trouble started and WATERWORLD became a big, overproduced
bore.
     In this monstrosity, Kevin Costner plays the Mariner, a mutation
that is mostly man but has gills and fish feet.  The Mariner travels
the ocean on his tricked-out trimaran, trading, scavenging and fighting
off evil bad guys called Smokers.  The Smokers are lead by the Deacon
(Dennis Hopper) and their goal is to find a young child named, Enola
(vociferously played by Tina Majorino), who bears a birthmark that
holds the way to a mythic place called Dryland.
     The Mariner arrives at a huge atoll to trade pure dirt (a most
precious commodity) for hydro (fresh water).  While there he meets
Enola and her mother Helen (Jeanne Tripplehorn).  When the Smokers
attack the atoll so they can capture Enola, the Mariner escapes with
the help of Helen and the young girl and the three head out into the
open sea.  At first, the Mariner doesn't want their company but he
eventually grows fond of them and together they set out to find
Dryland.
     Up until the point where the Mariner escapes the atoll, WATERWORLD
moves along in a swift, entertaining fashion.  After that, the story
slows to a crawl and all we are left with are the paper thin
characters.  Director Kevin Reynolds has a good eye but he and
cinematographer Dean Semler can't make up for the lackluster script by
Peter Rader and David Twohy.
     The only thing as bad as the writing in this film is the acting.
For his part, Costner never seems to find the right tone.  His Mariner
oscillates between a tough, uncaring anti-hero and a sensitive `90's
guy.    Hopper, playing yet another villain,  looks as if he
sleepwalked through his role as the Deacon.  He has a few good
one-liners but he is never menacing and that does not make for much
drama.  As the poorly scripted Helen, Jeanne Tripplehorn, no matter
what she tries, cannot make her character interesting.
 She stares a lot and yells often at the Mariner but we never really
 learn much about her and she does not give us much reason to care to.
     Technically, WATERWORLD is a great achievement, except I would
like to know why on a film that costs $175 million, things still look
fake.  Production designer Dennis Gassner's sets, which include the
atoll, a super-tanker and the trimaran give a sense of where some of
that enormous budget went.  The editing by Peter Boyle is slick and
James Newton Howard's score, while it is nothing memorable, works just
fine.  Unfortunately, despite all its technical bravado, WATERWORLD is
a lousy movie.
