Authors
John Benjamin Strelow
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Spanish Prisoner, The (1997)
The Spanish Prisoner (written and directed by David Mamet, 1998)
        If David Mamet's THE SPANISH PRISONER is not the best film of the 
year when it's time to party like it's 1999, 1998 will have been a 
phenomenal year for the cinema.  This film is a carefully woven tale, a 
tapestry of deceit sown in the wonderful dialogue of David Mamet, who has 
taken a break from the writer-for-hire chores of THE EDGE and WAG THE DOG 
to both pen and direct a new masterpiece about con artists.
        And con artists is the perfect term.  The confidence game to 
which Joe Ross (Campbell Scott, son of George C.) falls victim is nothing 
less than an artistic and aesthetic masterpiece; you applaud each of the 
game's twists even as you feel for Ross, an Everyman trapped nearly every 
step of the way.  The beauty of THE SPANISH PRISONER is that even if you 
are one step ahead of the con, you still are not sure exactly how it will 
play out, what the ramifications are, or how Ross will react.  There is 
always an extra step, and always an extra element to each step.  THE 
SPANISH PRISONER certainly keeps one on one's toes.
        Any plot information is too much; it is best to enter the film 
without expectations about any character.  It is evident quickly who the 
victim will be; what is not evident is who exactly is playing who and 
how.  Suffice to say that there is a lot of money at stake; suffice to 
say that the MacGuffin of the day is a mathematical uberformula dubbed 
The Process; suffice to say that if The Process falls into the wrong 
hands there will be hell to pay for Joe Ross; suffice to say that The 
Company will watch Ross and The Process very carefully.
        But no one is careful enough in The Spanish Prisoner.  No one is 
careful enough because almost no one is who they claim to be.  Everyone 
acts to one degree or another, everyone deep in facades and masquerades. 
There is a sinister menace in a world where an innocuous summer 
conversation alters one's life.  Everyone's acting, everyone wants 
something, everyone's out to con everyone.  Mamet does not spare us one 
moment of the menace, and we are all a lot richer for the experience.

Title
Review for Braveheart (1995)
It was with great anticipation that I sat down to view BRAVEHEART last 
week as it premiered on American cable.  The Academy Award winning film 
had been highly acclaimed.  It also featured the music of one of my 
favorite film composers, James Horner.  What I was in for was a 
disappointing and overlong film which was anything but the best picture 
of 1995.
What drags BRAVEHEART down is its screenplay.  It abounds with high 
production values:  John Toll's award-winning cinematography (which also 
graced Edward Zwick's 1994 LEGENDS OF THE FALL), a gorgeous score by 
Horner, and the sort of logistics that make you wish assistant directors 
were household names.  But this does not save a misguided script.
The film wishes to paint its central character as a hero, but the 
viewer's only response to his "heroism" is intellectual:  William Wallace 
(producer-director Mel Gibson) is fighting for freedom and against 
tyranny, so we have to root for him.
But Wallace's actions paint a different story.  He speaks of freedom and 
acts of vengeance.  Though one intellectually realizes Wallace is on the 
right side, the film paints an unconvincing emotional portait, in which 
Wallace is just not as bad as the English king.
Wallace speaks of freedom, but his acts point toward vengeance.  After 
kicking the English out of Scotland, he decides to invade England.  This 
is evident of a "Spartacus Complex", and this example applies both 
historically and cinematically.  The historical Spartacus at one point 
moved from liberating slaves to sacking Roman cities; the film SPARTACUS, 
like BRAVEHEART, has high production values and competent performaces and 
is dragged down by an awful screenplay.
It is a shame that such an excellent score is part of such a terrible 
film.  Horner's score tries to make emotional connection, but the 
performances and the script do not help.  Gibson portrays Wallace in such 
a way that the audience cannot relate to him or identify with him.  This 
drags down any emotional connection to the film's plot, and turns three 
hours into a total waste of time.
