Authors
Phil Trubey
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Go Fish (1994)
     Black and white "docu-drama" about lesbian life.  A low-budget
film that works both as a low-key venture into lesbian life and as a
truly artistic film.
     I describe this movie as a "docu-drama" primarily because the
movie works more as a view into lesbian life that it does as a
traditional story--the movie does have a plot, but it is simplistic
and predictable.  The movie is ostensibly about Max, a young pretty
woman who is desperately searching for the perfect soul mate.  We
sometimes hear passages from her stream of consciousness written
journal.  Her roommate, Kia, carefully sets Max up with Ely, a woman who
has been hanging onto the ghost of a relationship for the past few
years.  The rest of the movie follows the blossoming relationship
between Ely and Max.
     Along the way, however, are several cinematic, artistic, and
dramatic devices that move this movie from being merely okay to being a
real treat to watch.
     One of the most powerful scenes is a beautifully done piece just
after one of the characters sleeps with a male friend of hers.  As she
is walking back, all sorts of guilty, peer pressure thoughts race
through her mind--is she truly a lesbian?  How will other women react?
Will she be outcast from both straight and gay communities?  She ends up
defending herself before a back alley mock trial of her peers in a
surreal, dark, judge and jury atmosphere.  The viewer is left to make
up their own minds about what it means to be "lesbian," "straight," or
"bi"--and whether any of these labels make any sense anyways.
     The movie is also infused with some genuinely funny scenes--we see
the hilariously distorted imaginings of what went on the night before
as Ely and Max describe what happened to their respective roommates.
The part where four women try to come up with a colloquial name for
"vagina" almost threw me off my seat.
     Unlike Hollywood's attempts at slickly "exposing" male gay life,
GO FISH doesn't ram any messages down your throat.  It matter of
factly shows slices of lesbian lifestyles and lets you extract what you
want from the movie.
     If you're looking for an alternative to this summer's bland
offerings of mindless Hollywood shoot em up action adventure movies, go
see GO FISH.  It is an artistic treat that will spawn many good cafe
discussions.
