Authors
Joshua McAdams
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Saint, The (1997)
        Boy, what can you say about a movie like the Saint? Did I say
movie? I apologize. I should have referred to this Val Kilmer vehicle
as an experience ---  an experience that I will now attempt to relate
to you. It was four in the afternoon on a rainy Sunday  when I pulled
into the parking lot at the Carmike Six Theater. As local movie houses
go the Carmike is easily the best in Charlottesville; the screens are
the right ratio, the sound is DTS, and the place is generally showing
big budget  films with mass appeal. Case in point, last week Carmike
was screening four different Harrison Ford movies in five  theaters.
Talk about over-exposure.
        The first thing I noticed was the line that generated from the
box office and spilled into the parking lot to block traffic. Strange,
I thought, there must be a debut this week other than "The Saint."
Quickly I scanned the posters hanging outside: it was definitely too
late for  Star Wars mania and word of mouth had pretty much killed
"The Devil's Own." It turned out that two other features, both low
concept romantic comedies,  were going heads-up with Val this very
weekend. Still, even taking into account the weather and the sizable
student population, I got the errie feeling that these carbon drones
were really waiting in line to see a cheap Mission Impossible rip-off.
        Now don't get me wrong, I thought Mission Impossible was an
James Bond rip-off, but at least it was expensive. I'd seen the
trailers for "The Saint" --- lots of Kilmer in disguises, Elizabeth
Shue acting vulnerable, and machine guns in every third shot.  Enough
of the plotline had trickled out to let everyone know that communism
may be dead but those crazy Russians were up to something again. As
contrived as it was,  Mission Impossible killed Emilio Estevez in the
first reel and then dusted Voight in the climax! The most one could
look forward to with "The Saint" is allot gunplay and generic villains
delivering cornball lines. Yet here I was locking my car door and
strolling toward the theater.
        I walked quickly up the sidesteps and examined the lobby. The
"Help Wanted" sign had been taken down so I had to assume the theater
was no longer under-staffed. No matter. Two guys, both high school
age, were grabbing cash and handing out tickets like trained seals at
the box office. The concession stand was absolutely buried under five
different lines of hungry movie-goers eager to pay the 300% markup for
artery clogging popcorn.  Quickly I counted out anyone at these two
stations, they were too busy to notice me and hadn't batted an eye
before when I did my thing. The assistant manager was a different
story however. 
        Standing in his red-vested monkey suit at the portal to the
screens, he was mechanically ripping tickets and giving directions to
the public. The Jedi Mind Trick had never worked on him, he took it
way too personal to be influenced with any slick talking.  The
"backdoors", two wide corridors for exiting patrons that can be
accessed from the front of the lobby,  looked like the best bet.
However, they were not without risk. If spotted by Monkey Boy
assistant manager there would probably be a confrontation. The rest of
the staff were getting paid 4.25 an hour and doing their level best to
avoid bumping heads with anyone; especially someone that looked like
they would make them feel stupid for even questioning. Monkey Boy was
a different story, he had actually thwarted me and comrade just the
day before at a four oclock showing of Star Wars.
         I opened the door and walked inside, finding a place at the
back of a food line.  Slowly drifted sideways, pretending to examine
the Titanic hanging poster, and tried to scope the manager. I hadn't
seen him here in weeks but I knew that he would be on-premises for a
triple debut weekend. But where?  There he was, coming out of the
"Employees Only" door with a roll of greenbacks  in his hand, looking
flustered, annoyed, and constipated all at once.  The day was going
bad for him, he was probably scheduled off but had to show up when the
place was swamped by unexpected interest in "The Saint." As he crossed
to the ticket booth I made my move, sliding behind a tall potted plant
just as Monkey Boy looked down to rip  tickets and proceeding down
the one way open corridor. The exposure time was less than three
seconds but the familiar juice was still there - a hot rush that
generated in my upper spine and flowed through my head until it began
to resonate behind my eyes. 
         I made a b-line for the theater where "The Saint" was playing
but DAMN! ---there was a chick taking tickets right in front of the
double doors. It was to late, having already committed I held my
breath and just jump right in and walked straight past her. She didn't
even acknowledge me. Once inside the viewing area my prediction was
realize; the place was packed. I stood against the wall for a few
minutes then sat it the last seat on the left in the last row. A few
minutes after the designated start time the lights dimmed and the
projector whirred to life.
        The movie began erratically in flashback. The weakest title
card I have ever seen in my life tells us its: The Far East -
Yesterday. Cool idea about the ambivalence of the timeline but the
delivery is fundamental screwed by a generic block font that
completely clashes with spirit of a spy adventure film. It turns out
that The Saint is was once a nameless orphan with a gift for picking
locks. He wreaks havoc at the orphanage and escapes one night but not
before: (A) naming himself Simon Templar and (B)watching his first
love dashed to pieces on a hardwood floor when she is knocked off a
balcony by a couple of German Shepherds lead by the Evil Priest!
Attack dogs hunting down away children? In a Catholic orphanage? It a
little extreme even for the Far East. They couldnt expect us to buy
that, could they? Yes, they actually did feel you would buy it
because after that  "The Saint" ventures into fields of ludicrous
absurdity hitherto untrodden. Certain things can be bad but tragically
comic at the same time. See Daylight and recently released Devils Own
for examples of such camp.  The Saint is so screwed up that you have
to dig deep in the cluttered rough to find even the most tarnished
chunk of iron sulfide. Needless to say the plot is Hollywood fools
gold on a level of such utter banality that a I could spend hours
peering into, and shining the light of day through, each and every
plothole. 
        The second title card fades in the words :Moscow - Tomorrow.
Then some  Russian oil magnate is shown goading his rebellious
countrymen by mimicking Mark Anthony in his famous Caesar funeral
dirge: "Friends, Countrymen, Russians!" The crowd assembled cheers and
the screenwriters figured the crowd in the theater would shiver at the
thought of yet more anarchist Russians controlling the power of
nuclear life or death over us. Hell, Muscovites cant even feed
themselves, so I aint worried about them too much; but i guess it's
better than Islamic terrorists.
        Enter the orphan who has fashioned himself into a high-end
thief who  can scale walls, crack safes, and  deliver cheesy
one-liners with the best of them.  Mr. Templar steals a important
"microchip" from the Bad Russian Industrialist but not before creating
a "jealous son" subplot that is never explore during the rest of the
movie. Bad Russian Industrialist then hires The Saint to steal  a new
formula for creating free and endless energy. 
        Enter Elizabeth Shue as, get this, a scientist who invents
said workable cold fusion theory! In here first scene she stands,
complete with schoolgirl skirt and bobby socks, and answers some
questions posed by her colleagues on her invention. A vacuous actor
playing a equally vacuous-looking rocket scientist queries "Could you
explain the process of cold fusion?"  All he left out was the part
about "for the audience." 
        Immediately Simon falls for the hot bookworm and has a moral
dilemma when he steals the formula from his new found love.  Should he
turn the plans over to the Bad Russian Industrialist? Should he give
it back? 
        Before any of these questions can be explored the story once
again degenerates into endless shots of Russian thugs running after
Kilmer, Russian thugs shooting machine guns at Kilmer, or Russian
thugs chasing Kilmer in a Range Rover. Did I say this movie was beyond
bad?  It gets worse. Example: the hip-hop, one-two-one soundtrack that
makes you feel like you are attending some under 18 rave sponsored by
Diet Pepsi. I must have checked my watch on at least a dozen different
occasions. 
        When the plot dragged to the point where it became painful I
sat in on Jedi for a few minutes to try and remember what good,
creative filmmaking was all about.  As much as I'd like to have stayed
and watch the Emperor try to turn Luke to the Dark Side of the Force I
had to go back. After all, I had burn too many synapses plotting my
ingress strategy to not see the majority of the flick I came to judge.
        Back in cinematic hell I began to notice that the special
devices, pre-requisites in an spy caper, were exceptional low budget
and impractical. Though few of the gadgets worked miracles via
blinking lights alone, apparently Templar still had the functionally
inaccurate Macintosh laptop issued by the IM Force.  Unfortunately old
Simon should have considered what a better move it would have been to
back up Ethan Hunt instead of going solo. Sure the money is  better
playing the field but the chance of a sequel are completely ruined. 
        On a closing note I would like to say that Val Kilmer is
pretty much my ideal Hollywood actor.  I would cast him for one of my
leads any day. Hes been Jim Morrison and Deniros sidekick (the only
one to escape in "Heat"). Hes played an FBI agent  and Batman with
equal measures of aloof coolness. However in "The Saint" I fear that
the idea of headlining has gone to his head; he executes with the
carelessness and egotistical grandstanding of a bullfighter. Maybe it
was the director or maybe the lines he was given affected the
performance but I really expected more from the Iceman.  Elizabeth
Shue is a wasted completely and the Russian heavies were more comical
than anything.  
        All togather a bad, bad movie.
Rating:  Kilmer arches his eyebrows and Shue bats her lashes. People
fire machine guns endlessly with impunity. Fifty thousand dollar
automobiles explode. Is it action or romance? Do you care?

Title
Review for Lost Highway (1997)
        Mere words cannot begin to describe the experience of David
Lynch's "Lost Highway."  To label the film as egotistical ,
nonsensical, and ametuerish would be an insult to films i have
previously considered as bottomfeeders. I would rather face a Brian
Bosworth retrospective than be forced to suffer through this offering
again.
Lynch mistakes begin in the opening credits when he attempts
to blend  some Billy Coriggan imitator croning over a erratic POV shot
speeding down a deserted highway at night. This incredibly blatant
grab for the "alternative" box office totally unmasks Lynch the
"artist" to reveal a director who I can only describe as comiclly
untalented.
More examples of Lynch's overt attempt to be "different"
abound as the story starts to progress. Bill Pullman is a saxaphonist
with a cheating wife who starts finding videotapes on his front stoop
from an anonymous evil entity. See how long it took to describe the
action? Lynch doesn't see it as this straight forward. Instead he
milks every minute detail of the couples' strained relationship,
pausing for endless amounts of dead time and filtering in "errie"
music to manipulate the audience. Granted, soundtracks always toy with
the audiences emotions but "Lost Highway" is so contrived that you
feel used instead of apprehensive. 
Lynch shakes the camera, which some will no doubt laud as
great direction. Lynch puts people wearing black shirts against black
backgrounds, which some people may see as symbolic. But what Lynch
does most of all is waste time and film. "Lost Highway" drags  into a
world of  "surrealism" until it finally begins to twist and constrict
around itself until all the promise and life is choked out of the
film. Why is the publicity surrounding his films always about him?
Three words: lack of story.
To further disguise the plot abyss, Lynch brings in these
graphic sex scenes, six or seven in all, that I suppose could be
justified as central to characters. Instead I found myself asking why
I was looking  at Patricia Arquette's breasts again. Again "Lost
Highway" sets itself in a category that has been reserved for the
absolute worst of the worst. Yes, it breaks new ground and falls
straight into the basement.
Unfortunately there are some individuals who have the right to
enjoy this type of film making. I find them  gathered in art galleries
and coffee shops discussing the meaning of this or the theme of that.
I always attempt to get some type of concrete examples as to why they
feel Lynch is a quality director, but all I tend to get is artiste
doublespeak such as "Lynch explores repressed tensions of the world."
It's a sad statement about our commercial society when something is
considered artistic just because it is different or because someone
(usually the person who does it) tells you how different and artistic
the work is.
As I opened with words cannot describe the pain one must
endure to reach the credits on "Lost Highway."  Manic/Despressives
beware: I'm thankful I left my gun at home or I may have opted for
suicide. I noticed the usher takes you belt and shoestrings as you
enter.

Title
Review for Private Parts (1997)
        The movie "Private Parts", starring popular radio personality
Howard Stern, documents the rise of a obscure kid from sub-urban New
York who becomes the self-crowned "King of All Media." Director Betty
Thomas paints by numbers over an Ivan Reitman comedic template that
had given us such films as "Ghostbusters" and "Stripes." In this time
test formula the hero gets laughs while battling an oppressive
establishment that wants to shackle all that is funny and good in the
world. Throughout the film the audience is blatantly  manipulated into
routing for the shock-jock. Poor Howard is constantly belittled and
picked on by everyone from his father to the WNBC program manager. He
is ridiculed by other performers for his Fartman act at the MTV Music
Awards. Meanwhile the guy carries on a romance with his beloved wife
Allison that is straight out of Brothers Grimm fairy tales. When he
finally gets some clout he uses it to stand up to the evil corporate
lawyers and management types that want to tone down his radio show. In
the end Howard spells out (for anyone who missed the first ninety
minutes) how misunderstood he has been his whole life and how is
really just a loving father and husband. Message received loud and
clear.
"Private Parts" reminds me of a book I read in high school.
Its called "Fahrenheit 451". It a prophetic novel by Ray Bradbury
that deals with a society devoid of books and completely dependent on
television. Truth and fiction have become so ambiguous that only the
weather is immune to manipulation. People become like drones willing
to accept what ever form of reality is offered to them.  Welcome to
the United States of America circa 1997.
You see I dont like or dislike the man personally nor do I
have any objection to any of his humor. Ive listen to his radio show
before on many occasions and have seen him of E! Entertainment
Television where Howard has a half hour show. I never read the book on
which "Private Parts" basicly because I wasnt really interested in
what a radio disc jockey would write about. Of course plenty of people
were extremely interested in what Stern was saying - the book became a
bestseller. Its not really the vulgarity of his shows that attracts
me, its the spontaneity of the individual. Like his WNBC program
director is told in the movie, people tune in because you never know
what Howard is going to say next. Unfortunately, in "Private Parts"  I
knew exactly what was going to happen next.
This film is not about Howard as much as it is for Howard and
his handlers. The man needs more mainstream appeal in order to sell
future movie projects. Enter the Hollywood machine which cranks out a
thinly veiled piece of propaganda and then creates a marketing
blitzkrieg surrounding it. People flock to it because of star
recognition and curiosity, they leave assured that Howard is really a
sweet guy, unfairly persecuted by a conservative society of idiots in
seal suits.   They may never hear his caustic humor that ended up
costing him almost two million in fines from the FCC. They may never
see the pornographic pay per view specials that netted him over twenty
million dollars.  They will never witness his treatment of women and
mental handicapped people. While I find of this type of corrupting and
infectious humor to be extremely funny, the mass audience may not have
approved. Then again, he would have never become the media behemoth
that he is by catering to family values.
Its shocking how much this film behaves like a marketing
infomercial for the kinder, gentler Howard.  I almost expected to see
a preview for some high concept comedy starring Stern to run before
"Private Parts." Howard and Jim Carey are wacky Siamese twins joined
at the waist in the 1998 release of "Oh, Brother!"  Or maybe, as
rumored,  Shumacher will put him in the  Batman serial as the
Scarecrow opposite the next  actor to prostitute himself as the cape
crusader. Either way both Howard and those who hold his leash are
looking at significant returns.
Incredibly Private Parts has not only been well accepted by
the general public(who may be helpless after years of idiotic sitcoms)
but also by critics who are supposed to protect us from the
unscrupulous designs of the movie business. Films should be
trade-offs, you take my seven bucks but I get something in return. It
could be a good, entertaining story, it could be(but usually isnt)
some though provoking insight. If all the filmmaker is doing is
polishing a persons image then you come off feeling like a hooker who
not only gets rode hard but is stiffed on her fee as well. 
To me, Stern comes off not as the All American anti-hero but
as the Benidict Arnold of entertainment, selling out his hard core
antics in favor of the marginalized profits of world-wide super
stardom. Some may claim the humor make for a better movie, I think it
serves to disguise the true purpose of the what you are watching. If
you are busy laughing at jokes about genitalia how much objective
thinking can one do? To her credit,  Betty Thomas tries to show
Howard in all of his glory, behind the microphone stirring up trouble,
but I imagine her hands were tied by powers from on high from the word
Go. But we arent talking about historical accuracy or artistic
integrity here, were talking money. We are talking box office. We are
talking sequel.  Cha-Ching!

Title
Review for Lost Highway (1997)
        Mere words cannot begin to describe the experience of David
Lynch's "Lost Highway."  To label the film as egotistical ,
nonsensical, and amateurish would be an insult to films I have
previously considered as bottomfeeders. 
        Lynch mistakes begin in the opening credits when he attempts
to blend  David Bowie (imitating Billy Coriggan) crooning over a erratic POV shot speeding down a deserted highway at night. This incredibly blatant grab for the "alternative", or art house,  box office  totally unmasks Lynch the "artist" to reveal a director who I can only describe as comically untalented. But at least he knows his target audience. 
        More examples of Lynch's overt attempt to be "different"
abound as the story starts to progress. Bill Pullman is a saxophonist
with a cheating wife who starts finding videotapes on his front stoop
from an anonymous evil entity. See how long it took to describe the
action? Lynch doesn't see it as this straight forward. Instead he
milks every minute detail of the couples' strained relationship,
pausing for endless amounts of dead time and filtering in "eerie"
music to manipulate the audience. Granted, soundtracks always toy with
the audiences emotions but "Lost Highway" is so contrived that you
feel used instead of apprehensive. 
        Lynch shakes the camera, which some will no doubt laud as
great direction. Lynch puts people wearing black shirts against black
backgrounds, which some people may see as symbolic. The man treats his
narrative like a disobedient child; taking the story away from the
audience for a couple of minutes, beating the hell out of it and
bringing it back when it starts to behave like he thinks it should.
But what Lynch does most of all is waste time and film. "Lost Highway"
drags  into a world of  "surrealism" until it finally begins to twist
and constrict
around itself, choking all promise and life from the offering. Why is
the publicity surrounding his films always about Lynch himself?
Three words: lack of  plot.
        To further disguise the idea abyss, Lynch brings in these
graphic sex scenes, six or seven in all, that I suppose could be
justified as central to characters. Instead I found myself asking why
I was looking  at Patricia Arquette's breasts again.  "Lost
Highway" sets itself in a category that has been reserved for the
absolute worst of the worst. Yes, it  constantly  breaks new ground:
and fall straight into the basement.
        Fortunately there are some individuals who 
enjoy this type of film making. I find them  gathered in art galleries
and coffee shops discussing the meaning of this or the theme of that.
I always attempt to get some type of concrete examples as to why they
feel Lynch is a quality director, but all I tend to get is artiste
doublespeak such as "Lynch explores repressed tensions of the world."
It's a sad statement about our commercial society when something is
considered artistic just because it is different or because someone
(usually the person who does it) tells you how different and artistic
the work is.
        But what are these rambling sentences but word? To truly
appreciate  this artist with no art, Lost Highway is a must see.   
Rating: Class Four Buzzkill: Go alone or you will end up apologizing.

Title
Review for Screamers (1995)
When adapting a science fiction story to the big screen three
pre-requisites are required: unique alien sets, interesting
characters, and a "hook" that sucks the audience in.  "Screamers",
based on a short work by Phillip K. Dick, appears to have been
assembled piecemeal by the interns at "Deep Space Nine". This film
look so much like low-budget TV sci-fi that I was expecting Patrick
Stewart to make a cameo. "Picard to Enterprise. There's no intelligent
plot here. One to beam up."
Director Chris Duguay, the mastermind behind "Scanners II" and
"Scanners III", made his first mistake when he signed on to this
project.  I mean listen to the plot: It's 2078 on the distant planet
of Sirus 6B where two armies, the NEB (New Economic Block) and "The
Alliance", battle for control of the vital Byrinium mines. The
Alliance commander Hendrickson (Peter Weller) runs a depleted outpost
that is protected by the real stars of this celluloid disaster:
mechanical moles armed with spinning saw blades called "screamers."
When the NEB command sues for peace, Hendrickson and a space marine
make the journey across Sirus 6B's scourched surface to the enemy
fortress. Along the way they discover that the "screamers" have become
self-aware and are independently upgrading themselves into more
effective killers. At the NEB base, Hendrickson teams up with a buxom
black marketeer (Jennifer Rubin) and a couple of soldiers in order to
combat these dreaded subterranean menaces.
Duguay's second mistake is taking this script seriously.  His  attempt
to inject suspense into this farce  reveals just how weak the story
actual is. To cover up this lack of content, he offers us mindless
philosophy, generic romance, and cheesy  point-of-view shots of
"screamers" tearing along the ground at their hapless victims. Duguay
lops a few plot twists at the audience but these are so blatantly
telegraphed he'd have better luck sending them Western Union.
While the premise - technology, if given the chance, will attempt to
destroy it's creator - is a good one, it is demonstrated far better in
the "Terminator" films. Even die hard trekkies would feel insulted by
this offering so it goes to reason that  Joe Movie Goer should be
doubly reluctant to plunk down a hard earned seven dollars for this
drivel.  You'd be better off renting a truely suspenseful sci-fi flick
like "Alien" or "Predator" and steering clear of "Screamers" - it's
nothing to shout about.
