Authors
Gerard Martin
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Copycat (1995)
Directed by : Jon Amiel
Photographed by : Laszlo Kovacs.
Written by : Ann Biderman and David Madsen
Edited by : Alan Heim and Jim Clark
Music by : Christopher Young.
Starring : Sigourney Weaver, Harry Connick Jr., Holly Hunter,
           Dermot Mulroney, William McNamara, Will Patton
     In Jon Amiel's film COPYCAT, a vicious and premeditated act of
murder is more than a perfunctory plot concept, more than a cinematic
reconstruction of a fatal event, and more than an immoral lethal act.
Long before psychologist Helen Hudson, played by Sigourney Weaver,
takes a magnifying glass to COPYCAT's first murder scene glossies, the
act of murder is defined as something more elaborate than the mere
slaying of a life.
     Serial murder as the art of semi-ritualized killing would
ordinarily be the movie's principal overriding theme if not for the
unexpected presence of a possibly clandestine narrative element that
finds its analog somewhere in the modern-day dint of a powerfully
ubiquitous communication media infrastructure.
     In today's rapid-transit communication environment, "media" is,
after all, the plural of medium, and a copy of a copy is often far more
than the double sum of its number.  At some point, a copy or replication
of thought, point of view, bias or prejudice becomes memetic--so many
replicated components seeking to attach themselves to value systems of
previously existing memes.
     A "meme" is defined by cultural evolutionists as a
cognitive-behavioral pattern that can be transmitted from one
individual to another through communication.  Memes are ideas that
function in the mind in much the same way as a gene or virus would
function in the body.  Just as viruses can leap from body to body,
ideas will leap from mind to mind.
     COPYCAT begins with a birds-eye view of a university campus grassy
glade.  Students have flocked together in groups of two and three.  As
our point of view descends, we also see briefly where a female student
is silently reading a book.
     As our field of vision descends even further, a building appears
in the distance.  A narrative voice-over is heard describing the scene
of a murder.  As the scene changes to a view inside the building, the
spoken words are emanating from a large projection screen.  A more
complete view of the stage shows Dr. Helen Hudson, the speaker behind
the podium, who has just finished a book about serial killers.  She is
the celebrity of her own lecture.
     In a matter of seconds, three powerful media--the book, the
lecture and the television screen--are introduced and revealed as the
powerful agents of dissemination that they are.  Then briefly our
attention is directed into the shadows of a capacity audience where FBI
statistics would suggest that possibly one of our nation's "35 white
males aged 20 to 35 years" serial killers might be lurking.  Seconds
later in the lecture hall audience--a hand gesture, a silently mouthed
threat, a revolver cocking, hesitation at the podium--and we know that
he has just been located.  Signs are evident that Dr. Helen Hudson is
about to begin the ride of her life.
     Minutes later into the story but months later in real life; having
survived a brutal assault on her life, Helen Hudson remains a
house-bound victim suffering the agony of acute agoraphobia and
intermittent attacks of anxiety.  She is a prisoner in her own home.
We can see her but Dr. Hudson is not sure that she wants to see us.
     The murder rate in San Francisco must be comparable to most any
other city of its size in North America.  But what makes a series of
murders serial?  This is where the insights of Dr. Hudson become
inestimable.  Though evidence indicates that each of the killings was
performed by a different person, Dr. Hudson insists on a serial pattern
for the crimes.  After fourteen frantic attempts to communicate her
knowledge to police, homicide investigating officer M.J.  Monahan,
played by Holly Hunter, takes the telephone receiver and quickly judges
her "knowledge" to be inconsequential.  Monahan is, of course, soon
apprised of Dr. Hudson's estimable credentials.  We very quickly see
them together again at her apartment where apologies and requests for
assistance are negotiated and settled.
     Dr. Hudson is perhaps correct in her assessment of a serial
pattern to the crimes.  Soon realized is the full extent to which this
is no ordinary killing spree.  But how could she know?  The serial
murderer, played by William McNamara, very meticulously pays homage to
every detail of other previous slayings by past nefarious darlings of
the broadcast media -- Dahmer, Son of Sam, the Boston Strangler and
others--who were all made famous through relentless media coverage.  It
is as though he became those people and they became his modus
operandi!
     The copycat nature of the crime surely suggests that the victims
of the story were killed more by media "meme" than by mere mortal man?
Memes of a harmful nature can obviously be very deadly when we consider
how the spread of thoughts and ideas might actually be analogous to the
rapid spread of a deadly virus.  Instead of moving from body the body,
the analogy would be a rapid or exponential ideological movement from
mind to mind.  Indeed, if direct bodily contact is necessary for the
spread of a disease, what different kinds of direct contact might
assist the spread of a meme?
     We might first ask ourselves about some of the more popular memes
in existence.  Writer-zoologist, Richard Dawkins who coined the term,
gives us a host of them--the belief in Santa Clause, the existence of
the tooth fairy, and then, for the adults, potentially parasitic memes
like the advertiser's slogan or jingle.
     But what of some of the potentially more deadly memes like those
leading up to the events of the post World War II Marxist-Leninist
Soviet Union, the soon thereafter immense military industrial build-up
during the cold-war, and present-day neo-Nazi assertions that the
killing of six million Jews never happened?
     Never missing an instance, COPYCAT offers us an utterly complete
tour of every circuit, every pathway, every promiscuous avenue by which
memes and their carriers can reach our eyes, ears and other vital
organs.  Even Dr. Hudson, who would never leave her apartment, is not
immune.  The best display of this is the full extent to which she is
hard-wired to the Internet--multiple graphical windows on her computer
workstation screen, real-time chess games in colorful three dimensions,
and extravagant video animation with full teleconferencing potential.
As if the most important carriers were limited to a computer desktop,
there is then her television, her police radio scanner and almost
always the telephone, right? If still not convinced, then listen for a
catchy tune by THE POLICE.
     COPYCAT gives us the usual for our money.  However, considering
that this movie is riding in the wake of other successes of the genre
like THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS and, more recently, SEVEN, the "usual" is
understandably not always enough.  Fortunately, COPYCAT offers more
than the usual.  In addition to intense co-protagonist performances by
Sigourney Weaver and Holly Hunter, this film is brimming with subtle
intelligence and satire--even from the villains!  In a cinematic
portrayal where the tiniest memetic details can echo and reverberate up
and down through the multi-threaded channels of our media-tuned
make-up, this movie is a treat that, like all good thrillers, will soon
bear rewatching!

Title
Review for Ice Station Zebra (1968)
     By placing a high premium on the value of information, ICE STATION
ZEBRA remains a movie that nearly holds its own almost thirty years
later. Indeed I would speculate that simply to have revealed this basic
"information" tenet of the story would surely have been viewed as a
serious "spoiler" in 1968 when the movie was released and 1963 when
Alistair MacLean's book by the same name was published. You see, ICE
STATION ZEBRA is really about the retrieval of "information about";
this along with a never-ending routine of attention paid to the always
frequent exchange of logistical "information for" in the movement of
people and things across the earth's geography.
     Director John Sturges' production of ICE STATION ZEBRA opens with
critically acclaimed special effects shots of a satellite in orbit far
above the earth; this immediately followed by scenes of the
instrument-lit technical subculture world of satellite geo-orbital
tracking. Then, almost as soon as the space-age starts, the scenes of
vast antenna arrays are replaced when high-tech meets low-tech in the
scene-change to a more down-to-earth yet oddly formal underworld of a
bar, a telephone, and a proverbial private chamber where only secrets
about secrets are ever revealed. Here is where the constant need for
much more information quickens the pace. Questions abound and answers
are few and far between. Even the questions quickly lead to more
questions! Who are the good guys, the bad guys ... and what do they
know about this story?
     Beyond the search for Ice Station Zebra - and much sooner rather
than much later, there is cause for wonder of the more eclectic kind.
Why are there no women in this film? When did actor Rock Hudson, who
plays submarine captain James Ferraday, decide that he preferred the
company of men? Was not the character "David Jones," played by Patrick
McGoohan, the opportune warm-up exercise for the acting role of No. 6
in THE PRISONER which aired on television the same year? "There's
somebody who doesn't want us to get to Ice Station Zebra" speaks
Jones mid-way through the film when a deadly sabotage effort threatens
the mission of this state-of-the-art nuclear-powered submarine. Can
chewing gum really be that deadly? Not, implies Jones, unless one knows
what one is doing.
     In the end, perhaps "doing" is what the story is all about. The
enigma that is the Arctic "Ice Station Zebra" is a place, a moment in
time, and an action packed final=E9 to elaborate opportunities to show
a nuclear submarine as intricate, powerful, vulnerable, monumental and
awe inspiring no matter how one chooses to use this "chess-piece" in
the ancient cold-war game of sizing-up the enemy.

Title
Review for Powder (1995)
     Wreathed in tragedy, POWDER begins with a first vestige of human
existence; a new life is abruptly born into our world while another,
his mother, departs.
     The new-born child is alone for the first time in his short life.
Just how alone, it seems, he will also remember for the rest of his
life.
     Nicknamed Powder for his powder-white albino skin, this newborn is
aware of everything and everyone around him.  The wired devices
measuring his brain activity completely blacken the extreme limits of
the measurement scale.
     Years later, the young man Powder, played by Sean Patrick Flanery,
remembers every detail of his life--the loss of his mother;
abandonment as a baby by his father; and the many works of literature
that he absorbed while down in the comfortably dark cellar of his
grandparent's farmhouse.  He was surrounded by shelves of books that he
will remember word for word for the rest of his life.  Interspersed
against walls are diverse toylike devices of his own construction.
     The story really begins the day that both of his grandparents are
dead; his grandfather being the last of the two to pass away.  Still a
minor, he becomes ward of the state and, for the first time in his
life, he is joined with the ranks of humanity; his grandparents having
served as living buffers during the entirety of his early life.  For
reasons of fear or ignorance, they had even stopped touching him.  It
seems that Powder holds a frighteningly unique relationship with the
adverse forces of the heavens.
     A series of far-reaching metaphors express profound notions about
life.  At the orphanage that doubles as a boy's reform school, Powder
arrests the attention of the more unfriendly of their number by
dramatically magnetizing the mealroom's entire collection of spoons
save one.  Held together into one giant clump of silverware and food,
the one spoon remaining flits across the table to join the clump only
to realize it crash apart into individual pieces again.  Not too much
longer into the story, the presence of a science lab arc lamp reveals
Powder's unearthly relationship with the electrical forces.
     Other special abilities are revealed.  Powder is close enough to
humanity to feel another's feelings--to actually listen to people from
the inside.  In an episode involving a hunter, he is even able to
transfer the fear and sickness of an animal's near death to
life-numbing effect.  A sports-hunter's life, needless to say, is
changed forever.
     Time and time again, the bits and pieces of life are challenged.
The firmest pillars of society are undermined one by one.  A sheriff
and his deputy must yield everything they believes to a higher plane of
existence.  Otherwise Powder might really be a threat to all that is
unifying about life--all things normally unanswered or unasked.
     Where does our soul go after death?  To what extent might we not
even exist except as small parts of everything else?  Are we substantial
enough to allow life to be cordially reduced to electrical impulses
only to be reconstructed into re-animated vitalizing forces of
existence?
     There is always much happening just under the surface of POWDER.
What is the pure essence of life?  High school science teacher Donald
Ripley, played smartly by Jeff Goldblum, would have life reduced to the
smallest possible elements--molecules governed by carefully controlled
and ordered impulses of electricity.  As some of these basic
assumptions are challenged, levels upon levels of meaning are revealed
in Ripley's gleaning insights, relentless further questioning and his
relooking closely at the elements that comprise the basis of life and
living.
     POWDER is a beautiful film to watch as the narrative unfolds with
every change of scenery.  There are incredible compositions that
involving pure light, meaningful colour and revealing shadow.  There is
the whiteness of powder against the drab contours of broken inner
lives.  The surface layer of order and understanding is shattered
against what lies just below, under the surface and perhaps,
ultimately, holding all of the pieces together in a discerning order of
arrangement.
     In a discourse that is very much alive in this closing of the
millennium, humanity is pitted against technology as the one is divided
from the other.

Title
Review for GoldenEye (1995)
Directed by: Martin Campbell
Photographed by: Phil Meheux
Written by: Jeffrey Caine and Bruce Feirstein
Based on a story by: Michael France
Edited by: Terry Rawlings
Music by: Eric Serra
Starring: Pierce Brosnan, Sean Bean, Izabella Scorupco, Famke Janssen, 
          Joe Don Baker, Judi Dench, Robbie Coltrane 
     James Bond is back!  And isn't he better than ever?  After what
amounted to a six year hiatus, GOLDENEYE is the latest Bond movie
addition to the long-running 007 series tradition.  It has been
estimated that half the world's population has seen a James Bond
movie.  Meanwhile, hasn't the world changed?
     This time, the premise of the story concerns two lost secret
military first-strike earth orbiting Russian satellites with the
potential to burn ever so brightly enough to produce a burst of
electromagnetic energy overcharging and obliterating the electrical
circuits of every instrument and light-bulb within its target range ...
including, of course, flying MiG jets, computers, and other
orbiting eyes in the sky.  Such tactical precision, however, is not
without its disadvantages.  Once triggered, the spectacular fiery
explosion also takes the `Golden Eye` satellite down with it.  So it is
also with almost every device, every deception and every appendage that
makes the James Bond spy-adventure epic bond so well together.  Yes,
"Bond, James Bond" is back and this time REMINGTON STEELE's Pierce
Brosnan is the debonair secret service agent with the Aston Martin, a
penchant for vodka martinis, all of the luck and most of the toys.
     GOLDENEYE's addition to the 007 licensed-to-kill epic truly frames
a golden age of James Bond spy action and adventure.  The cinematic
event holds a rich history behind it - a rich tapestry of traditions
upon which this latest edition stands.  Afterall, depending upon how
one counts them, GOLDENEYE is the eighteenth motion picture adventure
adaptation of the literary works of Ian Fleming and later, John
Gardner.  Though Pierce Brosnan is no David Niven, in some respects
GOLDENEYE can be said to be the culmination of all nineteen Bond
movies.  Along with the usual measure of repartee-style satire, there
is a bomb of sorts, there is a James Bond nemesis and there are love
interests that probe the mantel of the story and the characters of all
the participants.
     Natalya Simonova, played by Izabella Scorupco, is the
Internet-savvy computer programmer in step with an information-driven
society.  She's a protagonist with Bond.  There is also the CIA and the
marines, a new "M," another Miss Moneypenny and good old "Q" played
once again by Desmond Llewelyn.  For antagonists, there is Xenia
Onatopp (rhymes with "on the top"), played with carnal abandon by Famke
Janssen.  She is a Georgian ex-fighter pilot in vacuous partnership
with former secret service agent Alec Trevelyan, as played by Sean
Bean.  As surely as death follows asphyxiation, the fate of such
relationships are fastened.
     Relationships to the old and usual are crucial.  In the all
familiar casino scene, the playing cards have no numbers.  Unless one
takes the time to count, only the shapes made by the configuration of
clubs, hearts, diamonds or spades on the cards are there to indicate
the card's value.  The idea that information counts is meaningful to
the story.  Afterall, in a world with no electrical circuits, there can
be no flow of information.  Just like the way in which a deck of
playing cards complete with numbers must in history precede the deck of
playing cards without any numbers at all, the flow of knowledge from
one utility to another is all essential.  Such is the legacy of
history.
     But does one need to know the historical significance of villain
Alec Trevelyan's Cossack parentage, or how historically the Zaporozhian
Cossacks became an authority unto themselves and with their hetmans
elected chieftains who proceeded to initiate schemes and designs
rivaling even those of SPECTRE?  No, enjoyment of GOLDENEYE makes no
absolute claim on this knowledge.  But the weight of history is another
matter.  What's bred in the bones of this epic are so many monumental
remains.  Though they provide ballast, they also exact a heavy toll.
GOLDENEYE confronts both the forces of our expectations and the ongoing
presence of our departed history.
     In GOLDENEYE, James Bond is indeed back and, chances are, he will
be back again to serve the interests of world peace and movie-screen
carnage.  But, if nothing else, he will also serve as sometimes
poignant testimony to the passage of time.

Title
Review for Copycat (1995)
Directed by: Jon Amiel
Photographed by: Laszlo Kovacs
Written by: Ann Biderman and David Madsen
Edited by: Alan Heim and Jim Clark
Music by: Christopher Young
Starring: Sigourney Weaver, Harry Connick Jr., Holly Hunter,
          Dermot Mulroney, William McNamara, Will Patton
     In Jon Amiel's film COPYCAT, a vicious and premeditated act of
murder is more than a perfunctory plot concept, more than a
cinematic reconstruction of a fatal event, and more than an immoral
lethal act.  Long before psychologist Helen Hudson, played by
Sigourney Weaver, takes a magnifying glass to COPYCAT's first murder
scene glossies, the act of murder is defined as something more
elaborate than the mere slaying of a life.
     Serial murder as the art of semi-ritualized killing would
ordinarily be the movie's principal overriding theme if not for the
unexpected presence of a possibly clandestine narrative element that
finds its analog somewhere in the modern-day dint of a powerfully
ubiquitous communication media.
     In today's rapid-transit communication environment, "media" is,
afterall, the plural of medium, and a copy of a copy is often far more
than the doubling sum of its number.  At some point, a copy or
replication of thought, point of view, bias or prejudice becomes
"memetic"--so many replicating components seeking to attach themselves
to value systems of previously existing memes.
     A "meme" is defined by cultural evolutionists as a
cognitive-behavioral pattern that can be transmitted from one
individual to another through communication.  Memes are ideas that
function in the mind in much the same way as a gene or virus would
function in the body.  Just as viruses can leap from body to body,
ideas will leap from mind to mind.
     COPYCAT begins with a birds-eye view of a university campus grassy
glade.  Students have flocked together in groups of two and three.  As
our point of view descends, we also see briefly where a female student
is silently reading a book.
     As our field of vision descends even further, a building appears
in the distance.  A narrative voice-over is heard describing the scene
of a murder.  As the scene changes to a view inside the building, the
spoken words are emanating from a large projection screen.  A more
complete view of the stage shows Dr. Helen Hudson, the speaker behind
the podium, who has just written an authoritative textbook on serial
killers.  She is on a publicity lecture tour.
     In a matter of seconds, three powerful media--the book, the
lecture and the television screen--have been introduced and revealed
as the powerful agents of dissemination that they are.  Briefly our
attention is directed into the shadows of a capacity audience where FBI
statistics would suggest that possibly one of our nation's "35 white
males aged 20 to 35 years" serial killers might be lurking.  Seconds
later in the lecture hall audience--a hand gesture, a silently mouthed
threat, a revolver cocking, hesitation at the podium--and we know that
he has just been located.  Signs are evident that Dr. Helen Hudson is
about to begin the ride of her life.
     Minutes later into the story but months later in real life; having
survived a brutal assault on her life, Helen Hudson remains a
house-bound victim suffering the agony of acute agoraphobia and
intermittent attacks of anxiety.  She is a prisoner in her own home.
We can see her but Dr. Hudson is not sure that she wants to see us.
     The murder rate in San Francisco must be comparable to most any
other city of its size in North America.  But what makes a series of
murders serial? This is where the insights of Dr. Hudson become
inestimable.  Though evidence indicates that each of the killings was
performed by a different person, Dr. Hudson insists on a serial
pattern for the crimes.  After fourteen frantic attempts to communicate
her knowledge to police, homicide investigating officer M.J.  Monahan,
played by Holly Hunter, takes the telephone receiver only to quickly
judges her "knowledge" to be inconsequential.  Monahan is, of course,
soon apprised of the psychologist doctor's estimable credentials.  We
very quickly see them together again at Dr. Hudson's apartment where
apologies and requests for assistance are negotiated and fulfilled.
     Dr. Hudson is perhaps correct in her assessment of a serial
pattern to the crimes.  Yet, soon realized is the full extent to which
this is no ordinary killing spree.  But how could she know? The serial
murderer, played by William McNamara, very meticulously pays homage to
every detail of other previous slayings by past nefarious darlings of
the broadcast media--Jeffrey Dahmer, John Wayne Gacy, Son of Sam, the
Boston Strangler and others--who were all made famous through
relentless media coverage.  It is as though he became those people and
they became his modus operandi!
     The COPYCAT nature of the crime surely suggests that the victims
of the story were killed more by media "meme" than by mere mortal man.
Memes of a harmful nature can obviously be very deadly when we consider
how the spread of thoughts and ideas might actually be analogous to the
rapid spread of a deadly virus.  Instead of moving from body the body,
the analogy would be a rapid or exponential ideological movement from
mind to mind.  Indeed, if direct bodily contact is necessary for the
spread of a disease, what different kinds of direct contact might
assist the spread of a meme?
     We might first ask ourselves about some of the more popular memes
in existence.  Ethologist and evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins,
who coined the term meme, gives us a host of them--the belief in Santa
Clause, the existence of the tooth fairy, and then, for the adults,
potentially parasitic memes like the advertiser's slogan or jingle.
     But what of some of the arguably more deadly memes like those
leading up to the events of the post World War II Marxist-Leninist
Soviet Union, the soon thereafter immense military industrial build-up
during the cold-war, and present-day neo-Nazi assertions that the
killing of six million Jews never happened?
     Never missing an instance, COPYCAT offers us an utterly complete
tour of every circuit, every pathway, every promiscuous avenue by which
memes and their carriers can reach our eyes, ears and other vital
organs.  Even Dr. Hudson, who would never leave her apartment, is not
immune.  The best display of this is the full extent to which she is
hard-wired to the Internet--multiple graphical windows on her computer
workstation screen, real-time chess games in colorful three dimensions,
and extravagant video animation with full teleconferencing potential.
As if the most important carriers were limited to a computer desktop,
there is then her television, her police radio scanner and almost
always the telephone, right? If still not convinced, then listen for a
catchy tune by THE POLICE.
     COPYCAT gives us the usual for our money.  However, considering
that this movie is riding in the wake of other successes of the genre
like THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS and, more recently, SEVEN, the "usual" is
understandably not always enough.  Fortunately, COPYCAT offers more
than the usual.  In addition to intense co-protagonist performances by
Sigourney Weaver and Holly Hunter, this film is brimming with subtle
intelligence and satire--even from the villains!  In a cinematic
portrayal where the tiniest memetic details can echo and reverberate up
and down through the multi-threaded channels of our media-tuned
make-up, this movie is a treat that, like all good thrillers, will soon
bare rewatching!
