Authors
Greg Dean Schmitz
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Mulan (1998)
     This review can be found on the WWW at Bookhouse's Previews of
     Upcoming Movies
     (http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3181/mulan.html)
     I went into Mulan with high expectations, due mostly to the
     sweeping ads we've been seeing for months, and my own hopes that
     Disney could make an animated movie that didn't talk down to the
     audience, and I wasn't disappointed.  Mulan matches all
     expectations and exceeds them, returning to the qualities that we
     can see in Disney's classic era of animated films, sitting
     alongside Snow White and the Seven Dwarves as one of Disney's best
     ever.  The key to Disney's success in the animated-musical field
     has always been their ability to market their films to both
     children and to the grown-ups who will take the children to the
     movie.  With Mulan, Disney ups this angle quite a bit by instead
     making a grown-up movie that the kids can like as well, rather than
     the other way around.
     Mulan succeeds because it never talks down to the audience, and
     doesn't paint needless stereotypes or use stock characters in
     unoriginal ways.  Mulan features a wide smorgasboard of great
     supporting characters, none of which over-dominate the film, and
     all of which give us just enough entertainment to leave us thirsty
     for more of them.  This applies to everyone from Mulan's dog,
     Mulan's grandmother, and the cricket she gives Mulan, Mulan's
     ancestors (including a great voice-over from George Takei), Mulan's
     comrades-in-arms, Mulan's captain, the barbarian bad-guy, and many
     more.  All of the supporting characters are there to support Mulan,
     letting her shine, and she does, as a truly heroic female character
     who does not rely on old stereotypes to win our hearts.  She's not
     a tom-boy, she's not a egg-head, she's not shy, she's not
     egotistic; Mulan is as close as Disney has ever come to having a
     believable, human character, and she is also Disney's first true
     hero who succeeds on her own terms and her own merits.  She
     succeeds not because she reacts to the events of her life, she
     succeeds because she is the active figure driving the whole story,
     in exciting, thrilling scenes, and well-considered character
     scenes.  Finally, there is Eddie Murphy as Mushu, who provides nice
     measured amounts of comic relief and cute asides to Mulan (and us)
     that give this drama just enough humor to please us all.
     The film works as well because the story and art work together to
     give us an unified vision of a China that melds smoothly with what
     we might already know, without painting wild, offensive
     stereotypes, and without Westernizing the characters.  Mulan goes
     against tradition with the full knowledge that it could mean her
     own death in several ways, but she does it not out of heroic pride,
     but out of the driving need to protect the family honor.  This
     theme, and the plot and character elements that instill it all
     appear to be firmly loyal to legends and traditions that you can
     see in many of the great Chinese and Japanese film classics, such
     as The Seven Samurai.  Finally, the art and music works in Mulan in
     smooth ways we've not seen from Disney in over 30 years.  There is
     a smoothness to the characters, the backgrounds and the musical
     numbers that melts evenly from scene to scene.  Musical numbers in
     other Disney films often seem forced, but in Mulan, they come and
     go nearly without us noticing, and they all make perfect sense
     within the story, adding a lot to the story.  A favorite of mine,
     in particular, is a musical number about halfway through that
     features the soldiers singing about how much women love fighting
     men, as the number is done in Chinese-character style
     calligraphical art, and it really works.
     For somehow combining elements of Asian legend,  stirring action,
     inticing and vibrant characters, and somehow making a film that can
     appeal to nearly anyone in any family, Mulan very quickly earns
     it's place as possibly the best film Disney studios has ever made,
     and certainly the best in their last 30 years.  If you and your
     family see only one movie this Summer, Mulan could be that movie.
     Greg Dean Schmitz
     Bookhouse's Previews of Upcoming Movies
     http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3181/
bookhouse@geocities.com

Title
Review for Tarzan and the Lost City (1998)
(This review can be found on the WWW at
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3181/tarzanlostcity.html)
I saw Tarzan and the Lost City last night, and I enjoyed it quite a bit.
I was quite impressed with how well they combined the Edgar Rice
Burroughs novels with the style of the old Johnny Weissmuller films. Oh
sure, it's not a perfect film... there's a particularly fake looking
monkey, and it stars a near unknown (Casper Van Dien is mostly known as
the star of Starship Troopers), but I don't think you go to this film
expecting big budget spectacle. You see a Tarzan flick because you want
to see a fun adventure story... and Tarzan and the Lost City delivers.
(just suspend your disbelief a little... especially in the last 5
minutes)
There's been a real lack of good movies about heroes in recent years.
Attempts to bring the spandex-wearing types from comic books into the
cinema have been mostly campy (the recent Batman films), or so painfully
dark as to obscure the "heroics" of the genre.  (Spawn)  In this new
Tarzan, we have a hero who is truly heroic, yet vulnerable, with very
little camp (thank goodness), and not much angst. (ditto).  Of course, I
fully expect most critics will really hate this film, but I don't think
they're seeing it for what it is... the return to the long-lost genre of
the jungle-adventure movies, the stuff of Saturday matinees in the 40's.
(My parents tell me about them :)
I'm not going to go into too many details about the plot, but I'll just
mention that I thought Van Dien's portrayal of Tarzan was right on.  He
portrayed him not as a man-beast (which is the common interpretation...
and the one that Disney appears to be going with in their upcoming
animated version), but as an intelligent savvy adventurer, yet one that
is still just a man.  He's at least half-clothed during most of the
movie, which is loyal to the novels, and even when he gets down to just
his shorts near the end, it's not a loincloth but torn shorts.  He
wields a knife and a bow and arrow, and looks the part of Tarzan.  None
of the actors are particularly amazing, but this isn't a film where you
look for great roles.  Besides, Casper Van Dien benefits from a
supporting cast of unknowns, as they don't overshadow him that way...
and in a Tarzan flick, that works.
Most people won't get Tarzan and the Lost City, but if you want 90
minutes of action-packed adventure escapism featuring a hero we haven't
seen done well in a long time, this film delivers despite some minor
glitches.  (Like the Stargate-esque finale)  I give it a B+
This review can be found at:
Bookhouse's Previews of Upcoming Movies
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3181/
