Authors
Bert S. F. Lo
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Sicilian, The (1987)
     The King of Bad-Movie Reviews returns with his fourth entry (following A
PRAYER FOR THE DYING, SLAM DANCE and PRINCE OF DARKNESS).  
     I should have known to avoid THE SICILIAN since it was made by Michael
Cimino of HEAVEN'S GATE and YEAR OF THE DRAGON fame.  The story is about
Salvatore Giuliano, an Italian bandit in the 1930s (?) who worked against the
Church, the Mafia, and the ruling class to bring about land reform.  The only
familiar face I can name is Christopher Lambert of SUBWAY, HIGHLANDER, and
GREYSTOKE: THE LEGEND OF TARZAN, LORD OF THE APES fame.
     The two biggest problems with the movie are the disjointed story telling
and the wooden acting of Christopher Lambert in the lead role.  The events
portrayed are very small (and uninteresting) and, even together, hardly serve
to explain the motivations of the various characters.  And Mr Lambert's line
reading is so machine-like that the "hero" never comes across as a person.
When Giuliano is killed off (no spoiler, the movie opens and closes with this
scene), the only emotional reaction from the audience was the ecstatic
realization that it was okay to go take a pee.
     On top of this, the music is unbelievably overwrought and the beautiful
landscaping is completely wasted.  And there's not even anything
unintentionally funny to laugh at.

Title
Review for Slamdance (1987)
     This is a review for a movie that came and went (in the San Jose area) in
one week about a month ago.  I didn't figure it would be of any use but then
you can never tell when these bombs get dropped elsewhere around the country.
     The name of the movie is SLAM DANCE and yes, it's a stupid title and yes,
it was a stupid movie but not in the way the title might suggest (i.e., it was
not aimed at teenagers).
     For background, SLAM DANCE is by Wayne Wang, who made DIM SUM and CHAN IS 
MISSING, both good movies.  It stars Tom Hulce, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio,
Virginia Madsen, Harry Dean Stanton, John Doe, Adam Ant, and Don Opper.  The
music is by Mitchell Froom.
     The basic storyline is that Hulce is a cartoonist either separated or
divorced from his wife or ex-wife, Mastrantonio.  A woman, Madsen, with whom he
recently had a sex-mostly affair is found strangled and he is the prime suspect.
Stanton and Doe are investigating the case.  Opper is a thug involved in the
murder.  Ant is a friend of Hulce's.  For those who might care, the movie is
set around Hollywood.
     What the movie tries to be is a stylish non-linear mystery.  It certainly
succeeds in being stylish, in fact to a fault, as an excessive amount of time
is spent on very cold beautiful shots of places and things that have nothing to
do with the story.  It also succeeds in being non-linear as clues are suggested
but not fleshed out until much much much later, when you've forgotten about
them already, and details of Hulce's history and his involvement with Madsen
are strewn throughout the movie completely out of sequence and without warning
as to when those details occurred: the past, the far past or the present.
     What it fails at is being a mystery.  Things happen for about an hour with
no rhyme or reason, then suddenly in the last half-hour, the plot seems to get
going.  Hulce does some detective work to clear himself but the biggest, most
important clues he gets all come to him by unbelievable circumstances.  For
instance, one of the big clues is a business card that he finds in Opper's
jacket pocket.  How does he find it ?  Well, you see, after Opper beat him up,
he was so kind as to wrap his jacket around Hulce's shoulders.
     I think most of the blame must go to those who set up the mood.  With all
the glass and steel and plastic and fluorescent lighting, you get to feeling so
sick that you don't really care about your own life, let alone Hulce's.  It's
all kind of depressing but not in the same way as BLADE RUNNER.  It's like
being trapped in an LA yuppie singles bar that you can't escape from.
     Also, a lot of the acting is downright bad.  Not so much that people act
wooden (though Doe certainly does--don't tell me it's part of his persona),
it's that they act the wrong way nearly constantly.  For instance, Hulce acts
mildly irritated when he really should be acting thoroughly frightened.  And
Opper first acts cold and brutal and then without warning or reason changes to
fumbling and incompetent.  Stanton doesn't seem to be acting at all (I think
someone forgot to tell him this wasn't a readthrough).  Ant acts like an
asshole, probably because both he and his character are (he manages to ruin the
surrealists / fish light bulb joke).  Mastrantonio is pretty good actually,
though she should stop playing these roles in which her main job is to worry
about what happens to other people.  Madsen is good at her (rather small) role,
playing the ice princess but then that doesn't really take a lot of talent.
     (If you're wondering why I don't give it all around worst ratings, it's
because for a while, the style is somewhat hypnotic.  There are quite a few
extremely well composed shots.)

Title
Review for Prince of Darkness (1987)
     Anyway, I know all you John Carpenter fans have been waiting years now
since THE THING for a real Carpenter horror flick.  Well, PRINCE OF DARKNESS
isn't it.  The premise of the rebirth of Satan on Earth is very badly set up
with a lot of absurdly bad metaphysics and theology.  The horror and suspense
are nil--people  stupidly wander off alone and you just know they're going to
get it.  First you see them walking down the hall, then all of a sudden,
somebody appears from the side of screen and stabs them, breaks their neck, or
spits at them and then the scene is over (this last part, from the appearance
of the second person to the end of the scene, typically lasts 1.5 seconds).  By
the way, in case you're wondering "Spits at them?", well, that's supposed to be
scary but as you can already tell just by reading about it, it's so stupid, you
want to laugh every time it happens.  There is no gore whatsoever.  However, if
you're into disgusting things, this movie might be for you.  There are a lot of
shots of worms and bugs and maggots and all those fun things.  There's a nice
long sequence in which one of the characters walks around with the worst skin
affliction you've ever seen.  And there's one really funny scene in which a man
standing up is being eaten by zillions of bugs and his body parts start to fall
off.  Actually, a lot of the movie is so bad that it's funny.
     Other comments: the music never stops and it gets really annoying really
fast; the intro credits are interspersed with the beginning of the movie so
that it takes about 10 minutes before they're all done with; the acting is
really lame (most of the actors I recognized from TV series), the worst being
Donald Pleasance as a priest; and, finally, this movie has the highest Asian
count--3--among all movies (I know of) in which the characters' races were
irrelevant.
     Rating? 0 on -4/+4, $1/Cable on $(1st view/2nd view) and maybe 2 on S&N.

Title
Review for Prayer for the Dying, A (1987)
     I saw a preview of A PRAYER FOR THE DYING last night at Camera One in San
Jose.  Now, Camera One is one of those high falutin' places that play movies
like TAMPOPO, WISH YOU WERE HERE and MY LIFE AS A DOG.  A PRAYER FOR THE DYING
stars Bob Hoskins, Alan Bates and Mickey Rourke.  Mickey Rourke is an IRA
assassin who wants out.  Alan Bates is a funeral director who'll get him to the
USA if he'll do one more job.  Bob Hoskins is a priest (ex-military man) who
witnesses the killing.  Here is my list of complaints.
(Prescript: I went into this movie with a good attitude.)
[1] Mickey Rourke's accent is so inconsistent (it's supposed to be Irish) that
    it's nearly impossible to make out what he's saying.
[2] Once again, Mickey Rourke plays the detached, ultra-hip, cool guy just like
    in ANGEL HEART, 9 1/2 WEEKS, and YEAR OF THE DRAGON and it's getting boring.
[3] Not considering [2], Mickey Rourke can't act.
[4] There's no character development, motivation, suspense or mood.
[5] The music is unbearably overwrought.
[6] Alan Bates turns what could have been an extremely sinister character into
    high camp.
[7] Is Alan Bates wearing a wig and did he recently have facial surgery?  There
    is nothing above his collar that looks human.
[8] The movie can be broken down into a cycle of length 3: scenes which are
    supposed to be meaningful but are patently phony, scenes which are high
    camp, and scenes which are supposed to be hip."  It's a conspicuously bad
    mix.
[9] Bob Hoskins is totally wasted in a 0-dimensional role.
[10] For cheap sympathy, there's a blind girl.
[11] The audience was a bunch of morons.  In one scene where the priest loses
     his temper and starts to beat up the funeral director's henchman, it is
     clear that the priest is horrified by his return to violence.  During this
     scene, the audience was cheering him on like he was Rambo.  In general,
     even before it became obvious how bad the movie was, there was an awful
     lot of inappropriate tittering.
     There isn't a rating on the Sid and Nancy, Leeper -4/+4, or $$$ scale low
enough to place this movie.
Postscript: The only positive thing the person I went with could come up with
was that the movie showed what a funeral director's job was like more than any
other movie she'd seen.
