Authors
Michael Chen
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Deep Impact (1998)
There're so many things to criticize about I don't know where to start.
Recommendation: turn off your brain - don't be like me, decreasing the
rating everyday because I think about it too much.
A comet is about to strike Earth, causing a catastrophe similar to the
Extinction Level Event (E.L.E.) that wiped out the dinosaurs. What
follows is the story of a President's bid to think for the good of his
people, a rising reporter, the love story of two teenagers (one of whom
discovered the comet), and a team of astronauts on the ship `Messiah' to
save the world.
Firstly, there is nothing outstandingly inferior about the making of the
film (nor is there anything outstandingly good about it), but the plot
holes make the film corny and stupid. To be honest, I was more moved by
the trailer than the film itself (which isn't saying much). Mimi Leder's
follow-up to `The Peacemaker' is equally incompetent, with all the big
stars wasted. (Perhaps I'm just annoyed that the release of `The
Peacemaker' in the US overshadowed a far superior thriller, `The
Assignment'.) It is very obvious that the title not only represents the
big boom that will result from the collision, but also connotes the
heavy impact on human lives. However, the film simply fails on that
note. The effects are worn-out, the substandard screenplay limited the
acting, and the director continued her sad run in terms of
good-film-making credentials. She's still making good money though.
Téa Leoni's unfortunate character, the news reporter, is the foundation
of the story and of the cast. But the film suffers from too many
characters that do not need to be explored. Robert Duvall's aging
astronaut is lifeless, and Morgan Freeman's President is restricted to,
well, a righteous President (which means he's not interesting at all).
Leoni's character is the only appealing one, and is played with
reasonable conviction (but a rather peculiar showing when reporting for
MSNBC), but was definitely undervalued by the director and
screenwriters.
WARNING: SPOILERS INCLUDED (but a lot of it is irrelevant and
predictable anyway).
Plot holes, plot holes, plot holes. Now, E.L.E. is threatening to
exterminate more than 99% of the human race, and they send eight puny
little nuclear bombs up there? Where's the logic? Leder could have at
least made it plausible with 20. And then it turns out that only a few
percent of the world population actually perish, and those less selfish
ones (the ones that stayed at home) were the victims. The film was
almost mocking them, telling them they had died for nothing. I also fail
to see how two teenagers, carrying a baby, would be the first to climb
up the mountain/hill, even with a motorbike for a head-start.
It's unlikely that the dust will take just two years to settle, but that
doesn't really matter. Building caves was a strategy mentioned in `Dr.
Strangelove', which proposed that people lived underground for one
hundred or so years. Now THAT is a more practical use for caves. What IS
the point of living in caves? There is no, unlike `Dr. Strangelove', any
radioactivity outside to restrict exposure. How do plants grow? If
humans have the technology to keep plants alive in caves, there's no
reason why they can't do it in the open. The President disclosed that
other countries have been preparing their own caves. Obviously this
means that the other countries were informed a long time ago, and you
can't be serious to say that nobody leaked the news to the media.
In an important mission like that of the `Messiah', for that matter ANY
mission, it is impossible that isn't sufficient fuel for an extra couple
of hundred metres, needless to say tens of kilometres.
This is not DEEP Impact – it's a frivolous CHEAP Impact. But even with
all that, some overacting, and a 3.4 rating, it's still watchable, just
don't think about it. Okay?
Welcome any questions, comments, and criticisms to
microchip81@hotmail.com.

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
This is one of the worst big-screen film experiences I've had for a
while. With this film, plus `Showgirls' and `Basic Instinct', Paul
Verhoeven has stamped himself as currently one of the worst blockbuster
directors. His celebrated film `Total Recall' was – I admit –
successfully scripted, but it nonetheless contained directorial flaws.
Obviously nobody wanted to invest too much money in a production from
someone like Verhoeven, the result being that much of the special
effects in `Starship' seemed fake. But not EVERYTHING bad in the film
was the director's fault, even though he was one of the guys who
employed the actors. It is surprising that none of the actors received
nominations for the Razzie Awards (I expected five for the acting
categories). Casserole Vanity Devoid, Dense Ribald, Dingy Miasma, and
Jackass Bushy are in serious need of acting school. No, they have to
pass primary school drama classes first.
While `Total' was written well, `Starship' is purely pathetic. All
right, it is SUPPOSED TO be a fast-paced entertainment film, and you're
SUPPOSED TO turn off your intellect (completely) and enjoy the action
sequences and special effects (that is, guts and gore). As a matter of
fact, I found the activity incredibly boring, a complete waste of more
than two hours. Half of the film was a bad episode of `Beverly Hills
90210' (Dina Meyer was in "Beverly Hills"), while another quarter was
simply nothing (things like presenting irrelevant information in an
irritating way on the web), and the rest was a display of humans
fighting computer-generated images. The battles were all the same –
jumping around, shoot or get stabbed – and on barren planets that only
had giant insects. There weren't even any stunts, which I consider
slightly more exciting than pictures running around. I wonder what the
insects eat, if there's nothing but them on the planets? There is so
much laughable treatment in this film, and it is frankly not amusing
when jokes are intended. This type of story is obviously aimed at
10-year-olds, who can't see it anyway because of the violence and some
sexuality. But then, there are always 16-year-olds who have that frame
of mind.
The pointless plot begins when Johnny's (Vanity Devoid) girlfriend
Carmen (Richards) decides that she wants to join the troopers to fight
the insects who are throwing asteroids at Earth. Johnny then signs up as
a trooper also, after an overacted argument with his parents. But there
is another girl, Dizzy (Meyer), who likes Johnny and then there is
another boy who likes Carmen, which results in a love quadrangle, which
isn't better, because it means augmented worse-than-stereotyped soap
opera, increased bitchiness, and more bad Beverly Hills + Melrose. And
the result of this love quadrangle at the end is also rather stupid.
Anyway, getting back to the thing you might call plot, Johnny is too
stupid to be a pilot and has to join the infantry, while his girl and
the other dude are in the same league. Dizzy comes chasing Johnny and
joins the infantry also. They then start training, which contains what
Roger Ebert calls IPS (Idiot Plot Syndrome, moments when only an idiot
would have made such obvious mistakes), then real combat. And guess
what? That's about as complex as it gets. Oh, and one of their friends,
Carl (Neil Patrick Harris a.k.a. Doogie Howser M.D.), becomes involved
in war intelligence, and his abilities at the end are really corny and
make me want to spray insecticide on someone for it. He's my fifth nom
for a Razzie. The troopers fight, fall in love, die, kill, and try to
act. Naturally, they win, or sort of half-win. Of course, in between
(and at the end) there are soldiers chatting and smiling while carrying
grievous wounds caused by bug legs. The bugs also suffer from IPS: why
would you release hold of your captive before killing it? Isn't it also
amazing that Earthlings haven't invented better hand-held weapons by
then?
The only question that remains is why I gave it one star instead of
zero. Well, maybe a-quarter (of a star) for the originality of the
co-sex shower scene and the (very) brief moments of suspense, another
quarter for copying `Zulu' and letting the good guys (the bugs) win, and
half a star for the sucking-out of the brain of one of those people who
call themselves actors (but there should have been more, the troopers
deserved to die).
Heartily welcome any questions, comments, and criticisms to
microchip81@hotmail.com.

Title
Review for Usual Suspects, The (1995)
Rating: **** (out of ****)
Rating: 9.5 (out of 10)
Director: Bryan Singer
Starring: Stephen Baldwin, Gabriel Byrne, Chazz Palminteri, Kevin
Pollak, Pete Postlethwaite, Kevin Spacey
Screenplay by: Christopher McQuarrie
Duration: 105 minutes
If plagiarism were a crime in film techniques, director Bryan Singer
would be imprisoned for life. Screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie would
be serving a similar sentence. However, since it is not, Singer and
MacQuarrie (who have joined forces again after the not-so-successful
PUBLIC ACCESS) took advantage and duplicated nothing but the best. From
CASABLANCA to PULP FICTION, and even a version of a line (intentionally
or otherwise) from BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID.
The opening credits run while we see water, discernable by the
reflection of streetlights, quietly flowing in the background. It is
dark, and a chilling melody creeps. When the formalities conclude, we
are aboard a ship. It is ‘last night'. We meet a couple of people who
have a brief conversation. Soon after, the ship explodes, and we the
audience have absolutely no idea what's going on, but are dying to know
more.
The principal story starts ‘6 weeks ago', and revolves around five
hardened criminals, who seem unable to escape from the law – even if
they haven't done anything. The five are round up on suspicion of
hijacking a truck carrying gun parts. When they are inevitably released
they team up to plan and execute crimes – including revenge. But they
soon sense that someone is controlling them – someone with power –
knowing their every move. In amongst all this is a cop, at ‘present
day', who is obsessed with pinning down one of those five usual suspects
– an ex-cop.
There should not be more revealed about the plot, as this is a story
that has a twist-in-the-end. However, even if you can anticipate the
surprise, there are copious amounts of clever directing (especially the
final sequence) from fresh-face Bryan Singer with interesting camera
angles that upholds the film. Even though Singer borrows heavily from
prominent directors, he adds ingenious touches of his own for greater
effect. Along with the adroit directing there is nail-biting suspense,
slow-motion action, and superb acting. Not one actor is out of place.
All five criminals are distinct, have different fields of expertise, and
all are characterised brilliantly. The mania of McManus (Baldwin), the
calm authority of Keaton (Byrne), the insouciance of Hockney (Pollak),
the shadowy cowardice of Kint (Spacey), and the unfathomable speech of
Fenster (Benicio Del Toro). Then there's the assertiveness of Special
Agent Kujan (Palminteri), and the unquestioning loyalty of Kobayashi
(Postlethwaite) to his master, and other absorbing characters portrayed
by Suzi Amis, Giancarlo Esposito, and Dan Hedaya. Kevin Spacey is the
prize in this colossal pack, and was honoured with an Academy Award for
Best Supporting Actor. McQuarrie also picked up an Oscar for his
captivating original screenplay.
John Ottman was responsible for the expert editing. Believe it or not he
also composed the enthralling original score. From the first note of
‘Main Theme' to the last note of ‘The Greatest Trick' the music offers
substantial support for the film's atmosphere. Ottman was also the
editor and composer of PUBLIC ACCESS.
Many people oppose watching a film with a twist a second time. I
disagree. By watching it again you can observe how the director and the
screenwriter have hidden and revealed clues, how they have tried to
steer the audience away from the ending. First time is for
entertainment. Second time is for art. This film is certainly worthwhile
to see again. To date, I have watched it five times. (Two of those five
times I thought, ‘well, I'll just watch about half-an-hour,' but ended
up watching the entire film because it is so entertaining.) I'm not
exactly a noir fan, so it is assured that this particular crime film
appeals to a wider audience.
One minor thing I would like to point out is that the hospitalised
Hungarian's speech should have been subtitled because it is of some
importance.
THE USUAL SUSPECTS has a skilled director, an engrossing screenplay, and
ten praiseworthy performances. The film runs a fast 105 minutes. Don't
miss a minute of it.
Welcome any questions, comments, and criticisms to
microchip81@hotmail.com.
