Authors
Steve Harbaugh
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Big Hit, The (1998)
The Big Hit,from Sony Pictures is a delightfully corny action romp which
finds you glued to the screen every minute of it. Although not a future
Oscar winner the movie does make you so that there isn't a moment of
boredom within it. The Big Hit is plain stupid fun set for the under 20
male generation.
The movie centers around Mel (Mark Wahlberg),a professional hitman with
a heart of gold. Mel,along with fellow hitman associates Cisco (Lou
Diamond Phillips), Crunch (Bokeem Woodbine), Vince (Antonio Sabato, Jr.)
and Gump (Robin Dunne) get pulled into a moonlighting
gig gone bad. A seemingly quick and easy kidnapping turns into a all-out
war when it is revealed the kidnapee Keiko (China Chow) is actually the
godchild of the boss of the hitmen,Paris (Avery Brooks). Cisco,the man
behind the kidnapping turns against his colleagues to save his own hide
and goes after Mel along with Paris and Keiko's father. Addionally,Mel's
mistress,Chantel (Lela Rochon) skips town with some of his earnings.
Mel's fiance,Pam (Christina Applegate) is also involved when her
disapproving parents come to visit,Mort (Elliott Gould) and Jeanne
(Lainie Kazan) and get thrown into the backdrop of the whole sherade as
well. Balancing trying to impress the future in-laws,dodging bullets,and
many more things plague Mel.
The movie opens to a attention-getting action-packed sequence followed
by the bare hind-ends of
the hitmen in their lockerroom. Obviously a treat for the ladies in the
audience. The movie differs from other action movies...the cornyness
involved. A eccentric video store clerk bugs Mel through the entire film
about returning a copy of King Kong Lives to the videostore. The movie
actually escalates towards the end more around returning the
videocassette than the actual "main conflict"...
a delightful change of pace which adds some humor. Another humorous
aspect of the movie is Crunch's new discovery of self-love. That's all I
will say. Also,Mel's constant consumption of Maalox for his stomach
problems...was it just added as a shameless plug?? The movie diminishes
some action scenes with the much-needed element of humor. And it plays
very nicely indeed.
Some moments in the film push towards black comedy. In the opening,Mel
places two garbage bags of dead body parts in his bathtub...as much as
it tries to be humourous,something so gruesome cannot be. Cisco
also,following a slightly humorous speech upon encountering Gump does
away with his partner to save his own hide. A shocking transformation
which makes us now view Cisco as more of an enemy. Another situation
involves a geeky upperclass teenager making out with Keiko in the back
of a limo which in turn has Mel (who is posing as the limo driver)
blowing his brains all over the back of the limo...A situation similar
to the one in Pulp Fiction.
Some parts of the movie will have you laughing out
loud,on-the-edge-of-your-seat,or "just watching". Although,basically
most of the movie centers on the first two. Yet the movie lacks any
bored moments there are times you are just watching to see what might
happen next. It lacks many things however.
The Big Hit is a good movie to see if you would enjoy a movie similar to
Lethal Weapon meets The Naked Gun. Although not near as corny as The
Naked Gun it is not however,as serious as Lethal Weapon. You be the
judge. The movie contains lots of violence (From Keiko's horny friend
being decapitated by a bullet through the skull to a bathtub filled with
body parts to numerous killings of "the bad guys" with big guns). There
is a good share of profanity as well. The sexuality ranges from the bare
butts of the hitmen to Mel & Pam's butt-grabbing scenes to the sexual
inneundos of Mel and Keiko. Mostly however,the big complaint for parents
with whiny kids wanting to see this movie would be the violence.
The movie in my opinion is very good. A "wake-up call" if you will to
hopelessly dull action flicks which need that element of humor. The
movie although sometimes finds you "just watching" as I mentioned
before...but for the most part it's good...a nice mix of action and
humor. See it if you want to,if violence doesn't offend you,if the back
ends of movie hunks makes you drool,or if you crave action.
Overall : B +
