Authors
greg king
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for Very Bad Things (1998)
VERY BAD THINGS (M).  
(Polygram/Twentieth Century Fox)
Director: Peter Berg
Stars: Christian Slater, Cameron Diaz, Jon Favreau, Daniel Stern, Jeanne 
Tripplehorn, Jeremy Piven, 
Leland Orser, Joey Zimmerman, Tyle Malinger, Russell B McKenzie, Lawrence 
Pressman
Running time: 98 minutes. 
While Very Bad Things shares a similar moral to A Simple Plan,
it is ultimately a vastly different film.  This grim black comedy
looks at how normally ordinary people can commit atrocious acts and
then be torn apart by their guilty conscience.  However, debut
writer/director Peter Berg (from Chicago Hope, etc) relentlessly
pushes the pitch black material down a vastly different path.  This
uncompromising and brutal film about murder and mayhem is pervaded
with an air of cynicism, misogyny, and delicious black humour, the
like of which has rarely been seen in mainstream cinema.  A week
before his wedding, Kyle Fisher (Jon Favreau, from Swingers) heads off
to Las Vegas with four buddies for a wild bachelor party.  It's an
orgy of drink and cocaine and male bonding, taken to excess.  The
weekend takes a turn for the worse following the arrival of the
stripper.  During some energetic sex in the bathroom with the callow
Michael (Jeremy Piven), she ends up impaled on a hook.  While everyone
else panics, sleazy real estate agent Robert Boyd (Christian Slater)
takes charge, suggesting that they bury the body in the desert.  The
simple plan does not go smoothly and before long the body count is
steadily rising.
When the five men return to Los Angeles, their uneasy sense of
guilt begins to consume them, and eventually explodes into hysteria
and anarchy, disrupting the smooth wedding plans.  The former friends
turn on each other with a frightening and unexpected ferocity.
Sibling rivalries and old jealousies boil over into murder, and they
all pay a hefty price for their sins.
Very Bad Things takes a number of unexpected and macabre turns
before the final sting in the tail.  Berg has a jaundiced view of
human nature, and he unerringly strips away the thin veneer of middle
class urban values and ethics.  He maintains a delicate balance
between outright farce and psychological drama.  The humour is often
quite uncomfortable and vicious, and will not be to everyone's taste.
The opening scenes are handled somewhat awkwardly.  However,
Berg quickly hits his stride, and directs this inventive, but
uncharacteristic and uncomfortably black comedy with assurance.  The
ensemble cast throw themselves into their unsympathetic characters
with relish, their frenetic performances capturing the spirit of the
material.
An often manic and mannered performer, Slater has rarely been
so perfectly cast.  His intense performance captures the demonic,
unscrupulous and completely amoral Boyd, who doesn't hesitate to act
when he recognises his smoothly laid plans beginning to unwind.
Cameron Diaz (There's Something About Mary, etc) is also good as
Laura, Kyle's tightly wound fiancée, who becomes increasingly
neurotic as the wedding approaches.  Laura is so desperate to ensure
that her wedding proceeds without a hitch that she eventually becomes
as morally bankrupt as everyone else around her.  Her performance
reveals an often unexplored nasty side to her usually sweet screen
demeanour.  Daniel Stern (Home Alone, etc) brings plenty of shrill
nervous energy to his role as the family man who succumbs to his
feelings of guilt and paranoia, and finally snaps under the mounting
pressure.
Very Bad Things is decidedly nasty stuff, but those attuned to
its perverse wavelength will also find much to enjoy.

Title
Review for Chill Factor (1999)
A contemporary variation of the classic Wages Of Fear, with
plenty of chases and mindless action thrown in for good measure.
In 1987 scientist Raymond Long (David Paymer) developed a new
chemical weapon for the US military that created a fierce heat wave
capable of stripping the flesh off humans and destroying all plant
life in its path.  But when 18 soldiers were killed after an
experiment went horribly wrong on an isolated pacific island, the
disgraced Colonel Bremmer (Peter Firth) took the fall and spent ten
years in the military prison at Fort Leavenworth.  Upon his release,
Bremmer plots to steal the prototype of the weapon, cutely nicknamed
"Elvis", and sell it to the highest bidder on the open market.
The mortally wounded Long manages to make off with the weapon
before Bremmer can get his hands on it.  He gives it to Tim Mason
(Skeet Ulrich, who played the gay hustler in As Good As It Gets), his
fishing partner and a "hamburger jockey" at a local diner.  Mason has
to get the weapon to Fort McGruder before Bremmer can get his hands on
it.  And, most importantly, he has to keep it cold - below 50 degrees
Fahrenheit - or else it automatically detonates, wiping out everything
within a hundred mile radius.  That's where Arlo's ice cream delivery
truck comes in handy.
Arlo (Cuba Gooding jr) is a disenchanted, ex-employee of an
ice cream delivery firm, and initially reluctant to become involved in
this dangerous task.  These two mismatched, reluctant heroes transport
their volatile cargo over twisting mountainous roads, trying
desperately to outrace Bremmer's heavily armed private army, and the
dim-witted local sheriff who thinks Mason is a terrorist.
Chill Factor is a rather clichéd, formulaic odd couple
action adventure.  However, it does provide some thrills, and moments
of excitement and tension that make it better than most of these
straight-to- video thrillers.  Director Hugh Johnson maintains a
reasonably fast pace throughout, not giving audiences much time to
dwell on the implausibility of the whole thing.
The performances are also better than one normally finds in
this type of film.  Gooding brings plenty of his usual smart arse
humour and scene stealing style to an otherwise fairly one dimensional
and clichéd character, and his presence lifts the film.  Ulrich is
new to action films, but he seems to have pumped himself up for this
role, and he handles the more physical elements quite comfortably.
And Firth, who hasn't been seen on screen much lately, is having a
fine old time as the villainous Bremmer.
Chill Factor may not be brilliant stuff, but it certainly
turns up the heat for a couple of hours of diverting fun and
excitement.

Title
Review for Double Jeopardy (1999)
DOUBLE JEOPARDY (M).  
(Paramount/UIP)
Director: Bruce Beresford
Stars: Ashley Judd, Tommy Lee Jones, Bruce Greenwood, Annabeth Gish, Roma 
Maffia, Davenia McFadden, Daniel Lapaine, Benjamin Weir
Running time: 105 minutes.
This exciting suspense thriller is probably the most formulaic
of ex-patriate director Bruce Beresford's mainstream Hollywood films
yet (Silent Fall, Last Dance, etc).  Yet he proves himself more than
capable of handling this familiar genre material with the same panache
and skill that he brings to even his more intelligent and personal
film projects.
Slickly written by David Weisberg and Douglas S Cook (The
Rock), Double Jeopardy is an action film that will also strongly
appeal to a female audience.
The film centres around Libby Parsons (Ashley Judd, from A
Time To Kill, Kiss The Girls, etc), a woman who wakes to a nightmare
during a pleasure cruise.  She is covered in blood, and her husband
Nick (Bruce Greenwood) has gone missing.  Eventually, Libby is charged
with Nick's murder, and even though the body is never found, the
circumstantial evidence against her is overwhelming.  When she is
sentenced to prison, she arranges for her best friend Angela (Annabeth
Gish) to take care of her young son Matt.
But Angela soon disappears.  By chance Libby discovers that
Nick is still alive and living with her in San Francisco.  Realising
that she has been framed and betrayed, she starts planning for her
revenge when she is released from prison.  A fellow inmate informs her
of the law of double jeopardy, which simply means that, since she has
already been convicted of her husband's murder once she can now kill
him with impunity.
However, Libby is no Rambette, but rather a woman out to
redress a wrong, although she proves herself quite adept at handling
herself in tricky situations.  She doesn't want to kill her husband,
she merely wants her son back and a chance to reclaim her life.  But
first she has to escape her parole officer Travis Lehmann (Tommy Lee
Jones), who won't hesitate to throw her back in jail if she steps out
of line while under his watchful eye.  Jones is again in Fugitive
mode, playing a gruff, laconic law enforcement officer whose dogged
pursuit of a runaway felon eventually, and reluctantly, turns into a
search for the truth about a miscarriage of justice.  The desperate
chase takes the pair half way across America.
Judd has her meatiest role yet here, and is quite convincing
as the desperate woman prepared to go to extraordinary lengths to find
her son.  With The Terminator, James Cameron forever changed the
perspective of female action heroines, and Judd establishes a credible
and formidable presence.  Greenwood (from Exotica, etc) is good as the
smarmy villain of the piece, and he oozes insincerity.
Even the scenery, ranging from Vancouver to New Orleans is
great to look at and provides a superb backdrop for the fast paced
action.  The plot has a few flaws in it, but Beresford proves such a
dab hand at handling the pace throughout that audiences are given
little time to dwell upon them until after the credits have finished
rolling.
Double Jeopardy's success at the box office will undoubtedly
propel him into the same league as compatriots like Phillip Noyce, who
have also established themselves as top notch directors of formulaic
Hollywood action thrillers.

Title
Review for Magnolia (1999)
MAGNOLIA (M).  
(New Line Cinema/Village Roadshow)
Director: Paul Thomas Anderson
Stars: Jeremy Blackman, Tom Cruise, Melinda Dillon, Philip Baker Hall,
Philip Seymour Hoffman, William H Macy, Julianne Moore, John C Reilly,
Jason Robards, Melora Walters, Henry Gibson, Michael Bowen, April
Grace, Luiz Guzman, Ricky Jay, Orlando James, Alfred Molina, Michael
Murphy, Felicity Huffman, Emmanuel L Johnson, Don McManus, Eileen
Ryan, Danny Wells, Brad Hunt, Cory Buck, Thomas Jane 
Running time: 188 minutes.
        Paul Thomas Anderson's follow up to his amazing Boogie Nights
is an extraordinary, ambitious yet slightly flawed masterpiece that
tackles some important themes.  Magnolia explores how chance,
coincidence and random occurrences can play a large part in shaping
our lives, and how the past impacts on the present.  Anderson also
deals with larger themes of death, forgiveness, and reconciliation.
Another common thread running through the film explores the
psychological damage that fathers can, both knowingly and unknowingly,
inflict on their children.
The action of this sprawling pseudo-epic takes place over the
course of one inclement day in Los Angeles and follows nine principal
characters, whose lives are inexorably linked.
Dying millionaire Earl Partridge (Jason Robards) wants to
affect a final reconciliation with his estranged son (Tom Cruise).
His wife (Julianne Moore), who initially married him for his money, is
now tormented by her callousness and desperately seeks forgiveness.
Other characters who play an important role in the drama unfolding
include Jimmy Gator (Philip Baker Hall) a genial television quiz show
host with a dark secret that has scarred his cocaine sniffing daughter
Claudia (Melora Walters); Donnie Smith (William H Macy), a former
child genius who has trouble coping with the adult world, his faded
fame and his uncertain sexuality; and Jim Kurring (John C Reilly), an
incompetent but basically decent cop who falls in love with the
troubled and lonely Claudia.
An inexplicable phenomenon becomes the ultimate catalyst for
change, redemption, reconciliation, salvation, and a new beginning for
many of the characters.
Anderson is a wonderful and perceptive writer, with insight
into his flawed characters and the vagaries of human nature.  Some of
the confrontations and intimate conversations between the various
characters are revealing but uncomfortable.  Cinematographer and
regular collaborator Robert Elswit often works in close-up, which is
often intimidating and uncomfortable, especially in wide screen, but
somehow adds to the intimacy of many key scenes.  But the camera
fluidly weaves in and out of the various narrative strands, bringing
the stories to life.
The characters are beautifully brought to life by the
performances of the ensemble cast, many a familiar part of Anderson's
regular repertory company.  The standout performance comes from
Cruise, largely cast against type as a misogynistic, self-proclaimed
self-help guru who empowers men in their difficult relationships with
women.  He is electrifying, and this ranks as one of his best
performances.  Moore is hysterically overwrought and shrill as
Partridge's younger wife, and her uncharacteristically uneven
performance occasionally grates.  Philip Seymour Hoffman (recently
seen in The Talented Mr Ripley) delivers a sympathetic performance as
Partridge's devoted male nurse, one of the few constantly likeable
characters in the whole film.
Although working on a vastly broader canvas than previously,
Anderson directs the material with the same assurance he demonstrated
on Boogie Nights.  He pulls the various strands together with a
clarity that has lately eluded Robert Altman, the past master of this
sort of complex mosaic, and deftly constructed interlocking
multi-layered narrative.  However, the pacing is a little too languid
at times, and there are many moments throughout that misfire
awkwardly.  The early sequences introduce us to the story and the
myriad characters effectively enough, but the film tends to lose its
way a little in the middle.
Like most three hour movies, Magnolia is overlong and self
indulgent.  There are several scenes that could have been trimmed and
tightened, without diluting Anderson's themes or lessening its
devastating emotional impact.

Title
Review for Faculty, The (1998)
THE FACULTY (M).  
(Dimension Films/Miramax/Village Roadshow)
Director: Robert Rodriguez
Stars: Elijah Wood, Josh Hartnett, Jordana Brewer, Clea DuVall, Laura 
Harris, Shawn Hatosy, Famke 
Janssen, Robert Patrick, Bebe Neuwirth, Jon Stewart, Usher Raymond, Salma 
Hayek, Piper Laurie, Daniel 
Von Bargen, Chris McDonald, Summer Phoenix
Running time: 100 minutes.
A variation of the classic Invasion Of The Body Snatchers,
squarely aimed at a teen audience?
Something strange is happening at Ohio's Herrington High School. 
 Almost overnight, the once jaded and disillusioned teachers suddenly
develop a renewed interest in their students, as well as an
unquenchable thirst.  They are possessed by a race of alien parasites
planning on conquering the earth.  The obligatory group of film
literate school misfits and outcasts discover the truth and band
together to save the school.
Gun writer Kevin Williamson (who reinvigorated the slasher
genre with Scream, I Know What You Did Last Summer, etc) makes no
bones about liberally borrowing from The Invasion Of the Body
Snatchers or a number of other sci-fi thrillers (Village Of The
Damned, Invaders From Mars, The Hidden, and even the recent Men In
Black, etc) for his latest screenplay.  Williamson is a clever writer
who certainly knows his horror movies, but the rules of the alien
invasion genre are not as clear cut as those of the slasher genre.
Consequently, The Faculty offers less opportunities to playfully
dissect the clichés for a knowing young audience.  The script is
not as sharp or as fresh as his previous efforts, and the sly in-jokes
and film references are also a little harder to spot.
While the original movie also was a neat parable about the
paranoia and fear experienced by America during the McCarthy era,
Williamson's script takes the same themes and sets them in high
school, an environment with which adolescent audiences can easily
identify.  He deftly mixes gory horror and humour with liberal doses
of teenage angst.
The Faculty is the biggest budget film to date for director
Robert Rodriguez (Desperado, etc).  He makes the most of the
opportunity, with great special effects, solid production values, and
a strong cast.  The students are played by up and coming hunky young
actors, most of whom are new to the screen.
With 14 films under his belt, Elijah Wood (from The Ice Storm,
etc) is the veteran of the young cast, while Josh Hartnett recently
appeared in Halloween H20.  Jordana Brewster, Clea DuVall and Laura
Harris play the three female students with plenty of fire, spunk and
attitude to spare.  Herrington's creepy staff are played mainly by
veteran actors better known for their villainous roles - T2's Robert
Patrick, Piper Laurie (from Carrie, etc), Daniel Von Bargen, and
ex-Bond femme fatale Famke Janssen (from Goldeneye).  Laurie is given
little to do, while Rodriguez regular Salma Hayek makes little
impression as the school nurse, who seems to disappear without any
reason.
The Faculty moves along at a satisfyingly rapid pace, and is
certainly fun while it lasts.  But as soon as you leave the comfort of
the cinema, its faulty logic unravels very quickly.  For example, if
you were an alien creature that thrived on water, wouldn't you first
take over a small coastal town with a user- friendly environment
rather than some arid, inhospitable dust bowl in the middle of the
American mid- west?
Although an inferior film, The Faculty offers plenty to those
teen audiences who enjoyed Scream and its ilk.

Title
Review for Simple Plan, A (1998)
Set in Delano, a small town in America's midwest, during a
bitter winter, A Simple Plan invites obvious comparisons to the Coen
brothers' Fargo.  However, this violent, darkly comic, character
driven thriller has a darker and more frightening undertone.  A Simple
Plan shows how evil can be created out of the most banal
circumstances, and how greed and money can change even ordinary
people, driving them to acts of violence.  The wintry landscape,
evocatively photographed by Alar Kivilo, is the perfect backdrop for
this bleak, chilling and coolly ironic tale of greed and murder.  The
Mitchell brothers and a friend stumble upon a crashed plane buried
under the snow.  Inside the plane they discover the dead pilot, and a
bag containing $4 million.  After some discussion, they decide to keep
the money.  College educated and essentially a decent family man, Hank
Mitchell (Bill Paxton) suggests that they hide the money away for six
months, waiting until the snow thaws and the plane is found.  If
no-one claims the money, then they will divide it between them.  It
sounds a simple enough plan.
But immediately things go wrong as greed, suspicion and
mistrust sour the uneasy relationship between the three men.  The
violent, abusive, unemployed alcoholic Lou (Brent Briscoe) demands his
share of the money.  Hank's older brother Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton)
is unemployed and lonely, but also a little simple and too trusting,
and capable of inadvertently revealing their secrets.
Desperate to keep their secret while protecting his wife Sarah
(Bridget Fonda), Hank is forced to make some appalling decisions and
then live with the terrible consequences.  His actions lead to brutal
murder and cover up, and he seems to be digging himself deeper into
trouble at every turn.
As it explores the tragic consequences of Hank's actions, this
tautly crafted and intelligent psychological thriller also has a
strong moral undercurrent.  Its denouement delivers a terrific irony.
Scott Smith has adapted his own tense novel for the screen, and is
protective of the novel's dark, psychological territory.
The performances of the cast are superb.  Working together for
the first time since the chilling thriller One False Move, Paxton and
Thornton are both excellent, easily conveying their struggle between
essential decency and uncharacteristic greed.  Fonda makes the most of
her role as Sarah, the shy librarian who soon reveals her own amoral
streak.
A Simple Plan is one of those deliberately slow paced films in
which the violence slowly escalates.  An almost straight forward and
conventional thriller, A Simple Plan is an unusual choice for director
Sam Raimi, better known for his dark, comic-book-like horror films
(Darkman, The Evil Dead, etc).  While the film lacks Raimi's usual
visual flourishes, it is still full of effectively rendered scenes of
menace, slowly building suspense and moody atmospherics.  **** greg
king http://www.netau.com.au/gregking

Title
Review for Apt Pupil (1998)
APT PUPIL (M).  
(Phoenix Picture/Columbia Tristar)
Director: Bryan Singer
Stars: Ian McKellen, Brad Renfro, Bruce Davison, Elias Koteas, Joe 
Morton, Joshua Jackson, David 
Schwimmer, Jan Triska, Michael Byrne, Heather McComb, Ann Dowd
Running time: 111 minutes.
There were high expectations for Bryan Singer's follow up to
his Oscar winning crime thriller The Usual Suspects (1995), and Apt
Pupil doesn't disappoint.  Apt Pupil is the third story from Stephen
King's Different Seasons anthology to be filmed, following both Stand
By Me and the brilliant The Shawshank Redemption.  This is a superb
and unsettling psychological thriller, that again shows how good a
writer King is when he moves away from straight horror to explore the
darker potential of human nature.
The film deals not only with the knowledge that one generation
passes to the next, but also the attitudes, prejudices and hatred.
It's also a tale about the loss of innocence, and the seductive,
persuasive power of evil.
Sixteen year old school boy Todd Bowden (Brad Renfro, from
Sleepers, etc) is a brilliant student with a healthy appetite for
knowledge.  But after he discovers that an elderly man in his
neighbourhood is actually a Nazi war criminal, he becomes consumed
with sharing his experiences of the war and the concentration camps.
A symbiotic relationship gradually develops between the two as they
realise that they need to trust each other with their terrible
secrets.  Todd's curiosity eventually reawakens an old blood lust in
Dussander (played to perfection by Ian McKellen).  Events soon spiral
out of control, as Dussander's true identity is revealed.
McKellen's role is not all that far removed from the power
hungry fascist he played in the brilliant Richard III.  He delivers a
superbly chilling performance as Dussander, but he also manages to
bring some depth to the role, making the character far more complex.
At times he even manages to elicit some sympathy for Dussander, who is
smooth and charming on the surface.  In his best and biggest role to
date, Renfro is also superb, deftly suggesting a mix of youthful
innocence and guile and evil.  We witness his frightening
transformation from wholesome, clean cut all-American school kid as he
loses his sense of perspective.  As the final scene demonstrates, Todd
is indeed an apt pupil who has learnt his lessons from Dussander only
too well.
This is a creepy, tense and unnerving little thriller.  The
tension slowly builds under Singer's tight and assured direction.  The
supporting cast, which includes Bruce Davison, Joshua Jackson and
Friends' star David Schwimmer, are all good.
Apt Pupil reaches our shores almost a year after it was the
centre of some controversy in the States.  A number of concerned,
angry parents sued the producers over the treatment of their children
during the shooting of certain scenes.  Consequently, the film
features probably the most controversial shower scene since Psycho.
However, the outcry doesn't seem warranted, given the brief screen
time the powerful and evocative scene occupies.  But, as they say in
this business, any publicity is good publicity!

Title
Review for In Dreams (1999)
IN DREAMS (M).  
(Paramount/Dreamworks)
Director: Neil Jordan
Stars: Annette bening, Robert Downey jr, Aidan Quinn, Stephen Rea, Paul 
Guilfoyle, Margo Martindale, Dennis Boutsikaris.
The best films from director Neil Jordan are those set in his
native Ireland (The Crying Game, Michael Collins, etc), while his big
budget Hollywood entertainments (We're No Angels, etc) are bland and
disappointing.  His latest film In Dreams falls into this latter
category.  Co-written by Bruce Robinson (the cult classic Withnail And
I, The Killing Fields, etc) this bleak psychological thriller is
adapted from the book by Bari Wood (who wrote the novel upon which
David Cronenberg's creepy Dead Ringers was based).
The tormented heroine of the piece is Claire Cooper (Annette
Bening), who writes and illustrates fairy tale books for a living.
She is having terrible dreams and nightmares, most of them featuring a
young boy in a room filling with water.  It seems she has established
a psychic connection with serial nutcase psychopath Vivian (Robert
Downey jr), and witnesses some particularly gruesome murders.  The
only trouble is that no-one, including the local cops and her
frequently absent airline pilot husband (Aidan Quinn, in a thankless
role), will believe her.
When her own daughter becomes the killer's latest victim,
Claire has a nervous breakdown and is institutionalised.  It becomes
apparent to Claire that the killer is deliberately passing messages to
her, and she feels compelled to escape from prison and track him down
to end her traumatic experience.  But her dreams increasingly become
blurred with reality.
Jordan deftly establishes an unsettling atmosphere that is
reminiscent of far better thrillers (Don't Look Now, etc), but In
Dreams is ultimately disappointing.  This sort of thing has been done
before (e.g.; The Eyes Of Laura Mars, etc), but unfortunately the
potentially fascinating scenario is never quite convincing.
Jordan borrows much of the film's dark and forbidding
structure from the very fairy tales that Claire illustrates.  Jordan
also imbues the film with plenty of surreal imagery and rich
symbolism, particularly focusing on the colour red and apples, but it
all becomes too messy and obscure.  However, ace cinematographer
Darius Khondji (Seven, etc) creates some memorable and evocative
images.
Bening's performance has a nicely hysterical and over wrought
edge that suits the grim mood of the material.  There is a nicely
ironic touch to the casting of Downey, especially given his recent
legal troubles and his confessions to the tabloids, but he gives a
performance that is enigmatic rather than malevolent and genuinely
unnerving.  Regular Jordan collaborator Stephen Rea is wasted in a
stereotypical role as the haunted looking and sympathetic psychiatrist
who tries to puzzle out the true meaning of Claire's strange dreams.
In Dreams leaves a nasty aftertaste in the mouth, and will
have audiences feeling vaguely unsatisfied.

Title
Review for Out-of-Towners, The (1999)
Neil Simon's 1970 comedy about a married couple from Ohio who
experience a series of comic disasters during their first visit to New
York City gets the '90's treatment in this largely unfunny and
unnecessary remake.
Reunited for the first time since 1992's Housesitter, Steve
Martin and Goldie Hawn work hard to recapture some of the chemistry
and rapport.  Martin brings his usual uptight persona and mannerisms
to his performance as Henry Clarke, an advertising executive who heads
off to New York for a job interview.  At the last minute his bored and
lonely wife Nancy (Hawn) decides to accompany him.  The couple even
run afoul of a supercilious, cross dressing hotel manager (John
Cleese, of course!, whose performance suggests a tired trans-Atlantic
Basil Fawlty).  Through a series of increasingly frenetic disasters,
the pair come to gradually rekindle that spark of adventure and
excitement that has disappeared from their 24 year marriage.
Unfortunately, writer Marc Lawrence (who previously scripted
the banal romantic comedy Forces Of Nature) strips away much of the
neurotic tone from Simon's original script.  He also dispenses with
the sharp writing and the pithy one-liners that are almost trademark
Simon.  Instead, Lawrence opts for a rather formulaic and
disappointing odd couple comedy that liberally draws upon elements of
Planes, Trains And Automobiles and Fawlty Towers, amongst others.  In
fact, Martin even gets to play another car rental scene, albeit a
rather laboured and pale copy of that classic hilarious moment from
Planes, Trains, etc.
Martin gives another variation of his familiar straight laced,
middle class white collar suburban dweller, although a few scenes do
allow him some room for the kind of physical comedy at which he is
adept.  Hawn shines through, and works hard to make some preposterous
material seem better than it actually is.  Only Cleese seems to bring
any energy to the film, and he is not on screen often enough.
There are some good moments throughout, but they are far and
few between.  For much of its duration, The Out-Of-Towners is a tired,
laboured and unfunny comedy.  And everyone involved, including veteran
tv director Sam Weisman (George Of the Jungle, etc), seems to know it.

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
In the 60's, John Frankenheimer was without peer as a director
of taut action films and riveting political thrillers.  His more
memorable films included Seven Days In May, The Manchurian Candidate,
Seconds, and The Birdman Of Alcatraz.  Since the 70's though his
career seems to have stalled with a succession of grim, second rate
thrillers, like French Connection II, Prophecy, 52 Pick Up, and The
Fourth War, that only showed brief glimpses of his true talent.  His
tv career has thrived in the meantime, with a number of critically
acclaimed HBO features.  But now, the 68 year old returns to form with
Ronin, a gutsy post cold war thriller that shows many of today's hip
and flashy MTV inspired younger directors a thing or two about making
tough, stylish action films.
Historically, the ronin were disgraced samurai of feudal Japan
who hired themselves out as bandits or body guards.  In this action
thriller, their modern day counterparts are a group of free lance ex-
spies, former mercenaries and disillusioned cold war warriors, who are
gathered in Paris for a mysterious mission.  They are to snatch a case
from a heavily guarded escort.
But once these experts in the clandestine arts have
successfully stolen the case, they find themselves ensnared in a
labyrinthine web of treachery and murder.  Gregor (Stellan Skarsgard,
from Breaking The Waves, etc) double crosses everyone and makes off
with the case himself, hoping to sell it to the highest bidder.  Sam
(Robert De Niro), a former CIA agent, and Vincent (the wonderfully
droll Jean Reno, from Mission Impossible, etc) join forces to retrieve
the case and uncover the identity of their mysterious employer.
The deft and sinuous plot has been written by J D Zeik,
Richard Weisz and an uncredited David Mamet.  As with both Pulp
Fiction and Robert Aldrich's tough noirish thriller Kiss Me Deadly,
what's actually in the case is never revealed.  The contents are
immaterial; they are what Alfred Hitchcock used to refer to as a
macguffin, a red herring that is irrelevant to the central plot
development.
The tough characters are suitably enigmatic, and we learn
little of their background or motivation.  The performances from the
ensemble international cast are solid, and of an unusually high
calibre for the action genre.  Both De Niro and Reno in particular are
excellent as a pair of cynical former spies, while Natascha McElhone
(from Surviving Picasso, etc) is alluring and mysterious as Dierdre,
their nominal boss.  Ronin also includes appearances from three former
Bond villains - Sean Bean, Jonathan Pryce and Michael Lonsdale - which
adds to its flavour.
Ronin is a tense action thriller that delivers on its promise
with brutal efficiency and energy.  But the highlight of Ronin is
undoubtedly its series of superbly executed car chase sequences, which
eclipse most recent cinematic car chases, and a gun battle in the
streets of Nice that recalls Heat.  Cars race at breakneck speeds
through the tunnels and crowded autobahns of Paris and the narrow,
twisting streets of Nice, leaving a trail of carefully orchestrated
destruction in their wake.
This adrenaline charged and testosterone fuelled film keeps
the audience hooked throughout its numerous twists and turns and
improbabilities.  Frankenheimer directs the material at a slick,
bruising pace that rarely lets up.  Ronin is indeed a welcome return
to form for one of Hollywood's most influential premier action
directors!

Title
Review for Shakespeare in Love (1998)
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE (M).  
(Universal/Miramax/UIP)
Director: John Madden
Stars: Joseph Fiennes, Gwyneth Platrow, Geoffrey Rush, Colin Firth, 
Imelda Staunton, Tom Wilkinson, 
Ben Affleck, Martin Clunes, Judi Dench, Simon Callow, Jim Carter, Joe 
Roberts, Rupert Everett, Antony 
Sher, Mark Williams
Running time: 123 minutes.
This bawdy, slightly irreverent but delightfully entertaining
romantic comedy offers us a fictional interpretation of the creation
of Romeo And Juliet, one of literature's greatest tragic love stories.
The film is set in the Elizabethan London of 1593.  Up and
coming young playwright Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes, recently
seen in Elizabeth) has been commissioned to write a play by
sycophantic but debt ridden theatre owner Henslowe (Geoffrey Rush, in
a wonderful comic turn).  It is hoped that this new play will put him
on a par with arch rival, the famous playwright Christopher Marlowe
(an uncredited Rupert Everett).  But, even before he has put pen to
paper for his farce Romeo And Ethel, The Pirate's Daughter, he is
unfortunately struck by writer's block.
Enter Viola (Gwyneth Paltrow, in a role originally intended
for Julia Roberts), the headstrong daughter of a noble family, who
desperately wants to become an actress at a time when women were
forbidden to pursue a career in the theatre.  Although she is
betrothed to the slimy Wessex (Colin Firth) in an arranged marriage,
Shakespeare falls heavily in love with Viola.  She becomes his muse,
and soon the words are flowing from his quill.  Their illicit romance
provides the inspiration for the struggling playwright, and the drama
of their affair is reflected in the developing play.
Some of the characters and incidental details may already be
familiar to audiences who saw the lavish BBC tv mini-series starring
Tim Curry as Shakespeare.  Playwright Tom Stoppard (Rosencrantz And
Guildenstern Are Dead, etc) and co-writer Marc Norman suffuse their
script with an air of irreverence, playfully mixing fact with fiction.
The result is a briskly paced and enjoyable comedy about love,
mistaken identities, duels, passion and death - the very stuff that
became the essence of Shakespeare's famous plays.
This wonderfully written film offers plenty of insights into
the world of Elizabethan theatre without becoming didactic.  British
director John Madden (Mrs Brown) also gives it a slightly contemporary
flavour with his treatment of the off stage dramas, the bruised egos,
the rivalry between writers, and the scrambling for patronage and
favour.  His direction is crisp, and he makes the most of the sharp
script and the poetic beauty of the dialogue.
The ensemble cast are all uniformly good, and their solid
performances lift this delicious comedy.  Golden Globe winner Paltrow
is luminescent as Viola, and she delivers a wonderful performance in a
quite challenging dual role.  Fiennes only stepped into the role of
Shakespeare after Daniel Day Lewis passed, but it's hard to imagine
anyone else bringing such passion, wit and smouldering intensity to
the part.  He is superb, and if he keeps getting good roles in quality
films like this, the younger Fiennes will possibly eclipse his more
famous but over rated brother Ralph.
Tom Wilkinson brings his usual touch of class to his role as
Fennyman, the money lender who eventually sponsors the creation of
Romeo And Juliet.  Judi Dench lends her commanding presence to the
role of Queen Elizabeth.  Imelda Staunton is marvellous as Viola's
sympathetic and understanding nurse.
This handsomely mounted production beautifully brings to life
the Elizabethan setting.  The costumes and the set design evoke the
marked contrasts between Viola's world of pomp and privilege and the
destitute, grimy world of London's growing theatre community.  Stephen
Warbeck's gorgeous music score and Richard Greatrex's luscious
cinematography further enhance the classy production.  **** greg king
http://www.netat.com.au/gregking
