Authors
Jim Maguire
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Jack (1996)
JACK
Starring : Adam Zolodin, Fran Drescher, Bill Cosby and Robin Williams. 
Directed by : Francis Ford Coppola.
TIN CUP
Starring : Kevin Costner, Rene Russo, Don Johnson and Cheech Marin. 
        Comebacks. They mean something. A comeback can be better than
it would be if the director or the star of the movie wouldn't have had
two good back-to-back films.
        Both Ron Shelton (COBB) and Francis Ford Coppola needed a
comeback. Coppola needed one because he hasn't made a good film in
ages, all the way back to APOLOCALYPSE NOW. Shelton, whose disaterous
COBB made my top 5 worst films of the year, looked like it was made by
a wild crazy lunatic who had no idea on the subject of filming. They
both put forth movies now, TIN CUP for Shelton, and JACK for Coppola.
It would seem that Shelton, whose name is not as catchy in Hollywood as
Coppola's, would have a long way to come. But, Coppola panicked at the
last second, and threw some hypier-sad fluff at us.  Shelton played it
cool, and therefore his movie just works. It works on every level.
        Speaking about comebacks, need I mention Kevin Costner and Bill
Cosby. Costner hasn't made a good film since DANCES WITH WOLVES, and he
hasn't made anything thrilling, (not counting pictures with budgets
over 150 million) since FIELD OF DREAMS, and even then he had to use a
character actors help in James Earl Jones. With bombs like WATERWORLD
and THE WAR, Costner HAS BEEN blown out. He's nothing in the Hollywood
arena.  He only got in this film because of Shelton, who worked with
him on BULL DURHAM. Bill Cosby, who never can explore much in any
character, needed some variety to boost his upcoming ONE FOOT IN THE
GRAVE based on the British comedy. They both freeze out here.
        JACK is about two parents who have a baby, and find out that he
is ageing four times too fast. So, by the time JACK is ten, he'll have
the body, and the body organs of a forty-year old. He's tutored by Bill
Cosby, who's the only real reason this film is close to surviving.
Cosby's very charimatic, surprisingly subtle, and if anything, cool.
Of course, who else to play the forty year old that Robin Williams.
Williams is in the middle of a great stretch of his career, playing
characters that are totally centered around their comic tension, and
nothing around sentimentality. JACK fails for this reason.  Williams
yells and screams, and looks and sounds like a ten year old Jodie
Foster in NELL. So, Williams shouldn't be there. He's wasted his talent
playing someone with too much well, character, that he ends up losing
the character. Was this supposed to be an Oscar attempt for Williams?
Was this supposed to bring him to the top? THE BIRDCAGE did that. I
expected everything that was in MRS. DOUBTFIRE, THE BIRDCAGE, and
JUMANJI combined. That was a high expectation, but I got none of it.
Also, Williams doesn't play JACK right, either. Does your ten-year old
child crawl into a slide underport and ask her teacher if she wants a
gummi-bear? Does he jump up and down, get scary dreams and leap into
your bed at night. Jack eventually meets a friend. How nice, Jack gets
a friend. Adam Zolodin daftly plays 'the friend' role, with his very
ditzy mother played by Fran Drecsher. The movie's real arrogance is
that it actually expects us to laugh, cry and get touched. So much for
that idea.

JACK : D+
The review above was posted to the
rec.arts.movies.reviews newsgroup (de.rec.film.kritiken for German reviews).
The Internet Movie Database accepts no responsibility for the contents of the
review and has no editorial control. Unless stated otherwise, the copyright
belongs to the author.
Please direct comments/criticisms of the review to relevant newsgroups.
Broken URLs inthe reviews are the responsibility of the author.
The formatting of the review is likely to differ from the original due
to ASCII to HTML conversion.

Related links: index of all rec.arts.movies.reviews reviews


Title
Review for Hunchback of Notre Dame, The (1996)
Featuring the voices of:
        Tom Hulce, Demi Moore, Jason Alexander, Kevin Kline, Charles 
Kimbrough, Mary Wickes, Tony Jay.
        Victor Hugo's tale THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME was an extremely 
long book - 600 pages- and showed us a lot about poor, evil, and the 
forces that surround all human beings. As they say, everything can be 
turned into Disney. First it was POCAHONTAS, now this. Disney, however, 
has really struck on something big. Although I had various reasons for 
not liking POCAHONTAS, THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME has turned around all 
the complaints given by critics.
        First of all, the voices in HUNCHBACK are fresh, and surprisingly 
free. POCAHONTAS, however, is incredulously under-voiced. If the Disney 
animators care about comedy in their features, why don't the animals 
talk. NOTRE DAME has three refreshing gargoyles, voiced by Charles 
Kimbrough, SEINFELD's Jason Alexander, and the late Mary Wickes. 
        Second, POCAHONTAS tries to convey emotion in terms of violence, 
sloth, and greed. On a comic note, it has all the seven sins from the 
Morgan Freeman movie SEVEN. HUNCHBACK puts more love in between the two, 
and less anger. Disney has finally realized that the comedy and romance 
is where their stories spring, not the lust.
        Third, and last, POCAHONTAS's songs are incredibly dry; it's the 
first Disney movie that actually had me annoyed from having songs in my 
head. For example, in the song " Mine, Mine, Mine" in POCAHONTAS said 
"mine, mine, mine" so much that I felt like stabbing all the characters 
who sung it. THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, however, had me muttering "the 
bells of notre dame" everywhere I went. 
        With beautiful love contrasts between Demi Moore and Tom Hulce ( 
Quasi and Esmeralda,) who wants to have a history lesson???
