Authors
Moise17
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
Cast: David Duchovny; Gillian Anderson; John Nevill; William B. Davis; Martin
Landeu
 Every Sunday night I would be glued to my sofa, watching my favorite
television show from 9-10pm.  It is a show about mystery, atmosphere, science
fiction, horror, conspiracies, and characters so worthy of regocnition, I am
pleased to find out even the Pope knows who Agents Mulder and Scully are (okay,
maybe he doesn't, but who doesn't other than him?).
 Creator Chris Carter made a breakthrough show.  A show unlike any other on the
air today, yesterday, or tomorrow.  Now, he has taken a step further: Moving
this monument onto the silver screen.  The results are a class act.
 (Warning: spoilers ahead!) The film continues the adventures of Mulder and
Scully (if you don't know about their quest for truth, justice, and aliens,
than what are you doing reading this review?) from season five.  That right
there is something I have never seen, a show's season finale written right into
a motion picture.
 The Agents are taken off their X-File cases and assigned to a Dallas bomb
threat. When the bomb goes off (in a frightening, intensely realistic portray),
Mulder and Scully are blamed for misguidence and split apart.  Mulder is later
told by a shadowy figure (Martin Landeu is a brava performance) that the bomb
intentionally exploded to cover-up a conspiracy dealing with the body of a
little boy who was infected with the deadly black-oil.
 This sends our heros back to Dallas to investigate the mishaps, which turns
out to be the key in an on-going conspiracy to hide the evidence of
extraterrestrial life on this planet for millions of years.
 As sci-fi goes, X-Files is a classic movie that deserves to be seen on the
bigscreen (which I am going to do again).  Most people might not understand or
like the film's story and aspect of Mulder and Scully's quest.  Only a certain
amount of fans and serious sci-fi buffs (not the Star Wars type) will
appreciate the movie's intelligence and way it doesn't exploit aliens, as did
Independece Day (1996) did.  X-Files is about secrets and mysterious stories,
and, the film is, also, splashy in the FX department.  But it doesn't show-off
the laborious set pieces too much.  ID4 was too grande in the FX, and not in
the plot.
 The X-Files will likely be the best film this summer, until Saving Private
Ryan (which I hear is getting some great critical acclaime already).  If you
can't understand the film's relentless fascination with the dark side and
life-long goals, too bad for you.
