Authors
Ben Guaraldi
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Man with a Plan (1995)
     I have seen many an independent film all made with a spare budget
at breakneck speed, driven only by the director's will to create, yet
the most outstanding example of this art I have seen recently was A MAN
WITH A PLAN, a semi-fiction film made by John O'Brien.
     From its opening credits we are stunned and entertained by
O'Brien's originality and irreverence.  We see "HERO (choose not more
than ONE):" in bright, friendly blue and white with a few names after
it.  A red X is placed next to Fred Tuttle, completing the patriotic
metaphor.  With this simple satiric element, O'Brien sets the tone for
his absurd political commentary; an especially refreshing movie in the
light of THE AMERICAN PRESIDENT, the 1996 Presidential race, and the
recent shutdown of the American government.
     The story is tried and true:  for some reason, an unknown underdog
political candidate runs for an office he cannot hope to obtain.  By
fighting his way against incredible odds that would destroy a lesser
man, he wins (of course).  Pretty formula.  The motivation here?
Money.  Pretty standard.  The candidate?  Here is where we begin to
deviate:  Fred Tuttle (played by none other than O'Brien's neighbor Fred
Tuttle) is not young, not attractive, not wildly intelligent, but he
does have wit, charm and charisma.  He is desperately in need of money
to repair his farm, to buy a new hip for his father, and do the many
other things that his social security check cannot provide for, and he
figures entering the government is the only way he can make a six-figure
salary without a college education (surely this comment is intended as a
tribute to the intelligence of our representatives).  While Tuttle gives
us mountains and mountains of physical, intellectual and social
commentary and comedy, he remains true to the believability of his
character, showing that he is a talented performer though he may be
untrained in any art, performance or otherwise.
     Herein lies the brilliance of O'Brien's work: its
unprofessionality.  In Italian neo-realism we see what amateur actors can
bring to a picture, but A MAN WITH A PLAN takes that much further.
Nothing here seems professional.  The camera work is shaky,
unintentionally (or so it seems) in the style of cinema verite;  it
roams without regard to mise en scene, color or lighting, and this
yields a documentary style to this obviously fictional work.  The acting
is clearly improvisational, sometimes with long, confusing passages of
dialog, leading to an unclear point.  (Some of the off-the-cuff remarks
are great, though, such as this exchange between Tuttle and the
reporter: "So, you're going to put a chicken in every pot?"  "Yup, a
chicken in every egg.")  The visual effects are simplistic and
unrealistic, most markedly in the scene where Tuttle decides to run for
the House, seeing a government building masquerading as his father's hat
in a scene which looks distinctively like Terry Gilliam's Python
animations.
     But this amateurism imbues the film with a sort of freedom, both
giving it realism through its documentary style and absurdity through
its loony comedy.  The former is needed to let the latter remain
plausible and the latter gives the movie its distinct impression and
hold on the viewer's memory.
     And with this indelible marker poised over his viewers mind,
O'Brien imparts his ideology.  By showing Bill Blachly (Tuttle's
incumbent opponent, played by (you guessed it) Bill Blachly) as a rotten
scoundrel who will do anything to win the election, we see that O'Brien
is disgusted with government as it stands, and figures that it would be
better to let regular people like Fred Tuttle, who are truly
representative of the people, run our country.
     All of this is communicated with force and with comedy, neither of
which would have been possible in O'Brien's unique way without his
rejection of the high gloss, high glitz archetype of a Hollywood movie.
Here O'Brien has created a small masterpiece, with neither the studios
nor their ethic, both of which can destroy art for commerce.  A MAN WITH
A PLAN, though technically lacking from time to time and often quite
camp and not a little silly, is a grand tribute to the tenets of
independent film and the artistic core of all great filmmaking.
     So, where can you see this film?  Sadly, at the moment, nowhere.
John O'Brien is feverishly working to find a distributor, submitting it
to contests and clearinghouses everywhere.  If this plan fails, he
hopes to follow the Presidential primaries with screenings, capitalizing
on the political mind-set, which means your only option would be to sit
tight and wait for John O'Brien to ride into town.  But, have no fear,
this zephyr of independent spirit certainly will.

Title
Review for Amateur (1994)
Directed by: Hal Hartley
Photographed by: Michael Spiller
Written by: Hal Hartley
Edited by: Steve Hamilton
Music by: Hal Hartley and Jeffrey Taylor
Starring: Isabelle Huppert, Martin Donovan, Elina Lowensohn,
          Damian Young, Chuck Montgomery, David Simonds
     AMATEUR involves you.  One becomes attached to the eccentric
characters and their confused lives right from the start.  This should
not often be considered an extraordinary feat for a movie, but with the
way this film jumps wildly about from philosophical commentary to deeply
felt emotion to murder scenes right out of Monty Python, this trait is
somewhat surprising.  Add to that acting that is nearly uniformly dry,
characters that develop with massive contradictions and scenes that have
no jokes (yet still manage to be quite funny), and one finds oneself
with the surreal aura that makes this preposterous story believable.
     But let us begin with the characters, who are something to behold:
Isabelle, the nymphomaniacal (and virginal) ex-nun (Isabelle Huppert);
Thomas, the amnesiac pornographer who wants to lead a new life (Martin
Donovan II); Sofia, the child porn star whose naivete is intriguing for
one who has lived so long on the seamy side of life (Elina Lowensohn);
Edward, the sympathetic accountant who is electrocuted and becomes
insane (Damian Young); Jan and Kurt, the well-cultured ex-accountant
hit-men (Chuck Montgomery and David Simonds); and the deeply bass
disembodied voice of the double-crossing Jacques.  To even conceive of
these wildly anti-stereotypical characters is one thing;  to integrate
them into a coherent story is quite another.  Hal Hartley, the writer
and director, manages to do both, weaving in new characters and
sub-plots with the seeming ease that life weaves such things into our
experience.
     But Hartley doesn't truly believe in the randomness of life, as
betrayed by his use of color;  these characters descend from bright
colors to black and white as they get deeper and deeper into the
underworld.  It is inevitable for the color to disturb them again, with
the bright blue of the police officers' uniforms at the end.  Even with
this idea of pre-destiny, Hartley sets up an interesting dichotomy;
Isabelle says that God has told her that it is her mission to save these
people, but Hartley has quite a different idea, ending with the
climactic slaughter at the nunnery's steps.
     And yet what is the point to this entire movie?  The key to
understanding this is within the title:  Amateur.  This word refers to
Isabelle, who struggles to be both a nymphomaniac and a pornographer;
Thomas, who is finding what it is to be a new person and Sofia, who
attempts to blackmailing for the first time.  Then one must look at the
last line, "Yes, I knew this man."  Isabelle still knew little or
anything of Thomas' past life or past wrongs, but she still asserts that
she knows who he is, clearly saying that it is different than who he
was.  Herein the author makes a significant argument for the ability to
start anew.
     And it is this argument, not any of the crowd-pleasing bawdy humor
that it is at the heart of the film.  Hartley's almost bored treatment
of the bleeding heart missing persons cop coupled with his rushed
montage of electrocuted Edward's escapades show that his heart is not
truly in these scenes but is more in the deadpan, dryly humorous
philosophizing that fills the rest of the movies.  Perchance, however,
Hartley will soon find a way to tie these two widely different brands
of humor together.  Then he will have enough practice in both to make
films that adhere them together and cohere as a whole.
