Authors
Derek Banas
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Prophecy, The (1995)
     Yet again we have here another example of a possibly great story
that is ruined by trying to cram to many characters and scenes into
ninety minutes.
     The movie stars Thomas Daggett (Elias Koteas) a former priest
become cop that has been thrown into the middle of a war started in
heaven between two angels, the arch-angel Gabriel (Christopher Walken)
and the good angel Simon (Eric Stoltz).  I thought I was going to like
this movie because Simon seemed to be a very charismatic character that
was a good opposite to Gabriel, who played a evil yet comical in a
gruel way character because the story was developed well in the
beginning in that what was occuring was that Gabriel came down from
heaven to steal the soul of a evil general to lead his evil angels
against the good, Simon got there first and hide the soul in a little
girl.  But then my opinion soon changed when Thomas started to take
over with the same old tortured cop we've all seen so often before.
And worst of all we were constantly again and again seeing angels
impaled on stakes which became more of an annoyance than a good
addition to the movie.  And as if the story wasn't ruined enough then
we have two more worthless characters added to the scene.  Catherine
(Virginia Madsen) the school teacher of the little girl that Simon hid
the soul in.  And probably worst of all a very small part played by
Lucifer.  Isn't that ironic Lucifer playing a small part but that is
what it was and a part better left out all together because all he did
was tell Catherine a secret we never hear and then ruined the ending
all together leaving the crowd hating him more than ever?
     Like I said, there were many possibilities in this movie but in
trying to make up for wasted time spent with Thomas and Catherine the
ending became a quicky job that left everyone very disappointed.  I did
like a few things about this movie however such as the camera work and
some of the scenes were beautiful and probably one of the best parts in
the whole movie was Gabriels tortured sidekick praying for death and of
course Simon and Gabriel.  If you want a few and I mean a few good
scenes and want to see a few nice scenes you might want to see this but
don't expect a good ending and be prepared to leave the theater asking
yourself what was Lucifer's secret and why was he in it for except to
ruin the ending.  I give this a 5 on a scale of 1 to 10.
