Authors
A. Estey
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
Review of Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
Written and Directed by: George Lucas
Rating: **1/2 out of ****
        Perhaps the only thing I find more disturbing about the fact
that I had to give such a disappointing rating to the first episode of
Star Wars, is the fact that part of me feels overly generous about it.
I mean, I'm talking about Star Wars, the film series that has
transcended the boundaries of the silver screen and infused itself as
part of our social consciousness. Everyone who is alive and actually
interacts with the rest of society knows the story of Star Wars; and
they know who all the characters are; and they know at least a handful
of quotes from the film. Even if they've never seen the movie. 
        So I find myself in a rather frustrated position when I have
to sit down and announce that this film simply isn't as great as it's
predecessors, because the reality is: it isn't.
        The story opens as two Jedi knights: Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam
Neeson) and  Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) set out to diffuse a
potentially hostile situation dealing with unfair taxation levied
against the small planet of Naboo by the Federation. Unfortunately,
for all those involved, the hostile situation changes from potentially
to authentically, and the Jedis have to rescue the Queen of Naboo
(Natalie Portman) before she is taken prisoner. Eventually they all
leave Naboo to find Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd).
        Also, on the surface of Naboo, the Jedis meet up with Jar Jar
Binks (Ahmed Best), an amphibious creature who thereafter becomes a
central character. Now if I were forced to point out one reason why I
had such distaste for this film, well it's Jar Jar Binks. In all
honesty, this character should have been completely written out of the
picture. His brand of intellectually deprived humour is so unbearably
annoying, that I'm still in shock that Lucas thought it was a good
idea to include him in the cast. The pain of having to watch this
character is roughly equivalent to someone screeching their
fingernails endlessly on a chalkboard hooked up to a guitar amplifier
turned up to 10. If the mindless banter provided by C3P0 even slightly
annoyed you in the previous films, prepare to be squirming in your
seat and squinting in pain as you endure the cinematic catastrophe
that is Jar Jar Binks. After enough exposure to this character, I was
lamenting the fact that the concession stand didn't sell painkillers
to help ease my Jar Jar viewing experience.
        This illustrates another fundamental problem of Episode One:
the tone of the picture is far too light-hearted. Not for one minute
did I feel that any of these characters were in any real danger (with
the exception of the Jedi duel towards the end of the picture, but
I'll discuss that later). There are also no characters which challenge
what's being presented to them, they just sort of go from point A to
point B as if their lives are a scripted movie (and although there's a
pretty cool sense of irony about that, it's not a good thing). In the
previous three films, Han Solo was the character whose motivations
were, to a certain extent, guided by personal interest. He also
perfectly counterbalanced the juvenile antics of C3PO. None of that is
present in this picture.
        However, it would also be a mistake to argue that there is
nothing in Episode One which deserves commendation. Of course, the
special effects are breathtaking, and the scenes which focus on the
Jedis are especially interesting. If the film had only decided to
examine more of the lives of the Jedis and brought more screen time to
the antagonist Darth Maul (Ray Park); Episode One could have easily
been the greatest entry into the series. The lightsaber fight between
Obi-Wan Kenobi, Qui-Gon Jinn and Darth Maul is absolutely incredible
and managed to alleviate a lot of the boredom I felt from earlier
parts in the film.
        I really wanted to love this picture. Personally speaking, I
love the Star Wars trilogy - not in the quasi-insane "I'll camp out
for eight weeks to get tickets for a movie that will be in theatres
for eight months" way, but I do think they're really great movies.
What Lucas has produced with The Phantom Menace unfortunately
resembles a two-hour cartoon rather than an epic tale of good and
evil. I hope that future Star Wars films will be an improvement over
this one.
Reviewed by: A. Estey
Copyright 1999, by A. Estey (gbv_adam@hotmail.com)

Title
Review for Can't Hardly Wait (1998)
        Movies about teenagers and teenage culture rarely prove to be
either interesting, entertaining or convincing, because of one
fundamental reason: movies are made by adults and not teenagers.
        Occasionally, however, films like Say Anything, Dazed And
Confused and The Breakfast Club will break the mold and offer genuine
insight into the lives of those bizarre creatures which surround us
called "teenagers." Can't Hardly Wait, however, does not. Instead, the
writing/directing team of Harry Elfont and Deborah Kaplan manages to
take every cliché found in the teenage genre, strip it completely of
perception, intelligence and wit - and turn it into one of the most
nauseating cinematic experiences I have ever been subjected to.
        Can't Hardly Wait follows a group of characters as they attend
a house party on the night of their high school graduation. The main
characters are such perfected stereotypes that no analysis needs to be
provided to perfectly understand them: there's the average male
protagonist Preston (Ethan Embry), prom queen and cheerleader Amanda
(Jennifer Love-Hewitt), football star Mike (Peter Facinelli), white
rapper wannabe Kenny (Seth Green), computer geek William (Charlie
Korsmo), and brainy outsider Denise (Lauren Ambrose).
        I couldn't stand any of those characters. Whether it was
William getting drunk and signing along to heavy metal songs or Kenny
proclaiming "Yo, I gotta have sex tonight!", all I could think of was
how Elfont and Kaplan possibly managed to con Columbia Pictures out of
ten million dollars to fund their film.
        Apparently, Can't Hardly Wait is supposed to be a comedy, but
it tends to fail in this respect because of the fact that it's not
funny. In all honesty, Elfont and Kaplan should be forced by their
employers to attend remedial classes in humour. And when I say
"forced", I mean it. They should be strapped down to a chair and have
their eyes wedged open in a similar fashion to Alex in A Clockwork
Orange. This is how desperately they need to be educated about the
concept of humour. For instance, Can't Hardly Wait features a foreign
exchange student who is instructed to repeat absurd statements such as
"I am a sex machine." For some reason, Elfont and Kaplan believe that
if this character repeats it enough, eventually it will be funny. If
only Elfont and Kaplan could recognise the irony that they actually
got paid for making this junk - now that's funny.
Reviewed by: A. Estey
Copyright 1999, by A. Estey (gbv_adam@hotmail.com)

Title
Review for Cruel Intentions (1999)
        I never understood what the cliché "Hell on Earth" truly meant
until very recently. I've just never experienced anything in my life
which was so terrifying, so horrible, so monstrously deplorable that
it justified being termed as "Hell on Earth". After all, I've never
been to war, I've never been the victim of any violent crime, I've
never really been broken hearted, and I've never been audited; so I
really had no frame of reference as to people meant when they said
that something was "Hell on Earth"  
        In a perfect world, I would be in charge of all the movie
studios. The very first thing I'd do in this perfect world, would be
to take every Hollywood producer who thinks that setting any story in
contemporary America with a 20-something cast playing teenagers and
featuring a soundtrack ripped directly from MTV, and throw them in
jail. But it wouldn't just be your average jail, not even a maximum
security installation. I'd have these producers (and everyone else
involved in the production of these films) put in front of a war
crimes tribunal and forced to beg for mercy for their crimes against
humanity.
        Now you're probably thinking to yourself: "Is this really how
bad Cruel Intentions is?"
        The answer is no. It's actually much worse. Watching the cast
of this motion picture atrocity try to act their way through Roger
Kumble's awfully written script is probably a lot like stabbing
yourself in the arm with a chainsaw and then pouring salt on the open
wound. And then pouring acid on the salt. I don't know if Kumble was
trying to evoke comedy or tragedy out of his opening scene where Marci
Greenbaum (Tara Reid) whines about having nude photos of her posted on
the internet, but the only emotion I felt was sheer boredom.
        From that opening scene, where boring actor Ryan Phillippe
tries to seduce TV actress Swoosie Kurtz, to the conclusion which I
don't remember because I had practically fallen asleep; Cruel
Intentions is truly "Hell on Earth," right up there with war and tax
audits.
Reviewed by: A. Estey
Copyright 1999, by A. Estey (gbv_adam@hotmail.com)

Title
Review for Mighty Aphrodite (1995)
        Just leave it to Woody Allen to compare the life of a neurotic
New Yorker to Greek Tragedy - after all, no one else is going to do
it. Allen is probably the only American director that can get away
with making a film which intercuts a traditional narrative with scenes
of a Greek Chorus commenting on the story. Heck, he's the only
director who can actually pitch this sort of idea and not be laughed
at by the studio executives.
        The story follows Lenny (Allen), a sports writer who is
persuaded by his wife Amanda (Helena Bonham Carter) to adopt a baby.
As the child grows older, Lenny becomes obsessed with finding the
parents of the child, and embarks on a minor odyssey to meet them,
despite the warning of the Greek Chorus. Eventually he manages to
track down the biological mother of his child, Linda Ash (Mira
Sorvino), who lacks all of the qualities which Lenny's son seems to
posses. She also turns out to be an unintelligent and extremely
perverted prostitute. Needless to say, this causes much grief for
Lenny and he tries to change her into a wholesome lady so that he can
romantically pair her with Kevin (Michael Rapaport), an equally dim
boxer.
        The Greek Chorus is certainly the most innovative features of
this film, and serves as the premise for many of the jokes in the
film, such as the Chorus appealing to Zeus for guidance but only
getting his answering machine. Unfortunately, the film does suffer a
bit from the fact that a few too many of the jokes fall flat,
especially considering that this is coming from Woody Allen and not
just any other writer-director.
        Mira Sorvino won the Academy Award for best actress, and it is
a worthy performance. Sorvino manages to portray the naďve character
with a sense of balance; she plays dumb but without diving to absurd
depths where the authenticity of the character is lost.
        Mighty Aphrodite certainly isn't Allen's greatest film, but
for fans of his work (like myself), it's still worth seeing how the
auteur creates yet another bizarre situation for himself and laughing
along as he tries to work it all out.
Reviewed by: A. Estey
Copyright 1999, by A. Estey (gbv_adam@hotmail.com)

Title
Review for Entrapment (1999)
        I have no real tangible proof of this, but I swear that there
are a lot of producers in Hollywood who adamantly believe that if you
take a bad script, written by a bad writer and give the project it to
an equally bad director, then it is actually possible to make a good
movie. Using their logic, all that really needs be done to change the
bad movie into a good movie is cast a bunch of super-famous actors and
provide an almost unlimited production budget.
        This is the only way I can fathom how 20th Century Fox hired
Jon Amiel in order to direct this eighty million dollar waste of my
time (not counting the time it took me to get to and from the
theatre). Now, before I continue to ferociously attack what's wrong
with this film, I just want to point out that one of the reasons it
fails so miserably is because it does have the potential to be an
exciting thriller. Catherine Zeta-Jones plays Virginia Baker, an
insurance investigator tracking down an infamous art thief named
Robert MacDougal (Sean Connery). If you've ever seen any Hollywood
blockbuster before, I really don't have to spend too much time on
frivolous plot details: the two team up for various jobs, stealing
various things for various purposes. 
        The problem we come to is that we've all seen this a few
billion times before and this film doesn't break any new ground in the
big-budget/Hollywood/action genre. The result is that the entire
production feels contrived. I'm going to be completely honest here:
pretty much the only thing keeping me awake throughout the run-time
was looking at Catherine Zeta-Jones. Now while this may be a
compliment for Ms. Zeta-Jones, it certainly isn't for either the
writers or the director, who are not nearly as clever as they think
they are. Just about the most profound thought they can inject into
this film is when they have MacDougal lecture Baker on the semantic
difference between "entrapment" and "blackmail". 
        With an eighty million dollar budget, you'd think that
Entrapment would at least feature edge-of-your seat action scenes or
breathtaking special F/X. Well, you'd be wrong. The action that is
present in this film takes place in a huge skyscraper and is
relatively unspectacular. Unfortunately for all those involved with
Entrapment, Die Hard narrowly beat it to the screen by 11 years. The
reality is that after 15 minutes of watching this picture, you know
exactly what's going to happen, despite rather pathetic attempts in
the screenplay to throw in plot twists.
        Many scenes seem to exist merely as a reason to outfit
Zeta-Jones in extremely tight-fitting clothing. One particular scene
features Baker crawling around trying to avoid laser-beams while she
tries to steal an ancient Chinese mask. Nothing wrong with that, but
she entered the room from the floor and knew exactly where the mask
was - so why didn't she and MacDougal tunnel in directly under the
mask instead of the other side of the room? I'll tell you why: because
it's a great excuse to photograph Zeta-Jones' posterior as it slides
underneath those beams (and it also allows a second scene of the exact
same thing - the rehearsal).
        Ving Rhames also makes an appearance in this movie, and though
he has great screen presence (although so do Connery and Zeta-Jones)
and the most interesting character in the film, not even he can rescue
this film from the depths of the Boring Film Abyss (a concept I
invented just to describe this picture). 
        One last complaint: Entrapment is littered of instances where
MacDougal will just slip into a shadow or behind a building, or he
becomes obstructed by a moving vehicle and then in the next shot,
he'll spontaneously disappear in ninja-like fashion. I can picture
Amiel patting himself on the back, thinking to himself "It'll leave
the audience wondering for days: How did he do that?" We know Jon,
it's called editing.
Reviewed by A. Estey
Copyright 1999, by A. Estey (gbv_adam@hotmail.com)

Title
Review for L.A. Confidential (1997)
"Go back to Jersey, Sonny. This is the City of the Angels and you
haven't got any wings."
        If I had to choose one particular line of dialogue from L.A.
Confidential that perfectly summarised the kind of feeling you get
from watching this film well, I don't think I could do it. The
reality is that every single moment of this film is so well crafted
that I can't see how it could possibly be improved. However, the above
quote, uttered by Dudley Smith (James Cromwell) during a violent
police interrogation, succinctly sums up the world of L.A.
Confidential. This is a world of tough justice, where the cops are
every bit as bad as the criminals and corruption lurks everywhere.
This is classic film noir.
        The story revolves around three cops in L.A. during the 50s,
whose lives become entangled following a horrendous spree killing at
the Night Owl Coffee Shop. Bud White (Russell Crowe) is the merciless
cop who prefers the violent brand of justice. Ed Exley (Guy Pierce) is
the ambitious, by-the-book cop, who is trying to live up to his
father's police career. Kevin Spacey (Jack Vincennes) is the cop who
works as technical advisor for a TV show, who, in a rather poetic
moment, admits that he can't remember why he became a cop in the first
place.
        Now this may all sound rather routine for the genre, but L.A.
Confidential is superior to almost all its noir relatives. The script
is so well written and the acting is so uniformly superb, that it's
two and a half hour length actually feels short, even upon multiple
viewings. Indeed, L.A. Confidential deserves to mentioned alongside
other landmark noir films such as The Maltese Falcon, Chinatown and
The Big Sleep. 
        The film crams so much plot into it's run-time, that there's
no way I can provide an adequate summary in this review. I haven't
even mentioned the roles of Lynn Bracken (Kim Basinger), Sid Hudgeons
(Danny DeVito), or Pierce Patchett (David Strathairn), and yet they're
all such memorable characters. 
        Probably the most amazing thing about L.A. Confidential is the
fact that Curtis Hanson's name is next to the writing and directing
credits. We're talking about the man who's previous accomplishments in
film include The River Wild and The Hand That Rocks The Cradle (just
thinking about them makes me cringe). However, Hanson has made a
complete turnaround with L.A. Confidential and proven that he can make
film on a level far above most of his contemporaries. What remains to
be seen is whether he will emerge as the latest auteur or remain a
one-hit-wonder.
Reviewed by: A. Estey (gbv_adam@hotmail.com)
Copyright 1999, by A. Estey
