Authors
Mike Trout
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Ironweed (1987)
     Well, it's here.  I finally saw IRONWEED last night, in a sneak preview in
Albany for cast and extras.  It opens nationwide today (12 February).
     First, a warning.  Film reviews are subjective by definition.  This one
will be worse than usual, as I have a personal interest in the film.  It's the
biggest thing to happen to Albany in years.  However, I will do my best to be
as objective as possible.  I saw the film with three other people, two of whom
were in the movie just as I was, and I tried to listen carefully to their
comments and integrate them with my thoughts.
     IRONWEED is a good film.  It's not great, but I think it's better than the
general reviews indicate.  I found it to be well-written, brilliantly acted,
and powerfully moving.  The general story flow was surprisingly smooth.  
     The biggest problem is with editing.  The movie is too long--2 hours 16
minutes--and there are obvious segments that should have been deleted.
However, other scenes show signs of excess editing, causing some confusion in
the story line and many dangling subplots.  We finished filming in early summer
and the film was released in mid-December.  To me, that seemed like not enough
time to do a careful editing job.  Perhaps it was rushed to completion in time
to be eligible for the 1987 Academy Awards.
     IRONWEED is the story of Francis Phelan's return to Albany, New York.  In
1901, Phelan was a trolley car worker for the Albany Traction Company.  During
a strike, Phelan throws a rock and kills a scab conductor.  To escape
prosecution, he leaves Albany for a year.  After he returns, he attempts to
build a life with his wife and children.  But he drops his 13-day-old son
Gerald on the floor, killing him.  Phelan splits for good.  For the next
several years, Phelan wanders all over the US and Canada, playing minor league
baseball--his rock-throwing at the trolley strike was a preview of his throwing
skills.  But the Great Depression hits and Phelan becomes just another of the
millions of hungry, boozing bums.  During these dreary years he takes up with
Helen Archer, a sickly but lovable homeless woman with a musical background.
Finally, in 1938, Phelan returns to Albany to confront his past, his family,
and the ghosts that populate his memories.
     I think IRONWEED the movie is considerably superior to IRONWEED the book.
Although I'm a big fan of William Kennedy's books, I was quite disappointed
with IRONWEED as a novel.  To me, it was self-indulgent, overly experimental,
and difficult to wade through.  Most Albany readers seemed to enjoy it
(probably due to all the local references), but a lot of non-Albanians I've
talk to hate it.  I even know two people who took it back to bookstores and
demanded their money back.
     But Kennedy has done an excellent job with the screenplay.  The movie
doesn't deserve the nickname "Ironweird" like the novel does.  Excising all the
bizarreness of the novel, Kennedy has managed to concentrate focus upon the
main character Francis Phelan.  Despite numerous flashbacks, Francis' story
flows from scene to scene with sparkling logic.  His character is strong and
understandable.  Jack Nicholson's superb acting lifts Francis into a memorable
film character.
     Kennedy's handling of the "ghosts from the past" subplot is extremely
clear in the film, unlike Kennedy's rhetoric in his novel.  Hector Babenco's
direction shows considerable understanding of this subject as well, as it is
not difficult to share the feelings of this powerful theme.  I originally felt
that this subject should probably be dropped from the film, but Kennedy showed
how it can be done with clarity and conciseness.  Too bad he didn't take the
same approach with his novel.
     The best part of the novel was Phelan's confrontation with his family, and
the same can be said for the film.  In the novel's emotional climax, Phelan
accepts his wife's offer to move back home.  This is not as clearly or
powerfully handled in the film, but it is replaced with a scene of equal
intensity.  Phelan reads a letter he received many years ago from his loving
nine-year-old daughter, who is now a grown woman filled with bitterness at
Phelan's desertion of his family.  Phelan has kept the letter all these years,
and the quiet strength in Nicholson's voice as he reads the letter is an
awesome performance that brought up the tears for me.
     Kennedy has also lifted Helen Archer, Francis' girlfriend, into a major
character role.  I was concerned about this, as Archer plays only a minor role
in the novel.  But again, Kennedy has changed the novel into the screenplay
with amazing skill and taste.  And Meryl Streep, as Archer, shows the stuff
that pros are made of.  You won't forget her performance for a long time.  When
she belts out a tune in "The Gilded Cage" nightclub, the audience on the screen
and in the theater are both moved.
     A couple of other outstanding performances were displayed by Tom Waits, as
Phelan's friend Rudy the Kraut, and Carol Baker, as Phelan's wife.  Both showed
unusual skills in wide-ranging roles, and after the film I heard some comments
that they'd stolen the show.  A galaxy of other minor but colorful characters
keeps flowing through IRONWEED, making it a "fun" movie as well as a skillful
look at life.  I think this is what makes the movie flow well despite its
length.  IRONWEED doesn't seem long and doesn't really drag.
     Still, several subplots should have been removed.  Others needed to be
expanded or better explained.  Parts of the story seem to have been nearly
removed anyway and are left dangling--such as the near-seduction of Phelan as a
teenager.  Throughout IRONWEED, we see three ghosts, but only two of them are
ever explained.  I had no trouble following the story, but I suspect that
people unfamiliar with the novel might have difficulty, due to the sometimes
choppy editing.  Some audience members expressed confusion with several scenes
and subplots.  
     Another subplot that begged for expansion was the one I was in.
Seriously.  Local residents and American Legion members, the "Raiders," attack
and burn down the shantytown where Phelan and Rudy are visiting friends.  In
the six nights I worked on the film, we produced an enormous number of
spectacular and fascinating scenes.  Unfortunately, they all seem to have been
left on the cutting room floor.  As portrayed in the film, the attack is
confusing.  While working on the movie, I watched a powerful Nicholson
performance of Phelan's loyalty to his fellow bum Rudy.  That does not appear
in the IRONWEED final product.  On screen the whole thing lasts about 60
seconds and is over before you can figure out what it is.  Some audience
members asked me afterward what the heck was going on there.  The motivation
for the Raiders' attack simply was not there.  Incidentally, I think I saw
myself in one or two quick shots, but I couldn't be sure since it went by so
fast.  I'll have to watch it again a few more times and study it frame-by-frame
when it comes out on video.
     I can certainly see how movies go way over budget.  Babenco spent
tremendous amounts of money on scenes that were barely used or cut out
entirely.  A dead steam locomotive was shipped up from Mexico and altered at
great expense, yet appears only in a couple of non-vital quick shots.  And of
course, I personally made several hundred dollars working on this movie, yet my
efforts ended up in the waste can along with that of hundreds of other Albany
residents.
     This film does an exceptional job with set decoration.  Albany area folks
will have lots of fun spotting area localities, as well as many Albany "inside
jokes" in props, signs, and such.  It can get a little confusing for us at
times, though.  In one scene Phelan and Archer are examining a friend's body in
Albany's South End.  They take a few steps and are suddenly in Troy, about five
miles away and across the Hudson River.  Phelan points back to Albany and
mutters something about the body "over there," as if it's still a few steps
away.  Troy, Hudson, and other local cities served as substitutions for various
Albany neighborhoods in IRONWEED.  
     For now, I'll give IRONWEED three stars.  I must admit that while watching
the movie, I spent too much energy trying to spot myself, my friends, and
Albany landmarks.  After I see the film a few more times, I may change my
opinion--but I suspect I may like IRONWEED even more.
Michael Trout (miket@brspyr1) =-=-=-=-=-=-= UUCP:brspyr1!miket
BRS Information Technologies, 1200 Rt. 7, Latham, N.Y. 12110  (518) 783-1161

Title
Review for Suspect (1987)
     I caught SUSPECT at a sneak preview last night, so I thought I'd fire off
my opinion.  I can't really describe it without giving away at least some of
the plot, so hit 'n' now if you so choose.  This is a *good movie*.
     SUSPECT is so much like NO WAY OUT it's a little annoying.  It's the same
basic core plot.  A big Washington politico kills a young woman and tries to
cover it up.  Lots of artsy District of Columbia location shots, with the
mandatory Watergate shot and lots of pretty monuments and imposing federal
buildings.  The same feel for power in high places and the misconduct it may
bring.  Although one might suspect that SUSPECT (sorry!:-)) was a direct
rip-off of the success of NO WAY OUT, it's probably just a coincidence since
most of the work on SUSPECT must have been completed by the time NO WAY OUT was
released.  
     As much as I liked NO WAY OUT, I think I like SUSPECT even better.  In NO
WAY OUT the emphasis seemed to be on the convoluted plot line.  In SUSPECT the
emphasis is on the characters.  And the characters work better.  Cher
accomplishes an astounding performance as the public defender called in to
defend a deaf and mute derelict accused of murder.  Her characterization of the
overworked, underpaid P. D. has never been done better.  She brings a
tremendous amount of nervous energy into her character, yet shows excellent
subtleties and complexities.  I identified with her from the beginning.  I
think she showed up Kevin Costner in NO WAY OUT.
     Unfortunately, Dennis Quaid as one of the jurors was disappointing.  His
character does some incredibly bizarre and dangerous things, and we never quite
feel his motivation.  Actually, he *does* have a motivation; he's trying to get
into Cher's pants.  At least that's all I could determine.  Early in the film
we see that Quaid's character is a lobbyist for the dairy industry who will
stoop to any sleazy methods to advance his cause.  There's potential for an
interesting character there, but Quaid keep his character weak.  About all he
does is grin and smirk.
     To this film's credit, there are *no* sleazy sex scenes.  In fact, there's
no sex at all.  It was a *very* refreshing change to sit through a mainstream
Hollywood film without the mandatory sex scene.  We see Quaid take a
congresswoman to his apartment where they *start* to remove clothing--but
there's an immediate fadeout.  Quaid also visit's Cher's apartment and some
kissing begins, but the scene ends so quickly we don't know if it went beyond
kissing or not.  That's it.  It made me think that the sex scenes in NO WAY OUT
were just an added attraction that may have added little to the movie.  Sure,
they were some of the steamiest and best sex stuff Hollywood has produced in
years, but would NO WAY OUT have been a weaker film without them?  Probably
not.
     SUSPECT has excellent supporting work, which I thought was a bit weak in
NO WAY OUT.  Liam Neeson, John Mahoney, and Joe Mantegna did terrific jobs.
Sorry I can't match names with faces (first date--didn't want to stay for the
credits :-)).  The deaf-mute derelict was good although a bit overdrawn in
parts.  The hostile judge couldn't have been better, and Cher's co-worker
should have had more screen time (as should have the deaf-mute derelict).
     SUSPECT is sort of a "hybrid" film, as it incorporates both the
politcal-thriller aspects and standard courtroom drama.  While NO WAY OUT was
set in the back halls of America's intelligence community, SUSPECT is set in
our judicial system.  This makes SUSPECT a little more identifiable, a little
more understandable, and makes the whole film flow like melted butter.
     SUSPECT seems to be one of the first mainstream Hollywood films to deal
with the homeless issue in any detail.  A lot more could have been said, but at
least this film shows us the tip of the iceberg.  After watching SUSPECT, we
are a tiny bit more aware that millions of perfectly normal Americans are
living in cardboard boxes and eating out of dumpsters.
     Some faults:  there's a overuse of the "make the audience jump with a loud
noise" technique.  You expect this in a thriller, but it happened at least a
half-dozen times, often for no reason other than just to keep you jumpy.  And
some of the scenes are too predictable.  You *know* the judge is going to kill
himself when he takes out the shotgun.  You *know* that Cher is going to be
attacked every time she's in some dark hallway.
     SUSPECT's director Peter Yates deserves a lot of credit for keeping this
one in line.  These political-murder-thrillers can get pretty hokey at times,
but SUSPECT moves like a Swiss watch.  Although the film is long (about two
hours) it drags only in a few short spots.  Suspense levels are superior to
those in NO WAY OUT.  The more I think about it, the better I like this film,
and the worse NO WAY OUT looks.  I'd give it three stars--maybe three and a
half.
     For another perspective, the person I was with thought SUSPECT was "okay
but not really all that good."  She felt the predictability factor was
excessive enough to be *very* annoying.  I don't think she felt the suspense
levels I did, and wasn't as thrilled with the pacing as I was.  She did like
the lack of the mandatory sex scene.  Of course, she did say that NO WAY OUT
was "one of the best films I've ever seen."
  --  Michael Trout (miket@brspyr1) =-=-=-=-=-=-= UUCP:brspyr1!miket BRS
Information Technologies, 1200 Rt.  7, Latham, N.Y.  12110  (518) 783-1161
