Authors
Alex Bryson
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Ice Storm, The (1997)
Review: The Ice Storm (1997)
Starring: Kevin Kline, Joan Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Christina Ricci,
Tobey Maguire, Henry Czerny, Adam Hann-Byrd, Jamey Sheridan, David
Krumholtz, Elijah Wood
Ang Lee ventures into new territory in "The Ice Storm" - 70s America.
At least I thought it was new, until about two minutes in a character
makes a speech about what families are like ("personal negative
matter" apparently). That's OK by me though - Lee is the undisputed
master of this type of film-making, as he showed in "The Wedding
Banquet" and more recently "Sense and Sensibility".
Something is badly wrong in the well-heeled suburbia of New Canaan,
Connecticut. It isn't the interior decor, or the hideous shirts and
flared trousers - the malaise is deeper. Fortunately the director
realises that, and although there are a few jokes at the expense of
waterbeds he cuts straight to the deeply troubled relationships of the
inhabitants.
"The Ice Storm" is about two families: that of Joan Allen and Kevin
Kline, and Sigourney Weaver and Jamey Sheridan. It is a period study
of the era where the experiments of the late sixties had seeped into
the middle-aged middle-class consciousness, wreaking havoc on their
respectable lives, and changing the face of their society. Ben Hood
(Kline) is having an affair with neighbour Janey Carver (Weaver). His
daughter is experimenting with sex with her two sons. Elena, Ben's
wife, is uneasy, sensing his betrayal, and is meanwhile preyed on by
seedy clergyman Michael Cumpsty. Paul Hood (Tobey Maguire), the
insightful narrator has his sights set on a vacuous rich girl after
she spouts about existentialism.
The film is played out at dinner parties and "key" parties, and as the
story unfolds to its climax the ice storm of the title rages outside.
Ice is big in the movie, like the pressure on its characters to find
direction and meaning in the inhospitable climate of the day. Their
notions seem ridiculous, but Lee manages to retain our sympathy for
them, no matter how screwed up they are. They struggle with the
consequences of the upheaval, seeking emotional satisfaction: the
adolescent Paul seems to have the profoundest understanding, and that
comes from a Fantastic Four comic book. A lack of connection between
them has deadened their lives like the fury of the elements outside -
one scene shows Kline bored out of his skull in a board meeting, yet
he cannot communicate his frustration to either his wife or Janey, who
seeks only an "explicitly sexual relationship". Elena attempts to
block out the pressures and turns towards the artefacts of the
seventies like cultish religion and group marriage therapy. Even she
succumbs to quite possibly the most unerotic extra-marital love scene
ever filmed.
All the while the children are on a journey of discovery themselves:
Wendy, the independent daughter of the Hood family (played
marvellously by Christina Ricci) threatens the remaining order by
exposing herself to Sandy (Sigourney Weaver's reprimand speech about
coming of age rituals in "Samoa and other developing nations" is
particularly acute). In another scene she and Mikey fumble as she
wears a rubber Nixon mask - a disturbing image. The seventies are
evoked through this listless search for something and the bizarre
solutions that were offered. With their partner swapping and gullible
self-help philosophies, their need for emotional support, the adults
attempt to play the children, whilst the younger generation attempt to
find their way in the adult world.
The forces at play on these people are like the ice: ice so powerful
that it can bend iron lamps and fell trees: such an immense force that
it will crush anything it forms on: there is a sense that something
terrible will happen throughout - images like Mikey jumping up and
down on a frozen diving board, or Sandy playing with explosives. The
tragedy of these battered relationships is clear right from the
beginning: the families are splintered by straining marriages and
generation difference, but ultimately tragedy brings them together,
the ice storm uses up its energy and calm is restored: and in the bare
new light emerges understanding.

Title
Review for Land Girls, The (1998)
It is 1941 and as the men of Britain's farming communities leave to
fight their roles are assumed by women of the Women's Land Army. The
Land Girls tells the tale of three such ‘girls' brought together from
different backgrounds: Rachel Weisz' Cambridge graduate ‘Ag',
Catherine McCormack's Stella and Anna Friel's (predictably chirpy)
hairdresser, Prue.
Underneath what is ostensibly a story about friendship forged in a
time of adversity, about pulling together and female bonds that
transcend boundaries of class and so on, a more subdued tale of regret
and thwarted happiness lies. Disguised for most of the film by
digestible sentimentality this makes for a bittersweet experience
ultimately.
This is a period drama with a pastoral theme almost out of a Hardy
novel, but the producers know what they are doing and pull it off with
ease. The impossibly picturesque farming community is photographed
beautifully, and this pretty facade will no doubt satisfy those
looking for a BBC costume piece (the costumes are wonderful too
actually).
For such a long film the plot is slight - really just a series of
vignettes chronicling the development of the main characters, but the
acting holds it together. Steven Mackintosh is charged with bedding
the entire female population of the South-West it seems (it is
particularly welcome seeing the Our Mutual Friend pair again), and all
three ‘Land Girls' are a pleasure to watch.
There are many moments of comedy, but in some ways the ethos is grimly
stoic. In keeping with the times duty and sacrifice are paramount, and
additionally we are provided with an examination of guilt and regret
at the choices we make. Don't let that put you off this rewarding look
back at what is fast becoming ancient history though.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Once in a while a movie arrives that is capable of appealing directly
to the nobler emotions of the viewer, and succeeds in embedding itself
in the popular consciousness. I'm pretty sure this is one of those
movies. As a piece of cinema Titanic suffers from any number of highly
visible flaws but for some curious reason as a whole it proves to be a
triumph, offering an exhilarating and affecting three and a quarter
hour experience few will forget quickly. Cameron expresses himself on
the largest and most expensive canvas ever but there is still intimacy
and subtlety in the film at its best.
Titanic is a cinematic brain bypass operation, but I don't mean that
in a disparaging way: the best films find a way to communicate their
themes: love, sacrifice, tragedy in this case without you noticing.
There is an examination of class and society in the film, as well as
the familiar notions of arrogance and greed so often associated with
this subject, but that is secondary to the main purpose of Titanic,
which is to tell the tale of a doomed romance. Categorising Titanic is
difficult: it is an uneasy combination of traditional disaster movie,
epic romance and James Cameron's other action flicks, almost as if it
had been decided that something for everyone should be included in
order that its eventual success be certain, but I think it is clear
that it is the second element he hopes we will concentrate on.
Whether it captures the full horror and scale of the tragedy is
debatable, but we are certainly given a privileged position to observe
an awesome recreation of that night in 1912. The events of that
evening are so familiar to us that making a picture with impact on the
subject must be doubly difficult: the film succeeds, but whether this
is due to the sheer immensity of the enterprise as it is presented to
the cinemagoer is unclear. Whatever the explanation, Cameron has
created a stunning movie. The budget has been the focus of much
debate, but I think it would be true to say that we see where it all
went. It was well spent.
The film chronicles the story of Rose DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslet),
an upper class Philadelphian returning to America to marry the wealthy
Cal Hockley (Billy Zane). She is not wholly convinced of the merits of
this arrangement, and on board she meets Jack Dawson (Leonardo
DiCaprio), a penniless artist, with whom she falls in love. Dawson is
the catalyst for her to break free of the restrictive conventions and
blinkered thinking of her 1st class companions, and she develops
independence and some real spirit. The sinking as well as incidental
stories like the present day search for a valuable gem in the wreck,
are interwoven with the main love story. Veteran Gloria Stewart makes
an appearance as Rose in the present day.
Now I mentioned there were problems. I will begin with the most
serious, the script. Titanic is the product of James Cameron, and the
script though hugely effective in terms of its grand thematic sweeps
does not maintain the high standard at a close-up level. It seems at
times that the film has been constructed from a mass cull of old
Hollywood romances, and most of the film seems familiar in some way,
but frankly this is not worth moaning about when the end product is
this impressive.
All the themes are there: love, self-sacrifice, honour: apparently the
film was pitched to the studio as 'Romeo + Juliet' aboard the doomed
liner. Guess who plays the hero? This type of thing is repeated a
number of times: Frances Fisher basically reprises the Charlotte
Bartlett role from "A Room with a View" as a stern matriarch for
instance. Some elements actually seem to have jumped straight from A
Night to Remember. The characters are familiar from hundreds of other
pictures, but at least Cameron has an eye for what sort of characters
work. I think he misses one cheap trick in failing to emphasise the
name of the elderly Rose when it occurs early on however.
Dialogue is clunky for the most part, but that is not to say Cameron
does not structure the narrative well. The flashbacks are hugely
effective - a scene where the ghostly wreck briefly returns to its
former glory is testimony to the storytelling flair of the director.
Cameron also presents us with a computer simulation of the sinking
early on which means we understand fully what is going on later. The
cinematography is superb, and visual effects have to be seen to be
believed. I think this could justifiably be called Cameron's best
work.
The performances are perhaps what keeps the film afloat: Leonardo
DiCaprio is an impressive spirited Jack, and he has shown again that
he has vast potential. I think I would be right in saying this is his
first leading man role, and he deports himself well as the resourceful
- though perhaps too boyish - hero. Winslet carries the film however,
yet again stunning in a role that suits her perfectly. She is perhaps
not at her best, but her transition from repressed aristocrat to
liberated heroine is a joy to watch, and marks a possible Oscar
contender even in this tough year. The chemistry between the two
lovers is almost tangible, and may offer the key to understanding the
film's effectiveness. Kathy Bates, Bill Paxton and Jonathan Hyde
amongst others offer solid support
The way it has been filmed results in the last hour feeling almost
like real time, but the sinking is surprisingly less successful than
the romance of the first part of the film. Cameron is revealed as a
closet romantic despite his fascination with cyborgs and heavy
machinery, and I'm not sure his heart is in the action sequences set
in flooded corridors with sparking lights and groaning metal. After
this the story does revert to its original type, but curiously I found
the final 1912 scenes not particularly moving: perhaps the problem was
the fact that the stories are already is so well known, or that I had
heard the Celine Dion song so had a fairly good idea which characters
would draw the short straw. The impact is subdued - more could have
been wrung from the characters at this point, but as I said before,
the film has flaws.
James Horner's score is one of his more impressive: elements of his
1995 Braveheart and an Enya like sound have been fused to create a
haunting and effective soundtrack: his interpretation of the action
sequences are not quite as good as the rest, but then I don't suppose
the action sequences themselves were. Fortunately Dion is kept for the
end credits where she belongs.
There really is little reason to dislike Titanic - certainly it is at
points trite, cliched and poorly developed, but at its best it has a
vitality and spirit that make these faults pale into insignificance
beside the awesome grasp of its ambition. I would be surprised if
Titanic does not come to be considered alongside the great historical
epics, though maybe it is not a Lawrence of Arabia. Admittedly the
same people who are saying this now probably said it about The English
Patient last year, or Dances with Wolves before that, but the
effectiveness of Titanic and this same ambition will surely secure its
place in that pantheon.
What critics struggle to communicate about this film is the ability it
has to involve the audience in its story and the sheer power the
visuals and narrative exert on the viewer - analysed separately the
script would suggest a fairly disappointing film, but Titanic has a
strange quality that allows it to overcome all its limitations. I
can't express what makes Titanic so special either - no doubt every
studio executive is asking precisely this question. In any case see it
for yourself.
(Review by Alex Bryson  - this review is also
available at http://www.balmyle.demon.co.uk/ReelTime/)

Title
Review for M (1931)
Dir: Fritz Lang
Starring: Peter Lorre, Gustaf Grundgens, Otto Wernicke, Theodor Loos
[Before I start I should point out that I'm not absolutely sure which
version I am commenting on - I suspect it was the recent Munich
version]
In a seedy 1930s city Peter Lorre's child murderer picks off his
victims by offering them balloons and candy. The authorities are
powerless to stop him, and tension, mistrust and suspicion amongst the
citizens are bubbling to the surface. Criminal gangs, threatened by
the increased police presence determine that they will hunt down the
perpetrator, whilst Otto Wernicke's homicide inspector follows up his
own leads.
A mother waits in her apartment for her daughter to return from school
but she never arrives. A little girl's ball bounces into view and
stops. Her balloon is shown fluttering tangled against power lines.
Lang conveys the essence of the horror of a subject familiar today,
but what makes this a truly important film is the philosophical
content: is Lorre's Hans Beckert a monster to be destroyed like an
animal, or is the situation more complex: is a compulsive child
murderer more or less culpable than a ruthless mafia boss who is free
to do otherwise? Should we think in terms of treatment? Is he
deserving of sympathy, or is he beneath contempt? Where does the
legitimacy of punishment come from?
All power in the city is shown as corrupt and decadent: the well-fed
homicide squad, the well dressed gangsters become one in their hunt
for the killer. This moral equivalence is emphasised by a particularly
effective sequence where the discussions of the two groups are
intercut, Lang seemingly not impressed by the police. In scenes like
this Lang evokes a grim and jaded image of a decaying and ineffectual
system, and the panic ruling the place. In the film he shows no love
for his home, and indeed left soon afterwards.
The killer is revealed early on, and with his wide eyes and child-like
face seems grotesque but not the ultimate embodiment of evil. Beckert
is a man who probably plays marbles with children when he is not
abducting them, one character remarks. As he is tracked down and
finally cornered his fear is palpable, making him the victim too of
his terrible impulses.
In genre terms this is probably a police procedural, though it is also
a gangster film. There is surprisingly little suspense as the net of
criminals closes on Beckert: instead the more effective and truly
shocking section of the film is the question of what the kangaroo
court will do to him. I won't reveal the ending here, and I suppose I
should point out that the ending will differ according to the version
you see. There is no satisfactory conclusion however, in keeping with
its subject-matter.
In many ways "M" is startlingly modern: Lang's direction would not
feel out of place today, and the situation is not an alien one either.
The terms of the debate are still the same, as the script he wrote
with Thea von Harbou shows. All the familiar positions are laid out:
the feelings of a city terrorised by the child-murderer (if Beckert is
handed over to the police he will plead insanity, be placed in an
asylum and possibly escape to kill again). A woman shouts that he
cannot know how it feels to lose a child. The acting defence counsel
argues that he is not responsible for his actions, and not even the
state should be allowed to kill him. Gustaf Grundgens' underworld boss
wants him "eliminated", since he has admitted that his behaviour is
compulsive. The criminal fraternity sees a wide distinction between
themselves and this "monster", though Schraenker has killed three men
at least. Someone else says that, "Ill people are treated by doctors
and not executioners". 
By the end the issue is as unclear as ever, but Lang has succeeded in
making us ask some unsettling questions. "M" is a disturbing film, as
it was intended to be, but it also has great artistic qualities. If it
were released today it would shock just as much, if not more, than
when originally released. This is one of the most incredible films to
have emerged out of inter-war Germany, and if you get the all too rare
opportunity to see the movie take it.
