Authors
Matt Rettenmund
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Next Best Thing, The (2000)
Paramount Pictures/Lakeshore Entertainment. Director: John Schlesinger. Writer:
Tom Ropelewski. Cast: Madonna, Rupert Everett, Benjamin Bratt, Kimberley
Davies, Illeana Douglas, Stacy Edwards, Neil Patrick Harris, Lynn Redgrave.
In the interest of full disclosure, I'm a Madonna fan. That said, I go to all
of her movies with a sense of apprehension. After more than her fair share of
atrocious movies (SHANGHAI SURPRISE, WHO'S THAT GIRL, FOUR ROOMS, GIRL 6 and
BODY OF EVIDENCE spring to mind), Madonna's film career had at one point taken
on the same "save me" quality that Marilyn Monroe's life had for fans and
admirers.
But after acing EVITA with an almost-but-not-quite-Oscar-worthy deathbed scene
as her greatest achievement, Madonna seems to have finally realized that it's
better to wait for good material and well-tailored roles, a realization that
rewards viewers in THE NEXT BEST THING.
John Schlesinger directed MIDNIGHT COWBOY. This is no MIDNIGHT COWBOY. He also
directed EYE FOR AN EYE. Thankfully, this is no EYE FOR AN EYE.
THE NEXT BEST THING is a timely, warmly felt, sweetly funny film that offers a
slice of life view of a contemporary friendship that suffers-but ultimately
endures-some missteps. The friends are the yoga-teaching Abbie and the
construction-working Robert. She's fabulous (but doesn't know it) and he's gay
(but is tired of living stereotypically).
After a weak opening featuring Madonna's Abbie being dramatically dumped by her
woefully miscast snake of a boyfriend (Michael Vartan), the bulk of the movie
glides by with charming comic scenes that evoke smiles and also flesh out the
main characters until they are like members of your own circle of friends. 
Most delightful-and most artfully played and directed-is the drunken night the
friends spend together in a picture-perfect showhome Robert's minding, trashing
the place and getting trashed and having a ball. The direction here is
haunting, as if you're viewing this as one of the best memories of your life.
Madonna and Rupert make an excellent Fred and Ginger.
When Abbie winds up pregnant, the pair decide to live together and raise the
child, which they do successfully until he's school-age.
At this point, Abbie meets a sexy yuppie played by Benjamin Bratt, and her
priorities change. Now, she would like to follow him in marriage across the
country, a move that would render Rupert a father in name only.
In what could have become a mess of complicated loyalties, THE NEXT BEST
THING's single greatest asset is Rupert Everett, whose performance allows both
Abbie and her future husband to be simultaneously sympathetic and also selfish,
totally real. He accomplishes this by over-reacting himself, by being jealous
and threatened, and by making one tragic mistake that threatens to push them
all past the point of no return.
The courtroom scenes are perfunctorily directed, and yet the leads summon
heartbreaking emotion before a slightly rushed conclusion.
In all, this is Madonna's most consistently entertaining film since A LEAGUE OF
THEIR OWN and is yet another reason to think of Rupert Everett as one of
today's most gifted performers.
Gripes? Would have been wonderful to have seen more of the talented but wasted
supporting cast...would have been even better to have heard the soundtrack put
to practical use.
