Authors
Joshua Tyler
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Ghosts of Mars (2001)
America loves convenience.  After all, we're the culture that invented
the cell phone, the 24-hour ATM, and my most beloved, the remote
control.  Yet perhaps this time, with Ghosts of Mars, we have taken our
love of convenience to far.
Ghosts of Mars stars Natasha Henstridge as a tough as nails,
pill-poppin', Martian cop, sent with her squadron to retrieve
"Demolition" Williams (Ice Cube) from a remote mining town for trial
back home.  When she and her comrades, appropriately dubbed "The
Commander," "The Rookies," and the guy with the cool accent discover the
town's residents slaughtered, they are forced to team up with Williams
to escape from the remaining residents' head-chopping, alien-possessed
clutches.
Filled with a lovely overuse of storytelling flashbacks,
flashes-sideways, and viewpoint changes, Ghosts of Mars is a hapless
mishmash of poorly constructed dialogue and ill-conceived action
sequences.  The only thing keeping this film from becoming an
incomprehensible mess is the sheer idiotic simplicity of its story. 
Ripped straight from the pages of a 1970s zombie movie, Ghosts leaps
from one convenient moment to the next, stopping only to kill the
characters which are most convenient to lose.
Attempts at character interaction and development are rare and forced. 
Most of these moments come off as Kwik-E-Mart wisdom, dispensed heartily
around the Slushee machine of life by the even-tempered streetwise hand
of Ice Cube.  With a gun in one hand and a dynamite cap in the other,
Cube reminisces about his street life, comparing the zombie-stomping fun
to "Me and my brother when we was kids."  Apparently, crime in the Bronx
has gotten so bad that the residents have actually taken to ritually
decapitating one another for entertainment.
But, even in the film's darkest moments, fate conveniently lends a hand,
supplying heavily armored transportation and easily accessible rifles
and dynamite.  Yes, in the future, man may travel to space and conquer
Mars, but nothing beats a good stick of TNT.  And as we all know, every
police station, past, present, or future, keeps a healthy supply on
hand.
Characters die, heads are lopped off, but they were only supporting
roles anyway, so why should we care?  As long as you have plenty of
narcotics, immunity is guaranteed.  Eventually though, even the most
well-trained zombie alien gets a bit uppity and needs to be taught a
lesson.  What better way than by sacrificing a few minor characters to a
convenient nuclear detonation, killing anything the machine guns can't
handle.  Explosions are fun.  And even if the nukes don't get them, the
conveniently placed dynamite packs on the train stolen from the set of
The Road Warrior certainly will.
In the end this film defines itself when our cop's tribunal pronounces,
"Is that all you have to tell us?"  For, indeed, John Carpenter has run
out of things to say, and has instead decided to use whatever is
convenient to tell a ridiculously bad story.
Director: John Carpenter
Producer: Sandy King
Writer: Larry Sulkis, John Carpenter
Starring: Ice Cube, Natasha Henstridge, Jason Statham, Clea DuVall, Pam
Grier, Joanna Cassidy, Richard Cetrone
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/ghostsofmars/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Glass House, The (2001/I)
People who live in glass houses... better not have much to hide. 
Because sooner or later, you'll get caught with your pants down, leaving
everything hanging out for everyone to see.
The Glass House stars everyone's favorite Helen Hunt clone, Leelee
Sobieski, as half of a sister-brother duo who move in with family
friends after the untimely deaths of their parents.  Little does she
know that her new guardian's motives are less than altruistic and it's
up to her to protect herself and her brother.
Few would classify Sobieski as a big movie opener, but she, much like
several other actors her age, has slowly been building her career with
notable roles in notable movies, and her burgeoning confidence shows
here.
There is little to fault in The Glass House as a whole.  Competently put
together, smartly acted, The Glass House is a continual slow build
toward revelation and resolution.  I for one was totally hooked, until
the final few moments, when after bursts of shock and terror, The Glass
House shatters into a thousand pieces.  Suddenly, the film casts off its
smart, suspenseful garb and trades that in for a final few moments of
homage to cheap slasher flicks and Hollywood murder clichés.
Even with its unworthy ending, The Glass House is a wholly entertaining
and thoughtful flick.  If nothing else, it scores points by avoiding the
ridiculous teen angst so often seen in other films with young casts. 
Instead, Glass House chooses to use the realities of a parental death
and its effect on children as a springboard to disturbing and dangerous
possibilities.
Without a more intelligent ending befitting its finely crafted build-up,
The Glass House dodges the realm of Hitchcockian excitement.  But even
without a proper resolution to bring things home, director Daniel
Sackheim doesn't get caught with his pants down in his feature film
debut.
Director: Daniel Sackheim
Producer: Neal H. Moritz, Michael I. Rachmil
Writer: Wesley Strick
Starring: Diane Lane, Leelee Sobieski, Stellan Skarsgĺrd, Rita Wilson,
Bruce Dern, Michael O'Keefe, Trevor Morgan
http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/theglasshouse/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Legally Blonde (2001)
You'd have to be legally intoxicated not to realize that Legally Blonde
is little more than Clueless goes to college.  Yet, unlike most other
teen-to-twenties translations, Legally Blonde manages to maintain a
certain sense of charm, while casting off any sense of dignity Reese
Witherspoon attempts to maintain.
Blonde, as my UA ticket stub so proudly dubbed it, stars Reese
Witherspoon as Elle Woods, a blonde sorority babe with fashion as a
major and cuteness as a minor.  But when her boyfriend jumps ship to
find a more appropriately intelligent brunette, she sends in a Harvard
application and follows him to law school.
In spite of its 1001 Blonde Jokes-inspired name, Legally Blonde is out
to prove wrong every dumb blonde crack in the book, sort of.  Apparently
you can be incredibly intelligent and still be a shallow,
fashion-obsessed airhead.  But most of all, you have to be pink.  And I
mean really pink.  This film is pinker than the Pink Panther.  More pink
than a Mary Kay Cadillac.  Pinker than even my wife's freaky fuzzy
bathroom... but that's another story.  Girly color choices aside;
Witherspoon portrays the cutest lawyer this critic has ever seen.
But like most comedies you're likely to spot in the local megaplex,
Legally Blonde frequently and tragically forgets to be funny.  That's
not to say there aren't enough jokes; far from it.  Rather, most of the
jokes tend to turn into "Awww, isn't she cute???" opportunities rather
than out-loud, belly-laugh guffaws.
In all fairness, maybe Blonde wasn't really even trying to be funny. 
Perhaps some wise sage got it into his head that the blonde bimbos of
the world have something important to teach us and figured it was high
time they tell it, through their own unique brand of fuzzy pink
moralism.  Or maybe Blonde's writers just lack a legitimate sense of
humor.  I'll take the latter.
Legally Blonde is a lovely attempt to re-ignite the Valley Girl fervor
among the now-twentysomething teens who went all gooey over Alicia
Silverstone's high-class, high school airhead in Clueless.  And while
any who venture in to Elle's world are likely to emerge with a smile,
one can't help but wonder if the revival of the Valley Girl trend didn't
begin and end with Cher.
Director: Robert Luketic
Producer: Rick Kidney, Marc E. Platt
Writer: Karen Lutz, Kirsten Smith
Starring: Reese Witherspoon, Matthew Davis, Selma Blair, Ali Larter,
Holland Taylor, Luke Wilson
http://www.mgm.com/legallyblonde/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Siunin Wong Fei-hung tsi titmalau (1993)
The American action film has been slowly drowning to death in a sea of
Asian wire-fu copycats.  It's not a pretty death, and it's leaving the
likes of Schwartznager, Stallone, and Van Damme wearing cement galoshes
at the bottom of a kung fu sea.
Sometimes, the mix results in a mind-blowing spectacle unlike any
other.  Quality action with amazing and exciting stunt work, as in
1999's The Matrix, can be a real gem.  But too often Hollywood gets it
wrong, even when they pay off Chinese directors.  Flying ninjas and
floating karate masters have been replaced by soaring Bronx detectives
and slow motion kicking scientists.  Mostly it's laughable.  In
Hollywood's rush to emulate the success of The Matrix, trademark Asian
stunt choreography has become more of a joke than an art form.  But Iron
Monkey, the latest Asian import, shows us how to get it right.
Iron Monkey (actually a reissue of a 1993 film) is the story of a 19th
Chinese vigilante (Rongguang Yu), fighting with his own unique style of
Shaolin kung fu for the rights of the oppressed and the bellies of the
hungry.  But it is also a piece of the narrative of legendary Chinese
film hero Wong Fei-Hong, most recently seen in one of the most
overlooked, and possibly best films of 2000, Drunken Master 2 (released
in the U.S. as The Legend of Drunken Master).  Unlike Drunken Master 2,
which stars Jackie Chan as an adult Fei-Hong, Iron Monkey finds a much
younger Fei-Hong (Sze-Man Tsang) and his father Wong Kei-Ying (Yen Chi
Dan) thrust into the middle of Iron Monkey's fight against oppression.
Iron Monkey succeeds as no kung fu film since Drunken Master 2.  At
times, fighting styles, especially that of Monkey himself, do devolve
into the ridiculous twinkle-toed floating of films like Crouching Tiger,
Hidden Dragon, director Yuen Wo Ping eventually remembers to bring his
action scenes back to earth.
Iron Monkey is at its heart a hardcore, kung fu action film rather than
any kind of drama a la Crouching Tiger.  However, there are brief
moments of profoundness shared between characters, such as those that
pass between our outlaw hero and his good-hearted but misguided enemy,
Chief Fox.  In those moments, and in others, Iron Monkey manages to
transcend its mindless kung fu nature to touch the hearts and minds of
its audience.  While in no way the equal of a masterpiece like Drunken
Master 2, Iron Monkey dances quite nicely to the invading kung fu tune.
Aka Siunin Wong Fei-hung tsi titmalau.
Director: Yuen Wo Ping
Producer: Hark Tsui
Writer:  Hark Tsui, Cheung Tan, Pik-Yin Tang, Tai-Muk Lau
Starring: Rongguang Yu, Donnie Yen, Sze-Man Tsang, Jean Wang, Sai-Kun
Yam, James Wong, Yee Kwan Yan, Fai Li, Shun-Yee Yuen
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Goonies, The (1985)
The Goonies has convinced me that sterility might not be such a bad
thing.
The Goonies stars Sean Astin and Corey Feldman in their formative years,
as leaders of a ratty group of kids who live in the boondocks.  When
wealthy developers threaten to move in, they discover an old treasure
map, and set off in search of "the rich stuff" to save their admittedly
pathetic way of life.
The Goonies is more than just some goofy Fox Kids treasure hunt story. 
Over time, it has become a true cult classic, heralded by film geeks and
movie nerds the world over.  Yes, at its heart it is just a simple
kiddie tale, no different than the hundreds of other kiddie tales which
go straight to video every year.  But, The Goonies has a certain
scruffy, goofball roughness that makes it endearing and lovable,
allowing it a special place in the hearts of its followers that has
endured the test of time.
That's not to say that every viewer will quickly find himself caught up
in the film.  The Goonies suffers from an overabundance of shouting and
at times devolves into nothing more than a furball of grungy kids
running around screaming and talking over one another.  Indeed, at times
I was left wondering why director Richard Donner didn't hire a nanny or
a drill instructor to get the kids to shut up and talk in coherent
sentences.  But real kids are not quiet, and real kids do not deliver
Oscar-worthy lines with great drama and flair.  Real kids do run around
shouting and jumping and generally making a nuisance of themselves.  So,
perhaps in spite of the fact that the film frequently becomes extremely
annoying, the rampant kiddie-rampaging isn't so bad after all.
In the end, The Goonies is a flick to watch with your children.  Much
like this year's Spy Kids, this is a film that the whole family can
love.  Replete with lavish and quirky set design, goofily harmless
antics, and smart scoring, Donner manages to delight and surprise at
every turn in a coming of age tale the likes of which is rarely seen.
Grab the kids, order a pizza, and let The Goonies convince you that
perhaps your children really aren't so bad after all.
Director: Richard Donner
Producer: Harvey Bernhard, Richard Donner
Writer: Chris Columbus
Starring: Sean Astin, Josh Brolin, Jeff Cohen, Corey Feldman, Kerri
Green, Martha Plimpton, Jonathon Ke Quan, John Matuszak
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (1971)
When you're a kid, candy is a dream: a fluffy white cloud of chocolate
joy.  For adults, candy is poison, a fat filled brick of love handles,
pimples, and excessive flatulants.  But, Willy Wonka, despite being a
film about sugar-tooth delights, brings joy to adult and child alike.
Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory stars Gene Wilder as Wonka
himself, in an 70's adaptation of the popular children's book, Charlie
and the Chocolate Factory.  Willy Wonka tells the story of a
poverty-stricken boy on a fantastic voyage through the magical candy
factories of the Willy Wonka Candy Company.  A strange and fantastic
place, filled with dancing midget Oompa Loompas and chocolates with
powers far beyond those of common Hershey bars.
Here, as he does in Young Frankenstein, Wilder makes his mark as an
amazing character actor, specializing in the disturbing and wildly
wonderful secrets of the world.  With Wilder's Wonka as a guide, the
Chocolate Factory comes to life as an amazing fantasyland, a place where
anything, any dream... or any nightmare can come true.  But there are
lessons to be learned in a place where your fondest wish can be your
greatest downfall.
The Gobstoppers may be sugar coated, but the movie is not.  Willy Wonka
deals with child issues such as greediness, selfishness, and vanity in
harshly adult ways.  Death could be the punishment for an adult sweet
tooth, so kiddies beware!  But Wonka never strays too far down the path
of realism, maintaining childlike innocence throughout Wonka's wacky
world.
Unlike other films, which seem to indulge the bad parenting and me-first
behavior of modern society, Wonka dives in like a sugared-up Barney Fife
and nips it in the bud.  The unexpected is key, and each moment of the
film brings something you are unlikely to ever see anywhere else.
Yes, at times the cheesiness is thick.  And even though it may seem a
little hokey to watch Charlie fly through the air in a glass elevator,
somehow, Wonka manages to make even these most absurd scenes
exhilarating.
Much like Hook or The Goonies, Willy Wonka is bound to drag the child
inside of all of us out, lured by the scent of gum drops and Everlasting
Gobstoppers.
Director: Mel Stuart
Producer: Stan Margulies, David L. Wolper
Writer: Roald Dahl
Starring: Gene Wilder, Jack Albertson, Peter Ostrum, Roy Kinnear, Julie
Dawn Cole, Leonard Stone, Denise Nickerson
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
