Authors
Gerard Foley
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Fatale (1992)
        Partly moved by Louis Malle's recent death and partly because it
was on the library shelf, I looked again at "Damage", the 1992 film which
he produced and directed.  The screenplay is by David Hare from a novel by
Josephine Hart (I have not read the novel.  I believe David Hare writes
fiction about British politics). 
I think the film is extraordinary on several levels.  It is the
most convincing tale of eroticism that I have ever seen.  It also
maintains a moderately high level of suspense, not enough to distract from
my enjoyment of other aspects of it.  The performances Malle has obtained
from his three stars are outstanding.  Jeremy Irons and Juliette Binoche
have, properly enough, top billing.  In addition to her surprising
delivery of her lines, without the least sign of a French acccent, as
Malle says in his epilog, she tells volumes without speaking at all.  So,
for that matter, does Irons.  I do not remember him giving a performance
of such range in any other film or TV vehicle.  He convinces me that he is
an upper level politician and technocrat, an even smoother performance
than we have grown accustomed to from other British actors playing
politicians and civil servants.  Part of this, of course, must be credited
to Hare, the screenwriter, and Hart, the novelist, but some credit should
go to Irons and Malle too. 
The story is of a middle aged politician whose instant infatuation
with his sons girl friend is as instantly reciprocated.  Miranda
Richardson plays the wife-mother, a much smaller and less flashy role than
that of the other two actors but equally convincing.  Malle makes you
perfectly aware, by the end of the film, that a woman like the one Binoche
plays is an all around menace, but you still mourn Irons characters loss
of her as much as you do his loss of his wife and son. 
As I write this, I am reminded of Polanskis "Bitter Moon". 
Superficially one might want to compare the male villain of "Bitter Moon"
with the female protagonist of "Damage", but to me Polanski reveals a
really deep hatred and contempt for all of his characters, while I think
Malle really loves all of his. 
The video includes a very warm interview-epilogue with Malle.  Weve
lost one of the great film makers. 

Title
Review for Grosse Pointe Blank (1997)
John Cusack, Minnie Driver, Alan Arkin and Dan Aykroyd
Directed by George Armitage 
Story by Tom Jankiewicz 
Screenplay by Tom Jankiewicz, D.V.DiVincentis, Steve Pink and John Cusack 
    My memory must be getting worse, because I thought I recalled
someone's review of "Grosse Pointe Blank" made the movie sound
interesting.  It's not.  Seeing that the screeplay is credited to four
people, it is easy to understand why a Hollywood committee would write a
Hollywood movie. 
   A large number of cliches have been whipped out to fill the hour and a
half or so going on to all day that this movie takes.  The trailers tip
you off to the premise:  a professional killer goes to his high school
reunion.  (It seems a good year for high school reunions - see Lisa Kudrow
of "Friends" is in another one opening soon). 
   I find myself depressed by the assumption that the U.S.Government is in
the assassination business, and further depressed by the concept that
automatic weapons hardly ever kill anyone, no matter how close the range
or how many times they are fired.  I was not struck by the attraction
bwtween John Cusack and Minnie Driver, nor much impressed by the idea that
Minnie spent 10 years mourning John's inexplicable and unexplained
disappearance.  It would have been ok with me if he had stayed away. 
The dialog, if that is the correct term for the lines spoken by the
actors, is straight from the Hollywood book.
Gerry - gfoley@freenet.columbus.oh.us
