Authors
Anna G. McDougald
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Last Action Hero (1993)
     When a theatre owner assures a film fan that there are far worse
things than movies in this world, and that "Politicians are twice as
bad as any of the rest"--you wonder just who he is really speaking
for.
     John McTiernan's LAST ACTION HERO seems, at times, a furious
manifesto crafted specifically to answer official posturings on "movie
violence." The roster of stars McTiernan has recruited for cameo
appearances in this film would suggest his concerns are fairly
widespread.
     Unfortunately, it debuted at a time when the words ACTION and
HERO, together, were as fondly received as a leper's warning-bell.
(Just how the Tutsis, Yugoslavs and Khmer Rouge learned to commit the
most awful outrages without help from Steven Segal remains a mystery!)
     Danny Madigan (Austin O'Brien) is a young man any parent would
happily claim.  Neat, attentive, and properly respectful toward
policemen and old folks, he finds cheerful solace in the campy "Jack
Slater" movies, one of which his friend Nick (Robert Prosky) graciously
premieres after presenting Danny him with a "magic ticket."
     Danny is a Director's dream as well; corny dialogue and hokey
effects don't bother him at all, if they're carried off with wit and
style.  As the the on-screen action starts to heats up, the ticket
"activates" itself--and Danny is catapulted directly to his hero's
side.
     Unmoved by steadily escalating explosions, artillery barrages, and
music blasts, Danny desperately tries to convince Jack Slater (Arnold
Schwarzenegger, in a lovely bit of self-mockery) that this *is* after
all, "just a movie."  (It's amusing to note just who shows "real"
intelligence here, and who has trouble with the concept!)
     Before Danny can succeed in making Jack aware of the facts, the
ticket activates itself again, this time in reverse, and expels the
two into the "real" world as it falls into the hands of master-criminal
Benedict (Charles Dance).
     We are battered by what approaches cinematic overkill as Jack
finds himself facing his old Nemesis (made corporeal as well with
Benedict's help), and Danny frantically searches Nick's theatre for the
other half of the ticket.  Only by reclaiming it can Danny prevent the
unleashing of even nastier monsters and assure Jack passage back to a
world where the worst of wound is simply an inconvenience.
     Was there a conspiracy in place to discredit this film, and its
Director, from the very start?  Granted, LAST ACTION HERO has plenty of
flaws--length, and excessive self-reference being merely two.  But what
it says about movies of this genre must strike certain people as being
totally unacceptable.
     The notion that children can be quite capable of sorting fact from
fantasy, that our fictional heros may be the only ones who never let us
down, and that every movie ticket is "magic" in that it grants us
access to worlds we could never otherwise visit, where we may view Evil
in any number of guises while retaining the power to leave it exactly
where it is--these, to some, are truly "dangerous" ideas.
     Perhaps McTiernan tried a little too hard to make his point.
Perhaps he let his penchant for irony at times get the upper hand.  But
if this is failure, it counts as a noble one.  For, how else can you
even begin to argue with people who won't believe it's "just a movie"?

Title
Review for Hunt for Red October, The (1990)
     When John McTiernan's film of THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER opened in
the spring of 1990 early reactions were mixed.  Those who had read Tom
Clancy's novel were upset at the way the story had been edited down.
Those who had NOT read the book wondered how the tale could retain any
relevance given the ongoing collapse of Soviet military power.  And
English speaking audiences everywhere were puzzled by the selection of
Sean Connery as the movie's lead.
     Nonetheless, the film became--and remains--a success, attracting a
world wide fan following which it continues to enjoy.  Many who admit
to repeated viewings cite the superb acting, acting, direction, and
sound as the picture's chief attractions, along with a spellbinding
quality not quite so easy to explain.
     What exactly casts that spell becomes more and more obvious as the
Cold War fades into history.  Today's viewer discovers more than just
another "geopolitical thriller."  For Tom Clancy's story, as adapted by
the able John McTiernan, emerges as a clever retelling of the most
famous submarine epic of them all.
     When Alec Baldwin is seen as the ingenuous Professor Aronnax,
Scott Glenn as the cynical Ned Land and Courtney Vance as a compelling
and very hip Consuelo the choice of Connery as the moody Master of the
Deep is revealed as a stroke of genius.  Even the glittering hardware
and vast scale of the Red October--in contrast to the dark and
claustrophobic sets normally presented in submarine movies--make sense.
For the menacing, mysteriously-driven Red October is, from this
perspective, the re-incarnation of Jules Verne's Nautilus, and her
Commander, a latter-day Nemo.
     (Physically, Connery is a virtual double for Nemo as Verne
describes him.  In one of the more charming passages, Nemo--having
amused himself by testing poor Aronnax's facility with foreign
languages--informs the Professor that though his books have made for
good reading they could, in Nemo's opinion, stand improvement!)
     How McTiernan moves his story to a thunderous denouement while
remaining faithful to both Clancy *and* Verne delights and astonishes
audiences to this day.  But not content to simply update the Verne
tale, McTiernan--aided by Connery's unforgettable portrayal and by
Basil Poledouris' rich and highly anthemic orchestral score--adds to
the film a spiritual dimension that cannot fail to resonate with even
those who have never heard of Tom Clancy, or of a Nautilus far older
than America's atom-powered version.
     The ambiguous tone of the film is established at the very outset,
as the mixed choir's haunting and evocative "Dosvedanye, Rodina"
("Farewell, My Homeland") contrasts sharply with the all-male chorus,
extravagant in its praise for the destructive capabilities of their new
weapon.  The film itself is filled with allusions to martyrdom and
resurrection.  The grouping of officers in the wardroom shortly after
the Red October sails echoes da Vinci's "Last Supper"; Ramius' bunk
fits him uncannily like a coffin while a "lift" from Melville allows
Sam Neill to play Starbuck to Connery's Ahab; a small cross appears
briefly amid the geysering spray of a submarine explosion; and the
finale aboard the Red October calls to mind an old sailors' metaphor
for passage to a better life--making Ryan's closing line both
poignant and prophetic.
     For all these reasons, increasingly apparent as the Cold War
continues to fade from memory, John McTiernan's HUNT FOR RED
OCTOBER--far from becoming another piece of nostalgic
propaganda--stands revealed at last as a brilliant reworking of a
masterpiece, capable of standing as a classic on its own.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN (DreamWorks - 1998)
Starring Tom Hanks, Edward Burns, Tom Sizemore, Jeremy Davies,
  Vin Diesel, Adam Goldberg, Barry Pepper, Giovanni Ribisi,
  Matt Damon
Screenplay by Robert Rodat
The "meatgrinder" of Omaha Beach has rarely been as vividly portrayed
as it is in Steven Spielberg's SAVING PRIVATE RYAN. Horrific war
imagery is not a new cinematic device: it's at least as old as the
floating severed arm (and oblivious owner) in Cornel Wilde's 1967
classic, BEACH RED. What IS new is Spielberg's portrayal of
shell-shocked GI's weeping hysterically, or gleefully blasting
surrendering Germans: as I watched the scenes of carnage unfold, it
seemed to me that we were at last going to gain some new insights into
the physical and moral convulsion known as war.
Spielberg is merciless in his portrayal of what happens to the bodies
(and minds) of men under continuous, withering fire. But once "Captain
Miller" (and the story) move off Omaha Beach, things change...almost
as if Spielberg has had a "change of heart", not toward war, but
toward those who participate in it and prolong it.
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN has been touted as "anti-war" simply because it
DOES confront us with those ghastly images. But a TRUE "anti-war" film
should feature characters that are morally doubles for those images;
but Captain Miller (Tom Hanks) and his little Squad would not be out
of place in a John Wayne epic.
Perhaps Spielberg is exploring his own ambivalent feelings about
war. As a citizen of the "enlightened nineties" he cannot help but be
disgusted with the waste and the suffering it epitomizes. But he is
also aware that without men like Captain Miller rushing deliberately
into harm's way at Omaha Beach, "Schindler" and the constuitents of
that famous "List" might well have been reduced to ashfall in a Polish
meadow.
Are the American GI's (and their British and Canadian Counterparts) to
be seen as ordinary, decent men--or just simple-minded, suicidal
pawns? Spielberg, for all his revulsion towards war, simply cannot
bring himself to condemn those who don military uniforms. It almost
seems as if he is trying to atone for the way his generation presented
returning Viet Nam vets with bags of dog excrement: certainly the
quest for the elusive "Ryan", with its objective of "saving" instead
of "slaying", seems almost too perfect a reversal of the premise of
Francis Ford Coppola's APOCALYPSE NOW.
Again and again, Spielberg brings us to the brink of
revelation....only to draw back at the last second. He cannot, like
Richard Attenborough in A BRIDGE TO FAR, bring himself to show us the
"Ryan Rescue Mission" as a pointless, bloody debacle. Nor can he, like
Michael Caton-Jones' 1990 version of MEMPHIS BELLE, make Miller and
his brave band mere fodder for the cold-blooded machinations of a
Public Relations Department. Had he done so, we might have had some
subjects for serious debate here, and not simply "discussion points",
and might have found some answers.....
How does a man who dispatched 94 men to their deaths, avoid becoming
himself a dehumanized killing machine? How does the Company Sniper (a
nod to Howard Hawks' SERGEANT YORK?) reconcile Scripture passages with
his murderous specialty? SAVING PRIVATE RYAN gives us no
"answers"...only more questions.
In William Wellman's 1949 classic, BATTLEGROUND, a Chaplain begins his
Christmas Sermon to the battered Bastogne defenders with the words,
"Was this Trip necessary?" One might almost ask, of SAVING PRIVATE
RYAN, "Was this Movie necessary?" The answer in both cases is an
unequivocal "YES!" Yes,--because for all its reluctance to "take
chances", SAVING PRIVATE RYAN comes about 20 years after
Attenborough's epic--and may enocourage a generation to think about
the sacrifices that made its very existence possible, and hopefully to
look at the work of other, earlier directors who risked their souls
(and careers) to explore this brutal and bloody phenomenon that seems
so unthinkable--and yet at times, so very tragically "necessary".

Title
Review for Hamburger Hill (1987)
        Almost a full decade before Steven Spielberg's SAVING PRIVATE 
RYAN asked whether a film could be both "anti war" and "pro-soldier", 
John Irvin's HAMBURGER HILL proved it could.  Lost in the inundation of 
critical acclaim that greeted Oliver Stone's PLATOON, this excellent 
film was dismissed as "too militaristic". It's hard to understand 
exactly why---unless Irvin, in assembling his motley collection of young 
men who for predictable (and often naive) reasons "chose to show up" for 
the Vietnam debacle, ---has refused to present us with the stone killer, 
drug-stoked psycho and ruthless opportunist who have become to Vietnam 
war epics what "the Polack, the Hillbilly and the Kid from Brooklyn" 
became to WWII movies.
HAMBURGER HILL, based on a true story, is not an easy film to watch. 
There is a scene that will have graying anti-war activists squirming in 
their seats, or moved to genuine tears. And the climactic final assault 
on the "Hill" in question is visually confusing. Gristly realities are 
presented in brief flashes, as if the brain dared not acknowledged what 
it had encountered. And in the mud and smoke officer and enlistee, 
veteran and "newbie", black soldier and white, become almost 
indistinguishable from each other, as they do in the chaos of actual 
combat. The acting throughout is solid with an absolutely stellar 
performance rendered by Courtney B. Vance as Doc--in a role that will 
have many flatly disbelieving that this is same actor they cheered as 
"Seaman Jones" in McTiernan's RED OCTOBER. 
If you've seen PRIVATE RYAN, you owe it to yourself to see HAMBURGER 
HILL--if only to determine that the all the valour and horror of 
Spielberg's vision was as present in the Ashau Valley as it was at Omaha 
Beach.
