Authors
Ken Varnum
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Shooting Fish (1997)
"Shooting Fish" is a delightful romantic comedy with a strong cast.  Dylan
(Futterman) and Jez (Townsend) are orphans, the first American and the
second British.  They grew up in similar circumstances (in orphanages) and
with similar desires (their own house, a place to create the home neither
had as a child). Dylan, who is dyslexic and relies on Jez to help him jot
down addresses and other notes, is "Mr. Personality" and can charm the most
hardened executive. Jez, a technological genius, claims to have received a
degree in the "Psychology of Electronics," can repair anything electronic,
but is as socially inept as the stereotypical Silicon Valley wonk.
While they are both intelligent, even brilliant, neither has found his
niche in society.  The two, who are as close as brothers, get along
famously.  Unable to succeed in the real world, they have made a career of
confidence games, cleverly bilking unsuspecting and gullible (but always
wealthy) individuals and companies.  They see themselves as modern-day
Robin Hoods, robbing the rich (who don't really need the relatively small
amounts they pilfer) for the sake of the poor -- in this case, orphans.
Things start to go awry shortly after their success leads them to hire a
temporary secretary/assistant Georgie (Beckinsale).  Georgie is a young
medical student, betrothed to a wealthy businessman.  While Georgie is
initially taken in by Dylan and Jez's stories, she begins to doubt their
stories.  At the same time, she is attracted to both of them -- and both of
them, to her.
Between Dylan and Jez's schemes, which grow ever more complex, and
Georgia's own financial problems, the plot grows more complicated.  The
script, written by Stefan Schwartz and Richard Holmes, is witty and treads
a fine line between being too clever for its own good and too obvious.  As
the characters find their way into and out of trouble, their conflicting
means begin to coincide in a single end.
The movie is marked by several visual cliches that let the audience know
the production crew is enjoying its work.  Beckinsale steals the show as
the young fiancee torn between her responsibilities, her choices, and her
heart.  The interplay of the three main characters is utterly entertaining.

Title
Review for She's So Lovely (1997)
Starring: Sean Penn, Robin Wright Penn, Harry Dean Stanton, John Travolta,
Debi Mazar
This movie about two dysfunctional families never really gets off the ground,
despite some good performances from a basically competent cast.  Eddie (Sean
Penn)  and Maureen (Robin Wright Penn) are a not-so-happily married couple
down on their luck.  Living in rented rooms in the seedier part of an unnamed
city, they spend what little income they have at the local bar, owned by
Shorty (Stanton), Eddie's best friend, and his wife Georgie (Mazar).  Maureen
and Eddie share an odd relationship marked by Eddie's frequent
disappearances.  On his return, he promises her the world and professes his
undying love.  Their manic reunions all too soon lead to new lows, as Eddie
disappears again.  Like a junky craving the next high, Maureen suffers
through the lows to reach the next high. Their relationship is further
complicated by Maureen's pregnancy.  She wants the baby and the father, but
deep down seems to sense the inevitability of losing the latter.
During one of Eddie's absences, Maureen is attacked by Kiefer, her neighbor,
who gets her drunk (with her cooperation) and then insists on intimacy.  She
leaves badly bruised and in fear of what Eddie might do -- not to her, but to
Kiefer. She lies about what happens to ensure that no harm will come to Eddie
as the result of his inevitable rage.  He lashes out as she expects, and ends
up in an institution for what he believes to be 3 months -- but in reality is
10 years.
During this decade, Maureen divorces Eddie and remarries a more solid and
reliable individual, Joey (Travolta, in a small role).        Her life falls apart
again when Eddie is released from the institution and comes to find her. Joey
insists on bringing Eddie into his home and making his wife choose between
her husband (and father of two children) and stability (Joey makes a good
living, drives a Cadillac, and they live in a large house in the suburbs) and
the love of her previous life.        She chooses her past, and sacrifices not only
her new life but her old (by giving up her and Eddie's daughter to Joey). 
But the Eddie that she knew is gone, replaced by a mere shell of the man he
was.  Maureen is herself a mere shell, more an automaton than a woman -- as
if she had gone through whatever therapy and treatment Eddie was given along
with him.  Perhaps these two really do need each other and can find happiness
(or maybe the lack of sadness) together, but the movie's denouement was not
convincing.
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading
