Authors
Dean Thomas Sebastian Carrano
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
CONTACT
Starring Jodie Foster, Matthew McConaughey, James Woods, Tom Skerritt,
Angela Bassett
Viewed July 5, 1997 at advance screening in Forest Hills, NY
Capsule Review: Slow-moving tale lacks promised payoff.  But some good
moments along the way.  5 out of 10.
At my viewing of this film, I sat next to THE KIDS YOU DON'T WANT TO SIT
NEXT TO. They seemed to be expecting "Contact" to be along the lines of
"Independence Day".  "I better see some aliens!" they demanded of the
screen many times, and emphatically urged the story onward at every turn. 
I didn't share their impatience, but you gotta admit, this movie was LONG. 
It was about two and a half hours long, and seemed longer (unlike,
say, "The Godfather", which is a three hour movie that seems like two
hours max.)
For me, the pacing worked fine at first.  The movie begins with an epic
sequence.  The camera begins with a view of earth, and then pulls farther
and farther back, taking us past each planet in the solar system.  As we
leave earth behind, its sounds - radio and TV broadcasts which meander
randomly through space - fade out until we hear dead silence. "We get the
point already!" cried the kids, but the camera kept going and silence
otherwise reigned.  The spectacle, especially the dramatic use of total
silence, was reminiscent of 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY, and the scene lived up
to that high standard. 
All these celestial wonders, we are meant to understand, have long been
contemplated by our heroine, Dr. Eleanor Arroway (Jodie Foster).  Since
the thrill of this movie is anticipation, I have to be pretty careful
here.  Suffice it to say that "Ellie" has devoted her life to listening
for signs of extraterrestrial intelligence via the use of massively
high-powered radio equipment that I couldn't even begin to explain.  This
is far from fictional, and indeed, a mark of the film throughout is that
it takes great pains to set itself in the real world and to avoid asking
the audience to suspend disbelief.  The Search for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence (SETI) government project is going on as we speak.  It's
based in New Mexico, and uses the famous Very Large Array to listen for
sounds of alien life. After some setbacks, Ellie is able to use the SETI
equipment for her research.  Needless to say, everyone thinks she's a
flake and the government, represented by the grandstanding science advisor
David Drumlin (Tom Skerritt), wants to cut her funding and use the money
for more "practical" applications.  Ellie's research is about to be
terminated when...she hears something.  A message that could only be
produced by an intelligent life form.  From then on, we watch the biggest
news story in history develop through the eyes of Ellie, its central
figure. 
This movie reminded me very strongly of two other films.  One was 2001,
mentioned above.  The other is THE ABYSS.  2001, THE ABYSS, and CONTACT
are all epics dealing with the first meeting of humanity and an alien
race.  2001 is the longest film of the three.  However, I would submit
that it has the most "payoff."  Even though we can argue for hours about
what "really happens" in that famous final scene, we accept it as a
fitting conclusion.  It fits in with the mythos that the story has
created. It is sufficiently dramatic.  We may not feel totally satisfied,
but we take this as a sign that some mystery is still retained, rather
than as a flaw in the storywriting. 
By contrast, THE ABYSS does not deliver that tremendous kick.  And CONTACT
is much, much worse in this regard.  If I were the aliens, I wouldn't even
bother to call us collect with the information they impart, much less go
through all the trouble they did.  It is a supreme disappointment.  At the
one moment where the movie needs inspired dialogue (or monologue), the
script fails.
One aspect of what Ellie learns from the aliens is brought out by her
relationship with Palmer Joss (Matthew McConaughey).  Ellie is an atheist; 
she sees no scientific evidence of God and thus cannot believe.  Palmer is
an ex-priest and best-selling spiritual author who believes that science
and technology are separating us from ourselves.  The relationship
reminded me of AGNES OF GOD, where Jane Fonda and Anne Bancroft might as
well have had "REASON" and "FAITH" stamped on their foreheads.  If you're
going to go this route, at least make it a little more subtle.  Palmer
doesn't have to be the spiritual leader of the country; he could just be a
guy that Ellie likes who has strong beliefs. 
As it was, these scenes were very unsubtle.  Moreover, they were wrongly
motivated. The movie assumes that science and religion are
irreconciliable.  This is just not true.  Many scientists believe that the
order they study - the beauty of the rules - could only have been created
by a supreme being.  This is a perfectly self-consistent viewpoint.  The
dichotomy - the assumption that one must choose between either science and
reason, or religion and faith - simply does not exist. However, since the
movie does set up this dichotomy, it is to its credit that Ellie does not
become a religious convert. 
One cannot help but be impressed by the plausibility of the "science" 
scenes.  I suppose this is what happens when you have Carl Sagan working
on your movie; the late, great astronomer not only wrote the novel on
which the movie is based, but co-wrote the screenplay and served as
co-producer.  The news coverage of the event, and the reactions of the
masses, are also very realistically portrayed.  As I said, the movie sets
out to make us believe that this could happen in our world tomorrow.
However, that impression is undermined by the final scenes.  At a
Congressional hearing, Ellie is grilled by another nasty government guy,
Michael Kitz (James Woods).  Ellie is supposed to be the smartest person
in the room, and there are any number of ways in which she could have
answered the questioning so as to make Kitz look absolutely ridiculous. 
Instead, she is made into another victim of the supposed reason/faith
dichotomy.  The last half hour of this movie needs serious editing.  So
does the first half hour, which does not contribute enough to the story to
pull its weight. 
To sum up: The special effects are spectacular.  (Although everyone in the
theater laughed at the computer-enhanced appearances of Bill Clinton as
himself. I know FORREST GUMP director Robert Zemeckis likes to do this,
but it was really gimmicky and detracted from the mood here.)  The story,
although it moves slowly, gets you excited when it does move.  You'll
believe in the story, and you'll be on the edge of your seat as the film
moves towards its climax.  And then you'll say, "Yeah...and?" 
Movie review by Dean Carrano - dcarrano@wesleyan.edu
(This is my first review.  Please send comments!)

Title
Review for Tomorrow Never Dies (1997)
TOMORROW NEVER DIES
Starring Pierce Brosnan, Jonathan Pryce, Michelle Yeoh, Teri Hatcher
Seen 12/21/97 at the Sony Theatres Village VII, New York, NY
TOMORROW NEVER DIES is a typical James Bond movie.  Bond beds some women,
uses some hi-tech gadgets, and saves the world.  If you're a sentient
being who's been on this earth for a decent amount of time, you probably
have formed an opinion of Bond movies.  If you like 'em, go see this one. 
If you don't, no need for you to bother. 
Bond saves the world twice in the film, actually.  The first time is
before the opening credits, in a good action scene.  Following the opening
credits, which feature the terrible theme song by Sheryl Crow (whose
attempt to recast herself as hip and jaded is not coming off too well), we
get the "real" movie, dedicated to the second adventure.  A British ship
encounters two Chinese planes near the Chinese coast.  The result is that
one of the planes is shot down, and the ship is sunk.  But is the
explanation as simple as it seems?  Neither the British nor Chinese
government thinks so, and with the two countries on the brink of war over
the incident, the answer must be known.  The British send Bond (Pierce
Brosnan) to investigate a possible culprit, while the Chinese send Wai Lin
(Michelle Yeoh) to do the same.  That suspect is Elliott Carver (Jonathan
Pryce), the owner of a worldwide media empire.  Thanks to some truly
terrible secret agent work, Bond blows his cover in about six seconds, and
the battle is joined.  Bond has to contend with Carver and his goons.  He
also has to decide whether Paris (Teri Hatcher), a former flame who is now
Carver's wife, is on his side or Carver's. 
As in the BATMAN movies, the main character, Bond, is a well-known
constant, so the movies are made or broken on the strength of the villains
and the sidekicks.  This works a little better in the Bond realm than it
has in the BATMAN series for a few reasons: we've had 16 films to get to
know Bond; Bond isn't as complex a character as Batman; and unlike the
BATMAN series, Bond movies have wisely limited themselves to one villain
(plus a "lead henchman") and one sidekick, max.  Brosnan is pretty
believable as Bond.  He's certainly bringing more energy to the part than
Timothy Dalton did. 
As the villain, Pryce is average.  He only really shines in a couple of
moments.  One is early in the film, when he checks in with the presidents
of the various branches of his empire.  The other is much later, when he
taunts Yeoh by imitating her martial arts style.  In these two scenes,
Pryce shows an ability to have fun with the character.  Bond villains
should not be played too seriously.  If they are, we begin to think about
the plausibility of their scheme, and plausibility in general is never a
strong point of Bond movies.  Only at the very end of the film do we get
any kind of semi-logical explanation of why it makes financial sense for
Carver to spend the billions of dollars undoubtedly required for his plan. 
I will say that a media mogul is an interesting choice of villain.  Carver
expresses the fear that many of us have about the power that some players
in the telecommunications industry (Disney, Turner Broadcasting, etc.) 
have gained.  The fear is that such giants will abuse their position as
Carver does and use it to manipulate the news, as in AD CITY or WAG THE
DOG, rather than to report it.  Of course, this movie doesn't dwell on
those issues, nor should it.  But it's interesting to see who we fear as
villains now that the Cold War is over. 
The "lead henchman" here is the Aryan "Stamper", played by the wonderfully
named Gotz Otto.  How often does an actor in a James Bond film have an
even more appropriate name than his character?  Anyway, the filmmakers
should have just given in and cast Rutger Hauer in this role.  It's the
most Rutger Hauer-esque part I've ever seen.  Unlike some of the lead
henchmen in past Bond films, like GOLDENEYE's Xenia Onatopp or
GOLDFINGER's Oddjob, Stamper is not interesting at all.
Hatcher is wasted.  She's in the film mostly to have her top taken off,
and we only get a dorsal view of that.  It's implied that her character,
Paris, may have had more of a relationship with Bond than the expected
one-night stand, and somehow "got too close."  But the issue isn't
explored.  It's probably just as well, since Bond films shouldn't be
character studies.  Nonetheless, it's a silly point to bring up in the
first place if you're not going to make any effort at all to explain what
it means. 
Yeoh, the Hong Kong film legend most familiar to American audiences from
Jackie Chan's SUPERCOP (a.k.a. POLICE STORY 3), makes a very good
sidekick.  She doesn't really have any chemistry with Brosnan until well
into the film, at which point they start to really click.  A scene in
which Wai Lin shows Bond her home is very funny, which is a rare moment in
a film which in general takes itself a little too seriously.
Unfortunately, it's already too late by then for us to fully buy into the
relationship between Bond and Wai Lin.  Still, if you ignore the end,
where she is reduced to a damsel in distress, Yeoh kicks plenty of butt
throughout. 
And, indeed, the action sequences in general are well-done.  A long chase
scene with Brosnan and Yeoh on a motorcycle is particularly good.  My only
beef is that Bond makes out a bit too much like Rambo in this one. 
Outmanned 50 to 1, he shoots himself out of the situation, rather than
finding a more creative solution involving the gadgets he's given or some
other type of ingenuity.  Even hand to hand combat would usually be more
entertaining to watch than gun combat, unless the gunfighting is directed
very well.  A *lot* of bullets are fired in this film; a John Woo-like
number.  In fact, the film pays direct homage to Woo when a character is
shown jumping while firing a gun held in each hand, all filmed in slow
motion.
In another disturbingly RAMBO-esque moment, Bond disposes of Carver in a
particularly gruesome way.  A simple arrest would have sufficed, since
Bond had already thwarted Carver's plot.  I didn't think that the good
guys killed for no reason, even if they had a license to do so.  And in
such a disgusting manner?  Not cool at all.
Sum: TOMORROW NEVER DIES is a James Bond movie.  React accordingly.
