Authors
Mike Joyce
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Welcome to the Dollhouse (1995)
An "offbeat" film about a young girl who has just entered junior high
school and is taunted by her peers. Dawn Wiener (played by Heather
Matarazzo in her first feature film) is the most unpopular and disliked
girl in her year level. Her locker is covered in graffiti of harsh insults,
and she is taunted by many of the students. This film brings back, with
haunting reality, the horrors of high school, and reminds one of just how
cruel kids can be. Is it any coincidence that her surname (Wiener) is
"nerdy"? I think not. The film revolves around Dawn, with her poor dress
sense, and looks at her life at school and at home. Both of which are sad
and unhappy. Dawn's older brother has a band, and Dawn falls in love (or
thinks she does) with the 'cool' lead singer. She is oblivious to the
reality that she has no chance with him (and because of her obsession
rejects offers from a boy in her class who really likes her). Meanwhile her
younger sister, who constantly wears a tu-tu and dances around the house,
is the obvious favourite of Dawn's parents. This means that Dawn is often
ignored and given second preference to by her parents. This adds to her
unhappiness.
Welcome to the Dollhouse is a black comedy, and one often feels guilty for
laughing at Dawn's predicaments. All in all, it is a sad (yet somehow
funny), look at poor Dawn's life. One can't help but think that she could
get somewhere if she would just get a new wardrobe, new glasses, and a new
hairdo. However, if she did that, it would effectively be another
unrealistic, Hollywood-style film with a happy ending. I recommend this
film to anyone who enjoys black comedies, or who wants to be taken back to
the terrors of high school.
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Title
Review for Romeo + Juliet (1996)
When I first heard that Romeo & Juliet had been "updated" I shuddered. I
thought that yet another of Shakespeare's classics had been destroyed.
Fortunately, I was wrong. Baz Luhrman has directed an "in your face", and
visually stunning piece with this film. It revolves around the two rival
families, who in this version each run multi-million dollar enterprises.
These rival companies/families are the Capulet's and the Montague's. The
younger generation of these two families have formed gangs, who despise one
another. As the storylines goes, Romeo Montague (played by Leonardo
DiCaprio) and Juliet Capulet (Claire Danes) meet at a fancy dress party,
and it is love at first site. I never believed love at first site was
possible until I saw this film, the scene in which Romeo's eyes meet
Juliet's through the fish tank is one of the most memorable. Of course,
they cannot publicly reveal their love, for their families are arch
enemies. So they marry in secret, this is where things begin to go wrong.
The story, as with all good Shakespeare, ends in tragedy.
The cinematography is spectacular to say the least, and the soundtrack
provides the perfect atmosphere in which to "lay our scene", as the film
says. There is very little to criticise. The performances are convincing,
and several of the film's younger stars may find that it provides a launch
for their careers. The modernisation of the script is ingenious and clever.
Despite the well known storyline, this latest version still manages to
cause tears among many members of the audience (especially the younger
generation), and this is certainly a great credit to the film.
Film review by Adam Joyce.
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Title
Review for Chain Reaction (1996)
Chain Reaction attempts to combine the action, suspense, thriller and
political intrigue genres. It tries too hard to combine all these aspects
leading to a complex plot with too many twists to be believable. The story
revolves around a Hydrogen Energy Project aimed at producing mass, clean,
free energy by causing a chain reaction in Hydrogen. Eddie Kasalivich
(Keanu Reeves), a machinist and physics student with the Project, discovers
the right frequency in order to cause a stable chain reaction to take
place. Following this success, the head physicist of the Project is
assassinated, and the workshop blown-up. Eddie Kasalivich and Lily Sinclair
(Rachel Weisz) the head physicist's assistant are framed for the
assassination and explosion. This leads to a huge chase, in which the FBI
attempt to track down and capture Eddie and Lily (who predictably become
closer as they flee together). In this respect the film is reminiscent of
The Fugitive, and this is little wonder given that the director (Andrew
Davis) also directed The Fugitive.
Shannon (Morgan Freeman) is the head of the "Foundation", an underground
operation which attempts to replicate the Hydrogen Energy Project. However,
they need Eddie Kasalivich, as he is the only person who knows the correct
frequency. It is here that the plot becomes twisted, and it is hard to
follow. Shannon was involved in the original Hydrogen Energy Project, but
we now find him involved in this underground operation which at first we
are lead to believe is privately funded for power and money. Next we
discover that the C.I.A. is somehow linked to the project, and that free
energy cannot be released upon the world because it will cause a crash of
world economies and lead to recessions, or something. The plot is too hard
to believe, that is, if you can follow it. Performances are reasonably
solid, and the actors do their best with the script. At times the action is
thrilling, however, it has all been done and seen before.
Review by Adam Joyce.
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Title
Review for People vs. Larry Flynt, The (1996)
Larry Flynt is a self proclaimed smut pedlar and the owner/publisher of the
multi-million dollar Hustler Publications company. The People vs. Larry
Flynt is the story of Larry Flynt's fight for the freedom to circulate and
sell his pornographic magazine, Hustler. Based on a true story, the film is
almost a documentary in that it's a very vivid and detailed look at Larry
Flynt's life.
Woody Harrelson gives an excellent performance. He conveys Flynt's
peculiarities and his character with depth and focus. By the end of the
film the audience actually finds themselves, somewhat grudgingly, liking
Larry Flynt. This is some feat given Flynt's apparent lack of any morals or
ethics and his extremely smutty and childish behaviour in court. However,
Flynt has a number of things going for him, he's rich, he's funny, and most
importantly, he says exactly what he means.
Larry Flynt's wife, Althea Leasure is played by Courtney Love. Larry meets
Althea at one of his clubs, and they fall in love (a very sexual and open
love). Both of them indulge in a world of too much sex, and eventually too
much drugs. Flynt had been taking an excessive amount of pain killers after
being paralysed from the waist down (which was especially upsetting for
him) by an assassin. Althea had joined him in taking the drugs. Following
an operation Flynt decides to stop taking drugs, Althea does not have any
such plans, nor the determination to follow them. As the film progresses we
see her become increasingly frail and sick. Courtney Love obviously has a
great understanding for Althea's situation, as she is brilliant in
portraying Althea in every respect. It's extremely sad to watch Althea
literally wither away.
Edward Norton plays Flynt's lawyer, Alan Isaacman. Again, this is a solid
performance. The audience finds it easy to sympathise with Isaacman who
somehow puts up with Flynt's courtroom antics. Flynt is not only childish
in the courtroom, but downright rude to the judges, and lands himself in a
lot of trouble (and even in a mental institution) because of it. Isaacman
is very easy to like, and great at proving (in quite clever ways) his
points to the court.
Milos Forman has done a great job in directing The People vs. Larry Flynt.
It is not really an exciting or thrilling film, but instead a highly
interesting portrayal of a true story. Due to Larry's character it is also,
at times, a very funny film. However, it is much more than that. It is
about the fight for freedom of speech, anti-censorship, and the right to be
able choose for oneself what to see and buy. An excellent look at Flynt,
his life, and his story. Keep a look out for the real Larry Flynt who makes
a cameo as Judge Morrissey.
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm
