Authors
Omar Odeh
Number of Reviews
12

Title
Review for Nil by Mouth (1997)
"Metteur-en-scene, director. The point is not to direct someone but to
direct oneself."
-Robert Bresson, Notes on the Cinematographer
There seems to be a general disaster zone that the majority of
actors-turned-directors wander into. It is to actually try to direct
the film (usually according to some miniscule fraction of theory or
method that they have recently misunderstood.) A number of examples
come to mind of which, Buscemi citing Cassavetes and Hanks naming
Kurosawa, Kubrick and Eisenstein in the same breath are only the most
notorious examples. Anyone who saw, Trees Lounge or That Thing You Do
knows that despite their differences the films share an alarming
capacity for self-delusion. Flawed assumptions, heavy-handed
referencing and all around awkward articulations are the hallmarks of
such films which, incidentally, are not without a lot of company. Gary
Oldman's latest film Nil by Mouth, avoids such pitfalls by recognising
the number one job of the actor-director: to marshall their unique
talents (knowledge of performance and interpretation) in a coherent
effort. No flashy loud camera work (Albino Alligator), no overpriced
contrived production values (Braveheart) and no heavy handed ludicrous
symbolism (Dead Man Walking). Gary Oldman, like accomplished
actor-directors before him (epitomised by the late John Cassavetes,
and not unlike the more recent efforts of Sean Penn) makes a number of
very specific directorial decisions guided by what he believes the
crux of cinematic representation to be. Just as Errol Morris who
studied Philosophy, or Antonionni who studied Political Economy,
employ directorial methods that privelege their given expertise.  In
the case of the actor-director this expertise is clear, and it is
often insecutrity about acknowledging such limits that lead
actor-directors astray. Oldman has reminded us that when such errors
are not made the results are complex and astounding films.
    Nil by Mouth chronicles the dynamic between a lower-class London
family (This is all you really need to know). Oldman wisely, keeps the
plotting down to a minimum concentrating instead on accurately
rendering the complexity of the characters and their
relationships. For much of this he defers to the actors (all of whom
play superbly) by the specific camera decisions he makes. Throughout
the film, Oldman's camera is never in the wrong place but more
importantly the scale of the shots is perfect.  Vitrually the entire
film is shot in close and medium shots through long lenses that truly
crush the depth of field. There is also inly a very selective use of
two-shots and group shots in the film. To call the result
clasutrophobic and uncomfortable is a gross understatement. The
implications of this technique for the narrative are manifold: it
alludes to the enclosed world of the characters as well as
establishing a number of key associations between these
characters. This gives them a first layer to work with. More
importantly, howver, the longer lenses, necessarily allowed Oldman to
move away from the actors freeing up their physical space despite the
very particular diegetic space (oweing to the reduced depth of field.)
It is a technique not unlike the one Cassavets uses in A Woman Under
the Influence. The result of these decisions is apparent in the job
the actors do which I'v already said is excellent. Oldman could have
chosen any number of avenues by which to shoot these people, all of
which would have left a flawed product that udermined the strength of
the performances. Although, I don't think every film should be made
this way, when it is an actor at the helm, the technique truly seems
perfect.
    Over and above these stylistic elements the narrative of Nil by
Mouth is extremely assured. With a running time of just over two
hours, Oldman clearly had no doubts about the events to be included in
the portrayal. The film is apparently based on autobiographical
events, which shows in the film's authenticity.  The plotting is kept
to a minimum but this does not mean the film was not carefully
scripted. There are a number of crucial speeches, which are placed at
specifc times in the film for specific reasons. In a number of cases
Oldman foregoes dramtatic efficiency in order to convey a mood uf
unese and discomfort. The prominence of the unique South Londin accent
is only the ost prominent example of this. The characters seem
incapable of not talking, as if constantly nervous and hiding
something. Even towards the end of the film, in a lengthy scene of Ray
left to his own devices this tendency does not stop.  The scene is
deftly edited as to have Ray almost talking with or at (not to)
himself. This underscores some of the ambiguity with which the Ray
husband is treated. Such a treatment is genuine in a way that a film
like Bastard from Carolina could not hope to be.
    I am not sure if Oldman intends to direct other projects or if
this was a one time effort to exorcise a number of demons that the
actor has harboured. One source (I can't remeber who) has said that
Oldman was offended by the apparent glamourising of street and drug
culture in Trainspotting and thus finally decided to commit his idea
to celluloid. The accusation is a common one that I think is unfair
but we can be thankful that Oldman chose to respond in the manner that
he did. We can only hope more actors show such poise in their future
directing efforts..

Title
Review for Kundun (1997)
"In this country you have to change quickly, and all the time;
otherwise people say, 'You already did that...Next!'. I want to reply
'Wait, wait...it seems like the same film, but it's not..."
The subject of the much anticipated, new Scorcese film, Kundun, is not
clear. This is not a liability. The most that can be said is that it
is a cinematic description of events surrounding the life of the 14th
Dalai Lama. Unlike, previous films by the director (Taxi Driver, Alice
Doesn't Live Here Anymore), however, anything beyond this description
is mere speculation. I was not sure what to make of Scorcese's last
film Casino (something more than Goodfellas but less than Raging
Bull). Kundun, unlike Casino, whos formal merits are undeniable but
that somehow never leaves the realm of conventional cinema, transcends
previous elements of Scorcese's style by using devices familiar to the
director in wholly new ways. The voiceover is only the most obvious
example which in this film is an accomplished and integrated layer of
the film as opposed to a crutch or support to an overburdened
narrative as it has been elsewhere in Scorcese's films. The director
has offered an unlikely film, to say the least, and one that is a
happy indication that he is not through astonishing us.
    The film has been faulted in various sources for its lack of
dramatic cohesion. That Kundun does not benefit from the deft plotting
and eerie characterization of a film like Taxi Driver is undeniable,
however, to cite this as a fault seems short-sighted. By his own
admission, there was little interest in approaching Kundun, along
classical lines; the dramaturgy of the film is particularly loose,
breaking from the narrative for long periods of time for the Dalai
Lama (the title character) to comtemplate and debate key decisions
with his advisors or for Scorcese to simply present moody montages.
Formally, Scorcese employs a number of motifs including shoes and
ancient art (the sand Mandala) layered with a nearly constant use of
music. The result is not the type of film we have come to expect but a
type of sound-poem instead. A film as concerned about conveying mood,
intention and meaning as it is with generating pace.
    The careful craftsmanship that has produced Kundun is evidenced by
the approach Scorcese took to the film. The very first translations of
the concept came not in the way of a conventional storyboard but
rather as loose sketches or visual ideas. The precise plot thrusts
were left deliberately, vague a the director focussed his preparatory
work on how best to convey mood through the visual construction of the
film as well as the cinematography. DOP Roger Deakins has credited
Scorcese with paying particular attention to how the his lighting
would serve as one of the key players in any scene. (There is an
excellent account of the circumstances surrounding the photography and
production of Kundun in the February issue of Americain
Cinematographer). That all this was achieved on a relatively low
budget is testimony to the team's technical mastery.
    It seems clear that this film is destined for a Western audience:
the actors all speak in english (albeit somewhat awkwardly) and
although, the cinematic merits in and of themselves are reason enough
to see Kundun, there is little, thematically, in the film that an
Eastern audience would not already be aquainted with.  This being the
case Scorcese's strategy seems particularly well chosen. In opposition
to the necessary perversions that come with this territory (not using
the mother tongue, etc..) the style of the film in terms of the
narrative strategy and formal arrangements employed remains true to
the culture being portrayed. The serene beauty and meditative tone of
Kundun are a more responsible treatment of Eastern themes than, for
instance Schindler's List is of Germany during WWII. In other words by
confronting the viewer with a film that falls outside the realm of
conventional cinema Scorcese compenstaes in some ways for other
necessary distortions. The result is both more legitimate and
responsible than a film like Schindler's List that attempts to cloak
its deceptions in more duplicity; the equivocal, lowest comon
denominator, button pushing, that is the Hollywood continuity style.
    As usual, the fact that great films such as this receive only a
pitiful release here in Ottawa must be opined. In fact if I am not
mistaken Kundun's first-run here in the capital lasted 2 weeks and
consisted of one screen at the Capitol Square cinema (one of the
marginally better venues we have). It is both depressing and
surprising that this was the case since it is largely a reflection of
popular tastes. It is a shame that even Scorcese's stature was not
enough to keep the film around.

Title
Review for Hana-bi (1997)
Hanna-Bi marked a rude but pleasant awakening for me, introducing me
to the work of Takeshi Kitano.  (I missed KIds Return inspite of a
luxurious one day repertory stint at the Bytowne...) It Hanna-Bi is
linked but not entirely representative of the director's previous
work. It is often in such cases when a filmmaker is marking new
territory that extremely accomplished work is done. The Sweet
Hereafter was an exception for specific reasons, but Lost Highway,
Dead Man or Crash all make the point. All credit here is to Kitano who
wrote, directed, edited as well as stars in the film. This is perhaps
the closest The filmmaker can come to serving as true artist, true
analog to the mode of a novelist or painter, as opposed to some hybrid
of artist-manager. For the most part today, even in cases of
responsible filmmaking, it is not at all clear that a single person's
creative thrust anchors a film. Kundun and Happy Together for
instance, both remarkable, cannot be credited soley to their
respective director's efforts. This is neither good nor bad, although
in a case like Hanna-Bi there is much less ambiguity as to the source
of what is being ennunciated by the film. The result is a level of
coherence that is absent from most films; while Scorcese or Wong are
able to marshall the efforts of collaborators into a unified voice
most films produced via the conventional collaborative model end up
feeling like six people shouting at you and each other.
    Hanna-Bi is well served by this unity of thrust, since it is in
fact a very ambitious project. There are in fact two distinct layers
to the film. The first is the content itself, which is both a yakuza
crime fiilm as well as a melodrama. Nishi, the protagonist embodied by
Kitano is a taciturn policeman who is confronting two sets of
psychological demons. The first is related to a less than smooth sting
operation, while the second centers around the fact that his wife is
dying. Conventional wisdom would suggest that a film with this much
'premise' should set about economically and efficiently relate the
plot until by the end it is hurtling at light speed to as big a bang
as its budget will allow. Instead there is a whole other layer to
Kitano's film where one would least expect to find it; in the formal
devices used. Kitano constructs his shots and by extension his entire
film with razour sharp precision and with absolute disregard to
textbook storytelling. Long scenes are spent in absolutely no service
whatsoever to the empirical events being narrated. And yet it is these
moments that are most articulate in commenting on the loneliness and
alienation that Nishi feel. Kitano foreshadows this method of
revealing truth through form as opposed to content through the first
third of his film. The sting operation referred to is shown several
times and yet it serves only to confuse. Even the source of bullets is
not clear. The viewer is left with recourse only to articulations
between shots, compositions, silence and Nishi's austere stare as the
only legitimate signs of the film's concerns.
    Although a number of sources have emphasized the content-linked
themes of the film, such as sacrifice, identity and in some sense
redemption, these seem to be cursory or at least only part of what
make Hanna-Bi intriguing. What truly is inspiring is the density of
the film's treatment of violence. It is a study of clinical precision
in this regard. In an interview in Film Comment (March-April 1998)
Kitano ws quite specific about the approach he wished to take to
violence in Hanna-Bi. It is an approach not unlike Michael Haneke's in
Funny Games (yet to be released in Ottawa) which exposes the
mundaneity of violence as it is used in conventional cinema. To this
end Hanna-Bi makes use offscreen space to haunt the viewer with
allusions to the acts comitted. We are shown either the brutal and
humiliating aftermaths (in the restaurant early in the film, at the
beach towrds the end..) or the spontaneous outburst. It has become
Nishi's last resort and only known way to express affection. (Not
unlike the protagonists in Tokyo Fist) On this basis the final scene
is one of excruciating compassion.
    It is the evolution that Nishi goes through to get to such a point
that maintains the interest of the content-linked elements of the
film. The perfectionist manner in which Nishi raises money and the
meandering journey it spawns are more literal components of this
evolution.  Throughout there are continuous shifts in tone and
possible motivations that the characters never seem one-dimensional or
just tools in a theorem. There is no easily explicable or definable
scapegoat to which Nishi's behaviour can be attributed and as such the
viewer is forced to confront the possible sources and to begin to
assess the precise effects of the various acts of brutality that are
depicted. These stand in counterpoint to the artwork produced at
intervals by another character in the film (whom I cannot divulge if i
want to limit the amount of plot I explain). These paintings and
drawings serve as perfect punctuation to a film as aesthetically
accomplished as this one. Not to be missed.

Title
Review for Cheun gwong tsa sit (1997)
Wong Kar-Wai is in the middle of one of the most exciting periods of
sustained brilliance in some time. Although it would be sheer hyprbole
and, frankly, totally out of order to compare it to Godard in the 60's
I'm sure it won't be long before someone does. It was a relief to have
Happy Together land in the Ottawa region, particularly after being
denied the inestimable treat that is Fallen Angels (Wong Kar-Wai's
fourth film that never made it here).  The film has no doubt
benefitted from the 'Best Direction' accolade it earned at Cannes last
year.  Although, praised or not, there is really no need to look for
an excuse to show Wong's films. He is one of the most unique
filmmakers practicing today and has shown the ability and willingness
to transcend and challenge past triumphs. It would be easy to imagine
an interminable series of variations on Chungking Express's style and
technique but instead the director has treated it as one step in his
filmmaking. Some will argue that Fallen Angels disproves this, and
they may be right (though I would beg to differ) but the fact remains
that taken as a whole the filmmaker's canon (Days of Being Wild, Ashes
of Time) is void of redundancy.
    The film chronicles the trials and tribulations of a gay man whos
trip to Argentina with his partner has not turned out as planned. The
film is about their relationship: jealousy, ambiguity, hypocrisy and
sincerity. It is about travel: spontanaeity, discovery, adventure and
the unexpected. It is about Hong-Kong: It's limitlessness, isolation
and ambivalence. And it is about a million other things that I surly
missed altogether.
    This is only the most superficial layer of the film. It is
cursory, maybe even unimportant since Wong's and DOP Christopher
Doyle's off-balance style take center stage. Although the events and
situations in Wong's films are never banal or uninteresting the real
strength of the filmmaker is his abiltiy to appropriately employ every
facet of the medium. The photography in this film consists of murky
gray-scale scenes or sepia tinted, washed out colour. The colour is
controlled quite carefully with the sepia occasionally being replaced
by more natural skin tones as to create certain associations between
the state of the relationships shown. One effect of this
cinematography is a bewildering number of allusions emerging. The use
of sound in the film is equally complex: Wong has a predilection for
voiceover which is a device that can easily get annoying. It was used
expertly in Chungking. It's use in Happy Together, however, is
comparatively spare. The relative futility of spoken words is alluded
to by the repeated references to nature (the waterfall) and in the bar
scene in which Liu is asked to leave a message on a tape recorder and
can only muster sobs. In this way the confusion and difficulty of
expression that the protagonists seem to experience is mirrored by the
film's technique. This provides a very distinct tone compared to the
dismayed though rarely verbally challenged characters of Chungking
Express.
    The narrative technique used can best be descrtibed as
non-continuous.  It contains fragments, repetitions isolated musings
and coincidences. The film ends up feeling like a rough copy, however,
further inspection betrays this first impression. I am not sure why
but an event that should be little more than an awkward sledgehammer
beating of a point to death such as the Taiwanese friend's trip to the
'bottom of the world' seems eleagant in Wong's hands. Scenes that
could deceptively be passed off as filler like the repeated soccer
games with the many bumps, touches and glances that Liu throws his
Taiwanese friend speak volumes. And cruel coincidence that could feel
totally contrived such as the bathroom scene in which Liu resorts to
acts he has condemned earlier in the film feel absolutely perfect.
Perhaps it is because Wong places his emphasis in the right
places. There is no long deliberate scripting process (thought to be
essential for a well planned relatively low budget shoot) instead his
last three films were largely based on notes and sketches made on the
day of shooting. The result is a very specific spontanaeity to the
films. There are no heavy handed compositions or forced
symmetries. Instead the films seem to be the result of intuitively
collecting the right material and then rigorously editing it together.
I have already heaped enough praise on the results that these methods
yield.
    When so much cinema seems to be at pains to push the limits of
content: more violence, more nudity, more shock therapy Wong Kar-wai
seems much more interested in pushing the limits of how things are
said and told as opposed to what is told. On this basis, Happy
Together seems linked to Sokurov's Mother and Son. The two films are
negatives of each other that on first glance could not be more
different. Both films however, render wholly new methods of expression
positioning themselves well ahead of their peers and their time.  --
-Omar Odeh http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3920

Title
Review for Sweet Hereafter, The (1997)

Commentary about The Sweet Hereafter has had as much to do with Atom
Egoyan as it has had to do with the film itself. Egoyan's career
trajectory has followed a trajectory, that is made explicit by his
latest film, from; small budgets to larger ones, family centered cast
to professional, specific- personal themes to universal-personal
etc...  This makes questions of changes in quality or level of his
work particularly important. The general consensus seems to be that
while the merits of the film are clear, the position to whcih Egoyan
seems to be going is questionable. I disagree.
Interestingly, the style here seems reminiscent of Egoyan's earlier
films. Next of Kin in particular comes to mind. The simpler
associative techniques, for instance, like the repeated tilts and pans
linking key characters and events in each film. At the same time there
are set pieces that convincingly demonstrate a new level of technical
mastery; the muted crash scene is the best example. This has come
about, in all likelihood, because of the fact that the scale of The
Sweet Hereafter dwarfs anything Egoyan has done to date. On this
basis, the film marks a new phase for the director. If one accepts
that this is the analog to Next of Kin, with respect to this second
phase, imagine the analog to The Adjuster...
After Exotica, the ante was raised and Egoyan has answered by making a
film on a fairly large scale, addressing complex themes, in a
responsible and challenging manner. Thematically, the film exposes the
inadequacies of one of soceity's most treasured symbolic languages:
the law. Specifically, in the face of issues such as community and
redistribution. Egoyan's critique is savage and embedded in an
intricate flashback structure that remains extremely clear throughout
the film. It would have been very easy for the strategy to end up
muddled, especially since the source material (Russell Banks' novel of
the same title) is said to be more linear.
Impatiently awaiting installment 2-1.

Title
Review for Chronicle of a Disappearance (1996) (TV)
In a recent article for Cahiers du Cinema, Frederic Strauss, described
Palestininan filmmakers as filmmaker-ambassadors.  Implicit in this
description is the added burden, for these artists, of representing an
entire people as opposed to simply their own views or ideas on a given
subject matter. One of the remarkable qualities of Elia Suleiman's
first film, Chronicle of a Disappearance is that it eleagantly
balances both these tendancies. The film uses an elliptical and
occasionally opaque structure to relate the tale of a Palestinian
filmmaker named Elia Suleiman who has returned to Palestine. The
expected ambivalence, confusion, amusement, despair and elation that
comes with this journey are all conveyed in the film. This is seen
through a number of episodes that are presented, almost as a simple
travelogue, except that a carefully controlled style and a number of
associative devices are used to elevate this material in masterful
ways.
    Suleiman achieves considerable economy of means by keeping his
production modes relatively simple: non-professional actors, natural
lighting, location shooting.  However, his actual use of these tools
is by no means simple. It would have perhaps been tempting to offer a
more straight forward narrative, in the vein of recent 'social
realism' such as (Sandrine Veysset's) Will There be Snow For
Christmas, an accomplished film in it's own right. Instead, however,
Suleiman uses an episodic structure marked by a number of careful
repetitions and variations. A car repeatedly comes to a halt outside
of a cafe and the drivers have an altercation or exchange of some
kind; the 'Holy Land Souvenir Shop' is repeatedly framed in long-shot,
with usually one key element of motion either being introduced or
withdrawn from the frame etc.. While specific interpretations will
vary, it is the overall technique: the juxtaposing of seemingly
similiar yet disparate scenes as to tease out inquiries that is
telling.  These are moments in time...a people that has perhaps grown
eerily accustomed to being marginalized by an annexing culture that
denys them both their history and their future. In a recent interview
Suleiman asserted that, "...a principle reason for [outsiders] wanting
peace today, is to deny the existence of Palestinans before 1948; to
not have to deal with this problem."
    One of the most notable aspects of the film is Suleiman's
restrained use of the camera. For the most part scenes are framed from
a single static position. But this is not the arbitraray static camera
that has come to plague so many, fiscally challenged and aesthetically
bankrupt Americain Independant filmmakers. This is not the
'Look-ma-no-cuts' style of Jim Mackay (Girlstown) or Neil Labutte (In
The Compny of Men). Suleiman employs Bressonian rigour in choosing the
composition, angle and particularly the articulation between his
shots. The result is a considerable density despite the spare means
described earlier. This 'persistence' of the camera alludes to a
feeling of the need to document. A need to describe and represent in
the absence of an official history for Palestinians. The insistence of
a certain computer journal to perpetually record the words "The next
day", as if this in itself were enough, reinforces this notion.
    The film is at its best when it betrays the comic sensibility of
its director. The opening monologue of a woman sitting on a couch
indulging in neighbourhood gossip, the meeting of two friends who
shake hands, offer each other cigarettes and light them exactly
mirroring each others gestures, the bufoonery of Israeli police as
they raid a woman's house and fail to see her despite an obvious
presence (more concerned with being policemen than with recognizing
their foe.) all provide humorous counterpoints to the more serious
undertones of the film. Suleiman has provided an exceptionally well
realized work that we can only hope will spearhead continued efforts
from Palestinian filmmakers in Palestine and around the world.

Title
Review for Lost Highway (1997)

David Lynch's second best film to date is perfect evidence of what
makes him fascinating as a filmmaker; he has always since day one made
the types of films you normally have to earn the right to
make. Filmmakers in the Americain system, capable of comandeering
substantial resources(financial, human, technical etc..)  in support
of their projects have usually had to go through some sort of rite of
passage after which the reigns on creativity are considerably
loosened. John Woo had to wait two films (ignoring the more sinister
implications...). There is no louder testimonial to this fact,
regarding Lynch's cinema, than his first (and best) film,
Eraserhead. Lost Highway is just as brilliant although we are clearly
in different territory at this point.
Generally speaking, Lost Highway is either about a couple's
experiences with a bizarre mental illness or an interconnected telling
of two distinct tales within which certain characters intertwine. It
could also be both. This is not to suggest that a single reading
exists and that it is difficult to decipher; the whole point is that
the film is any and all of these. In effect Lynch has negotiated an
unprecedented relartionship with the spectator of total and complete
complicity as far as reception and meaning-generation are concerned.
A variety of sources (Cahiers, Film Comment, Cineaste etc..) have
commented on the various structures that establish this
relationship. All in some way or another are linked to Lost Highway's
narrative technique. Structurally, Lynch's conception transcends more
conventional circular narratives in that it is ultimately a loop that
invites the viewer to join in at a given point and follow through
until he has reached this origin. It has been suggested that the
film's indeal exhibition of the film would be a continuous loop of the
film. The fact of the matter is that just as form came front iand
center in Greenaway's The Pillow Book, Lynch here buries his story, as
intriguing as it may be, under the two real creative thrusts of the
film: narrative technique itself and the production design. Both are
decidedly eerie...
The collapsing of space between filmmaker and spectator brings with it
such a degree of subjectivity in the viewer that many have ended up
terrified. This terror usually ends up being expressed as anger,
frustration or accusations of self-indulgence on Lynch's
part. Paradoxically. nothing could be further from the truth, in that,
it as an act of heroic bravery, given today's viewing climate in
Ameica to put forward a film that puts so much faith in them.

Title
Review for Mon oncle Antoine (1971)
"Although Canada has continued to produce a number of
interesting films with uniquely Canadian content, the majority of
them are either shot out of the country with CFDC funding or use
Canadian locales to represent other locations entirely..." 
                        -David A. Cook, A History of Narrative Film
    Under the auspices of the Toronto International Film Festival
Group, an pristine print of the late Claude Jutra's 1971
masterpiece, Mon Oncle Antoine is being circulated. It is a
welcome opportunity to re(visit) a film that eschews the two
criticisms made above. The film is shot entirely in rural Quebec in
a town that essentially plays itself as opposed to Nova Scotia playing
Long-Island (Love and Death on
Long Island) or Toronto playing New York (Take your pick...). As the
Canadian cinema begins to earn
some very real, long overdue international recognition at increasingly
pretigious venues Jutra's film serves
as a reminder of a proud film heritage. The film is truly world class, in
its aesthetic as well as its
technical merits; the climatic conditions under which many of the scenes
were shot are truly savage. The
film has been taglined as 'the greatest Canadian film ever...', a dubious
honour and an ironic example of
marketing hyperbole, given our usual predilection for understatement; an
approach that for once would
have been appropriate. 
    At the risk of dispelling whatever tame interest there exists for this
film, it can best be described as a
coming of age chronicle. In every sense of the term, the themes of
self-discovery and identity permeate
the film. This is exposed not just through the trajectory of the young
protagonist, but through the state of
things in the very town itself. The finances of the general store, for
instance are increasingly put into
question suggesting its days are numbered. Each of the principal characters
struggles through awkward
attempts to define themselves, their existence and to accomodate certain
uncomfortable realities. Joe's
clumsy farewell scene is an excellent example. Their roll in the hay is
almost certainly an event from their
past and its reincarnation is both uncomfortable and very touching.  It is
an extremely eleagant way to
underscore the deep felt change that Joe's leaving represents. It is such
change that is at the very heart
of the film. Unlike the repetitive cyclic change of seasons (deftly
integrated into Will There be Snow For
Christmas) this is the permanent and enduring change of a natural disaster.
 This is the very process that
the towns and the characters undergo through the course of the film. Jutra
thoroughly integrates this
theme into the film allowing for a multitude of allusions to emerge. The
result is a depiction of veritable
coming of age; not the banal musings on dating partners and sex that
populate so many other films on
the same subject. 
    Many aspects of the film allude to documentary filmmaking, including
the style of the film itself. The
camera is never sure about anything ultimately giving the film the feel of
an interrogation not an assertion.
This is particularly significant since it is via the documentaty tradition
that Canadian filmmaking was born.
Jutra punctuates his film with a number of sustained shaky zooms. A number
of key scenes in the film
as well as the opening and closing shots are photographed this way. But the
device is more than simply
homage to the early traditions of Canadian cinema. The themes of change and
of self-interrogation are
particularly well served by the technique. The shaky zooms are extremely
self-conscious but not at all
certain or sure. Contrast these to Kubrick's expertly executed creeping
zooms from 'The Shining'. Both
are instances of virtuoso filmmaking where the director achieves remarkable
density through the use of a
rigorous and coherent code. At other times in the film Jutra uses long-take
shooting to turn things over to
the remarkable cast who sing along or share moments of tortured intimacy.
The gut-wrenching moment of
discovery for the young protagonist late in the film, for instance is
perfectly handled in this way. 
    Mon Oncle Antoine, sets an unassuming mandate for itself: it is a
chronicle of painful transition of a
people and a place. The film is free of pretense and fullfills this mandate
exceptionally well. The narrative
structure of the film is elliptical but never opaque. The dialogue is not
weighed down with
pseudo-philosophy or other annoyances. At the center of this chronicle of
change and evolution is the
Antoine of the title. The young protagonist's uncle who is perhaps the only
character that is spared the
uneasy task of revaluating themselves and their lives. Thoroughly content,
or so it seems, he fullfills his
tasks as the town's undertaker and general store owner in an aloof but
sympathetic manner. As the film
progresses however, Jutra unveils his scheme, and the viewer comes to know
a man who is not the pillar
of certitude he appeared to be. Although certain elements of the film are
left ambiguous, the film is never
unclear. It is the ambiguities that reinforce that feelings of apprehension
and confusion that precede any
momentous change. 
    The film could reluctantly be called a precursor to Jean-Claude
Lauzon's Leolo. While direct
comparison of the films would be reductionist both constitute examples by
Quebecois filmmakers to
reveal uncertainties about their time and place through stories centered
around a child. It is interesting to
speculate as to how big an influence Jutra's film may have been on Lauzon.
At any rate, Mon Oncle
Antoine cannot help but strongly influence any who chose to see it. It is a
fine choice, to celebrate
Canadian filmmaking's past, present and future. 
-- 
-Omar Odeh
http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3920

Title
Review for Nowhere (1997)
Instead. Instead of a movie about two guys echanging banal witticisms
in a convenience store.  Instead of three brothers pandering to every
cliche surrounding religion, relationships and infidelity. Instead of
holier than thou posturing by making a movie about three girls even
thouhg you're a guy. Instead of masturbatory musings about your
personal problems and LA nightlife.  Instead, Greag Araki has
committed to himself to the relentless pursuit of a unique style and
uncompromising vision that has yielded true gems of Americain
Independent filmmaking.
I missed the first installment of the Trilogy that this film
concludes, (Totally Fucked Up, The Doom Generation, Nowhere). However,
it is clear from the last two, that Araki is taking leaps and bounds
cinematically. Continuing its alarming capacity for ignorance, the
popular press gave Nowhere a cold reception. Most complaints centered
around accusations of a 'vacuous style'. A bizarre comment considering
how accomlished Araki's direction is here.
The first time you see a film by Araki, it looks like the work of a
cheap and clumsy wannabe. However, it seems that as his trash aesthtic
becomes apparent, along with his ideological position (a gay male in
US society) and subsequent psychoanalytic and semiotic concerns, Araki
emerges as an interesting and very competent filmmaker. Although his
homosexuality has recently come into question Nowhere wrapped in 1995,
and so many of these concerns were still brought to bear on the film.
As such, Araki's films in general are unappologetic, very loud
challenges to virtually every position held in conventional society.
Nowhere in particular is a savage critique that is both relevant and
convincing of youth in America and their cult-of-slacker-horseshit. On
this basis, although rooted in 90210 and other contenporary pop icons,
the film also reads as a poignant comment on the 'Kevin Smith set'.
 Araki's visual style here is head and ahoulders above his previous
work both technically and aesthetically. Despite accusations of
excess, I'd much rather see Araki shoot loud murals than Ed Burns
incompetently choregraph steady-cam shots. Nowhere's quick off-tempo
cutting and surrealism is ample support to Araki's ideological
concerns. This film is evidence of heroic bravery in the face of the
Americain Independant scene as it exists today. This is best
epitomized in the final scene in which Araki shows no mercy in
carrying out a complete and total sabotage, thematically as well as
visually, of his entire film.

Title
Review for He Got Game (1998)

 It would be pointless for me not to admit at the outset that I have
always held great esteem for Spike Lee and his films. And just in case
I have left anyone in doubt, that means I find it extremely difficult
to provide objective evaluation in this regard. It is some thing I
have proven incapable of time and again, despite good advice on this
subject from Christian Metz.  Nonetheless I am going to try to make a
convincing and unbiased case for He Got Game as one of the best films
of the year. Lee is one fo the more prolific filmmaker's working today
having released virtually a film a year since his first feature.  This
is neither good nor bad, although it might be an indication of a type
of inferiority complex Lee has alluded to regarding the facility white
director's have in marshalling finacing. His trajectory over the years
has had peaks (Do The Right Thing, Mo' Better Blues) and valleys
(Clockers). I am still convinced that keeping faith after being denied
accolades for Do The Right Thing and Malcolm X at various venues (the
two films he considers to be his best) was not an easy task; something
that clearly showed in his filmmaking post-Malcolm X. With He Got
Game, however, Lee truly impresses as he once did.
    It has been implied that an important reference point for He Got
Game is Hoop Dreams. This comparison seems to miss the point. Lee's
film transcends both the situation as well as the shortcomings of the
latter film. (These are well treated in Cineaste Vol.  XXI, No.3) He
Got Game introduces viewers to Jesus Shuttlesworth, the number one
highschool basketball prospect. The film chronicles the decisions he
faces and the contradictions and hypocrisies people begin to contrive
in view of his potentially lucrative situation. The film is an essay
on the dignity and poise needed to go through circumstances such as
the ones Jesus is in. It is clearly not to relate in a realistic or
naturalistic way the pressures Jesus is under, or the cruelty of the
recruiting system. Nor is it as mundane a venture as simply
'fictionalizing Hoop Dreams'. Lee makes this clear from the opening
frames shot in slow motion, alluding to basketball as a heroic almost
spiritual experience. His intentions are reinforced by the scrrenplay
wahich proposes one of the most ludicrous setups in recent
memory. Clearly this is not a setting or situation that is meant to be
taken literally but rather a grotesque carricature designed to provoke
an interrogation by the viewer. For those still unconvinced, consider
the scenes in which Lee overtly undermines the narrative either
through his patented direct address scenes or the roll call
sequence. These scenes reaffirm an intention not to adress the
spectator through the narrative itself but through what this
hyperbolic scenario alludes to.
    The photography colludes perfectly to complement this
intention. Two things are made very clear. the first is that Lee has
gotten very comfortable shooting commercials, the second is that he
has somehow also maitianed his poise as a craftsman. The style of the
basketball scenes with multispeed photography and luminescent colours
presents the TV commercial aesthetic as a parodic device. The players
are a marketing tool before the first contract is even signed or the
first TV camera ever arrives. In shooting the basket ball scenes this
way the associations between what is happening on the court, in the
players minds (projecting themselves as sports celebrities) and in the
viewers' minds is collapsed. There is something almost sinister in
this depiction in marked contrast to those that graced the opening
titles.  Lee mixes styles to deliver such effects several times. The
light on the Milla Jovovich character is rarely motivated and almost
angelic despite some clear shortcomings of the character. The
high-contrast look to the team introduction sequence is yet another
example. There is nothing transparent or understated about the
camerawork, just as there is nothing naturalistic or 'real' about the
screenplay. It is a very apt marriage of style and content to make the
point that it is beneath the situations or events that the real
discussion is happening in this film. It is a very eleagant way to
give the material some weight; a difficult task in films that center
on sports.
    In fact much more than a 'sports film', He Got Game is truly
tragic.  The scenes between Jesus and his Sister, or The Sister and
the Father, ring with a certain intensity that I am not ashamed to
admit had me fighting back tears. This tragedy is woven into the very
texture of the film: In spite of any good fortune that may befall
Jesus Shuttlesworth, the cost at which it has come is truly horrific.
-- -Omar Odeh http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3920

Title
Review for Deconstructing Harry (1997)
Good news: Woody Allen's back. Despite an embarassingly humble release
pattern, here in the capital, Allen's new film Deconstructing Harry is
one of the best of the year. It chronicles life history, more or less,
of a New York novelist of jewish origin. This description is unfairly
simple, however, since ultimately this loose story serves only as a
premise for Allen to launch a savage social critique, backed by deft
casting and narrative technique. The film has been characterised as
everything from 'irresponsibly sexist' to 'embarassingly
revealing'. This is perhaps hardly surprising in view of the
technocratic lynching Allen received in the media several years ago.
Ironically, many of these reviewers are in fact indulging the very
vices that Allen critiques through his protagonist. It is to his credt
that despite this he has managed to pull off a film as inspired as
this. (Ottawa dwellers be advised of the upcoming screening of
Manhattan at the Bytowne.)
    Allen takes no prisonners as he lampoons every facet of
conventional life and those naive, bored or lazy enough to still
practice it. The jewish faith, and by extension, institutionalized
religion, is treated with characetristic duality (Love and Death),
sexuality is twisted into an eerie grotesque (Manhattan) and Allem's
wit is razour sharp. Not the gimmicks and tricks that littered Mighty
Aphrodite or Everyone says I Love You. The film is exemplary of the
bizarre experiences Allen's best films put us through: to laugh while
recognizing how pathetic the goings-on are. And no-one is more
pathetic here than Allen's protagonist. A man so incapbable of
spending time in the real world, he has been left no alternative but
to create his own.
    The film benefits from truly inspired casting. The film is
structured such that for most of the people present in Harry's real
life there is another set of actors that play the fictional
recreations of these people as present in Harry's books. The pairings
could be the subject of a review in and of themselves.  Examples of
people/character pairings include: Kristie Alley/Demi Moore and Judy
Davis/Julia Louis Dreyfus. The considerations that emerge from these
pairings are two-fold, exploring both the unreliability of perception
and by extension the artistic process as well as alluding to the
fallacy and duplicity inherent in the star system. (Perhaps that last
one is my own zeal getting the better of me) Nonetheless Allen seems
to have payed careful attention to every casting decision. Even Robin
Williams apearrance as an actor in one of Harry's fictional stories,
although it lasts only several minutes, is elevated to a level above
that of a simple cameo. A lesser filmmaker would have treated the
appearance in a purly cursory manner, Allen instead seems to be
suggesting that the casting is to be scrutinized in detail.
    One of the most notable aspects of the film, is its narrative
construction. Deconstructing Harry is narrated with a flashback
structure that consists of three planes. The first is Harry's present
day life with all of its dilemmas and complications, the second is the
fictional world of Harry's books, and the last is Harry's true past
that is dealt with on occasion to contrast with the fictional world
that we are presented with. Which of these is which is only made clear
as the film progresses.  The associations that emerge as a result of
the interacting of these three planes are a primary source of meaning
generation in the film.  It is only as the fictitious and the
non-fictitious is delineated that the relevance of certain scenes
becomes clear. Harry turning 'soft' is an amusing gimmick on it's own,
however, situated as it is after the actor-story and late in the film
it is an eleagant device reaffirming the inescapable fate of the
protagonist: to forever be confounded by the very fiction he seeks
therapy with.
    On this basis, an attractive reading of the film-although it is
impossible to confirm or refute it- is as an allegory for the current
state of Americain independant filmmaking. As filmmaker after
filmmaker lines up with their low budget, flawed assumptions and
'genuine story', there are eerie parallels to be drawn with the flawed
ethic displayed by Allen's protagonist.

Title
Review for Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998)
Adapt, the last time I checked, means to 'make suitable for a new use
or situation'. No where in the dictionary that I consulted did it say
to 'clumsily and simple mindedly try to force something into a new
situation.' And yet for some reason the majority of filmmakers seem to
use the latter definition in screen adaptations. (The English Patient,
Forrest Gump etc...) Such films fail because of a misguided approach
to adaptation which usually involves simply directly translating
original material into a photoplay. This ignores that implicit in the
very definition of the word adaptation is a transformation a complete
change to give rise to something new, not a simple translation.  Often
reactions to adaptations will discuss whether 'justice to the
original' was served. To ask a film to do this is ridiculous. Some of
my favourite adaptations have yielded something wholly other than the
original and in so doing simultaneously converges with the tone or
central concerns of that work.  Terry Gilliam's (Brazil, The
Adventures of Baron Munchausen) latest film, Fear and Loathing in Las
Vegas is to be commended for carrying out this imperative despite
source material that was touted as 'unfilmable'. Although it has been
repeated a thousand times elsewhere, the perfect fit between Gilliam's
style and Hunter S. Thompson's 'novel' cannot be overstated. it is
surely because of such a perfect match that Gilliam has been able to
craft a masterwork from an original that would have stumped many
another director.
     The film recounts the misadventures of journalist Raoul Duke
(Johnny Depp) and his attorney Dr.  Gonzo (Benicio Del Toro) over the
course of a debilitating weekend in Las Vegas during which Duke is
meant to cover a motorcycle race. The two centrepieces of the
adaptation are the visual design and the tone of the film. Gilliam is
known for paying careful attention to the details of his worlds; not
just the look, but the very shape and texture of them. Director of
Photographer Nicola Pecorini does an outstanding job of rendering a
multiplicity colour to each frame. Instead of a colour scheme that
implies an overriding pattern or logic, most scenes are constructed in
exactly the opposite way.  There are red skies, shifting filter
colours and a hilarious amount of excess. The Vegas setting that
occupies much of the film has never seemed more ominous despite much
more realistic recent portrayals (Leaving Las Vegas). The chaotic
visuals are anchored to a narrative that is exemplary in its subtle
shifts in tone and point of view.  This is the key element that
elevates the film. Through careful manipulation of the duo's
interactions Gilliam is never far from reminding the viewer of the
very temporary nature of theirpleasures. (Not unlike those of the
conventional cinema) Duke's repeated returns to the type writer-
despite his condition making the task seemingly impossible- are an
example of the tonal shifts.  On the one hand it is hilarious that
what comes out is so lucid and yet the whole circumstance itslef is
haunting. Such shifts achieve their greatest effect in one of the
final scenes of the film that occurs in a diner. The ensuing events
can only be described as unsettling and serve as a clear reminder that
the film's ambition lies beyond being a quizzical cult artifact.
    Gilliam goes further to lend the material weight by using a very
carefully constructed soundtrack. A number of aspects of the film call
attention to this device from the very perticular articulations of the
two main characters, to the final third of the film that finds Duke
trying to reconstruct past events from a sound recording of them. The
sound effects found throughout the film are rarely only the directly
motivated sounds of on-screen events. The result is a soundtrack that
contributes to the discomfort felt throughout the film but also denies
the convenient conclusion of a single unified and coherent narrator.
The voice-over is a big part of this density that Gilliam acheves
through sound. Although nitially the voice-over is ostensibly a
conventional first person narration, through the course of the film
this gets collapsed with the 'read-over' of Duke's writing. The
bridging of this gap further undermines the protoagonist as a reliable
narrator and puts into question any notions of the two protagonists as
heroes.
    Some of the moments in the film that most terrified me are the
interations between the two main characters - played impeccably by
Depp and Del Toro - and the other Vegas dwellers. It is this
interations that show the chasm like gap that exists between the two
protagonists and the current conventions. This is very much the matter
of the film as opposed to it being purly 'about drugs'.  The early
scene in which bar patrons take on the semblance of giant lizards
signals any such interactions as important moments in the film: The
subsequent scenes involving Duke trying to leave his hotel without
paying or Gonzo scaring people in a neighbouring car are chilling
reminders of what side of the spectrum most of us occupy.  
-Omar Odeh http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Theater/3920
