Authors
Jaye Mathisen
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Total Recall (1990)
Summary:
     Sometime in the future, Douglas Quaid finds out that he's not
     who he remembers himself to be.  From there, the plot takes a
     downturn into aliens, violence, Mars,violence, air on Mars,
     violence, and memory implants.
     Up until now, I've always liked Schwarzenegger movies.  They're
usually not too intellectual, have lots of action, lots of violence,
babes, guns, chases, muscles, and all the other good things that make an
action film an action film.  Until now.  While TOTAL RECALL had lots of
violence, the special effects got in the way of what could have been a
good movie.  It doesn't bother me to watch people get hung, shot, karate
chopped, or what-have-you, but gallons of blood spraying everywhere tend
to be distracting, rather than "entertaining".  I know I'm not squeamish
about blood (having worked for a fire department and an ambulance
company), but slow-mo of globules of blood flying through the air just
doesn't do it for me.
     The plot of TOTAL RECALL is okay, right up to where Schwarzenegger
gets to Mars.  (The plot's complicated, I'm not going to attempt to
explain it.)  The memory implantation stuff reminded me of the many and
various SF books that deal with "sensies," or "feelies."  (Movies/things
that allow you to sense what the characters on the screen sense).  Some
poor special effects of people in a vacuum, outright ridiculousness of
the ending, and the lack of believability in the story-line in general
ruined it.
Enjoyability
     Bleeech!  When I go to a movie, I like to "immerse" myself in
     what's happening on the screen.  Movies like STAR WARS and
     friends, I can believe, because it's way beyond where we're at,
     but is nice to think about.  TOTAL RECALL on the other hand, was
     hard to believe in.  "Aliens build air-producing reactor, that
     creates a perfectly breathable atmosphere in every detail for
     the human life form, on a planet-wide scale, in a matter of
     seconds, by converting old fashioned ice at the core of planet,
     into life-giving oxygen.  This air-producing reactor hasn't been
     tested, and the switch to turn it on is a large ball that you
     put your hand into.  Film at 11."  Naaaah.  1 star out of 4.

Title
Review for Loaded Weapon 1 (1993)
     You know, there are occasionally some well-done idiotic movies.
NAKED GUN wasn't bad.  HOT SHOTS wasn't bad.  As long as you took them
for what they were.
     Not LOADED WEAPON.  This was just plain stupid, more in the line of
THE PERILS OF GWENDOLYN IN THE LAND OF THE WHATEVER IT WAS" [YIK-YAK.
-Moderator].  A weak, nay, gasping for breath plot.  Emilio Estevez
apparently was supposed to play some macho cop walking the edge.  All I
got was that he was suffering from a combination of food that didn't
agree with him, and a mega-wedgie.  His acting was wooden.
     I can't remember who played his partner, other than he was in
PATRIOT GAMES, but whoever he was, he was definitely slumming, and
definitely didn't fit the part.  [Samuel L. Jackson  -Moderator]
     The only redeeming virtue in the whole show was a brief view of
Kathy Ireland in some rather interesting attire.  Not that it made up
for the cost of the movie, but at least it wasn't a total disaster.
     LOADED WEAPON kind of reminds me of the "little movie that could."
I think that a parody of LETHAL WEAPON and other cop movies could be
done, and done well.  But for whatever reason, the makers of LOADED
WEAPON really dropped the ball on this one.
Rating:
     1 star (does the system go any lower?) out of 4.  Just
     plain pathetic.  A few sight gags garnered a couple
     chuckles, but it couldn't overcome stilted dialog,
     plain acting, and a pathetic script.
Enjoyability rating:
     Ah, here it does go lower.  Don't go see this movie.
     Don't even suggest it to your worst enemy.  Don't rent
     it when it comes out on video.  Boycott theatres that
     are showing it, don't even go to the other movies at
     the same complex.  Write letters to the editor
     denouncing this piece of movie tripe.

Title
Review for Cutting Edge, The (1992)
A brief sidenote:
    [I seem to be finding quite a few movies recently that while
    not epics of modern filmmaking, seem to be quite enjoyable.  I
    call them my "pick-me-up" movies, and when I'm looking for
    a movie that's not too heavy, but fun, I turn to some of these.
    So I thought I'd toss a few reviews out, in case you haven't
    caught these.  None of 'em are box-office smashes, but I find
    them enjoyable.]
     D. B. Sweeney plays ex-hockey amateur star Doug Dorsey, who gets
his eye injured in the 1988 winter Olympics, and can no longer play
competitive hockey.  Moira Kelly is Kate Mosely, an Olympic medalist
wanna-be, but who's earned a nasty reputation as the Ice Bitch, for her
lousy attitude.
     As to plot, there's not much there.  Kate can't find a male partner
to skate with, and so her coach in a last ditch effort, contacts Doug,
to see if he'd be willing to make the attempt.  He is, they do, there's
conflict, resolution, and an ending with everybody happy and Doug and
Kate in love.
     The film is intended to be a love story, built around skating,
probably to tie in to the Olympic skating craze.  It's not a great love
story, it's a good love story.  Moira Kelly has the bitch part down pat,
her facial expressions of disgust towards D. B. and some of his antics
are priceless.
Rating:
     3 stars out of 4.  There is some nice camera work in taping
     some of the skating, especially all the fancy footwork, but
     nothing amazing.  It looks like Kelly and Sweeney did a fair
     amount of skating, although certainly not all the stunt
     skating.

Title
Review for Back to the Future Part III (1990)
     Marty and Doc do their level best to make the Universe safe for non
time-travelers.  All the old characters, including Biff are back in new
roles, along with the old ones.
     I really liked this movie.  Almost as much as I liked part one.
Sure, Marty and Doc don't resolve all the paradoxes that
occurred/might have occurred from the jumping about through the
space-time continuum, but they have a lot of fun doing it, and so did I.
     Doc is at his zaniest best, from the gigantic ice-tea making
machine, to the telescope strapped to his rifle.  And of course, to make
it complicated, Doc's gotta meet a girl (Mary Steenburgen, another
fave).
     Mad Dog (Biff) is truly the epitome of the old-west sleazoids.
However, there was one oddity about Mad Dog.  Doc and Marty are looking
through a history book, and discover that one of the reasons Mad Dog has
his name is because of his tendency to drool.  Gallons of slobber
dripping off of Mad Dog's chin in the first meeting with Marty must've
been left on the cutting room floor, so Mad Dog's name really didn't
make sense.  But if that's the only thing I can find to complain about,
the movie can't be too shabby.
     The ending is certainly corny, but fun.  It certainly looks like
this is the end of the series, and not much of a chance for any more.
Of course this was a given anyway.
Rating:
     The movie's light, moderately fast-paced, and very enjoyable.  It
     helps to riffle through BTTF II before seeing III, just to refresh
     the old brain cells, as the plot still has its twists and turns.
     The special effects are as good as always, and I almost fell out of
     my seat at the time-traveling steam engine.  I give it 4 stars
     (****,excellent) out of 4.
Enjoyability
     All the above.  Don't miss it, it's great fun.  4 stars again.

Title
Review for Pretty Woman (1990)
     Richard Gere plays Edward Lewis, a powerful, aggressive, and very rich
business man who buys up companies, and spits out the pieces for profit.  With
his limousine jammed in a parking lot, he grabs his lawyers' Lotus Esprit.
After the standard "Where's first?" and "How to use a clutch," he ends up lost
on Hollywood Boulevard looking for driving lessons, and directions to his ritzy
hotel in Beverly Hills.
     Enter Vivian Ward (Julia Roberts), a hooker, who needs rent money.  For
twenty bucks, she not only gives him directions to his hotel, but also drives
him there after he gives up handling the Esprit in exasperation.  After
arriving at the hotel, Edward almost leaves her outside waiting for a bus back
to Hollywood Boulevard, but finally decides to invite her up to his room.
     There are some cute scenes where they enter the hotel, accompanied by the
expected dropped jaws, tongues on floor etc.  etc.  After reaching Edwards'
room, Edward is a little at a loss as to where to start the evening, but we
find out that Edward is very serious about what he does, he has no current
romantic interests, he doesn't drink, doesn't smoke, doesn't do drugs, and
finds watching Vivian watch 'I Love Lucy' to be a turn-on.
     Later, we find that Edward is in the process of buying out a large
corporation, and that the owner of the corporation wants to chat with Edward
about his plans for the company.  On his lawyer's advice, Edward is to make the
evening a social event, rather than a business meeting, so he needs a date.
After some tough negotiating in the tub, Vivian agrees to be at Edwards' beck
and call, for the remainder of the week for the paltry sum of three thousand
dollars.
     Romance blossoms, with Vivian falling in love with Edward, and Edward (in
his own way) falling in love with Vivian.  There are some funny scenes
including a scene in a restaurant with the ages old dilemma of which fork to
use, pointers on how not to deal with escargot, and scenes of Vivian trying to
shop on Rodeo Drive while not dressed appropriately.  After being asked to
leave a swanky clothes shop, Vivian returns to the hotel, only to be greeted by
the manager (Hector Elizondo), who suggests that since Mr. Lewis is such an
important person to the hotel, they will permit her to stay, but as soon as
Mr. Lewis goes home to New York, they'd rather not see her at the hotel again.
     One scene that had me in stitches occurs when Edward finds out that the
one shop on Rodeo Drive threw Vivian out, and he takes her to another dress
shop, where they spend "an obscene amount of money" for clothes and some
general "sucking-up."  The manager of this store reminded me of Wesson oil.
     The end of the week rolls around, and Edward is talking to Vivian about
how he'd like to see here next time he's in L.A.  He offers to set her up with
an apartment, car, money, and everything else she needs or wants.  Vivian
passes on the deal, and tells Edward about how she always dreamed of the knight
in shining armor riding up to her and rescuing her from the tower, but the
knight never said, "I got you a condo to stay in...."
     Edward and Vivian part company, and Vivian prepares to move to San
Francisco, while Edward is readying for departure back to New York.  Somewhere
on the ride to the airport, Edward realizes that Vivian was the best thing that
ever happened to him, and takes the white limo to her apartment to "rescue
her."
Rating:
     As a technical marvel, or as a brilliantly written screenplay, the story
never reaches greatness.  A flimsy plot, and some oddly-placed asides by Vivian
left me wondering if there were some important chunks of film still on the
cutting room floor.  So it rates 2 stars (**,average) on the 1 to 4 star scale.
Enjoyability
     Disregarding the above, the film is great.  I enjoyed it very much, with
Robert's performance being at the proper times funny, sassy, sad, and mushy.
Richard Gere plays the businessman just like it should be done: suave, cool,
and debonair.  Edward's lawyer has just the right amount of sleaze and
ruthlessness about him.  The other actors and actresses in the supporting roles
were also appropriately funny, and lent a light touch.  My wife loved it, I
liked it, I'll buy the video tape when it comes out, and so it rates a high 3
stars (***) on the 1 to 4 scale.

Title
Review for Home Alone (1990)
     I wasn't expecting much going to this film.  How funny can it be to
watch some wild child and his antics around the house while his parents
are gone?  The answer is: Not very.  Oh sure, there are some funny
moments, and some of the situations are amusing, but this is definitely
a movie that appeals to younger people than me.
     The biggest problems with the film are all the contrived things
that appear throughout the show.  There are also some odd asides that
have to be chalked up to "let's get a laugh," rather than some real
need.  The plot is all too predictable, and while there is occasionally
some inspiring camera work, young Macauly Culkin doesn't really have
what it takes to carry a whole movie yet.  Yes, he's funny, and he has
some great bits, but as a whole, he just didn't pack it.
     I should mention that as a "grown-up," I didn't really get a kick
out of it, but if the gales of hysterical laughter coming from about
every child in the theater are any clue, this movie has gobs and gobs of
appeal to the much younger crowd.  Perhaps they can relate better to
some of Kevin's family problems which appeared out of nowhere.
Rating:
     Take your kids to it, but if you don't have any, or can't get ahold
of some, then skip this one.  It's not trash, it's just not great.  2
stars (**) on the old 1 to 4 star scale.

Title
Review for Dick Tracy (1990)
     Who's Dick Tracy?  I don't know.  About the only thing I know about
Dick is he has a radio wristwatch, and doesn't he have a secret decoder
ring?  Or is that Captain Crunch?
     Anyway, I didn't have a lot of preconceived notions about Dick
Tracy when I went to see it.  I'd seen the previews, and they looked OK,
but there wasn't the same level of anticipation as for BATMAN.  Maybe
Dick's a character for another generation.  He's certainly not a big
part of mine.
     I was definitely impressed with the show.  Warren Beatty plays a
great Dick Tracy, right down to the yellow overcoat and hat.  Madonna
turned in what has got to be one of the best performances of her film
career.  The woman radiated sex.  I was certainly surprised to see her
in the ending.  My guess as to the real identity of No-Face was way out
in left field.  Justifiable, but not on the mark.  Al Pacino was superb
as the gangster Big Boy Caprice.  His constant little "quotes" by famous
people were a nice touch.
     All of the smaller parts were done well too.  88 Keys (Mandy
Patinkin), Flattop, Mumbles (Dustin Hoffman), and the rest of the
disfigured criminal elements were right on the mark.  My impression was
that everybody was having a lot of fun with the part, and played them to
the hilt.  Tess Trueheart (Glenn Headly) turned in a good performance as
Tracy's girlfriend, and the Kid provided a light touch of humor.
Rating:
     Classy stuff.  The comic book-like use of color, the make-up,
     the sets were all very well done.  Given my lack of familiarity
     with the history of Dick Tracy, it was still easy to follow the
     movie, except for trying to remember all the gangster names.
     But if you can picture the face, you can probably remember the
     name.  Great acting, an okay plot, good makeup, and nice special
     effects earn this one a 4 stars (****,excellent) out of 4.

Title
Review for Bird on a Wire (1990)
     Mel Gibson is Richard Jarmine, a guy who testified against a couple
of corrupt DEA agents, and was rewarded by being placed in the Federal
Witness Protection program.  Goldie Hawn plays a lawyer (Marianne
Graves) who runs into Richard at a Gas Station.  The last time she's
seen him is 15 years ago when he left her at the altar.  In fact, when
she gets gas at a station that he's working at,she's not sure it's him.
     Prior to all the above events, a bad dude (David Carradine) --
one of the DEA people that Rick sent to prison -- has just been
released, and needs to wipe Rick out both on general principles, and
because Rick hasn't testified against the bad dude's partner, another
bad dude.
     These bad dudes hunt Rick down, and attempt to kill him.  In the
meantime, Marianne has gone back to the place where Rick works to see if
it really is him, and notices the bad dudes attempting to turn Rick into
dog food.  Some excitement later, Rick and Marianne are now together,
and Rick needs Marianne to help him find his contact at the FBI to
relocate him, but that person appears to have retired, and the FBI
doesn't have any record of Rick now.  (This is because another bad FBI
dude has wiped out Ricks records for reasons that never were explained).
     The rest of the movie is guns, babes (Rachel Varney -- played by
some playmate), motorcycles, hairdressers, bad dudes, and wild animals.
Rick and Marianne constantly leap from the frying pan and into the fire.
The final fire is at a zoo where Rick used to work, and he uses his
rapport with animals and a lot of luck to smoke all the bad dudes.
     The number of chases/crashes/exciting events is quite long, and fun
to watch.  However, after LETHAL WEAPON 1 & 2, it's very difficult to
watch Mel not being a kick-butt kind of guy.  I suppose it was an
attempt to show that clever is better than brawn, but I think the latter
is more fun to watch.
     In the end, Rick and Marianne emerge victorious and in love, and
live happily ever after....
Rating:
     If I was going to be picky, BIRD ON A WIRE doesn't have a lot going
for it.  The plot doesn't really develop (why was the FBI guy that wiped
out Ricks file involved with the other bad dudes), and I'm not sure why
they bothered to mention that Marianne is a lawyer.  I don't recall
hearing her spout any legalese, unless the point was to show that she's
rich.  There were other gripes, and holes, but it certainly wasn't the
worst.  So it rates 2 stars (**,average) on the 1 to 4 star scale.
Enjoyability Rating:
     Disregarding the above, the film is pretty good.  I enjoyed it very
much, Mel's a stud, Goldie's a babe, and there was enough
action/comedy/adventure that even if you noticed the holes in the plot,
you were too caught up in what was going on to pay much attention.  Make
no mistake, the film hauls butt.  I'd recommend it to my friends, and
maybe even see it again, so it gets a 3 stars out of 4 for enjoyment.
-- 
 Jaye Mathisen,systems manager Internet: icsu6000@caesar.cs.montana.edu
 410 Roberts Hall BITNET: icsu6000@mtsunix1.bitnet 
 Dept. of Computer Science         
 Montana State University                 PHONE: (406) 994-{4780,3931} 
 Bozeman MT 59717
