Authors
David Bezanson
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Sunshine (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member David Bezanson.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/c07dc6534306c06d8825691c0006e12f?OpenDocument
Now that the 20th century is finally over, I guess it's time to start
re-interpreting it.  Hopefully, summarizers of the century will follow
the example of Hungarian director Istvan Svabo and honestly face the
truth, no matter how painful.  (Unfortunately, many intellectuals don't
always seem interested in the truth --- especially about subjects like
communism, which many continue to embrace.)
In Sunshine, Svabo looks back through the last 100 years of his
country's history for meaning, and finds some --- enough to fill a
three-hour, soapy epic about the century's chaos.  The film mostly
works, and is a worthy addition to Svabo's art.
Sunshine begins at the end of the 19th century, focusing on three young
people who take Hungarian surnames and abandon the traditions espoused
by their father, a Jewish entrepeneur named Emmanuel Sonnenschein
("Sunshine" in English).  The ambitious son Ignatz (Fiennes, who also
plays Ignatz' son and grandson) rises to power in the Hungarian
government, then goes down with the monarchy.  His silly, free-spirited
cousin Valerie (Jennifer Ehle) deserts him over his conformity and
allegiance to the regime; his brother (James Frain) turns communist.
After WWI, the focus shifts from this triangle to Ignatz's son Adam
(Fiennes again), who becomes an Olympic champion and public hero after
renouncing Judaism, only to find his father's admonishment not to trust
in political power proved true.  When the Nazis ("philistines" as one
character describes them) overrun Hungary, Adam fails to save his family
from being killed or scattered.  Valerie is almost the only survivor. 
She is played in later life by Rosemary Harris (Ehle's real-life
mother), whose luminous performance is easily the film's best.
Adam's son Ivan (Fiennes once again) is scarred by watching his father's
murder at Auschwitz and, after the war, becomes an official in the
equally brutal and philistine Communist Party.  The Communists are also
anti-Semites (because they hate the wealthy classes) and Ivan finds
himself again imprisoned and dehumanized.  At the end of the film, Ivan
and Valerie remember their family and faith, and Ivan changes his name
back to Sonnenschein, though the name is all he has left.  His house has
been confiscated; the furniture, keepsakes, and cultural artifacts that
decorate the movie are thrown onto a garbage truck.
Sunshine clearly cost some bucks to make, and the result is the most
meticulous recreation of a historical period that I've seen on film. 
The screenplay is not as flawless: some characters are sketchy and
others are unappealing (especially Adam's girlfriend, played by Rachel
Wiesz) --- though to be fair, only Valerie and Ivan live long enough to
reach maturity.  There are some superficial moments; some of the sex
scenes are unpleasant and unrealistic.  But ultimately, the film is
redeemed by its religious core and its powerful use of images and
themes, both good (love, freedom, civilization, family) and evil
(politics, power, ambition, envy).  The film starts off slow but gets
better and better as it goes, building to a powerful, thoughtful
conclusion.
In the film, Svabo clearly draws distinctions between good beliefs and
bad beliefs.  Aware that he has lost his faith and followed the false
gods of political ideals, Ivan asks, "If there never was a God, then why
do we miss Him so much?"  Among the film's many characters, it is
perhaps great-grandfather Emmanuel (played by David de Keyser) who comes
off best, because he remains true to sensible beliefs.
On New Year's Day of 1900, Ignatz predicts that the new century will be
a time of "love, justice, and tolerance."  Lots of people probably still
think the 20th century was a time of greater love, justice and tolerance
(along with modern improvements, walking on the moon, etc.) so it's
probably a good thing that the movie brutally underscores the irony of
Ignatz's prediction.  The 20th century was the most murderous and
"philistine" century in history, in which Europe actually became less
civilized.  It was not a century of improvements but of "breaking all
our inheritance" (as one character says) and throwing it onto garbage
trucks.
At the end of the film and the century, Hungary knows freedom for the
first time in almost a century.  But in a world that is becoming ever
more "philistine" (judging from say, Eminem's new CD), less religious,
and less diverse, will the next century be much better?
Director: Istvan Svabo
Producers: Robt Lantos, Andras Hamori
Screenwriters: Istvan Svabo, Israel Horovitz
Stars: Ralph Fiennes, Rosemary Harris, Jennifer Ehle, Rachel Weisz,
Molly Parker, Miriam Margolyes, Deborah Kara Unger, James Frain, William
Hurt, John Neville
http://www.metrofilms.com/sunshine/
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for End of the Affair, The (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member David Bezanson.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/52062df4ccf337588825686f0080bda6?OpenDocument
I was dragged to see THE END OF THE AFFAIR expecting another lavishly
costumed, pointless period romance of the Merchant-Ivory type ... only
based on Graham Greene instead of Jane Austen or E. M. Forster.  The
kind of movie that our wives drag us to.  Instead, I was converted.
 THE END OF THE AFFAIR makes a lot of serious points, and offers a very
modern, psychological drama in spite of the period setting (London
during World War II). Instead of being another revisionist Hollywood
remake, THE END OF THE AFFAIR is the best kind of historical drama: one
that reminds you that history was made of real people and their emotions
--- love, pain, jealousy, and emptiness.
 The film revolves around a wartime affair between Sarah Miles (Julianne
Moore), the wife of a civil servant, and a writer, Maurice Bendrix
(Ralph Fiennes), who becomes her jealous lover.  Bendrix hires an
investigator (drolly played by Ian Hart) to follow Sarah, convinced that
she can't love him as purely as she does.  Ultimately, he finds that the
rival for her affections is not another lover, but something more
unexpected.
 Graham Greene, who converted to Catholicism before writing THE END OF
THE AFFAIR, was one of the last generation of writers (along with
contemporaries like Evelyn Waugh, C.S. Lewis, and William Faulkner) to
seriously consider the implications of religious belief.  Greene's
refusal to resolve his ambivalent faith is transcribed in the movie,
which goes deeper than the fashionable nihilism of most movies these
days.
 Director Neil Jordan returns to form with this work.  Jordan has
brought Greene's novel alive, revealing the conflicted, turbulent
emotions of the survivors of the Blitz.  The cast is excellent,
including Fiennes as the lout and Stephen Rea as the cuckold; but
Moore's sensual portrayal of Sarah, an ordinary individual forced to
struggle with belief, is the most haunting, and worth an Oscar nod.
THE END OF THE AFFAIR offers a much more balanced view of faith than
many supposedly religious movies --- unlike, say, THE GREEN MILE, with
its unbelievable Christ-figure and obvious social-gospel message, or the
whiny, cliched despair of ANGELA'S ASHES.  By holding God accountable
for pain and suffering as well as miracles, the makers of THE END OF THE
AFFAIR capture the uncertainty and passion of people struggling with
real faith.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for House on Haunted Hill (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member David Bezanson.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/a92fbd19d4c5c874882568d3000492c2?OpenDocument
     A film review by David Bezanson - Copyright (c) 2000 filmcritic.com
Every so often, most recently with Scream, a film will briefly try to
make the horror genre something it's not --- like creative,
entertaining, cool, or self-aware.  But The House on Haunted Hill is not
one of those films.
Instead, it's pretty much a copy of all the other haunted-house horror
movies that have run briefly in theaters over the years (and then run on
cable channels indefinitely, giving teenagers something to stare at for
a minute or two before leaving the house or switching channels).  I
understand that the beast of cable programming must be fed, but I still
don't understand why directors are still making new movies like this,
given the thousands that have already been made.  Why don't the cable
channels just run old ones from the late 1980s that nobody remembers?
Five people are invited to a party at a deserted former institution for
the criminally insane.  They've been promised a million dollars --- if
they get out alive.  I could summarize some of the other clichés in
Haunted Hill, but anybody who's had cable for a while can probably do it
for themselves.
There's nothing new or innovative about this movie except maybe for the
baffling presence of a few name actors.  Almost every actor or actress
is haunted by a few B movies, and hopefully the careers of Diggs,
Larter, and Kattan will get out alive.  But nothing can explain or
excuse the participation of Geoffrey Rush, who actually has won an
Oscar, for God's sake. Faced with the pressure of following up his work
in Shine and Shakespeare in Love, Rush choked, I guess.
I guess these movies are fun to make, but they're not interesting to
watch.  Please, no more!
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Mansfield Park (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member David Bezanson.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/e48cad7e2da19297882568580005a7e9?OpenDocument
What is it about Jane Austen?  This box-office stalwart has inspired
five major film adaptations in the '90s (six counting the excellent
BBC/A&E production of PRIDE AND PREJUDICE in 1995).
I think I know what Austen's secret is: Her books are recent, but not
modern. Her central characters have good manners and triumph over bad
marriages or economic straits, instead of succumbing to their own vices
or whining too much about their problems.
MANSFIELD PARK is the last of Austen's major novels to be filmed
recently, and I think it is usually considered Austen's weakest novel,
though not too weak for cynical filmmakers to try to squeeze a bit more
cash out of the writer's legacy.
Writer-director Patricia Rozema's cynicism comes out in other ways in
this film, too. She transforms Austen's diffident, quiet heroine Fanny
Price (Frances O'Connor) into a sassy, '90s, politically-aware attitude
girl who shows up the fatuousness of most of the other characters. Only
Edmund Bertram (Jonny Lee Miller), Fanny's true friend and ultimate love
interest, meets her approval.
Worse, Rozema has embellished the tale with a subplot about the moral
evisceration of Fanny's adopted family, the Bertrams, caused by the
family's ties to slavery (based on a few brief references in the novel
to family business in the West Indies).
The movie features one of the best casts in the Austen movie series:
O'Connor is very good, Miller just as good, and Harold Pinter (he can
act, too) does well in the revised, over-politicized role of Sir Thomas
Bertram. Rozema's direction gives the polite, overwritten novel some
needed sensuality.
Unfortunately, Rozema has also refracted the novel through a modern,
unsubtle, feminist bias. The result is still better than the average
'90s politically-correct sermonette, but definitely not a portal into a
19th-century brain (BEING JANE AUSTEN it isn't).
Austen's book is a study on virtues like "constancy," an un-modern
concept which does not mean the same thing as monogamy, nor does it mean
being "true to oneself," THELMA AND LOUISE style. It means believing in
certain moral values and being true to them even though others' conduct
is not always good or bad. Some of this subtlety comes through in the
film, but most of the characters are either too good (i.e. Fanny) or too
bad (everyone else, especially Sir Thomas) to be realistic studies. The
subplot about slavery is especially jarring, because it introduces
something morally unambiguous into a story which is about tolerating
shades of moral ambiguity.
The best dialogue in the film is in Austen's spirit, such as Fanny's
observation that "Life is but a succession of busy nothings" or Edmund's
wish for a "life of compassion and contemplation" (as a clergyman). But
too much of the dialogue is the kind of blunt raving that would have
made 19th-century families as dysfunctional as today's, except that they
customarily kept it to themselves.
Many of Rozema's revisionist additions ring false, like making Fanny an
aspiring writer (even if there were autobiographical elements in the
original novel, I doubt that Jane Austen was the smartass that Fanny is
portrayed as here) or having a character say things like "this is 1806,
for Heaven's sake."
It was supposed to be 1806, but MANSFIELD PARK the movie has a little
too much 1999 in it --- naďve social criticism, bathos, and vulgarity.
And judging from the popularity of Jane Austen adaptations, a lot of
moviegoers are tired of movies that remind them of the present.
Still, they'll probably take any period drama they can get...
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Pokémon the First Movie: Mewtwo Strikes Back (1999)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member David Bezanson.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/60e74e041ca9cd6b8625626f0062219f/759a34e0a6186893882568a6006b9928?OpenDocument
 Just because something makes money doesn't mean that it is good.
 This is a hard lesson to learn, especially for Americans, but
fortunately there are always things like POKEMON: THE FIRST MOVIE to
remind us.
 No one at Nintendo thought to wonder if a video game could really
provide sufficient backstory to sustain an entire movie.  Nor has anyone
at Nintendo ever stopped to think about whether children might enjoy
childhood more if they didn't spend it mindlessly repeating nonsense
words like "pikachu" made up in spare moments by Nintendo employees.
Instead, Nintendo saw a chance to make billions of dollars, and moved
forward monolithically with their cynical hypermarketing.
The resulting Pokemon craze is the emptiest craze yet --- a fantasy
world of garbage, without plot, compelling mythology, or point.
 Before now, children's literature was dominated by writers like Dr.
Seuss, A. A. Milne, C.S. Lewis, Lloyd Alexander, Disney, etc., who took
seriously the responsibility of creating entertainment that might shape
the thinking of children.  No longer.  The content of POKEMON is
probably harmful to kids in a dozen ways, but to even try to find any
intellectual subtext in the movie at all is pretty iffy, so I will not
waste readers' time with a lot of analysis of how the movie fosters
violence, discourages environmental awareness, and so on.
 This is the most cynical movie ever made.  Even the movie's subtitle,
"MEWTWO STRIKES BACK", is cynically derivative --- the filmmakers secure
in the knowledge that the film's target audience doesn't care that there
is already a movie called THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK (which was itself an
amalgam of earlier works).
 There are no redeeming qualities of POKEMON... and only one serious
question: Should entertainment products be designed solely to please
children too young to understand what is entertaining? In previous
centuries, people thought not.  Is this progress?
 For an adult, the only appropriate response to the Pokemon craze is
simply, ostrich-like, to try to pretend it doesn't exist. After writing
this review, I'm going to try to do just that.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
