Authors
W. Waffle
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Welcome To Sarajevo (1997)
Are you tired of all the hot new releases being gone by the time you get to the
video store?  
WaffleMovies.com is dedicated to finding those hidden gems that lie on the
shelves.  Everyweek, WaffleMovies.com reviews independent film and big studio
pictures that deserve a second chance on video.  Here is a sample review:
In light of America's recent intervention in Kosovo, Welcome to Sarajevo is a
reminder of the horror America and the world ignored for years. 
Set in Sarajevo 1992 and based on actual events, this picture examines the
human and societal casualties of war. The picture opens with a family escorting
their young bride to her wedding. As they make their way down the street, a
sniper shoots the mother of the bride. Yet another reminder that daily life in
war torn Sarajevo can never escape the horror of war. 
In this scene, we meet Joe Flynn (Woody Harrelson), an American reporter who
stops reporting to help a priest carry the mortally wounded mother into a
church. Joe is cocky, but also good at heart as he continues to carry out kind
deeds for people he doesn't even know. 
His fellow reporter is the British Michael Henderson (Stephen Dillane). Michael
is quickly growing tired of the horror that surrounds him and the world's lack
of interest. Henderson is haunted by the memory of an altar boy who witnesses
the mother's death as well as a young girl who he finds orphaned in a hospital
after a mortar attack on citizens waiting in line for bread. He decides to take
action when a United Nations' delegation descends upon the area to declare
Yugoslavia the fourteenth most dangerous place on Earth. 
Henderson begins a series profiling an orphanage located on the front lines. He
finds children of all ages living in fear and taking care of each other with
the help of one adult. During his visits, he befriends a pre-teen girl, Emira
(Emira Nuseric) who serves as surrogate mother to baby Roadrunner. He promises
to get Emira out of harm's way if he gets the chance. After the UN delegation
leaves the country without rescuing any of the children, Henderson loses hope. 
However, his reporting has grabbed the attention of Nina (Marisa Tomei) and her
children's aid group that helps to find homes for the Yugoslavian orphans.
Unfortunately, only babies are wanted for adoption, so Henderson pledges to
take Emira to England. The group of children, Nina and Henderson depart the
front lines on a dangerous escape for Italy. Can they complete this dangerous
trek through the war torn countryside and avoid hostile troops gathering up
Muslims for concentration camps? 
The movie was beautifully and sensitively made. Director Michael Winterbottom
and screenwriter Frank Cottrell Boyce vividly express the societal destruction
that has occurred. They show the destroyed lives, families that have been split
up, and the desolation that everyone attempts to cope with. This is best
exemplified by the group of Yugoslavians Henderson, his producer and Flynn have
befriended. 
The group of twenty-somethings reside in a bombed out bar without life's
simplest pleasures and amenities. One of them is an accomplished musician who
spends his days playing the piano and promising to play a concert when Sarajevo
is declared the most dangerous place on Earth. Like the rest of those deeply
effected by the war, this small group tries to survive instead of trying to
live. 
Winterbottom brilliantly intersplices scenes with actual news footage to give
the film the feel of a documentary and keeps the viewer aware that many of
these horrors are being carried out thousands of miles away as you sit safely
in your living room. The picture is also bolstered by beautiful cinematography
that captures the devastation of this city that hosted the 1984 Olympics. 
Winterbottom and Boyce also produce a realistic portrayal of the reporters
covering the atrocities. This portrayal is much more flattering to reporters
than earlier Wafflemovies.com selection Mad City. We watch them struggle to
cover the horror, while trying to remain professionally detached. However, they
are human and question the reason behind it all, why no one cares, and how they
can get out. 
Stephen Dillane is wonderful as Henderson. He portrays the character as an
everyman caught in the middle of extraordinary events. Dillane avoids making
the character overly heroic and preachy. Henderson realizes that he cannot save
the world, but he can help a few. It is a wonderful opportunity for Dillane
after he had to suffer through the Denis Leary-Sandra Bullock disaster Two if
by Sea. 
Woody Harrelson continues to prove that he is one of the finest, most versatile
actors of his generation. Harrelson plays the cocky celebrity reporter with a
heart of gold by allowing the character's caring nature and vulnerability shine
through. Harrelson is equally adept at taking on roles as zany leading men
(Cheers, White Men Can't Jump) as well as excellent supporting roles such as
this one. This ability will serve him well and give him a long, successful
career. 
America's involvement in this struggle comes seven years after the events of
the movie take place. For those who do not have a full understanding of the
history of the conflict, the entire movie, most importantly the opening scenes,
provide a history lesson. War is a foreign concept to most of us in America.
Battles are fought thousands of miles away among people we have no attachment
to. Televised images of the Gulf War are all the experience most of us have
with war. This picture brings it right into your living room and makes you
think outside of our own small world, something we don't do enough of in 90's
America. 

Title
Review for Smoke Signals (1998)
I review independent flicks and movies that deserve a second chance every week
at WWW.WAFFLEMOVIES.COM. Here is a sample:
In Smoke Signals, director Chris Erye and writer Sherman Alexie give us a
realistic and moving view of Native Americans. They drop the stereotypes and
truthfully portray Native Americans as regular people full of hopes and dreams,
facing tough decisions and coping with loss. Erye and Alexie also examine the
stereotypes and racism they face, as well as the inner struggle each faces
dealing with the world. 
The movie opens with an incident that connects our two main characters for
life. In Coeur d'Alene, Idaho on Independence Day 1976, Arnold Joseph (Gary
Farmer) saved the life of Thomas (Evan Adams) as both of his parents perished
in a horrible fire. Now orphaned, Thomas is raised by his grandmother and tries
to connect with those around him through storytelling. Also rescued from the
fire is Arnold Joseph's son, Victor (Adam Beach). 
Erye skillfully uses a series of flashbacks mixed with modern day action to
explain the relationship between Thomas and Victor. He shows us the friendship
shared by the two until a guilt-ridden Arnold Joseph leaves his family for
Arizona. On that day, young Thomas (Simon Baker) suggests it is young Victor's
(Cody Lightning) fault that his father has left. Victor never forgives Thomas
until his mother (Tantoo Cardinal) receives a call from Arnold Joseph's
neighbor (Irene Bedard) informing her that his father has died. 
Victor wants to travel to Arizona to claim his father's remains, but cannot
afford a bus ticket. Although they have grown apart, Thomas agrees to lend him
the money, but with the condition that they go together. Thomas always had a
strong relationship with the man who saved his life, and wishes to say good-bye
with his old friend. 
The resulting movie becomes one of the best buddy movies I have seen in a long
time. Unlike the classic Dean Martin/Jerry Lewis buddy pictures, this one is
driven by Alexie's sharp Tarrantino-like dialogue instead of zany situation
comedy. During the trip, we learn about the racism Victor and Thomas face as
they encounter others filled with hate. 
Not only do Victor and Thomas face hate as they leave the reservation for the
first time in their lives, but they are burdened by conflicting ideas of how
they should act and portray themselves. One of the best scenes of the movie
results when Victor instructs Thomas how he should act or else, "the white man
will run all over you." Victor tells Thomas he must abandon his trademark suit
and braids for long flowing locks and a stoic appearance. Thomas transforms
himself into a warrior, but retains his nerdy demeanor, realizing that he
doesn't want to be a stereotype. 
In Arizona, Thomas and Victor learn about the rehabilitated Arnold Joseph. He
gave up drinking and loved his son from afar. Arnold's neighbor, Suzy Song,
explains why he left Victor and his mother and the truth behind the most
important incident in Victor and Thomas' lives. 
The picture is full of excellent performances. Gary Farmer shines as the
alcoholic and remorseful Arnold Joseph. Farmer is excellent as we slowly watch
him deteriorate and become consumed with guilt. Adam Beach is fabulous as the
emotionally withdrawn and heartbroken Victor. He fills the character full of
rage and hurt. Evan Adams should have been nominated for an Oscar for his
performance as the "Dances with Wolves"-loving, mystical, nerdy Thomas. He
creates an appealing and enduring character that you hope will reappear in
other work by Eyre and Alexie. 
Why was this movie released in June of 1998?!?!?!? Unfortunately, this
excellent movie would have been better served if it were released in the fall
or winter like most Oscar contenders. That competition would have been more
appropriate than facing Saving Private Ryan, Armageddon and Something About
Mary. The movie was awarded the Audience Award and the Filmmaker's Trophy at
the 1998 Sundance Film Festival, and could have made a strong Oscar showing if
released at a better time. 
Chris Eyre does an excellent job helming the first movie by Native Americans
about Native Americans. Unfortunately, the movie has some fantastic
cinematography that is lost on the small screen. Although this movie never
registered on the national radar screen, Eyre has great potential and will be
heard from as he makes more movies. Fortunately for us, this movie is available
on video, allowing us the opportunity to enjoy this hidden gem. 
