Authors
JABII
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Scream (1996)
Twelve years ago, director Wes Craven gave audiences "A Nightmare on Elm
Street", and terrified an entire generation. After an ungodly number of
terrible sequels, Mr. Craven has collaborated with writer Keven Williamson on
something quite new. "Scream", is a rare item indeed. A serious horror movie in
which all involved seem to realize they are in a horror movie. 
A serial killer, obsessed with old horror movies, is stalking a small
California town. After the brutal murders of two high school students in the
beginning of the film (one of the movie's most shocking and tense scenes), a
group of high school students decide to figure out who the killer is. Sidney
Prescott (Neve Campbell), is more or less the leader of the group, and her
mother had been killed the year before. As the teens search for the killer's
identity, everyone becomes a suspect. Things are made more interesting by a TV
reporter, Gale Weathers (Courtney Cox), and a deputy (David Arquette) who are
also trying to determine the killer's identity.
This film is not for the squeamish, be forewarned. It just barely squeaked by
an NC-17 rating for exessive gore.  I can't, in good conscience, give a blood
splattered horror movie a higher rating than four stars, but this is truly one
of the best I've seen. The only weak point in this film seems to be Neve
Campbell's acting at times. It's not that she does a bad job, she simply isn't
as convincing as the rest of the cast. In particular, Skeet Ulrich and Matthew
Lillard are quite good. Lillard plays Campbell's boyfriend, and Lillard is a
goofy member of the group. Jamie Kennedy is a riot as the horror movie expert
of the gang, spending a good deal of time spouting off lines from horror films
and quoting the rules for how to survive a horror flick.
Another excellent member of the cast, though she isn't in it for too long, is
Drew Barrymore. Playing a terrified student, home alone one night at the
beginning of the film, she does a marvelous job. One last thing I must point
out, is how much I enjoyed the mystery aspect to the story. The majority of
horror films make it quite clear who the killer is. Not here. The murderer
wears a ghoulish halloween costume which hides the face behind a rather scary
looking fhost mask.
This movie is a lot of fun for those who have strong stomachs. If you don't
normally enjoy slasher flicks, stay far away from this one. Watch for two
rather surprising actors in here too. Henry Winkler, as the high school
principal, and Robert Englund (Freddy Kreuger) shows up very quickly as a
janitor.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick, try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com

Title
Review for Hurricane, The (1999)
Directed by: Norman Jewison
Written by: Rubin "Hurricane" Carter, Sam Chaiton
In the past I have stated that strong performances are incapable of saving an
otherwise weak film (1998's Hurlyburly being a perfect example of this). Denzel
Washington proves me wrong in "The Hurricane", the story of Rubin "Hurricane"
Carter. While the film itself is languid, overlong, and melodramatic,
Washington's performance is outstanding. Washington has, in fact, already
received a Golden Globe nomination for his role, and if he doesn't receive an
Oscar nomination to go along with this, someone in the academy is going to
hang.
Shot in two different time periods, the film tells the story of Rubin
"Hurricane" Carter (Denzel Washington). Portions of the film show Rubin's rise
to fame and troubles with the authorities. The time frame then shifts to
Rubin's days in prison and the efforts of a young man named Lesra (Vicellous
Reon Shannon) and his three Canadian teachers/foster parents (John Hannah, Liev
Schreiber, Deborah Unger) to free him. While the group searches for clues which
will help exonerate Carter, they are threatened and harassed by the racist cop
(Dan Hedaya) who pinned the murder on Rubin thirty years prior.
The majority of the film moves along at such a leisurely pace that I noticed
half of the audience drifting off. During these scenes, all one can do is wait
for Washington to show up and ignite the screen. However, not all of the film
is quite so sluggish. The scenes in which the Canadians hunt for clues move
along at a nice, brisk pace. The biggest fault perhaps lies in the amount of
time spent on Carter's younger days. For nearly half of the very long picture,
we watch Carter get cheated out of everything he's earned again and again.
During these scenes, we're shown Hedaya's vengeful Lieutenant Della Pesce
trying everything he can to have Carter locked up. The problem here is that
despite a great job by Hedaya (as always), the character has no personality.
He's evil, pure and simple. We're given nothing beyond this. In a movie like
"Star Wars" this works fine, but here we really need something more to make us
hate this character.
As for the performances here, I've already made clear how incredible Washington
is, but the majority of the supporting cast is really quite good as well. I
truly believe that Dan Hedaya can't help but act well. Liev Schrieber (Scream
2), Deborah Unger (The Game), and John Hannah (The Mummy) are all adequate at
their worst and entertaining at their best. Clancy Brown (Highlander) and Rod
Steiger (End of Days) both make fairly brief appearances, but both are talented
enough actors that it's a pleasure seeing them at all. The only weak link here
is Vicellous Reon Shannon. I'm not entirely sure if this is due to Shannon
himself, or the rather weak dialogue written for him. I lean towards the latter
because every now and then Shannon seems to break free and display some real
talent. 
"The Hurricane" is by no means a great movie. It can, however, be an
interesting one at times. The film runs 125 minutes, which would normally be a
good running time, but fifteen minutes or so of this movie could easily have
been chopped. "The Hurricane" is at its best when we see how Carter deals with
life in prison, which involves him cutting himself off from anything and anyone
he cared about. However, countless melodramatic scenes and a whole lot of
preaching keep the film from being anything more than fairly good. I'd
recommend waiting for video on this one, but do try and see it. 
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.

Title
Review for Mystery Men (1999)
Imagine a city where superheroes are a dime a dozen. They're all over the
place, crowding the costume shops and karate stores; tripping over each other
in an attempt to make a name for themselves. Unfotunately, all these
superheroes are also godawful at their jobs. This is the basic premise behind
the very amusing comic book superhero spoof "Mystrey Men". With an all star
cast, an often hilarious script, and great visuals, this is one of the few
truly good satires in recent memory.
Captain Amazing, Champion City's protector, has a problem. His funding is
slowly being cut by all the major companies which sponsor his crime fighting.
This is because he has captured or killed all the real super villains, and is
now reduced to fighting street punks. In an effort to revive his dwindling
career, he arranges for the release of his old nemesis, Cassanova Frankenstein.
His intention is to fight the villain in a climactic battle and win back
support. However, there's one small flaw in his plan. Frankenstein is
brilliant, and Amazing is a moron. Captured by Cassanova, Amazing's only hope
lies with a group of superhero wannabes. Mr. Furious, who seems to have the
power to get really mad; The Shoveler, who hits people with his shovel (imagine
that) Blue Raja, who throws forks with deadly accuracy; Invisible Boy, who is
only invisible if no one looks at him; The Bowler, who throws a bowling ball
filled with her father's skull; The Sphinx, who speaks like a rather dumbed
down version of Yoda; and The Spleen, who is an expert with, umm, gas. The
motley band attempts to free the real superhero, while making some sort of name
for themselves. 
For a long time, I was quite a comic book fan. I collected just about every
comic imaginable. However, there were certain things in them which always
rather bothered me. For example, why couldn't anyone tell that Clark Kent and
Superman were one and the same? Mystery Men covers that in a very amusing
discussion the heroes have while in a diner. The movie does, in fact, take so
much glee in poking fun at comic book styple heroes, that some of the gags run
on a bit too long. The Spleen, for instance, gets a little annoying by the
film's end. However, most of the humor is right on target, such as when the
heroes are creating their new costumes.
As for the acting, from a cast like this one expects the best, and in this
case, receives the best. All the actors appear to be having an absolute blast
with their roles. Hank Azaria was my absolute favorite as the Blue Raja,
speaking in a hilarious English accent, and constantly attempting to explain
why he has one when his name and costume are obviously Indian. The rest of the
cast are uniformly great, each character having odd litle quirks which never
failed to make the audience laugh uproariously. The only character who never
really seemed to find his niche was Invisible Boy, who basically sat in the
background through most of the film.
If you don't care for spoofs, don't see this movie. If you don't like comic
books, you might not enjoy this. Otherwise, try and catch "Mystery Men". It's
one of the best entries into the genre in recent memory, and earns four stars.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com

Title
Review for Three Kings (1999)
If there's one new idea that I could quickly become irritated by, it's major
motion pictures being shot with a home video camera. This idea, which proved
popular in "The Blair Witch Project", is now being used in the Gulf War film,
"Three Kings" for no apparent reason. Well everyone, if you thought we were the
good guys in Desert Storm, you were wrong. According to "Three Kings" the
Americans are evil intruders, save four renegade soldiers.
Archie Gates is a commander at the end of his career. He therefore has nothing
to lose when three soldiers Troy Barlow , Chief Elgin , and Conrad Vig discover
a map to a stash of gold stolen from the Kuwaities by Saddam. While stealing
the gold back however, they break the cease fire by killing several of Saddam's
troops. Soon, they've teamed up with a group of rebels and their only concern
is to save the people of Iraq. During this entire affair, we're treated to an
utterly pointless subplot which involves one soldier, Walter Wogaman leading a
reporter on a wild goose chase.
There are so many irritating details in this movie that I'm not entirely sure
where to begin. The utterly pointless violence in some scenes is quite
irritating. For example, Clooney describes what a bullet does once inside the
body to his cohorts. During his description, we're treated to a scene actually
displaying the gruesome subject. We are also given the chance to see such
things as a cow exploding (this is apparently very funny), a mother being shot
in the head, a baby and mother being blown to bits, and a child being crushed
by debris.
The grainy, home video like shooting is apparently supposed to add realism,
though I think it is present only to make the film appear more "arsty".
However, about half way through, the filming suddenly shifts to regular
Hollywood style. Almost all the humor in "Three Kings" falls flat, being
completely out of place in a movie as violent as this. The script is also
predictable and rather poorly written.
There are a few redeeming qualities here. The acting is solid all around, and
some of the gun fights are truly interesting when shot in slow motion. These
few things aren't nearly enough to save this sub-par film however. I grant it
two stars, and a recommendation to steer clear unless you're looking for a nap
or a sick stomach.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com

Title
Review for Stir of Echoes (1999)
If there's one thing that will always confuse me, it's the timing that film
companies possess. I'm curious as to what inspires these people to release
movies at the same time similar movies have been released by different
companies. It happened in '98 with "Armageddon" and "Deep Impact"competing, and
then, only months later, "Antz" and "A Bug's Life" went at it. Why Artisan
chose to release "Stir of Echoes" right after "The 6th Sense" will forever be
beyond my comprehension.
Tom Witzky is a Blue-collar worker in Chicago. He has a loving wife and a son
who (we learn right away) can see and speaks to ghosts. One night, at a party,
he talks his hippy sister in law, Lisa, to hypnotize him. In doing so, she
unknowingly grants him abilities similar (though not as useful) to his son's.
Soon, he becomes obsessed with finding out what the sudden, bizarre images he
receives mean. He puts the rest of his life on hold, and begins acting in very
erratic ways. This slowly begins to alienate his wife and friends, but he
doesn't care. The mystery is all that matters to him now.
I don't want to reveal to much more about the plot, because it is revealed in
mystery format. In fact, this is the film's greatest problem. Whereas it starts
with horror film like images and ideas, it rather suddenly turns into a very
obvious murder mystery. So obvious, that the entire audience will most likely
know the answer to the mystery about half way through the film.
However, let me point out that there are, in fact, some great aspects to this
film. Kevin Bacon turns in a great performance as a man who suddenly possesses
a "gift" he doesn't understand. There are some truly creepy scenes in the film,
such as when his son is suddenly and very briefly channeling another voice, and
a scene in which his wife prepares to take a bath but isn't alone. There is
also a wonderful soundtrack which is a nice blend of more modern music, and
purely instrumental.
Other than Kevin Bacon, the other actors are uniformly okay, with only Illeana
Douglas adding something more to her performance. Zachary Cope gives a decent
offering as Tom's son, but he's simply outshone by Haley Joel Osment's turn in
"The 6th Sense". The number one flaw is the movie's rather idiotic mystery, as
I've already pointed out, but another large problem is the addition of
characters who are given nothing to do. For example, Officer Neil (Edddie Bo
Smith Jr.) appears to be a man who possesses the same abilities as Tom and
Jake, but he isn't in the movie for more than six or seven minutes.
Overall, "Stir of Echoes" could have been a much more interesting movie if only
it had been released at a time when the far superior "The 6th Sense" wasn't
still fresh in our minds. I do give it three stars and a  marginal
reccomendation, but wait for video.
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
E-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com

Title
Review for Bone Collector, The (1999)
Directed by: Phillip Noyce
Written by: Jeffery Deaver (novel), Jeremy Iacone
A dark city, a constant downpour, a serial killer who the cops can't catch, and
a brilliant detective who is the only one capable of finding him. With a tried
and true formula like this, how could a film possibly go wrong? By being
utterly, ridiculously implausible. Another example of how fine acting from the
leads can't save a script this unbelievable.
Lincoln Rhyme (Denzel Washington) was once a brilliant detective, but a falling
pipe crushed his spine and his will to live. Despite support from his friends,
Thelma (Queen Latifah) and fellow detective Paulie (Ed O'Neill), he has decided
to end his life before his injury escalates and he becomes a vegetable.
However, Paulie wants his help on one more case, which involves a killer taxi
driver who is leaving clues for the police. Lincoln agrees, but only if young
officer Amelia (Angelina Jolie) will be his eyes and ears by filming crime
scenes and reporting to him.
As I said, the acting here is really quite good, particularly from Denzel
Washington. It's remarkable what a performance he can deliver, despite being
able to move only his head and one finger. Angelina Jolie delivers an adequate
performance, but seems rather miscast. As always, it's a pleasure to see Ed
O'Neill in a film. Being known almost entirely for his role as Al Bundy on
"Married With Children", it's good to see the talented actor trying his hand at
something new. Michael Rooker (Cliffhanger, Tombstone) makes an appearance as
the useless Captain Cheney, whos character seems present only to hassle the
investigators and irritate the audience.
Speaking of implausibilities, how long do you believe a train takes to stop?
Quite a long time, at any rate. According to "The Bone Collector", it takes
maybe 20 yards to come to a complete stop. The scene involves Amelia just
having found a body and a clue which lies on the train tracks. She stands in
front of the train, yelling for it to stop and waving her arms back and forth.
The clue is a piece of paper held down by a bolt. This could very easily have
been moved off the tracks, but this wouldn't have been nearly as tense a scene
I suppose.
Another nice, impossible scene involves Amelia searching for a book which will
reveal the identity of the killer, according to Lincoln. The first store she
looks for this rare book in happens to have it, and she discovers its location
by reaching to the top of a shelf and pulling a pile of books down. The novel
in question lands right on top, turned towards her. As for the identity of the
killer, I guessed it as soon as he appeared on screen; but when his identity is
truly revealed, it comes completely out of left field, so don't even try to
guess his motives.
"The Bone Collector" runs a little too long at 118 minutes. I'd recommend it
only for die-hard fans of either the genre, or Denzel Washington. Even if you
fall under one of these categories, I'd still suggest waiting for video.
Feel free to e-mail with comments at: JABII@aol.com
* * * * * - One of the greatest movies ever made, see it now.
* * * * - Great flick. Try and catch this one.
* * * - Okay movie, hits and misses.
* * - Pretty bad. See it if you've got nothing better to do.
* - One of the worst movies ever. See it only if you enjoy pain.
