Authors
Laurence Mixson
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for Aliens (1986)
Review by Laurence Mixson(venom8@hotmail.com)
Starring Sigourney Weaver, Paul Reiser, Michael Beihn, and Bill Paxton.
        Every once in a while a movie comes along that completely redefines the
genre: with dramas, it was Citizen Kane, with arthouse it was Pulp
Fiction, and with comedy it was, well, that Jim Carrey guy(okay, so he's
not a movie, but he DID have a huge influence on the genre. Not to
mention an expensive one.) Sometimes a movie even combines them all into
a big, sprawling motion picture event, as did Forrest Gump four years
ago.
        With action films, it was Aliens, whic was released to much hype seven
years after it's equally-innovative parent, Alien(1979). Directed and
written by James Cameron(T2: Judgement Day, The Abyss, True Lies), THE
authority on action films, it was a masterful encore to his sci-fi
thriller The Terminator(1984). 
        While the original Alien film was a dark, enclosed horror film that
featured one alien slowly massacering a horrified crew, James Cameron
took the big-budget action film with Aliens, which featured multiple
aliens doing basically the same thing, although on a much-larger scale.
And boy, did he take that route! I'd say at about 165 mph or so...
        The film opens 57 years after the original, with Lt. Ripley(Weaver)
being found in her ship in a  cryogenic state by a salvage vessel. If
you'll recall, at the end of Alien Ripley, the only surviving member,
cryogenically "hibernated" herself after expelling the rogue alien from
her ship. Unfortunately, she thought she'd only be out for a couple of
weeks...
        Once she's returned to earth, Ripley is quickly interrogated by "the
company", who quickly dismiss her and her stories as lunacy. In truth,
they believe her, as they soon approach Ripley with an offer to travel
with some Marines to a new colony planet as an "alien advisor". It seems
that the colony planet was a once-breeding ground for the nasty aliens,
and now all communication with the planet has been lost...
        It doesn't exactly take a genius to guess what happens next: Ripley
agrees, and before you can say "big mistake", she and the half dozen
marines, plus the slimy corporate guy(Reiser), who has more than it
looks like up under his sleeve, are off to the colony.
        When they arrive, they find the planet in ruins. Only one survivor is
found, a little girl, Newt, who confirms that, yes, the aliens were here
and that she only managed to survive by hidding in the ventilation
system. And soon enough, the marines come under attack from the
aliens...
        What happens for the next hour and a half or so is what completely sets
this movie apart from any other standard alien sci-fi movie: the action
scenes.  Cameron directs them so skillfully, and so suspensefully, that
you're literally ringing your hands by the time the finale rolls around.
Which features, in my opinion, the best fight scene ever recorded on
film, as Ripley straps herself into a huge robot and battles the nasty
Queen alien to the death.
        Many people will tell you that this film, while being a great action
film, has no real drama and is all cliches. Well, they would be wrong,
my friends. If this film had no "drama", then why was Sigourney Weaver
nominated for Best Actress at the 1987 Academy Awards? That's right,
best actress. You know that ANY action film that has an oscar nomination
attached to it for something other than technical stuff like editing and
F/X has GOT to be good.
        In short, Aliens combines all the right elements(great action and F/X,
drama, a good plot, good dialogue, and great villains)into what could
arguably be called the best action film of all time. Then again, maybe
not. Movies rise and fall from glory and, sad to say, Aliens was
wrestled from it's throne of Best Action Movie by another Cameron film,
T2: Judgement Day, in 1991. So who will be the next king? Well, let's
wait until December 19th and see yet another James Cameron film-the
highest budgeted film of all time-Titanic to make that decision. I can't
wait.

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
Men in Black (1997)Starring Tommy Lee Jones, Will Smith, Linda
Fiorentino, VincentD'Onofrio, and Rip Torn.
Review by Laurence Mixson (jarls@datasync.com)
>From Fully Loaded Entertainment: http://www.geocities.com/~fullyloaded
        I hate to burst your bubble, but after all the star power, mega
bucks,screenwriters, directors, and cool trailers, Men in Black is not
the best  movie of the summer. It's pretty good in it's own right, yes,
but I would  probably split the "best movie" honors among Face/Off,
Spawn, Con Air,and maybe Event Horizon.
        It's main problem is that it's quickly forgettable, and I can't 
remember one truly good scene from it. From Con Air, it was the scene
out in the desert when they were digging the plane out from the dirt. In
Spawn, it was the "living room hell" conclusion at the end. In Event
Horizon, it was the video of the Event Horizon crew being taken over by
hell's forces. And all of Face/Off was pretty dang good. But as for Men
In Black, the only scene
I still recall is when Will Smith is squishing all those giant roaches.
I remember it not for it's humor but because I am hate roaches with a
passion and was pretty disgusted. And yes, I did see Mimic, which is
something I'll touch on in a later review.
        Back to Men in Black(is it just me, or does that sound funny?) I
remember first hearing about Men in Black back when I was a comic geek
in the 7th grade and read magazines like Wizard, etc.(for those of you
who aren't comic-geeks, Wizard is basically to comics what Car and
Driver is to cars, what The New Yorker is to high society, what Boy's
Life is to Boy Scots. Okay, that one was pretty pathetic.) Few people
know this, but Men in Black is based on a very obscure comic book
that was, while not honest-politician-rare, very hard to find. This was
after the release of the high-grossing Batman Forever, and it said that
Tommy Lee Jones and Chris O'Donnell were being considered for the
roles(in the comic book, there were no black Men in Black. Kind of
weird, huh?) All I can say is, thank God they didn't cast Chris
O'Donnell. I know I can't be the only person on the planet who thinks
he's an annoying, preppie little snot...
        Sorry. My apologies to O'Donnell fans. I actually had a 7th grade
teacher who was a big comic collector and was set to buy some of the
comics from him, anticipating rather craftily that, if the movie was a
big hit, it would drive up the price of the comics rather nicely. He
decided not to sell them to me, because they were "innappropriate".
Hmm....
        So now you're probably wondering why I've wasted about 5 paragraphs
with lame anecdotes from my junior high years. Good question. I'll move
on to the movie now. As you probably already know, Will Smith and Tommy
Lee Jones(Agents K and J, respectively) belong to a top secret agency
known as Divison 5, or it's nickname MIB(Men in Black.) Men in Black is
a reference to the black suits and sunglasses the agents wear, and
they're mission is to investigate reports of alien landings and keep the
aliens under control while they're here on earth. Not to get too
technical or spoil the plot for the 6 people in the world who haven't
seen this movie, but a basically-big-roach-type-bug lands in a redneck
farmer's yard, inhabits his body, and attempts to destroy the entire
universe. Not bad, eh?(I have no idea why I just typed that. I'm not
even really paying attention anymore.)
        The special effects are good yet dissapointing in Men in Black. I found
their main headquarters to be boring, as were the "cool weapons" they
had. The noisy cricket just plain sucked, no matter what anyone said.
        And the movie definitely surprised me in tone, although it probably
shoudln't have. It's director, Barry Sonnenfield, is known for "black
humor", directing both Addams Family movies. This movie was basically a
"black comedy", not an action/sci-fi like I expected from the trailers.
        Don't get me wrong on what I think of this movie. It's not bad, I gave
it ***. It was mostly entertaining throughout it's run, and had a
very good ending, although I think I was the only person in the theater
not amazed by it. My diagnosis for this picture: a good weekend rental,
but not worth a movie ticket. Of course, the movie is now long gone from
theaters, but that's beside the point. I think.

Title
Review for Assault on Precinct 13 (1976)
Starring Austin Stoker, Darwin Joston, Laurie Zimmer, Martin West, Tony
Burton, Charles Cyphers, and Nancy Kyes.
Review by Laurence Mixson (jarls@datasync.com)
I like Quentin Tarantino alot. In fact, he's one of my favorite
directors. After all, here's the man that did Pulp Fiction, a movie so
good I gave it ***** out of ****. Which is why I rented Assault on
Precint 13. Normally, I don't rent too many movies from the
70's(although I loved One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest), I checked this
one out because the video cover had a quote from Quentin Tarantino
saying, "One of my favorite movies!", or something like that. So I gave
this one a shot.
Assault on Precint 13 was directed by John Carpenter(Halloween, Escape
from L.A.) another one of my favorite directors. As a matter of fact,
let me just get this over with and state my favorite directors right
here: Quentin Tarantino, Robert Zemeckis, John Carpenter, and James
Cameron.
Now, back to the point. If you know anything about John Carpenter, you
know he's a very "hands-own" film-maker, usually writing AND scoring the
movies he directs. Assault on Precint 13 is no different. While the
music(he's famous for electronic synthesizers) isn't quite as catchy as
his masterpiece Halloween, it's excellent in its own right, and
certainly captures the eerie feeling of the movie.
So here's where I stop talking about the film makers and production and
give the plot. Actually, this one's pretty easy. If you've seen Night of
the Living Dead, you've basically seen this film. While Assault doesn't
have endless hordes of zombies, it does have endless hordes of teenage
gang members. Then again, there isn't really that much difference
between the two...
Okay, back to the plot. The teenage gangs in L.A. are unifying and have
captured a huge arms shipment. Meanwhile, Station 13, Precint
9(interestingly, the title is incorrect)is closing down. Only one police
officer, Bishop(Stokes), with two secretaries, is left to care of the
station until it's permanently shut down tomorrow. However, a bus of 3
Death Row-headed inmates arrives at the station because one is sick,
including Napoleon Wilson(Joston, portraying a sage-like inmate), upping
the ante a little. Soon after, another cast member is introduced, as a
man who runs into the station in shock after seeing his daughter
murdered by some gang members. The man retaliated, killing one, and now
the gang has chased him to the station. The assault begins...
Here's where the fun(and the Living Dead similarities)begin. The
suspense climaxes again and again as endless waves of silent gang
members seige the station, with our heroes armed with little ammunition
and no lighting. John Carpenter's high-pitched music only adds to the
suspense and helps to create some of the best low-key action sequences
I've ever seen.
So what did I think of this movie? I loved it. The gang members, who
never say one word, are great villains. This movie, for an action movie,
is very realistic, which is one of the reasons I loved Pulp Ficton.
Everything that happens in both of these movies could technically happen
in real life. Then again, that airplane scene in Eraser could
technically happen, but you know what I mean...
This is definitely one of my favorite movies out there. So why did I
only give it ***1/2, instead of ****. Because the acting in this movie
is horrible. If the actions that take place are plausible, the dialogue
isn't. The responses are flat and poorly-timed. A secretary is shot in
the arm and doesn't even flich. C'mon. Unfortunately, the only thing
that holds Assault down is the pathetic acting, except for the character
of Napoleon Wilson. But don't let that discourage you from renting it.
It certainly hasn't discouraged me from renting it almost a dozen times,
copying it, and buying the laserdisc.

Title
Review for Se7en (1995)
Starring: Morgan Freeman, Brad Pitt, Gwyneth Paltrow, Richard Roundtree
Review by Laurence Mixson (venom8@hotmail.com)
>From Fully Loaded Entertainment: http://www.geocities.com/~fullyloaded
        It always takes me a while to review a movie after I see it. I
can't sit down immediately after viewing a film and write a review of
it. I have to sort it out, think it over, go through the ending and
beginning and everything else. When I finished watching Seven last night
after watching it, I didn't know quite what to think. I knew it was a
good movie, sure, but I still couldn't form any true impressions of it. 
        When I woke up this morning and thought about it, I got a
depressed, unsettling feeling. Seven is, in no ways, a happy movie. Of
course, you probably knew that already, unless people being killed by a
nutball based on the "deadly sins" sounds like a hilarious romp to
you(and believe me, where I live, this sometimes isn't too far from the
truth.) It has a brutal, unrelenting finale, that not only is superior
to the overrated Silence of the Lambs but is much darker and grimmer.
All though not very realistic, I was able to forgive it for that
because, hey, like there's ever been a realistic ending to a serial
killer movie. C'mon, Silence of the Lambs was less believable...
         The movie follows two detectives: Sommerset(Freeman), a cop
retiring in a week who is paired with a young, break-all-the-rules wild
card named Mills(Pitt). Formulaic? Sure. But the movie rises far above
the cliched characters, and both actors, especially Freeman, breathe
energetic wisps of breath into their roles.
        The detectives are assigned one day to investigate a truly
bizzarre homicide: an obese man was forced to eat spaghetti until he
died. The only clue they have is "gluttony" written on the wall and a
brief note tacked behind the refrigerator witha  quote from the author
Dante.  More killings follow, based on the sins of Sloth, Greed, and
others. Viewers beware: although the movie contains little on-screen
violence, the afterviews of the killings are graphically intense and
sometimes disgusting, especially when you begin to replay in your mind
the murders and how long they took to committ.
        Although he doesn't appear until about the last 25 minutes of
the movie(well, he makes a brief appearance before then, but you don't
acutally see him and he doesn't talk), no serial killer movie is
complete with out a captivating, creepy killer. I won't spoil the
surprise for people who haven't seen the movie by naming the killer, but
I will say that you've probably seen him before, he's a recent Academy
Award winner for a movie I gave ****, and he's excellent in his role.
        There are very characters in Seven other than Mills and
Sommerset. The only other person who has a signifagant role next to Pitt
and Freeman is Paltrow, who brings shimmering glimpses of hope to the
dispairing and gloomy atmosphere created by the director, David
Fincher(Alien 3, The Game). Although her role is very small, its
signigant more in idea, especially with the shocking conclusion.
        So is Seven a must see movie? That's hard to say, I don't really
believe in the concept of must see movies. But if you are into movies,
and are looking for a good one, then Seven is a very strong
recommendation. It's entertaining, but don't expect a good time.

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
Starring Jim Carrey, Ed Harris, Laura Linney, and Noah Emmerich.
Review by Laurence Mixson (venom8@hotmail.com)
>From Fully Loaded Entertainment Movie Reviews - Website Coming This
July!
When I first saw the ads for The Truman Show, I expected this: a Jim
Carrey comedy, with maybe a little bit of a serious side(I'd heard about
a "total departure" from his normal routine) about a man whose life is
watched by the whole world on TV. Then, I started hearing that the film
was the event of the decade, and the best movie this summer. So I began
to expect maybe something a little more heartfelt, about a character we
all can root for, a la Forrest Gump. So which is The Truman Show? Well,
neither.
Instead, the film is a deeply psychological study of greed and
unchecked appetites; it is something of a message film about what can,
and will, happen if we do not put limitations on our demands for
entertainment.  Certainly, it is Carrey's best effort to date, but it is
more than just a movie; it is like a moral story told with visuals.
Carrey plays Truman Burbank, a man who was brought into the world as an
unwanted baby, adopted by a corporation, raised in a giant controlled
set, and whose life has been filmed and seen live on national television
since before his birth.  Everything and everyone he sees around him is
fake; the people are actors, his home and the buildings around him are
sets, even the sky is nothing but a matte painting.  There are thousands
of cameras surrounding him, and every shot is controlled and put onto
television by the director, Christof(Harris.) Truman, of course, does
not know that his entire life is fake, for no one has ever told him. He
accepts his life as it is.
Truman lives a comfortable suburban life: nice car, nice house, nice
neighbors, nice wife(Linney). He works as an insurance company
representative, and has a wonderful best friend(Emmerich.)  However, he
longs for more; he wants to get out of Seahaven, his artifical hometown,
and go around the world; more specifically, to Fiji. His high school
crush lives there, he thinks, because he was told that by her father. In
reality, she was merely an extra in high school that he was not supposed
to fall for, and when she tried to tell him that his whole life was
fake, she was written out of the script and forced off the show.
Truman is urged on in his desire to leave not only by a lost love, but
also because he senses that things are not quite right around him. One
day, a spotlight falls out of the sky and onto the street in front of
him. He sees a missing wall in an elevator, and a set being changed
behind it. Extras appear to block his path out of nowhere, and amazing
disasters occur whenever he tries to find out something that Christof
doesn't think he needs to know.
Truman also has personal problems with leaving Seahaven. When he was a
young boy, he saw his father drown while they were sailing in the sea
during a storm. Obviously, it was an actor, and he did not really drown,
it was all in the script.  Yet Truman thinks it actually happened, and
has been terrified of the water ever since. This is not an easy thing to
deal with, because Seahaven is an island. Additionally, subliminal
messages are sent at him to not leave the comfort and safety of his
town; messages on TV say that there is no reason to leave the community
you live in to explore the world; newspaper headlines say things like
EUROPE: WHO NEEDS IT?, and posters in travel offices show airplanes
being struck by lighting with captions like IT COULD HAPPEN TO YOU.
I began to feel discontentment while watching The Truman Show, and it
continued to rise right up until the end. Not discontentment with the
movie, but with the idea that this man's life is controlled, and how
fake and cruel the reality of that is. Truman is the number-one
celebrity around the world, outside his dome, yet he has no personal
choices in his life, for everything has always been pushed upon him and
decided for him. Even his material possessions are nothing but product
placements, all availabe, of course, in the Truman Catalouge.
The filmmakers went to great length to show the reality of such a show,
including things that could go wrong: actors becoming upset or unstable,
technical problems, and people sneaking onto the set. In my opinion, The
Truman Show is never once not believable. All of this, with one more
small step, could become a reality in the society we live in today.
Think not? Then think about The Real World, one of MTV's most popular
non-music related shows. For over six years, viewers have tuned in to
watch the lives of people they don't know, doing ordinary, everyday
things like them. For most viewers, it is comforting to watch people on
television that they identify with; people that they can relate to and
understand. To take it further, all they would have to do is watch a
person who doesn't know that he is being taped, because this would make
it all the more real. Yet also all the more fake and cruel. And that is
the message that The Truman Show sends loudly, and triumphantly, across
the screen.

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
Starring Laurence Fishburne, Sam Neill, Joely Richardson, Kathleen
Quinlan.
Review by Laurence Mixson (jarls@datasync.com)
        Event Horizon really fools you for a while. For about the first third
of the movie, I thought it was going to be your average, run-of-the-mill
late-summer release, basically a straight-to-video release put into the
theaters. I was wrong.
        The movie sets up the plot rather quickly: seven years ago(it takes
place in the year 2040-something)a spaceship named the Event Horizon,
designed to explore the vast caverns of space, dissapeared. Now, in the
present(although, technically, it's the future, but let's not get into
that), the ship suddenly reappers with no apparent crew on board. A
rescue ship crew, headed up by Captain Miller(Fishburne)to explore the
event horizon. Accompanying he and his several man crew is Dr.
Weir(Neill), who designed the Event Horizon. He lets them in on a secret
rather early into the picture: the Event Horizon was not
actually a space exploration ship, but a top-secret time-travel ship,
designed to create a black hole and use it to travel from one end of the
universe to the other. 
        Miller's crew boards the Event Horizon and discovers that none of the
Event's crew is present, all though lots of neat gore and blood splatter
is everywhere. Eventually, they begin having hallucinations, and things
start to get more violent, and Weir is cracking up...
        Event Horizon owes more than a little to both The Shining and
Hellraiser which it gracefully rips off; and even ups them, in
some cases. The special effects, while not cutting edge, are very good;
they're the best when showing off graphic displays of gore. Like a man
being cut open, having his insides dumped out, and hung from hooks on
the ceiling. Did I mention this is a well-rounded, family movie as well?
        All though it's probably too late now to see it at the theaters, Event
Horizon is a definite must-see video. Which, I suppose, makes it a good
direct-to-video picture. Except it's better than that. Except that's not
the point. Or is it? Aww, forget it...

Title
Review for Stuart Saves His Family (1995)
Starring Al Franken, Laura San Giacomo, Vincent D'Onofrio, and Harris
Yulin.
Review by Laurence Mixson(venom8@hotmail.com)
A Fully Loaded Entertainment Review - Website Coming in July!
I didn't really expect very much when I rented Stuart Saves His
Family.  The movie bombed at the box office, and I had never really
liked the Saturday Night Live sketch on which the movie was based. My
real concern, though, was the general reputation of SNL-related movies
translating to the big screen with less-than-stellar results(Half-Baked,
anyone?)
I was surprised to discover a truly entertaining, often hilarious yet
also touching little film.  It is an Al Franken production
through-and-through, who not only created the title character but also
wrote and starred in the picture. For those of you who don't know, Al
Franken plays a guy named Stuart Smalley, who has a really annoying show
on a public-access station about increasing your self-esteem, etc.
Although not a licensed therapist, Stuart Smalley is, as the program
proudly boasts, "a graduate of several 12-step programs."
Stuart is doing well enough with his tv show, but he keeps getting
distracted by family troubles. Stuart's relatives are a mess: his dad
and brother(Harris Yulin and Vincent D'Onofrio, respectively)are
alcoholics, his sister is overweight and getting over another divorce,
and his mom is in constant self-denial and solves all perceived problems
by baking. Then, disaster strikes. 
Stuart accidentally insults the manager of the station and gets his
show revoked. He is forced to move back in with his family after he can
no longer support himself, and there the comedy truly picks up.
Franken wrote all of the characters not just as cliches or stereotypes,
but as sharply-drawn, real people. Although Smalley's dad has always
imbibed too much, Stuart can still recall times when his father seemed
like an okay guy. Also, after an accident towards the end of the movie,
both Stuart and the audience learn that there is more to his mother than
previously thought.
Although filled with small, very funny scenes, Stuart Saves His Family
also has its share of dramatic moments, especially towards the
conclusion. For a lightweight comedy, it handles these scenes especially
well, often better than many so-called "serious dramas" of today. All
the more amazing is that such a movie comes from a Saturday Night Live
sketch that is essentially a one-joke bit.
If you feel like renting a comedy, and you haven't seen this film, I
definitely recommend you try this one out. You'll laugh...you'll
cry....it's all there.

Title
Review for Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998)
Review by Laurence Mixson (venom8@hotmail.com)
a Fullyloaded Entertainment Review: Website Coming Soon!
        Hunter S. Thompson's Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, written in 1971,
is already an American classic; not merely because it was an
unadulterated journey through the post-psychedelia of the 1960's, but
also because it ushered in a new form of journalism known as "gonzo".
Soon after the book was written, Hunter S. Thomspon became the basis for
a character in Doonesbury known as Uncle Duke.
        And that is the problem with Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas(the movie.)
Although the book is one of my favorites, I now agree with Thompson's
own assessment of the novel as "unfilmable." 
        The main problem is that the book, although detailing wild drug use and
tripped-out adventures, was not written on the road. It was written and
edited by Hunter S. Thomspons, relatively sober, at his home. So
although the book depicts drug use and still more drug use, it is told
with a sense of aloofness and some humor. Hunter S. Thomspon, the
narrator, while always drugged out, still has a grip on reality, and can
still tell, with journalistic ability, what is going on around him.
        Not so with the characters in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. Despite
name changes and one minor scene from the book dropped, the movie is an
exact duplicate of the book, in terms of dialouge. Unfortunately, this
can get annoying, in the form of Johnny Depp's(who plays
Thompson)excessive narration. And the characters, while having vivid
personalities, are played as 2-D characers on the screen: Dr. Raoul
Duke(Johnny Depp, the name Raoul Duke was an alias of Thompson's) and
his riding companion, Dr. Gonzo(Benicio Del Toro), who is a large Samoan
lawyer, have no personalities or emotions at all, save for stoned.  
        The film is very faithful to the plot(what there is) of the book, in
that Dr. Raoul Duke is sent by Sports Illustrated to cover the Mint 400,
and takes along not only his Samoan lawyer but also car trunk full of
drugs. From there, one set of stoned adventures after another happens,
including one of the few good scenes in which Depp, high on acid,
watches all the people in the bar around him turn into, literally,
lounge lizards.        
        While the movie has its moments(few), it is almost unwatchable at
parts, especially towards the end.  Despite a lot of celebrity cameos,
the stars never get off the ground. The set decoration and costumes are
great, and probably deserve an oscar nomination.  However, as we all
know, it's not sets or effects that make a movie, its the characters;
and quite frankly, these characters are no good.

Title
Review for Cable Guy, The (1996)
Starring Jim Carrey, Matthew Broderick, Leslie Mann, and Ben Stiller
Review by Laurence Mixson(venom8@hotmail.com)
A Fully Loaded Entertainment Review - Website Coming in July!
>From Ace Ventura to Truman Burbank, Jim Carrey has run the whole gamut
of comic, yet sympathetic, characters.  1996's The Cable Guy was
supposed to be his big "breakthrough" role from zany humor into darker,
more dramatic acting. As most everyone knows, the results were, well,
less-than-stellar. Not only did the film not do so hot at the box
office, but it was also panned by critics. As far as I know, Gene Siskel
and I are the only ones willing to admit that we dug it.
The first time I saw The Cable Guy, in theatres, I was in Super
Critic-mode, and didn't really like it. However, due to the fact that
HBO shows the movie every single day, I've had time to lean back, relax,
and take in the film. And to my surprise, it grew on me.
The plot is rather simple: Broderick plays a guy named Steven who
befriends his cable guy, played by Carrey, then is stalked by him when
Steven tries to break off the relationship.  See, Steven's been having
some problems with his girlfriend, Robin(Leslie Mann), and he doesn't
think he has any more room in his life for a new friend. Also, some of
the cable guy's antics have been creeping him out.
Carrey, as the cable guy, gives Steven various aliases, which later we
find out are all tv characters: Larry Tate, Chip Douglas, Ricky Ricardo,
etc. He apparently lives in his cable van, and while many critics didn't
enjoy this newer, darker, less-manic performance from Carrey, I thought
it was interesting and rather well-done.
For me, its not the movie as a whole that's enjoyable, but rather
several individual scenes: a karaoke jam at Steven's apartment, a
medieval fight at a theme restaurant, and a bathroom beating(a la Liar,
Liar), just to name a few.  Perhaps the fact that more of Carrey's
humorous side comes out during these scenes is what makes them so funny.
And if you really want to see something, you've got to hear his version
of Jefferson Airplane's "Somebody to Love", sung at the aformentioned
karaoke jam.
The Cable Guy has its bad spots, like most any movie. I didn't
particularly like  Steven's girlfriend, and I felt that more focus
should have been used on the relationship between Steven and his best
friend. Also, the ending, while having you fooled for a moment, is
rather contrived, and somewhat dissapointing.
Still, I found The Cable Guy to be a worthwhile venture; if you're at
the video store and can't think of anything to rent, I suggest you try
it out. Or if you have HBO, just wait till it comes on(you won't have to
wait long.) Hell, that's what I do every day.

Title
Review for Spawn (1997)
Starring: Michael Jai White, John Leguizamo, Martin Sheen, D.B. Sweeney,
Nicol Williamson, and Theresa Randle.
Reviw by Laurence Mixson(venom8@hotmail.com)
        Finally, after years and years of waiting, the moviegoing public gets a
good film based on a comic book. You do, of course, recall the
awe-inspiring stupidity of Punisher, the wretched horribleness of
Captain America, and you will cringe in mortal terror by
remembering another recent summer release, Batman and Robin. But since
this is a GOOD movie, I won't dwell on those embarassments of cinema.
        If you're a comic book reader, you probably already know the story of
how Spawn came to be. But for those who don't, I'll give a quick
synopsis of the first 15 minutes or so of the movie. Basically, Al
Simmons(Michael Jai White) is an assassin at some secret government
base, kind of like the CIA. He is happily married to Wanda(Theresa
Randle), who he loves dearly. His partner is Terry Fitzgerald(D.B.
Sweeney) a computer geek.
        After completing a successful assassination of a US enemy and killing
lots of civilians in the process, Simmons grows a conscious and decides
to quit. But not before he completes one last mission, his boss, Jason
Wynn(Martin Sheen) tells him. Al agrees. Little does he know that the
mission is a set-up, and that Wynn has cut a deal with the devil,
Malebolgia, who is represented by the fould-mouthed Clown(John
Leguizamo). Malebolgia has given Wynn power in exchange for a deadly
chemical weapon. Now he wants something else: a person to lead his dark
forces in the apocalypse between heaven and hell. He orders Wynn to kill
Al Simmons so that Al will go to hell(assassins don't go to heaven),
thus giving Malebolgia a leader. Wynn agrees, and it's goodbye Al.
        When Simmons is killed, he wake up in the dark pit of hell and hears a
voice asking him if he'll lead the dark armies on earth in exchange for
being able to see Wanda. Al agrees, and is returned to earth. But a few
things have changed...
        1)His body is badly burned, although he now has a special
costume and cool chains that come out of his body.
        2)Malebolgia has returned him to earth 5 years later.
        3)He now has Clown and Count Cogliostro(Nicol Williamson)
following him around. Clowin is trying to persuade him to hell's side,
while Cogliostro is wooing him to heaven's side.
        Of course, now Simmons is unpresentable to Wanda, who has married
Terry, and had a child together, Cyan. Plus Clown is trying to get him
to kill Jason Wynn, because Wynn has a device in his heart so that if
his heart stops, the chemical weapon he developed for Malebolgia will go
off, killing a lot of the earth's population and giving a chance for the
dark armies of hell to cross onto earth. Now you're confused, right?
Don't worry, the movie lays it out in a way so that you always know
what's going on.
        Of course, for a movie like this to work, it has to have 2 things: good
characters and good FX. On the first note, everyone is excellent in
their acting, but John Leguizamo stands out as being the hilariously
evil Clown. On the second note, the FX are terrific. Wait till you see
the battle in hell between the Violator(the hideous
and bigger half of Clown)and Spawn.
        If you have any reservations about seeing this movie, then throw them
away. It's the best film playing right now out there, and the 3rd best
movie this summer(it falls short of Con Air and Face/Off). Go see this
movie.

Title
Review for Pulp Fiction (1994)
Review by Laurence Mixson (venom8@hotmail.com)
Starring John Tavolta, Samuel L. Jackson, Uma Thurman, Bruce Willis,
Ving Rhames, Harvey Keitel, Tim Roth, Amanda Plummer, Quentin Tarantino,
and Christopher Walken.
        Artistically speaking, Pulp Fiction was hands-down the best movie of
1994, and I'd even say it was the best movie of the '90's.  Yet it's
also one of the most misunderstood films out there.
        Pulp Fiction only won two oscars at the 1994 Academy Awards, although
it was nominated for many, including Best Picture and Best Actor. The
two oscars it did manage to walk away with were for Best Original
Screenplay(to Roger Avery and Quentin Tarantino) and Best Supporting
Actor(to Samuel L. Jackson.) It's main competition, Forrest Gump, got
away with the rest.
        Yet Pulp Fiction was a better film than Forrest Gump. Now don't get me
wrong here; I loved Forrest Gump, it was a **** film. It was a
wonderfully orignal comedy/drama that genuinely made you feel for an
unlikely hero. But that's about all it was: an original movie that was
fun to watch. Pulp Fiction contained, and stood, for a whole lot more.
        To get to the plot: there's nothing conventional about Pulp Fiction,
including the plot structure. The movie is comprised of three stories,
but it's not an anthology, because the stories connect. Not only that,
but they cut off and then start back up again at different times, in
between segments. Pulp Fiction doesn't follow in a chronological order,
either, and in one bizarre side effect of this, a character is shot dead
in the middle of the film yet returns again at the finale, because of
the film's odd continuity.
        The four stories are rather simple enough: the first one deals with two
lovers(Roth, Plummer) who decide to rob a restaurant. The second one
concerns two hitman(Travolta, Jackson), as they go to "finish up some
business" with their boss' estranged business assosciates. The third is
about a boxer(Willis) who upsets that same boss(Rhames) after refusing
to take a fall in a match the boss bet heavily on. There's more to each
story than that, of course, but I only listed the opening scenes of each
segment.
        The first story is the weakest and takes up the least screeen time; the
two lovers, known only as Pumpkin and Honey Bunny(their pet names for
one another) basically just sit around and talk about the robbery. That
is, until they meet up with the hitmen later. Those two hitmen, named
Vincent(Travolta) and Jules(Jackson), have the most interesting story
going for them, and it takes up the most screen time and is divided into
several parts. Their scene opens with them driving to a hit in their
car. Later scenes include Vincent taking his boss' wife out while the
boss, name Marcellus Wallace, is out of town(it's a favor for the boss)
and, uh "cleaning up" after a hilarious incidence that occurs in his
car. I'll touch on that one later...
        The boxer segment deals with Butch Coolidge(Willis), who is payed by
Marcellus to take a fall in the 5th round. He refuses to do so, and
actually winds up killing his opponent in the ring. He escapes, and
later he and the Marcellus have an intersting run-in with two hicks in a
pawn shop.
        The best thing about Pulp Fiction is that each of these stories are
deeper and more complex than they sound on the surface: for one thing,
they're very realistic. When Vincent and Jules are driving to the place
where they're to carry out their hit, they don't act like the "cool"
hitmen you always see on the screen. They discuss what hamburgers are
called in France(Royales with Cheese)and such. These conversations are
not only hilarious in their content but are funny because of who's
saying it.
        The most humorous scene, the one I mentioned earlier, occurs when
they're transporting a guy named Marvin back to their boss, Marcellus.
Vincent accidentally shoots Marvin in the face, and blows his head into
little pieces all over him, Jules, and the car. In a panic, they rush to
a friend's house, Jimmy(Tarantino)who contacts Wintson Wolf(Keitel) to
come and help them clean up the gore and dispose of the car. This scene
works, in terms of humor, not only because of everyone's dialogue as
they work, but because everyone, including Marcellus, is panicking and
trying to hurry the clean-up simply because Jimmy's wife comes home
soon, and she would divorce Jimmy if she saw those people in her home.
The sight of all these tough hitmen and cold-blooded killers panicking
over a woman coming home is way too funny.
        Pulp Fiction was heavily criticized when it came out for being violent,
but I actually thought the violence was very subdued, and nothing
compared to most movies these days. When people are shot, it's almost
always off camera and rarely bloody. Sure, poor Marvin has his head
blown off, but all that's shown is the blood splattered everywhere, not
the actual act.  Die Hard with a Vengeance or Desperado were both a
hundred times more violent than Pulp Fiction, as I'm sure anyone who's
seen these films will agree, yet no one whined and complained about
those pictures.
        So what's the deal with Pulp Fiction? Basically, if you're into
comedies, dramas, action pictures, arthouse films, or something a little
different, then Pulp Fiction will work for you, because it manages to
take the best elements from all of these genres and combine them into
one great big spectacle of a motion picture. So go to the nearest video
store and rent a copy if you haven't seen it yet. Or even if you have.
Trust me, you won't be dissapointed.

Title
Review for Escape from L.A. (1996)
Starring Kurt Russell, A.J. Langer, Steve Buscemi, Georges Corraface,
Pam Grier, and Cliff Robertson.
Review by Laurence Mixson (jarls@datasync.com)
Escape from L.A. is like a xerox copy of something. When viewed at a
distance, or by people who haven't seen the original, it looks okay. But
when examined close-up by those who dealt with the first one, the flaws
and imperfections are gaping.
Escape from L.A. follows the return of Snake Plissken, who Kurt Russell
first brought to the screen 16 years ago in Escape from New York. Back
then, Kurt was trying to break away from his Disney-status in a raw,
unconvential film, directed and written by one of my favorite
directors(if you're a regular reader of my reviews, you'll know, my
favorite directors are Ridley Scott, Quentin Tarantino, John Carpenter,
James Cameron, Robert Zemeckis, Steven Speilberg, and Kevin Smith.) 
Snake Plissken is the classic anti-hero, a guy who breaks the rules but
won't kill innocent people and eventually winds up going on heroic
missions. His two distinguishing features are his eye-patch and the
snake tattoo on his chest. Oh yeah, and those cool threads: black combat
boots, tight leather pants and a vest. As a matter of fact, he's kind of
like a biker, only smaller and with less hair. And no hawg.
Escape from New York took place in 1997, when Manhatten Island had been
turned into a maximum security prison where all of the US criminals were
dropped. Snake, a recently-convicted criminal headed for New York, opted
to go in and save the President, who had been kidnapped after an
emergency landing there, in return for a full pardon. Then again, he
didn't have much of a choice. The doctors implanted him with a poison
before he went that would detonate in a certain time period, and only
administered the antidote until he had safely rescued the President.
What set the film apart back then was that it wasn't your typical action
flick. Shot on grungy sets with B-lists stars and a relatively low
budget, it had a grainy, film-noir feel to it. Unfortunately, Escape
from L.A. doesn't try too hard to recapture that feeling.
Like I said earlier, Escape from L.A. is like a copy of Escape from
N.Y., right down to the plot. Except this time, it's set in the year
2013, when an earthquake has seperated L.A. from the rest of California.
For some reason or another, L.A. has also been turned into a huge
dumping bin for America's scuzziest criminals. Also, America isn't the
America we know and love anymore; it's now a virtual dictatorship, run
by a President-for-Life(Robertson), who oversees the US in an amusing
extreme-right wing fashion: There's now no cursing, drinking, smoking,
violence, red meat, etc. 
It turns out that the President's daughter, Utopia(Langer)has helped
hi-jacked Air Force 3 and crashed it in L.A., and is holding The
Doomsday Device, which, with one press, will shut down all of the
earth's power. So the government thinks to itself, "Hmm, we need someone
who can go in, get the device, and get back out. Let's see, Plissken did
the same exact thing in New York 16 years earlier, so why don't we use
him?" Fortunately for the government, and the plot of this movie, Snake
Plissken has committed some sort of crime and can, in return for a full
pardon, go in and attempt to get the Doomsday Device and the President's
daughter(so the President, a real strict parent, can execute her). Of
course, they've once again injected him with a virus. And bad
one-liners.
Anyway, the movie never picks up, even when Snake hits L.A. It looks a
lot like New York, only the buildings are shorter. And they're more
people. And, for some reason, the special effects are really, really
bad. You'd think with a big release like this, they'd give it a decent
FX budget. Of course, knowing John Carpenter, he could be using the bad
FX to give the movie a more campy feel, which it definitely revels in.
But if that's what he intended, it sure doesn't work. 
Not that this movie is totally bad. I did give it **. There are lots of
amusements and high points. Like, for example, at the L.A. Deportation
Center, where people who are going to be sent to L.A. have the option of
being electrocuted instead. Or the scene in which Snake is kidnapped to
be the donor of parts to people who've had one plastic-surgery too
many(this scene has Bruce Campbell of Evil Dead film in a cameo as a mad
doctor). Steve Bescumi is good in his role as Map-to-the-Stars Eddie, as
is Pam Grier, playing a trannsexual who Snake used to hang out with and
was called Carjack. Now he, uh she, uh, IT is known as Hershe Las
Palmas. It's just too bad that these few small moments of humor and
wittiness don't make up for the serious defaults this movie has, like a
boring villain named Cuervo Jones(Corraface), bad FX, and a horrible
ending that not only rips off the first one, but does it poorly and
carries it on WAY too long. Plus there's that feeling I kept getting
while watching it that I was basically watching the 1981 movie, except
with a few plot changes and a general dumbing-down of the script.  
I do save a little hope for this series, however. A line that's been
used both in the ads for Escape from L.A. and in the movie itself is,
"He survived Cincinatti. He escaped from New York. Now he must
face...L.A." I seriously hope this is hinting at sequel set in
Cincinatti BEFORE Escape from New York. Because I know that, just like
Chasing Amy did with Kevin Scott's New Jersey trilogy, the third film
can overcome the deficiencies of the second film and recapture the magic
from the first.

Title
Review for Scream (1996)
Starring Neve Campbell, Courtney Cox, Skeet Ulrich, David Arquette,
Matthew Lillard, Rose McGowan, and Drew Barrymore.
Review by Laurence Mixson (jarls@datasync.com)
        I expected one thing when I rented Scream and got some something
entirely different when I watched it. Which isn't really a bad thing, as
you can tell from my giving it ***1/2. So what's so different about this
movie? One main thing: it turns from a horror movie into a
murder-mystery gen-x docudrama. A good one, though.
        The film opens with Drew Barrymore in a house by herself, waiting for
her boyfriend, a big football player named Steve, I think, to arrive.
She starts to cook some popcorn. Although I can't recall the exact
dialogue, etc., she gets several phone calls from an unnamed stranger.
At first the phone calls seem innocent enough, but they soon turn into a
game of life-or-death. Needless to say, Drew and beau die. Very messily.
Kudos to the special-effects team for their very realistic depiction of
a disembowelment.
        Because dead people don't make very interesting character
studies(unless they're zombies)we're soon introduced to Sidney
Prescott(Neve Campbell), whose mother was murdered one year ago.
Although the "killer" was caught and sentenced to die soon afterwards,
Sidney is beginning to have her doubts after the recent killings. Of
course, that pesky tabloid reporter Gale Weathers(Courtney Cox), who
won't leave Sidney alone and is writing a book in which she very
strongly says that someone else was the killer doesn't help any...
        Sidney comes complete with your average assortment of movie friends:
There's her boyfriend Billy Loomis(Skeet Ulrich), the geeky movie
fanatic Randy(Jamie Kennedy), party animal Stuart Macher(Matthew
Lillard), Tatum Riley(Rose McGowan), and Rose's older brother, Deputy
Dewey Riley(David Arquette). Even the principal is played by Henry
Winkler. You know, the Fonz from Happy Days.
        Like I said earlier, this may be billed as a horror movie, but it
belongs more in comedy/drama. The murders are violent but not scary.
There's little suspense. We know who the killer is from about the 1st 30
minutes onward. But this isn't a bad movie. It's very good. For horror
fans, it's filled with tons of references and inside jokes. For example,
Stu Macher is named after Joel Schumacher, who directed The Lost Boys.
Billy Loomis is named after Dr. Loomis in Halloween, which actually
plays a big role in this movie. Even Wes Craven has a cameo as the
school janitor, complete with a Freddy Krueger shirt on.
        The body count in this movie is pretty high, but the surprising amount
of characters coming back to life is even higher. I can recall offhand
four characters who we think are dead coming back. Of course, one of
them is the killer. Which brings us to the antagonist.
        The killer is known simply as The Ghostface Killer, or Father Death,
from the costume he wears. It's pretty good, actually. It'd scare me if
he showed up at MY door.
        There are a few qualms I have about Scream, though they're pretty
minor. This movie was originally going to be called Scary Movie, as kind
of a farce, but Miramax/Dimension Films thought that sounded too corny.
Apparently, this decision wasn't made until after the film was finished
shooting, though, as the words "scary movie" are used almost a dozen
times. Also, some scenes aren't very plausible. Are we to believe that a
house full of people wouldn't notice someone crushed at the top of the
garage? And the killer's motive is weakly explained at the
not-very-scary end, not really making much sense. But these are minor
misgivings. Rent the movie. It's one of the better films of 1996. I'm
just waiting for Scream: The Sequel.

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
By Laurence Mixson: venom8@hotmail.com
Starring Casper Van Dien, Patrick Muldoon, Dina Meyer, Jake Busey, and
Neil Patrick Harris
        I've heard a lot of complaints about Starship Troopers in the 4
days since it's been open: "it's too violent!", or "the characters
suck!" or "the action scenes are non-stop". Well, not to point out the
obvious, folks, but THAT'S NOT THE FRIGGIN' POINT OF THE MOVIE!
        First of all, Starship Troopers IS the most violent main-stream
movie I've ever seen, about 10 times the scale of Braveheart. Seriously.
The director, Paul Verhoeven(Robocop, Total Recall) who's already known
for his willingness to show graphic images, completely lets himself
loose here. I want get into the gory details, but let me just say this:
I truly believe that the reason there's so little profanity in this
movie is so they could squeak by the MPAA with an R rating, instead of
the dreaded NC-17.
        But that's beside the point. Basically, the movie, like most good
sci-fi movies, is set in the future(did that make any sense?). The hero,
Rico(Van Dien) just recently graduated from high school. He joins, both
in an attempt to impress his girlfriend AND to gain citizenship(I'll
explain later) the Federation Army.
        Back to that citizenship part: the earth, or even the universe, for all
we know(that's one thing I like about this movie: it doesn't have a
"dummy history" at the beginning that scrolls down and gives you a
complete history of the movie. You kind of have to figure things out for
youself) is comprised of the Federation(yeah, yeah I know it's a trek
rip-off.) You can either be a civilian, without advanced priveliges like
being able to give birth to children, or you can become a citizen by
touring with the armed forces for a couple of years. Rico desires to
become a citizen, mainly because of the influence of a high school
teacher. Lucky for the plot of this movie, he joins just as the "Bug
War" breaks out.
        "Bug War?", you ask. Let me explain: in a planet not too far from here,
named Klandathu, there live various types of "bugs", albiet really big,
really mean bugs, that keep launching meteors at earth. One hits,
conviently killing Rico's parents, and earth, of course, declares war on
the bugs.
        Here's where the fun begins: Rico slowly rises through the ranks,
accompanied by his friends Diz(Meyer) and whoever Neil Patrick Harris
plays. I can't remember the dude's name. He also slowly loses touch of
his girlfriend, who's a pilot in the service, to a cocky pilot named,
uh, something-or-other, played by Patrick Mulroon.
        The infantry, with Rico and Diz, lands on the bug planet. They fight
the bugs, mainly the swords-for-limbs arachnids, with machine guns.
These aren't really too effective on the bugs. Which brings me too a
point: in the future, if they can launch handheld nukes from
bazookas(which they do numerous times in this movie), then why can't
they just drop a big nuke on the bug planet? Of course, the answer's too
simple: that would eliminate the cool fight scenes.
        Which brings me to the fight scenes: technically speaking, they're huge
accomplishments for Verhoeven and his team.  The bugs are visually
stunning(even if you can't tell where their faces are), and the blood
and guts fly convincingly as well. Of course, if you're squeamish,
you'll hate these scenes completely. Let's just say I have a very strong
stomach concerning movie violence, and even I gulped a little when an
arachinid bit a man in half and the bottom half flopped down on Rico.
Eww.
        To wind things down(I think this is the longest review I've ever
written), let me just say this about Starship Troopers: it's a witty,
somewhat forgettable, high budget b-movie.  The witty part comes from
Verhoeven's very sick sense of humor indulged in these sort of
"newsreel, propaganda pieces" the federation uses to recruit new
members. These shorts, very remniscient of the 40's and 50's same-type
thing, are hilaroius. Even if that "Would You Like to Know More?" thing
gets annoying after a while(it doesn't always tell you more. Maybe I
wanted to know more, dangit!)
        So what's the bottom line skinny on Starship Troopers: if you liked
Robocop, Total Recall, or just action and sci-fi films in general, this
is definitely the best film of that type this year(much better than The
Fifth Element".) If you're a little squeamish, or pregnant, then stay
away. Or if you're just stuck in the middle, trying to find an
alternative to "Bean" or "The Devil's Advocate"(God knows, who isn't?)
then check this one out, for sure!
