Authors
Brian Reistad
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Hardware (1990)
     Regarding the newly released movie HARDWARE, my recommendation is,
don't waste your money.  The first half of the movie is quite boring as
the movie does not go anywhere.  It has some visual artsy stuff, but is
sorely lacking in plot.  The second half is filled with hack and slash.
As far as a horror type movie, the last part is yes violent.  But the
characters were flat and the setting/world situation was poorly
developed.  
     Apparently, USNews [probably USA TODAY--moderator] gave it 3 stars
(on what scale I don't know, but probably 4 or 5) and as one person
commented sarcasticly on leaving the theater, "They were a little
generous."  
     For my critique and trashing, see below, but be warned, I may give
away part of the story.
Basic summary:
     The robot is dug up out in the desert and brought back to I think
New York, where this sculptor uses its head in a piece of work.  A scrap
dealer is investigating the nature of the robot and finds it is the
government's latest killing machine.  But about this time the completely
dismembered robot starts to piece itself together; i.e., it hands and
such move around by themselves and repair the robot including animated
cables.  Once this is done, it goes on a killing spree in the sculptor's
apartment, killing anything and everything.  And coming back from being
fire-bombed, cut in half and tossed out the window.  All in all most of
the characters die.
Trashing:
     The world is mostly desert and hot due to an apparent nuclear war,
possible a 'small one' (if there is such :-;) and the city is flooded
and thus motorboats are taxis.  But despite the world disaster, the
American society still exists, including the President and congress.
And not only do they have radio, but a number of TV channels, including
heavy metal music videos.  Most of the people are struggling to survive
and the government wants to institute population controls when it seems
they would need people, unless this is to control the spread of mutant
genes but this is never made apparent.
     The robot itself is suppose to be a great killing machine with six
primary limbs, weapons including chainsaw, claws, a drill, and a strong
poison delivered through 6" long needles.  However, it has an Achilles
heel of being designed for the desert, moisture can affect its computer
system.  Well, for the latest in killing ability, it has no projectile
weapons of any sort and its vision is via infra-red.  But its
programming does not allow it to distinguish between the hot oven and a
person.  The absurdity goes every further when the main character
escapes the robot by crawling in the refrigerator, but doesn't shut the
door.  Her skin temperature could not cool down to the same temp as the
inside of the fridge in a matter of seconds.  Her body heat would really
stand out in front of that back ground.
     Those are some of the major things that disturbed me, but the movie
was filled with many other silly things.  Like the lady couldn't work
her own computer system to override the emergency door lock.  A security
officer being sliced in half by the apartment doors which used pistons
to shut them.  And more.
     Basically, there was no plot and I kept wondering where this was
going.  After the beginning scenes which looked somewhat promising, I
realized that it wasn't going anywhere.  If you want a violent movie,
there are better ones as this one did not contain that much.
