Authors
Carol Bloom
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for American History X (1998)
American History X (1998) 3 1/2 stars out of 4
 American History X is a brutal, saddening story of hate and the bitter
fruit it sows.
 The movie is a powerful and disturbing drama about prejudice, its
consequences and family.
 And director Tony Kaye gets right in your face with his message. Much of
the movie is shot in close-up, so you can look these people in the eyes.
 The drama centers around two brothers, Derek (Edward Norton) and Danny
(Edward Furlong). The story is narrated by Danny, who idolizes his older
brother.
 Derek, following the death of his firefighting father - who was shot while
battling a blaze at a crack house - succumbs to a philosophy of hate and is
transformed into a charismatic leader of a white power movement.
 Derek is sent to prison for murder. There, he goes through a process of
self-discovery, realizing that what he thought he knew and what he was
taught by Cameron (Stacy Keach), the behind-the-scenes manipulator of the
skinheads, is bogus.
 Released from prison after three years, Derek arrives home and finds Danny
starting to trod Derek's old path - hanging around with Cameron and the
other skinhead losers.
 Derek works to dissuade Danny from that life of hatred, trying to convince
him of the lies and intolerance spewed by Cameron.
 Danny, meanwhile, must rewrite a school paper for his history class
because the one he wrote on Mein Kampf - at Cameron's urging - was
rejected. The principal orders him to write about Derek, how he feels about
him and the events leading to Derek's incarceration.
 Through this process, and through talks with Derek, Danny slowly comes to
realize the truth - that the venom spewed by Cameron and his ilk creates
nothing but misery.
 Kaye and screenwriter David McKenna spare no one as the sins of one
brother are visited upon the other.
 Many disturbing scenes, especially the trashing of a Korean-owned grocery
story, will leave you breathless in their mindless violence.
 Norton gives a powerful performance, his best since his stunning debut in
Primal Fear. He shows Derek's intelligence, his charisma and his
commitment, both to the cause to which he thought he believed and, after
his release from prison, his resolve to extract his brother from the
ill-fated path he followed.
 Norton's performance is of Academy-Award caliber.
 Furlong, best remembered as young John Conner from Terminator 2: Judgment
Day, brings a sense of confusion mixed with adulation to his role as the
impressionable younger brother.
 With his skinhead haircut and slit-eyed glance, one can see the virus of
hate planted in the boy begin to grow. When Danny is around Derek, his
entire posture changes. He is more the young, adoring brother hanging on
every word said by his older sibling.
 There is a powerful moment when the brothers take down all the hate
literature and Nazi paraphernalia hanging in their bedroom. No words are
needed. Their actions say it all.
 Later, Derek stares long and hard at the large, black swastika tattooed
over his heart, with a look combining regret and shame. Again, without a
word, Derek places his hand over his heart in order to obliterate the foul
reminder of his past life.
K aye has gathered a rather impressive cast. Keach, as Cameron, is, in
Derek's words, "a chicken hawk," preying on young dissatisfied minds to
convert to his cause, sending them out to do his dirty work while he stays
in the shadows. Keach speaks in calm, low, soothing tones, pouring his ugly
philosophy into the ears of boys such as Danny. He is a snake in human
form.
 Avery Brooks, as the school's principal and Derek's former teacher, is a
rock of integrity, a man who wants to help the brothers regain their moral
equilibrium.
 Beverly D'Angelo and Elliott Gould are featured as the brothers' mother
and her would-be suitor. Gould's Murray, a liberal Jewish teacher, is
driven away by Derek's racist and anti-Semitic tirades.
 Kaye refuses to allow a happy ending. Tragedy, built from hate and
bigotry, strikes Derek's family, and the consequences of his earlier
actions are brought home in the most brutal manner.
 American History X is not a comfortable movie. It will make you squirm. It
will shock and disgust you. But most of all it will sadden you. The movie
is a fine treatise on hate, a movie that should not and cannot be ignored.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, Ind.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net
Carol Bloom of Bloom Ink Publishing Professionals
3312 Indian Rock Lane  West Lafayette, IN 47906-1203
765-497-9320   fax 765-497-3112  cbloom@iquest.net
Committed to Lifelong Learning through Effective Communication 

Title
Review for Thomas Crown Affair, The (1999)
 The Thomas Crown Affair (1999) 2 1/2 stars out of 4. Starring Pierce
Brosnan and Rene Russo.
 "The Thomas Crown Affair" is a fun, fluffy caper film. And it is fitting
that the movie is about theft, because Rene Russo steals this romantic
drama from nominal star Pierce Brosnan.
 The film is a remake of a 1968 feature that starred Steve McQueen and Faye
Dunaway. The plot has been updated. In this version, multimillionaire
Thomas Crown steals valuable paintings instead of robbing banks.
 And, as in the original, Russo is the top-notch insurance investigator who
is out to prove Crown is the master thief.
 Much has changed in 30 years. The sexual tension that existed between
McQueen and Dunaway could not be consummated on screen as it is here.
 "The Thomas Crown Affair" is a movie about trust. As Crown's
blunt-speaking shrink (Dunaway in a sparkling but small part) continually
hammers at him, he is a man afraid to trust, to let others into his life.
 The crux of this movie lies in the ability of Brosnan's Crown and Russo's
Catherine Banning to learn to trust each other, even as they play their
cat-and-mouse game.
 Russo is so strong, so sexy - and she is not shy about showing her
attributes - so smart that she overpowers whoever she is on screen with,
especially Brosnan. As an actor, he is one of those men who relies more on
his looks - a raised eyebrow, a set jaw - than his thespian abilities to
carry a role.
 That is why he is so good as James Bond. Brosnan looks good in a tux or
three-piece suit, holding a drink in his hand and making quips. He just
can't emote worth a damn.
 And that is the movie's sore point, because Russo is so strong, so
confident, it is difficult to understand what she sees in the almost-wooden
Crown.
 Brosnan's Crown steals the paintings not for profit, but for the fun of it
- for kicks. It's a sign that he is alive. It keeps him alert, functioning.
 He knows that she knows that he stole the painting and she knows that he
knows she knows he is the thief. But none of that matters. It is the sexual
sparks between these two protagonists that propel this movie. You are more
interested in them than in the mechanics of the theft and the investigation
that follows.
 "The Thomas Crown Affair" is a pleasant experience, like eating out at a
fine middle-class restaurant. It's nothing special, but it is satisfying.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net

Title
Review for Mulan (1998)
To paraphrase a song title from an earlier Disney movie, Mulan is a whole
new world.
 The Mouse Factory's latest feature is a treasure, featuring magnificent
animation, a strong story and finely drawn characters.
 Mulan is the story of a fiesty, head-strong young woman who, unlike other
Disney heroines, isn't seeking her Prince Charming,
 Mulan's motivations are simple; to save her father, serve her country and
find a place for herself in a world in which females have no say.
 The story of Mulan takes place in ancient China at a time when the Huns
have invaded the nation. The emperor has called for a conscription, one man
from each family to join the army and defend the nation.
 Mulan's crippled father is called, but Mulan sneaks off, steals his armor
and takes his place.
 Mulan is a saga of courage and self-discovery. Yet, despite the grim
backdrop of war, it is a lively tale of self-reliance and brain-over-brawn
that even the smallest child can appreciate and enjoy.
 The movie utilizes a strong corps of Asian-American talent as the voices
for the main characters, including the wonderful Ming-Na Wen (The Joy Luck
Club) as Mulan, B.D. Wong as Shang, Mulan's commanding officer and later
love interest, Pat Morita as the Emperor and the veteran Soon-Tek Oh as
Mulan's proud, but loving father.
 Also adding to the proceedings is Eddie Murphy as Mushu the dragon, sent
by Mulan's ancestors to watch over and help the young woman.
 His fast, wise-cracking, hip-talking Mushu may seem out of place, but it's
a crowd pleasing performance, especially for the youngsters.
 The movie features only a couple of songs, fewer than most previous Disney
animated flicks, but Mulan's are winners. The music by Matthew Wilder and
lyrics by David Zippel  fit nicely into the plot.
 The overall score by Jerry Goldsmith also is a plus.
 Mulan is a treat, more powerful than Hercules, with more heart than The
Hunchback of Notre Dame.
 At about 85 minutes, Mulan moves rapidly, and will hold the attention of
youngsters from beginning to the end.
 Mulan will set a new standard by which future animated efforts by Disney
and other studios will have to work hard to attain.
 Also, it is hoped that the success of Mulan, and there is no doubt that it
will prove to be a popular vehicle, will spur an interest for more movies
with Oriential or Asian-American themes so as to provide more substantial
roles for the talented performers who gave their voices for this
production.
It would be nice to see them on screen as well as hear them.
  Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette,
Ind. He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net
Carol Bloom of Bloom Ink Publishing Professionals
3312 Indian Rock Lane  West Lafayette, IN 47906-1203
765-497-9320   fax 765-497-3112  cbloom@iquest.net
Committed to Lifelong Learning through Effective Communication 

Title
Review for 10 Things I Hate About You (1999)
10 Things I Hate About You (1999) 2 stars out of 4. Starring Julia Stiles
and Heath Ledger.
10 Things I Hate About You is a simplified and simplistic adaptation of
Shakespeare's The Taming of the Shrew.
 Set at upscale Padua High School, the story revolves around the Stratford
sisters, Kat and Bianca.
 Kat is the school bitch, a senior who hates guys and lives by her own
convictions. Bianca is a sophomore, the belle of the school, a popular girl
every guy wants to date.
 But there's a catch. As in the original, Bianca can have nothing to do
with the opposite sex until Kat is wooed. In other words, until Kat gets a
date, Bianca must sit at home and wait.
 The movie deviates from Shakespeare in several aspects, most notably
giving Kat a valid psychological reason for her disdain of boys.
 And while 10 Things I Hate About You is not as intellectually stimulating
nor as bawdy as the original, it has enough to satisfy young viewers and
give them a sampling of the Bard's wit and style.
 A cast of basically unknown young actors breathe life into this 90-plus
minute confection, led by Julia Stiles as Kat and Heath Ledger as Patrick
Verona, the bad-ass student hired to tame "the shrew."
 The movie lacks weight. It's a fast-food film, easy to digest, but nothing
remarkable or memorable.
 10 Things I Hate About You follows in the wake of Clueless and Cruel
Intentions, making the classics palatable for younger, unsophisticated
audiences. Whether it stimulates young viewers to the point of actually
reading the originals is problematic.
 Older audiences may find the proceedings juvenile, but 10 Things I Hate
About You is a fun date movie for the under-25 crowd.
 The only reason Shakespeare would roll over in his grave is any lack of
credit for inspiring this update. But, that's Hollywood for you.
 Bob Bloom is the film critic at the Journal and Courier in Lafayette, IN.
He can be reached by e-mail at bloom@journal-courier.com or at
cbloom@iquest.net
