Authors
Sandra J. Grossmann
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for Shining Through (1992)
Cast:        Michael Douglas, Melanie Griffith, Liam Neeson, Joely Richardson, 
             John Gielgud
Screenplay:  David Seltzer, based on Susan Isaacs' novel
Director:    David Seltzer
Length:      2 hours 10 minutes
     Let me put it this way.  I didn't pay to see this film, and I had
an enjoyable pre-film conversation with the person who sat next to me.
Those were the highlights of the evening.
     The film does have entertainment value, but probably not what
Seltzer had in mind.  Oh, it's stylish, all right, the look of the
forties is well- produced, and occasional images remind you it's a
big-screen movie.  But the characters? the dialog? the *plot*?  Who
could've conceived of anything this stupid?
     Melanie Griffith forgot to play a new character, but it doesn't
matter.  She plays the same Working Girl except her hairstyle is
different and her name is Linda.
     Her boss is Ed (Michael Douglas), who may or may not be a spy for
the U.S.  Oh, hell, of course he's a spy.  And of course she falls in
love with him.  Anyway, once Pearl Harbor is attacked, he moves on to
more important work while she is shunted into the typing pool until he
returns, in full uniform, at which time Linda works for him again.  
     This time, though, Ed has a problem.  One of his agents in Nazi
Germany can't exactly work any longer.  What is Ed to do?  *Who* can
replace this agent?  Why, Linda has an idea.  Since she speaks
"perfect" low-class  German (compliments of her Berliner grandparents),
Linda suggests to Ed that she can infiltrate the very heart of Berlin's
Nazi society by becoming a cook for a high-ranking Nazi officer so that
she can photograph secret plans and smuggle the microfilm out of Nazi
Germany.  And Ed, a full colonel in the OSS, agrees that she's his best
bet, so he makes the arrangements and off she goes.  Wait.  Did I
mention she's "half Jewish?"  (Her very words...)  And did I tell you
she only has a week or two to (a) infiltrate, (b) take advantage of an
unguarded moment, (c) get the stuff, and (d) slip out of Germany before
her papers will "expire"?
     If you think the plot up to now sounds preposterous, well, you
ain't seen nothin' yet.  I won't go into all the details (I've already
tortured you enough), but suffice it to say that the latter part of the
movie makes the first part sound reasonable.
     OK, so the plot's ridiculous.  Movies are more than mere plots,
though.  How about the cinematography?  It's very nice--good work by
Jan de Bont.  How about the sound?  It's fine, nothing special, but
fine.  How about the acting?  Uhm...
     Michael Douglas actually does a nice job for more than half the
movie, and it's really not his fault that his character is totally
impossible and stupidly written.  And John Gielgud is on-screen for no
more than about four minutes total, so I doubt this will tarnish his
reputation.  Joely Richardson does a good job all the way through.
Liam Neeson (who plays a high-ranking Nazi) does an OK-but-nothing-`
special job.  But Melanie Griffith sets new lows for mediocrity.
     Aside from the fact that she has no feeling for the 40's style and
conducts herself in a strictly modern fashion, she simply fails to
convey emotion.  Her voice is flat, her face is flat, and her delivery
makes Clint Eastwood look like Olivier.  Even worse, the film is told
in flashbacks, and guess who narrates.  Fortunately, some of the
narration is so bad that the film accidentally becomes entertaining.  
     If ever a budding screenwriter wanted lessons on why flashback is a
dangerous device, well, here's an instructive movie.  Another lesson
this film carries is that relying exclusively on mood and style is
unprofitable.  So this movie isn't a total waste: it teaches what not
to do.  The studios, though, will probably interpret the audience's
lukewarm acceptance as a sign that no one is interested in period
pieces, and it'll be that much harder for a good "retro" screenplay to
get the go-ahead.
     I recommend not seeing this film until it reaches video.  It's
instructive enough (and pretty enough) to warrant a rental, but it's
not even worth matinee prices now.
Sandy Grossmann          sandyg@sail.labs.tek.com

Title
Review for Doors, The (1991)
Cast:       Val Kilmer, Meg Ryan, Kyle MacLachlan, Frank Whaley, Kevin Dillon
Director:   Oliver Stone
Screenplay: Jay Randal Johnson and Oliver Stone
     "The show is about to begin."  We look around at the audience, my
husband and I, wondering how many people in the theatre were old enough
to form sentences when Morrison died.  Half?  Less than half?  Will the
young ones get it or will they be mesmerized?
     By now you've probably seen pictures of Kilmer-as-Morrison.  It's
uncanny.  Tumbled locks of hair, slightly parted lips, the eyes
bemused...  What was there about that face, about Morrison?  Like Rudolf
Valentino, he had a femininity that attracted females.  Like James Dean,
he had a rebellious streak that attracted males.  And like Janis Joplin,
he had a self-destructive urge that attracted and repelled would-be
saviors.
     THE DOORS is a disturbing film.  A relentless soundtrack, visually
skewed images, warped colors, and shamanistic shapes combine into an
assault on the senses.  Fascinated, we watch.  Just as his fans did.
Like moths drawn to a bonfire.  
     Who lit the fire that consumed Morrison?  Was it his fans?  His
band?  His girlfriend?  His parents?  His own visions?  Was he an
overrated rock star?  An underrated poet?  Stone's film is like a
documentary: scene after scene replayed, vaguely familiar.  We want to
hear Morrison explain what happened to him, but he doesn't.  We want to
turn him away from that bathtub in Paris, but we can't.  Morrison is
beautiful and he is hateful.  He gives his soul to his fans and he
attacks his friends.  He is naive and innocent one moment, brutal and
pretentious the next.
     This film is about excesses and pushing past limits.  In a sense,
the  60's were about that, too.  Break the old boundaries: they no
longer apply.  They were our parents' rules, but we are free of their
restrictions.  We can do anything.
     The limits, though, weren't the problem.  Morrison and drugs and 
death weren't the solution.  
     It is said that every generation must define meaning for itself,
and fortunately, most of us survive the experience, even if we fail the
test.  Perhaps we use our leaders as scouts, cheering them as they blaze
the trail.  We follow much later, if at all.  In Morrison's case, well,
we watched  Icarus fall from the sky, his wings melted.  He plunges into
the sea -- in this case, a bathtub, in Paris, in 1971.
     The closing scene is at Pere Lachaise, a cemetery in Paris.  We see
the quiet graves of Chopin, Berlioz, Moliere.  The last shot is of
Morrison's grave, graffiti-strewn and candlelit.  It's an unquiet grave,
anointed by the adoration of fans who still worship his self-consuming
fire.  
     Yet some have learned the lesson.  Will this film renew the lesson
or renew the blind passion?  To his credit, Stone doesn't hit us in the
face with A Message.  He sends us clippings instead and forces us to tie
the pieces together.  He turns the camera on Morrison/Kilmer, frequently
showing us Kilmer's back so that we are, literally, following Morrison
to his death.  
     Kilmer is magnificent.  He speaks pure babble as if it were
Shakespeare and he absolutely commands a crowd even when he can't focus
on it.  (Kilmer wore black contact lenses to make his pupils look
dilated.  The lenses had the added effect of screwing up his
equilibrium.)  All of the concert shots feature Kilmer's vocals, which
means that he not only looks and acts like Morrison, he sounds like him,
too.
     Kilmer is so good that the original band members had trouble
distinguishing some of the cuts Val sings from ones sung by Jim.  When
viewing some of the footage, guitarist Robby Krieger said, "I'm really
glad that we finally got  'The End.'  We never got a recording of that
live with Jim.  Now we've got it."  Kilmer has recreated Morrison.  It's
eerie.  Frightening, like a voice from the grave.  I ask again: will the
young ones get it or will they be mesmerized?
     The camera, you see, is in love with Morrison/Kilmer--it can't
resist him, and neither can the audience.  Morrison's dazed eyes have
come back to haunt another generation.  Let's hope this generation knows
a dead-end when they see one.
Sandy Grossmann      sandyg@tekchips.labs.tek.com

Title
Review for Dances with Wolves (1990)
     Lieutenant John Dunbar (Kevin Costner) secures a position as head
of a garrison on the remote edge of the frontier, smack in the middle of
Sioux territory.  (He got this post--and his buckskin Cisco--through an
impulsive act of suicide that was interpreted as heroism.)  The garrison
is deserted, but rather than turn back, Dunbar unloads the provisions,
begins cleaning the debris, drifts into a daily routine, and starts
keeping a journal.
     For roughly one-third of the film, the journal serves as the device
that justifies Dunbar's narrative.  We hear his written words, we see
the pictures he draws.  Through the narrative, we begin to "see" the
man.  He is quiet, he is unperturbed by isolation, he is content.  He is
unaware that his movements are watched by the neighboring Sioux; he's
also unaware that other whites have been murdered by Indians.
     In a break from the narrative pattern, we switch point of view and
sit in on a Sioux pow wow held to discuss Dunbar's invasion into their
territory.  Soon we switch point of view again, this time riding on a
children's raid.  Object: Cisco.  This vignette is a wonderful set of
scenes that does much to further character development and entertain us
at the same time.  Looking back, it's one of the most satisfying parts
of the film.  It works well because it's on a human scale and it
portrays human foibles.
     Gradually, and I mean gradually, Dunbar meets and interacts with
the Sioux.  In parallel, Dunbar befriends a lone wolf.  Those of us who
yearn for multiple levels in a film gladly recognize this wolf as
symbolic of Dunbar's developing relationship with the tribe.  And the
tribe sees Dunbar's antics with the wolf as proving that Dunbar is
"more" than a white man, since wolves are revered in Sioux culture.  (My
limited understanding is that wolves are spiritual, and honoring a man
with a name that includes "wolf" is a great honor indeed.)  Dunbar
becomes Dances with Wolves.
     A key event in the film is the buffalo hunt.  What a scene!  I'd
read earlier that the cast actually rode in a stampeding herd of 3,500
buffalo, but that didn't clue me in on the primal nature of the hunt
that shows so clearly in this scene.  The theatre I saw this in had a
THX sound system, which provides an immediacy that can't be described
easily.  Dunbar plays a pivotal role in the hunt, and the tribe adopts
him unreservedly.  (Incidentally, Costner had a spectacular fall during
this scene, yet refused to let a stuntman ride for him and even took the
stuntman's horse in order to get back in the scene.)   
     Up to this point, the film develops in a leisurely fashion,
mirroring the slow way that Dunbar becomes integrated into the tribe.
Although some critics felt the movie was slooooow, the pace seemed
appropriate and even comfortable to me.  What's lacking is much deeper
than a pacing problem.
     The idea of a white man adopted into a tribe is alluring but
insufficient material for real drama.  Another layer is required:
conflict.  Not just a battle-scene-type of conflict, but the gut-type
conflict: take a half-white, half-Indian and pull on both sides.  Make
him want both, make him see flaws in both, put him in conflict.  If you
don't have conflict, you don't have drama.  That's what's wrong with
this film.
     The whites are portrayed as such barbarians and the Sioux as such
noble humans that Dunbar never has moments of doubt.  Why should he?
Instead of Dunbar being pulled in two directions, the medicine man is
the one who has to weigh both sides and make the telling decision in the
film.  That is so very very wrong.
     Oh, the movie is beautiful and worth seeing, but it's a soft film
that ultimately falters and fades.  There are at least three ways that
this film violates good filmmaking: shifting points of view, the
central character's lack of conflict, and an ending that happens before
the characters see the results of their actions.
     To his credit, Costner stuck by his guns, getting Lakotah and
Pawnee dialects into the film with English subtitles.  It was an
important decision that worked well.  (The Sioux communities are
delighted with Costner--they've accepted him into their tribe.)  Also to
Costner's credit is the length of the movie that he insisted on, which
befits the nature of the material.  Another plus is the cinematography,
which is often breathtaking.  The acting is acceptable and occasionally
is much better than that.  
     It's a good Western, in summary, but it's not a great or important
film.  Go see it in a good theatre with a good sound system so you can
enjoy the things it does well.  Its flaws will be too apparent, and the
grandeur lost, if you wait to see it on a VCR.

Title
Review for Rush (1991)
     I've waited for this film for more than a year; high expectations
seemed reasonable given the cast and Wozencraft's novel.  In some ways,
these expectations were more than met.  Parts of RUSH fill the screen
with such force and angst that they spill into the rest and lift the
film from the mediocre to the accomplished.  Yet to be fair, the film
has too much Hollywood rubbed into it.  I'll explain that later.  For
now, let's visit the story.
     Why would anyone actually choose to be an undercover narcotics cop?
A hatred of pushers?  A thrill at worming your way into a closed, secret
society?  A love of danger with the accompanying high that only an
adrenalin rush can give you?  And once you get there--once you are a
narc--how do you insinuate yourself into this other lifestyle without
having it permeate your very sense of self?
     Kristin Cates (Jennifer Jason Leigh) is the novice who wants to
"make a difference."  She's driven by ideals.  In direct contrast is Jim
Raynor (Jason Patric), the experienced narc who picks her for his
partner.  If he ever felt the same drive, it was several lifetimes ago.
Now he does his job, he does it well, and he does nothing else.
     Why did he pick Kristin for his partner?  He says it's because of
her edge--something he saw in her during a competitive track event that
he watched.  But she is also a tender young thing, completely unsullied.
The contrast between them is extreme, and his attraction to her speaks
volumes about his own psyche.  He trains her carefully, gently, quietly.
She is very willing:  the best partner Jim could ever pick, and the
worst one.  (Think how much further you used to go on a dare than you 
would have gone on your own.)
     On the surface, all they have to do is buy drugs without having
their  cover exposed, put the drugs in manila evidence folders with the
pertinent  details of the buy, and hand the folders over to Captain
Dodds (Sam Elliott).  The drug busts will occur all at once.  
     So much for the surface.  The danger of the job is that they must
appear to be  heavily into drugs.  They are "on-stage" full-time, and
their work requires  total immersion in a drug-based lifestyle.  If the
only way dealers will trust  them is to take drugs with those dealers,
so be it.  But what happens to a narc  when the adrenalin rush is
surpassed by a different type of rush?  And what happens when ties to
dealers or informants become stronger than ties to other  cops and the
"outside" world?
     Zanuck has said that she didn't want to glamorize the allure of
drugs but also didn't want to fill the screen with cliche-ridden images
of rat-infested drug dens.  She said she wanted to present the
challenges and choices of the characters without manipulating the
audience.  She accomplished part of her goal: the audience sure does
get acquainted with the challenges.  Less successful is Zanuck's goal of
showing choices.  Jim and Kristin seem forced into much of what occurs,
rather than making choices.  In fact, this film has large gaps between
events, undermining the impact.
     Sometimes it's hard to know where the director had problems and
where the script fell short.  Many of the problems seem to result
directly from screenwriter Dexter's adaptation of the Wozencraft novel.
The gaps between vignettes make for a very sudden decline instead of a
gradual one.  And the ending?  It is W R O N G.  Simple-minded
Hollywood.
     However, it is clear that some of the directorial decisions were,
uhm, suboptimal.  One scene in particular was supposed to show
desperation but struck me as downright laughable.  Another flaw that
rests squarely on Zanuck's shoulders is the use of Eric Clapton's
"buy-my-CD" score: it sometimes drowns out the dialog.  (And the
occasional guitar solo is demandingly loud, detracting from what the
actors are trying to do.)
     Zanuck's strength may be in eliciting controlled performances from
her actors.  The role of Raynor must have been quite a challenge: he is
inarticulate.  He simply cannot talk about what he is going through.
Patric turns in an outstanding performance, using physicality instead of
dialog to communicate with his partner and with his audience.  In a
couple of scenes, he portrays Raynor as bewildered, vulnerable,
frightened, and out of control.  Most actors tend to hold back
something; they play at being exposed.  Patric does not play at it, and
his performance is beyond acting.  In another scene earlier in the film,
he inserts a needle into his arm.  Matter-of-factly, a demonstration for
the rookie.  Watch that scene closely.  It's not done with special
effects.  Patric inserts the needle for real: it's frightening, just as
Zanuck wanted.
     Leigh's performance is weak at the beginning but deepens
substantially around a quarter of the way through the film, and in the
last half, she is superb.  When Patric and Leigh share the screen, they
are riveting.  Their partnership is outstanding.  Equally impressive is
Max Perlich as a strictly small-time middle-man.  Considerably less
convincing is Sam Elliott, who always seems to be posing for the
camera.  Most of his scenes slow the pace of the film.  Greg Allman has
received praise for his performance, but not by me.  He lacked the
menace and presence demanded of his role.  Directly contrasting Allman's
lackluster performance is Special K McKray  (yes, that's what the
credits said...), who plays a dealer and turns a  5-minute scene into
the definition of danger in the drug world.  Whew.
     Bottom-line time.  Is the film worth seeing?  Yes.  Look past the
Hollywood machinations in the script, the occasional directorial goof,
and a few unconvincing moments.  Underneath the problems are
performances that occasionally nail you to your chair and routinely
overcome most of the problems with the film.  It's worth going to see,
and it's a promising first film for Zanuck, but some may prefer seeing
this at matinee prices.  (A few unique, effective shots won't make it in
TV aspect ratio, so don't wait for video.)
Sandy Grossmann       sandyg@sail.labs.tek.com 

Title
Review for Ghost (1990)
Cast:  Patrick Swayze, Demi Moore, Whoopi Goldberg
     Sam Wheat (Patrick Swayze) and Molly Jensen (Demi Moore) have just 
renovated a loft and moved into it.  Sam is an investment banker, Molly
is a ceramicist.  They're a nice couple; they seem to balance each
other in a satisfying way.  Very much in love, they're entering a
deeper phase of commitment which is rudely interrupted by a mugger who
kills Sam in front of Molly.  Sam watches over his own death and is as
horrified as Molly, especially since he finds he's incapable of
comforting her.
     As we watch him follow Molly and watch over her in his old, uhm,
haunts, (sorry, couldn't resist...) we feel his frustration and
depression.  Demi Moore can look so vulnerable that the audience joins
Sam in wanting to put an arm around her.  One day when she goes out for
a walk, Sam remains in the loft and discovers that his mugging wasn't an
accident: he was murdered.  Worse, he recognizes that Molly is in--yes,
you've guessed it--"grave" danger, and he must find a way to protect
her.
     In desperation, Sam goes to the storefront business of Oda Mae
(Whoopi Goldberg), a con artist whose latest con is spiritual advising.
No one is more surprised than Oda Mae when she does actually hear a
voice from beyond.  Therein starts the comic combination that develops
into a truly entertaining set of scenes.  Goldberg plays this role with
such relish that we willingly go along for the ride.  
     Sam pesters Oda Mae until she reluctantly agrees to talk with
Molly, but convincing Molly of Sam's ghost turns into a very difficult
project not at all aided by the fact that Oda Mae has one hell of a
police record for swindling.  Sam, meanwhile, needs to find out who was
in charge of his murder.  While pursuing his mugger, Sam is terrorized
by a ghost on one of the subways.  This ghost can affect the real world
in a way that Sam can't.  Eventually, Sam learns a thing or two from an
old ghost.  
     The rest of the film shows Sam having an increased effect on the
real world, and there's no way I'll tell you in advance what happens.
Now for a look at the style of this film: what worked and what didn't?
     The humor works.  It develops organically from the situation and
the characters, and it's a necessary component in this film.  Although a
local critic felt that the film bounced too much between being a romance
and being lighthearted, I can't agree with the criticism.  If it weren't
for the humor, the film would slip into pure sap without style.  As
previously mentioned, Goldberg plays her part with gusto, and Swayze is
as believable a ghost as I've ever, uhm, seen.
     The music works, as you've probably already surmised by previous
comments in the rec.arts.movies group.  Unchained Melody always seemed a
sentimental piece that I liked for its pure romanticism.  Now I'll think
of it and this movie as a unit.
     The performances work: they were nearly perfect for this movie.
I'm not usually a fan of Swayze, but as someone else on the net pointed
out, he's a very physical kind of actor, and he did a fine job.  After
you see this movie, try to imagine someone else playing Sam Wheat.  I
can't think of anyone who'd be better here.  Demi Moore also is
irreplaceable in this film.  She maintains a very sweet sadness
throughout the film, entirely believable, entirely appropriate.  It's
only when you consider that she spent 6/7ths of the movie with tears
rolling down her face that you realize her role didn't have much meat.
She managed very well.  And I've already expressed delight with Whoopi
Goldberg.  No one else could have played her role as well as she.
     The special effects work most of the time.  However, I'm not
convinced that it was necessary to show us the difference between being
sucked up by good ghosts vs. bad ghosts; it looked downright corny to
me.  Another complaint: one of the special effects (toward the end) was
gruesome.  I'm less willing to forgive that.  I firmly believe that
explicit violence and comedy are mutually exclusive.  
     The ending was, I suppose, a natural consequence of the preceding
events, but it seemed a trite too silly and it tried a bit too hard to
tug at the heartstrings.  (For anyone who's interested, I've been
thinking of alternative endings, and  I'd be interested in exchanging
email about it.)  
     All in all, though, this was an entertaining movie that makes me
miss movies about people and the connections between them.  It's not a
"statement" movie, so you probably won't go home a better person :-),
but you'll probably enjoy at least the love scenes between Sam and Molly
and the humorous scenes between Sam and Oda Mae.  And maybe you too will
find the old-fashioned idea of eternal love a compelling notion.

Title
Review for Bird on a Wire (1990)
     Reviews of this movie seem to fall into two camps: either the movie
is depicted as a See-Mel-Run-and-Hear-Goldie-Scream film ("Summer Camp
for the Stars"), or the movie is seen as a nice little action comedy
that only reviewers can't appreciate.
     You know by now that Mel plays Rick and Goldie plays Marianne.
Rick is part of the Federal Witness Protection Program.  He testified
against some bad guys and has been looking over his shoulder ever since.
Marianne is his former sort-of-fiance, who was told that Rick died in a
plane crash (part of his cover).  She has long since given Rick up for
dead, but still carries a picture of him.  
     At the start of our story, Marianne is headed for Detroit, where
Our Hero Mel (oops--Rick) is a service station attendant.  So far, so
good.  Heck, I'm willing to accept that a person who looks like Gibson
(oops, Rick) and has an IQ over 45 and has a college education would be
a grease monkey at some little station in Detroit, no problem.  Like,
maybe he's not ambitious.  No problem.  And I'm perfectly willing to
accept the chance meeting that brings  Marianne to Rick's door.  I mean,
life is funny, right?  So the basic idea that this story is built on is
okay with me.  At least up to there.
     Now, I don't want to wear an asbestos suit because I don't want to
inhale any of those nasty asbestos fibers, so I won't give away too much
of the story.  Besides, I doubt I could if my life depended on it.
Because, you see, no matter how willing you might be at the start of the
movie, by the time the movie starts cooking, you have to be very
forgiving of the, uhm, plot.  And you have to develop a tolerance for
Goldie's little screams and big screams, little whines and big whines.
And you have to forgive Goldie for playing such a snivelling fool in
every movie she's made for the last ten years.  As for Mel, well, he
does fine, really, but let's just put it this way: This ain't no Hamlet
role.
     This is a chase movie.  There's a period there, folks.  If you like
chase movies, see this one, because it's snappy and has pretty people to
look at and smile at.  Lisa somebody-or-other from Entertainment Tonight
asked Mel to describe this movie.  He said, and I'm quoting him, "It's
somewhere to go and sit in the dark and choke on your popcorn."  He's
got that exactly right.  It's not great art and it doesn't try to be.
     Even so, I can't help but be disappointed.  There's nothing new in
this film and no real chemistry between the players.  There's no TIME
for chemistry--it's one chase after another after another....  Would a
little bit of character development really have gotten in the way?  In a
related vein, could Marianne have had a bit of gumption and solved
problems on her own instead of playing helpless?  And my biggest gripe
with this picture:
     It's supposed to be a fairly light-hearted romantic comedy with
suspense thrown in.  What's light-hearted about shooting the romantic
lead in the abdomen and the shoulder?  What did they think this was,
LETHAL WEAPON III?  I guess the director and the screenwriter just
couldn't resist: "After all, Gibson is so good at playing hurt; he's got
the sexiest grimace in town.  Let's just shoot him a couple of times,
make him bleed all over the place, and then make him okay at the end,
whaddya think?"
     I think they coulda done better.  If I play compare-this-movie,
BIRD ON A WIRE doesn't fare well.  If I just look at the movie as a
separate entity, it's a disappointment.  Eh.  I'd rather go to a movie
that offers something more than a place to sit and choke on my popcorn.
But Gibson does look cute with a ponytail....
Sandy Grossmann      sandyg@tekirl.labs.tek.com
Xref: cbnewsj rec.arts.movies:22078 rec.arts.tv:16510

Title
Review for Black Rain (1989)
Film    :  Black Rain
Director:  Ridley Scott
Starring:  Michael Douglas, Andy Garcia, Ken Takakura, and Kate Capshaw
     You may be familiar with another Scott film: BLADERUNNER.  BLADERUNNER
was taught and suspenseful.  The sets were perfect.  The mood was indelible.
The characters were distinctive and the acting was superior.  Years after
seeing the movie (even only seeing it once), images of the film come to mind
easily.  In short, it was an evocatively stylish film.
     Although BLACK RAIN shares some of those attributes, it's very far below
the standard set by BLADERUNNER.  Still, the film is interesting, as much for
its failures as its successes.  The cinematography is superb.  The film shows
Japan as a *very* foreign country.  The three lead characters are well above
average in their portrayals of flesh-and-blood people.  And the
directing/editing is excellent.  With all those things going for it, you may
well wonder why reviewers (including this one) have generally found this film
substandard.
     One reviewer even criticized Michael Douglas merely for taking on the role
he plays in this movie.  That critic felt Douglas was capitalizing (literally
:-) ) on the current wave of dislike/fear/scorn of all things Japanese.  Other
reviewers have also taken pot shots at the story line.  The movie deserves this
treatment from reviewers.
     You see, there were so many possibilities here.  We could've seen an
exploration of morals that transcend cultural bounds.  Looked at the definition
of good and bad.  Explored the way that different societies deal with violence
and scum.
     What we get instead is an action movie with a xenophobic view of Japan.  A
cheap shot.  A waste of talent.  We are tantalized with glimpses of what the
movie could've been.  The one theme that is actually explored is the
universality of honor.  But we only get little shimmering glances of
intelligence in a film that could've delivered magnitudes more punch.
     So what's it about, you ask.  Well, it's about America vs. Japan.  It's
about the utter lack of comprehension and the contempt that Americans have
about the Japanese.  It's about scum, violence,  and honor.
     Two American policemen journey to Japan with an extradited Japanese
scumball.  The scumball is being returned to Japan courtesy of the U.S.  But
the Japanese police don't get their guy because of, uhm, a handoff problem.
The rest of the film pits the Americans against the Japanese as they attempt
to recapture the scum.  And herein lies the central problem of the movie.
     Do we get to see how the Japanese handle the scum of their society?  Do we
see how the well-established, well-understood hierarchy within the Japanese
police works when apprehending criminals?  Do we learn *anything* from the
Japanese?  Hell no.  They're portrayed as, well, inept.  Formal and inept.
Ritualized and incapable.
     It's up to the Great White Hope.  And, in case anyone in the audience has
trouble picking up on facial expressions and body language, the screenwriters
make sure that we hear Douglas and Garcia (the two Americans) voicing
unrestrained contempt for the Japanese.  Racism.  Not just lack of
understanding.
     The language and the attitude communicated contempt, but I'm sure that was
just supposed to explain to us how very far the Americans would have to travel
to cross over the cultural bridge.  The screenwriters would sincerely protest
their script being called racist--they probably thought it was exactly the
opposite.
     Where the scriptwriters went wrong was in the foundation of the story:
that there would need to be a Great White Hope to save the day in Japan.  That
an American maverick, with complete disregard and contempt for a foreign
culture, would come to respect exactly *one* Japanese man.  And that this would
be symbolic and would somehow let the film off the racist hook.  Nope.  As 
beautifully communicated as some of the moments are between Douglas and 
Takakura (the one Japanese man shown in a favorable light), those moments do
not redeem the movie.
     So it's flawed.  Very fatally flawed.  But it's captivating, and there
are about ten minutes of truly fine ensemble acting.  If you're offended by
the kind of racism that reviewers criticized in MISSISSIPPI BURNING, don't see
BLACK RAIN.  It's got the same type of problem.  If you are a Douglas fan,
you'll probably (but not necessarily) like this film.  If you like Ridley
Scott movies, you'll probably be a bit disappointed.
     Having read the reviews of BLACK RAIN, my own decision was to wait for it
to come out on video.  I'm sure it was more visually satisfying on the big
screen, but I'll sacrifice that in exchange for a $1.88 rental in many cases.
This is one of them.  (And it's probably even worth $3.00.  :-))

Title
Review for Monsieur Hire (1989)
Cast:      Michel Blanc, Sandrine Bonnaire, Andre Wilms, Luc Thuillier
     Monsieur Hire (Michel Blanc) is an enigmatic tailor who is watched
suspiciously by his neighbors.  His pale face, rigidly upright posture,
and meticulous hygiene are unusual enough, but his unsmiling and
piercing gaze set him quite apart from the masses.  
     Hire is not a sociable man, and more than his posture seems rigid
when we first meet him.  We see him watching the rest of the world, and
we understand that he is apart from that world:  he is detached, an
observer.  What goes on inside his head is a mystery.  
     A murder in the neighborhood causes the finger of suspicion to
point toward the unusual Monsieur Hire.  His neighbors fear him, but his
pets--white mice--do not.  When one mouse dies, he carefully wraps the
little form in a swatch of fabric.  We begin to glimpse Hire, but we
must be voyeurs to unravel his story because much of the information we
need is visual.  
     Of course, this voyeurism on the audience's part is more than just
a device.  In order to catch a thief, so the saying goes, one must be a
thief.  Monsieur Hire is a voyeur, so we become voyeurs in order to know
him.  We watch him watching his neighbor Alice (Sandrine Bonnaire).  We
watch her watching him watch her.  We watch Alice's boyfriend (Luc
Thuillier) and Alice.  We watch the investigator (Andre Wilms) watching
Hire.  We watch scene after scene in the same way a nosy neighbor hides
behind drapes while looking out the window.  And we begin to sense that
someone knows something that he or she wants to know if anyone else
knows.  Confusing?  Not when you're watching.
     This unusual film explores trust and suspicion, passion and
detachment, hope and hopelessness.  Peter Travers (Rolling Stone
magazine) noted that this film is shot in extremely wide Panavision,
making the faces startlingly close and vivid.  We know those faces
intimately: as intimately as if we were watching them from inches away.
Yet we keep examining those faces for more clues, because no matter how
close we are, we need an interpreter, a Greek chorus to tell us what
we're seeing.  
     Leconte has solicited highly charged yet subtle performances from
Blanc and Bonnaire.  Under his direction, the film emerges as a coherent
thriller which has prompted critics to admire both the style and the
content of this movie.  This film deserves that acclaim.

Title
Review for Air America (1990)
     Billy Covington, a young helicopter pilot who does traffic reports,
loses his pilot's license because of, well, stunt flying.  He's not out
of work for long, though: a recruiter for Air America convinces him that
excitement and money are just a half-world away in beautiful Laos.  Not
having anything better to do, and finding the thought of exotica fairly
enticing, Billy ships out and arrives at Air America's headquarters for
Laos.
     A word now about Air America, 1968 style.  The slogan was
"Anything, anywhere, any time."  (Or something similar :-)) And that's
what Air America could get for you if you were a "friendly" in the
Vietnam war.  As you probably know--but just in case you didn't--Air
America was a civilian airline run by your friends, the CIA.  And it was
the largest airline in the world, what with branches in South America
and in most trouble spots in the world.
     Gene Ryack (Mel Gibson) is one of the Air America pilots in Laos;
he breaks Billy in and shows him the ropes.  They talk, they fly, they
get shot at, they walk through jungles, etc.  Sounds like a typical
buddy movie, doesn't it?  It's not.  In a buddy movie, two characters of
(usually) dissimilar backgrounds and lifestyles and mores learn
Important Lessons from each other.  That doesn't happen here because the
two don't interact much on that level and don't really go through
important changes.
     That hints at the problem with this movie: the characters don't
move much from their original positions.  Where's the conflict that
causes a wrenching moral dilemma?  That is the basis for drama, and it's
just not here in sufficient quantity.  As a matter of fact, this film
feels disjointed, as if too much cut-and-paste occurred in a dark room.
     If you're interested in finding out how and why this movie got
made, read the article in this month's PREMIERE magazine (the one with
Nicholson on the cover).  Lots of work, lots of discomfort--including
typhoons and earthquakes--and lots of thought went into this movie, but
something happened during its transition from an idea to a reality.
Chop-chop, let's cut out the love interest.  Chop-chop, don't show so
much of Gene's home life.  Chop-chop, there's too much talk and not
enough action.
     The producer realized that a summer blockbuster has to appeal to
15-year-old boys.  Isn't there some sort of law against taking an adult
film and "teenaging" it?  Look at the lovely structure for this film: a
world-weary, distrusting pilot works for the CIA and learns to watch out
for his family, ignoring the compromises he has to make every day.  A
young pilot who stands on principle begins working for the CIA and
learns that not everything is clearly right or wrong.  The young pilot
pulls the world-weary pilot into a contest where the compromises are
unacceptable but the consequences to his family are too threatening.
That would make a good movie, don't you think?
     Now.  How can we screw it up?  Hmmm, let's see...  We'll make the
world-weary pilot a real cool cookie who never worries about safety or
thinks about the compromises he makes.  And let's make the young pilot a
hot head who never learns how to cool it.  Okay, now for the antagonist.
He should be a greedy guy, and let's not spend much time on him.
     As a result of this type of thinking, we have main characters who
only marginally influence each other, and not even in a believable way.
The main crisis is such a forced (and even trite) situation that not
even the main characters seem to take it seriously.  There's no real
danger, no real threat, and no real growth.
     Gibson is extremely restrained in this role.  It's as if he were
wrapping a cloak around himself in preparation for becoming Hamlet (his
next role).  His restraint has the curious effect of making his
character seem wooden.  He's never been worse than in this movie.  The
script (at least the script as we hear it) doesn't give him much to say,
but he has always risen way above any role he has played.  Maybe the
problem is with excessive exposition: you can hear him reading the
words.  Or maybe he was holding back, maintaining a reserve for
Zeffirelli (his next director).
     Robert Downey, Jr., does well enough, but his character was not
very interesting.  He's managed a couple of nice moments, and he
interacts well with the other cast members, but that's about it.
     Apparently, the filming, which was done in Thailand, was quite a
strain on everyone.  The monsoons couldn't have been very pleasant.  And
they really did have a 6.1 earthquake plus aftershocks.  The entire
cast and crew had to suffer through a myriad of inoculations as well as
worry about snakes and various nasty critters (including Siamese baby
pigs.  Really.  They're carrying some bizarre, fatal disease.  Would I
kid you?).  Gibson's usual stuntman either wasn't available or left
part-way through the film (I'm not sure which).  A myriad of
personality clashes tangled matters even further.  Altogether a
difficult prospect to film.
     Some directors can profit very handsomely by filming in a location
that increases stress: the conflict between characters is heightened,
and the location itself becomes part of the conflict.  However, this
director didn't focus the discomfort.  Instead, he tried to keep things
light and comedic.  He tempered the conflict.  He was wrong, and we're
the ones who pay.
.


Title
Review for After Dark, My Sweet (1990)
Cast:       Jason Patric, Rachel Ward, Bruce Dern
Director:   James Foley
Screenplay: Robert Redlin & James Foley, based on Jim Thompson's novel
     Just about any book on screenwriting stresses that the first few
pages of a screenplay must establish the main character's personality
and introduce the major conflict.  "Few" means 3, 5, or 7, which
translates to 3, 5, or 7 minutes.  It's a good thing that Redlin & Foley
ignored such advice.
     AFTER DARK, MY SWEET pulls you in bit by bit, always holding back
and making you try to fit the pieces together.  Interesting from the
very beginning, it sure as hell doesn't follow a formula.
     Ken Collins (Jason Patric) is an ex-boxer.  When we first meet him,
we discover that he has escaped from an institution, but it isn't clear
why he was institutionalized.  We meet up with him in the Californian
desert, where his voice-over begins the narration that continues
throughout the film.  He has a diffident voice:  stumbling,
non-energetic, shy, and reserved.  Non-Hollywood.  His gait is curious,
too; he walks with his shoulders hunched forward, his legs advancing him
toward an unknown opponent in the peculiar, somehow-awkward stance of
the boxer.
     He stops in a bar and tries to strike up a conversation with Fay
Anderson (Rachel Ward), who immediately sizes him up as a stupid oaf.
When the bartender attempts to throw him out, Collins' reflexes take
over.  He stumbles out into the desert along the highway, where Fay
impulsively picks him up.
     She looks at his face and renames him Collie.  There they are on a
road in Indio, California.  The landscape provides nothing--absolutely
nothing.  No reason to stay but too hot and still for people to summon
the energy to leave.  Everything that happens just seems to happen all
by itself, and the flat, endless landscape is flattened still further by
a relentless sun.
     A friend describes this film as Technicolor noir.  Maybe he read
that somewhere, or maybe he made it up himself, but it's a good label.
Certainly the tone is film noir, and the overbearing light in this film
serves the same purpose as the dark, shadowed images of yesteryear.
While regular film noir depends upon particularly malevolent characters
and a pervasive pessimism, AFTER DARK, MY SWEET differs in that the
characters aren't stereotypical or especially stylized.  Although the
characters are at once recognizable, they are in some sense archetypes
instead of stereotypes.  Also in contrast to film noir is the holdout
for hope that the characters maintain.
     I don't want to spoil this for you by telling you too much about
the story or giving away too much about the characters.  Let me put it
this way, though: these characters are complex and their relationships
constantly shift.  The acting is superb.  I'd never even heard of Jason
Patric before, but I know of him now and greatly respect his ability.
Rachel Ward is grand.  Bruce Dern is perfect as Uncle Bob, a schemer who
amuses Fay.
     Hats off to the writers of this play for creating such complete
characters and events that just start happening.  In contrast to many
screenplays, the characters' reactions to events and opportunities
actually drive the story.  Put another way, the plot doesn't drive the
characters--the characters drive the plot.  Rare is the screenplay that
allows this to happen.
     Why this didn't get more attention is beyond me.  It's well-worth
seeing, and Patric's performance makes this a film worth buying.  Rent
it, though, and tell me what *you* think.  And tell me what the heck the
title has to do with the film, OK?  I never did get it...
Sandra J. Grossmann         sandyg@sail.labs.tek.com 

Title
Review for White Palace (1990)
     Max (James Spader) lives alone in a big expensive house.  He combs
the fringe of his Oriental rug with his fingers.  Twice, in case we
didn't catch it the first time.  Label him Repressed.  Mr. Repressed
goes to a bachelor's party, bringing with him 50 White Castles--uhm,
White Palaces.
     [What is a White Castle/Palace?  I'm glad you asked.  It's a square
hamburger with a hole in the middle.  It's cooked in lots of tasty
grease, which also flavors the square buns.  The grease is tasty because
they cook onions in it.  It's more a religion than a meal.  Anyway,
trademarks being what they are, White Castle is transformed into White
Palace.]
     So.  Mr. Repressed returns to the party and discovers that he only
received 44 White Palaces--6 of the boxes are *empty*!  Standing on
principle, he insists on leaving the party and returning to White
Palace to get the other burgers.  Once there, he argues with Nora the
Waitress (Susan Sarandon) and finally gets his $3.00 or so back.
(Yeah, I know, he was gonna get burgers.  Hey, I didn't write it.)
     He returns to the party and has an awful time because for some
reason everyone is watching slides and of course the slide projector
gets stuck when showing a picture of his dead wife.  At least the slide
didn't burn, which is what I was expecting.
     After having such an awful time, Mr. Repressed goes to a seedy
bar.  Why?  Well, this is just a guess, but let's assume that all
yuppies are shallow and don't know how to have fun.  Apparently
Mr. Repressed recognizes this truth and, realizing that low-class
barflies have more fun, drives to the nearest dump.  Now for the
Coincidence.  Guess who's at the generic seedy bar?  Guess who does
everything she can to pick up Mr. Repressed?  Guess where they wind
up?
     The director wanted Sarandon to look and sound cheap.  She does.
Time for the Explicit Sex Scene, where she, uhm, either rapes or seduces
Mr. Repressed, take your pick.  During this scene, Nora bestows oral
favors, thereby reawakening Max's zest for life.  But wait, there's
less.
     This is, for the most part, a cheap shot at a film.  The more I
think about it, the less I like it.  The script depends on our
willingness to buy into well-worn caricatures: Jews are loud,
opinionated busybodies (except, of course, for the quiet Mr. Repressed).
Waitresses at hamburger joints live in filthy, ugly shacks and do
nothing but smoke, eat, litter, and screw.  Young urban professionals
are superficial and repressed.  Etcetera.
     Even the sets are caricatures.  For example, Max's living room
contains a baby grand piano.  Not because of his involvement with music,
mind you.  It's yet another prop showing wealth.  In deliberate
contrast, Nora's dump of a shack is so dark, you'll want out more than
she does.  Which could've been effective if shown only for a few scenes,
but nooooooo.  Nearly the whole movie is filmed there.
     The theme of opposites attracting is just as much a caricature.
Mr. Repressed and Ms. Waitress aren't real characters, they're grocery
lists of stereotypical traits.  He likes opera; she likes the Oak Ridge
Boys.
     The story is some sort of weird variant of Cinderella, done worse
than most writers could manage.  If that's not sufficient reason to
laugh at this film, consider the casting.  James Spader, the ultimate
WASP, is the Jewish yuppie.  Right.  Susan Sarandon sports a truly
unusual hick accent that I never heard once while I lived in St. Louis,
and I lived there 17 years.  It's hard to turn a silk purse into a sow's
ear.
     There are two very well-played scenes, though.  Especially the last
scene, which cleverly puts a nice taste in your mouth right as you're
ready to leave the theatre.  It's not a total loss, just a big
disappointment.
     In summary, the film is heavy-handed in nearly everything it does,
and there ain't much relief from it.  A few funny lines seem incredibly
clever because they rise out of such a mire.  Most of the time, though,
you'll feel more out of place in this film than in a David Lynch movie.
I don't understand why this movie hasn't been blasted by other
reviewers.  What do people see in this film?  My advice: wait for a
$1.88 video rental....
Sandy Grossmann       sandyg@sail.labs.tek.com

Title
Review for Hamlet (1990)
Screenplay:  Christopher De Vore and Franco Zeffirelli, based on Shakespeare
     Maybe you did your Master's thesis on Gertrude's libido.  Or maybe you
never read HAMLET and never want to.  Whatever your background, this version
of HAMLET will give you something new.
     Zeffirelli has taken a complex and ambiguous 4.5 hour play and
transformed it into a 2-hour film.  Gone are subplots, political
intrigue, secondary characters, and much of the rich dialog that makes
Hamlet-the-play so fascinating to read.  What's left?  A captivating
tale so visually rich, with such strong characters, you can't help but
be carried along.
     The sets, the costumes, the lighting, the sound: all are perfect.
Faultless.  At a price tag of 15.5 million, producer Lovell got one hell
of a bargain.  The cast worked for pittance; apparently they felt that
the play's the thing.  And just how well did this cast do?  At worst,
moderately well.   At best, phenomenally well.  One thing is clear: the
cast got to experiment and play and create new dimensions within their
characters.  
     Each part--except Horatio--seemed to break new interpretive ground.
Sometimes it worked to great advantage.  For example, Laertes (Nat
Parker) is a younger, more impressionable lad than I'd ever imagined
him.  That fits.  Sometimes, though, the new ground seems unwarranted.
For example, Polonius (Ian Holm) seems more savvy than his lines would
indicate; he only plays the fool instead of being a fool.  This
interpretation doesn't fit, even though Holm does his usual excellent
job in delivering a performance.
     The ghost of King Hamlet, played by Paul Scofield, is less a
frightening aberation than a haggard and sorrowful soul.  Scofield's
rendition is particularly effective, especially since Zeffirelli refused
to use hokey special effects and decided the ghost should appear as a
man.  (Zeffirelli claims to have seen a ghost three times; he says
they're just there.   Guess you could say he plays them as he sees
them...)
     Ophelia (Helena Bonham-Carter) is a stronger, smarter lass than is
usually portrayed.  Her descent into madness is therefore inexplicable
and absolutely does not work.  Also, Bonham-Carter's performance is
unexpectedly weak in spots.  Because Zeffirelli's "screenplay "
emphasizes her importance, this weakens the film.  The only places the
film dragged were her "madness" scenes.  (And there were too many of
those, as long as I'm complaining.)
     King Claudius (Alan Bates) is more a lovesick puppy than a
calculating, power-hungry politician.  This is certainly new ground!
Personally, I found this the most curious of all the portrayals.
Perhaps Bates (and Zeffirelli) felt that all the missing subplots took
the oomph out of Claudius' political maneuverings, but Claudius the
Cuddly never occurred to me as a possibility.  In rereading the play, I
still don't see it.  Does it work in the movie if you've never read the
play?  Yes!  Is that enough?  For those who haven't read it, obviously
yes.  For those who have, probably not.
     Hamlet (Mel Gibson) is a displaced son with all the confusion and
frustration that implies.  Most of Shakespeare's dialog that explored 
Hamlet's displacement from the throne is missing from this version.  
Therefore, the only remaining displacement for Hamlet is as the major 
object of his mother's affection.  While other Hamlets have been 
contemplative and/or indecisive, this Hamlet is a prince of action 
trapped by circumstance into inaction.  
     Queen Gertrude (Glenn Close) is so surprisingly sensual that it'll
catch you off-guard even if you know it's coming, so as to speak.  (No
wonder this Hamlet has trouble weaning himself.)  Yes, yes, yes, the
basis for this interpretation is certainly in the "script", but Close
pushes it much further than it's probably ever been taken before.  This
isn't the regal queen of Elizabethan theatre.  This is a queen for a
lusty king, the medieval King of Denmark.
     Speaking of lust and times medieval, one thing Zeffirelli has most
definitely accomplished is making the story of HAMLET a tale of real
people--folks with hopes and drives and hates and fears.  These aren't
stiff, serious, solemn renditions.  Neither are they one-dimensional.
However, some purists accuse Zeffirelli of creating too simple and easy
a version of HAMLET.
     It is a short version, though.  And rearranged.  Now, it must be
mentioned that there are at least four "original" versions of
Shakespeare's HAMLET.   Scenes are shuffled, lines are changed.  All by
Shakespeare's own hand.  Zeffirelli contends that few audiences of
Shakespeare's time would sit through nearly 5 hours of play, and that
the shuffled scenes and changed lines of the surviving versions are
proof that Shakespeare himself played with the presentation of HAMLET.
Well, yes, but I doubt he left out key characters such as Fortinbras,
and I doubt he ever left Denmark without an apparent ruler in sight.
     For those familiar with the play, the movie may give you vertigo
sometimes as it combines disparate scenes and condenses dialog and cuts
particular lines out only to reinsert them in completely unexpected
places.  It ain't pure, but it sure is interesting.  I suspect that
viewers who haven't read the play recently (or never read it) will find
the film quite fluid and sensible.  
     I saw HAMLET during a Saturday matinee.  The audience was mostly
quiet and attentive.  I say "mostly" because at least three teenage
girls--in different parts of the theatre--giggled at the beginning of
each of Gibson's soliloquies.  Behind me sat a couple in their late 40s
or early 50s who consistently commented at the end of each soliloquy,
"Wasn't that nice."  If it hadn't been for such "bookending" of the
soliloquies, they would have been seamless.  In other words, they were
soliloquies, not Soliloquies.  Although I've heard them delivered
better, I've never heard them as well-incorporated into the play.  When
in doubt, Gibson underplays.
     There are so many good moments in this rendition.  Here's a short
list.  The interactions between Hamlet and Gertrude, Gertrude and
Claudius, and Claudius and Hamlet are more dynamic than I've ever seen
them before.  The "get thee to a nunnery" scene between Hamlet and
Ophelia, although oddly placed in time, is extremely effective.  The
wistful "Yorick's skull" scene is quiet and lovely.  The sporting
contest between Hamlet and  Laertes is done with more humor, then more
temper, then more pathos than any other on film.  The moment Gertrude
realizes she's been poisoned is more poignant than you'll ever see it
again.  And Hamlet's shock at his own mortality is profoundly right.  
     For these moments and more like them, for the thrill of the
spectacle, and for the majesty of the language, get thee to a theatre
and see HAMLET.  The film's the thing.

Title
Review for Q & A (1990)
Violence and sex ratings:  Not an excessively violent film.  No sex.
The setting for our drama is New York City, and our main characters are:
  Al Francis Riley, the assistant D.A.  (played by Timothy Hutton),
  Quinn, the district attorney (played by Patrick O'Neal),
  Mike Brennan, the cop who commits murder (played by Nick Nolte),
  Bobby Tex, the drug dealer (played by Armand Assante).
     In most films, Nick Nolte plays a gruff-voiced but huggable teddy
bear.   Not so here.  His character is a law-and-order cop whose 20-plus
years on the force have pushed his hatred of low-life dealers and
criminals to an obsession.  He's the local hero of the precinct, known
as the cop who always delivers, no matter what the difficulties.  When
he fatally shoots a two-bit criminal, no one is much interested in
finding out about the details.   The D.A., Quinn, calls on a young
cop-turned-lawyer, Riley, to run through the Q & A (Questions and
Answers) procedure.  This procedure is a standard call-em-in-and-ask-em-
questions routine.  The outcome of a Q & A is a report with
recommendations that is turned over to the grand jury, which then
decides whether to press charges in the case.
     The D.A. tells Riley that he wants an assistant D.A. who shares
his values of law and order.  Riley's father was a well-known cop of
the same repute as Brennan, and the D.A. seems to be grooming Riley
for a part in the intricate world of enforcement.  The case that the
D.A. puts him on is the shooting that began the movie.  This is
supposedly an open-and-shut case of self-defense, and the D.A. tells
Riley to process the case ASAP so that  Brennan can get back to work.
     One of the witnesses is Bobby Tex.  In the course of the
investigation,  Riley begins to doubt Brennan's testimony, but each of
the witnesses whose story conflicts with Brennan's is a convicted
criminal whose word means little when in direct opposition to a
respected officer's word.  Riley is faced with the dilemma of doing his
job "right"--in other words, not being a rubber stamp--but by doing the
job right, losing the respect (and backing) of the D.A., losing the
camaraderie of the cops he so hungrily wants to be part of, and somehow
failing in comparison with his father.
     The people Riley always looked up look different up close, and he
finds his heroes-- even his father--to be substantially lacking in the
moral department.  Even more unsettling, some of the bad guys are
better than the good guys.  Bobby Tex is a proud Puerto Rican whose
sense of honor prevents him from falsely testifying.  Yes, he's a coke
dealer, but he's not the sweet Mel type of dealer that we encountered
in Tequila Sunrise.  Bobby has a depth of character and toughness that
are nearly palpable.   The contrast between Bobby and Riley is notable:
beside Bobby, Riley is a wimp, and a fairly dumb one at that.
     I won't comment on the rest of the plot, because information about
the outcome would spoil your enjoyment of this film.  Instead, let's
probe those characters a bit.
     Bobby Tex is the most interesting character of the film, and Armand
Assante turns in a great performance.  It's hard to believe that this
is acting:   Assante is so perfect for this part that it seems like
type-casting.   However, this street-wise tough guy is played by the
same actor who played the French psychiatrist in Private Benjamin.  Now
*that's* scope.
     The D.A. is a power-hungry politician, and I'm a bit tired of this
stereotype.   Nothing terribly new here, and a mediocre performance by
O'Neal.
     Riley could have been an excellent role for a good actor, but
Timothy Hutton doesn't have what it takes to suggest complexity in this
character.  Hutton takes a very one-dimensional, straightforward
approach here, projecting naivete and a childlike, trusting quality that
are out of place in this film.   (He's supposed to have been a street
cop before he became a lawyer, and his father was a cop, too.  That
isn't exactly the sort of background that produces naivete and childlike
trust.)  What happens to his character in this film is the stuff that
great roles are made of, but Hutton is simply, well, too simple to
portray a multi-dimensional character.
     In direct contrast with Hutton is Nolte.  The easy, Hollywood
interpretation of this role would be of a hard-ass racist who has
complete disrespect for the law he supposedly enforces.  Nolte, though,
plays a passionate man whose respect for his fellow officers and
workers is completely colorblind.   The easy banter between the officers
demonstrates an ethnic-rich humor that has nothing to do with racism.
Interestingly, the script was probably somewhat ambivalent about his
orientation; Nolte picked his way carefully, and he crafted a tragic
character of memorable proportion.
     This is not a great film, but it's a good one.  Its most
conspicuous flaw is that some of the characters' motivations are poorly
sketched (or played) and their actions unlikely.  In spite of its
flaws, though, the movie is well worth seeing just for Nolte and
Assante.  One superior performance in a film is a rarity today.  Two
superior performances ?  Enjoy.

Title
Review for Vie et rien d'autre, La (1989)
Director:   Bertrand Tavernier 
Cast:       Philippe Noiret, Sabine Azema, Pascal Vignal 
Screenplay: Jean Cosmos and Bertrand Tavernier
     Major Dellaplane (Philippe Noiret) is the director of the War
Casualties Information Bureau.  One of his official responsibilities is
to match corpses, amnesiacs, and worldly effects with the 350,000
reports of soldiers missing in action (MIA).  The other official but
secret responsibility is to find a very dead, very unrecognizable, but
very French unknown soldier to go under the Arc de Triumphe in Paris.  
     You might say he doesn't see his job in the same light as his
superiors.  Methodically, Dellaplane leads the effort of counting
corpses, photographing faces, interviewing family members, and
collecting identifying information about each missing soldier.  He
ignores the request for an unknown soldier for as long as possible.
     The idea of giving up on identifying any corpse is morally
repugnant to Dellaplane.  He does what any unwilling bureaucrat would:
he stalls for time and impedes "progress".  Impatiently, his superior
tells him to find a body already and stop sending the horrid body count
statistics.  His superior wants unidentified corpses exhumed in hopes of
finding a suitable candidate.  Dellaplane provides Oriental gravediggers
who will not touch the dead for religious reasons.
     Most of France, it seems, is impatient to bury the 1,500,000 dead
along with all the remnants of war.  Except, of course, for the
families of the 350,000 missing and for the new profiteers of war: the
war-memorial sculptors/artisans, the lumber suppliers, the cooks who
feed the remaining army, and the private investigators who--for a
fee--locate and bundle up the dead.  
     If this were an American movie, we'd see grim people in a grim
landscape.  The camera would show us, for example, a close-up of a face
edged in tragedy then would shift focus and show us an artistically
arranged stack of decomposing bodies.  But this isn't an American movie.
We see no corpses.  Instead of iconic characters whose names might as
well be Heartbroken or Disillusioned, we meet villagers and soldiers who
simply and anonymously do their jobs of clearing debris and rebuilding
the village.  They are pragmatic and unsentimental.
     We meet two women: Irene (Sabine Azema), the Parisienne
daughter-in-law of a senator, and Alice (Pascal Vignal), a local
schoolteacher.  Irene is looking for her MIA husband, and Alice is
looking for her MIA fiancee.  Irene seems to be the imperious upperclass
type when we first meet her, while Alice seems the impressionable,
tenderhearted young thing.  
     Irene attempts to use her father-in-law's clout and her pointedly
superior social position to increase the amount of effort expended in
finding her husband.  Major Dellaplane is not impressed.  He tells Irene
that her husband will receive precisely 1/350,000th of his attention.
Also, she should harbor no romantic notions that her husband will
reappear and be all right, Dellaplane tells her curtly.  Even if he is
alive, the very fact that he hasn't returned makes it a good thing that
he hasn't: he is either dead or might as well be dead.  
      Alice gets a similar lecture from the Major.  Neither lecture has
the desired effect, though; both women are determined to find what
they're looking for.  We begin to see that Irene and Alice share more
than a common goal.  They share qualities called fortitude and loyalty
and perseverance.  Much like Dellaplane himself.
      We learn about Dellaplane gradually, the way we would in person.
He is an intriguing, complex man.  An example to the men underneath him,
he is courageous in the face of danger, unquestionably willing to work
ceaselessly through a crisis, and completely committed to his cause.  He
is a gentleman.  He is also temperamental, abrupt, and boorish.
      He has researched Irene's husband, but he doesn't share this
information with her until he can produce a definitive answer.  During
the rest of the film, we watch their relationship change from mutual
hostility to mutual respect.
      Dellaplane resists the effort to symbolize or glorify the colossal
loss of life.  To him, such symbolism hides the loss.  More important
to Dellaplane is to chronicle the deaths as completely as possible so
that the business of life can ensue.  Every day, civilians gather
outside a mined tunnel, hoping to find clues that reveal whether their
sons died in there.  They cannot go home without knowing.  Neither can
France heal without this issue put to rest.
      Yet the officials over Dellaplane glorify the dead instead of
laying them to rest.  Villagers attempt to redraw their village
boundaries so they can show they had losses.  The sculptors delight in
the 35,000 villages that each want a monument honoring their dead.
Soldiers stand to sing a patriotic song in a surge of national fervor.
      The director offers a counterpoint:  We see an aunt and uncle
enter the mined tunnel in order to identify and claim their nephew.  A
young soldier accompanies them.  When the makeshift casket is opened,
the aunt looks in and tilts her head.  "He is so thin," she says.  The
soldier faints; the uncle carries him out.  Perhaps nowhere else in the
film is the personal reality of war so sharply drawn.
      This is an understated piece, done by the same director as A
SUNDAY IN THE COUNTRY.  Tavernier shows us both the consequences of
chauvinism and the resilience that allowed France to emerge with such
dignity.  The warning and the hope, one could say.
