Authors
Stephen Evans 
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
Eyes Wide Shut 
Dir: Stanley Kubrick. Starring Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman and Sydney Pollack
Cerebral, brooding and darkly comic, Stanley Kubrick's swansong, like
his greatest films, requires multiple viewings before a full
appreciation begins to sink in. And that may be unfortunate, since an
ambitious art film - even with two major stars - will have a hard time
competing for a repeat audience during summer blockbuster season.
Worse, few movies could live up to the expectations for Eyes Wide
Shut. Fueled by more than a year of rumors about the plot, nearly all
of them untrue, an audience will be looking for the ultimate erotic
film. This isn't it. To say Cruise and Kidman do nothing more than
nibble earlobes isn't giving anything away. Rather, we're doing film
fans a favor by letting them know if they've come for a hot time,
they'll be disappointed. And that's not their fault. It's easy to get
the wrong ideas about this picture.
Despite a teasing ad campaign from Warner Bros., this is not a movie
about kinky sex featuring Hollywood's most famous married couple. Or
even yawn-inducing sex.
Eyes Wide Shut is a tale of sexual obsession, with deep psychological
undertones, told with the logic of a nightmare.
Cruise and Kidman are wealthy Manhattanites (although the film was
shot entirely in England) with a darling seven-year-old daughter and a
well-appointed apartment. As Dr. William Harford, Cruise is a man at
ease in high society, overly confident with himself and his place in
the world. Kidman is Alice Harford, an art curator and seemingly
devoted wife whose sexual fantasies threaten the couple's complacent,
insular life.
Their intimacy is established from the beginning, and not in an erotic
way. The movie opens with a shot of Kidman slinking out of her black
dress. Later, while her husband dresses for a Christmas party, they
chat casually while she sits on the toilet, then wipes. It may be a
cinematic first.
They attend a party hosted by the fabulously wealthy but decadent
Victor Ziegler (Pollack), whose lifestyle provides a stunning peek
inside the world of the super-rich.
The Harfords are an attractive, desirable couple. And they are not
immune to temptation.
Alice dances and flirts at the party with an oily Hungarian
aristocrat, while Dr. Harford soon finds two willing companions
clinging to each arm. The Harfords barely rise above these attempted
seductions. The doctor is about to wander off with his two bimbettes
when his host sends for him. It's urgent, a servant implores.
Upstairs, a beautiful model slumps in an upholstered chair in
Ziegler's bedroom.
"I think she OD'd," Ziegler says, seemingly more concerned about the
impact this could have on him.
The doctor intervenes, calmly and without judgment.
"You know," Harford tells the young woman as her eyelids flutter. "You
really need to get into rehab."
He rejoins Alice and they leave the party, but all the attention and a
head full of champagne have put hinky ideas in her mind by the time
they get home.
Back at their apartment, William and Alice relax with a joint. But
something's turning in her mind. They argue about jealousy, fantasies
and sexual politics. In a stunning sequence that illustrates the
sudden chasm between the couple, Alice confesses she once saw a young
naval officer who she would willingly have thrown away her marriage
and family for a single night of sex.
The revelation shocks her husband, who is actually quite repressed and
naive, unable to grasp the possibility that his wife could be
unfaithful, even though it's never made explicit that she actually
would. But the possibility is enough to send the doctor reeling into
the New York night, where he begins an odyssey of temptation and
sexual obsession, flavored with syrupy decadence. This is where the
film begins to wobble, as it is difficult to believe Harford's ego is
so fragile that a chance comment from his stoned wife would send him
out of the house on a dark quest for...indeed. For what?
Each stop along his journey draws him, fascinated, to a deeper level
of sexual deviance. Each new encounter is more perverse than the
preceding event. This isn't as titillating as it sounds. Think of
Scorsese's After Hours (1985), with less humor, more nudity and
approximately the same weirdness quotient.
Following a chance encounter with an old college chum, now stroking
the ivories at smoky, midtown jazz clubs, Harford learns of strange
parties where his friend is forced to play blindfolded. But the piano
player admits the blindfold once slipped and he saw garishly costumed
men and mostly naked women doing, well, unspeakable things. The jazz
player gives Harford the password to the party and slips away.
For a troubled soul like Harford, this provokes curiosity of a very
high order. He persuades the owner of an uptown costume shop to reopen
after midnight so Harford can rent a black cape and demonic
mask. After an interminably long, silent ride, a taxi drops him at the
gate of a Connecticut mansion where a costumed Black Mass orgy is in
full swing. This is the sequence where digital shadows and
computer-generated "observers" were added to some scenes so the
picture could qualify for an R rating, as opposed to the box-office
poison of NC-17. That illustrates the ridiculous problems with the
rating system, since it deprives adults of the chance to experience
what Kubrick intended, while actually making the film more - not less
- accessible to children.
Harford certainly stares with eyes wide open as his conception of the
world splinters like the glass shards in a kaleidoscope.
Kubrick's stock-in-trade is metaphor and allegory. Here, he has
created the cinematic equivalent of a fever dream. And that's
appropriate, since the source material is Traumnovelle, or Dream
Novel, by Arthur Schnitzler, a friend and student of Freud.
Stunningly photographed in the ultra-formal compositions that Kubrick
favored, this is an often fascinating but flawed look at the
complexities of marriage, sex and love, informed by a highly flexible
notion of morality.
Eyes Wide Shut may not be the final masterpiece we would have hoped
for from the late director, although in its dispassionate, darkly
humorous view of humanity it is without question a Kubrick film. His
imprimatur saturates every frame. And even mediocre Kubrick is more
challenging than a dozen contemporary pictures, vying for audience
attention at the octoplex.
Rated R for considerable nudity, sex and language.
Cinema Uprising copyright ( 1999 by Stephen B. Evans. All rights
reserved. This work may not be reproduced or transmitted in any form,
by any means, without the prior, written permission of the author.
