Authors
dnf@nauvax.ucc.nau.edu
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Natural Born Killers (1994)
     I just came back from seeing this film, and must say that I hated
it, then I loved it and found it absolutely brilliant!  But I think
most people will not like it since it's not at all main-stream.
     The story, of course, is of Micky and Mallorie, the M & M Killers
(as the media dubs them), and their capture and rise to celebrity
status.
     After the first fifteen or so minutes, I decided I hated the
film.  It represented perfectly *everything* about Oliver Stone that I
hate.  Stone is an excellent script-writer, as his previous works
prove, and as a straight-forward director he is pretty good.  But I
could never tolerate his avant-garde, surreal touches that he gave his
movies, because they were never well-executed.  After the first fifteen
minutes of this movie, I thought that this would be a perfect film for
anybody who likes randomly-placed diagonal, crooked shots that seem to
be placed for no apparent reason.  But then, after introducing the
characters, I saw something I never would have ever thought I would
see: a stroke of genius in an Oliver Stone film.
     The original script for the film was by Quentin Tarentino, who
wrote RESERVOIR DOGS (which he also directed and appeared in) and TRUE
ROMANCE (et al), a couple of very straight-forward films.  I imagine
that when he wrote the script for NBK, he intended for it to be done
straight-forward as well.  I don't know how much re-working the script
went through, but either way, the script is still brilliant.  It is the
rest of the film that is no longer straight-forward.  When we learn
about Mallorie's abusive father (played by Rodney Dangerfield) and her
generally messed up life, Oliver Stone had the nerve to supply an
actual *laugh track* to the movie!  The scene looks like a Sit-Com!!
But of course we know that there is nothing funny about a father who
sexually abuses his daughter, yet we hear laughter! Here's where the
stroke of genius came in.  I realized that while Oliver Stone was being
pretty non-straight-forward, it had an eerie effect, rather than giving
a feeling of miscellany (that the strangeness has no part in the
film).  For myself, when I heard the laugh track in the film, I was
disgusted.  Even more so when I realized I was hearing laughter from
some people in the audience as well.  It's one of those "Gee, I hear
laughter, so it must be funny, so I'll laugh along.  Wait a minute.
What the hell am I laughing at that's so funny?" kind of moments.
     Oliver Stone's way-out directing style is sometimes hard for me to
forgive, but not this time.  Part of the reason I am willing to forgive
is because Mickey and Mallorie were the only real characters in the
whole film.  By "real" I mean that everyone else seemed more like a
parody or caricature of a person.  For instance, Tommy Lee Jones
played a prison warden.  But this guy was not like any normal person.
Jones exaggerated the character to an extent where for some it may be
considered bad acting, but in this movie, it was obviously
caricature.  It made Mickey and Mallorie's characters easier to relate
to, even though they were so cruel, simply because they were the only
people who were anything like real people!
     And speaking of Mickey and Mallorie, I have never liked Woody
Harrelson in a movie before.  But in this, he executed his character
flawlessly (or at least pretty damn close).  And what can I say about
Juliette Lewis?!  Superb as usual.
     One of the prominent characters was a character named Jack
Scagnetti.  Now is it my imagination, or was Jack Scagnetti the name of
a talked-about-but-never-seen-on-screen character in RESERVOIR DOGS?
Mister Blonde's parole officer, by any chance?  Well in this, Jack
Scagnetti was the officer investigating the M & M murders, a kind of
flat character, so not too much to talk about....
     Robert Downey, Jr.--he finally took acting lessons and learned to
do a pretty good accent for CHAPLIN.  Once again, he delivers a fine
performance as the host (with another accent) of a program similar to
"America's Most Wanted."  Not much to say about this, other than to
note that Downey has really come a long way since his early films.
     The movie of course did have its downfalls.  Oftentimes Oliver
Stone had quite a bit of overkill with his strangeness.  Too many
times scenes were randomly inserted for nothing longer than a few
frames, just long enough for you to say, "Did I really just see a
couple of dogs tearing apart some dead animal?  Or did I just imagine
that?"  It got kind of annoying sometimes.  Either that, or I just
imagined it....  ;)
     Anyway, that's my review for now.  On a scale of one to ten, I
give this film a 7.5.  Maybe an 8.  Perhaps a bit higher.  Maybe
a bit lower.   Just see it for yourself and make up your mind, and let
us all know what *you* think.

Title
Review for Renaissance Man (1994)
Warning:  Some *minor* spoilers follow.  I'll try not to give away too
much plot, but I do have some things to say about certain aspects of
the movie....
     Let's start with the opening credits: Talk about product
placement!  Penny Marshall plays a game of "let's see how many major
labels we can fit in the first two mintues of the movie while still
looking like we're just trying to establish Chicago as the backdrop of
this film."
     If you've seen ON DEADLY GROUND (even if you haven't, you've
probably heard about the famous bit of dialogue), you remember
something along the lines of:  "How long will it take for man to learn
to be good?" says the good-guy.  "All I need is some time to change,"
replies the bad-guy.  Excuse me while I barf.  ON DEADLY GROUND pretty
much stuffed its morals down your throat.  If you've seen WITH HONORS,
you remember dialogue along the lines of, "Our Constitution was written
by good men who wanted to make sure that power is in the hands of the
people," etc., etc., etc....  Once again, Hollywood stuffs its morals
down your throat *so blatantly* that you don't have to read between
*any* lines to get the message!  Hollywood thinks we're all dumb!
     Well, once again, a movie comes out that is so in-your-face with
its message that no thinking is required at all.  This time, though,
the dialogue is as follows:
     Danny DeVito is a teacher in the Army (I suppose I should have
mentioned that earlier, so you all would know what I'm talking about),
and a drill-sergeant is played by Gregory Hines.  Hines is a fine
actor, but is not used to his potential at all in this film, largely
because he was very miscast.  In a confrontation between Hines and
DeVito, DeVito manages to get Hines upset.  Hines lunges towards
DeVito, but it looks mostly like he just sorta wants to knock some
sense into him.  He is stopped before he even reaches DeVito, but
overall, Hines does not seem like a deadly character.  The very next
scene has DeVito talking to some high-ranking guy who says, "He could
have killed you.  He would have been court-martialed, but he could have
killed you."  Wait a minute!  Hines *never* looked like he wanted to
kill him!  Or even like he is the kind of person who *would* have
*ever* wanted to kill him!  ARGH!  So much about this movie frustrated
me!
     DeVito teaches HAMLET to a bunch of Army recruits who need to be
smart in order to pass military academy.  But it doesn't seem like they
really learned anything about grammar or any of the other areas in
which they lacked, just by reading HAMLET.  They just sort of liked the
story about incest, sex, and murder.  And if the entire plot revolved
around him teaching HAMLET, he could have at *least* taught it
*properly*!
     Penny Marshall is a wonderful director.  She doesn't do anything
too outlandish in any of her films, and the same is true for
RENAISSANCE MAN.  As usual, she is pretty straight-forward in her
story-telling.
     This film definitely has potential.  The script-writer (whoever
he/she/they may be) obviously knows a lot about comedy, because there
certainly were many comedic moments in the film.  Plenty of opportunity
to laugh out loud.  But they knew *nothing* about writing drama.  The
dramatic arts of the films were *way* poorly written.  It's a shame
that it didn't get a couple other drafts because it really could have
been good.
