Authors
C Roberts
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Short Cuts (1993)
Starring Andie MacDowell, Jack Lemmon, Tim Robbins, Lily Tomlin, Annie Ross.
     I have previously admired the satirical content of Robert Altmans
work in THE PLAYER and POPEYE.  However these leave one unprepared for
SHORT CUTS which must rate as one of the more scathing critiques of
suburban life!
     It implies that the most educated generation in the world inhabit
an environment where no one feels a need to recourse to a newspaper and
conversation has been reduced to monosyllables.
     A portrait of women who potter through life completely engrossed
by the next party, but occasionally managing to retain their common
sense.  This contrasts with all but one of the male characters, who
seem to stumble blindly on with no standards whatever!  Is this Raymond
Carver's vision of hell?  Was it Altman who added the earthquake to shake
some sense into them?
     It is a very curious thing to see a director use such a realistic
setting to convey a feeling of supreme decadence.  As humorous as a
bird watching a snake.  Like a painting by De Kooning, this work exists
not in the marks on the canvas, but in the emotional response
experienced by the viewer.  (Beyond natural empathy, eh?)
     We are all neighbours.  In fact thats the name of one of one of
the myriad of "soaps" shown for families on U.K. television, which draw
their content from prurient tabloid headlines.
     Altman's film, which makes those observing children integral to
the plot, can be appreciated for its ingenuity and wit.  The Australian
and British soaps which employ such similar themes cannot.  Judging by
their ratings Im in the minority, having banned them from my household
on grounds of taste.  This director has I think put his finger on the
problem.  Whilst we must all endeavour to mind our own business,
indifference is a value we pass on to children children at our peril.
     NB.  This film is awful.  The people involved have gone to immense
time and trouble to make it precisely so.  Its brilliance lies in the
subtlety of its indictment.
