Authors
Annette Cardwell
Number of Reviews
13

Title
Review for Jurassic Park III (2001)
While the first Jurassic Park was mediocre and the second film
god-awful, Jurassic Park III finally gets the formula right.  These
movies were never meant to be science heavy or overly sentimental; they
should've been what #3 is -- an amusement park thrill ride packed
wall-to-wall with dinosaurs and more dinosaurs, clocking in at less than
90 minutes with as little dialogue and subplot as possible.  Plus, big
bonus -- no Jeff Goldblum!
Instead of Goldblum, JP3 brings back Sam Neill as the slightly grizzled
Dr. Alan Grant who seems happy to put his terrifying up-close dino
experiences behind him.  Grant and his new protégé Billy (Alessandro
Nivola) are once again looking for funding for their research, and are
coaxed into accompanying a new wealthy benefactor -- Paul Kirby (William
H. Macy) and his wife Amanda (Téa Leoni) -- on a fly-over of the second
Jurassic island, Isla Sorna.  But things turn ugly when the Kirbys
announce they plan to land on the island to search for their 14-year-old
son Eric (Trevor Morgan) who was conveniently lost there while
paragliding.  When the group ends up crash landing in the jungle, the
movie becomes a race to see who will get off the island and who will
become lunch.  (Sounds like a cool idea for the next Survivor.)
While dialogue has never been these films' strongest suit, JP3 remedies
this by having less of it.  Regardless, the writers behind this
screenplay-of-fewer-words are pretty impressive: Alexander Payne and Jim
Taylor are the minds behind Citizen Ruth and Election.  It comes off as
a bit like how a dumb movie turns out when it's penned by smart people
(like a Wayne's World) -- lots of action peppered with throw-away
goofball lines like, "They weren't making dinosaurs; they were playing
God."
As evidenced by dialogue like that, JP3 doesn't take itself too
seriously, which is perhaps its saving grace; and it pulls no punches
when taking potshots at the other two movies.  For example, when Grant
finds Eric (or, rather, after Eric rescues Grant), Eric tells the
scientist, "I've read both your books.  I liked the first one better
than the second."  Also, the so-called millionaire Kirby turns out to be
a plumber.  So much for a repeat of John Hammond.
Above all, JP3 packs in more dinosaurs per square inch than any other JP
film before it.  This time, big, angry reptiles are coming out of the
sky and water as well as land, and the filmmakers even introduce a dino
to rival the T. Rex, a massive monster called Spinosaur (that's right,
dino-fighting).  And, of course, the raptors are back, and now they can
communicate with each other (don't ask, evolution's a bitch).  Most
importantly, none of the humans try to fight the dinosaurs themselves,
so we won't be seeing any unbelievable scenes of kids knocking out
velociraptors with a few gymnastics kicks.
Efficiently crammed with lots of thrills, Jurassic Park III may come off
as a little bit like a big-budget B-movie, but you're not likely to have
a better time at a blockbuster this summer.  It's just loud,
smash-and-crash monster movie fun at its finest.
Director: Joe Johnston
Producer: Steven Spielberg
Writer: Peter Buchman, Alexander Payne, Jim Taylor
Starring: Sam Neill, William H. Macy, Téa Leoni, Alessandro Nivola,
Trevor Morgan, Michael Jeter, John Diehl, Bruce A. Young
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Head Over Heels (2001)
With Freddie Prinze Jr., a perky Julia Roberts-wannabe girl next door,
four models, and a comic-relief dog, Head Over Heels has something for
everyone.  That is if "everyone" is under the age of 18.  The rest of us
will likely wonder what happened to the need for a decent story or a
well-written script, but then again, this movie is not made for the rest
of us.
In line with the recent and unbelievably profitable string of lame teen
films like Save the Last Dance and Dude, Where's My Car?, Head Over
Heels is a train wreck of bad lines and predictable plot twists. 
Fortunately, all the passengers involved are pretty damn attractive,
plus it's occasionally funny (even if the laughs come mostly during the
movie's most dramatic, heartfelt moments).
The story begins with good-hearted art restorer Amanda (Monica Potter)
breaking up with yet another bad boyfriend and moving into a new
apartment with a klatch of supermodels.  In the apartment across the
way, she spies hunky fashion exec Jim Winston (Prinze) who makes her as
weak in the knees as paintings by Titian (yes, that is a good thing). 
And Jim truly is Mr. Perfect: successful, washboard abs, loves babies,
coaches Little League, and even has a hint of vulnerability (he's
asthmatic -- awww).
Unfortunately, unlucky Amanda -- in her nightly spate of voyeurism --
spies Jim beating a woman to death.  Is her dream man a psycho-killer? 
Monica and her runway crew do some detective work to find out.  Of
course, this naturally involves some major, slapstick hijinks. 
According to the film's Web site, the filmmakers were going for a
"Hitchcock-style thriller" played "for laughs."  [Hitchcock tried this
himself with The Trouble with Harry and that was a pretty miserable
film, too. -Ed.]
Obviously, the result is nowhere near the first, and only occasionally
does it hit the second goal.  But, you're more likely to be eliciting
groans instead of chuckles, especially with lines like the one Prinze
delivers after his first sexual encounter with Amanda that goes
something like, "After tonight, I think I'm moving to a new town:
Amandaville."  Yep, that Prinze must be a master thespian to keep a
straight face while delivering that tripe.
On a positive note, you'll be treated to a decent performance from China
Chow as Amanda's sharp-tongued lesbian co-worker, though we don't see
nearly enough of her in the film.  There are also some shocking
non-sequiters thrown into the mix to keep you on your toes.  Overall,
most of Heels makes Dawson's Creek look like Masterpiece Theater. 
Judging from the coos and sighs coming from the crowd at this screening
(which also screamed and applauded for free Backstreet Boys tickets),
that's not likely to matter.
Director: Mark Waters
Producer: Robert Simonds
Writer: Ron Burch, David Kidd
Starring: Freddie Prinze, Jr., Monica Potter, Shalom Harlow, Ivana
Milicevic, Sarah O'Hare, Tomiko Fraser
Web site: http://www.headoverheels.net
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Glitter (2001)
After enduring Mariah Carey's film debut, Glitter, I'm reminded of a bit
from Chris Rock's Bigger and Blacker.  In response to women saying that
they can raise a child without a man, Rock says, "You can drive a car
with your feet, but that don't mean it should be done."  To that I say,
you can give Mariah Carey a movie, but that certainly don't mean it
should be done.
Sure, there are plenty of pop star film vehicles out there -- from The
Beatles' A Hard Day's Night to the Spice Girls' Spice World -- but none
have been so vapidly pointless or laughable as Glitter.  Everything
about this complete tripe is ludicrous.
Start off with the story, which -- as gruesomely predictable as it is --
is the least offensive part of the movie. The film is inexplicably set
in the 80s, a period piece that really shows no sign of its period
except for a few chicks in leg warmers.  Worse yet, everyone's speaking
late 90s hip-hop slang in what should be 1983.  Meant to be partially
autobiographical, Carey plays Billie Frank, a young singer in New York
who struggles to overcome a rough childhood and abandonment by her
alcoholic mother.  Influential club DJ Julian Dice, a.k.a. "Lucky 7"
(Max Beesley playing a bad mix of Puff Daddy and Robert De Niro), hears
her sing on a track, and decides to make her a star.  In predictably
rapid succession, Billie and Dice fall for each other, she starts
hitting it big, Dice gets jealous and starts acting like an ass, and
suddenly Billie's on "the roller coaster of superstardom."  In the
meantime, Billie is on an emotional hunt for her missing mom.  I won't
give away the ending, but -- honestly -- just think of unicorns and
rainbows... you'll figure it out.
The movie screams to be made with camp, and that could've been fun.  But
the filmmakers thought making the bulk of Glitter weepy and dramatic
would be better.  What a mistake.  The brief attempts at comic relief --
as in a scene where an effeminate Russian-sounding director gets wacky
with filming Billie's first music video -- go over like lead balloons. 
Instead, the audience at my screening tended to laugh loudest during
Mariah's most dramatic scenes.
Which brings us to the performances, of which there's nothing good that
can be said.  Mariah is primarily seen with a wide-eyed
deer-in-the-headlights look frozen on her face.  She actually looks
scared during her one love scene.
But you have to wonder if the writing isn't even worse.  So much of the
dialogue is so hackneyed and watered down for Carey's virginal target
audience that it's probably impossible for any actor to pull it off with
aplomb.  Even the characters couldn't have been written more absurdly. 
They're all members of a Barbie playset: the important film director who
swoons, "Billie, I'd love to put you in a movie I'm making," and the
big-time record executive who takes Billie's demo tape and says, "Oh,
I'll make sure the whole team listens to it in the morning."  Everyone
in the film is a device, and it's painful to keep watching just to see
another one appear.
To say more would be a waste.  There's so much wrong with this film. 
And, it pains me that Mariah Carey -- with her ego and sanity in such
fragile condition these days, as evidenced by her multiple hospital
stays -- will have to suffer through all the negative reviews she's
likely to get.
But, then again, I had to suffer through her movie.
Director: Vondie Curtis Hall
Producer: Laurence Mark
Writer: Kate Lanier
Starring: Mariah Carey, Max Beesley, Da Brat, Tia Texada, Valarie
Pettiford, Ann Magnuson, Terrence Howard
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Chocolat (2000)
Take Footloose and Like Water for Chocolate, steep the combo in a
heaping helping of corn syrup, and you'll come out with the sticky,
sickly-sweet romantic cautionary tale Chocolat.  The Cider House Rules
director Lasse Hallström helms this adaptation of the best-selling novel
by Joanne Harris, and delivers yet another pretty package of tempered
social messages -- this time preaching about social tolerance instead of
abortion.
Set against the idyllic backdrop of a quaint puritanical village in the
French countryside, mysterious Vianne (Juliette Binoche) and her
daughter, dressed in identical Red Riding Hood outfits, literally blow
into town "on the North Wind."  Within days, the duo brazenly opens a
magical chocolaterie across the street -- gasp -- from the church, and
on the first week of Lent, no less.  Vianne -- who comes off as a
50's-era Erin Brockovich sporting low-cut tops and bright red stilettos
-- is turning the townsfolk on to her sweets, which a la Pleasantville
miraculously inspire increased sex drives, feminist awakenings, familial
reconciliation and even criminal rehabilitation.  Soon, the town's
prudish mayor launches a campaign to drive the sin-inducing shop out of
business.
As if the girl-against-God story doesn't hit you over the head with
enough meaning, along comes a swarthy band of Irish "river rats," headed
up by the Blues guitar-playing, ponytailed Roux (Johnny Depp), to stir
the xenophobic waters even further in the tiny hamlet.  This Erin gypsy
bad boy with a heart of gold finds an ally in fellow ne'er-do-well
Vianne.  She's a little bit country, he's a little bit rock and roll,
and romance ensues.
But regardless of its good intentions, Chocolat wastes the talents of a
great cast.  Juliette Binoche manages to eke out a little dignity among
Vianne's folklorish jibberish, and Judi Dench lends weight to her role
as a local diabetic curmudgeon.  However, all of these otherwise adept
actors must deliver their lines in French-accented English, which comes
off as a chintzy device to remind the audience that, hey, the movie's
set in France -- and perhaps also to explain the lack of an "e" at the
end of the title.
Plus, the story has some serious problems of its own.  The only reason
given for Vianne's obsessive nomadic tendencies is that her foolish
French dad married a wild-eyed Mayan woman who instilled the need to
blaze a trail across Europe, leaving cavities and heightened libidos in
her wake.  Of course, things all wrap up rather neatly in the end,
something that becomes very apparent less than halfway into the film,
and there's even a Disney-esque treat to close the picture that's sure
to incite a few groans.
Of course, Chocolat will be ideal fare for the Oprah's Book Club crowd,
and will surely be a great pick for seeing with mom over the holidays or
maybe a cute first date.  Just be warned; Chocolat is more
Russel-Stover's than Godiva.
Director: Lasse Hallström
Producer: Kit Golden, David Brown, Leslie Holleran
Writer: Robert Nelson Jacobs
Starring: Juliette Binoche, Johnny Depp, Judi Dench, Alfred Molina, Lena
Olin, Carrie-Anne Moss, Peter Stormare
Web site:
http://www.miramax.com/mm_front/owa/mp.entryPoint?action=1&midStr=1453
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Corky Romano (2001)
The one question that eats at me after seeing Corky Romano is why
Touchstone spent so much money marketing this throwaway film.  Since
June, I haven't been able to turn on the TV or go to the movies without
getting hit by some ad depicting Chris Kattan as the spastic Corky,
shrieking out A-Ha's "Take On Me" in his yellow Miata.  Why would Disney
sink so much cash into the Corky hype machine?  Honestly, I was hoping
that all the goofball ads were actually a front for a decently funny
movie.
Man, was I wrong.  Corky Romano is one of those throwaway, cliché-ridden
TV-star-to-film vehicles built upon the most rickety of plots. 
Fortunately for Chris Kattan's precariously positioned career, Corky
does have some good laughs, even if most of them are of the lowest-brow
variety.
Kattan plays the title character, the unsinkable assistant veterinarian
Corky who has a penchant for sunshiny '80s tunes, bright ties, and banal
coffee mug slogans ("You don't have to be crazy to work here, but it
sure helps.").  When his mob boss dad (Peter Falk) is about to be put
away on murder charges, his bungling, lughead brothers (Peter Berg and
Chris Penn) rope in innocent, black sheep Corky to infiltrate the FBI as
an agent and steal the evidence.  Predictably, hijinks ensue.
If the basic plot sounds bad, wait until you get into the inner-workings
of this clunker.  The writers will amaze you with the depth of their
inanity.  Corky's FBI agent identity is named Corky Pissant ("That's
pronounced Pees-ahn.  It's French.").  He becomes a first-rate agent by
accidentally stumbling Mr. Magoo-style onto the proper clues and talking
his way in and out of situations, which plays like something out of a
sitcom.  And not a good sitcom, I mean.  The Romano family brothers even
insult each other by farting in each other's face.  And in a scene taken
straight from There's Something About Mary, Corky gives a dachshund
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
But it's not a complete disaster.  The manic Kattan does occasionally
rescue some comic moments, including a bit featuring a cat in a fat suit
named Jesus and another involving schoolchildren, a German Shephard, and
a kilo of cocaine.  Plus, Berg -- whose career has obviously gone
downhill since The Last Seduction and Chicago Hope -- gives a great turn
as the illiterate brother Paulie.  And, it's nice to see that Richard
Roundtree of Shaft fame is getting work.
Unfortunately for those out there who can't truly appreciate animal or
fart jokes, Corky won't have much to offer you.  So the next time one of
those pesky ads appears on your TV, asking, "Who is Corky?" you can
simply reply, "Who cares?"
Director: Rob Pritts
Producer: Robert Simonds
Writer: David Garrett, Jason Ward
Starring: Chris Kattan, Vinessa Shaw, Peter Falk, Peter Berg, Chris
Penn, Fred Ward, Richard Roundtree, Matthew Glave
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Brothers, The (2001/I)
Like many other African-American-targetted flicks like The Best Man and
Waiting to Exhale, The Brothers is best when it's trying to be a comedy
and comes off as fluffy if not sappy and lame when attempting to teach
us more serious lessons about life and love.  But this movie about the
trials and tribulations of four attractive, successful "buppies" will
definitely entertain, and it's sure to rake in the box office cash.
The four "brothers" are commitment-fearing Jackson (Morris Chestnut, who
also starred in The Best Man), woman-hating playboy Brian (Bill
Bellamy), not-so-happily married Derrick (D.L. Hughley) and reformed
womanizer Terry (Shemar Moore).  When Terry decides to get married, his
boys start sizing up their own lives.
Jackson's new girl Denise (Gabrielle Union) seems like "the one," until
he finds out a secret from her past.  Derrick's wife (Tamala Jones)
isn't meeting his -- ahem -- needs.  And Brian is busy fighting off
crazy "sistahs" and venturing into interracial dating, only to find that
all women are -- to him -- just plain crazy anyway.  In the end, they
all have a lot to learn, as all these kinds of movies seem to preach.
Unfortunately, you'll have to endure the film's preaching to enjoy the
truly hilarious dialogue and ad libbing from this talented cast.  While
the script is full of great lines for him to deliver, almost everything
that comes out of Hughley's mouth gets a laugh.  He's especially a riot
in the outtakes shown at the end of the movie, where he invents new
versions of one of the film's already hysterical speeches.
Bellamy and Chestnut are serviceable and sometimes even good in their
roles, but the wooden Moore is clearly just hunky, chiseled, Rick
Fox-wannabe eye candy.  Thankfully for him, this is definitely the type
of movie that calls for a guy like Moore.  It's a picture that's
tailor-made for the ladies -- especially black women -- who will be
swooning over these almost-perfect, hard-working, educated "brothers"
who just need a good woman to make them "wanna be a man."  And, it
doesn't hurt to throw in a few gratuitous shirtless basketball scenes
that could rival the famous volleyball scene from Top Gun.
For anyone who's already a fan of Hughley or the comedy of Chris Rock
and his ilk, or even if you just like ogling a pack of "fine" young
African-American men, The Brothers has a lot to offer.  Don't go looking
for any sage revelations on life, love and happiness.  When this
hit-and-miss script gets up on its pulpit, you may want to walk out on
the sermon.
Director: Gary Hardwick
Producer: Darin Scott, Paddy Cullen
Writer: Gary Hardwick
Starring: Morris Chestnut, D.L. Hughley, Bill Bellamy, Shemar Moore,
Tamala Jones, Gabrielle Union, Tatyana Ali
Web site: http://www.spe.sony.com/movies/thebrothers/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Zoolander (2001)
In Zoolander, the world's most successful, influential and
intellectually-challenged male model Derek Zoolander wonders, "Is there
more to life than being really really really good looking?"  Obviously,
the film's creator and star Ben Stiller asked a similar question when
crafting a feature-length movie out of his hilarious VH1/Vogue Fashion
Awards short-film subject: Can there be more to this film than being
really really really silly?  No, of course not, and it never aspires to
be anything more.
Much like Derek, Zoolander is a sweet simpleton of a movie.  It's not
complex in either its social commentary or its comedy, and it never
produces any gut-busting laughs (except maybe a scene when Derek's model
roommates all die in a tragic "gasoline fight" accident -- a riotously
funny take-off of Tommy Hilfiger ads).  But it has a satisfying handful
of strong chuckles, wild characters and performances, and mildly harsh
potshots at the fashion industry to keep you amused.  Better yet, this
exaggerated version of the original three-minute skit is only blown out
to an efficient 95 minutes -- just enough time to string together its
goofball plot without exhausting the gag.
Zoolander opens with several fashion bigwigs plotting to assassinate the
Prime Minister of Malaysia, since he wants to abolish child labor in his
country and thus driving up their costs.  Fashion designer and criminal
mastermind Jacobim Mugatu (Will Ferrell) drafts a plan to brainwash the
dumbest fashion model to carry out the evil deed.  Enter Derek, whose
career is slumping as newcomer Hansel (Owen Wilson) takes the
spotlight.  On the trail of Mugatu's plot is Time magazine reporter
Matilda Jeffries (Stiller's real-life wife Christine Taylor), and she's
hoping to use Mugatu's pawn Derek to ultimately foil the scheme.
Much like the Austin Powers films, Zoolander relies heavily on the
strength of the talent involved, and this zany comedy features some of
the funniest people in entertainment today.  Wilson is hysterical as the
young, vain Hansel.  Ferrell nearly steals the show from everyone as the
flamboyant, freakish Mugatu in the same way Dr. Evil upstages everyone
in Austin Powers.  Jerry Stiller -- Ben's dad who's best remembered as
Frank Costanza of Seinfeld -- makes a priceless turn as Derek's slimy
agent Maury Ballstein. Even Ben Stiller Show alum Andy Dick shows up as
a deranged, large-assed masseuse.  As for Ben Stiller, it seems his
Derek has one gag: He's stupid, which plays out in some uproarious
one-liners.
Unfortunately, Taylor seems out of place and out of her league here. 
Maybe it's just because I can't stop seeing her as Marcia Brady (who she
played in both Brady movies), making her unbelievable as a dowdy, brainy
plain Jane who hasn't had sex in two years.  She leaves me pining for
the cynicism of Janeane Garofolo, who would've added real comic
substance to the flimsy role.
While Zoolander is hardly highbrow, its screwball humor is welcome
during these trying times, especially considering the gross lack of
decent pickings in the theaters these days.  Zoolander's no masterpiece,
but a very worthy distraction.
Director: Ben Stiller
Producer: Stuart Cornfeld, Scott Rudin, Ben Stiller
Writer: Drake Sather, Ben Stiller, John Hamburg
Starring: Ben Stiller, Owen Wilson, Christine Taylor, Will Ferrell,
Jerry Stiller, Milla Jovovich
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Haunted Castle (2001)
More freaky and odd than scary, the latest 3D IMAX film, Haunted Castle,
is not what it sounds like.  Don't expect a funhouse-style ride through
a house of horrors.  Instead, get ready for an outrageously bad plot
filled with ear-piercingly bad music -- yikes, there's even a really
lame live band sequence at the end -- and laughable dialogue.  But,
who's really going to see a 3D IMAX film for a great storyline and
acting?
The best reason to see most IMAX films, especially the 3D variety, is to
ooh and ahh at the giant screen antics.  Through the clouded lenses of
the bulky IMAX visor, tree limbs will jut out into your face, demons
will fly straight into your body, and you'll even feel like you're
peering precariously over the edge of the castle's gargoyle-dotted
rooftop.  Even if the film's CG animation is obvious from the beginning,
it comes off looking much like an elaborate video game, and is far less
bothersome than some of the film's most ridiculous element: story.
The weak tale begins with our struggling musician hero venturing to a
spooky castle to collect on his inheritance from his famous rock star
mother.  He soon learns that mom had sold her soul to the devil, and now
"Mr. D" -- as he's called here -- wants to sign the kid up for mom's
same deal.  The movie takes us with him on his tour of Hell's more
musical realms.  But, will our boy sign on the fiery dotted line?
Of course, none of this matters.  The half-witted story will give you a
headache if you even pay attention to it, and the voice acting is just
absurd.  So don't give it a second thought, and just enjoy the cool
visuals.  But, Haunted Castle isn't as suitable for the whole family as
most IMAX films are, since some of the film's images are pretty gruesome
and even more harsh being viewed in 3D -- such as a that of a corpse
being electrocuted or grisly bodies suffering in Purgatory.  In fact,
there was talk that IMAX was not sure whether to release this movie,
since it doesn't cater to an all-age audience.  As a real horror flick
might say: Be warned... if you're bringing a small child to the movies
with you.
Director: Ben Stassen
Producer: Charlotte Huggins, Caroline Van Iseghem
Writer: Ben Stassen
Starring: Jasper Steverlinck, Kyoko Baertsoen, Harry Shearer
http://209.250.99.211/hauntedcastle/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Baby Boy (2001)
Ten years after releasing the groundbreaking Boyz N the Hood,
writer-director John Singleton revisits his "young black man in the
ghetto struggling against a violent end" cautionary tale, but with more
humor and realism, in his newest film Baby Boy, showing that maybe baby
boy Singleton's done some growing up himself.
In the same South Central Los Angeles neighborhood, real life is about
to crash down on 20-year-old Jody (model/singer/VJ Tyrese Gibson). He
has two children by two different "baby mamas" -- level-headed Yvette
(Taraji Henson) and too-young Peanut (Tamara LaSeon Bass) -- he's
unemployed, and he's still living with his own mama Juanita (A.J.
Johnson).  He's also clashing with his mom's new man, an aging "O.G."
named Melvin (Ving Rhames) who's looking to move in; and, he's got to
keep his volatile roughneck friend Sweetpea (Cuba Jr.'s brother Omar
Gooding) out of trouble, without getting dragged down into more trouble
himself.  And to top things off, he's seeing competition from Yvette's
ex-con ex-boyfriend (the inimitable Snoop Dogg).
While this all-too-familiar story of inner city woe has been done to
death over the last decade, Singleton manages to keep it fresh and
unpredictable by steering the plot in unconventional directions
throughout the movie. He puts unusual yet plausible twists on such
overplayed topics as drive-by shootings and domestic abuse, and still
manages to deliver some powerful messages in the mix.  And unlike the
caricaturized roles in Boyz, he's created very complex characters that
are more believably flawed.  Instead of Laurence Fishburne's ultra-Zen
and all-knowing father, we get Ving Rhames' reformed killer who wants to
teach Jody how to be a man, but has very little patience for his
hardheaded immaturity.  Thankfully, Singleton seems to have gotten a
better sense of humor these last few years (maybe Shaft loosened him
up?) and peppers the movie with a number of hilarious scenes, including
one where Jody walks in on a totally naked Melvin cooking eggs for
breakfast.
It also seems that Singleton has great luck with putting non-actors to
work in his movies.  Just as Ice Cube showed his acting chops as Dough
Boy in Boyz, Snoop really produces with a menacing role, and film
newcomer Tyrese turns out a dramatic and varied starring performance. 
Singleton's women are even more stunning, especially Johnson as the
tough and torn Juanita and Henson, who handles Yvette's roller coaster
emotions with skill.
By refusing to be as dogmatic or overly simplistic as he's been with his
other films, Singleton may have redeemed himself and his talent with
Baby Boy.  Perhaps now we can erase those bad memories of Higher
Learning.
http://www.sony.com/babyboy/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Captain Corelli's Mandolin (2001)
Captain Corelli's Mandolin is one of those films that most people can't
in good conscience say they hate.  In the tradition of films like Waking
Ned Devine and Cinema Paradiso, it's a sweet but flawed wartime romance
with enough gorgeous scenery and quaint villagers to choke a horse.  It
innocuously celebrates the triumph of true love, exalts the rise of an
everyman hero, toasts art's ability to eclipse the horrors of life, and
at times is even a visual feast (Miramax should charge the Greek tourist
board royalties).
Adapted from the best-selling novel by Louis de Bernieres, the story
begins in 1941.  Dr. Iannis (John Hurt) and his lovely daughter Pelagia
(Penélope Cruz) live on the idyllic Greek isle of Cephallonia, where
Pelagia is betrothed to fisherman Mandras (Christian Bale) who's eager
to prove his mettle in the growing war in Europe.  He goes off to fight
for Greece against the Italians; in the meantime, the Italians invade
his home island.  But these Italians aren't scary, Mussolini types;
they're jolly, good-natured and even kind.  According to them, Italians
are best at "eating, singing, and making love," which the filmmakers set
out to prove to no end in this movie.  Let's put it this way: Puccini
gets some serious screen time.
When the opera-crooning Captain Corelli (Nicholas Cage) -- beloved
mandolin in hand -- is placed in Dr. Iannis' home as a boarder, he and
Pelagia fall in love.  All seems wonderful, especially when word arrives
that Mussolini has surrendered to the Allies.  The Italians are ready to
go home, but in handing over their arms to the still-fighting Germans,
some of the fun-loving Italians get shot.  Soon, Corelli and his men are
working with the resistance to help liberate the island and avenge their
brothers' deaths.  But, can these few men defeat a huge Nazi onslaught? 
Can true love prevail?
Don't be so certain of the answer, but don't expect miracles either. 
Films about love and war should have pathos and grit, and Corelli's
gives us smatterings of each.  Unfortunately, those glimmers are
smothered by incredulously bad, syrupy dialogue ("I feel I could've
watched you forever.") and ludicrous -- almost comic -- accents.  The
performances are all passable, but Americans and Brits posing as
Italians and Greeks can be too much to bear at times.  Cage seems to
channeling a toned-down Roberto Benigni, exclaiming "Bella bambina!"
every time he catches sight of Cruz.  And Christian Bale as a swarthy
Greek revolutionary?  That casting decision is pure comedy.
While it's not remotely as bad as Pearl Harbor, the war here is
basically a nice device to teach us the important lesson of acceptance. 
We're all not so different (well, except maybe the Nazis, but everyone
hates them, right?).  Greeks, Italians, and Germans can remarkably
understand each other... in their accented English, of course, and these
cultural exchanges are where the film's painless platitudes come to
light.
Oddly, Corelli's does provide quite a bit of gruesome battle footage and
its fair share of brutal death, which gives you quite a jolt after
watching an hour of bucolic harmony, Italians singing happily, lovers
cooing at one another, and "Bella bambina!"  It's a welcome shock back
to reality.
But with the billing of "From the director of Shakespeare in Love," one
would hope John Madden's follow-up would have touted the same witty,
incisive and radiant dialogue as its predecessor, but this script is
made of lead.  Instead of clever, we're treated to cliché with a thick
artsy varnish, and there's certainly a big audience for that.  Too bad
he couldn't get Tom Stoppard to bail him out this time.
Director: John Madden
Producer: Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner, Kevin  Loader, Mark Huffam
Writer: Sean Slovo
Starring: Nicholas Cage, Penelope Cruz, John Hurt, Christian Bale, David
Morrissey, Irene Papas
http://www.captain-corellis-mandolin.com
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Bubble Boy (2001)
It's difficult to expect much from a director whose greatest
accomplishments to date are a handful of "award-winning" TV commercials,
as is the case with Bubble Boy director Blair Hayes.  That said, Hayes's
feature film debut lives up to expectations, coming off mainly as equal
parts offensive and moronic.  But occasionally, Bubble Boy transcends
its substandard roots with glimmers of humor and scathing social
commentary.
Those moments of intelligence are delivered mostly by the film's two
stars, Jake Gyllenhall as the immuno-deficient Jimmy and Swoosie Kurtz
as his over-protective, hyper religious, Reagan-loving mother. 
Gyllenhall's sweet-natured delivery of Jimmy's hilariously naďve
narration serves as the backbone for an otherwise flimsy coming-of-age
story: Jimmy is a Bubble Boy, a kid born without immunity who could die
if he comes in contact with a single germ -- a plight explored more
seriously in the John Travolta TV movie Boy in the Plastic Bubble and
less so on Seinfeld.
His mom home-schools Jimmy, filling his head with wildly twisted
conservative propaganda and anti-sexual messages, until he's befriended
by Chloe (Marley Shelton), the beautiful girl next door.  Jimmy falls in
love with Chloe, but is afraid that his love will literally kill him, as
evidenced in a scene when she drunkenly tries to enter his bubble for a
kiss.  But when Chloe decides to marry her high school boyfriend, Jimmy
builds a bubble suit and embarks on a hijinks-addled cross-country
voyage to stop the wedding by professing his love.
The offensive bits have little to do with Jimmy's rare handicap
(regardless of what the film's protesters would have you believe), but
instead center on outrageous racial stereotypes, including a screaming
Chinese strip club owner and a devout East Indian Hindi.  But even if
you find stereotype humor funny, it's hard to muster more than a giggle
for these shallow gags.  They even manage to bungle some potentially
great moments with a group of carnival freaks.
But a few of the harsh jabs manage to work, especially in the case of
Kurtz, who very bluntly shows the dark, hypocritical side of the
religious right, and a wacky send-up of a cult called "Bright 'n Shiny,"
led by the inimitable Fabio.
Unfortunately, a few giggles can't make Bubble Boy the riotous,
off-the-wall comedy it so desperately wants to be.  Honestly, it's a
mystery how on earth this movie was ever made, and I'm not just saying
that because it's so mediocre.  How odd for Disney to take a gamble on a
film with an unknown director starring virtually unknown actors that
doesn't seem to appeal to any particular demographic and has the
potential to offend so many.
And now that the studio is suffering through a very public protest
against the film by the parents of real-life bubble boy David Philip
Vetter, maybe Disney's wondering the same thing.  Hope the opening box
office take makes it worthwhile.
http://bventertainment.go.com/movies/bubbleboy
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Crazy/Beautiful (2001)
Just going on the sassy and jangly rock-filled MTV ad campaign for
crazy/beautiful, you'd think that this teen flick was just another She's
All That-style adolescent love story about the popular kid and the
misfit, but this is not just another happy-go-lucky clone.  While the
writing may be a little too self-indulgent with its message-laden
speeches, crazy/beautiful is pretty brave in the subjects it takes on,
and does its best to avoid many teen movie conventions.
Nicole (Kirsten Dunst) is the privileged daughter of a congressman
(Bruce Davison) who remarried to start a new family after Nicole's
mother's suicide.  Traumatized and emotionally alone, Nicole is always
in trouble, and makes a defiant play for wrong-side-of-the-tracks Carlos
(Jay Hernandez from MTV's Undressed soap), a hard-working straight-A
Latino who commutes two hours from East Los Angeles to the Nicole's
ritzy Pacific Palisades high school.
Of course, the film's filled with pat questions, like "Can their
inter-racial, inter-class romance survive?"  "Can Carlos teach Nicole to
love?" and "Will Nicole's dad ever reach out to his troubled daughter?" 
But the writers show smart glimpses into the many sides of some of these
cliché issues.  For example, instead of just going the Pretty in Pink
route where the poor kid feels alienated from the rich kid's exclusive
clique, this time the tables are turned.  Nicole finds herself at a loss
at Carlos' eastside Latino family party.  She realizes she's competing
with other Latina women for Carlos' affection, and that his family and
community could mean more to him than her or her family's money and
prestige.
But those trite themes get played out in a bad way as well, mostly
through poorly written, long, groan-inducing soliloquies.  Case in
point: Carlos delivers a classic "you make me not afraid to be myself"
monologue that could just make you gag.  Fortunately, most of the
non-speech dialogue is decent stuff.  Unlike Kevin Williamson's
tiresome, adult-sounding teen banter, conversations between Nicole and
Carlos are actually very real and often touching.
Much of that realism may be more a result of the truly impressive
performances from Hernandez and most especially Dunst, who plays Nicole
as the fragile party girl who acts out with wild and crazy antics to
dull a heart-wrenching pain.  Even Davison does the best anyone could do
with the often hollow father role, adding depth where the writing for
the character doesn't provide any.
Just keep in mind that -- despite the marketing -- this movie is no
screwball romance, so don't go in expecting to get one.  Instead of
crazy/beautiful, it should be Prozac-addled/beautiful.  In other words,
it's not a good kind of crazy; it's that dark, disturbing kind of
crazy.  In that way, it's hard to say who this movie's intended for,
but, judging from all the puffy red eyes in the screening audience, teen
girls will at least get a tearjerking (and a lame-ass soundtrack by the
likes of Seven Mary Three and Fastball) out of it.
Director: John Stockwell
Producer: Mary Jane Ufland, Harry Ufland
Writer: Phil Hay, Matt Manfredi
Starring: Kirsten Dunst, Jay Hernandez, Bruce Davison, Taryn Manning,
Lucinda Jenney
http://studio.go.com/movies/crazybeautiful/
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within (2001)
With a team of 200 graphic artists and animators working on this first
film production from game developer Squaresoft's Square Pictures, Final
Fantasy, inspired by the top-selling game franchise, is visually
awe-inspiring and groundbreaking.  No doubt, you have never seen
anything like this film, and the hyperbolic fanfare surrounding its
release is absolutely deserved.  But why does such a tremendous feat of
eye candy have to be weighted down with a problematic story, wooden
dialogue and generally uncharismatic voice acting?
Obviously, the primary goal of the film is to stun and amaze audiences
with extremely sophisticated CGI.  Everything you see in the film is
rendered in great detail: individual threads in the fabric, individual
strands of hair swaying, wrinkles and pimples on skin, incredible water
effects.  Overall, the expressions and lip movements fairly accurately
match the emotions and dialogue; and the times when they don't sync
perfectly really stand out, since the animation is usually so dazzling. 
But you won't spend much time dwelling on those gaffes -- as soon as you
catch one, the next stellar monster or effect will have you muttering,
"Wow..."
Like the series of games, Final Fantasy's plot and characters have
little to do with its predecessors, outside of being born from the same
Japanese mastermind, Hironobu Sakaguchi.  It's the year 2065, and humans
are prisoners in caged cities of their own making that guard them from
an outside world now overrun with deadly alien "phantoms."  Whenever a
human comes in contact with the ghostly visitors, the often-invisible
beings pass through the body and wrench out its soul (for some
unexplainable reason).  While many humans agree with a plan by
monomaniacal General Hein (James Woods) to blast the aliens with a "Zeus
Cannon," Dr. Aki Ross (Ming-Na) and Dr. Sid (Donald Sutherland) plan to
build a "wave" using eight collected "spirits" to counteract the
phantoms and kill them off.
While the images serve the sci-fi aspect of the film well, the
storytelling doesn't.  It's unfortunate, because the plot seems so
intricately thought out.  Perhaps it was far too complex and enormous to
be entirely incorporated into the script.  Some could blame this
weakness on the fact that it was a Japanese concept translated to
English, except two Americans wrote the screenplay.  Nevertheless, the
end result is an elaborate story complicated by confusing holes.  Why do
these aliens feed on souls?  If they can pass through bodies and ships,
how can humans hurt them with guns?  What is so special about the
"spirits" that they would create a force strong enough to destroy the
aliens?
Worse yet, the dialogue is scripted to be either like a science-heavy
Star Trek episode, an installment of Die Hard, or a sappy love story,
depending on who's doing the talking.  For the most part, it's bearable
considering the genre, but tedious speeches and cheesy lines don't do
anything to help the actors and can get annoying in the longer scenes. 
The only exception is Steve Buscemi as pilot Neil Fleming, who always
has great cracks during tense moments.
But, when the lights come up and the credits roll, you're more likely to
be remarking on how fantastic the film looked.  There's no question that
the roughly 33 million people who have bought at least one Final Fantasy
game will be eager to see this movie, and so should anyone who enjoys
being floored by the best CG animation ever put to film.  You'd be
living in a fantasy world of your own if you expected much more.
Director: Hironobu Sakaguchi
Producer: Jun Aida
Writer: Al Reinert, Jeff Vintar
Starring: Ming Na, Alec Baldwin, Donald Sutherland, James Woods, Ving
Rhames, Peri Gilpin, Steve Buscemi
---
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!
Visit filmcritic.com on the Web at http://www.filmcritic.com
