Authors
Ernest Lilley
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
October Sky Universal Pictures
Review by Ernest Lilley
Editor - SFRevu (http://members.aol.com/sfrevu)
Cast: Jake Gyllenhaal (Homer Hickam) , Chris Cooper (John Hickam), William Lee
Scott (Roy Lee), Chad Lindberg (O'Dell), Chris Owen (Quentin), Laura Dern (Miss
Riley), Natalie Canerday (Elsie Hickam) 
Director: Joe Johnston / Screenwriter: Lewis Colick / Producer: Charles Gordon 
In October 1957 the coal industry was declining, rock and roll was rising, and
all over the world people looked up to see man's first satellite streak across
the night sky. A Russian satellite named Sputnik.
While most Americans trembled with fear or anger, a few felt another sense -
wonder. OCTOBER SKY, is a true (nearly) story based (mostly) on the memoirs of
Homer Hickam, who was 17 years old when Sputnik went up, and living in a West
Virginia coal town. Homer got the sense of wonder out of it. Suddenly the
future wasn't something you read about or watched on TV. Suddenly for Homer, it
was something you had to be part of. 
His brother is a local football hero and his dad is the mine supervisor. He's
nothing special, not a jock, not a genius, just a bit of a dreamer. The kind of
dreamer that can change the world if he finds the right dream. And for Homer,
that dream is building rockets and the world is Coalwood, West Virginia.
The first rocket blows up his mother's garden. Rather than accept failure,
Homer makes the ultimate sacrifice - he teams up with the school's oddball geek
Quentin, and forges a rocket building team out of a group of friends. Along the
way, lots of things blow up. The rockets do it. The miner's union does it. The
principal does it. His dad really does it. But after a while, things start to
take off - spectacularly, and a band of outcast boys gets a chance to carry the
hopes of a small town toward the stars. So to speak. Actually it's a science
fair, but it's really a lot more than that. 
And along the way, they launch rockets.
Not hobby shop, paper tube and pre-made ceramic and cardboard engines like you
can buy today. Ones made out of seamless steel tube with machined steel nozzles
that arrow into the sky like javelins hurled at the heavensusually. Early on,
stability isn't their strong suit.
There's a lot of coming of age stuff in the movie. In fact, the producer
decided to make it the point of the movie. Taking hold of a dream, believing in
yourself, sharing vision, risking failure. The whole feelgood deal. Which was
good. But the rocket launches should have been the star of the film. Of course,
I'm sure that was done in the name of broader appeal, and maybe this means you
can take a date along and both find something in the film. Much as I like
feeling good, I would have liked it if they'd kept in a bit more of the stuff
that makes my heart race - Sex, Rockets, and Rock and Roll.
The book, hastily re-titled OCTOBER SKY, after its release as ROCKET BOYS
(reviewed in SFRevu Jan '99 http://members.aol.com/sfrevu) pulled a lot fewer
punches. Teenagers discovered the things teenagers always discover, to their
parents' horror, Jocks tear down what nerds build and in general it's a rougher
ride for the rocket boys. I liked the book's version a lot better. The
challenges were tougher, the success sweeter, and the rockets louder. 
In a way, OCTOBER SKY is the real revenge of the nerds, except that instead of
defeating the people who laugh at them, Homer, Quentin, and the others manage
to draw them into their dream as well. And yes, that's the real trick. Yes,
that's the lesson more valuable than how to mix rocket fuel out of moonshine
and potassium over an open fire. 
The movie is good, though it slows down in places. The book is great, and for
me time reading it passed unnoticed. Do both. Go see OCTOBER SKY when it opens
this weekend. Go read the book now that it's a paperback. Then, after the movie
is over and the book closed, go start a dream of your own. Just remember not to
blow yourself up.

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
Cast: William Hurt (John Robinson), Mimi Rodgers (Maureen Robinson), Gary
Oldman (Dr. Smith), Matt LeBlanc (Don West), Heather Graham (Judy), Jack
Johnson (Will), Lacey Chabert (Penny), Dick Tufeld (Robot's Voice)
Director: Stephen Hopkins Screenwriter/Producer: Akiva Goldsman
LOST IN SPACE is a blast! Of all the TV series remakes I've seen, LIS plays the
deftest hand, updating the overly campy original series with a darker cast
while incorporating style and substance from the original. Gone is the
international tension that sparked sabotage of the Space Family Robinson's
colonizing mission to Alpha Centuri, replaced by the Sedition, a movement to
thwart the unified Earth government's project to establish a hypergate to Alpha
Prime - a planet probes have identified as capable of supporting Terran life.
With the Eco-systems of Earth on the ropes, Scientist John Robinson is willing
to travel to Alpha Prime by normal space to establish the crucial "other link"
and make two-way hypertravel possible. Driven by his work, and haunted by the
specter of his own father's parenting failure, he insists on taking his family.
It's a twisted idea, as the self proclaimed "Space Captive" Penny explains in
her personal video diary, but he means well by it. Dr. Smith does not mean well
by anyone, and in the pay of the Sedition sabotages the mission in classic
style. His reward for avarice is an all expense paid trip to an unknown region
of the galaxy with the Robinsons.
The elements of the original series are lovingly encoded into a very fresh work
by writer/producer Akiva Goldsman, who deserves applause for mixing the old and
new without making them look borrowedand us blue. The tributes are many, from
the appearance of five of the original LIS cast as support characters in the
pre-launch segment, to morphing of ship and robot from old to new and the use
of the familiar robot voice. Mark Goddard, the original Major West, belies his
retirement from acting in his short but nicely realized role as "The General",
giving orders to the upstart Major West. Throughout the film you will see shots
coinciding with actual sequences from the series as your mind clicks into a
place 30+ years ago, assuming you were around then. It will be curious to see
the reverse effect on younger audiences if they ever see the series pilot,
suddenly seeing the connections in the film.
While the old is well served, so is the new. The original cast cameos work to
hand 
off their roles to the next generations, especially the ones by June Lockhart
(the Principal) and Mark Goddard. The props echo or incorporate their
predecessors, but they do it with cutting edge style. Even the storyline makes
sense. It is excellent SF, and surprisingly consistent for a mass appeal Sci-Fi
project. LOST IN SPACE takes advantage of the audience's SF education in the
intervening years. Goldsman has put together a complex project that would have
been overkill not long ago but now deserves the accolade action packed instead.
The new cast does a super job of balancing old and new. Gary Oldman's Dr. Smith
is a tribute to Jonathan Harris's performance, with just the right amount of
the old ("oh, the painthe pain") and the new. Oldman's Dr. Smith happily
acknowledges his evil - it's a philosophical choice, he explains. I liked the
more competent villain he portrays as much as I liked Mimi Rogers as Maureen
Robinson. In fact, I've always liked Mimi Rogers, and I think it's good to have
a Maureen Robinson with a Playboy pictorial (Mar '93) in addition to her movie
credits. Though she doesn't show an excess of skin, Mimi shows plenty of steel
in the new role. William Hurt's John Robinson gets a 90's update too.
Screenwriter Goldsman used the part to recall the splintered families that
surrounded us as we watched the original, and to promise that among the wonders
of future parents working to save their families will be the most precious.
Hurt's character does beat us over the head with his awareness of the effect of
his work obsession though, as we all got it the first time. 
If you want a benchmark for how far CGI (Computer Generated Imagery) has come,
compare the opening "bubble fighter" space combat sequence to the Babylon 5
Star Fury shots. The only things not CGI are Matt LeBlanc and the other pilots.
Crisp and breathtaking. The B5 work has nothing to be ashamed of, but it's
nowhere near the LIS sequence. Now go back and check the Star Fighter combat
scenes from THE LAST STARFIGHTER. Ouch. And I thought they were so sharp when
they came out in 1984. Or even more telling, take a look again at the
Millennium Falcon jumping to hyperspace and then compare it to the Jupiter 2's
fiery transit. Wow.
LOST IN SPACE reunites us with an important piece of our Sci-Fi past . For
those of us who watched, glued to the screen as Irwin Allen's first family in
space launched from our black and white screens back in 1965, this timewarp
serves a kindness no school reunion ever will, showing us our memories as we'd
like to remember them - improved by the passing years. Incredibly, it even
knows when to get off the stage, leaving us brimming with hope and wondering
about what comes next.
Thank you, LOST IN SPACE. Godspeed, Space Family Robinson. Robot, keep an eye
out for them, they're our family too.
    Subscribe now by Emailing SFRevu@aol.com with any of the following in the
subject: 1) "Notify Me" to get notices when the WebPage changes 2) "Email
Subscription" to have the text version sent to you vial Email. 
  SFRevu brings Science Fiction reviews and interviews to the web each month.
Pass the word! Help SFRevu grow by forwarding copies to friends, we can use all
the help we can get. SFRevu's contents may be reused with the following
conditions: 1) credit SFRevu@aol.com and give our URL:
http://members.aol.com/sfrevu 2) contents may not be changed without the
permission of the Editor >> >>

Title
Review for Gattaca (1997)
British filmmaker Andrew Niccol wanted to make a film longer than 60 
seconds. With the release of GATTACA, billed by Columbia Pictures as a 
"science fiction thriller", he has succeeded beyond his wildest dreams. 
Alas. Not only is GATTACA longer than a minute, its pacing appears to 
stretch the time spent watching the movie like some relativistic time 
dilation.
Ethan Hawke (EXPLORERS, DEAD POET'S SOCIETY, REALITY BITES) plays 
Vincent, a child conceived out of love and good intention, into a 
society where conception is a matter of careful genetic screening and 
manipulation. Although he escapes the intervention of the pre-natal 
geneticist, at the moment of his birth he receives his sentencing as a 
drop of his blood is read into sequence analyzers to be interpreted like 
the entrails of a sacrificial fowl. Damned by a litany of probable 
shortcomings, including a tendency towards violence and an expected 
coronary failure by age 30, Vincent is a willful weakling, ever in the 
shadow of his genetically flawless brother, the product of his parents' 
recantation of nature and society's taste for gene tailoring. 
Though the odds are on the genetically perfect, Vincent possesses that 
popular element of classic SF - the indomitable spirit, manifested in 
the desire to become an astronaut. Specifically a "Navigator Third 
Class" on the upcoming first mission to Titan, a role that none but the 
most genetically pure could be considered for. Vincent may not be 
perfect, but he never accepts his limitations. Through a very special 
broker he finds a member of the genetic elite who has suffered a 
crippling injury and assumes his identity through a bizarre symbiosis 
where the cripple, Jerome (Jude Law) provides him with a name and enough 
body waste and clippings to fool the genetic scanners at the GATTACA 
space agency. Why they call it GATTACA is one of the film's little 
mysteries. Nobody ever says. Vincent, now Jerome, rises to the top of 
the organization and reaches out to accept the coveted space on the 
Titan mission.
When the agency's director is beaten to death with a keyboard and the 
entire organization is subjected to increased scrutiny, Jerome/Vincent's 
deception becomes even more fragile. At the same time he falls in love 
with Irene (Uma Thurman - BATMAN AND ROBIN, PULP FICTION), despite the 
androgynous 1940s business suits that everyone wears. Will he manage to 
avoid the murder investigation and join the Titan mission? Will Irene 
lose her flawed heart to Jerome/Vincent? Will this movie ever end?
A remarkable cast assembled to create this deadpan dystopia. Alan Arkin 
plays a future Colombo on the killer's trail. Gore Vidal is the Mission 
Director who has devoted his life to the exploration of space, Ernest 
Borgnine (Borg-9? Any relation to Seven of 9?) is a janitor whose role 
in the film is only hinted at. His real contribution to the film is 
lying, I suspect, on the editing room floor.
Andrew Niccol wrote and directed this bit of supposedly serious SF, but 
I suspect that he's never read SF and is a bit put off by it. Mr. 
Niccol's future is as devoid of trappings of technology as he could make 
it. The only science evident exists in black boxes that pop up pictures 
of the owners of whatever bit of hair, skin or spittle is fed into them. 
Evenings are spent in classic smoke filled salons in formal evening wear 
and "hovercraft and epaulets" have been strictly banned from the set. 
Mr. Niccols has taken it on himself to reinvent Science Fiction by 
removing the techno-glitter from Sci-Fi and creating the world in a 
retro-classic image. Although the cast praised his vision, comments by 
the writer/director are conspicuously absent from the studio's press 
kit. His moral message of the inadequacy of class distinction is 
delivered with little enthusiasm, and less plausibility. Yes, it is a 
frightening prospect that testing may reveal so much about us that we 
never dream of challenging our proscribed limits. No, I didn't believe 
that Jerome/Vincent could get away with it, or even that he should. 
Worse, I strongly doubt that anyone will remain interested in the film 
long enough to come to their own conclusion. Even if you were to remove 
the minute traces of SF from the film it would teeter shakily on its 
underpinnings of Mystery and Romance. If studios cannot bear the thought 
of turning to authors of SF for good SF scripts, they should stick to 
Sci-Fi SFX extravaganzas.
If GATTACA is the Science Fiction Drama of the year, 'tis a lean year 
indeed.
