Authors
Thuan N. P. Nguyen
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Forbidden City, U.S.A. (1989)
     Until last November, I had never even heard of the Forbidden City
nightclub.  I didn't know that during the 1940's there was a cabaret show which
featured Asian-American jazz singers and tap-dancers.  Their existence wasn't
documented in any movie I'd seen or books that I'd read.  Until now.  And I
find myself enjoying the movie FORBIDDEN CITY, U.S.A.
     I think Arthur Dong, the director, succeeded in communicating the feelings
that being an Asian-American singer and dancer was indeed "forbidden" in those
times.  Being a jazz-singer or a tap-dancer just didn't fit the stereotypes of
Asian-Americans held by American society.  We were expected to be cooks and
launderers.  One of the dancers, Mary, recalled being told that the Chinese
shouldn't be dancers because they don't have "rhythm" and are all bow-legged.
Being an entertainer didn't exactly fit the roles that Asian parents envisioned
for their children either.  The women were expected to be dutiful wives and
mothers.  The men were expected to work in their father's businesses.  If the
father was a grocer, then the son was also expected to be a grocer.   A career
as a professional crooner or tap-dancer was out of the question.  Or was it?
     The Forbidden City nightclub was packed nightly during the war years.
GIs who were passing through San Francisco were lured by the sheer novelty of
a nightclub which offers "all-Chinese" cabaret acts.  They arrive expecting
something mysterious and exotic.  What they see is exotic enough, I suppose,
simply because of the ethnic origin of the performers.
     The entertainers saw themselves as Americans.  Their parents and
grand-parents and great-grandparents may have come from countries in the Far
East, but they themselves grew up in towns scattered all over the West Coast.
However, they were perceived as foreigners.  They were given nicknames such as
the "Chinese Fred Astaire," the "Chinese Sophie Tucker," and the "Chinese
Frank Sinatra."  These nicknames belittle the achievements of these performers
and reduced them to mere imitations.  The effect is like calling Connie Chung
the "Chinese Barbara Walters" or I. M. Pei the "Chinese Frank Lloyd Wright."
The perception that they were outsiders was at times hard to ignore.  One woman
recalled being in a roadshow traveling through Oklahoma and Texas and having
people following her around and wanting to touch her just because they had
never seen someone of Chinese ancestry before.  Several other performers in
that show recalled something uglier--Jim Crow.  Which restrooms do they go in,
the one marked "black" or the one marked "white"?  Where do they sit on the
bus, in the front or in the rear?  And what would happen if someone decided
that they'd made a mistake?
     I like this film because I can identify with the experiences of the
participants.  The recurrent theme is the frustration resulting from being
denied opportunities in life because of arbitrary stereotypes set by one's
society.  The stereotypes have changed, but the problems still exist.  Today,
Asian-Americans are often lumped together and perceived as the "model
minority", exemplified by the wiz-kids and rags-to-riches stories.  The
stereotypes mask the poverty and somewhat less-than-spectacular scholastic
achievements of new Asian immigrants struggling to get by in urban ghettos,
such as San Francisco's Tenderloin.  These same stereotypes have led many
Universities to apply quotas on the number of Asians who are accepted because
there are "too many" of us, to the point that an Asian student with a 4.0 GPA
was denied entry at UC Berkeley.
     FORBIDDEN CITY, U.S.A. omitted some aspects of the nightclub business
that I was curious about.  No one talked about whether there was illegal
business going there.  Was there gambling? drug dealing? prostitution?  How
did these activities affect the careers of the performers?  How did they feel
about their lives after the club closed in 1962?
     Overall, I'd say that this film is well-worth viewing, especially since
it's shown for free on PBS as part of the series "The American Experience."

Title
Review for Prick Up Your Ears (1987)
          Summary:  This new movie directed by Stephen Frears (THE HIT,
     MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE) chronicles the relationship between British
     playwright Joe Orton and his lover Kenneth Halliwell.  The story is
     [humorously] told through flashbacks and interviews with Orton's agent
     and relatives.  The sixteen years from the time Orton meets Halliwell
     to the time Halliwell bludgeons Orton to death are basically scenes
     from a failed marriage.  The frankness of the movie was touching
     although it might disturb prudish viewers.  I would rate it a +3 on
     the -4 to +4 scale.
    Frears begins the movie with the murder-suicide, which makes the viewer
wonder about the causes of the tragedy.  The events which follow, though 
hilariously funny at times, are always shadowed by the knowledge that they are
contributing to the couple's doom.  I was reminded of a movie called DANCE WITH
A STRANGER about Ruth Ellis, the last woman to be hanged in Britain.  She shot
her boyfriend, played by dashing Rupert Everett, after a sordid and destructive
affair.  In both movies, the audience knows that a human time bomb is ticking
away but is helpless to defuse it.  
    PRICK UP YOUR EARS (which Joe Orton would pronounce "Prick up your rear")
contains flashbacks taken from Orton's diaries and re-enacted interviews with
Orton's agent, Peggy, and with his sister.  Peggy is played by Vanessa Redgrave
with a coolly satirical attitude.  My favorite line from the movie is spoken by
Peggy as Orton's sister is mixing his ashes with that of Halliwell.  The sister
was fretting over the exact proportion of the men's ashes that should be mixed
in the urn.  Peggy calmly says to her "It's a *gesture*, Dear, not a recipe."
Joe Orton is played by Gary Oldman and Kenneth Halliwell by Alfred Molina.
Both performances were unforgettable.  Oldman's wickedly charismatic smile,
when photographed in shadow, mixed innocent boyish features with irresistible
sexual appeal: half satyr and half angel.  As he is watching the Queen's
coronation on TV with his new roommate, Halliwell reaches over and stroked
Orton's thigh for the first time.  Orton quietly says "This is a new
experience for me..........television" and grins rogueishly.  :-)  Molina was
perfect as the frustrated and neglected "wife".  Just before the murder, he
looks at himself in the mirror, rubs his bald head and says "I'm an only child.
I was an orphan at 18.  Bald by 20.  I'm a homosexual.  It's all the right
ingredients for an artist.  So why is *HE* the success!!!"   After he bludgeons
his lover with the hammer, he notices the award for the Best Play of the Year
(a human statuette) on the desk.  He picks it up and said "I should have hit
him with this--more theatrical." :-)
     The heart of the movie is about the gradual decline of a marriage as one
partner achieves fame and the other is left in drudgery and obscurity.  Sadly,
it was Halliwell who was the bright young star when they began their
relationship.  However, near the end, Orton was the acclaimed one and was 
getting a job offer from the Beatles.  Orton did not share the spotlight with
Halliwell.  Perhaps it was fear of being publicly exposed as a gay man.
Perhaps Orton was selfish (actually, he did seem to be quite selfish).
Halliwell suffered in neglect and abuse and ... he blew up.
     There are many more wonderful details in this tragic story which I 
recommend highly to anyone who enjoys black comedies.  I believe that this
movie is Stephen Frears best (of his works that I have seen).

Title
Review for Maurice (1987)
     SUMMARY:  MAURICE tells the story of a platonic love affair between
Maurice Hall and his Cambridge classmate Clive Durham which took place when
homosexuality was still a criminal offense in England.  Under societal
pressures to conform, Clive tries to suppress his love for Maurice and marries
a [dull] upper-class woman.  Maurice also tries to suppress his attraction for
men but eventually  comes to term with his feelings and casts aside the
homophobic and  class-divisive values of his society.  
     MAURICE is quite a bit more exciting than the above summary suggests.
It's a fantasy romance with elements of a grim reality, the cruel persecution
of gay love.  Maurice Hall is outwardly an ordinary man, an upstanding member
of wealthy English society, as is Clive Durham.  But they share a secret.  
Each loves the other.  Maurice has been attracted to men as long as he can
remember, but he was never able to discuss these feelings with anyone because
the teachers & clergymen constantly tell their wards about the  "unspeakable
sin of the Greeks" and watched them constantly.  It is by  accident that
Maurice meets Clive at Cambridge.  Their friendship blossoms and the two fall
in love but for a long time, neither is capable of acknowledging his emotion
for the other.  
     The movie succeeds beautifully in capturing the moods of romantic love,
the wistful longing glances, the words almost-but-not-quite spoken.  The 
interior settings are rich with period details and everything radiates warmth.
The outdoor settings are equally romantic.  The fields and woods always appear
green, lush and misty.  Clive's country estate possessed a dignified, timeless 
charm as filmed by director James Ivory.  The costuming was equally flawless,
as with A ROOM WITH A VIEW, the previous film by the Merchant-Ivory producer-
director team.
     The most interesting part of the movie's storyline, for me, involves the
two paths taken by Clive and Maurice in response to the trial of their mutual 
friend, Lord Risley.  Entrapped by a policeman, Risley was sent to hard labor
for committing a homosexual "offense."  Clive becomes ill with worry and fear
and eventually breaks off his affair with Maurice to marry a woman and enter a 
career in politics.  These changes, however, are nothing more than monumental
acts of self-deception for Clive.  Maurice also tries to conform.  He goes to 
a hypnotist who tries to "cure" him of his "sickness."  Maurice eventually
comes to accept his gay sexual identity and ends up the happier for it.
     James Wilby turns in a convincing performance as the torn Maurice.   This
role was originally to be played by Julian Sands, who played George in A ROOM
WITH A VIEW.  I think James Wilby's appearance is more suited for the role of
the "ordinary" man which Maurice is.  Julian Sands would have been too
"pretty."  Hugh Grant plays dashing Clive Durham and manages to effectively
communicate the pathetic changes that occur in Clive (keep track of who has the
mustache :-) ).  The supporting cast is generally amusing.  Ben Kingsley puts
in a appearance as the American hypnotist.
     MAURICE presents a positive, idealized view of gay love in comparison to
the grim depiction of a gay marriage in PRICK UP YOUR EARS.  The author,
E. M. Forster, wrote it with a happy ending in mind, with the idea that "two men
should fall in love and remain in it for the ever and ever that fiction allows"
and said that he "shouldn't have bothered to write otherwise."  The story's
main weakness is the contrivedness of some of the meetings.  (re: Maurice &
Alec)   I enjoyed the movie a great deal and found these faults to  be minor.
As a matter of fact, I'll probably go back to see it *again* soon, which is my
way of saying "this is one of the best movies I've seen this year."
MAURICE
Starring: James Wilby, Hugh Grant, Rupert Holmes
Also starring: Denholm Elliott, Ben Kingsley, (and many others)
Director: James Ivory
Producer: Ismail Merchant
Adapted from the novel MAURICE, by E. M. Forster.

Title
Review for Miracle Mile (1989)
     I liked MIRACLE MILE even though the concept of the movie isn't
particularly original.  The main character, Harry Washello, has  just met the
woman of his dreams while wandering through a museum at the LaBrea Tar Pits.
He's a trumpet player, a self-professed Glen Miller wannabee, who looks sort of
sweet and honest like John Boy from the  Waltons.  Julie's a waitress, an
"old-fashioned girl" who lives with her grandmother; she also promises to
"screw his eyeballs blue" on their first date.  Fine.  So they have the hots
for each other.  "Big deal!"  you say.
     Their hot date doesn't go as planned.  Harry inadvertently answers a phone
call meant for someone else.  The caller is a young soldier stationed in a
missile silo in North Dakota.  He had meant to call his  father to say goodbye.
You see...The BOMB is coming.
     Harry is stunned.  He can't be sure if the phone call was real or if it
was a prank.  I couldn't tell either.  Throughout the movie, I kept changing
my mind as the situations became more frantic.  "Oh s**t! it's real."
"Sigh...it's not real.", etc.   Now that I have had some time to mull over it,
I'd say that the suspense is reminiscent of AFTER HOURS.
     The movie did raise some questions.  What if an ordinary person, someone
I'd trust, tells me that the BOMBS are flying *now* and that I have 50 minutes
'til I'm vaporized.  Would I be more likely to believe it if I heard it from a
clean cut man in a suit as opposed to a disheveled homeless person?  And if
the BOMB really is coming, what should a responsible adult do?  Will I regret
not doing the things I really want to do but never had the time for?
     MIRACLE MILE doesn't have the clinical horror of THE WAR GAME (the BBC
production) or the goofiness of THE ATOMIC CAFE, but I did feel that I got my
money's worth out of it and I would recommend it to my friends.  Oh...and don't
see it alone.  I think you'd want to have a friend along to talk about the
movie afterwards, over your favorite-dessert-which-you-have-been-avoiding.
