Authors
John Newman
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Eating (1990)
    Director Henry Jaglom's new film EATING has the voyeuristic
attraction of spying on a group therapy session.  On the surface, the
scene of this film is a large birthday party in (where else?) southern
California, where 38 women gather to celebrate the birthdays of Helene
(turning 40), Kate (30) and Sadie (50).  However, much of the film
centers on the deeply personal revelations of these women concerning
their problems with food, men and body image.  As the film progresses,
we see more and more how the various problems of these apparently
independent and successful women express themselves in an obsession with
food, thinness and dieting.
    One of these women is Martine, a French television documentary
maker, played convincingly by Nelly Allard.  Martine is ostensibly
producing a documentary about Southern California lifestyles, but her
work actually centers on women and food.  This "play within a play"
mechanism is contrived, but it produces some of the most memorable
moments of the film.  EATING is sprinkled with short cutaways and
collages from this woman's videocamera, as the women at the party
describe the formative moments of their relationship with food.
    I will not try to list all of the notable performances in this film,
since every one of the actresses, even the nameless bit players, has her
moment of revelation, many in front of Martine's videocamera.  Director
Henry Jaglom obviously establishes a rapport with these women, and the
portrayals come across as absolutely authentic.  I will however, single
out two performances.  Gwen Welles plays the neurotic and unsympathetic
Sophie, whose jealousy of her successful (and, above all, thin) friends
leads her to viciously attack and manipulate her closest friend Helene.
And Frances Bergen (Candice's mother) plays Helene's mother, perhaps the
only character who is not obsessed with food, and who tries to confront
various other characters with their neurotic behavior.
    One memorable scene:  The cutting of the birthday cake, where slices
of birthday cake are passed endlessly around the room as if they were
time bombs.
    My favorite line:  "I guess I'm still looking for a man who will
excite me as much as a baked potato."
    While EATING does center on the topic of eating disorders, it is
completely unlike those preachy television docudramas which isolate
specific problems in an otherwise Leave it To Beaver world.  EATING
presents eating disorders with both humor and pathos, as a symptom of
the problems women face in affluent Western society.
    I strongly recommend EATING to anyone who can put up with "talky"
films.  In my opinion, this may be the best film to hit the arthouse
scene since JESUS OF MONTREAL.

Title
Review for Bob Roberts (1992)
     BOB ROBERTS is a quirky, biting satire on modern politics and the
"new conservative" movement.  The title character, Bob Roberts (played
by Tim Robbins), is a stockbroker, folk singer and amateur fencer who
runs for a U.S. Senate seat from Pennsylvania.  He does not represent any
single political figure, but viewers will see in him traces of many
real personages, from Pat Robertson to (most definitely) Ross Perot.
The film sprays abuse in all directions, from pandering politicians to
poll-obsessed reporters to fanatic camp followers.  I recommend BOB
ROBERTS to anyone who intends to vote this November, and I recommend it
even more strongly to anyone who presently doesn't.
     The film presents itself as a mock-documentary, following in the
footsteps of THIS IS SPINAL TAP.  The rarely seen hand behind the
camera follows candidate Bob Roberts's campaign in his satellite-linked
tour bus, where Roberts' aides simultaneously manage his campaign and
his speculative stock dealings.  Interspersed with this campaign
commentary are interviews with Roberts' parents, fans, incumbent
campaign opponent, and a bedraggled heckler from the alternative press 
who badgers his campaign with accusations about alleged links with
Iran-Contra, misuse of government funds, and other half-paranoid,
half-believable claims.
     BOB ROBERTS also mixes in two not-quite-funny faux MTV music
videos, and a distressing amount of Roberts' smug folk music, such as
his paean to his scapegoats, lefty college students and lazy welfare
bums, "(They'll) Complain and  Complain and Complain."  This music was
written by David and Tim Robbins, and sung without much talent by Tim
Robbins.  A fellow film-goer told me that no soundtrack will be
released, to prevent the music from being (in the film-goer's words) 
"misused";  Robbins isn't much of a singer though, and I can't imagine
that anyone would want to hear this music ever again.
     Tim Robbins in the title role holds center stage, not surprising
given that he also wrote and directed BOB ROBERTS.  There are, however,
a number of big names in supporting roles and cameos.  Notable among
these is Alan Rickman as Roberts' shady power-behind-the-throne,
fighting congressional inquiries on Iran-Contra and the S&L bailout as 
he guides his protege's campaign.  James Spader and Susan Sarandon
appear as toadying TV news anchors, and Ray Wise (Leland Palmer in TWIN
PEAKS) plays one of Robert's campaign aides.
     Another presence to note is novelist and political pundit Gore
Vidal (!), who turns in an excellent and heartfelt performance as
Roberts' rival in the campaign.  Vidal is playing himself here, and
uses this platform as an opportunity to rail against the "real
government," the National Security Council.  As such, he does slip a
bit off the edge of believability for a character who is supposedly a 
30-year Senate incumbent.  Still, his performance certainly compares
favorably to William F. Burroughs' weakly acted cameo in DRUGSTORE
COWBOY.
     While I did enjoy and appreciate BOB ROBERTS, I must admit that
this film did, quite literally, make me sick.  The film's "documentary"
pretext implies hand-held-seeming camerawork, and the constant shaking
and weaving hold little appeal for the eye, still less for the inner
ear.  If you don't have your Dramamine handy, you might try sitting
toward the back of the theatre.

Title
Review for IP5: L'île aux pachydermes (1992)
Both directed by Jean-Jacques Beneix
     Watching Jean-Jacques Beneix's new film, IP5, is like holding a
conversation with a man with no long-term memory.  His individual
sentences make sense, and are sometimes well-crafted and beautiful; but
the the discussion does not hang together as a whole.  Every scene of
IP5 is a cinematographer's dream, a masterpiece of color, landscape 
and light; it is unfortunate that character development was given such
short shrift.  This film won several awards at the  Seattle
International Film Festival, but the SIFF is known for flaky
award-giving.  IP5 isn't worth a trip to the theatre, and wouldn't work
on video, so I recommend skipping it entirely.
     The plot of IP5, such as it is, centers on a young (about 18 years
old?) graffiti artist and his younger (12 years old?) sidekick.  The
young man roams Paris painting improbably beautiful graffiti (or
"hip-hop") and acting antisocial, while his sidekick mugs for the camera
and generally acts like W. C. Fields' worst nightmare.  On the side, the
young man pursues an icy-cold nurse, who never gets enough screen time
to make any sort of sense.  A gang of skinheads steal the artist's photo
album of his work, and force him to drive a van to another city to
retrieve it.  He and his sidekick set off, to retrieve the art and to
pursue the young nurse.
     Underway, our heroes abandon the van to steal a flashier car and
chase after the love interest, and that subplot is never seen again.
They wreck the car and are rescued by Yves Montand as an aging hermit
and eccentric.  The hermit seems to have magical healing powers and
insight, but is also an escapee from a mental institution.  They have
some adventures together in the primeval French forest and the
surrounding towns.  Montand contributes a fine performance, but is
unable to turn IP5 around.
     Other films by Jean-Jaques Beneix include BETTY BLUE, DIVA and
ROSELYNNE AND THE LIONS.  DIVA is a very watchable and stylish thriller,
and ROSELYNNE AND THE LIONS, while no masterpiece, does at least boast a
coherent narrative.  IP5 must be especially disappointing to fellow fans
of BETTY BLUE, which may be the sexiest movie ever made.  Starring
Beatrice Dalle as Betty, BETTY BLUE traces a writer's affair with a
younger woman as she gradually sinks into insanity.  Beatrice Dalle's
stunning performance as Betty merges with solid storytelling and
beautiful cinematography to produce a memorable film.
     To end this disappointing review on a bright note, BETTY BLUE
has recently been re-released in a director's cut, restored to three
hours in length.  BETTY BLUE L'INTEGRALE introduces little character
or plot development beyond what was in the original release, instead
lengthening some scenes and perhaps adding one or two sex scenes.  The
camerawork is earned here, however, and I recommend BETTY BLUE 
L'INTEGRALE without hesitation to anyone who watches subtitled movies.

Title
Review for Naked Lunch (1991)
Directed and written by David Cronenburg
after the book by William S. Burroughs
Starring Peter Weller, Judy Davis, Ian Holm, Julian Sands,
         Monique Mercure
Summary: NAKED LUNCH is a surprisingly conventional movie given
its namesake.  Nonetheless, its depiction of drug use and its
creatively obscene special effects go far beyond typical Hollywood
fare.  Peter Weller stars as William Lee, a writer, exterminator,
junkie and sometime secret agent trying to stay alive and stay high in
the mysterious Interzone.  A top-flight cast of supporting actors turn
in strange and excellent performances as Weller's friends, his wife,
and his acquaintances in the Interzone.  I recommend NAKED LUNCH for
the ambitious film-goer with a high tolerance for the weird.
     A film adaptation of NAKED LUNCH is an ambitious undertaking.
NAKED LUNCH, written by William S. Burroughs, centers on the themes of
drug (and other) addiction and homosexual perversion.  It is without
coherent plot, is set mostly in a paranoid fantasy, and is definitely
the most vile book I have ever struggled to finish.
     The film NAKED LUNCH adopts some characteristics of the book, but
stays within the bounds of traditional cinema.  A storyline is grafted
on, as are recognizable characters.  In fact, the film comes off in many
respects as a parody of detective film noir (such as, say, the film
versions of Raymond Chandler).  THE MALTESE FALCON was never like this,
though.
     William Lee (played by Peter Weller) is an writer and ex-junkie
trying to make it as an exterminator, but having trouble maintaining his
supply of roach killer.  He discovers that his wife Joan (Judy Davis)
has been shooting up the bug powder.  "It's a literary high," she tells
him, "... a Kafka high.  It makes you feel like a bug."  The police
bring William in for questioning, and this is when the film starts
getting very strange.
     In the police station, Lee is recruited as a secret agent.  The
agent-runner is a giant bug, a roach as big as a Compaq, brought to life
by the director's vile imaginings (as an oblique reference to
Cronenburg's earlier hit, THE FLY?) and a generous special effects
budget.  Lee escapes to the Interzone, an Arabian mecca wildly distorted
from Burroughs' experiences in Tangier.  The rest of the tangled and
not-always-coherent plot, you should experience yourself.
     In the Interzone, pleasurable substances and pretty boys are freely
available.  Lee samples all manner of narcotics, from hashish-like
Majoun to "the meat of the giant aquatic centipede."  Typewriters take
on a mythic quality; they direct the authors' work, write on themselves,
and metamorphose into secret-agent-bugs, incubi, and other obscene
creatures.  The aforementioned pretty boys are a major attraction for
visitors and residents of both sexes, and for some residents who aren't
exactly human.
     One notable quality of Cronenburg's treatment is his matter-of-
fact depiction of drug use.  He does not pull away from the needle;
nor does he zoom in on it, as a War On Drugs training film might.  We
see Judy Davis injecting bug powder at full length, without
over-dramatization, as if she were eating lunch.  Incidentally, this
means that Davis must pull this off without stand-ins or fancy camera
cuts; she performs admirably, although some of the audience may have
felt a bit queasy.
     The film is at its darkest when it stays closest to the book.
Peter Weller, as the book's protagonist, occasionally quotes a sentence
or paragraph from the novel, which is so much darker than the film that
he sounds sententious and out of character.
     Once NAKED LUNCH moves to the Interzone and goes hyperbolic, the
plot does not hold together.  Cronenburg's relatively conventional
spy-vs.-spy plot never really makes sense; the actions of the characters
also don't make sense.  What makes NAKED LUNCH worthwhile is the
excellent deadpan performance of Peter Weller and the off-the-wall
portrayals by the supporting cast, set off against the milieu of
Cronenburg's Interzone.  Also, NAKED LUNCH features some excellent
special effects, effects which don't really push the F/X envelope, but
which are quite different from anything you'll see anywhere else.  Do
see NAKED LUNCH, if you're not easily offended; it is an entertaining
film, and it breaks enough rules to put the rest of cinema in a
different light.

Title
Review for Basic Instinct (1992)
     Imagine SEA OF LOVE directed by Paul Verhoeven (ROBOCOP, TOTAL
RECALL).  Now replace Al Pacino with Michael Douglas, whose acting here
is limited to Meaningful Eye Contact.  Switch out Ellen Barkin for
Sharon Stone, who spends half the film naked and still can't achieve
half the heat Barkin achieves by just smiling.  Finally, mix in dozens
of unintentionally comic music stings by the uninspired Jerry Goldsmith,
plenty of gratuitous violence, and enough sex to move BASIC INSTINCT
onto the softcore porn shelf.  What remains?  BASIC INSTINCT is a huge
goose-egg of a film, a dud big enough to kill an entire film studio
(this is the last film by Carolco); it's not worth watching, even for
free.
     The plot of BASIC INSTINCT, such as it is, starts with the grisly
murder of a rock-and-roll promoter.  He is stabbed with an icepick
during a sex bondage act.  (Naturally, we get to watch.)  Suspicion
gathers around his lover Carolyn (Sharon Stone), an heiress and
paperback writer;  her last bestseller depicted just such a murder,
right down to the color of the scarf with which his hands were tied.
Did she do it, or was it some copycat murderer out to get her?
     Carolyn plays the role of femme fatale.  In the police
interrogation, her investigators frantically pantomime "hot under the
collar" as she describes how she seduced the producer as research for
her book, then used him later on occasion for casual sex.  She spends
her days befriending psychopathic murderers to get characters for her
books, and her nights hanging out at impossibly decadent San Francisco
clubs.  What is her next book?  "A cop falls for the wrong woman ...
she kills him."  Naturally, no cinematic cop can resist such a come-on.
She and Michael Douglas spend much of the rest of the film "fucking like
minks" (Michael Douglas' words) as his investigation, and her book about
him, draw toward their inevitable bloody conclusions.
     The rest of the plot is unworthy of even a summary.  Every standard
element is present:  the cop-buddy, the ex-wife and girlfriend, the
psychiatrist's report, the car chase, the sneering Internal Affairs
investigator, as if they were checked one-by-one off a checklist for Cop
Flicks.  The soundtrack telegraphs every punch; wherever there might
have been some danger of surprising the audience, the heavy-handed
musical score kicks in well in advance.  Indeed, the music seems to
start just a little too soon, as if it were meant as a parody.  "I
didn't know this was going to be a comedy," was a common response after
the screening of BASIC INSTINCT; but the film takes itself too
seriously, and is too inconsistent, to succeed even as a parody.
     The blame for this catastrophe lies squarely with Verhoeven.
Verhoeven seems to specialize in overblown sex and violence, but he's
definitely much better with violence.  ROBOCOP has a gritty, hip quality
which surpasses the special effects extravaganza and paper-thin plot.
Sexual intrigue, as opposed to mechanical violence, requires focus on
the actors rather than the stuntmen, and this is what BASIC INSTINCT
sorely lacks.  Verhoeven gets in one good car chase, as the cars weave
around oncoming traffic on a twisty two-lane mountain road.  But Michael
Douglas and Sharon Stone never get a chance to do more than rehash tired
cliches.  They never build up any chemistry, and that is the key failing
of BASIC INSTINCT.
     BASIC INSTINCT does, at least, succeed as softcore pornography, and
this may be its salvation at the box office.  It might do even better as
a video, where viewers will have more freedom to fast-forward to the
"good parts."  BASIC INSTINCT is just pornography, despite its "R"
rating.  Those looking for another SEA OF LOVE, or another BODY HEAT,
will be sorely disappointed.
