Authors
Keith Lee
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Mars Attacks! (1996)
        Well, I bit the big one this Sunday and saw "Mars Attacks" at
the nearby RB Mann's Theatre and boy, was I dissappointed.  What with
all those big stars and grandiose FX, the writers forgot two simple
parts of the story -- like plot and characterization??!!
If your love stereotypes of those who are and aren't so
powerful, then you will love this movie.  For example, I didn't know
that most people in Kansas were pickup truck driving, tobacco chewing,
trailer park living, TV watching, rifle toting, fat goobers who waved
the flag and thought all Californian's were weirdos. According to this
trash hash of a movie, no one who has indoor plumbing should go to
Kansas.  Also, did you know that every CNN-like talk show host out of
the east was a vacuam head who couldn't find their rears with both
hands?  Same with the President and his staff:  this was every
Reagan/Clinton stereotype that you could think of. Everyone in the
White House is a self-centered power-monger who strives for more and
more fame and money no matter who gets in their way.  Wow, sure makes
me feel good about the ol' US of A!!
We do have some heroes and heroines in this insipid piece of
garbage.  The nerdish son of a Kansas guerilla fighting wanna-be saves
the day with his Grandmother (put in a resthome to vegitate and be
forgotten by her bible-toting bigot of a son).  The president's
daughter plays a cute version of Chelsey who falls in love with the
long-haired nerd and helps him fight off the evil Martians.  With all
of these one-dimensional characters, it's a shame the Martians didn't
win!!
There were some good parts in this movie.  Rod Steiger played
the stereotypical (in this movie, oh no) warhawk of a General who goes
down fighting to his last breath. Underneath his Patton persona, he
gives a speech that gives out the best attributes of rugged American
individualism.  Also, Jim Brown does in this movie what he has been
doing in real life: reminding us how important men are to a family
unit.  He plays a down and out ex-prizefighter who works hard in Vegas
to keep his wife and children fed and clothed in Washington DC.  While
Steiger and Brown couldn't help this turkey get off the ground, they
gave excellent performances for two actors unfortunately forgotten by
Hollywood's youth-crazed system.
Now, should I tell you how I REALLY feel about this movie?? :-)
