Authors
Douglas P Mosurak
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Piranha (1978)
starring Bradford Dillman, Barbara Steele, Heather Menzies, Kevin
McCarthy, Keenan Wynn, Dick Miller
written by John Sayles and Richard Robinson
a New World Pictures release
MPAA rating: R (for bloody violence, nudity, adult language)
on video: yes (Warner Home Video; may be deleted from their catalog)
genre: man vs. nature, sci-fi
recommendation: very high for fans of campy humor and B-movie antics
Here's an infectiously entertaining little horror film that apparently
did reasonably well at drive-ins and seedy little theaters worldwide
(making higher profits than "Jaws", its obvious predecessor, in several
third world countries).  It's great, mostly because the people who were
behind it are great too: Joe Dante is now a very inventive
commercial/big budget director who later manned the helm of "Gremlins",
"Innerspace", and this summer's "Small Soldiers", while John Sayles, one
of the most original and fiercely independent filmmakers in recent
history, went on to make classics like "Return of the Secaucus Seven",
"Matewan", and "Lone Star".
And they got their start at the drive-in, with features like "The
Howling" (1981), "Battle Beyond the Stars", (1980) and the seriously
underrated "Alligator" (1980) - films that bear repeated viewings,
simply as well-made and entertaining homages to the handful of B movies
made by talented folks who used small budgets to their advantage and
concentrated on their own skills as filmmakers to pick up the slack. 
Producer Roger Corman has a knack for finding people who fit this build.
and when it came time to make "Piranha", he knew just where to go.
The film opens with action, and pretty much keeps its pace up throughout
the film.  A reporter named Grogan (Bradford Dillman) with a drinking
problem meets up with Maggie (Heather Menzies), a skip tracer.  Turns
out they're both looking for the same missing person.  Before you know
it, a frenzied, delusional scientist (Kevin McCarthy, who had the lead
in the original "Invasion of the Body Snatchers") has them rushing
towards Lost River Lake.  Turns out that the doctor was working on a
mutant strain of super-fast, super-deadly piranha for use against Viet
Cong troops, and thousands of his specimen were accidentally released
into the water and are making a beeline for the Aquarena, a new
timeshare vacation site on the reservoir.  On the way, the killer fish
will pass a summer camp along the river at which Grogan's daughter will
be swimming.  And guess what.  NOBODY WILL BELIEVE THEM.  Certainly not
the police, who have recently pulled Grogan in on a drunk and disorderly
charge.  Certainly not Buck Gardner (the ubiquitous Dick Miller), the
shyster owner of the cheap-ass Aquarena, who can't handle such bad
publicity on his investment in its opening weekend.  And certainly not
Army personnel Col. Flaxman (Bruce Gordon), an unspoken investor in the
Aquarena, or Dr. Mengers (Barbara Steele), a "fish expert" who knows
more about the problem than she's led to believe.
Once you get past the actual pirahna effect (they look like clay
triangles quickly scooting about in straight lines through cloudy
water), it's actually possible to enjoy this thing.  One of the things
that stands out abut the film are the actual pirahna attack scenes. 
They're done on a budget, but that's beside the point - they're staged
with a mix of panic, comedy, and doom that makes waiting for them
extremely worthwhile.  Once the pirahna get near people in the water,
nobody is safe.  Everybody gets hurt.  Especially the children!  When
camp counselor Dumont (Paul Bartel) puts his face near the water, one of
the fish actually jumps out and bites him.  And the classic deadpan,
delivered by a waiter on the investor's pontoon boat to the Dick Miller
character: "Sir, it's the pirahna.  They're eating the guests."
The ending is a little ridiculous, and some of the scenes are shot so
tightly it's easy to recognize repeated images.  But all in all,
"Pirahna" delivers as one of the best low-budget horror films of the
'70s, and you should go watch it today.

Title
Review for Habit (1997)
written, directed, and edited by Larry Fessenden
Runtime: 112 minutes.  
MPAA rating: none (contains explicit sexual situations, frontal nudity,
some violence and gore, and profanity)
reviewed by Douglas P. Mosurak (c) 1998.
Right before I saw "Habit" this past weekend, a friend of mine and I
were having a heated argument about whether or not any more vampire
movies needed to be made - ever.  Said friend said that he had been let
down by far too many vampire movies to care about either the concept of
vampires or any cultural product geared towards (or stemming from) their
legacy.  I, on the other hand, have admittedly seen more vampire movies
than he has, and told him that, while I definitely agree that there's a
definite quantity-to-quality discrepancy in the genre, then that's
hardly a reason to give up on them entirely.  For example, he had
written off the whole concept of sex in vampire movies, saying that it
was another genre of film entirely.  Whatever -- the concept of romance,
and physicality, and especially sex, has always been closely intertwined
with the concept of vampires, going all the way back to Bram Stoker's
original characterization of the Dracula legend.  Long regarded as a
symbol of unrequited love, it is the vampire's power to seduce its
victims that keeps their relationships on such an agonizingly surface
level.  You can't buy love; you have to earn it, along with the respect
and responsibility that goes along with it.  Draining someone's blood is
not a solution for this issue by any means.
This point is hammered in fairly solidly in Larry Fessenden's debut,
"Habit".  Clearly a two-man operation (Fessenden and producer Dayton
Taylor handled almost all of the direction, production and post-op
responsibilities themselves), it's as strong a debut as I think I'll see
in a while, but for some reason that's not enough.  An extremely
intriguing portrayal of ambiguity is carefully created in the first 90
minutes of the film, and in the final reel, he almost blows it with
cliches ripped out of "Fatal Attraction" and the countless
direct-to-video knockoffs that followed.
"Habit" centers around Sam (Fessenden, who looks like a cross between
Keith Carradine and Nick Cave), whose life has hit a pretty big wall. 
His father, a renowned historian, has recently passed on, and his
patient girlfriend Liza (Heather Woodbury) has moved out of their place,
in the hopes that Sam will take stock of his life and get a grip on his
alcoholism.  But he's a fun guy, and well-meaning, if a little unkempt
and disoriented.  All of his friends seem to recognize that he has a
problem, but never really confront him on the issue.  His moments of
true clarity shine when he's drunk, and it seems that this is the way
that he's remembered.
At a Halloween party hosted by his friends Nick (Aaron Beall, who should
rename himself "Mr. Drama") and Rae (Patricia Coleman), a particularly
plastered Sam is approached by a girl named Anna (Meredith Snaider). 
Her pixie-like frame, close-cropped black hair, and semi-goth Italian
model visage frame her as someone who wouldn't normally cross the street
to pee on a guy like Sam if he were on fire.  Nevertheless, they leave
the party together.  When he realizes he's taken someone else's coat,
Sam asks Anna to wait for him.  When he returns, she's gone, and later
he loses the phone number she gives to him.
A few days pass, and Sam can't stop thinking about Anna.  At his work
(he manages a small bar and restaurant in Greenwich Village), his friend
Lenny recounts a similar experience from the party, in which he met a
girl who lives on a boat, and they has hot sex on the poop deck all
night long.  Lenny looks a little ill, though, probably due to being
naked on a boat in a NYC autumn.
Anna predictably drifts back into Sam's life at a neighborhood street
fair.  Leaving his friends, he follows her to Battery Park, where they
engage in some sort of unspecified sexual activity.  Sam wakes up
outside, half-naked and with a bloody lip, and thinks nothing of it -
probably feeling like of of the luckier guys in the city.
Repeated visits to Sam's apartment and his work find Anna becoming an
integral part of his life.  His health is slowly deteriorating, and his
injured relationship with Liza is almost broken off completely.  All the
while, the audience is led to believe that Anna is a vampire, and that
Sam is really dumb for not realizing it earlier.  She only comes over at
night, won't eat or drink anything, won't reveal to Sam what she does
for a living.  She won't enter Sam's apartment until invited in, stands
out in the hallway when she smells garlic, and, most importantly, likes
to bite him and drink his blood, a little at a time, during sex.  Sam
just assumes it's her kink.  But there's a rational explanation to all
of her appearances and disappearances, and Snaider plays her role with
determination undercut with an honesty not often found in screen
vampires.  Her character slinks through "Habit" explicitly on her own
terms, and for the most part, avoids the cliches you might anticipate.
As for Sam, his blindness to the situation around him lends itself to
his internal stability, and how much of a toll life has exacted from
him.  He doesn't open up his personality but a little bit; it's
refreshing to see a character we can draw conclusions from, and feel for
without feeling sorry for.  In one of the film's stronger moments, Sam
reveals to Anna the numerous scars he's made on his arms over the years
"at parties".  Whether it was an attempt at suicide, an attempt to
impress people, or just Sam trying to set himself apart from everyone
else, he describes them to the camera with loving detail, admiring their
designs with an objectivity that belies the entire narrative style of
the film.  Fessenden obviously thought about this character for a long
time, and in writing, directing, and starring in the role, we get a
sense of completeness that might have otherwise escaped us.  With his
mussed up long hair and missing front tooth, he resembles an overgrown
child whose parents have long given up trying to raise him.  But Sam's
too old to be taken care of, and by instilling that function in Anna,
and to a more fine point, deriving it from naughty sex acts, he loses
his way even further.
There are no weak links in the cast; even the most flawed character,
Nick, brings his sense of overacting with a zeal that provides
much-needed comic relief.  The direction is well-crafted and paced, and
Frank DeMarco's grainy color cinematography borders on stunning.  In
particular, a scene where Anna takes Sam, who suffers from vertigo, on a
ferris wheel, is extremely memorable; using a hand-held camera mounted
on the wheel itself, the scene creates a sort of on-screen nausea that
perfectly foreshadows the instability of the events that will unfold.
Was it scary?  Somewhat, in the same way that "Jacob's Ladder" was
effective - in chronicling a character's descent into madness, though
the terms set in "Habit" are much more conventional, and unfortunately,
that much more obvious.  If Anna is a vampire, like we're led to
believe, what's her motivation?  Why is she so afraid to tell Sam, who's
obviously ensnared within her, anything at all?  B-movie kitsch is
something that, while noble in its own right, is more "Habit"'s copout
than anything else.  Subtlety is key here, and the film's gory ending is
a complete sledgehammer.
Made for a budget of under $200,000, "Habit" shows a promising new
filmmaker in Fessenden and, for the most part, a compelling narrative
restructuring of a modern vampire movie, the likes of which I haven't
seen since Kathryn Bigelow's "Near Dark".  Let's hope that he's able to
keep it up in the leg stretching period of his next few films, whatever
they may be.

Title
Review for Ben (1972)
starring: Lee Harcourt Montgomery, Joseph Campanella, Meredith Baxter,
Arthur O'Connell
recommendation: only if you're in the mood for "Family"-style sugarsap
and aren't afraid of rats
Hot off the heels of the 1971 drive in staple "Willard" comes an untidy
sequel, "Ben", which gets its wires crossed about 20 minutes into the
game.  It can't decide whether to be a horror film or a Quaalude-induced
melodrama about a sick little boy, so it tries to be both.  
The story opens with the closing scenes from "Willard", as Bruce
Davison's Willard Stiles must come to bear with the wrath of his trained
pet attack rat, Ben, and his legion of pet attack rats.  These scenes
are the best of the whole film, probably because they have little to do
with "Ben" itself.  Ben the rat has a very malevolent stare that's
almost comical, as he squeals his evil bidding.  As the townspeople look
on, two bumbling cops go into the house and are attacked by rats as they
open the floorboards in the basement.  The army of rats escape into the
backyards and sewers of the adjoining neighborhood houses.  It's here
that the movie takes a ridiculous turn and loses any effectiveness it
might have had.
It's here that we meet David Garrison (Lee Montgomery), a cutesy, Adam
Rich-looking young kid.  He lives with his older sister Eve (Meredith
Baxter, years before "Family Ties") and just-a-bit-too-old mother Beth
(Rosemary Murphy, who got shot between the eyes in director Phil
Karlson's next film, "Walking Tall").  David's got some sort of
unspecified heart condition, which causes his mother to dote incessantly
on him.  Apparently this ailment forbids him to have any friends either,
so he stays at home in his backyard workshop, where he builds extremely
complex marionettes and writes songs for piano and harmonica.  The
uncomfortable air that comes with his song numbers is one I wouldn't
wish on the unfortunate masses who saw any live-action Disney films of
the period.
Ben makes his appearance in David's workshop.  David feeds him and the
two seem to be able to communicate with one another, which explains why
David calls the rat by his given name.  Meanwhile, every night the horde
of rats emerges from the drainage system and ransacks a different
location in town.  It's kind of cool to see thousands of rats tearing
apart the cereal aisle in a supermarket, and pretty funny to see them
attack some ridiculously large women (and a stereotypically gay man) in
a health spa, but such moments are few and far between.
Cops Kirtland (Joseph Campanella) and Hatfield (Arthur O'Connell) know
what the town is up against, but are too busy being typical crusty cops
to catch up with the rat invasion.  As a result, they take everything
really slow, fumigating houses after a rat attack, and trying to get
everyone they know to believe that there is a problem.  David is aware
of what's happening though.  His child-like demeanor won't let him see
that Ben is a coldblooded killer, but merely his only friend (who he
kisses in the sewer, and holds close to the open scar on his chest from
his last operation).  When David has the rats attack a neighborhood
bully, the cops press him for answers, but he's all hush-hush about it.
It all ends up in the sewers by David's house, with his sister trying to
find him and avoid being attacked by the rats, while cops and sanitation
workers do battle with the enemy with flamethrowers and firehoses. 
These scenes are the most ridiculous in the film - countless reused
shots of rats fleeing the fire and Ben sitting above them all, while the
humans are overcome by dozens of rats clinging to them.
This movie is bad, bad, bad.  In "Willard", the same silly premise was
there, but the characters had a lot more going for them, and in turn the
revenge fantasies that played out were amusing and trashy fun.  Here, I
wasn't the least bit encouraged to feel pity for David; I just wanted to
smack him around some.  He's an annoying little shit, and when he breaks
into the depressing title song (which you'll recall was performed by
Michael Jackson and nominated for an Oscar), you'll be fumbling for the
fast-forward button.  It's virtually impossible to care about anyone
else in the film; there's about half a dimension to each character, so
by the time the cops share a male-bonding exercise at film's end with
their reporter friend, I was just scratching my head.  The rat effects
at the end are terrible; one shot looks like a bunch of burning oranges
rolling down a hill, and it's used over and over.
What promised to be a cheap, entertaining Saturday afternoon UHF-band
"Suspense Theater" style film just could not deliver.  After my hour and
a half with "Ben" dragged to a close, I wanted to devise a huge rat trap
and spap the cast in two.

Title
Review for Shivers (1975)
stars: Barbara Steele, some other people who are probably dead by now
rated: R for gore, violence, rape, nudity, intense situations
availabilty: Vestron Video (out of print, I would assume - probably
rentals only)
recommended: very highly
"They Came From Within" is a rough, untidy little horror film which
marks one of the first recognized feature-length appearances by cult
Canadian writer-director David Cronenberg, last heard from for his
controversial adaptation of J.G. Ballard's "Crash" (1997).  There are
actually quite a few things in common between the two films: the
recurrent sex-equals-death theme that's so prevalent in many of his
films (especially "Rabid", "Dead Ringers", and "Videodrome"), scenes
well-paced and designed to shock the audience out of their skins, and
heavy Ballard influences (while "Crash" comes directly from a Ballard
work, "Within" appropriates a good number of settings and plot devices
from Ballard's 1973 novel, "High-Rise").
Watching "They Came From Within" in 1998, it really becomes evident that
Cronenberg was designing a film that's as much of an homage to the
sci-fi and horror films of the '50s as it is to the conventions he
brought to the genre himself.  It's also one of his most watchable
films, and avoids a lot of the dreariness that many of his later films,
like "Crash" and "Naked Lunch", were chided for.
"They Came From Within" takes place on Starliner Island, a
state-of-the-art apartment complex outside of Montreal which offers its
tenants all of the conveniences of city life, without the hassle of
other people.  From the get-go, it becomes perfectly clear that, even
without the presence of the malevolent parasites that do indeed come
from within, living in this building is a pretty warped place. 
Marriages are flat, lifeless affairs that are punctuated by hot sex with
teenage girls.  Nearly everyone in the complex is completely
dispassionate towards life in general, and from the few glimpses of the
tenants we see, it can easily be alluded that the excesses of '70s
"modern living" in the wake of '60s free love are clearly in effect. 
The security guards at the front desk even carry guns "because all the
other ones do".  The building is a closed system, stagnating on the line
between depravity and contempt.
The early scenes are comprised of a slideshow of the apartment's many
features, which is a fairly effective device for getting the basic
elements of the story out of the way.  In one of the film's most intense
sequences, Cronenberg juxtaposes a young couple entering the building
with a fierce struggle between an older man and a young girl in a school
uniform.  It's unclear as to why the struggle is going on, or who indeed
is the aggressor, but in the end, the man knocks the girl unconscious,
rips off her clothes, and proceeds to cut her open with a scalpel and
pour sulfuric acid into her body cavity.  He then slashes his throat and
is heard hitting the floor.  It's a really effective, masterful sequence
that equates a gender battle with freakish, clinical behavior, thus
setting the pace for the rest of the film.
As it turns out, the man who gutted the girl is a researcher and
biologist who was working on a new breed of parasite that could
duplicate the functions of human organs.  Hey, at least it sounds like a
plausible idea.  But of course, the parasites are really nasty creatures
that do all the things that parasites do (slowly destroy their hosts
while replicating inside of them), and do in a very gory fashion.  The
parasites also cause their hosts to engage in extremely compulsive and
violent behavior.  The girl was the test subject and got busy with
several men on Starliner Island.  Before you can say "tapeworm",
residents are exhibiting strange and dangerous mannerisms and are
vomiting blood all over the white porcelain sinks of their bathrooms. 
One character chucks up a parasite (which looks like a cross between a
penis and a turd) off the balcony, which hits an old woman's umbrella in
a particularly humorous sequence (she thinks it was a bird that bounced
off the building).  Soon the parasites are in the building's sewage
system, and making their way inside several of the people dwelling
there.  And it's up to Dr. Hobbs, the facility's medical examiner, to
try to figure out what's going on before it's too late.
This simple plot device gives Cronenberg the leeway to make an
exceptional low-rent horror picture and in turn exploit just about any
perversion you could think of.  With this nasty bug going around, along
with it comes numerous sexual assaults (my favorite is the woman who
looks like Divine who attacks a bell boy, saying "I'm hungry ... hungry
for love!"), excessive violence (Hobbs beats a handyman with a crowbar;
some super-gory car crashes follow), incest, some gay and lesbian
situations, and two naked women on leashes barking like dogs, which
Hobbs walks away from in a very funny sequence in a stairwell.  It's
obvious that Cronenberg is trying to put the audience on edge throughout
the film, but by erasing each step with semi-humorous situations, he's
able to desensitize viewers and push them even further.  In creating an
almost comical compulsion in the infected characters, Cronenberg also
strikes a chord of the limits of human nature, and illustrates a
phallocentric society that blurs primal behavior with regular human
interactions.  As a parasite makes its way out of a bathtub drain and
between actress Barbara Steele's legs, this parallel cannot become more
clear.
Cronenberg makes use of some excellent source material, using the film
to pay homage to Don Siegel's "Invasion of the Body Snatchers", George
Romero's "Night of the Living Dead", and "Village of the Damned" (as
there seems to be some sort of unified mind between the infected
characters).  In fusing these films with the art-porn he created in
films like "Stereo" (1969), Cronenberg ups the ante for levels of sex
and violence in films up to that point (a process that had already begun
with the advent of the '70s hardcore porn industry, and the works of
folks like Sam Peckinpah, Tobe Hooper, and Sean Cunningham).  In keeping
with most of his films, there is not a happy ending (or maybe there is,
depending on which team you're on), but the complete downer rush of
films like "Rabid" (in which Santa Claus is blown away by National
Guardsmen) and "Videodrome" (in which the protagonist kills himself in
the end) isn't all that present here.  
If you can stomach the gore and aren't offended by the numerous sexual
situations in the film, I'd say peep it - it's a very good introduction
to the bleak views of human nature as presented by Cronenberg throughout
his body of work.  Hopefully this film (and many of the other gaping
holes in the American-International film library) will make its way back
onto video sometime really soon. 

Title
Review for Grizzly (1976)
written by Harvey Flaxman and David Sheldon
a Edward L. Montoro production
released by Film Ventures International
MPAA ratinbg: PG for violence, gore, brief nudity, and mild profanity.
"If man continues to encroach upon this untouched natural environment,
he will soon displace those creatures who were meant to live here." 
Thus begins the opening tirade of "Grizzly", released at the height of
the mid-Seventies "man vs. nature" exploitation film craze.  Make no
mistake - this film is bad, probably as bad as most of the films
following "Jaws" (1975) that bit so firmly on the genre.  However,
"Grizzly" is bad in a very odd, almost endearing way that made me feel
kind of sorry for it.  It's almost as if the film were made on two
entirely different shoots.
The story copies "Jaws" almost verbatim, but with a twist.  Instead of
the ocean, we're in a national park, and instead of a shark, the
tourists and campers are plagued by one fifteen foot, two-thousand-pound
grizzly bear.  How did it escape the tagging and cataloguing efforts of
"National Park"'s rangers?  "I don't know", says Scott (Richard
Jaeckel), an eccentric naturalist hunter who wears a fur pelt.  "It just
did".
That's just one of the many plot deficiencies endemic within the film. 
Despite the warnings of rangers Kelly (Christopher George) and Don
(Andrew Prine), the park superintendent Tom (Tom Arcuragi) refuses to
heed the reports of campers mauled, eaten, and buried by this bear.  And
while the carnage continues, Tom opens the park to inexperienced,
drunken hunters to stalk the bear without a barrage of media attention. 
Yeah, right.  And when the cameras do arrive, Tom turns the situation
into a veritable media circus.  It's all a big part of his plan to
pursue what Kelly refers to as a "big warm, brown plastic office in
Washington".  Tom finds Kelly a "maverick".  That's the internal tension
in the film.  Seriously.  That, and the bear, which has no "bear"-ing on
any of the human drama that finds its way into the script.
By the way, we don't get to see the bear until the halfway point - those
initial victims are merely attacked by a large furry paw, capable of
shearing limbs.  Of course, nobody in management listens to reason about
how the bear behaves.  Of course, the people who get naked get killed
first.  Of course, the false scare of the little boy who goes outside
the front yard to round up his pet bunny is immediately followed with a
scene of him getting his legs torn off.  Of course, characters
disappear, then come back after the action is gone.  This is for the
drive-in, and late-night cable TV, not for Sundance.  Most of the men
with speaking parts have gruff, affected voices that border on
laughable.  Tact is definitely not its strong suit.
What this film does have going for it is some pretty tight editing and
wonderful aerial cinematography of the Georgia mountains.  Director
Girdler, who died in a helicopter crash after leaving us, unaccountable,
with the similar "Day of the Animals" (1978), and the blaxploitation
exorcism knockoff "Abby" (1974), scouted these locations well, and the
look of the film is certainly not unprofessional.  And it's got the
bear, who also manages to knock the head off of a horse.  But roughly
one-quarter of the film is padded out with annoying "bear-cam" shots
(you know, the first person perspective, with the rustling of leaves and
branches underscoring a low, growling sound that even the
hearing-impaired could sense).
I like bears.  I find them to be the clowns of nature, and the star of
"Grizzly" is no exception.  I wish he (and it is a he, since it also
eats a bear cub, something which a female bear would never do) would
kill the entire cast and not stop until they were all chewed on at least
a little bit.
As a whole, "Grizzly" works as mindless, fun, and entertaining, but it's
crap nonetheless.  It's definitely not gripping in any way, shape, or
form, and I would only recommend it to those who want to see people
dumber than they are get torn to shreds by a really big bear.
