Authors
greg@cpsc.UCalgary.ca (greg)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Medicine Man (1992)
     It has been said on the net that the Sean Connery movie HIGHLANDER
2 was better than a sucking chest wound.  Well, Bond has done it again,
and his new movie, MEDICINE MAN, is better than a double root canal.
I've had one.  I know.
     MEDICINE MAN is essentially a two-person show.  Sean Connery (a
bagful of James Bond movies, THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, HIGHLANDER) plays
Dr. Robert Campbell, a biochemist working for a drug company in the
deepest Brazilian Amazon rain forest.  He's been there for six years,
and the drug company wants to know what he's up to, so they send
Dr. Rae Crane (Lorraine Bracco -- GOODFELLAS) to find.  It turns out
that he's found a cure for cancer.  The only problem is, he can't
remember how he did it.
     The rest of the film is classic buddy-film material -- the two
protagonists can't stand each other, but are unified in their struggle
to recover the formulation process before the deforestation takes away
their laboratory.  Drunken bonding scene, humanistic bonding scene,
hair-raising scenes of peril and bonding, eventual respect and climax
resolution.  Ho hum.
     It boggles my mind how badly this film was done.  The script is so
inane, it should have been condensed into a one-hour made-for-TV-movie
with commercials instead of being a two-hour slog.  Tom Schulman, who is
capable of much better work (DEAD POET'S SOCIETY) gets the blame for
this one.  The natives are reduced to pidgin English, and then we're
given subtitles for even this.  The dialogue is forced, stilted and
clipped, and I remain unconvinced that two people ever talk to each
other like this.  Who wrote the dialogue, Sylvester Stallone?
     The acting couldn't have saved this movie even if it was good,
which it isn't.  Connery plays the same grizzled stubborn old veteran he
always plays, and Bracco gives us nothing but a lacklustre hard-line
scientist front, even when she's supposed to be experiencing
bone-crushing exhaustion or numbing self-doubt.  On the other hand,
Bracco is given a number of peek-a-boo body shots: Dr. Crane in a bra,
Dr. Crane bathing nude underwater, Dr. Crane splayed against a rock,
Dr. Crane's leg in a hammock.  These cheap attempts at sex appeal are
so artificial as to be laughable if they weren't so blatantly so
exploitive.
     The direction is appallingly bad in places.  There are cuts in the
action which leave the audience wondering whether the camera operator
suddenly took a restroom break.  There is dialogue where, when the scene
switches to the other person, the original speaker doesn't move her
mouth with the end of her line.  The scenery is nice, though that's only
due to the lush Mexican rain forest location as opposed to any inspired
camera work.
     MEDICINE MAN is shoddy and sloppy.  If it weren't for my role as a
reviewer, I would have left early.  Your eight bucks would be better
spent on Lotto 6/49 tickets.  Sean Connery should take this film, bundle
it with HIGHLANDER 2: THE QUICKENING, throw them into a volcano and hope
that everyone soon forgets they ever existed.
