Authors
Rachel Deahl
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Center Stage (2000/I)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Rachel Deahl.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/923fe48e03d5de09882568c7000d849b?OpenDocument
 At the American Ballet Academy, there is an abundance of passion,
talent and determination. Of course these things simply aren't enough
when it comes to making it as a professional ballet dancer.
 As the camera probes into a crowded room of ballerinas spinning and
dipping, a young blond is immediately isolated from the bunch. The male
choreographer's assistant notes that the girl has poor form. The
choreographer retorts, "Who cares, look at her." And with that the
blonde, blue-eyed Jodie is given a spot in the American Ballet Academy,
the Julliard of dancing.
 The visual entrance to the ABA is a series of close-ups on cut,
bruised, and bandaged feet; this is as nuanced as the film ever gets.
The pain and anguish of living out your dreams, of striving to beat out
the odds and become what you always dreamed of becoming (here it is a
dancer), is isolated in the trite experiences of three roommates at this
prestigious ballet school. Jodie is the one with "bad feet" but ample
heart; Eva is the talented one with a bad attitude; and Maureen is the
perfect one without the passion.
 Along the way misguided affairs (Jodie falls for the cocky, beloved
star of the Company), eating disorders and injuries crop up, pushing the
plot along. As do unfortunate lines like, 'I'm not dancing for them
anymore; I'm dancing for me.' The only solace from such schlock is the
fact that the film makes it clear from the start that it exists simply
to showcase the dancing itself. As such, it's no shock when the
choreography upstages the screenwriting.
 A Broadway musical in disguise, Center Stage parades around as a drama
by limiting the intricate dance numbers to rehearsals and performances.
No one breaks out dancing mid-speech -- they simply wait until they're
in the studio (which is more often than not).
The dancing itself is typified by the finale of the film, which takes
form in the modern "ballet" the students perform to the music of Michael
Jackson. The student performance, which of course appears before a
packed house in Lincoln Center, is intended to provide a hip twist on
the drab classicism of ballet (who knew one could pirouette to the King
of Pop as easily as to Tchaikovski).
Ultimately the story line here is as stupid as the final "rock" ballet.
The characters are one-dimensional, as are their "struggles." In fact,
the territory is so familiar that it's almost excusable. With that said
it's still hard to watch Center Stage and be able to get the familiar
opening music to Fame out of your head; it's also hard to remember why
you're not simply watching that film instead.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Winterschläfer (1997)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Rachel Deahl.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/1a1a10a405cae1b3882568d7005fda96?OpenDocument
Movie Title  Wintersleepers (Winterschläfer)
Director:  Tom Tykwer
Producer:  Laurence Mark
Screenwriter:  Anne-Françoise Pyszora, Tom Tykwer
Stars:   Ulrich Matthes, Marie-Lou Sellem, Floriane Daniel, Heino Ferch
MPAA Rating: NR
Year of Release: 2000 (USA), 1997 (Germany)
 Sweeping shots of snowcapped mountains, displayed against a thumping
techno beat and cut in with introductory shots of various characters
(complete with their names appearing on screen) packing up to go
somewhere might give one the impression that Wintersleepers is about a
heist. The momentum builds like wildfire in these opening sequences as
the phrase 'Are you really leaving today' echoes throughout the various
departures happening across the board. This momentum quickly dies, as
does the hope for any bank robbing scenarios. What comes in its place is
a much slower film which lumbers along (painstakingly at times) to a
crisp, almost haunting close.
 Tom Tykwer, the German director who exploded onto the international
scene with Run Lola Run brings this odd story of mistaken identity and
deathly fate to the screen with an awkward, but in some ways rewarding,
slant.
 Set in a winter resort in Bavaria (the scenery is breathtaking), the
story follows the intertwining story of two roommates, their boyfriends
and the devastation wreaked by a fatal accident. Laura and Rebecca live
together in Rebecca's impressive winter bungalow, essentially sharing
the space with Laura's slovenly ski-instructor boyfriend, Marco. When
Marco's car is stolen by a drunken stranger (it has been left with the
keys in it), the result is a devastating crash which ensues on a nearby
road. When the drunken stranger hits a local farmer he flees the scene
of the crime, leaving the farmer devastated with his young daughter
thrown into a deep coma. The farmer is left with a vision of the
assailant-- a strange snake-like scar on the back of his head.
 The farmer then goes on a relentless search to find the man with the
scar, angry that he is being blamed for the accident and his daughter's
devastating state. When Rebecca begins to date the hit and run drunk
driver in question, Renee, much is uncovered about what precisely
happened during the crash and why it occurred as it did. Twyker follows
the intertwined lives of these characters as their actions directly
affect one another, unbeknownst to them.
 The film certainly meanders, winding down seemingly pointless. Much of
the film is spent exploring the antagonistic relationship of Laura and
Marco and one can't help but wonder why. However, Twyker manages to pull
these diverging storylines and characters together in the end for a
powerful finale. The more interesting aspects of the film, namely the
strange condition which plagues Renee, come together beautifully in the
end.
 Although it's at time difficult and even unenjoyable to watch,
Wintersleepers finally ruminates on such large issues as death, fate and
human nature. In some ways it brings to mind Atom Egoyan's masterful and
devastating The Sweet Hereafter. And while Wintersleepers is unable to
achieve the precision and direction The Sweet Hereafter maintains
throughout, it does finally leave you with a similar despair.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
