Authors
Derek Miner
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Forrest Gump (1994)
     As a fan of director Robert Zemeckis, I have eagerly anticipated
his next directorial effort since DEATH BECOMES HER two years ago.
FORREST GUMP lives up to my expectations and surpasses them also.  The
film tells a genuine and moving story about an amazing character.
     FORREST GUMP is the remarkable story of a man (Tom Hanks) who,
despite an IQ somewhere in the area of 70, always seems to achieve
great success.  Forrest's amazing achievements are played out as a
humorous gimmick, but they are also part of his involving life story.
     The story, as told by Forrest himself, opens in his childhood.
Forrest not only is stigmatized by his low intelligence, but he also
must wear leg braces because of a crooked back.  His caring mother
(Sally Field) tries to teach him that despite his problems, he is no
different than everyone else.  Forrest is befriended by a young girl
named Jenny (Robin Wright) who is abused by her father.
     A sequence of events thrusts Forrest into the spotlight.
Literally shattering his leg braces, Forrest finds that he is an
amazing runner, which takes him through college as a football player.
Soon after, he enlists in the military, and is sent to Veitnam.  In
Veitnam, he meets a young black man named Bubba (Mykleti Williamson),
whose goal in life is to be a shrimp boat captain.  He also meets
Captain Dan (Gary Sinise), who eventually becomes legless through a war
injury.
     The three characters of Jenny, Bubba, and Captain Dan figure the
most in Forrest's life direction.  But throughout everything, the
inborn desire to do right and his love for Jenny are Forrest's
motivation.  Beyond Veitnam, there's more to Forrest's adventures, but
to reveal more would ruin the experience of watching the event's of his
life unfold in front of your eyes.  To experience such an emotional and
involving story is special.
     At the heart of FORREST GUMP are a lot of strong performances.
Tom Hanks plays Forrest as a friendly sort who you can appreciate,
rather than pity, for his innocence because it makes him more of a good
person than others with full mental capability.  Gary Sinise provides
some emotional shift in the film as Captain Dan, who comes out of
Vietnam bitter for having lost his limbs rather than his life.  Mykleti
Williamson's short but important role as Bubba, who is similar to
Forrest, is perfect in its simplicity.  One can see how Bubba and
Forrest latch on to one another, influencing Forrest's direction in
life.
     At first, FORREST GUMP doesn't appear to be the type of film
director Zemeckis (of BACK TO THE FUTURE fame) would tackle, but on
close inspection, it remains consistent with his previous work.  In
almost all his films, Zemeckis recreated a period of time, from
February 1964 in I WANNA HOLD YOUR HAND, his first film, to 1955 in
BACK TO THE FUTURE and even the late 70s in DEATH BECOMES HER.  In
FORREST GUMP, an entire lifetime is covered, from the early 50s to the
early 80s.  In between, the character of Forrest is convincingly
interwoven into old news and television footage.
     It also seems that Zemeckis had an urge to "grow up," so to speak,
like colleague Steven Spielberg did with SCHINDLER'S LIST.  The humor
and pathos in Forrest's life are well-balanced and create a story that
the audience can sympathize and identify with.  Unlike Zemeckis'
previous work in broader comedy, FORREST GUMP tells an intimate story
on an epic scale.  Also contrary to previous Zemeckis spectacles,
special effects are used subtly, most notably to make Gary Sinise
appear legless.
     FORREST GUMP is not a perfect film nor is it one-of-a-kind.  But
it is near perfect and not easily equaled.  It is instead special,
accomplishing an emotional link that many films try, and fail, to
attain.  FORREST GUMP is a film that entertains yet makes us think, not
by forcing the audience to keep up, but by letting us see the world we
know through someone else's eyes, the eyes of Forrest Gump.
- Derek Miner (ind00163@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu)

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
I suppose I'm asking for trouble when I have to take issue with a Coen
Brothers film. Sure, there have always been those who don't like their
work, but it hardly seems to matter what criticisms are launched when you
"get it." Take, for instance, "The Hudsucker Proxy" which I found to be a
highly enjoyable, inventively surreal, lovingly crafted parable. I was
(and still am) awestruck at the critical trashing that film took. So here
I am, a traitor to the ranks, I suppose, because I just didn't "get" "The
Big Lebowski"
The film starts curiously enough, promising to be some sort of urban
legend, paralleling the old west with early-90s Los Angeles. We meet "the
Dude" (Jeff Bridges) -- Jeff Lebowski number one, slacker extraordinaire,
whose prized living room rug is soiled by some punks who are actually
after a _different_ Jeff Lebowski. That Lebowski (David Huddleston)
appears to be a rich man who ends up using the Dude to help recover his
kidnapped trophy-wife. The Dude is much more interested in bowling with
his pals (John Goodman and Steve Buscemi), but trouble (in the form of
Nihillists and assorted other wackos) just won't leave him alone.
"The Big Lebowski" begins with such promise. The bowling alley credit
sequence is one of the most absurdly funny things I've ever seen. Our
characters (for the most part) seem so honestly part of their reality, you
feel like _something_ amazing will happen. But it never does. After an
hour and a half, I was desperately waiting for the tangents of this film
to converge in some sensible, if absurd or ironic, way. I forgave the
lapses between humorous parts becuase I sensed it was all going somewhere,
and at the end of the ride I would understand. By the time the end credits
rolled, however, I felt cheated. I say "cheated" because it always seemed
possible (and likely) that the non-existent payoff was around the bend
from the next plot twist. By the time the film edged over the two hour
mark, it seemed like the plot just twisted away into nothingness and they
forgot to let us in on that fact.
At times in "The Big Lebowski," I marvelled at just how much guts the
Coens had to pull off what I saw up on the screen. I laughed heartily
several times. But even gutsy, original work needs some kind of anchor,
something to bring home the humanity of the story. That's why a cheap,
sloppy film like "Clerks" works so well whereas a slickly produced
festival entry can fail because the characters and writing don't resonate.
Even with quirkiness to spare, "The Big Lebowski" has all the character
resonance of a whoopie cushion. The bowling alley talks (if you could call
them that) shared between the Dude and bowling pals seem forced and
unfunny. These friends seem to hate each other, and their conversations
are so rude, you hope that someone (preferably our main character, The
Dude) will realize this and just move on. But The Dude doesn't seem any
the better at the end of his journey, and neither does anyone else, for
that matter.
I've read several reviews of this film, and every one of them has been
ready to praise "The Big Lebowski" despite it's flaws. So until someone
lets me in on what I didn't "get," I'll just go back to enjoying "Fargo"
and "The Hudsucker Proxy" at home, where it's safe.

Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
JERRY MAGUIRE begins where most movies would build up to. Sports agent
Jerry Maguire (Tom Cruise) is one of the most successful agents in the
business. He's got big clients, he's engaged to a beautiful woman (Kelly
Preston), but he's disgusted with who he's become. So, one fateful night
at a convention, he drafts a "mission proposal" for the business,
emphasizing ideals, integrity and personal attention. Needless to say, the
powers that be are not happy with Jerry's sudden realization.
Enter single mother Dorothy Boyd (Renee Zellweger), who is an accountant
in the same agency Jerry works for. Dorothy is so inspired by Jerry's
ideals, she makes the spontaneous decision to join him when he's booted
from the agency. It's a Tom Cruise movie, so there's inevitably a romance
developing here, but it's a very well-paced one. Jerry and Dorothy embark
on a mission to succeed on their own with Jerry's only remaining client,
Ron Tidwell (Cuba Gooding, Jr.), a second-tier football player with an
outrageous personality and a big chip on his shoulder. Tidwell implores
Jerry to "show me the money."
Writer/Director Cameron Crowe has built his reputation slowly, directing
only three features in the last seven years. Each time, though, he
progresses to the next level. SAY ANYTHING (1989) was about young love and
leaving high school. SINGLES (1992) went out into the real world, with
characters who just want to meet people they can be happy with. JERRY
MAGUIRE is by far Crowe's most assured work, with excellent characters and
real heart (and another director-trademark Eric Stoltz cameo). The focus
is not as narrow as in his previous films, however. Instead of
concentrating a few situations and filling the rest out with humorous
asides, he expands the characters, letting _them_ fill out the film. Crowe
balances the comedy and drama effortlessly, allowing his characters to
drive the humor.
Cruise turns in a great performance as Jerry Maguire. The character still
fits the mold of a "Tom Cruise" part, but he doesn't drag it down to the
level of early Tom-Cruise-charm driven characters. Cuba Gooding, Jr.
starts off in what could have been a one-note, over the top performance,
but eventually brings it down to earth for some great moments. Most of the
attention has been focused on the male characters, however. Zellweger is
an attractive young actress, but she is not given a great deal of
substance here, which could move the audience past the initial impression.
It's not that her performance is bad, or that the film suffers because she
isn't as well defined,  but she is only given a few scenes where she could
shine. Regina King, on the other hand, makes a great impression in her few
scenes as Tidwell's wife. Again, the character is not given a great deal
to do, but we can sense how important she is in her husband's life.
JERRY MAGUIRE is one of the best movies of 1996, but probably not "Oscar"
material. The Academy tends to ignore audience-targeted films like this,
and this year saw few "commercial" films that attempted any sort of depth
with their characters anyway (two divergent films, THE FRIGHTNERS and
SWINGERS only stand out in my mind). Cameron Crowe's charcters develop in
a way that has a measure of predictability, but feels real, because
they're likable. JERRY MAGUIRE has a handful of truly great scenes, and a
very engaging story, making it's two-hour-plus running time feel
comfortable rather than dragging. JERRY MAGUIRE should please a wide-range
of audiences, and hopefully, they'll all come out feeling better about
themselves and their ideals.
