Authors
matmn@lure.latrobe.edu.au
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Sangatsu no raion (1992)
     This is a brief review of some of the films featured at this year's
Melbourne film festival.  I have followed my comments on each of the
feature films with a rating out of 10.  The ratings are only meant to
give a comparative guide to my estimation of the quality of the various
films, and should, like all ratings, be taken with a grain of salt.  The
festival also has a tradition of showing a large number of short films,
and I have included some comments on the best of these at the end.
     This new film from the director of MY LEFT FOOT is a dramatic
tragedy based on a play by John Keane.  It concerns the bitter struggle
of a tenant farmer faced with the loss of his land.  The film contains
much to admire: it explores powerful themes to do with tradition and
birthright, and is impressively photographed.  But it suffers from
being too close to its stage origins; many of the scenes are
self-consciously theatrical in a way that works against the film's
cinematic naturalism.  The almost melodramatic tragic ending to the film
feels like a poor man's KING LEAR.  The acting is generally good apart
from a flat and characterless performance from Tom Berenger as the
American.  Rating: 6.
FIVE FEMINIST MINUTES (Canada). D: Various.
   To celebrate its 15th anniversary, the women's film unit Studio D
commissioned 16 short 5 to 10 minute films from female film makers.  The
result is this wonderfully varied compilation film showing the breadth
of feminist experience and film-making techniques.  These short films
cover almost every genre and some are very good indeed.  Highlights
include: "No Choice," a confronting documentary about poverty; "The
Escapades of One Particular Mr. Noodle," amusing, tongue-in-cheek
autobiography; "Family Secrets," a subtle film about incest and the
traps of memory; "New Shoes," an amazing true account of an attempted
murder/suicide; and "We're Talking Vulva," a hilarious all-singing
vagina!  Rating: 7.
HALFAOUINE - CHILD OF THE TERRACES (France/Tunisia). D: Ferid Boughedir. 
                  Selim Boughedir, Mustapha Adouani, Rabia Ben Abdallah.
     It is surprising to see a film set in an Arab city presenting such
a frank and relaxed view of female sexuality as found in this film.  The
film is about a 12-year-old boy caught between two worlds, the world of
women, who look after the young children and act in a fairly uninhibited
way around them, and the far more repressive world of men, which he must
soon join.  A warm and spirited film, which is also pleasantly erotic.
Rating: 7.
     A wonderful domestic comedy/drama, every bit as good as his
previous film, HIGH HOPES.  Leigh affectionately, but unsentimentally,
dissects the social dynamics of a lower middle class British family,
undergoing fairly ordinary everyday family traumas.  This include
getting involved in their appalling friend  Aubrey's latest project, the
opening of a French restaurant called "The  Regret Rien."  Leigh's skill
lies in being able to make the banalities of life seem intriguing and
fresh.  He achieves this through careful observation, warm humour, and
the creation of convincing, interesting characters.  The ensemble acting
is first class.  A delightful film.  Rating: 9.
     This film begins with an interesting premise.  A young man loses
his memory.  A woman, who is in reality his sister, takes him home,
claiming to be his lover.  They live together as lovers, but then his
memory begins to return....  Although this seems to be a situation full
of dramatic possibilities, Yazaki seems more interested in a poetic,
contemplative cinema that deliberately avoids narrative drama and
tension.  The film has very little dialogue and long takes in which
almost nothing usually seems to happen.  The ending of the film seems to
mix reality and fantasy in an ambiguous way.  I found this a bizarre and
rather unsatisfying film.  It may well rely on an intimate
understanding of Japanese culture to appreciate.  Rating: 4.
PARIS IS BURNING (U.S.A.). D: Jennie Livingston.
     Glimpses of unusual cultures are always interesting.  This film
examines the Black and Latino gay subculture in New York revolving
around the Harlem drag balls.  This is a world with its own perspective
on the "normal" white society, and its own customs and jargon.  The film
is carefully structured around the vocabulary and customs of this
subculture, which give us a clear insight into how these people cope
with their marginalised position in the wider society.  A fascinating
documentary on an unusual subject.  Rating: 7.
     One of the pleasures of film festivals is seeing exciting
independent films such as this one which experiment with and push beyond
the normal conventions of mainstream film.  POISON is in fact three
films in one, each in completely different styles: one a mock
documentary about a mysterious boy who kills his father then flies away,
the second a beautifully done parody of a 50's B-grade horror film
about a scientist who creates and becomes infected by a revolting
disease, and the third an intense homo-erotic drama set in a male
prison.  The film constantly intercuts between these three stories,
challenging the audience to interpret the way their themes resonate
against one another.  Watching this film is an intellectually exhausting
and rather harrowing experience, but also a highly pleasurable one for
those who enjoy adventurous cinema.  Rating: 8.
     This was my favourite film of the festival, an intriguing,
electrifying film about a blind man who is also a photographer.  The
film explores the three-way relationship between the blind man Martin,
his friend Andy, and his housekeeper Celia.  Obsession is one of the
films major themes, with Celia being romantically obsessed with Martin,
and the Martin being obsessed with truth, his photographs being a way of
proving to himself that the outside world is as others describe it.
This is a beautiful, thought-provoking film with moments of marvelous
humour.  It caused quite a stir at Cannes, and will have world-wide
distribution.  Definitely one to see.  (The film also won the festival
audience poll for best feature.)  Rating: 9.
     Although it's rather too long, and needs to be more tightly edited,
this is nevertheless a lively and engaging documentary on the
author/personality Quentin Crisp in New York.  The film focuses not only
on the camp, flamboyant and mannered Crisp, whose persona appears to be
almost entirely a public one, but also on the attention-seekers who
surround him each vying for their fifteen minutes of fame.  The
showmanship and superficiality of much of New York society is nicely
captured in this film.  Rating: 7.
     This is a delightful and sharply comic film about the relationship
between an extremely stubborn elderly woman and her equally fiercely
independent young female tenant.  Both resort to various schemes and
deceptions to try to gain dominance over the other in a series of
confrontations in which sparks really fly, but gradually a reluctant
mutual respect begins to emerge.  This is a theme that has been echoed
in a number of recent films (such as "Driving Miss Daisy" and especially
"Tatie Danielle" [Aunt Danielle]) but here it is explored without a hint
of sentimentality.  The film is cleverly scripted and features a
marvelous central performance from Yvonne Lawley.  Rating: 8.
     This is a film whose theatrical origins don't work against it.  It
begins as a light comedy-romance as we watch an interesting relationship
develop between an upper-class society girl and a rather dull
station-master, then gradually changes gears and becomes a tense
thriller.  Almost all the film is set within the confines of a small
country railway station, which helps build up a suitably claustrophobic
atmosphere.  A good film, strongly directed with a fine sense of timing.
Rating: 8.
     A new film by the director a THE UNBELIEVABLE TRUTH, this is a very
black comedy on romantic and family relationships and the games-playing
and manipulation that lie behind them.  Hartley's direction is tight
and his dialogue razor sharp.  The story is full of unexpected twists
and revelations that keep the audience guessing until the very end.  A
provocative, potent and very satisfying film.  Rating: 8.
     The moral of this film is to beware of "message" movies.  This is
about a teenage girl being disturbed by memories of incest.
Well-meaning, but slow-moving and painfully dreary.  Rating: 4.
     WAITING is an ironic comedy that examines issues concerning
motherhood, surrogacy, personal privacy and female friendships.  At the
center of the film is the artist Clare, very pregnant and expecting her
baby very soon, around whom her closest friends gather, each of them
seeming to have some personal stake in the coming birth.  This is a
delightful film which skillfully treads a line between caricature and
seriousness.  It was the closing film of the festival and marked a
satisfying end to an extremely successful event.  Rating: 8.
_SHORTS_
     Of the shorts I saw the most impressive was a British short called
"Body Beautiful," a sensitive and sensuous film about the cult of the
body in our society and how those with damaged bodies learn to cope.
Also enjoyable was a 55-minute Australian film called "The Last Crop," a
cheerful adaptation of a short story by Elizabeth Jolley.  There were
also a number of excellent animated shorts at the festival, the best of
which were:
-"Creature Comforts" (U.K.), a hilarious mock documentary interviewing
animals at a zoo (winner of an academy award this year);
-"Door" (U.K.), a wonderfully bizarre story about doors and keys
featuring an astonishingly inventive mixture of animation techniques.
-"From Flores" (Canada), a moving adaptation of a Canadian short story;
-"At One View" and "A Fortified City" (Netherlands), two very unusual, 
playful pixilated films about film and film theory.
