Authors
Mac Verstandig
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Snatch. (2000)
---A copy of this review can be found at
http://www.moviereviews.org/snatch.htm ---
A rollicking exercise in perverse darkness, Guy Ritchie's sophomore
outing, "Snatch," is the rare film that produces disgust-induced humor
with some degree of frequency and yet never stoops to a juvenile
level. The laughs in this crime-dominated movie find their origin in a
hearty combination of relatively innocent matters like gambling
addictions, thick accents and trans-Atlantic travel as well as less
innocent yet equally amusing situations presented including unlicensed
boxing matches where the fix is in, a murderer who uses pigs to
dispose of his bodies and a band of less-than-honest gypsies.
Sorting out the plot of "Snatch" is a slightly more strenuous task,
however.  An oddly unique combination of "Goodfellas," "Entrapment"
and, in a more limited respect, "Diamonds," the movie follows a crime
ring, diamond heist and boxing scam that all intersect early and
often. It all starts when Franky Four Fingers (Benicio Del Toro, who
follows up his much-noted role in "Traffic" with another solid
performance) gets laid over in London on his way back to the States
where he is to deliver a huge diamond to his boss, Avi (Dennis
Farina). Meanwhile, he has some smaller diamonds he decides to unload
while "in town." In the process, his gambling addiction takes a toll
and he gives into temptation when asked to place a bet on one of the
aforementioned unlicensed bare-knuckle bouts that would give even Don
King the willies. The wager is, of course, a set up and soon enough
Franky Four Fingers has a problem on his hands. Enter Mickey O'Neil
(Brad Pitt, who gives one of his better and more enjoyable
performances in his return to a fighting role after the hugely-popular
"Fight Club"), an Irish gypsy with extraordinary charisma and a heavy,
incomprehensible accent that is worsened for the viewer by his fluency
in Cockney Rhyming Slang. After knocking out the boxer who was set to
go down in the match, Mickey must fill in for him. Problem is that
Mickey doesn't take orders too well.
There are more characters and additional plot lines, but
writer/director Ritchie seems thoroughly uninterested in their
clarity. And that is perhaps a wise move as an understanding of the
basic outline and an appreciation for the sinful and oftentimes-morbid
humor is enough to enjoy this fine piece of art. And to fill whatever
voids may remain, a phenomenal ensemble effort and some very creative
camerawork are at Ritchie's disposal.
Pitt steals the show with his hearty accent, scraggly facial hair and
obviously phony enthusiasm about the "mess" he gets himself into.
Unfortunately for Pitt, the film is being released three weeks after
the cutoff for consideration in 2000, a year full of generally weak
supporting performances where his might be considered among the
finest. But it is still far too early to speculate how he may stack up
against the class of 2001.  Benicio Del Toro also comes across strong
in yet another gangster performance, following earlier successes in
"The Usual Suspects," "The Way of the Gun" and, most recently,
"Traffic." The rest of the cast is delightful to watch in their oddly
creepy roles, including Vinnie Jones as Bullet Tooth Tony and Alan
Ford as Brick Top.
Ritchie, along with director of photography Tim Maurice-Jones and
editor Jon Harris, creates a strangely unique visual effect in many
parts of the film.  Whether it be snappy editing with isolated colors
in the film's opening montage or just generally deft coverage of the
movie's bouts, the trio recognize the possibility of visuals even in a
film made to look grungy and realize that possibility fully here.
Be warned that "Snatch" can be quite offensive at times. The film's
most subtle yet humorous line is a character's inquisitive "In the
quiet words of the Virgin Mary, please come again.'" There are Irish
jokes scattered throughout. It takes less than five minutes for a
Jewish joke to pop up. The film even takes a potshot at the British
from time to time. But even if 2001 is truly the beginning of the
"politically correct millennium, "Snatch" is the finest film to be
released thus far and well worth a look by most adult audiences.
