Authors
Jim Mann
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Gojira VS Kingugidora (1991)
I finally saw GODZILLA VS.  KING GHIDORAH, the third of the
revisionist Godzilla films.  This film is quite a step up from the
first two (GODZILLA 1985 and GODZILLA VS.  BIOLANTE).  Unlike the case
in GODZILLA VS.  BIOLANTE, for example, the battle scenes are well
done.  The monsters are threatening.  And, unlike the previous two
films, after the first twenty minutes or so the film does not drag.
The soundtrack is good, and the plot is not awful.
     The basic plot of the film is that travellers from the future come
to Japan and warn Japan that it will be destroyed by Godzilla.  But
they give them a way out: travel into the past and stop the creation of
Godzilla.  It turns out that Godzilla is a dinosaur that was still
alive in 1944 on a Pacific Island.  A 1954 H-Bomb test mutates the
dinosaur into Godzilla.  So, back we go, to 1944, where the time
travellers move Godzilla to another island.  Unfortunately, they really
want to destroy Japan (which had, in the early 21st Century, become an
even bigger economic power).  So they leave behind three little
muppets that mutate into Ghidorah, the Three Headed Monster.
     In one of the silliest "alternate timeline" scenerios yet,
Godzilla is no longer part of our timeline, yet everyone remembers him
and notes this fact.  People walk around saying "Ah, yes, Godzilla no
longer exists.  Too bad.  Maybe he could have handled this King
Ghidorah monster."
     However, Godzilla does exist.  The dinosaur has been exposed to
other radioactivity (a nuclear sub, perhaps), so he appears and trashes
King Ghidorah, then tries to trash Japan.  Finally, the good guy
contingent from the future must take Ghidorah back to the future and
turn him into Mecha-Ghidorah, so that he can stop an enraged Godzilla.
     Nonsense.  Sure.  But this is nonsense more in the spirit of the
original GHIDORAH or DESTROY ALL MONSTERS.  It's fun to watch, and at
times is a pretty good movie.
     It's still a big step down from the two best films in the
series--Godzilla and Godzilla vs. Mothra (the original), both of which
are good movies.  And I miss one of my favorite scenes in the whole
series: the birth of the original Ghidorah, from a fireball.  But this
is certainly the best film in the series in a long time, at least since
DESTROY ALL MONSTERS (one of my favorite "guilty pleasures") and
probably since the original GHIDORAH, THE THREE-HEADED MONSTER.
     One final note.  When this film was first released, there was a
bit of a controversy involving the pro-Japanese, anti-American slant.
In particular, reviewers (including the WALL STREET JOURNAL) focused on
how Godzilla saves a group of Japanese troops from the Americans in
World War II.  Actually, this scene didn't seem quite as blatant
nationalistic flag-waving as the whole reason behind the folks from the
future wanting to stop Japan.  Japan was so great, and became such an
economic power, that it managed to buy most of South America and
Africa.  This seemed a bit much, but it was only a minor distraction,
certainly not worth the space given to the articles written about it.
     [One final style note: excuse my spelling of "Ghidorah." I've seen
it transliterated several different ways.  Most recent copies use, I
believe, "Ghidorah."  The mid-sixties film used "Ghidra."  But I tried to
use the same spelling throughout this article.]

Title
Review for Sora no daikaijű Radon (1956)
     RODAN was Toho's second entry into the monster movie genre,
following quickly on the heals of their successful Godzilla.  While not
as successful, either artistically or financially, as GODZILLA, it
remains a good movie, and one of the better monster movies.
     The movie starts out (after the obligatory prologue, showing
H-bombs blowing up Pacific islands), with a mine cave in.  In the mine,
a worker is mysteriously killed. It turns out that a giant insect is
loose in the mines.  However, what has really been resurrected is far
worse: one worker is trapped in the mines and stumbles onto two giant
eggs. As he watches, one hatches, and the monster that emerges is so
large that it easily feeds on the giant insects. The monster, of
course, is Rodan, a giant Pteranadon.
     Rodan destroys the countryside not by trampling buildings (though
he does a little of that) but simply by flying over it. The huge
creature, flying at supersonic speed, generates typhooon force winds.
Worse yet for the humans: there is not one Rodan but two.
     There are some good special effects (at least for the day). The
scenes in which Rodan descends upon the city and is confronted by the
military are very good. And the climax at the volcano is spectacular.
     The sets are also good. The details around the mine, for example,
are nicely handled. They give a good feel for the area, and thus make
the whole film a bit more realistic.  The photography is also nice: I
believe that this is Toho's first color effort.
     The biggest negative in the film is the way the whole thing takes
a while to get going. The giant insect/mine disaster subplot seems to
drag, and it's not until Rodan shows up that the film really begins to
move.
     By the way, the costume used for Rodan in this film is reasonably
realistic. Right after watching this movie, my daughter and I watched
the second movie Rodan appeared in: GHIDRAH, THE THREE-HEADED MONSTER.
The costume in their is much worse. (Of course, the Godzilla costume in
that movie is also much worse than that used in most of the previous
"Godzilla" films.) The eyes, in particular, look phony in the latter
film.
     In summary, this is a good film. It is one of the better films of
its genre, and ranks as one of the top 5 monster films from Toho (along
with GODZILLA, GODZILLA RAIDS AGAIN, GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA (1964), and
MOTHRA).

Title
Review for Gojira VS Biorante (1989)
     I've been a Godzilla fan since somewhere in the early sixties, when
my father took us to the drive in to see KING KONG VS. GODZILLA.  Many
of my early theatre experiences where Saturday matinee showings of
Godzilla films: GODZILLA VS. THE THING (now known as GODZILLA
VS. MOTHRA); GHIDRAH, THE THREE-HEADED MONSTER; DESTROY ALL MONSTERS.  I
still from time to time watch some of the films in the series.  The
original, GODZILLA, is actually quite a good film (and is as much about
nuclear weapons as it is about a giant monster: it was the only film in
the series to truly focus on the human devastation caused by the
destruction of a city).  GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA has some good moments and
is a reasonable film.  DESTROY ALL MONSTERS is nonsense, but fun,
inspired nonsense.
     Somewhere along the way, though, Godzilla changed.  The series
became just out and out stupid.  GODZILLA 1985 was billed as a return of
the old Godzilla.  It, however, was a major disappointment.  While it
had a few nice moments, it was overall rather dumb.  And not the
inspired dumb of DESTROY ALL MONSTERS (alien invaders use mind control
devices to control Earth's monters as part of their invasion) but just
dumb dumb (birds are dinosaurs, so therefore Godzilla can be lured by
bird calls).
     GODZILLA VS. BIOLANTE was also a disappointment, though not quite
as big a one as GODZILLA 1985.  At the very least, it doesn't have
moments that are quite as dumb as the bird calls in GODZILLA 1985.
     First, a brief plot synopsis:  after Godzilla's destruction of
Tokyo, various groups try to get some Godzilla cells to use in biotech
research.  One Japanese scientist working for a middle eastern country
gets some, but they are destroyed in a bomb blast which also kills his
daughter.  Later, when he goes to work for the Japanese government and
gets more Godzilla cells (to be used to make an anti-Godzilla weapon),
he instead uses them to make a giant mutant rose of sorts (to honor his
daughter, who loved roses).  This giant mutant plant thing is Biolante.
Along the way, Godzilla fights Biolante twice, fights the Super-X II (a
new super weapon), destroys a city, gets zapped with artificial
lightening, etc.
     Now, while this whole thing sounds rather silly, it *could* have
worked.  Similarly silly things did work in movies like the original
GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA.  The movie, however, suffers from several problems
beyond the plot.  It plods along.  There seems to be no life in it.  The
older Godzilla films usually weren't boring; this film had long boring
moments.  Even the monster battles are dull and plodding.
     Another problem was Biolante.  The first time it appears, it is
perhaps the dumbest looking monster ever:  its head looks like a giant
rose.
     On the plus side, there are a few nice moments.  The destruction of
a city (Okinawa, I think) was very nicely done: probably the best
effects of its type done since a few of the early Godzilla movies.
Godzilla himself looked good: he was much more realistic than he has
been before.  The eyes, especially, looked real this time.
     I hope that the next movie in the series, GODZILLA VS. KING
GIDORAH, is better, though I'm not getting my hopes up after this film.
     One final note about the video tape: in these days when all sorts
of serious films are still not released in letterbox format, GODZILLA
VS. BIOLANTE *is* letterboxed.

Title
Review for It (1990) (TV)
     I'll start this review by saying that I am not a horror fan.  I
won't pick up horror books unless I have a recommendation from someone
saying that the book is a good book, not just a good horror book.  I am,
however, very fond of Stephen King.  King transcends the genre, writing
good novels, full of good, well-drawn characters.
     The novel IT is probably *the* epic horror novel.  I chose the word
epic deliberately.  The book has the feel of an epic.  The actions of
the characters feel as if they are a part of something much bigger,
something very important.  King uses a number of narrative techniques
and extensive foreshadowing to achieve this.  Before any major action
happens, you have glimpses of it, helping to make the action seem much
bigger when it does occur.  (For example, there is mention of "the
apocalyptic rock fight" several hundred pages before it actually
happens.  By the time it does, the reader knows (and feels) that it is a
pivotal point in what is to happen.)
     IT, like of all of King's major novels, contains well-drawn
characters.  By book's end, we know the main characters well, understand
why they do what they do, have lived with them through several major
choices, and so forth.
     Last night, ABC presented the first part of a two part "novel for
television" based on IT.  Actually, instead of calling a "novel for
television" they should have called it a "Cliff's notes for television"
since it is as close to the King novel as Cliff's notes are to a novel.
That is, it seemed to portray some of the surface of the book (not all,
by any means.  A number of important events are left out).  It does not
capture the feel of the book.  It instead is a pale outline of the book.
     First of all, all of the epic proportions of the novel are gone.
Key scenes--the rock fight, the first confrontation with it in the
sewers--are over quickly and seem rather trite.  They certainly happen
too easily.  There is no real build up to these scenes--they just
happen.
     Secondly, the characters mostly seem shallow, there motives
unclear.  This happens a bit with the lucky seven (the 7 kids who
challenge it) and happens even more so with the villains.  Henry Bowers,
the main nemesis of the kids, starts with murderous instincts, unlike in
the novel where his descent into evil happens in stages as he crosses
barrier after barrier in his criminal behavior.  His companions aren't
really portrayed at all.  (For those who have read the book: I was
particularly sorry that they left out Patrick Hofstadter (sp?), one of
the creepiest characters I've seen.)
     The novel portrays it as an ancient evil, something that had come
to earth millions of years in the past and fed on and corrupted what
would become the town of Derry, Maine.  This comes through almost not at
all in the movie.  The kids see old pictures of Pennywise the clown (the
chief guise of it), and one tells the story of a particularly nasty
accident at the town's ironworks.  This is not enough to really create
the feel of ancient menace that the book conveys.
     Moreover, the book has some moments of real menace.  The kids seem
in real danger a number of times, both when confronting Henry Bowers and
his gang and in confronting it in its many forms.  The teenage werewolf,
a frightening figure in the book, is trivial in the movie, for example.
(The movie downplays its shape-shifting, in any case.)
     In summary, I'm glad I read the book before seeing the movie, since
the movie would have soured me on the book.  Will I watch part 2.  Yeah,
probably.  Although at this point it is more a morbid desire to see how
else they are going to butcher things.
     On final note: how would it rate if I were taking it on its own
merits, without reference to the book?  That's hard to say, since I have
read the book.  Probably I'd consider it on par with your typical grade
C Hammer film (like a Christopher Lee Dracula film), an OK way to spend
two hours at the movie theater, but not anything great.
     On Monday, I reviewed the first part of the TV movie based on
Stephen King's IT.  At that point, I blasted it, calling it a "Cliff's
Notes for Television" rather than a "Novel for Television."  The
characters were rather shallow and the film just didn't have the scope
and epic feel of the novel.
     Part 2 was aired last night.  It was a bit better.  The characters
were fleshed out a bit (though still shallow) and the ending didn't seem
quite as rushed.  However, many of the problems of the first part still
remained.
     First of all, it failed to give you the feel of the scope, power,
and age of it.  It was simply a somewhat nasty monster faced by our
characters, not the timeless evil it was in the novel.
     The ending, while not as rushed as that of part one, still seemed a
tad too easy.  Moreover, the characters face down it on strictly a
physical plain.  It is a much more intense moment in the book, fought
primarily on what can best be described here as another plain, first by
Bill, then by Richie (whose role is trivial in the film).
     Another problem is that the film tries to bring in devices from the
book, but, without the buildup these things had in the book.  Thus, they
are just confusing or trite.  For example, Bill's "He thrusts his hands
against the posts and still insists he sees the ghosts" chant builds up
to something of mystic significance in the book, in part because of
King's narrative technique, in which Bill remembers this bit by bit.  In
the movie, many readers must have been shaking their heads, wondering
why he was saying such things to the monster at the end.
     Similarly, Silver is just Bill's old bike.  In the novel, it is
built up  in such a way that it seems much, much more, so that when Bill
used it to "beat the devil" it fits.
     Finally, the characters just don't seem to jell the way they do in
the book.  In the book, each character is an integral part of the whole.
Richie, for example, is NOT just the class clown.  His joking and his
voices are important in the resolution, and are part of the synergy of
the lucky seven.
     I realize that much of this probably comes from the time
constraints.  If they had 6 or 8 hours rather than 4, they could have
done a much better job.  I certainly would have expected more of William
Goldman, who is a fine screenwriter.  However, what we wound up with was
OK and  enjoyable, but a pale shadow of what it could have been.

Title
Review for Mosura tai Gojira (1964)
     After having watched GODZILLA VS. BIOLANTE last week, I decided to
go back and watch a *good* Godzilla-vs.-another-monster movie.  So I
pulled out my tape of GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA (a.k.a. GODZILLA VS. THE
THING).
     I should start by saying that I feel very nostalgic about this
movie.  It is one of the first movies that I ever got to see in a
theatre by myself.  More importantly (to me), it is the first film that
I actually waited for.  Ads showed up in the paper a week in advance.  I
looked at the ads (which stated "The face of the Thing is too horrible
to show in this ad.  You must go to the theatre to see it.")  every day
for a week, waiting for the Saturday matinee.  I wasn't disappointed
then, and I wasn't disappointed now.
     GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA stands head and shoulders above the other
battle of the monsters movies.  It has a reasonable story line, is well
paced and well directed, has good special effects, and a wonderful score
(by Akira Ifukube).
     The movie starts with the appearance of a giant egg in the waters
off Japan.  The egg, it turns out, is the egg of Mothra (a giant moth,
who had appeared in the movie MOTHRA (1961)).  Japanese industrialists
decide to keep the egg and make money by charging admission.  Meanwhile,
Godzilla has resurfaced, and sets about laying waste to much of Japan.
Japan's only hope is to appeal to Mothra for help.  Mothra, though near
death, comes to Japan, battles Godzilla to a standstill, but dies.
However, the egg hatches, two caterpillars emerge, and battle and defeat
Godzilla.
     Why is this movie better than the others of its type?  Well, for
one thing, there is real tension built up.  This happens in a number of
ways.  First of all, it is the only Godzilla movie in which the army
actually seems to be on near equal footing with Godzilla.  It isn't just
Godzilla stomping the tanks.  The tanks and planes have an effect,
herding Godzilla toward a prepared trap: an artificial lightning setup.
The lightning nearly defeats Godzilla, knocking him from his feet.  Only
when the impatient general orders the power to be turned up, thus
overloading the generator, does Godzilla manage to break free.  In the
battles with Mothra (both mother and children), the monsters are on
equal footing (unlike other movies when it is apparent from the start
that Godzilla is going to stomp the other guy in the rubber suit).
     Tension is built up in other ways: Godzilla threatens the giant
egg, for example.  Also, at the time of the final battle, Godzilla is
threatening an island to which a number of school children have gone for
a field trip.  Thus, scenes of the battle are intercut with scenes of
the heros going to the island to rescue the children.
     The pacing and editing is also good.  After about fifteen minutes
of setup, the rest of the movie zips along, helped by good editing.  As
we head toward the climax, there are several cuts in which we flip back
and forth between Godzilla heading toward the island where the climactic
battle will take place and the Mothra egg, which is about to hatch.
This contributes to the tension that I mentioned above.
     The special effects are good.  The scene of Godzilla destroying an
oil refinery is one of the best of its type ever done.  But what makes
the effects in this movie good is more than just their technical
quality: the effects are well directed.  The battles between Godzilla
and Mothra are not just random, unfocused wresting as is the case in so
many of the other Godzilla-vs.-somebody movies.  Other nice scenes
include a panicking crowd fleeing the city; after about five seconds of
crowd shots, the top of Godzilla appears over some buildings in the
background.
     Godzilla himself looks reasonable.  Raised ridges over the eyes
give him an evil look that was abandoned in future movies (in which
Godzilla was to become Earth's hero).  The eyes, often a real
embarrassment in later movies, are reasonably well done.
     The music is also nice, and is some of Ifukube's most memorable.
He uses some of the themes from the original Godzilla, but changes them
enough to make them distinctive.
     Overall, this is a reasonably good movie.  A juvenile, certainly,
and not for everybody.  But if you like monster movies but avoid the
Godzilla movies as simply "championship wrestling in rubber suits," take
a look at this.  In the Godzilla series, only Godzilla is better.

Title
Review for Gojira VS Mosura (1992)
Warning: This review contains a few spoilers. (As if that really
matters in movies involving giant monsters battling to the death.)
     I recently watched GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA (1992) and GODZILLA VS.
MECHA-GODZILLA (1993), the 4th and 5th films in the revisionist
Godzilla series.  Like the previous film in the series, GODZILLA VS.
KING GHIDORAH, they are good films (if you take them for what they
are), a return to a quality in Godzilla films that, prior to KING
GHIDORAH, we hadn't seen since the mid-1960s.
     One note, though, before I begin my reviews.  The GODZILLA VS.
MOTHRA tape I watched was entirely in Japanese (which I don't speak).
Therefore, I really watched it as a visual/musical experience.  I could
make out most of the plot, but I'm sure there are things I've missed.
GODZILLA VS. MECHA-GODZILLA was subtitled.
     GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA is sort of a remake of parts of the original
Mothra and of GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA (1964; a.k.a.  GODZILLA VS. THE
THING).  Mothra's egg hatches, Mothra comes to Japan, creates a cocoon,
turns into a giant moth, etc.  At the same time, Mothra and another
moth-like giant creature, Batra, battle Godzilla.
     The effects are impressive, by and large.  Toho studios have
gotten very good at making the destruction of miniature buildings look
real.  American movie makers could learn something here (and perhaps
save themselves hundreds of millions of dollars).  The monster fights
are very good and some are rather innovative, especially the undersea
fight between Godzilla and the Batra.
     Another nice point is the soundtrack.  It is again by Ikira
Ikafube and is again very good.  It contains echoes of some previous
soundtracks, but with some completely new themes. (Though, as noted
below, the GODZILLA VS. MECHA-GODZILLA soundtrack does this one
better.)
     It's not as good as the original GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA which still
remains the second best movie in the whole series.  I'd rank it,
though, high in the second level--behind GODZILLA, GODZILLA VS. MOTHRA
and GODZILLA VS. MECHA-GODZILLA (1993), and about on the par with
GODZILLA VS. KING GHIDORAH and GHIDRA, THE THREE-HEADED MONSTER.
     GODZILLA VS. MECHA-GODZILLA is a step up.  This is surprising.
First of all, it is following a couple of pretty good movies, so it is
a pleasant surprise to find one that's even better.  Secondly, though,
this time they didn't remake one of the better Godzilla.  Instead, they
remade (at least in the sense of borrowing title and main protagonist
from) a so-so (to be kind) movie and turned it into a very good.  It's
probably the third best movie in the series.
     As the movie begins, the Japanese government has raised the body
of Mecha King Ghidorah from the ocean floor.  Using the 23rd century
technology, they create the ultimate anti-Godzilla weapon,
Mecha-Godzilla.  Meanwhile, a prehistoric egg is discovered on an
island.  When scientists show up to investigate the find, they first
find the egg defended by Rodan (his first appearance in the revisionist
series).  Moreover, Godzilla also shows up.  They make off with the egg
while Godzilla battles Rodan.
     They assume that the egg is a Rodan egg.  However, when it
hatches, out pops a baby (8-foot) Godzilla (or gojirosaurus).  This
raises some intriguing questions.  Was the Godzilla egg put in the
Rodan nest much as a cuckoo puts its eggs in other bird's nests.  Or
are Rodan and Godzilla somehow related? There is certainly some
connection between the two, as we find in the movie's climax, when the
energy of a dying Rodan regenerates a dead Godzilla.
     The battles between Godzilla and Mecha-Godzilla are impressive.
They fight twice, and each time the battle is pretty evenly matched.
The effects are good here, as are the effects of various buildings
being destroyed.
     Ikira Ikafube's soundtrack is once again very good.  The
Mecha-Godzilla theme is perhaps the best new theme "signature" theme
for a Toho creation since the 1960s.  This new theme is mixed
effectively with many echoes of older themes, all to good effect.
     A nice point in both films as that they are internally consistent
and not particularly silly.  I cringed in GODZILLA 1985 when the used
bird calls as a Godzilla lure and when they used cadmium missles to
"moderate" Godzilla.  There's nothing like that here.  What nonsense
there is is the sort of fun nonsense that seems to fit with our
enjoyment of the movie rather than making us squirm in our seats.
     After watching GODZILLA VS. MECHA-GODZILLA I anxiously await
GODZILLA VS. SPACE GODZILLA.  I also really wish someone would show
these on the big screen.
