Authors
Steve Fritzinger
Number of Reviews
10

Title
Review for Beyond Therapy (1987)
     Set in the offices of two psychoanalysts, and in a very bad French
restaurant, BEYOND THERAPY is a love story about two very confused people.
     Bruce (Jeff Goldblum) and Prudence (Julie Haggarty) meet through one of
many personal ads Bruce has placed.  They have a disastrous lunch, and leave
expecting never to see one an other again.  Of course, they do meet again.
     During the course of their relationship we are introduced to Bruce's
homosexual roommate/lover Bob, Bob's "theatrical" mother, Bruce's
psychoanalyst, and Prudence's psychoanalyst.  A series of bizarre coincidences
puts these six people on a collision course with the hilarious climax.
     BEYOND THERAPY builds momentum slowly.  The first 45 minutes, during which
the relationships between the main characters are reveled and expanded, are
slow sometimes to the point of being tedious.  About half of the people in the
audience walked out during this part of the film.
     But once all the players are lined up in their domino-like positions, the
film delivers a 20-minute punch line worth the wait.  When the final push
comes, the characters start to fall, and knock each other down with a very
satisfying crash.

Title
Review for Predator (1987)
     Arnold Schwarzenegger leads a team of elite mercenaries through a Central
American jungle to rescue a captured "Cabinet Minister" from communist-backed
rebels.  Along the way he deals with a treacherous CIA agent, about a hundred
insurgents, and an alien sportsman doing a little trophy hunting.
     The "plot" of PREDATOR is only a set-up for the long hunt scene that takes
up 3/4 of the movie.  Any reason to drop 5 or 6 heavily armed men miles from
civilization would have worked just as well, so little time is spent here,
only long enough to let us know who the good guys and the bad guys are, and
then one obligatory battle scene so Arnie can use his patented groan-inducing
corny combat banter.  Characters that started out as one-dimensional Rambos are
barely developed to the point of being two-dimensional Rambos, and most of the
dialogue is so stiff and unnatural that the characters seem to be announcing
important information for the sake of the audience, rather then talking to one
another.  Lines like "You were my friend; now you are a treacherous CIA agent.
What happened?", and "He was my friend.  Now I want revenge."  are typical.
     But that doesn't really matter, because PREDATOR is not trying to present
a soldier's experience.  These guys are not ALIENS' grunts in space, nor are
they the regular guys in a horrible situation from PLATOON.  PREDATOR is about
the local bare-knuckles champ going up against an out-of-towner who's won his
last 725 fights.  And on that level PREDATOR works well!
     The alien's actions are believable, and consistent with the idea it is a
sportsman.  It treats the human characters like game animals, stalking them
down, taking them one by one, and taking care of each kill before going out
again.  The alien is a competent, though sometimes over-confident, hunter after
dangerous big game, and it behaves accordingly.
     The thing that impresses me most is that throughout PREDATOR, the humans
have a chance.  Too often in movies like this, the monster is unstoppable.  It
is indestructible and omniscient until the last five minutes of the last reel,
when the hero finds some laughably easy way to destroy it.  In PREDATOR the
alien is very very good, but fallible.  The movie carefully portrays the alien
as a real threat, without making it seeming invincible.
     The effects used to create the alien are another strong point.  While
watching the movie, you know that the alien's camouflage suit and blaster would
work just as well as shown on the screen.  There is plenty here for the people
who complain about Tie-fighters banking and spacecrafts making noise to pick
apart, but it LOOKS real, and that is the important part!
     There are still some holes in PREDATOR.  The last scene of the alien mars
the rest of the performance, and I feel some of the characters are killed off a
little to easily so they could get on with the final fight of Arnie vs.  The
Thing.  But it works more often than it fails.
     It's hard to rate PREDATOR since if you don't like this sort of movie,
this isn't the one that is going to change your mind, so as a movie I only give
it +1 on the -4 to +4 scale.  Die-hard fans of action movies, in the TERMINATOR
style, can take a +3.

Title
Review for Innerspace (1987)
     INNERSPACE retells the FANTASTIC VOYAGE story, this time going for, and
getting, laughs.  Dennis Quaid plays Tuck Pendelton, a washed-up fighter pilot
with an ego the size of a truck.  He is to man the first miniaturized
exploration of a living animal.  When the experiment is interrupted by
industrial spies, Pendelton is accidentally injected into the rear end of Jack
Putter, a Safeway clerk played by Martin Short.  Putter is a nervous
hypochondriac whose ego is as under-developed as Tuck's is over-inflated.
     Putter, with the help of Tuck's reporter girlfriend, must recover the
stolen microchip needed to reenlarge Tuck, before Tuck's air supply runs out.
They are chased by villains reminiscent of a James Bond film, captured by rival
scientists, and threatened by orange-haired grocery shoppers.
     INNERSPACE takes the elements of a typical adventure thriller, adds some
snappy dialogue and good special effects, and skillfully creates a very
entertaining movie.  More than once the whole theater was laughing out loud.
Dennis Quaid described INNERSPACE as "a dumb, stupid comedy...and I love it.
We encounter every dumb, stupid cliche in the book.  Leave your brain at home
and you'll have a good time."  I took my brain along, and thought INNERSPACE
was great.

Title
Review for Hollywood Shuffle (1987)
     With HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE, first time writer/director Robert Townsend creates
a very entertaining film.  This good-natured parody of movie-making gets most
of its laughs from gentle but well-aimed shots at the stereotypes connected to
black actors and white film makers.  Along the way HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE takes time
out to lampoon hard-boiled detectives, Eddie Murphy, TV movie critics and the
rewards of stardom.
     Townsend also stars as Bobby, a struggling young black actor who works
part-time at the local "Winky Dinky Dog" hot dog stand.  Bobby is trying out
for his first movie role playing a street hood named Jivetime Jimmy.
Unfortunately while Bobby hopes this part will put him on the road to stardom,
he also feels the role is so absurdly unrealistic in its portrayal of blacks
that to take the part would be selling out his integrity.
     The best scenes in HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE take place in Bobby's mind, as he
daydreams and images the consequences of his actions.  The tone of these
scenes ranges from a dry Pythonisque humor to absurd visual humor that would be
at home in one of the "Airplane" movies.
     With the exception of Bobby's family and girlfriend, the other characters
are caricatures of actors, producers, and hog dog vendors, but these
caricatures are not presented in a mean-spirited way.  You are left with the
feeling that Townsend is spoofing the stereotypes, not poking fun at the people
associated with the stereotypes.
     An intelligent comedy, and an effective parody, HOLLYWOOD SHUFFLE rates a
+3 on the -4 to +4 scale.

Title
Review for Beverly Hills Cop II (1987)
     No one told Eddie Murphy and Robert D. Wachs that originality counts when
they were writing BEVERLY HILLS COP II.  Only the names (of the villains) and
the crime have been changed to make this sequel.  The first 10 minutes of
BEVERLY HILLS COP II convinced me I was in for a long 2 hours.  20 minutes into
this movie, I asked the guy next to me to wake me if anything funny happened.
     The first reel reintroduces us to Axel Foley, and the rest of the cast
from BEVERLY HILLS COP.  Foley is still causing trouble in Detroit.  In Beverly
Hills, Rosewood, Taggart, and Bogomil are in trouble with the new police chief.
We are also treated to some "mood setting" scenes, Murphy's "You'll believe
anything if I talk fast and loud" routine, some fast cars being driven
recklessly (but not always wrecklessly), and a quick robbery to show us how
much firepower the bad guys will be toting.  The stage is set for Foley to go
West and stop the bad guys while fighting off hostile local cops and hiding
from his own captain in Detroit.
     In the first thirty minutes Murphy hogs the camera to the exclusion of
everything but his car.  Every situation, every joke, and every shot is
straight out of the first movie.  COP II shows all the signs of being a hacked
together recycling of COP I.
     Then something wonderful happens.  About 30 minutes into COP II everything
clicks and the film starts to build the same momentum that carried COP I.  The
camera moves off Murphy and starts pulling in the supporting cast.  John Ashton
as Sergeant Taggart and Judge Reinhold's Detective Billy Rosewood save COP II
from being a mediocre rehash of COP I.
     Reinhold is a pleasure to watch as he adds some much needed pacing and
direction to Murphy's frantic Axel Foley.  Reinhold gets more than his share of
the laughs by parodying tough-guy movies and hamming up his sensitive
character.  Ashton doesn't have a lot to do as the conservative and worried
Sergeant Taggart, but he works well as Reinhold's straight man.  Since Murphy
is no longer expected to carry the movie on his own, his performance loses the
hurried and pushed feel that marred the first third, and COP II takes off.
     There are still some problems.  Foley, Taggart and Rosewood mostly stumble
onto clues rather than doing any convincing detective work.  Foley seems to
have watched too many episodes of MACGYVER, having taken to checking for
finger prints with Super-Glue, and rigging alarm systems with chewing gum.
There is the expected number of car chases, but the profanity is way down.
Maybe comedians have realized that yelling certain words at the top of their
lungs is no longer an automatic laugh.

Title
Review for Lethal Weapon (1987)
     LETHAL WEAPON is a light-weight action thriller that quickly degenerates
to an extremely stupid movie.
     While a detective whose name I don't remember is investigating the murder
of a friend's daughter, he and his new partner, Riggs, a suicidal burned-out
ex-Vietnam sniper, stumble onto a heroin ring.
     This movie is so loaded with cliches, ex-CIA men turned to crime, a tough
looking guy holding his arm in a flame to prove his loyalty to Fearless Leader,
kidnapped daughters, and so on, that there is no room left for any genuine
suspense.  What is left is an adventure movie with no guts or heart.
     If you look hard for something worthwhile in this movie, there is a vague
chemistry between Glover and Gibson that provides a couple of good laughs.  But
that chemistry is erratic at best, and doesn't come close to saving the film.

Title
Review for Blind Date (1987)
     Walter has a problem.  He needs a date for a dinner party being thrown for
one of his firms biggest clients.  His regular girlfriend has stood him up at
the last minute, and now he's desperate.
     Walter finally accepts a blind date with Nadia, a friend of his
sister-in-law, and, ignoring the warnings of his sister-in-law, allows her to
drink.  After all, Nadia is a charming and beautiful woman.  What harm could
come from sharing one bottle of champagne?
     Unfortunately, no one told Walter that Nadia is a hopeless dipsomaniac
who, after just one drink, gains the destructive force of a tornado.  Walter,
of course, has a miserable night.  Over the next 6 hours, he is the butt of
every slapstick gag known.  In addition to being mugged, jailed, and fired he
ends up in love, and responsible for saving Nadia from the plotting of her
unscrupulous ex-fiance.
     BLIND DATE has everything you would expect from a Blake Edwards movie,
except Julie Andrews.  The dialogue is funny, the slapstick is funny, and the
pacing is good.  For high-concept comedy, it's pretty good, but there are
several problems.  At first Bruce Willis struggles against his David Adison
image, playing Walter as a disorganized portfolio analyst with no style or
social skills, but then falls into his "Moonlighting" persona.  Kim Bassinger
gives a good performance as Nadia, but the role requires that she only behave
drunkenly and then helpless, so there isn't much room for depth.  It also has
the one hundredth movie dog named Rambo this year, and several running jokes
that quickly become stale and predictable.

Title
Review for Straight to Hell (1987)
     In STRAIGHT TO HELL, three inept hitmen/bankrobbers and their moll spend
four days hiding out south of the border.  Which border is never really clear,
but they have defiantly crossed into a weird place.  On the lam in a town run
by Irish bandits, they drink a lot of coffee, beat up a hot dog vendor, and
spend a lot of time talking about, but never actually having, sex.
     Alex Cox's spoof captures much of what makes a great spaghetti western.
Ugly tough men sit in a run-down Mexican town and exchange enigmatic dialogue,
meaningful looks, and gun-fire, oppressed villagers hope for salvation, show
fighting spirit, and die, etc.  But mostly Cox unintentionally shows that the
spaghetti westerns were a pointless indulgence in a genre that the director
didn't really understand.  The result is a rambling mish-mash that is
entertaining as often as it is boring, and ultimately ends without ever having
gone anywhere.
     Cox recaptures the strangeness that made his earlier film, REPOMAN, a cult
classic, but doesn't provide a story to carry the film.  There is really no
reason for any of the actions of any of the characters, and that is the
downfall of STRAIGHT TO HELL.  It proves that watching even the strangest
antics can be boring if after twenty minutes nothing else happens.

Title
Review for RoboCop (1987)
     The Terminator is back, and this time he's a good guy.  In this future the
police force is run as a for-profit division of Security Concepts Inc., and an
up-and-coming young executive thinks he can eliminate crime and get himself a
vice-presidency with his Robocop project.  Peter Weller is Alex Murphy, a
Detroit cop killed in the line of duty, who has been "recycled" by SCI's labs.
His personality is erased, and what is left of him is merged with a cybernetic
body to form an unstoppable super-cop.  The cyborg's computer-controlled
reflexes and enhanced senses and Murphy's 20 years of police experience are
combined to form the perfect vehicle to dispassionately uphold the law.  The
Robocop performs flawlessly until Murphy's personality and memory returns.
     One of Robocop's many strengths is Peter Weller's performance in the title
role.  Limited by the cumbersome cyborg costume, Weller depends on his voice,
and later his face, to show the transformation from emotionless machine to
human being.  The subtle changes in his speech and movement give life to a
character that could have been as flat and two-dimensional as the worst comic
book hero.
     Another strong point is Murphy's partner.  Officer Lewis is a tough,
competent and compassionate cop, everything police heroes have always been.
Her relationship with Murphy helps him reassert his control over the robot, and
also provides a human counterpoint, and some restraint, to the violence and
shoot-outs inherent in this type of movie.
     The atmosphere of ROBOCOP is rich with detail.  Carefully watching the
action in the background gives the viewer a sense of what this world is like.
It's the same level of throwaway details that made STAR WARS a "real-looking"
world.  Comic relief is added by throwing some pointed darts at SDI, toxic
waste, and network television.
     ROBOCOP gets my vote for best film so far this summer, and as one of the
top science fiction films in quite awhile.

Title
Review for Adventures in Babysitting (1987)
     Chris is a high school senior from the suburbs of Chicago.  After her
boyfriend breaks their date, she agrees to baby-sit the Anderson's little girl.
Soon after the parents leave, Chris gets a call from her best friend, Brenda.
Brenda ran away, made it to the downtown bus station before her money and
resolve ran out, and wants Chris to drive into the city to pick her up.  The
little girl and her love-struck brother blackmail Chris into taking them and
the brother's best friend along with her.  They climb into Chris's mother's
car, and head for the bus station.
     A flat tire, a missing spare, and a forgotten purse leave them stranded
and broke in a city that seems to be one large unfamiliar and threatening slum.
Chris's task is clear: she must fix the car, evade the murderous auto-theft
czar, and get the children home before Mom and Dad get back from the party.
     ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING borrows heavily from RISKY BUSINESS, AFTER
HOURS, and FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF.  It is amusing with some genuinely funny
moments, but it's all been done before.  Another problem is director Chris
Columbus, writer of GREMLINS and GOONIES.  He paints this movies cute with a
wide brush: childhood innocence melts the hearts of hardened city toughs, help
is found in the most unlikely of places, and the kids learn about people and
about their own abilities.  The result has cloying sticky-sweet feel that will
disappoint anyone over the age of 14.
     ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING does have its moments; the appearance by blue
legend Albert Collins is almost worth the ticket price.  But there are so many
decent comedies out this summer, that unless you've seen everything else it
would be best to wait until ADVENTURES IN BABYSITTING hits cable.
