Authors
Andrew Mitchell
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Fargo (1996)
I saw Fargo on Saturday night. I had to make a reservation at Roger's
video a week ahead to get it.  But it was worth it. And despite all
the hype I thoroughly enjoyed it and would put it on my top 10 list
for the year.
I liked the outlandishness of the situation and the reactions of our
Minnesotan neighbours. Didn't Rose from the Golden Girls come from
this part of Minnesota? The people in this movie sure seemed to be of
the same intellect. I think most of the people in Brainerd were of
Swedish descent. The accents were fun. Sounded very Canadian to me.
Reminded me a lot of "Blue Velvet" for the fact that a most horrendous
crime takes place in a small, happy town where the usual tragedy is
missing the weekly all you can eater. Frances McDormand was a
revelation. She captured the comic character without making fun of it,
thus creating a real person which seemed lacking in her police
partner. She reminds me of certain people who have an innate
brilliance for what they do but seem entirely vapid elsewhere. Or the
kind of person who would face a tragedy and not need therapy because 
they wouldn't comprehend the severity of the situation. I especially
liked the first breakfast scene with the long take of her husband
eating breakfast and then her coming back into the house to ask for a
jump for the car. Reminded me of that static scene at the end of Big
Night where Secondo is whipping up the omellette. I also liked the
scene with her and the Asian high school guy she met at the
Radisson(where they make real good food). Her reactions were priceless
from the fixing of her hair as she walked in to the place to her calm
solace after he made the moves on her. She remained reasonably sunny
all through and wasn't even phased later when she found out his wife
didn't die of leukemia as he purported. There are whackos all around
her but she manages to retain a safe distance from it all. Not even a
blemish. And after all that's happened, doncha know it, we get a nice
happy ending. Her hon gets his artwork published on a stamp!  
http://www.inforamp.net/~amitch/andrew.html
