Authors
Craig Gustafson
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998)
For a movie reviled by Serious Film Critics, "Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas"
is quite good.  This adaptation of the classic Hunter S. Thompson novel about
a drug-saturated search for the American Dream in 1971 Las Vegas (height of
the Nixon era), has long been considered unfilmable.
Journalist Raoul Duke and his foreign ("probably Samoan") attorney, Dr. Gonzo,
spend a weekend in Vegas, ostensibly to cover first a motorcycle race, then a
District Attorneys convention on the Evils of Drugs.  In reality, they are
there to find out if the lifestyle of the sixties has a chance of survival in
the seventies.  And where better to ask the question than the Playground of
the Nixon Generation?
The main question of the American Dream is perhaps even more pertinent now in
an era when frankly speaking one's mind can land one in court to sit and
ruminate on the heinous offense of "misusing" Freedom of Speech to actually
Offend Someone.
Johnny Depp is brilliant as Raoul Duke.  His is a dead-on performance that
perfectly embodies Duke's curiosity as to just how far society will allow him
to go before he is slapped into jail.  His strongest moment, however, points
up a weakness in the film:
In the scene where the out-of-control Dr. Gonzo threatens a burned-out shrew
of a waitress (Ellen Barkin) with a very large knife, Barkin shines.  She is
heart-breaking in the small role of a tough dame who bites off a bit more than
she can chew.
He is at once embarrassed, discovering that perhaps there is a line not to be
crossed, and filled with pity for the woman.  AND, on top of all that, he
seems appalled and frightened to find these feelings within himself.  It is
masterful film acting.  This complexity, amply displayed in the book, is seen
only in this one scene.
Terry Gilliam's direction is perfect for both the historical and hallucinatory
ambiences of the film.  We are in a Las Vegas that exists both in the "Foul
Era of Nixon" and in a territory that freely embraces people morphing into
literal lounge lizards and carpets that rapidly fill with blood. The point of
the book that Las Vegas in itself is a bad trip is well realized.
As Dr. Gonzo, Benicio del Toro is adequate.  He is most effective when the
Samoan loose cannon is called upon to be quietly, homicidally dangerous.  But
his mumbling does not delineate the rampaging monster of the book.
High points include the faithfulness to the source material.  The high volume
of narration, while Frowned Upon by critics, is literate, compelling and
funny.  A love of the language is evident.  There is also a rousing atmosphere
of Spot the Cameo: appearances are made by, among others, Katherine Helmond,
Cameron Diaz, Gary Busey, Penn Jillette and, hysterically, the real Hunter S.
Thompson.
Low points: Gary Busey's scene as a highway cop.  I won't reveal what happens,
but the comic point is lost: that Duke, when confronted by a non-stereotypical
cop who treats him like a human being, is at a complete loss on how to deal
with the situation.  The Debbie Reynolds scene disappoints, probably due to
budget considerations; Ms. Reynolds, however, graciously supplies her own
voice for a scene that, in the book, made venomous fun of her.
A bit more problematically, the movie runs out of gas near the end.  There is
no real way to wrap up a plotless movie.  The only thing you can do when the
ride is over is to get out of the car.  But the ride is terrific, for the most
part.  And with the top down, it's a breath of fresh air in our land of "Lost
in Space" and "Godzilla."
-----== Posted via Deja News, The Leader in Internet Discussion ==-----
http://www.dejanews.com/   Now offering spam-free web-based newsreading
