Authors
Peter Wels
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls (1995)
     I've got to admit it...  I'm a huge Jim Carrey fan.  I loved the
first ACE VENTURA, as well as THE MASK and DUMB AND DUMBER--and even in
BATMAN FOREVER (which was a pretty awful movie), Carrey was one of the
few people to come off looking reasonably good.  Until I saw ACE
VENTURA 2, I had no idea how people could find the guy annoying.
     Sadly, ACE VENTURA 2 shows just how irritating and annoying Carrey
can be.  Carrey goes through the same schtick he went through in the
first Ace movie, but this time it is no longer funny--it is just a
rehash of many of the same jokes used in Ace I.
     The plot sees pet detective Ace Ventura retiring after failing to save 
a raccoon (in a reasonable Cliffhanger spoof).  Soon he is called out of 
retirement to find a bat which was kidnapped and, if not returned in 
four days, will cause two warring African tribes to destroy each other. 
Once again, it's up to Ace to save the day, using his uncanny detective 
skills.
     Those who have been disappointed by Carrey's more restrained roles
in the films following the first ACE VENTURA may be glad to see him
over-acting to the best of his ability, but some may be disappointed by
the fact that this sequel doesn't capture the feel of the original.
     The original benefited from what looked to be Carrey's constant
hyped-up improv sequences, which were hysterically funny.  Here,
however, the tighter script (which is reminiscent of the old Disney
telemovies) takes the improvised material from the first, and
shamelessly recycles it in the new movie, giving Carrey little chance
to improvise.  Instead, his extremely funny manner has been reduced
to just walking around stupidly.
     But one of the biggest problems I had was with the character of
Ventura himself.  In the first movie, he was always cool, and one step
ahead of every one else--perfect for Carrey's off-the-wall approach.
But here, Ventura is made to look a lot stupider, and is often made out
as the straight guy--a role which is definitely not Carrey's style.
     There are definitely some very funny moments, but they are few and
far between.  They are also nowhere near as funny as anything Carrey
did in the first ACE VENTURA, or even DUMB AND DUMBER.

Title
Review for Money Train (1995)
     Cashing in on the success of WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP and the failure
of most of their solo vehicles (including THE COWBOY WAY and DROP
ZONE), Wesley Snipes and Woody Harrelson have reteamed, hoping that
they can strike up the same success.  Sadly, if this dismal, cliche
ridden and mind-numbingly boring action pic is anything to go by, they
haven't got a chance in hell of even coming close.
     This time out, the duo play foster brothers who are transit cops.
Following several run-ins with their tyrannical boss (Robert Blake),
who is obsessed with the "Money Train"--a train which carries all the
subway's takings--and will let nothing stop it (now *there's* an
original plot device), Harrelson's character decides to try and take
off with the cash.
     Along the way, both of them fall in love with the same
woman--another transit cop who also hates her boss.  This leads to
the typical sibling rivalry crap that you usually find in a film of
this standard ('you were always the better brother' etc. etc. etc.),
and doesn't help to add anything to the film.
     Given a better script, better performers in supporting roles
and a shorter running time (the film almost went for two hours--or did
it just feel like it?), this film might (and I mean *might*) have
turned out okay, but as it is, it is stocked with the worst action film
cliches, whose only purpose appears to be to pad the film out to its
painfully long running time.
     Robert Blake, who plays the evil boss, has got to be the most
pathetic bad guy in film history!  He sounds like Wayne Newton, and
appears to think the best way to appear evil is to have your eyes
bulging as though they are about to burst out of their sockets!
     But this is only one of MONEY TRAIN's problems.  If you look at
the script as if it was an action film, it lacks originality and
suspense.  But if you try to look at it as if it were a heist film, it
is even worse.  The final robbery sequence is almost trivialised and
the characters definitely ain't Butch and Sundance.
     The film isn't all bad though.  Snipes and Harrelson, when they
aren't using the dumb cliches that the script gives them, make an
agreeable duo, and some of the stunt-work is indeed excellent.  But good
stunt-work cannot save a bottom-of-the-barrel action movie.
     If you're a really undemanding action freak, there's a chance
you'll like this.  But if you're looking for something original, or
suspenseful, try somewhere else--I doubt you'll find it here.
