Authors
Mark Stantz
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Fugitive, The (1993)
     It was easy to fear the worst.  Begin with a classic 1960's
television series, add a big budget and an A-list star in the lead
role, and stir.  Script, you ask?  Who needs one, kid ... we've got
ourselves a formula.
     That was my fear: a bloated monster without any sense of
direction.  Then, much to my amazement, everything that could possibly
go wrong ... didn't.
     THE FUGITIVE is as lean, taut and tense as anything the action
genre has produced in the last several years.  Under the direction of
Andrew Davis (1992's UNDER SIEGE), THE FUGITIVE grips you by the throat
from the outset and never lets go.  Expect box office to go through the
roof, deservedly, and expect an Academy Award nomination for Tommy Lee
Jones.
     The premise is a simple one.  Dr. Richard Kimble (Harrison Ford)
is wrongly convicted for the murder of his wife after struggling with
the real killer, a man with an artificial arm.  After an escape attempt
by some other prisoners during a transfer goes awry, Kimble finds
himself on the run.  His one goal: to find the one-armed man (Andreas
Katsulas) before U. S. Marshall Sam Gerard (Tommy Lee Jones) finds
him.
     Where THE FUGITIVE surprises the most is the script, by Jeb Stuart
and David Twohy.  In a genre where one is almost always asked to allow
leaps of logic, the script repeatedly astonished me with its
intelligence, its attention to detail and its respect for the
audience.  In an early sequence, Kimble sneaks into a hospital to shave
of his beard, slick back his hair and change into a lab coat.  On his
way out, a police officer jokingly tells the man he doesn't know is
Kimble to zip up his pants.  It's a small moment, but it punches home
the urgency of Kimble's situation, and exactly what a man concerned
about not being recognized might easily forget.  Later, while trying to
lose himself in a parade, Kimble thinks to drop his overcoat, the most
likely way he'd be recognized from behind.  It's these details which
convince us that when a colleague of Kimble's tells Gerard that he's
too smart to be caught, he may just be right.
     Credit must also be given to the special effects and stunt
coordinators.  The bus crash which allows Kimble's escape is a
spectacular sequence, as is a leap from a dam into the water below.
The action is crisp and brutal, and never romanticized.  Special kudos
go to director Davis for maintaining a relentless pace which
underscores the single-mindedness of the two leads.
     And what a pair of performances those leads are.  Tommy Lee Jones
is nothing short of brilliant as Gerard, because he manages an
incredibly challenging feat.  For the first third of the film, there is
really no *villain* per se; Kimble is on the run, and Gerard is out to
find him.  It would have been very easy to turn Gerard into a
malevolent, vindictive Inspector Javert, but that never happens.
Instead Jones plays him as a sharp, committed man who's just doing his
job, so that when he responds to Kimble's comment, "I didn't kill my
wife," with a matter-of-fact, "I don't care," we know exactly what he
means.  It's not his job to determine guilt or innocence.  It's his job
to bring in a fugitive.  This is a well- written character played with
relish by an actor at the top of his form.
     The only unfortunate thing about Jones' stunning turn is that it's
likely to overshadow Harrison Ford, and that's a shame.  For his entire
career, Ford has been underappreciated as an actor due to his
pigeonholing as an action hero.  However, he does a fine job with the
less flashy part of Kimble, always keeping at the forefront the
advantage this man has because of his intelligence.  THE FUGITIVE could
only work to its fullest if the two protagonists always seemed to be on
equal footing, and Ford is up to the task.
     This summer has been loaded with action/suspense films, and most
of them have been doing brisk business.  However, it's time for Clint,
Sean, and various dinosaurs to step aside.  The chase is on.  My advice
is to catch it.

Title
Review for Robin Hood: Men in Tights (1993)
[This was written by a friend of the poster and was forwarded to the net
with his permission.  Caution: minor spoilers.]
Starring Cary Elwes, Roger Rees, Richard Lewis and Amy Yasbeck.
Directed by Mel Brooks.
Reviewed by Scott Renshaw.
     I have a housemate who works for a theater concessions company,
and periodically he can get us in free at the theaters where his
company does business.  "Robin Hood: Men in Tights" was showing at one
of these theaters.  I shelled out nothing more than an hour and forty
minutes of my life.
     ROBIN HOOD: MEN IN TIGHTS is co-writer/director Mel Brooks' stab
at the swashbuckler genre, most specifically the 1991 Kevin Costner
vehicle ROBIN HOOD, PRINCE OF THIEVES.  Cary Elwes is Robin of Loxley,
who returns from the Crusades to find England in the grip of the
usurper Prince John (Richard Lewis) and his muscle the Sheriff of
Rottingham (Roger Rees).  The story, of Robin's attempts to free the
kingdom and to win Maid Marian, is a thin frame on which to hang a
collection of sight gags and groaners, almost none of which work.
     MEN IN TIGHTS ranks among the most excruciating movie-going
experiences I've ever had, and it's a damned shame.  Once upon a time,
Mel Brooks was funny.  There is evidence.  He was a writer for "Your
Show of Shows," co-created "Get Smart" and created such classic film
parodies as YOUNG FRANKENSTEIN and BLAZING SADDLES.  But for the past
fifteen years, his screen efforts have ranged from the dreadfully
uneven HISTORY OF THE WORLD, PART I to the breathtakingly dumb
SPACEBALLS to the pointless LIFE STINKS.  I honestly didn't think it
could get any worse.
     Unfortunately, it got much worse.  MEN IN TIGHTS is a failure on
so many different levels, it's difficult to know where to begin.  The
acting is at times unwatchably bad, with Richard Lewis the primary
culprit, guilty of first degree mugging.  There was an editor in the
credits, so I assume there was one, although the positively leaden
pacing provides no evidence that he did anything but pick up a check.
And then there is the script, a cavalcade of miserable puns that goes
on...
     ...and on, and on, and on.  Then there is the requisite Brooksian
bodily function humor, and the gay jokes, and the breast jokes.  Then
there are moments when you know there was supposed to be some kind of
joke somewhere, but for the life of you, you can't figure out what it
was.  This is a film so jaw-droppingly unfunny that the few positive
reviews I've seen seem absolutely incomprehensible to me.
     What's even more of a shame is that Cary Elwes' Robin Hood is
actually quite charming.  He generates such enormous good will,
striking arms akimbo poses at every opportunity and doing his level
best to underplay his part, that I kept holding out hope that it might
get better.  Even more depressing is the cameo appearance by Patrick
Stewart as King Richard, a la Sean Connery in PRINCE OF THIEVES.
Whatever it was that they paid him, it couldn't possibly have been
enough.
     On the Renshaw scale of 0 to 10 arrows: 1 arrow, right through the
heart of whoever green-lighted this piece of garbage.
