Authors
Chris Simpson
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Big Lebowski, The (1998)
Directed by Joel Coen
Written by Ethan & Joel Coen
Starring Jeff Bridges, John Goodman, Julianne Moore, Steve Buscemi
About six months ago, I was in the cinema watching the trailers for
upcoming movies. There was the usual complement of five, and they had
one thing in common -- they were all previewing remakes or sequels.
There was not one original idea between them. Add to that the "reverse
spin-off" movies from TV shows (I won't pass judgement on "Lost In
Space" or "The X-Files" yet, but "Sanford and Son"?  Puh-leeze!), the
alarming number of cases of two movies being made from the same
material (Steve Prefontaine, volcanoes, the Dalai Lama, earthbound
comets) and Miramax's interest in resurrecting the "Rambo" franchise
and you've got to wonder what things are going to be like in a few
years' time. So it's in this atmosphere that it's good to see the
refreshing and always-original Coen brothers follow up "Fargo", a movie
about an unusual quasi-kidnapping, with "The Big Lebowski", a movie
about...an unusual quasi-kidnapping.
OK, so the similarity may pretty much end with that sentence, but given
that this is hardly a genre that's flooding the cineplexes, it's all a
bit unnerving. So much so that "Fargo" was always in the back of my
mind, which was a shame since "The Big Lebowski", while undoubtedly
better than most current movies, compares unfavourably to that earlier
picture.
Jeff Bridges plays Jeff Lebowski, known as "Dude", a pot-smoking
neo-hippie who returns from a bowling game with his friends Walter
(John Goodman, who spends the entire movie shouting) and Donny (Steve
Buscemi, in a ridiculously small role) to find two goons in his
apartment demanding payment for debts run up by his wife. The goons are
actually looking for another Jeff Lebowski (the "big" one of the title,
played by David Huddleston), but being typical goons, they fail to
realize that the Dude's abode is far removed from the opulence of their
millionaire targets, and by the time they realize this one of them has
already urinated on the Dude's rug. Walter persuades the Dude to try to
get some compensation from the Big Lebowski and it is this meeting
which causes the Dude to be brought in as a courier when the richer
Lebowski's young wife disappears and a ransom note is received. Things
of course do not run smoothly and typical Coen brothers mayhem ensues.
So, what's wrong with this picture? Well, while the collection of
subplots and dream sequences usually succeed by themselves, as a whole
they lack cohesion and the movie feels disjointed. Earlier Coen
brothers movies got their delightfully surreal nature predominantly
from the premise, but in "The Big Lebowski" it is the characters who
provide the surreality via a collection of unusual traits, and this
melting pot of bizarreness fails to produce the overall feel possessed
by their previous movies. The movie does have some great scenes,
however, especially those featuring John Turturro as a bowler on a
rival team, and invites frequent laughter, but ultimately it's not up
to the consistent standards of the Coens. That doesn't mean it's a bad
movie, since these standards are high, but it will be a disappointment
to many fans of Joel and Ethan's work.
Also look out for the brief screen debut of singer/songwriter Aimee
Mann as the girlfriend of one of the three German nihilists, and the
motion sickness-inducing camera shot looking out through the
fingerholes of a bowling ball during one of the dream sequences.
