Authors
George Lau
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Muse, The (1999)
In, "The Muse" Albert Brooks plays Steven Phillips, a Hollywood screenwriter
who after winning a Humanitarian Award for his work is dumped by his studio.
They claim that he's lost his edge and his agent is quick to agree with them.
He knows that he needs to write something fresh and original and quick or else
his career will be over. So he turns to his "best" friend, Jack (Jeff Bridges)
another screenwriter who's enjoyed success after success. On the way over to
Jack's house Steven sees Jack helping an attractive woman (Sharon Stone) into a
cab and begins to think: Is he having an affair? When confronted, Jack
relunctently tells him that this mystery woman is, in fact, a muse, a
mythological figure who is believed to have inspired all creativity, and has
helped him garner his success.
"She doesn't do any actual writing," he is told, "but inspires you." Steven is
excited by what he's hearing and asks Jack to call her up to see if she'll take
Steven on as a new client. Jack arranges a meeting between the two and suggests
that Steven bring her a present, preferably something from Tiffany's. After the
meeting the muse, Sarah decides to take on Steven, but at a price: She wants a
suite at the Four Seasons and wants Steven to perform odd tasks for her (like
bringing her salads in the middle of the night.) Steven's wife (Andy MacDowell)
sees him at a food store and questions him about why he has tampons in his
wagon. Steven confesses everything and, although at first suspicious, she later
allows Sarah to move into their guest room and eventually into their life. The
only question for Steven is if the muse is worth all the trouble he's going
through for her. And that's a question only time will tell.
"The Muse" is Albert Brooks' sixth film as writer/director/actor (he co-wrote
with Monica Johnson) and although it's a good movie it's not up to the level of
his best works ("Defending Your Life" and "Mother"). The problem lies in the
script, and for a movie that relies on its dialogue for its humor, there aren't
nearly as many laughs as they are chuckles despite a few good one-liners. It
has a great premise but doesn't deliver up to it's full potential. 
But, I like Albert Brooks in this film and I think that we can all identify
with Steven Phillips a little bit. He may whine and complain, but he just wants
to support his family and be happy. And I like Sharon Stone in this movie too;
it's a nice change of pace for her. And I also enjoyed the cameos featuring the
likes of Rob Reiner, James Cameron and Martin Scorsese. And although "The Muse"
doesn't have as much to say about Hollywood as Robert Altman's "The Player" I
still left the theater feeling good. And that's something I wish I got out of
more movies.
Visit my homepage "Thoughts on Film" at
http://members.aol.com/videolau/ThoughtsOnFilm.html

Title
Review for 13th Warrior, The (1999)
Cast: Antonio Banderas, Omar Sharif, Diane Venora, Vladimir Kulich, Dennis
Storhři, Maria Bonnevie, Mischa Hausserman, Sven Wollter, John DeSantis,
Asbjřrn Riis
Director: John McTiernan (with re-shoots directed by Michael Crichton)
Producer: John McTiernan, Michael Crichton, Ned Dowd
Screenplay: William Wisher and Warren Lewis based on the novel "Eaters of the
Dead" by Michael Crichton
Cinematographer: Peter Menzies Jr. 
Editor:
Music: Jerry Goldsmith
Running Time: 102 minutes
MPAA Classification: R (Violence, bloody carnage, headless bodies) 
"The 13th Warrior" comes at the end of as summer where we've already
experienced man eating sharks ("Deep Blue Sea"), man eating crocodiles ("Lake
Placid") and even a man hunting witch ("The Blair Witch Project"). Now, "The
13th Warrior" presents a tribe of flesh eating men who believe that they are
bears. 
The story, if that's what you want to call it, follows Ahmed Ibn Fahdlan
(Antonio Banderas) an Arabian poet who falls in love with his king's wife and
is banished from his home land. He then travels to the land of the Vikings and
becomes an Ambassador to them. Eventually the Vikings are called upon to
protect the people of the village who are being hunted by the flesh eating men.
Thirteen warriors are chosen to go on the mission, and as you guessed it, Ahmed
is chosen as the thirteenth. He's not a warrior, and at first not well accepted
by the Vikings, but as the movie advances he'll have to prove himself both on
and off the battlefield.
That's basically the entire plot. There is also a romantic subplot that has
been so badly mishandled and, one assumes, drastically cut that you begin to
wonder why the filmmakers didn't just edit out all of the scenes attaining to
that part of the story. Instead they chose to leave just enough of those scenes
in to annoy the viewer. 
The film is basically non- stop action and when it pauses and tries to develop
a story it becomes a laughing stock. The battle scenes, although well
choreographed, are not involving and not the least bit exciting. We don't get
to know any of the characters and so we don't care who lives and who dies. The
film, which wants to be Beowolf, comes across more as a failed action-adventure
story aspiring to epic proportions but not achieving it on any levels.
It was directed by John McTiernan who's, "The Thomas Crown Affair" is also
playing in theaters currently. And it's not that McTiernan worked
simultaneously on both films but that, "The 13th Warrior" was placed on the
shelf for so long with the studio just waiting for a time to dump it on
audiences. It belongs back on the shelf. 

Title
Review for Jaws (1975)
Cast: Roy Scheider, Richard Dreyfuss, Robert Shaw, Lorraine Gary, Murray
Hamilton and Jeffrey Kramer 
Director: Steven Spielberg 
Producer: David Brown and Richard D. Zanuck 
Screenplay: Peter Benchley and Carl Gottlieb based on the Novel by Peter
Benchley 
Cinematographer: Bill Butler 
Editor: Verna Fields 
Music: John Williams 
Running Time: 124 minutes 
MPAA Classification: PG 
`You're gonna need a bigger boat,' cites Chief Brody (Roy Scheider) upon
viewing his first glance of the killer shark in Steven Spielberg's 1975
masterpiece, `Jaws.' The fact that this is also the audience's first glance of
the shark and that it takes place almost an hour and a half into the film is
what makes `Jaws' such a great film. By not showing the shark in the first two
thirds of the film director Spielberg generates much more fear when he shows
attacks. We, the audience, don't see what is attacking the swimmers and so we
create in our own imaginations a greater fear than any director could ever
project on screen. The fact that Spielberg didn't plan on doing this only makes
it better; you see when it came time to shoot the attack scenes the mechanical
shark, named Bruce after Spielberg's lawyer, wasn't properly working so
Spielberg couldn't show it all. 
The story begins in Amity Island when, in one of the greatest opening scenes of
all-time, a teenager partying on the beach with some friends decides to go
skinny-dipping. All of a sudden something starts attacking her, and although
she is able to momentarily grab onto a buoy, she is eventually pulled under the
water and, we assume, killed. 
The next morning Brody, the local Police Chief who hates the water, is called
in to investigate a possible drowning reported by a friend of the girl who was
attacked. Brody's Deputy has discovered the remains of the girl's body, which
has washed up on shore, and the possibility of a drowning is ruled out. 
Brody's gut reaction is to close down the beaches but the local Mayor (Murray
Hamilton) insists on keeping to beaches open for business reasons. The Mayor
informs Brody that, `Amity is a summer town. We need summer dollars.' And Brody
is forced to keep the beaches open. Soon after, another attack claims the life
of a little boy and the Mayor announces that the beaches will be closed for 24
hours to try to catch the beast that is responsible. 
Enter, ichthyologist Matt Hooper (Richard Dreyfuss) who confirms that the first
attack was one of a shark. Later in a scene where Hooper and Brody go out to
sea at night to try and find the shark Hooper discovers a tooth in an abandoned
fishing boat at the bottom of the sea, a tooth that could only belong to a
Great White Shark. Then, without notice, while examining the tooth the
fisherman who owned the boat's head appears and frightens Hooper into losing
the tooth. According to the Internet Movie Database preview audiences screamed
at the original version of this scene, but director Spielberg re-shot it
because he wanted them to scream louder. 
Eventually, the town has to turn to a loner/shark hunter named Quint (Robert
Shaw) who has promised the shark dead for ten thousand dollars. Quint
reluctantly agrees to allow Brody and Hooper accompany him on the mission and
the three men sail off to sea on what Brody has described to his kids as a
fishing trip. Quint at first resents Hooper's rich upbringing but in a great
scene where the three men (mainly Hooper and Quint) sit and talk about their
physical and emotional scars they develop a sort of bond. Quint's tale is the
most horrifying, one of how during WWII after delivering the atom bomb his ship
was sunk by torpedoes and he and his crew of 1,100 men went into shark infested
waters. Waters that only 316 men would come out of alive. And with this scene,
which was written by Shaw himself, we understand why Quint has dedicated his
life to killing sharks. Shortly after, the shark begins his final attack on the
men, a battle that not all the men will emerge from alive. 
`Jaws' (Spielberg's second film) was filmed for $12 million and would go on to
be the first film to take in more than a $100 million at the box office (it
wound up taking in $260 million in the US alone). The filming was plagued with
problems, ranging from the complications with the mechanical shark to budgetary
problems to author Peter Benchley's objection to the movie's ending. The film
also went on to get 4 Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, and
won in the othet three categories for Best Sound, Best Editing (Verna Fields),
and Best Original Score (John Williams). The editing and score are so crucial
to success of the film. Roger Ebert said that the film, `Jaws' was a good story
told brilliantly and he's absolutely right, without these two key elements the
film wouldn't be what it is. Try watching the attack scenes muted, they're not
nearly as scary as with the haunting theme. Or consider the way the attacks are
handled. Not only does the score help create suspense but also the cuts from
under water to above showing the shark fin to views from the beach of the
attack. These scenes handled another, more simplistic way wouldn't have
produced the same effect that they do here. 
`Jaws' placed 48th on the AFI's list of the 100 Greatest American Films and
it's high placement on the list, in my opinion, is deserved. `Jaws' is a highly
influential film that not only spawned three inferior sequels but countless
other rip-offs (the recent `Lake Placid' and `Deep Blue Sea' comes to mind.)
But none of these films managed to capture any of the atmosphere that the
original `Jaws' did. 
I heard recently that, Peter Benchley, the author of the book of which the film
is based said that he could not have written it today because of how it
unfairly treats sharks. Is it true that all sharks are man-eating monsters? Of
course not. Is it true that sharks purposely target humans the way they do in
`Jaws?' Of course not. The truth of the matter is that most shark attacks occur
because of the shark's stupidity (they usually mistake humans for seals). But
knowing all of these facts I still can not step an inch in salt water and not
hear the `Jaws' theme pop in my head. I'm still not sure whether this is a good
thing or not, but there's no doubt in my mind that `Jaws' is a great film, one
that, like other Spielberg masterpieces, stays with you long after your viewing
experience is over. 

Title
Review for Who Framed Roger Rabbit (1988)
Cast: Bob Hoskins, Christopher Lloyd, Joanna Cassidy, Charles Fleischer, Stubby
Kaye and Alan Tilvern 
Director: Robert Zemekis 
Producer: Robert Watts and Frank Marshall 
Screenplay: Jeffrey Price and Peter Seaman based on the book, "Who Censored
Roger Rabbit?" by Gary K. Wolf 
Director of Animation: Richard Williams 
Cinematography: Dean Cundey 
Music: Alan Silvestri 
Running Time: 103 minutes 
MPAA Rating: PG 
Having not seen, "Who Framed Roger Rabbit" in over 10 years, and not
remembering much besides that I liked it then, I decided to rent it recently.
Watching it I was struck by just how brilliant a film it is. Aside from the
fact that it's a milestone in animation in movies (it's the first film to
combine real actors and cartoon characters, have them interact, and make it
convincingly real) and a great entertainment it's also quite an effective
comedy/mystery. While the plot may be somewhat familiar the characters are
original, especially Baby Herman, and watching them together is a lot of fun. 
The story begins in Hollywood in 1947. Cartoon star Roger Rabbit is blowing
takes and having trouble keeping his mind on work, so hard-boiled private
detective Eddie Valiant (Bob Hoskins) is called in by studio head R.K. Maroon
(Alan Tilvern) to try to help get Roger's mind back on work. Maroon thinks that
Roger's wife, Jessica's, possible unfaithfulness to him might be the cause of
distraction and tells Eddie to get some photos of her in the act before it
costs him any more money in reshoots. 
Valiant takes some photos of Jessica playing, `patty cake' with Marvin Acme
(Stubby Kaye), the owner of Toontown (where all of the cartoon characters live)
and takes them to Maroon. Upon seeing them, Roger is emotionally destroyed and
soon after Acme is found dead and Roger Rabbit is the prime suspect. 
The rest of the movie follows Valiant and Roger as they run around town (and
eventually Toontown) trying to clear Roger's good name. Along the way they meet
Judge Doom (Christopher Lloyd) a judge-jury-and executioner type who's out to
get Roger and has discovered the one and only way to kill a `toon.' 
`Who Framed Roger Rabbit' won 4 Academy Awards including a Special Achievement
Award for Richard Williams for animation direction and creation of the cartoon
characters (Williams and his teams went through the film frame by frame and
hand drew the cartoon characters in). Director Robert Zemekis must be given an
equal amount of praise for overseeing the entire production, which included
hundreds of animators. Also Bob Hoskins' performance should be credited. He, in
addition to the rest of the human cast, finds the right note to play in all of
the scenes with his cartoon co-stars. According to The Internet Movie Database,
Hoskins studied his young daughter to learn how to act with imaginary
characters and I guess his hard work paid off. 
`Who Framed Roger Rabbit' is a rare film. One that not only presented a great
challenge to the filmmakers but one that can be enjoyed by the whole family
(although some very young viewers may be a little scared by Judge Doom). Do
yourself a favor and rent it, `P-p-p-p-please." 
