Authors
Lewis Butler
Number of Reviews
14

Title
Review for Apollo 13 (1995)
     I can't help thinking of THE RIGHT STUFF when I start talking
about APOLLO 13, obviously the movies cover the same basic topic;
America's space program.  While THE RIGHT STUFF focused on the romance
and action and adventure and heroism, APOLLO 13 takes a different
tack.  THE RIGHT STUFF was an epic movie about a period of recent
history, APOLLO 13 is a smaller film in that sense, dealing only with
the events surrounding the near-fatal accident that was APOLLO 13.
     I haven't read LOST MOON, the book the film is based on, and I'm
just young enough that I don't remember the coverage first hand; so
this was all pretty much news to me.  The story, however, is gripping.
Fantastic.  Awe-inspiring.  All those adjectives that are overused so
often finally have something worthy of their use.
     Ron Howard directs a finely crafted film, carefully staging at
each step of the way so that the audience is instantly involved in the
action.  The inclusion of news footage from the time (Walter Cronkite
in horrid neon-esque colors!) serves to make the film almost a
documentary.
     The performers are all first rate, and I do mean all.  From Hanks
himself to the Will Wheaton look-a-like playing his son (sorry, I
missed the name, would not be at all surprised if he was WW's younger
brother, the resemblance to Wesley Crusher from "Next Generation"'s first
season is uncanny).  Gary Sinise and Kevin Bacon stand out in my mind
especially, and Ed Harris, of course, is in his element.
     What most surprised me is that even though I knew exactly how the
crisis turned out, there was a constant edge of suspense.  A remarkable
achievement, I think. I could hear the audience breath a collective
sigh of relief, right along with the crew at Mission Control.
     This movie has to be the early favorite for Best Picture, Best
Director, and certainly Best visual effects.  No, they're not as
spectacular as RETURN OF THE JEDI, but ILM had to recreate a *real*
environment, a rather more difficult task.  As far as a three-peat from
Mr. Hanks?  Well, if he doesn't get it it won't be from any failing in
this performance.  I wonder what Mr. Lovell thought?

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
What can you say about a movie that shows a ring of red traffic lights
hovering in space?  THE FIFTH ELEMENT has the feeling of a comic book come
to life, and I mean that as a compliment.  There is a lot here that has
been done before, but never this well.  The film spends a lot of time
getting the little things right and assumes you'll go along with the
overall silliness of the main plot.  And you do.  The whole thing works
somehow.
There are references throughout the film to other movies, and there is a
whole 1930's Buck Rogers/Flash Gordon feeling to the whole epic.  The main
plot line is trivial and not worth going into here, what works best is the
overall presense of the film.  I was reminded of Steve Rude's artwork for
many of the scenes, and the entire sequence on the cruise ship could have
been stright out of the comic book NEXUS.
Gary Oldman turns in a wonderful performance as a psychotic power hungry
servant of evil (Mr. Shadow). And everyone else in the movie does what
needs to be done.  There is a particular performance that deserves
recognition, the role of the outlandish Dennis Rodman-styled DJ is
outstanding.  I don't know who the actor is, but he turns in a wonderfully
comic performance.
The special effects, of course, deserve their praise.  Some people might
dislike the comic-book look to some of the mattes and some of the city
scenes, but I found the whole thing quite appropriate.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
| kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100   |
|      WWW URL      \              ">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme>          | 
| [303/722-2009] Vox \ Sometimes, after a lighting storm, I can see in  |
| [303/777-2911] Data \ five dimensions.  -- Cornfed Pigg               |

Title
Review for Screamers (1995)
You thought PUPPETMASTERS was bad?  You thought FRIDAY THE 13th PART 4 was
bad?  How about Alien III?  Guess again sonny-boy, you just hadn't seen 
SCREAMERS yet.  How bad was it?  It was so bad, I laughed.  As a comedy, 
it might have worked.  As a suspenseful sci-fi flick, it stank to the 
rafters.  (-3 on +4/-4 scale).
There's a decent idea buried somewhere in this movie, but it is so obscured
with a laughably predictable plot, poor mattes, and dubious effects that
the end result is a boring movie without even a decent amount of shock
value.  Despite the theatre having the volume cranked to painful levels
(especailly considereding the high pitched "scream" from the title) I found
myself yawning.
Within the first five minutes of the movie anyone with a still connected
frontal cortex will have the entire movie mapped out.  There is no sin
worse in a suspense movie than to be so predictable.
Perfectly good opportunities to build supsense are wasted.  Chances to
build the characters from something more than their cartoonish charicatures
are squandered.  In short, the movie is a waste of time.
How bad was it, really?  It was a little worse than DUMB AND DUMBER.
-- 
Distrubution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
| kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100   |
|      WWW URL      \  ">http://ftp.netcom.com/pub/kr/kreme/kreme.html>  |
| [303/722-2009] Vox \ [303/777-2911] Data                              |
|

Title
Review for Hunchback of Notre Dame, The (1996)
I haqve to vent a little here, so go ahead an skip this paragraph if you
think all cartoons should be rated G, no matter what.  THE HUNCHBACK OF
NOTRE DAME starts with the murder of Quasimoto's mother on the steps of
Notre Dame.  This murder is quite visual (not like the distant shot in
Bambi) and quite obvious.  This movie should have been rated PG, and a
solid PG.  This is not the only time THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME shows
a violent streak, but it is the first, and it would have quite an impact on
any child much under 8.  If this movie had been live-action, with identical
shots, it would have been rated PG-13.  Now, I'm not saying it should have
been rated PG-13, but a PG rating would have been appropriate in this case.
Now, as for the film.  The voice talents are good.  Even Demi Moore, who I
was worried about, performed well.  The story is quite faithful to the
other movie versions, up until the last five minutes.  There is some
wonderfully done computer animation of the crowds and some flocks of birds.
As I said, the music is there, but not memorable in anyway.
There is one interesting shot where Quasimoto is singing from the roof of
Notre Dame, leaning over a gargoyle.  The scene reminded me so much of a
similar shot from AN AMERICAN TAIL that I'm convinced the hunchback was
singing "Somwehre out there."
The brightest spot of the movie, I think, was Jason Alexander as the voice
of one of the Gargoyles.  His gargoyle is something like a cross between
the "Crazy Eddie" in LION KING and his Duckman persona from the USA cable
show.
Obligatory "Disney is racist" comment:  If Quasi is a gypsy and all the
gypsies in the movie are shown with dark skin, why is Q so fair?
The ending of the movie could have easily destroyed whatever there was to
appreciate in this film, but it manages not to, somehow.  Despite the happy
hollywood ending, it doesn't get too smarmy.  Yes, Quasimoto lives, this is
a Disney movie after all, what did you expect?  Still, the movie makes it
mostly work.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL ">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme>          | 
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data

Title
Review for Eraser (1996)
ERASER is this summer's entry from Arnie, and it delivers just what you
would expect:  good action, good effects, passable story.  There's nothing
remarkable here, and none of the charm of TRUE LIES, but if you like Arnie,
it's a good romp through summer movie madness.  A solid 0 on the -4/+4.
This time around, Arnie plays a US Marshall working in the Witness
Protection program.  His specialty is making it look like federal witnesses
have been killed.
The plot thicks when Venessa Williams, playing a Jr. Executive for a
defense contractor that is selling weapons to the highest bidder, becomes
the target of just about every living person in the Washington DC area.
There are no suprises here, and the identities of the bad guys are obvious,
but not obnoxiously so.  The characters are at least interesting (I mean
the OTHER characters, of course.  Arnie's just playing good-guy
Terminator.)  James Caan plays off Arnie well as his boss and Vanessa
Williams manages not to fall into the helplessly stupid female her
character could have easily been.
There are some nice effects, although there is a strangely poor fire effect
toward the end of the movie where the flames look like they were animated
in.
In short:  If you're an Arnie fan, go ahead and give it a go, otherwise you
might want to pass and wait for INDEPENDENCE DAY.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL :">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme>
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data

Title
Review for Independence Day (1996)
ID4 is a movie with something for everyone.  It has a large cast of
characters, so there's plenty of people to identify with.  The plot is
basic and simple: Aliens finally come, and they're not friendly.  The movie
starts with the alien mothership's arrival, a huge ship 1/4th the size of
the moon.  The first half-hour is all about the arrival and Earth's
reaction to it.  Then things start getting messy.
The plot is thin, but adequate.  Before humanity is completely
exterminated, we have to find a way to win against superior technology.
Seemingly, we don't have a chance.  The Alien ships are bigger, more
powerful, and they have some sort of energy shield that we can't penetrate.
It's going to be tough.
Bill Pullman plays the only completly unbelievable character in the movie,
an American President who is not a political weasel, but a fairly young
ex-fighter pilot hero of the Gulf War, politcally naive.  A man of honor and
ethics.  Basically, he plays a President the exact opposite of our current
canidates if they were merged into one.  That said, he's a convincing
character, and you can't help liking him.  He gets the audience on his side
when he announces that he is staying in Washington DC even after the 15
mile wide alien spaceship (one of 30) takes position directly over the
White House.  He send the vice-president and the cabinet to Norad.  Of
course, we've seen the White House get blown up in the previews...
A lot of people die in this movie, obviously.  But while it could have been
a lot of faceless people, the filmmakers take the time to introduce us to a
few of them.  It gives the movie a little bit of an edge and prevents it
from becoming completely silly summer escapism.  It's still mostly that,
don't be deceived, but there's enough there to keep you going.
One of the things I enjoyed about this film was that it made an effort not
to ignore the rest of the world.  Yes, it's an American film about
Americans, but there are just enough cutaways to other parts of the world
so that we know what's happening.  And though we don't see them, the
rest of the world is fighting their own battle, with just a little bit fo
help from the Americans.
There are many nice touches throughout the film, and many references,
somtimes oblique, to other films.  Look for Randy Quaid late in the film
doing a scene from... well, that might be considered a spoiler.  You'll
know it when you see it.
Performances are solid all the way around.  Some of the highlights are Will
Smith, playing a fighter pilot; Judd Hirsch as Jeff Goldblum's father;
eff Goldblum as a computer geek; and Brent Spinner as a xenobiologist or
soemthing whose been locked away underground for 30 years or so.  Pullman,
Goldblum, and Smith form the core cast of the film.
It is easy to dismiss this as "just another summer movie."  But I would
remind people of some other, recent, summer movies.  HUDSON HAWK.  THE LAST
ACTION HERO.  BEVERLY HILLS COP III.  TANGO AND CASH.  DIE HARD II.  Get
the point?  While this may not be a "great" movie, it is exactly what it
wants to be, entertaining.  It is very entertaining.
And the effects.  I haven't even mentioned the special effects, and this
movie is loaded with them.  Still, what is there to say?  We live in a time
where special effects in movies are so good it's really only worth
discussing them when they are poorly done.  They are not poorly done.  They
are spectacular.  The most impressive effects are the ones involving the
destruction of the various cities.
See it, it is the best "summer" movie in a lot of summers.  Better, even,
than TRUE LIES.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL ">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme>
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data

Title
Review for Welcome to the Dollhouse (1995)
WELCOME TO THE DOLLHOUSE is a painful movie to watch.  I found myself
cringing in my seat throughout.  However, unlike most films that cause me
physical pain, WTTD is a good film.  The pain comes from reliving Jr. High
school, a fate that can seem worse than death.
The story, such as it is, revolves around Dawn Wiener, aka "Weiner Dog",
played with near-tragic precision by Heather Matarazzo.  Dawn is 11 years
old, is in Jr. High, and her life sucks.
Dawn lives in a surreal version of suburbia.  Her younger sister, Missy, is
so pretty and perfect that the audience can't help wishing great harm to
befall her.   Her brother is the ultimate nerd, even to the point of trying
to start a rock-band (drums, keyboards, and clarinet) to fill an
extra-curricular slot on his college resume.  Her mother hates her, and her
father is ineffective.  These aren't real people, these are caracatures
seen from Dawn's point of view.  Face it, all older brothers are hopeless
dweebs to an seventh grade girl, and all little sisters are perfect and
pretty and revolting.  And all mother hate eleven year-olds, it's how the
world works.
The audience is caught up in Dawn's view of the world, and Dawn's view is
distorted by the sudden realization that most of use have had that life
sucks.  Life is not fair.  Life, and especially Jr. High life, bites.
There's quite a bit of irony in the fact that Missy, who we all hate,
becomes the focal point of the movie near the end.  Here we've been,
thinking, "someone should really strangle that child" when all of a sudden,
there's a real possibility that someone might have.  Director Todd Solondz
(who also wrote, drawing on personal history) has set the audience up,
fulfilling their wish, and turning that against them.  We sit there,
uncomfortable in our seats, and we identify with Dawn's feelings of guilt.
She thinks it's her fault Missy is missing, but we know better.  We know
it's because of US.  Because of our hatred.
It's a dangerous trick, making the audience feel guilty, but Mr. Solondz
brings it off without a hitch.  He makes everyone identify with Dawn.  It
doesn't matter if you were the most popular kid in school, you're going to
identify with Dawn.  Everyone felt like Dawn at some point in their lives.
Maybe for you it was 6th grade, maybe it wasn't until your freshman year of
college, but we've all been there.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL: ">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme> 
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data

Title
Review for Star Trek: Generations (1994)
     The seventh film in the "Star Trek" series is the first to
introduce the cast of the wildly successful "Next Generation" series to
the silver screen.  As a transitional film between the original series'
cast (TOS) and the new (TNG) it does it job adequately, but not
spectacularly.  The scenes with Captain Kirk (William Shatner) feel
forced and unnecessary, as if they were a late addition to the script
to give Bill another paycheck.  The inclusion of Kirk coupled with the
absence of Spock (Leonard Nimoy) makes these portions of the movie feel
even more out of place.
     Other than Kirk, the plot is good, jumping from one climax to
another in a dizzying spiral, before crashing back to earth with a long
interlude featuring Kirk and Picard (Patrick Stewart).  The resolution
is predictable, but not childish.
     The effects work is outstanding, especially a long sequence
showing a starship crash-landing on a planets surface.  I saw the film
in a DTS equipped theater and the total effect was nothing short of
stunning.
     There are numerous references to TNG episodes, including a rather
humorous resolution to Data's "emotion chip" and an appearance by two
Klingon villains.
     The movie is no STAR TREK II: THE WRATH OF KHAN or STAR TREK IV:
THE VOYAGE HOME but it will satisfy most "Star Trek" fans while
establishing a credible baseline for future films featuring only the
"Next Generation" cast.

Title
Review for Mission: Impossible (1996)
Mission Impossible is a good movie that has been taking a lot of critical
hits from people who seem to have been expecting DIE HARD IV meets
GOLDENEYE.  MISSION IMPOSSIBLE is not that kind of movie.  What this movie
does is present a fairly intelligent plot that is highly detailed and makes
the horrible mistake (for a summer movie hopping to be a blockbuster) of
not spoon feeding every plot point to the audience.
There are no stupid pauses in the action to explain what's going on,
there's no extra effort made to guide the audience along with the gizmos
and gadgets.  The movie shows you what is happening, and then expects you
to be able to figure out the details.
There is a wonderful sequence towards the middle of the film that sold me.
Tom Cruise is talking to character A about the possibility of Character B
being a mole.  The entire time he's engaged in this conversation, Cruise
keeps flashing to a sequence on how Character A could have been the mole.
The juxtaposition of the converstation against what we see Cruise thinking
is a brilliant, and effective, device.  However, I could hear the
grumblings in the audience, they didn't seem to understand what was going
on.
Tom Cruise fits into the role of a spy very well.  He has a certain
presence on the screen that makes him quite believable.
There is, as there always seems to be with the special effects wonders of
recent years, a certain amount of suspension of belief.  One sequence in
particular has Cruise surviving an explosion when he is thrown by the
explosion onto the roof of a moving train.  Hollywodd seems to have decided
on several conventions in action films that boggle the mind:  cars have no
trouble driving through security gates (why anyone would build a security
gate that a car can drive through remains unanswered); explosions throw
heroes clear and kill villains; guns are highly inaccurate weapons; and
there are others, of course.  Still, those "mistakes" are so established in
the genre that they've become conventions.  The audience expects them.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL ">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme>
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data

Title
Review for Toy Story (1995)
Capsule:  You want computer animation, we got computer animation.
        We're not talking about some piddly stuff like the feather
        in FORREST GUMP or the effects in TRON, we're talking wall
        to wall computer effects.  Interested?  (+2 on the -4/+4)
     TOY STORY is the first film from the combined efforts of Disney
and a computer effects company named Praxis.  It is part of a three
picture deal, and it looks like we have something to look forward to.
     What we have is amazingly good computer animation, combined with
an adequate story, some memorable characters, and a lot of funny
dialog.  The basic plot is pretty straightforward; Andy gets a new toy,
which looks to beat out his former favorite.  A jealous tiff starts to
develop, but in the end everyone's friends.  Not a lot there,
admittedly, but the basis for an entertaining movie.
     The main characters are quite good, but the movie is almost stolen
by Mr.  Potato Head.  Hasbro should be very pleased, chances are there
will be a strong upswing in Mr. Potato Head's sales.
     There is a lot of humor in the film, and small touches that really
make the film work, at least for me.  One thing I noticed was that the
army men actually *look* like army men, including the little circles
stamped on their body's and the occasional translucent plastic ring
that's still attached.
     There is also a wonderful scene in which the mutilated toys of the
"evil" next door neighbor kid come to life in front of him and literally
scare the kid silly.  It's quite satisfying.
     That said, this is not completely a kids movie.  Some young
children might be a little scared of the mutilated toys, they evoke
memories of NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS with their twisted shapes.
-- 
kreme@netcom.com
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.

Title
Review for Twister (1996)
Stars: Bill Paxton, Hellen Hunt, Cary Elwes, flying cow
Summary: Popcorn movie.  Grade B plot with grade A effects. 
I am always happy when a movie like TWISTER comes out because it serves to
illustrate just how good movies like TERMINATOR and APOLLO XII (usually
dismissed as "just" action movies) really are.  TWISTER is just an action
film.  Oh yes, there is a plot, of sorts.  It is flimsy and instantly
forgettable.  In short, there is nothing in this movie besides the special
effects to make the movie interesting.
The characters are likeable enough, if superficial and empty.  I can't
fault the performances of any of the actors, they just aren't given
anything to work with. One gets the feeling that Michael Chriton scripted
this one the night before shooting was to commence.
That said, the effects are marvelously done, and there's nothing exactly
BAD about the film, just nothing good beyond the work of Industrial Light
and Magic.
Grade: -1.5 on the old -4 to +4 scale (0 being average) overall, with a +2
on the effects work.
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com
http://www.nyx.net/~kreme

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
     The most remarkable difference in BATMAN RETURNS is the lack of a
good director.  Schumacher creates a movie that is choppy, hard to
follow, and has some of the worst directed action sequences in recent
memory.  The movie has some neat gizmos and gadgets, too bad we don't
get to see how they work, or even exactly what the are doing.  There is
one scene in particular where Batman manages to escape certain death by
doing something involving his feet and fire.  I have no idea what
happened in this segment, and neither did anyone else in the audience.
     The casting is good.  Carey delivers a wonderfully wacky psycho
portrayal of The Riddler, and Tommy Lee Jones is passable as Two-Face,
although his character doesn't get the development that Carey's does.
     Nicole Kidman is as bad as Kim Bassinger was in the first movie.
A completely unbelievable female character, again.  Too bad, I like
Nicole Kidman (ever since FLIRTING).  I will say, all traces of her
accent are gone; she has a perfect American accent throughout the
film.  But she's not believable in any way, and there is no depth to
her character.
     Val Kilmer was not particularly impressive either.  Somehow his
Bruce Wayne lacked that edge of craziness that was the one thing
Michael Keaton did well.  Kilmer's Wayne is stoic and dull. There's
none of the interesting little quirks that were evident as far back as
TOP SECRET! and REAL GENIUS.
     Chris O'Donnell manages to make Robin an actually interesting
character.  Not that he's given a lot of opportunities.  He does manage
to make Robin a believable character Something the comic books never
did.  I did like the inclusion of "Nightwing" among the possible
nicknames, though.  Nice touch.
     The sets are quite poor, often involving shots that scream
"MATTE!" in large capitals.  There are also some strange instances
where one feels as if the director is setting off beacons and showing
off how he too can be clever.  All the uneasy mood of Tim Burton is
exchanged for cheap flash and poor editting.
     If one rates BATMAN at a +3, BATMAN RETURNS was a nice +2.  BATMAN
FOREVER drops the stakes considerably, weighing in at a mere +0.0 on
the -4 to +4 scale (where 0 indicates an average movie)

Title
Review for Heavy Metal (1981)
Well, it's been fifteen years, and the near mythical HEAVY METAL is
finally out on video tape, and will be out on Laserdisc next month.
HEAVY METAL was never legally released on video, and the film has been tied
up in some sort of littigation almost since it's release, if not before.
I'm not up on the legal details,but I seem to recall it had something to do
with the soundtrack.
Anyway, its scarcity elevated the film to a cult status that was probably
undeserved.  The film, enjoyable as it was, and is, is very much a product
of the 70's, and it's age shows.  The film (a group of vignettes, tied very
loosely together) is uneven, though the animation is well done throughout.
People who haven't seen the film in 15 years might find they are
disappointed, though it's not so bad that it won't be enjoyable.  Still,
you might leave the theater thinking, That was >IT
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.
--
kreme@cerebus.kreme.com   1015 South Gaylord, Denver, CO 80209 #100
WWW URL: ">http://www.nyx.net/~kreme> 
[303/722-2009] Vox
[303/777-2911] Data

Title
Review for Immortal Beloved (1994)
     The movie IMMORTAL BELOVED makes several fatal errors, chief of
which is playing fast and loose with historical accuracy.  How fast and
loose?  About the only things they got right were that Beethoven wrote
the 9th Symphony and that he died.
     It is frustrating to watch this movie if you know anything at all
about Beethoven, and the more you know, the worse it gets.
     Firstly, Beethoven was *not* a ladies man, in fact he was rather
unlucky with women in general, and was often rejected by them.  Because
of this, he tended to form attachments to women who were unreachable
(already married).  In short, he was not Amadeus Mozart, as the first
half of this film would paint him.  He has been linked romantically to
a few women, among them Guilietta Guiucciardi and Teresa von
Brunswick.  No one has ever seriously suggested a romantic link between
Beethoven and the person the movie portrays as the "Immortal Beloved."
As a matter of fact, a man named Maynard Soloman has effectively ended
the debate with his research linking Beethoven and the wife of a good
friend, Antonie Brentano.
     Secondly, Beethoven was quite old when he lost his hearing, in his
late 40's, and it wasn't until 1814, I believe, that he stopped
playing.  The implications in the movie are that Beethoven had stopped
performing by the time he wrote the Eroica (Symphony #3).  He did
remark on his hearing loss in the "Heiligenstadt Testament" written in
1802.  By 1818 Beethoven was unable to hear people in normal
conversation.
     Thirdly, Beethoven's deafness was in no way a secret.  He was
examined by many medical professionals of the day, and he used an
earhorn.
     Fourthly, although it is true that Ludwig and his nephew Karl had
a rather stormy relationship, it is not true in the way it was
depicted in the film.  Yes, Karl did attempt suicide, but he did not
leave his uncle until he had finished helping with the metronome
markings for the Ninth Symphony, and when he left it was with his
uncle's permission (albeit reluctant) to join the army.
     In short, the makers of this film wanted to recapture the essence
of AMADEUS, and in doing so they abandoned the truth.  Beethoven died
in 1827, and he was well-know, popular, and acknowledged as a great
artist.  There are over 100 "Conversation Books" surviving to the
present day, and thousands of pages of musical notes.  In short,
Beethoven's life is not a mystery, we know as much about him as about
Thomas Jefferson or Benjamin Franklin.
     Even with all the historical inaccuracies discarded, the movie
still fails.  Though the performances are good (especially Isabella
Rossellini) the movie fails to to capture the viewers interest.  I
found myself closing my eyes at times and just listening to the music,
knowing there was nothing interesting to see on the screen.  The basic
plot is not only laughable, but predictable.  That is, we know the
woman in black never saw the letter.)  And on top of that, the movie
switches time frames in a helter-skelter manner that leaves the viewer
struggling to reorient.  In short, a poorly scripted and edited
movie.
     In spite of all its flaws, there is some nice art direction and
cinematography work, and the music is wonderfully performed by the
London Symphony Orchestra.
