Authors
Matthew Beckwith
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Net, The (1995)
     THE NET is a realistic thriller that's refreshingly understated.
>From the first minutes of the film, when you meet the likeable
Angela Bennett, a beautiful introvert addicted to her computer, who
would rather stay home eating a pizza than go out on a date, through
the conspicuously non-cybernetic middle of the film, reminiscent of The
Pelican Brief, to the high-tech ending, in which the protagonist
programs an internet search in seconds to identify the mastermind
behind the terrorist attacks on presumably secure computer systems, THE
NET keeps you on the edge of your seat.
     Extra effort was taken during the making of this film, it is
obvious, to make it a quality work.  The protagonist's psychological
make-up (including a history of psychotherapy, an abandoning father,
and a mother with Alzheimer's disease) is carefully sketched out for
us, making her an intriguing character.  Subtle editing decisions were
made, such as a computer-generated image of flowers which become real
flowers, and an ant's-eye view of a carousel horse interposed in the
middle of a chase scene.
     The acting of all the characters in the film (including,
surprisingly enough, Dennis Miller's) is competent, studied and
professional.  Sondra Bullock does a superb job in her role.  Ken
Howard introduces the film in a cameo showing just the right amount of
authority and anguish for his tragic character.
     As a computer programmer and physician, I would have preferred the
film's makers to have taken a bit of extra care in avoiding technical
inaccuracies.  It is unlikely that simply hitting the escape key would
undo the receipt of an email which has already been sent, and viruses
(though quite powerful) generally do not give people back their lost
identities.  A nurse tells the protagonist that her friend has been
intubated, but in the next scene the patient is talking; this would
have been rather difficult if he had been on a ventilator (which the
word "intubated" implies).
     In a time of slam-bang thrillers with little character development
or subtlety, THE NET is a refreshing, edge-of-your-seat film with a
great deal of intrinsic quality.  I highly recommend it, both to those
who are computer-literate, and to neophytes in this ultra-networked
society of ours.

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
     BATMAN FOREVER is fabulous.  It's light years better than either
of the first two.
     This is an intelligent person's film.  Each scene contains many
brain ticklers.  It's the kind of film that you'll want to rent or buy
on video and view over and over.
     A great deal of time and energy was obviously spent on set
design.  The sets are quite intricate, and not as dark as those in the
first two films.
     A curious, and unexpected, factor in this movie was Jim Carrey's
effeminate posturings.  I found myself wondering whether it was that
the actor is gay, or that the character is gay.  At one point, The
Riddler and Two Face actually embrace and kiss.  Certainly the gay
lobby will not be offended by this film!
     The special effects of this version of Batman are comparable to
those of the better science fiction films of our time.  Batman's
frequent flights through the air are quite convincing and
awe-inspiring.  When The Riddler and Two Face are sucking up the energy
from the minds of the populace, it is quite spooky.  And when the
various bat-vehicles are on the move, it's like being in a roller
coaster.
     The screenplay and acting are quite good in this film.  The plot
lines are interesting, some of them deep.  Val Kilmer's soul searchings
as Bruce Wayne/Batman, with the seductive coaching of Nicole Kidman's
Dr. Chase Meridian, are psychologically intriguing, and not overdone.
Chris O'Donnell does an excellent job as Robin.  Perhaps the only fault
with the film is the lack of depth of the two villains.  Jim Carrey is
campy but not much else; and Tommy Lee Jones is one-dimensional (which
is ironic, considering his character).
     I highly recommend BATMAN FOREVER.  Even if your reaction to the
first two was lukewarm, you'll love this one.
--
>From the Desk of Matt Beckwith, Jacksonville, Florida, beckwith@jaxnet.com
