Authors
Joe Viglione
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
Written & Directed by Larry & Andy Wachowski
The cinematography is stunning!  At the beginning of the film at the
discotech, Keanu Reeves and Carrie-Anne Moss are face to face...the
camera closes in on Keanu with a blue light throbbing in the
background...that sets the tone for the rest of the film.  For two and
a half hours we get breathtaking shots and bleak gloom and doom, it is
quite a contrast.
A friend noted how there was much dialogue and less action for the
first portion of the film (Kevin Maynard's review on Mr. Showbiz
pointed out Keanu has limited dialogue...interesting... hey, how many
words did Arnold Terminator speak in the first movie? 64???)...
Laurence Fishburne's Morpheus is quite good.  At first he seems evil -
would you trust him?  Then he becomes the teacher - "morphing" Keanu's
character to this next level of development.
Hermetic Philosophy, Star Wars, Bruce Lee, ahh...but the real twist is
how this film is in reality a combination of Total Recall and
Terminator 1 and 2.  That is the key which makes this work on many
levels.
Where so much science fiction is derivative in a bad way, watering
down what came before (how many bad Star Wars clones will emerge in
July and August after Chapter 1 gets unleashed?)  ..The Matrix is a
clever script, solid acting (Joe Pantoliano's best role...you won't
recognize him for awhile)...this movie gets you thinking.
The Oracle is the other side of Yoda.  Her "students" are thought
provokers, and through it all, one wonders if The Matrix isn't really
Morpheus (a combination of Morphing and Orpheus), and The Oracle
playing mind games to help an individual get to their next level of
existence.
In other words, Keanu Reeves isn't only "The One", anyone walking the
path is a candidate.  Anyone.
http://pages.prodigy.net/millermedia/pubmac/

Title
Review for Civil Action, A (1998)
    This is a once in a lifetime role for John
Travolta, and at the onset, he looks brilliant
in it; but Robert Duvall not only outclasses
Travolta's character, he shows John what
Burt Reynolds meant about there being
nothing like an old Stradivarius...Burt is
right.  Both Travolta and Duvall have to
deal with annoying characters.  Both
lawyers are absolute jerks.  Where Duvall
plays it cool, calculated, like a professional
shark, Travolta is edgy in his role as the
flamboyant, greedy ambulance chaser.
    He overdoes it.  You don't feel sympathy
for Jan Schlictman, a sympathy that is there
in the book by Jonathan Harr.  Sure, he is
a prisoner of his own obsession, but you 
really have to wonder why his partners let
him behave like a runaway train?   And why
Travolta folds up into this "victim" when he
should be more "head held high" arrogant,
and cocky.  That's what I got out of the book,
but maybe John never read it.
    With all the investment, with the good will
of the victims of the tragedy, none of the 
lawyers stepped in and did the right thing.
But the actors playing them are splendid,
and the supporting cast keeps this film
afloat.  The relish with which some of the
unknowns attack their roles overshadows
Travolta.  
    Perhaps because of that, the film is magnificent.  You don't have to
live in Woburn to appreciate the sweeping beauty of the Boston skyline,
the river Charles, the microcosm of New York City. And  that is what
this film really does...it exposes Boston as a gorgeous city whose
lawyers, talk show hosts,  sports teams, and music scene,  well, just
come in second place to New York.  It's all there when The Attorney
tries to settle with Grace in New York.  Rather than put on the poker
face, Travolta gets the $2400.00
a night hotel room while the tycoon gets him
to put his feet up on some rickety antique.
    Out of his league.  And Travolta, despite
being hailed as the "comeback kid", and yes,
he certainly deserves credit for that, well,
he goes from brilliant to ok...passing grade.
Will he get an Academy Award?  Maybe out
of the sympathy of those voting for his hard
work and persistence...but he just doesn't
deliver the knock-out blow...Robert Duvall
does.  This is light years away from Robert's
performance in The Apostle...in fact, that
reminds me of Travolta here...almost, but
no cigar.  
    For the meat of the film, I must say,
the cinematography, the direction, the
editing, Danny Elfman's music, everything
falls into place.  This picture is something
very, very special.   How do you take an
old story that we in Woburn/Stoneham
have read and known about, and make
it an amazing work that stands on its own?
Somehow, they pull it off.  This film can
be watched again, and again, and again,
and it is the little things...the angle of the
camera, sweeping across rooms and
scenery...and for any resident of Woburn,
it is scary.  My friend said to me "how many
more sites like this in Massachusetts...?"
Good question...my reply: "Yeah, but I
live there..."  And he almost moved in!
    Perhaps we should get a place more
conducive to humankind...like, maybe
a condo in Palm Beach?  A Civil Action
is just the piece of filmmaking to tell any
sane person to get out of Woburn...     
   Who should have played the lead role?
Raymond Burr?  No, he had too much
authority...Richard Gere?  YES...Richard
Gere does the law thing with a sparkle,
he would have been a great antagonist
to Duvall's pragmatic bull.  Ah, but only
in a perfect world.
