Authors
Peter van der Linden
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Himmel über Berlin, Der (1987)
     When I went to see WINGS OF DESIRE this weekend, I'd been procrastinating
for some time;  I never thought for a moment that I'd enjoy the film.  And I
didn't.  But at least it wasn't as bad as it could have been.
     WINGS OF DESIRE is a sort of cinematic "Waiting for Godot"; nothing
happens but it takes two hours and there's a lot of complex symbolism.   Jeez,
is there ever symbolism.   This film is a powerful argument for those who claim
that the Germans should be expressly forbidden by international treaty from
writing literature and from making films.   And from annexing land east of the
river Elbe.  There hasn't been a halfway decent German filmmaker since
Fassbinder went to unspool that great big final reel in the sky.
     An angel falls in love with a ... trapeze artist!  WINGS OF DESIRE has
definite touches of KOYANNISQUATSI (I have to confess that I'm another of the
people who fell asleep during that film, and my blood sugar level is perfectly
fine, thank you).
     All films from German director Wim Wenders are boring odysseys, and WINGS
OF DESIRE is no exception.  Filmed in Berlin, it represents a homecoming
homage, after 7 years self-imposed exile in Hollywood.  All the sights of
Berlin are there: Anhalter Bahnhof, Mauer, the Grosser Stern, the Ku'damm,
Potsdammer Platz.  But notice anything about these places?  Right!  They're all
in West Berlin.  To me, it represented an awkward synthesis of what Berlin
never quite was, and now never will be.  Once the coldest focus of the cold
war, Berlin now languishes, forgotten and abandoned like a faded courtesan.
WINGS OF DESIRE would have made more sense if the angels' perch was not the
Grosser Stern, but rather the  Brandenburg Tor in the Russian sector.
     There's one memorable quote about Anhalter which I hadn't heard before.
Anhalter was, pre-1945, the grandest of the grand imperial railway stations.
Trains departed here for Ankara, Austria, Hungary, the Levant, and a host of
other exotic eastern destinations.  After the Red Army came to Berlin in 1945,
all that remains standing is a single wall in a field of muddy rubble.  "It was
not a station where the trains stopped; it was a station where the stations
stopped."  Wow, is that meaningful, or what?  Or is it?
     "Ich bin ein Berliner" said Kennedy, and the cartoonists had a field day,
for he had unknowingly said "I am a doughnut" in the Berliner dialect.  Wim
Wenders shows us that he is a doughnut, too, but the audience deserves a more
savory and filling repast.  
     Go see it if you're into artsy-fartsy stuff.  We can argue about it over a
bottle of wine in a smoky intellectual bar.  Film is worth 6.0 on the Richter
Scale (just like the earthquake which just occurred here)...

Title
Review for Big Top Pee-wee (1988)
SYNOPSIS:
     WINGS OF DESIRE is a recent film in which an angel falls in love with a
circus trapeze artist.  BIG TOP PEE-WEE is a recent film in which  Pee-Wee
Herman falls in love with a circus trapeze artist.  The two films have many
other surprising similarities in common, as this review makes clear.  Neither
film, in this reviewer's opinion, lives up to its potential.  
ASIDE:
     The credits for BIG TOP PEE-WEE listed a "Key Gizmo Man."  Is this an
established job on a film set?  What does he do?
REVIEW:
     Cinema today has occasionally been compared to religion: moving pictures
are essentially icons or likenesses taken on faith, requiring some suspension
of belief in the nature of everyday reality, and perhaps needing additional
imagination on the part of observers to fill in the lacunae of the presented
visions.  For this reason many film critics find particular interest in films
which touch on spiritual matters.
     One film which I saw recently seemed to center upon the "rite of passage"
of a spiritual being, and his earthy fascination with an aerial artiste, a
trapeze performer in a circus.  The opening moments of the film are moody and
powerful, as it becomes apparent that only small children can truly perceive
the nature or even presence of the protagonist, himself happiest when flying or
leaving the constraints of this mortal coil to appear far overhead.  But will
his infatuation with a circus showgirl prove to be a meretricious liason,
resolving her into his Nemesis?  Is a consideration of this eternal question
perhaps the "Angst" which eats out the soul, of which Fassbinder so fearfully
cautioned us?
     As enigmatic as Resnais's L'ANNEE DERNIERE A MARIENBAD (the French
translation is tantalizingly imprecise as to whether "derniere" is "last" in
the sense of "final" or rather "previous"), this film can perhaps best be
interpreted as an endorsement of Wittgenstein's fundamental philosophy (later
repudiated) that the correspondence between elementary propositions and real
facts (Wittgenstein's "Sachverhalt") can only be inaccurately pictured in
language, but not stated, for this would require an extra linguistic medium for
expression.  Hence, Wittgenstein erroneously reasoned, all philosophy attempts
to say the unsayable, and true to the consequences of this belief he gave up
his professorship and became a porter in an English hospital.  If only the film
director had followed this example!
     Others, more charitable, would suggest that a more accurate simile for
this cinematic woman-inspired evolution of the child-visible free-spirit would
be Bogart's definitive transformation of Charlie Allnutt (Bogart's only Oscar
was awarded for this portrayal) from intrepid but uncaring observer into
involved hero of courage, perseverance and devotion in THE AFRICAN QUEEN.  The
brooding concentration as an idiosyncratic hero follows an elegiac path, from a
world beyond conventional experience into the physical confinements of the
human condition, works on a plethora of levels and effortlessly conveys a deep
but ultimately unsatisfying sense of fantasy-fulfilment which mars both of
these films.
     Echoing Brecht's famous theory of alienation, the scene which worked best
for me was the one in which the earthbound lover slowly twirled the vertical
rope on which the aerial object of his affections was posing.  Bertolt Brecht
strongly believed in avoiding the creation of illusion, so that the audience
was not emotionally manipulated but remained capable of intelligent appraisal.
Shunning past transparencies, the hero of this film is now definitely
earthbound, while the heroine glides easily over his head in a clever, but not
wholly unanticipated, inversion of their prior stations; both have given up
much, but the union of both together achieves more.  Brecht's thesis, on this
occasion, is vindicated, ironically enough by the garish showmanship of a
circus act.
     Bazin (founder of the seminal CAHIERS DU CINEMA) held that a film-maker
should be considered in the light of thematic consistency, and development
throughout his work.  On these terms, this film can only be regarded as a
disappointing regression from previously promising, though inconsistent,
earlier works.  I'd like to end these pensees with a real kick-ass power
metaphor, but it's Saturday night and my intellect is throbbing in a way that
nothing short of a few swift bevies with the bitchin' babes at the local
brewhouse will allay.  Also it's my turn to argue whether "Being and
Nothingness" is a correct translation of Sartre's "Etre et le Neant," so I
gotta scoot.  Later, dudes.

Title
Review for Hairspray (1988)
     Film director John Waters has always pioneered his own distinctive brand
of American "cinema verite," but his latest work HAIRSPRAY marks a radical
departure from his earlier style.   Any film which is directed by John Waters
has to be interpreted in its wider context; without such a perspective the
imagery can appear unusually frank.  HAIRSPRAY represents a big (and I think
unfortunate) step towards mainstream Hollywood.
     Ostensibly about a 1960's teenage dance TV show, HAIRSPRAY is based around
a formative period in Waters' own teen years.  As his recent book explains,
Waters has always felt vaguely alienated from society, and he values every
opportunity in his films to confront society with itself.  Waters' films have
always centered, some would say obsessively, on aspects of the human condition
which polite people usually do not discuss in public.
     HAIRSPRAY is different, shunning overtness for commercial appeal; it can
be loosely characterized as a GREASE remake.  The plot is elemental, concerning
the triumph of good over evil, of substance over style, of character over the
superficial.  The casting is excellent, placing such untalented no-hopers as
Debbie Harry, Pia Zadora, and Sonny Bono in undemanding roles well-suited to
their abilities.   Longtime Waters fans will be treated to a double appearance
of Divine; in the normal housewife role; and most surprisingly, dressed as a
man, realistically depicting a 300-pound redneck TV station manager.   And look
out for Waters' own cameo appearance as a manic psychiatrist, wielding such
essential aids to modern medical diagnosis as the spinning disk, and the
cattle-prod!
     Directors often become boring or mawkish when they film
autobiographically.  For example, consider the last half-dozen Woody Allen
films.  It's because they wrongly assume that the audience will love the
subject as much as they do.  Waters veers near to committing this error here,
and it is unlikely that HAIRSPRAY will be well-received by the same people who
revered his earlier works such as PINK FLAMINGOS or FEMALE TROUBLE.  It just
doesn't have the inventiveness of POLYESTER.
     Lacking the ferocity of Fassbinder, or the triteness of Andy Warhol, but
sharing the sexual ambivalence of both, John Waters has for the past 20 years
been an "enfant terrible" within the American film industry.  With this latest
film, he is declaring his future direction to be unashamedly Hollywood-bound.
But it's a long way from Baltimore to Sunset Boulevard, and unless Waters is
careful, he's liable to end up where he's headed.

Title
Review for Cry Freedom (1987)
     The latest in a cycle of social-conscience films from director Richard
Attenborough, CRY FREEDOM succeeds well in translating and interpreting a
foreign land, a foreign culture, and a struggle for redemption in a system
which offers little hope for nine-tenths of its population.
     Depicting the fight against the repressive Apartheid system in South
Africa, CRY FREEDOM slowly informs its audience, just as activist Steve Biko
gradually educates liberal white editor Donald Woods to the reality of the
system which supports him (Woods) in odious luxury.  This is a powerful film of
contrasts; of black and white, of luxury and grinding poverty, of brilliant
sunshine and dank chambers of torture.  Attenborough's direction is evident,
but never overwhelming.  He lets the characters and events tell their own
story.  Woods and his wife were consultants to the film, so we are assured of
veracity.
     Contemporary press accounts of Biko's murder by the South African security
forces in 1977, and the subsequent callousness and cover-up made much of his
unique qualities as a leader of "black consciousness": his physical strength,
his charisma, his maturity.  Not all of this came across clearly in Denzel
Washington's portrayal of a challenging role.  In a sense, this doesn't
detract from the film at all.  The fight against racism, against repression,
against hatred, must take place in all lands and societies.  In South Africa
in particular, this struggle is much bigger than one man alone.
     This is one of the very few films I have seen, in which the audience did
not stampede for the exits just as soon as the closing credits began to roll;
rather they remained seated, stunned by the enormity of what had just been
witnessed.  "What permits such wickedness to continue in the twentieth
century?" was the unasked question on every lip.  The  answer of course, lies
in our own hearts.
     If you view the cinema primarily as a medium of light entertainment, then
this film is not for you.  If you also appreciate the wider context of
education, of politics, of brutal reality, and of artistry in film-making, then
you simply should not miss this tour-de-force.

Title
Review for Fish Called Wanda, A (1988)
     A local theater previewed A FISH CALLED WANDA last weekend.  A FISH CALLED
WANDA is an awkward title for a very funny film.  John Cleese (who wrote and
stars in, but does not direct this film) is back on form!  If you like zany
comedies, then you'll love this.  Some of Cleese's earlier solo films were
patchy (PRIVATES ON PARADE), and some were downright boring (CLOCKWISE), but
here we see sustained, clever, inventive comedy.  It simply gleams with wit!
     The story line is straightforward, based on a gang of double-crossing
jewel-thieves after a successful raid.  The story is set in London, and it's a
pleasure to see the care taken with the location shooting (apart from the final
shot of the speeding car heading from the Old Bailey to Heathrow; why are you
going via Oxford, John?)   Some of the film editing is a bit clumsy, too (how
does Michael Palin end up on the luggage conveyor at the airport?).  Kevin
Kline is superb as the ex-CIA hitman, sneering at the Brits.  
     The audience broke into spontaneous applause at the end of this film,  and
you don't hear that very often these days.  A FISH CALLED WANDA is funny,
contains sharp characterizations, and deserves to be an extraordinary success.
