Authors
Tak
Number of Reviews
18

Title
Review for Blue Chips (1994)
One-Line-Summary
----------------
     A coach fights corruption within himself and the system as he
tries to assemble a winning basketball team.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Coach Pete Bell (NICK NOLTE) is facing his first losing season and
doesn't like it, but can't compete for the best high school talent (the
Blue Chips) unless he breaks the rules and offers "enticements."
Ex-wife Jenny (MARY McDONNELL) knows Pete plays by the rules, but
wealthy alumni Happy (J.T. Walsh) is more than eager to tempt him, with
reporter Ed (ED O'NEILL) waiting if Pete should slip.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     This sports movie focuses on one coach's love for the game of
basketball.  He is passionate about the game and would do almost
anything to have the best team. He can't stand the corruption almost
inherent in the game--"You've taken the one thing really pure in your
life ... and you've corrupted it."  But he can't have the best team
without that corruption, which provides the focus for the movie.
     There are lots and lots of real basketball stars and legends in
BLUE CHIPS.  You can't watch 5 minutes without tripping over a
real-life basketball player, coach, or sports caster.  Oddly enough, it
works, and you don't have to be a huge basketball fan. (I'm not)
     The basketball action is exciting and energetic, both players and
crowd were real and it shows.  Since all the games were played with
real players, the film makers had no problem filling the bleachers--the
action was filmed in four standing-room-only games in Indiana.  Nick
Nolte: "We had ten cameras working but nobody was aware of where the
cameras were and the filming never interfered with the game. It wasn't
like filming at all."
     The few basketball figures who can't seem to act well come off a
bit flat, but none of them have more than cameo appearances, with the
possible exception of legend Bob Cousy, who my friend commented on
with--"You can tell which ones are basketball people--they can't act."
While this may be true for Bob Cousy (arguably) and Shaquille O'Neal,
Anfernee "Penny" Hardaway did a great job as Butch, the clean-cut
talent from Chicago.
     It would seem Nick Nolte's been really busy--I'LL DO ANYTHING and
BLUE CHIPS both released within a week of each other.  It's a testimony
to his acting ability that he performs excellently in both movies, with
a completely different character in each.  As coach Bell, Nolte is the
complete coach: hot-headed, intelligent, and dedicated to the game he
loves.  He looks more like a coach than the real coaches in the
film--Bobby Knight, Rick Pitino, and George Raveling.
     Mary McDonnell put in a strong supporting performance as Jenny.
You'll also see Ed O'Neill, who always surprises me with his acting
ability--initially it's so hard to see past his Al Bundy ("Married with
Children") character.  Louis Gossett, Jr., a college scholarship player
himself, appears as a high school coach.
     Despite the subtitles at the end ("Blah went on to play in the
NBA") this is *not* a true story.  The screenplay was first written
twelve years ago and was intended to deal with themes of corruption,
morality and ambition.  The events depicted are extremely realistic and
more timely than ever--a bunch of last year's University of Washington
Husky football squad got in trouble for just such antics.
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     I was surprised by this movie.  I thought it would be a showcase
movie for the numerous NBA characters.  Instead, we get an inspiring
story about a man who loves basketball and how that love affects every
aspect of his life. It's always a treat to watch people who love what
they're doing, and BLUE CHIPS provides us that opportunity.  Check it
out one evening, I think you'll like it.

Title
Review for Paper, The (1994)
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Henry Hackett (Michael Keaton), editor of a big-city newspaper
tabloid, is hot on a big story that could expose a major scandal and
free two innocent young men charged with murder--if he can meet his
deadline for the morning edition.  With his wife (Marisa Tomei) about
to give birth, his managing editor (Glenn Close) locking horns with him
and a rival newspaper trying to lure him over, Hackett is facing more
than one crisis in this everyday adventure: this day is going to change
his life forever.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     If you think *you* lead a stressful life, maybe seeing THE PAPER
will change your mind.  The running time of THE PAPER depicts more
stress than I've been subjected to in months, and it's all supposed to
happen over a period of twenty-four hours.  Yeesh.
     In this time span, we follow a heap of different plot lines, all
intertwined with Hackett's pursuit of a big expose that could free two
innocents.  He's also interviewing for another job and reassuring his
distraught wife.  The harried editor is worried about his medical
condition and trying to reunite with his estranged daughter.  A host of
reporters are out on the street doing research, most with their own
problems, including hiding from an angry city official.  To top it all
off, Glenn Close's character actively tries to stymie Hackett's story,
while simultaneously schmoozing to re-negotiate her own contract.
     There's *so* much going on in this movie, you can't help but be
overwhelmed.  Especially in the newsroom.  In one scene, Hackett is
juggling three people on hold and conducting an argument in his
office.  It's common to have many conversations going on at once (I
counted five in one scene), and there's always something happening in
the background if you have time to look. (Watch for five clocks)
     The characters in THE PAPER were great.  Glenn Close's has
unintentionally turned into everything she previously hated ("You're a
manager now, if everyone liked you, you'd be doing something wrong.").
Robert Duvall is the gruff editor in chief ("The trouble with being my
age is that everyone looks up to you as a father figure, but you know
that you're still the same old asshole.").  Marisa Tomei is Hatckett's
wife, an apprehensive career reporter who's envious that her husband
can still pursue his career ("Hypothetical situation: If a gunman said
he was going to shoot me or blow up the [office], which would you
choose?").  Then add more newsroom characters--the kid photographer,
the whiny complainer, the conspiracy nut, and varied screwballs.
     And did I mention that it's funny too?  There are one-liners,
hilarious arguments, amusing situations and funny events throughout.
     The trick to enjoying this highly charged, funny and complex movie
is staying detached and *watching* all the excitement.  If I'm not
careful, I get too involved in a movie--if it's even halfway decent, I
feel right along with a character.  Which is great if I'm watching
feel-good stuff.  Depending on your personality, watching THE PAPER
might get you a) stressed out, b) pumped, c) excited and/or d) amused.
Unfortunately for my date, I mostly got stressed out.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     I liked THE PAPER--it's exciting, funny, stressful and dramatic.
I'll gladly accompany my friends to see it again.  There's bound to be
more to catch the second time.  And I'll certainly never see my daily
newspaper in quite the same way after THE PAPER.

Title
Review for Intersection (1994)
One-Line-Summary
----------------
    A man, his wife, his daughter, his lover, his memories and his problems.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Vincent Eastman (Richard Gere) is a successful architect with
Sally (Sharon Stone), his wife and business partner of sixteen years,
and a lovely daughter (Jennifer Morrison).  His newfound love, Olivia
Marshak (Lolita Davidovich), fills a void in Vince's life and is more
than he can resist.  He suffers lots of angst as tries to choose
between his family history, or his happiness with Olivia.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     Lame Lame Lame.  There doesn't seem to be a point to INTERSECTION,
other than to study Gere's character.  At one point Vince yells at
Olivia, "It's not about you, it's about me!"  How true.  The whole movie
is set up so we can identify with his problems, his emotions, his
turmoil, his everything.  One problem.  I didn't.  Vince is a dweeb.  I
wished he would get it together and stop being indecisive.
     The movie takes place over the span of about a week, with
*frequent* flashbacks where Vince remembers and daydreams.  We see his
happy memories with Sally, his growing dissatisfaction, his meeting
with Olivia, his break with Sally, and his time as ex-husband and
single father.  Of course Vince thinks highly of himself.
     INTERSECTION's one action scene is the car crash featured in all
the commercials.  Because of this, I initially thought the movie might
be something like REGARDING HENRY, with a tragic accident and the
aftermath.  Nope.  Instead, we suffer through lots of Vince's problems
first.  And when the crash finally happens, the filmmakers get pretty
excited about it.  So excited that it is heavily foreshadowed and even
shown twice.  First we get the two-minute slo-mo version where everyone
makes their favorite anguished Sly Stallone faces, and then after the
comment--"I didn't have time to react, it all happened so fast..."--we
get to see exactly how fast two seconds is.
     Sharon Stone once again successfully avoids being sexy.  Unlike in
the stinker SLIVER, I think this time it was intentional.  At one point
Vince remembers (and we see) a "quickie" at a family gathering that is
actually humorously sad.  Poor Vince, no wonder he left.
     I wouldn't have noticed this a year ago, but this movie is just
monstrously *male*.  Everything supports Vincent.  Olivia's stated
goal--"I just want to make your father happy".  The glimpses of Megan
shows she still loves Dad and wants to be with her father, even
inviting him "out to the island" for Easter with Mom.  Sally even tries
to seduce her ex-husband--"what's a girl need to do to get some action
around here", but stops herself, saying "oh, where did that come from?"
     The ending was out of place ...  after everything that happens, we
are left with the distinct impression that everyone, wife AND lover,
still loves Vince, that romantic rascal.  Bah.  I don't believe it.
The heroic strength of "character" at the end is kind of insulting.
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     I didn't like this film.  I won't recommend this film.  I won't
even watch this film again.  There wasn't enough going on to keep my
interest, either emotionally or intellectually.  Maybe some of you will
like INTERSECTION, but I doubt it.

Title
Review for 8 Seconds (1994)
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     8 SECONDS--you only have to hang on to the back of that bull for
a mere 8 SECONDS.  Son of a small Oklahoma rancher, Lane Frost (LUKE
PERRY) was an acknowledged artist at managing that time with poise and
style.  As his reputation grows, he, his wife Kellie Kyle (CYNTHIA
GEARY) and his family must learn to cope with all the pressures and
hardships of the newfound fame.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     Although not a Disney film, 8 SECONDS certainly reminded me of
one.  Lane Frost was a god-honest rodeo cowboy, and Hollywood loves
cowboys right now, which perhaps explains the lovable, light treatment
of some heavy issues.  There's plenty of drama, but it's all easily
resolved and doesn't seem to have weight or consequences to it.
     The one issue that *is* dealt with is very heavy-handed.  Lane has
a strained relationship with his father.  Dad is very proud of him, but
incapable of praise other than through well-meaning critiques, even
when Lane's done it all.  Letting people know how you feel is an
important message, but seems rather cliched here.
     The rodeo action in 8 SECONDS was pretty exciting and well filmed,
though I suspect that many of the 8 second rides are a bit drawn out.
There's not much effort to explain anything about rodeo, we just know
that Lane Frost does it and he's damn good.  Why?  I don't know and it
really wasn't all that important for the story.
     My favorite over-heard comment about this movie: "Yeah, I liked
it, even though it was high on the cheese-factor."
     Yep.  We get cheatin' hearts, life on the road, and hard drinkin'
buddies who are tough as nails but, gosh, deep down they really *care*.
Lane is portrayed as a hard working, patient, generous, kind, and
usually thoughtful man.  He takes the time to talk to the little kids at
the rodeos because he "...wishes that someone had taken the time to do
that for him."  Gosh ....hearts are a-meltin' everywhere.
     In another scene, Lane and buddies have returned from a bar where
he abstained from drinking, "No thanks, I'll have a Coke please,"
literally causing a bar-brawl.  Lane endures buddy Tuff's ensuing
drunken accusations while calmly flossing his teeth.
     The other big fault of 8 SECONDS was the hurried feel.  They've
included all kinds of life messages and end up sacrificing quality for
quantity.  Near the end, one important scene got a collective "Whaa?!?"
as the audience mentally scrambled to incorporate this newest
development.  The important details of that scene were only explained
by an unseen, hard-to-hear rodeo announcer in the background a few
scenes later.  Maybe the film makers shoulda followed Lane's
advice--"do the best you can in those 8 seconds and then get off".
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     You might be disappointed by the cheese and shallow treatment if
you go to see 8 SECONDS and pay full price.  You'll have a much better
experience as a $1.99 rental experience.  While an inspiring story of
an outstanding sportsman, put 8 SECONDS on your VCR list.

Title
Review for Crow, The (1994)
Miramax/Dimension Films /rated R
Starring: Brandon Lee Ernie Hudson Michael Wincott 
Classification: Dark Tragedy
Tak Rating: see once as a matinee
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Eric (Brandon Lee) and his fiance, Shelly, are brutally killed
the night before their wedding.  A year later, Eric rises from the 
grave as an invincible avenger who sets out to kill all those involved 
in shattering his life and happiness.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     "One day you are going to lose everything you have.  
Nothing will prepare you for that day. Not faith... Not religion... 
Nothing.  When someone you love dies, you will know emptiness... you 
will know what it is to be completely and utterly alone.  You will 
never forget and never ever forgive.  For some things there is no
forgiveness... absolutely none."
     - John Bergan
       Introduction to THE CROW trade paperback
     If you want an unbiased review of THE CROW (movie), you'll
have to go elsewhere.  I'm afraid I can't help but compare the movie 
to the original comic series by James O'Barr from which it was 
adapted.  Yep, you guessed it.  The original was better.
     THE CROW (comic series) is an incredible work.  Not your
typical comic book.  It contains beautiful illustrations and poignant 
poem and song excerpts.  Not your typical story, either.  It's a 
heartbreaking story of lost love and a shattered life.  I've read it 
dozens of times and it never fails to move me.  The chapter titles 
give a feeling for the tone: PAIN, FEAR, IRONY, DESPAIR, DEATH.
     THE CROW (movie) failed me here.  It was certainly dark and
gloomy.  Detroit looked like Gotham city, the soundtrack was great (go 
buy it) and there were hardly any bright colors.  But I didn't feel 
it.  Nor did I feel like any great atrocity was committed.
     Brandon Lee, however, was great. He's believable as a good
person involved in an atrocity.  He tries to pull off the pain and 
agony felt in the story, literally writhing with pain at times. 
Although right from the story, this agonizing didn't play well on the 
screen, actually provoking giggles from younger audience members.
     I read that James O'Barr became good friends with Brandon Lee
during the filming.  So it's hard to imagine him being angry, outraged 
or unaware of the changes.  I hope the decisions were out of O'Barr's 
hands.  You'd think a comic book would be perfect for movie 
adaptations -- they've got the story, and even a storyboard.  But they 
still changed, added, and cut things.  Substantial things.
     o Originally, the atrocity was random and senseless. Now it's
       because Shelly took a stand against an eviction.
     o Originally, Erik had no powers other than being already dead.
       Now he's gets "Crow-Vision", vulcan mind-meld powers, and a 
       talisman (the crow) that powers his prolonged mobility.
     o Originally, Eric tracked his murderers, and interrogated street
       scum for clues, with the crow as an invisible cameo. Now he 
       receives supernatural guidance from the ever-present crow.
     o Originally, police involvement is almost background. Now two 
       minor police characters are combined into a sidekick/co-star.
     o And we get lots of Hollywood-isms.  Car chases, wry police 
       humor, rooftop sword fights, and a politically correct and 
       sanitized story. "These things [cigarettes] will kill you."  
       The dialog with the druggie FunBoy is missing, and the "crown 
       of thorns" morphine scene is reversed and sanitized.  Dammit. 
     But just so I don't end on a bad note, the shoot-out (combined
from two scenes in the original) where Eric confronts and takes out a 
whole room full of "foot soldiers" was awesome.  It's extremely well 
choreographed and exciting to watch.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     As a translation of O'Barr's THE CROW, the movie has some serious
failings.  THE CROW (movie) introduces Hollywood-isms, new plot 
elements, and can't portray the sheer tragedy, atrocity and pain. 
I won't tell you to not go see it, I couldn't bear to do that, 
especially if you haven't read it.  Just be aware that THE CROW story 
is orders of magnitude better than THE CROW (movie).
-----
Mark Takacs  "Fear is for the enemy.
mtakacs@netcom.com  Fear and bullets."      THE CROW, James O'Barr    
(Watch for my CROW shrine, appearing on WWW soon, bug me about it...)
-----

Title
Review for Guarding Tess (1994)
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Secret Service agent Douglas (Nicolas Cage) is called back for a
second three-year term at the Secret Service's worst assignment,
guarding former First Lady Tess Carlisle (Shirley MacLaine).  Fur flies
as Douglas tries to enforce Service protocol, while Tess just wants
respect and privacy.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     As a fan Nicolas Cage fan, I try and see him whenever I can.  I've
also been impressed by Shirley MacLaine's acting.  So I looked forward
to their pairing.  In GUARDING TESS, MacLaine's strong-willed character
is constantly bucking at Cage's strongly enforced security rules and
restrictions.  GUARDING TESS's funniest moments come from this
interaction as they constantly jockey and battle for the dominance.
     There's also an undercurrent going on.  They're fond of each
other, but not to the casual observer.  As GUARDING TESS opens,
Douglas's term of duty is over, but Tess likes him enough to pulls
strings and have him reassigned.  When Douglas asks why she did this
despite their conflicts, she replies, "Because I like you, Douglas."
     Douglas is often frustrated by Tess's stunts, and the lack of more
active assignments.  The only action he has to deal with are
ridiculously humorous excursions to the supermarket.  "We have lost
interest in peas, repeat, lost interest in peas..."  When something
finally happens, as it inevitably must, he is caught flat-footed.
Which leads to a scene where a superior berates him, saying "Are you
telling me that *seven* trained and heavily armed Secret Service agents
can't guard one senior citizen?!?".
     I laughed a lot during the first half of GUARDING TESS.  But about
two-thirds of the way through, it suddenly turned into a half-hearted
suspense drama.  The laughs went away and were replaced with
serious-faced goon squads to try and solve the crime.  Fortunately, the
deviation into bad suspense-drama doesn't last long and GUARDING TESS
redeems itself at the last moment by returning to comedy.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     GUARDING TESS is a decent comedy that turns into a bad suspense
drama near the end.  If you're a fan of either Shirley MacLaine or
Nicolas Cage (like I am), you might want to check it out as a matinee.
Otherwise, GUARDING TESS can probably wait.

Title
Review for Twenty Bucks (1993)
Press Release:
--------------
     A favorite at this year's Seattle International Film Festival,
TWENTY BUCKS features an illustrious cast of characters who come into
contact with a particular $20 bill, from its withdrawal at a bank
machine through its inevitable demise.  The journey of the greenback
touches the lives of a struggling young writer (Elizabeth Shue); a
street-person obsessed with winning the lottery (Linda Hunt); a
blue-collar fiance (Brendan Fraser) about to marry the boss' daughter
(Sam Jenkins); a priest who runs a Bingo game (Spalding Gray); a kind,
fortune-telling grandmother (Gladys Knight); her young,
rap-singing-Craig Clairborne-wannabe grandson (Kamau Holloway); and two
ill fated hold-up thieves (Christopher Lloyd and Steve Buscemi).  To
some, the $20 bill brings power, to others a symbol for their dream.
As it weaves a path providing food for the hungry, evidence for murder,
inspiration for the working class, and a tip for a stripper, this
twenty bucks touches the lives of many people, and in some way, changes
the future of them all.
TV-Guide(tm)-Review 
------------------- 
     A twenty-dollar bill serves as a device to examine an unexpectedly
inter-connected group sf people.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     Yet again, a movie exploring an idea that I've wondered about ...
what happens to that $20 I just changed?  I had just assumed I'd never
see or some into contact with a particular $20 again.  Well, you've
heard of the expression ".. keeps showing up like a bad penny?"  Now
we've got a $20 bill instead of a penny.  Inflation I guess.
     Initially when the twenty showed up in the presence of someone I'd
already seen, I thought "Waita minit' here, do you expect me to believe
that?"  I put that aside and just decided to watch the movie.
     After the show, I realized that the implausible re-occurrence of
the $20 is what makes this movie work so well.  It gives you a chance
to identify with the characters.  With so many characters and
relatively short times with each, it is a real testimony to the
screenwriters that they were able to engage my feelings.  In particular
I'm thinking of the article-in-the-wallet scene (no spoiler, so siree)
between Emily and her mother.
     My favorite scenes are with Christopher Lloyd and Steve Buscemi as
thieves, followed closely the entire plot-line with the struggling
writer played by Elisabeth Shue.
     I went into this movie expecting to see a SLACKER-ish film with
lots of characters passing briefly on-screen, never to be seen or
thought of again.  And although SLACKER was an interesting film (taken
in moderation--I'm definitely OD'd at one willing and three captive
viewings) it was boring.  I didn't *care* about the characters.  There
wasn't much situational variety--generally one small group after
another being accosted by a ranting loon.  Instead, TWENTY BUCKS
delivered an interesting and engaging movie with "main characters" that
I cared about, and only the minor players serve to pass the buck. (I
just *HAD* to put that in here somewhere. Sorry. -tak)
     You may be tempted to get up and leave a little early (you can see
the end coming, as two characters almost literally walk off into the
sunset) but there *IS* another minute or so after the old fashioned
"The End" script where the fate of the twenty is revealed.
Technical Notes: 
-----------------
     I don't really like looking for technical stuff, it tends to get
in the way of me watching the film.  The technical stuff should operate
in the background for the most part.  And that's what happened with
TWENTY BUCKS--no obvious "film effects" to interrupt your immersion
in the story line.  Which was just fine by me.
Talk with ScreenWriter Leslie Bohem:
------------------------------------
     After the screening, the local promoter introduced the
screenwriter, Leslie Bohem.  He fielded questions from the more than
half-full theatre that remained to hear him.  His responses were
elaborate, frank and informative.  We stayed for about twenty minutes
before they had to clear the theatre for the regular programming.
     The script was originally written by Leslie's father, Endre Bohem,
in 1935 (possibly the longest film in development).  After it was
accepted it was rewritten ten more times during the two-to-three year
filming process.  Most of the rewrites were not of the main plot, but
better ways the twenty could move around.
     This is his first screenplay that has made it to the SilverScreen,
though he said he's written 35+ screenplays and was paid for 25 of
them.  He has other film credits. After some arm-twisting from the
audience, he said they were mostly stuff in the horror genre--NIGHTMARE
ON ELM STREET V (the one with the baby), and some others.  He joked
about liking to exploring the father-child relationship (which he does
quite a bit in TWENTY BUCKS).  He appeared sort of embarrassed that he
worked in that genre, though not because he regretted the work, it
seemed he didn't want us to hold it against him.
     The movie was produced on a smallish budget (he jokingly said
"... 1/3 the budget of DEMOLITION MAN ...").  He was amazed at the quality
of the actors they were able to attract.  "They all worked cheap."  Many
of the actors were particularly drawn to the roles, especially Linda
Hunt, who relished her role as the street-person.
     He had not seen RESERVOIR DOGS, nor did he have any real say in
the casting.  So the irony in Steve Buscemi's (Mr Pink, the
"professional") role is particularly good.
     Christopher Lloyd's thief character was written as being extremely
pragmatic, but Bohem was pleased that the character turned sinister as
well.
     The only scene that remained constant through the two-to-three
years of intensive rewrites was the thieving scene.  This scene is
Leslie's favorite and was written by Leslie over a twelve-hour period
and is essentially unchanged.
     Much of the film has real life incidents from the life of Leslie's
father and co-writer, Endre Bohem.  These include the immigration
story, the bubble-gum thing, and the story-in-the-wallet.
     In response to a question about gratuitous nudity in the bachelor
party scene, he said that he didn't remember if he'd written it in to
be gratuitous or not (but he has no qualms about telling us if he
did).  The scene was written primarily to show the embarrassment and
awkwardness of such activities.  He remembers writing mainly to show
one character's (Buddha) bluster turn to embarrassment when dealing
with the stripper alone.
     This movie only opens in selected areas (San Francisco, Seattle
and New York) so if you're lucky enough to live in these areas go see
this movie.  The local promoter and Leslie Bohem both indicated that
its wider distribution depends on good box office performance and
reviews.  It certainly has my blessing.

Title
Review for My Girl 2 (1994)
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     With a new baby on the way for Shelly (Jamie Lee Curtis) and Henry
(Dan Akyroyd) Sultenfuss, Vada (Anna Chulmsky) feels a bit left out in
her home life and her pubescent social life.  She decides to visit
Uncle Phil (Richard Masur) in LA, birthplace of her deceased mother, in
hopes of finding out more about her mom.  During her five-day quest,
she learns that her mom wasn't what she expected, as well as learning a
great deal about herself.
Tak Thoughts ------------
     Okay, I admit I liked MY GIRL, even though it did have the
loathsome Macaulay Culkin in it, though he was tolerable there.  So I
knew what I thought MY GIRL 2 would feel like.  And I was right.  I got
to see some old friends, and make some new ones.  There were even a few
of those verge-of-tears-of-happiness moments that are kinda nice.
     Uncle Phil has found a job as a mechanic and is living with Rose
and her son (Austin O'Brien).  Rose is a great character.  She
complements Phil nicely and has a twinkle in her eye that emotes a very
playful attitude that's fun to watch.
     Vada's adventures as she tracks down information about her mother
are interesting too, especially a series of scenes where she begins to
realize her mother isn't the sweet little thing that she had expected.
But of course, her search culminates in a real treasure trove of good
information and good will.
     I'll briefly mention some things that didn't go well so I can
maintain my honorary grouch/cynic card....
     The romance between Vada and Rose's son seemed forced, but still
had some cute moments.  Vada's "black stage" (suggesting black
wallpaper for her room) back in Pennsylvania didn't seem to fit her too
well, nor did the childlike grumpiness at getting a new brother.  It
all happened too quickly and didn't fit her smiley, cheerful
disposition.  Happily, the awkwardness passes rapidly.  With her rapid
tracking, detective and schmoozing skills (plows thru red tape, travels
all over, and interviews half a dozen friends of Mom) she's got a great
career as a bounty hunter ahead of her.  But all these are really just
token objections.  I was more than happy to brush them aside, suspend
my disbelief, and enjoy the show.
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     I did like the movie, but I wouldn't recommend it at the movies
unless you're a big fan, which I'm not. There was nothing really WRONG
with this movie.  A friend thought MY GIRL 2 was "a cute movie" and I
agree.  This will make a great VCR rental.  And if you liked the first
one, this'll make a great nostalgia/warm-fuzzy home double feature.

Title
Review for Blank Check (1994)
One-Line-Summary
----------------
     Eleven-year-old Preston gets a million dollars, has lots of fun,
and draws wanted and unwanted attention from the FBI and some thugs.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Preston Waters (Brian Bonsall) is handed a blank check by a
hurried crook named Quigley (Miguel Ferrer), fills in $1 million, and
boldly cashes it at the local bank, where he is mistaken for a
messenger by crooked banker (Michael Lerner).  For the rest of the
movie, he is smitten by teller Shay Stanley (Karen Duffy), gets himself
chased by Quigley, the bank president, and thug Juice (Tone Loc), and
has lots of fun spending the money with his personal chauffer (Rick
Ducommun).
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     BIG.  Remember that movie?  Little kid gets turned into an adult,
plays like crazy, spends lotsa cash, gets a woman, and turns back into
a kid?  Well this has a similar feel--lots 'o cash is spent, much fun
is had, and there's a serious crush on Shay (Karen Duffy), though this
is Disney so nothing really happens.
     The plot's nothing really special.  It provides laughs and smiles
and a minimum of groans.  It does have a few itty-bitty twists, so I'll
turn my attention to the characters.
     What Disney film would be complete without bumbling villains?  The
bank president is the classic bumbler, but Quigley and Juice are pretty
respectable.  This is due in large part to (believe it or not), Tone
Loc.  According to the production notes "No one in his right mind would
believe I had any reason to fear [Quigley]...", so he helped them come
up with a plausible alternative to the bumbling sidekick that he was
originally to play.  Good move Tone Loc.
     Brian Bonsall (brother Andrew from "Family Ties," Worf's Klingon
son, Alexander, on "ST:TNG") is in almost every single scene and plays
a very smart, resourceful character whose only flaw is being eleven
years old.  I was very impressed--an intelligent kid character.
     Actor and comedian Rick Ducommun plays the chauffer, and is
responsible for a lot of the humor and jokes as he plays, wisecracks,
and jokes with Preston.
     And I couldn't leave this review without mentioning Karen Duffy,
who plays the bank teller.  Wow!  No wonder the kid had a crush on
her.  There's one scene involving a fountain and a wet dress that was
quite a treat.  Ahem.  I think those Disney censors were paid off for
that one.  Karen Duffy's certainly not a fantasy limited to
eleven-year-old boys.  The "chemistry" between them is oddly
believable, though.  He is smitten; she is very flattered, but always
takes him seriously (though there are extenuating circumstances)
without asking us to believe she could fall in love with an
eleven-year-old.
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     My rating system is set up differently than most, and it's time I
explained it.  Other reviewers try to rank movies on some sort of scale
as to how good they are.  This presents a problem for me, 'cause I like
almost all the movies I see.  So how do I give people an idea of the
merit of the film?  When friends ask me how I liked a movie, my reply
is usually "it was okay" or "it was good", usually followed by a
recommendation "wait for video", or "don't pay full price", or "I'll go
see it again with you!".  So there's where my rating came from.
     That said, I recommend BLANK CHECK as a VCR movie, or maybe
something to show the kids you're babysitting as a matinee.  I laughed,
had some chuckles, and ogled Karen Duffy, but recommend you do it at
home.

Title
Review for Threesome (1994)
TriStar Pictures /rated R
Starring:   Lara Flynn Boyle        Stephen Baldwin            Josh Charles
Classification: Romantic Comedy
Tak Rating: see it several times - full and/or matinee
One-Line-Summary
----------------
    A non-traditional love-triangle where no one's lust is reciprocated.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Things heat up when Alex (Lara Flynn Boyle) is mistaken for a male
by the college bureaucracy and placed with Eddie (Josh Charles) and
Stuart (Stephen Baldwin) in a college dorm room.  Alex soon develops a
huge lust for Eddie, Eddie would rather not get involved, and Stuart is
really hot for Alex.  The rest of the movie is about trying to sort out
these feelings and the situations that arise.
Tak Thoughts ** minor spoilers -- revealed in first 20 mins ** 
------------
     THREESOME opens with a definition of "deviant" that goes much like
this: 1) to stray, esp. from a standard, or principle.  2) to depart
from an established course or norm.  Eddie narrates, and says "... this
is the story of a time in our lives where we traveled the less traveled
path and, for a brief while, became deviants."
     When you look at the thick of things, it seems far from the norm,
but it's not such a stretch.  Each step down the so-called deviant
lifestyle makes sense as it's taken.  It's only after you've traveled
for awhile that you realize how far from normal you've gone.
     Anyone into combinations and permutations?  Well, THREESOME would
make an interesting story problem.  If you had three people, Alex,
Stuart, and Eddie; all of whom wanted to sleep with one of the others,
but the person they wanted didn't want them.  List all the possible
combinations of partners and their directed lust, indicated by a
directed arrow. ---> Find the solution with the most fulfilled lust.
     That's a lust of 3, but that's the given.  So let's list all the
other combos, including leftovers.
     The numbers say everyone should sleep with everyone, right?
Right.  But that's too easy.  And it just doesn't work.  Mostly because
the two guys have a problem with taking certain partners.  Though it's
not with each other, as Eddie is gay.  Eddie won't do Alex (except for
a trial run), and Stuart won't do Eddie (though he makes certain
concessions).  So they really have to find some solution that everyone
is comfortable with.
     They really try.  They try out all the combinations listed above.
They even bring in "outsiders" for the left out person in the couples
experiments.  These just don't work.  They're only really happy when
they're all together.  Then some sort of magic happens, where they can
all believe they're getting what they want.
     THREESOME could be seen as a glorification of an immoral
lifestyle.  This is certainly acknowledged, as the threesome become
quite the scandal at their dorm.  I certainly wouldn't condemn them.
It fact, I'm envious.  They look like they're having so much fun.  I
know there've been times in my life ... well ... :-)
     My favorite scene is a road trip where they abduct an garden
gnome, frolic in a rental convertible, and end up at a swimming hole.
Fun, tense, and delightful to watch.  Oh, and there's the "scary, hairy
Larry" scene.  There's lots more.
     I've spent more time than usual talking about the storyline.  I
think that's pretty high praise, actually.  I didn't have any problems
with any of the mechanics of the movie (actors, direction, etc) getting
in the way of me being totally immersed in the story.  Bravo.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     I liked THREESOME.  Strict adherence to wholesome-ness can be so
restricting at times.  Check it out--let yourself think about what it
might be like to be a deviant.  Who knows? If you're lucky, maybe
THREESOME will set you off on your own deviant path.

Title
Review for Sirens (1994)
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Traveling with her husband, Rev. Anthony (Hugh Grant), Estella
(Tara Fitzgerald) discovers an unfamiliar and initially unwelcome side
of herself in the Australian retreat of controversial artist Norman
Lindsay (Sam Neill).  While Anthony debates the moral implications of
art with Lindsay, Estella hangs out with the uninhibited models, Stella
(Elle MacPherson), Prue (Kate Fischer), and the child-like Giddy
(Portia De Rossi), and finds the SIREN within her.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     Australian director John Dugan (FLIRTING) summarizes SIRENS very
well: "I wanted to make a film about sensuality and repression and the
church's attitude towards sexuality."  I'll give him an A+ then.  Like
HENRY & JUNE, SIRENS is extremely sensual and focuses on one woman as
she grapples with this powerful emotion.
     SIRENS shows heaps of unabashed, and occasionally very sensual
nudity.  Except for Lindsay, who is always clothed, all eight
characters (male and female) are seen butt-naked or half dressed, and
not just briefly.  The painter's models Stella (Elle MacPherson) and
Prue (Kate Fischer) use sensual nudity to their advantage.  They
delight in making the English reverend and his wife uncomfortable.
     SIRENS does an wonderful job of showing female sensuality.  The
women are passionate, playful, and powerfully aware of their
sexuality.  Traditional Hollywood male sexuality is missing, replaced
by something much more arousing.  Even with the debut of super-model
Elle MacPherson (who gained twenty pounds to lend her body a Boticelli
contour), the "beauty myth" woman has been replaced by real women.  As
an added treat, there's a turn-about--a fake male, "Devlin: the
odd-jobs man," subject of many a Harlequin and cheap porno.
     And yet, SIRENS is not a preachy movie.  Lindsay's painting
reflect his statements that the female body is beautiful.  He believes
the church suppressed sexuality, and women as its embodiment, to gain
power over pagans who worshiped fertility and celebrated sexuality.
"How do you compete with something that popular?  You suppress it."
His painting attempt to reclaim that time and feeling of sensuality.
     The visuals were great.  His estate reminded me of an Olympian
glade--sensual, playful nude statues, fountains, riotous colors, and
a naturally beautiful nearby swimming hole.  All in stark contrast to
the unrelenting brown of the nearby town.
     And animals are everywhere, giving it a garden-of-eden feel.  The
characters fearlessly encounter snakes, kangaroos and insects.  I was
startled to see a moving koala bear--did you know they sort of hop?
Maybe "gallump" is more accurate.  In one scene Estella is awakened by
noises at night and encounters a strange animal ... and even *I* didn't
know what the hell it was!  I can't remember the last time I saw a new
creature.  It was the size of a large pig, and looked sorta like a
compact gerbil.  Very odd.  If anyone knows what this is, drop me a
line, I'd love to hear about it.
     NOTE: Although there was a real Normal Lindsay, this is *not* a
biographical study, nor was it intended to be.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     Sensual.  That's the word for SIRENS.  I used it nine times in
this review and that's almost the limit there.  I fully intend to watch
it again, this time with my girlfriend.  I can't wait for this one to
hit video as well.  Then I won't have to wait 'til I get home.

Title
Review for Angie (1994)
One-Line-Summary
----------------
     A woman comes to grips with her life, challenging her lifestyle,
family, friends and child in the process.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Angie's (Geena Davis) dreams and ambitions are different than
those of her friend Tina (Aida Turturro), or her family (James
Gandolfini, Jenny O'Hara).  So it's no surprise that things become
difficult: she breaks with longtime boyfriend Vinnie (Philip Bosco)
after becoming pregnant, and has an affair with Noel (Stephen Rea), a
Manhattan lawyer.  In trying to define herself, she faces her family's
dark secrets, and learns responsibility for herself and her baby.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     I think you have to be a woman to *truly* appreciate ANGIE.
Directed by Martha Coolidge (RAMBLING ROSE), ANGIE touches on many
issues, including pregnancy, childbirth, and searching for her identity
and place within her family structure.  This movie focuses on a woman,
is directed by a woman, and is target at women.  And that's fine--it's
about time.  But, being male, I wasn't as moved.
     There's one scene where Angie reflects on childbirth as having
finally made her feel like a part of something bigger than herself.  A
chain from mother to daughter, stretching back through time and on into
the future.  Yeah.  Okay.  If you say so.  I'd imagine this has a
greater impact if you're female.  The same with the childbirth scenes,
where Angie goes through about five different emotions within the span
of four minutes, and runs down the traditional retorts made so familiar
by female comedians. The material seemed tired to me, but I suppose
it's a never-ending source of material for women, just like being
knee'd in the groin is for men. I imagine women are a bit tired of
that, but it never fails to get at least a little bit of a reaction
from me.  So I guess I'll have to deal with the childbirth shtick.
     Geena Davis has been called "a feminist spirit trapped in the body
of a goddess" (which suggests an inaccurate contradiction) in Feb
Premiere magazine.  As such, her roles are always interesting.  Her
characters are complicated people, and in the case of Angie, are not
above making mistakes.  Which makes for good viewing.  Plus, the accent
she picked up for the role of Angie is outrageously accurate.
     I felt empathy with Vinnie, Angie's longtime boyfriend.  He just
doesn't quite understand why Angie has to be so difficult, or her
strong spark of irreverence and energy.  He's "... got a good heart ...",
but that's not enough for her.  At first I thought James Gandolfini's
Vinnie was going to degenerate into the stereotypical Italian, but it
didn't happen, for which I was profoundly glad.
     I like to listen for comments as people are walking away.  I get
some gems that way--some people would make great critics (actually
some of them are) if they'd expand their one-liners.  The best one from
ANGIE was from two guys as they walked out of the theatre:  "Well ...
there was some good stuff there, but it's certainly not for me." To
which the other guy added his assent.  And I'll add mine, too.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     I didn't get a lot out of ANGIE. I enjoyed watching it, and it
engaged my interest and even my emotions to some extent.  But I can't
see myself watching it at the theatre again.  I would have been happy
to watch ANGIE on cable, and I recommend you do the same.

Title
Review for Ref, The (1994)
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Gus, a hapless jewel thief (comedian Denis Leary), kidnaps a
bickering married couple (Judy Davis and Kevin Spacey) on Christmas Eve
and ends up becoming a hostage himself in the couple's home.  Forced to
play referee to their frantic feuding and to deal with their delinquent
son, annoying mother-in-law, etc, he finds himself at the mercy of this
All-American dysfunctional household and wishing for a "silent night"
anywhere else on the planet.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     The first time I saw THE REF was at a preview screening, a packed
house, filled with people out for the evening.  I left thinking THE REF
was "...the funniest movie I'd *ever* seen."  In fact, I it as my first
"many times at full price".
     So, this weekend, I got all psyched up after writing this review
and talked two friends into seeing a matinee on a sunny Saturday
afternoon.  Boy, was I disappointed.  I had to rewrite this review.
('Nother two hours down the drain).  I dunno if it was the non-capacity
crowd or my high expectations, but it wasn't as fun.  My friends liked
it, but they didn't rave about it like my friends at the screening.  I
think the crowd totally made a huge difference.
     On a better note, it's entertaining to watch people verbally slug
it out with each other.  The dirtier the fighting, the better.  Both
times I saw it, people in the theatres were laughing out loud.  And
although Denis Leary is a formidable talent here, he didn't steal the
show.  In fact, my favorite scenes are from early in the movie, where
the whole interplay is among Gus (Denis Leary), LLoyd (Kevin Spacey)
and Catherine (Judy Davis).
     Denis Leary is absolutely perfect.  His style perfectly
complements his exasperated, frustrated, pissed-off criminal
character.  He swears up a storm, snaps off zillions of one liners, and
rants non-stop.  And it's not really Denis Leary material--you don't
have to be a fan to enjoy THE REF.  In fact, the movie wasn't written
with him in mind at all, though it was a perfect match.
     The rest of the cast had their moments--the sheriff, a drunken
fruit-cake bearing Santa, in-laws that are funny because you recognize
them, and Gus's inept "...fucking waste of life..."  sidekick.  But it
wasn't the same caliber--just your normal lame-o hollywood idea of
funny.  Fortunately we're never away from the bickering for too long.
     The dialog in THE REF is fast-paced, and snappy from the very
first scene where we're introduced to the bickering couple at their
marriage counselor's office.  There's a slight tendency to get a bit
preachy that I noticed the second time around.  Denis Leary almost says
"Now kids, don't try this at home", as well as some speeches about
recognizing your privilege.
PS: Watch for the wrestling scene with the grandma: In Premier, Leary
    says he *really* got elbowed in the balls during filming.  Ouch.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     THE REF is really funny.  Though I'd recommend you go see it at
night, or whenever the theatre'll be crowded.  The experience will be
ten times better.  In either case, you'll enjoy THE REF.
-- 
Mark Takacs        mtakacs@netcom.com
Seattle, WA         "Only Amiga!"
WWW HomePage

Title
Review for Ace Ventura: Pet Detective (1994)
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Ace Ventura (Jim Carrey) is hired to find and return the kidnapped
Miami Dolphin's mascot, the dolphin Snowflake.  Zany antics abound as
Ace questions suspects, assists the police, researches, and romances.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     I didn't really *want* to like the movie, because it *looked*
stupid.  How funny can Jim Carrey be for 85 minutes?  His stuff's good
on five-minute skits, but I didn't think I could even remotely enjoy a
whole showcase movie.  I was wrong.  I ended up laughing a lot.
     Jim Carrey works all his famous bits--the cackling Popeye laugh,
his killer Captain James T. Kirk, and his physical humor.  Much of the
movie is funny because his exaggerated moves are so animated-comic-like
and, well, exaggerated.  He walks funny, he talks funny, and he makes
funny faces.  Doesn't sound funny, but he pulls it off.
     Tone Loc was surprisingly good as Ace's inside police contact.  He
didn't act like a rapper in a cameo, he just acted.  Check him out in
Disney's BLANK CHECK as well.  My opinion of him just keeps going up.
    Dan Marino should stick to making Isotoner commercials.  'Nuf said.
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     Talking about it ACE VENTURA really doesn't do it justice though.
You'll just have to watch it and, when it's all over, see how much you
laughed.  I'm recommending this movie to my friends (as long as they
like Jim Carrey) and I think I'll even go with 'em again.

Title
Review for Harlem (1993)
One-Line-Summary
----------------
     A native drug lord in Harlem's Sugar Hill neighborhood tries to
break away from the cycle of violence and start a new life.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     SUGAR HILL revolves around Romello (Wesley Snipes), his brother
Ray Nathan (Michael Wright) and their father (Clarence Thomas III),
told from Romello's point of view.  With both parents as victims of
heroin addiction, native Harlem residents Romello and Ray Nathan now
control the drug action, supported by old-time mob suppliers.  Problems
arise when smart, educated Romello wants out, tired of the
hopelessness, fear and violence.  Forces beyond his control, including
mob ties, a new and more ruthless operator, and his own family, try to
convince him that his place is in Harlem.
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     I love deadly serious, epic gangster movies like NEW JACK CITY,
JUICE, BOYZ IN THE HOOD, PUBLIC EYE, and THE GODFATHER series.  These
movies usually include slow motion shoot-outs, agonized and anguished
characters, and plenty of what could be considered melodramatic
scenes.  Sometimes they end on an upbeat note, and sometimes they end
like classical tragedies, with everyone dead or wishing they were.
SUGAR HILL manages to do both.  How?  I can't tell ya....
     The violence inherent in any drug/gangster movie was well handled
and not glamorized in the slightest.  When people get killed, tortured
or roughed up, it's not pretty, though it's not a gore-fest either.
It's stark, and all the more shocking.
     A friend of mine thought the pacing was slow, and even complained
about extraneous scenes, but I was totally into the movie and didn't
even notice the time.  Nor did I think any scenes were out of place.
     The scene under discussion involved Romello's love interest after
she spurns his lifestyle and goes out with an athlete, who ends up
almost raping her--instant asshole, just add alcohol.  She realizes
she had a good, loving man in Romello, especially as he's trying to
escape his old ways.  My friend argued that the whole "bad date" scene
was worthless, but I felt it served to explains why she returned after
so firmly rejecting him.
     Clarence Thomas III was wonderful as their shattered father.  A
former musician who used to deal but strayed, he was crippled by his
mob suppliers and was directly responsible for Romello's entry into a
criminal career.  Romello cares deeply for his father, a feeling not
shared by Ray, who can only see his father's failings.  Michael Wright
gives a believable performance as Ray Nathan, who is Romello's
constantly strung-out and emotionally insecure older brother.
     Wesley Snipes convinced me that Romello was intelligent,
street-wise and strong enough to establish his turf, yet also wise
enough to see that he's headed nowhere fast.  I believed he was a
basically good, caring person who had begun to regret the role he had
taken in life.  When I think about it, what I just wrote sounds really
implausible, but it worked, and worked well.
Tak Rating:
-----------
     I liked the intensity of SUGAR HILL.  The acting is first rate,
and I enjoyed the story.  If you like serious gang/drug dramas (verging
on tragedy) that depict the hopelessness and simultaneous struggle for
redemption, treat yourself to a performance of SUGAR HILL and then
bring some friends.

Title
Review for Blown Away (1994)
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     Jim Dove (Jeff Bridges) has been with the Boston bomb squad for
quite awhile.  He's a hero.  But now he wants out. He wants to settle
down with Kate (Suzy Amis) and her daughter Liz.  However, a figure
from his obscured past comes back to haunt him in the form of Mad
Bomber Ryan Garrity (Tommy Lee Jones).
Tak Thoughts 
------------
     BLOWN AWAY sucked.  I wanted to see lots of things blowing up.
Hoards of things.  And, to be fair, they did blow up a bunch of
stuff--a toilet, a truck, a man, a bridge, and a boat-of-eternal-
shrapnel-that never-hits-anyone.  They could have blown up more stuff
but our hero, played by Jeff Bridges, has this annoying tendency to
disarm the damn things.  And they missed a damn fine destruction chance
in one scene, where they imply that some lurking news and police
choppers were in for serious shrapnel.  But alas, no chunks-of-truck-
in-the-rotors.  A bomb's just not a bomb if it doesn't blow up, as
pointed out by Dennis Hopper in SPEED.
     Action.  That's what I wanted.  I've got a soft spot for mad
bomber movies, and SPEED hit the spot.  But BLOWN AWAY just didn't do
it for me.  Instead of lots of action, all sorts of PLOT gets in the
way.  Jeff Bridge's character is haunted by his past, he's the best but
he doesn't like it, he accidentally blew up some people he loved, he's
in Bomb squad to repent, blah blah blah.
     And the mad bomber?  The angry, insane IRA bomber is kinda old,
and the U2 soundtrack playing in the background is a little much.
Plus, Tommy Lee Jones is now robbing his own crazy man skit from UNDER
SIEGE.
     Oh, yeah. And there's BLOWN AWAY'S idea of suspense.  It's called
"extreme closeups" and slow-motion.  Dunno about you, but I though Jeff
Bridges' face looks awful stupid in extreme slow-mo.  And although
there are no spring-loaded cats (as horror movies are fond of for a
cheap scare) there's a kitchen scene where they'd have you believe
everything possible is gonna blow.  It works for the first grab at the
fridge, but the second?  Then the stove?  Then the light?  And the
phone?  And all five dials on the stove?  one by one? There was
laughter in the theatre on the third extreme closeup of the stove dial
hitting "lite."
     Any good stuff?  Yea, I guess so.  Let's see--the mad bomber has
a preference for Rube Goldberg type bomb triggers which make some
pretty neat scenes.  The bomb lore is pretty fascinating--"bouncing
betty's," and distilling explosive crystals with coffee filters.  They
killed a dog.  I dunno.  Read some other reviews for good stuff. I
don't wanna spend too much time remembering BLOWN AWAY.
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     Bah.  BLOWN AWAY took itself too seriously and got bogged down in
needless plot that didn't add anything to the experience.  Go see SPEED
again if you want a mad-bomber action flick.  Go rent IN THE NAME OF
THE FATHER if you want an Irish/IRA flick.  But don't spend your summer
movie cash on BLOWN AWAY.

Title
Review for Gunmen (1994)
One-Line-Summary
----------------
     A comedy/action-adventure where a DEA agent teams up with a
smuggler to beat a drug lord's hitman to a prize of $400 million.
Tak Plot Summary
----------------
     The action in GUNMEN takes place in South America and Mexico,
where we find out that drug lord Loomis (Patrick Stewart) has had his
entire $400 million fortune stolen.  He hires ruthless killer O'Malley
(Denis Leary) to retrieve it for him.  Meanwhile, temporary DEA agent
Cole (Mario Van Peebles) is forced to team up with outlaw Dani
(Christopher Lambert); only together do they have the whole picture of
where the millions have been hidden.
Tak Thoughts    ** minor spoilers -- from the first 10 minutes **
------------
     Well, this movie seems like yet more Hollywood actors jumping at a
chance to play cops and robbers on the big screen.  The result is a
silly whup-ass film.  Emphasis on silly.  There are film cliches, plot
devices from every drug-lord/cop movie every made, one-liners,
overacted parts and sappy music.  Some of the scenes are right out of
something like NAKED GUN. (a hand reaching out of a fresh grave, a
sunset burial at the beach (?!?), nuns, big black *shiny* 4x4s just
driven through the amazon basin, etc). Everyone's having great fun with
their roles though.  You need to keep in mind that it's a COMEDY action
adventure that doesn't take itself seriously at all.
     You really can predict what's going to happen next.  The plot
devices are well used, to put it kindly.  Some of the only surprises
come from abrupt jumps to odd places (an exclusive glitzy rap bar in
the middle of the Amazon jungle?).  You can even predict the end if you
think a little bit, but why ruin all your fun?
     I think Denis Leary (cd NO CURE FOR CANCER, THE REF, THE SANDLOT)
had the most fun.  He gets to play the hired killer who does everything
with a brutal grin and a sarcastic comment.  Repatedly, Leary's
O'Malley character gets to stomp around and express frustration in
amusing ways as he confronts his boss, chases our heros, and brow-beats
his help for shooting-to-kill when he needs information.  It's just so
hard to get good thugs these days.
     Patrick Stewart (ST:TNG, DUNE, LADY JANE, LIFEFORCE) played his
drug lord role with relish, especially since it is such a change for
him recently.  From the press packet:
        With his role as the captain of the starship Enterprise, "I
    became everything synonymous with honor, intelligence, and
    rectitude," he says.  "Loomis is a delightful and refreshing
    alternative to that."
Indeed.  In his very first appearance, we see him sitting at an open
grave, where he calmly has his wife buried alive.
     According to the press packet, Christopher Lambert (HIGHLANDER,
GREYSTOKE,THE SICILIAN) called up out of the blue and asked for this
roll.  Apparently, he wanted to play a comedy character, Cole's idiot
side-kick. I'm not particularly fond of idiot-comedy of this sort, but
he was good at it.
     The action was good. Lots of chases, gun-fu (all the bad guys went
to storm-trooper gun schools--nobody can shoot straight when they're
shooting at main characters), knife-fu and helicopter-fu, boat-fu, and
some good old beating-fu.  There are plenty of unbelievable action
sequences--more than your typical surviving a brutal beating with a few
scratches.  We get dives out of helicopters, over cliffs and waterfalls
and through rapids--all easily shaken off.  There's also an awesome
knife assassin--he knocks off five guards in as many seconds, some at
least thirty feet away, behind partial cover and fifteen feet up.
What's the drug lord need with O'Malley when he's got this gem?
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     I really wish they woulda left the cliched cinematic moments out
of this film.  I can only hope the more cheesy ones were in there for
their comedy effect.  The action was pretty good, though a bit of a
stretch.  And finally, I'm not sure the whup-ass mixes well with
comedy.  *However*, viewed with all those caveats, it was still a fun
movie to watch.  It's better viewed as a showcase for your favorite
actors and rappers.  They all wanted to make a comedy/whup-ass movie
and they finally got their chance in GUNMAN.

Title
Review for Man's Best Friend (1993)
NewLine Cinema / approx 90 mins / color
Rated: R
Tak rating:  see once as a matinee   (or wait a few weeks and rent it)
Tak Summary (I couldn't resist SOME low-grade guessable spoilers)
     Sounds great, right?  Well, apparently the good doctor hasn't
gotten all the kinks worked out yet, for the dog goes dangerously
psychotic and tends to munch on the lab help unless he gets his
periodic tranquilizer shots.
     Which wouldn't be of much concern to us except that Max is freed
from the vivisection-practicing lab by an investigative reporter who
befriends him.  Max, much to her surprise and delight, ends up staying
with her and her animal-disliking boyfriend.
     Max's drugs hold out for the night, so he remains calm.  But the
next morning he's feeling rather frisky: he offs a cat (defying gravity
to do so), a parrot, a mailman, a hydrant (I won't spoil it for ya),
makes two attempts at the reporter's boyfriend, and stops briefly for
some frolicking with a nervous neighborhood collie.
     Meanwhile the reporter (who still thinks Max is a big cuddle
beast) decides to give Max away so he won't be killed, found, or
returned to the EMAX lab. She takes him to a junkyard owner who
apparently has a dog-heaven ranch outside town.  She leaves, and before
she's out of sight, he beans Max over the back o'the head with a shovel
(he coulda used some spider sense ...), and chains him up for a career
as a junkyard dog.  Max will have none of it--he breaks his bonds,
gets a beauty mark, dispatches the owner (guys, you might not wanna
watch this scene ... ouch) and bounds home.
     Meanwhile the doctor has finally convinces the police to stop
investigating him for murder, and has them send the troops after his
million-dollar dog.  The bumbling police arrive just in time to save our
heroine, but not so-in-time for her boyfriend, whose face will never be
the same again (Max must drink too much cranberry juice).  We're then
treated to a five-car chase scene, low-budget car crashes
(fender-benders really), some goofy dog catchers, and the required
computer graphics.
     We pause briefly for breath, then jump right back into the thick
of things with many dead policemen, bullets, more car crashes and a
climactic showdown back at the Lab where it all began.  In true B-movie
style, they manage to include all sorts of goodies in the climax.  They
start with a chase, elbow-fu, projectiles, a car crash.  And it doesn't
stop until they've combined an impressive array of gimmicks, including
a series of chases, rubble, lurking psychotic dogs, the stuffed-dog
variant of the spring-load-cat scare trick, a shotgun, electrocution,
needles, big knives, tense hiding in dark spooky labs, bleeding (lots
of bleeding), a tender moment, and poetic justice by a cute dog that I
thought shoulda shared the parrot's fate.
     The movie ends on a sad note, but then turns things around
with ... anyone? anyone? ... hope for ... anyone? anyone? ... a
sequel!
     Okay, okay. There *was* one bad edit that looked like they dropped
about five frames from a chase scene.  And a tree-climbing scene
reminded me of those old live-actor spider-man movies where you can
just *tell* the camera is sideways.  But that's what makes a truly good
B-movie.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     I do so love bad movies.  This one was a fine example.  It was fun
to watch, the plot was dealt with early on so we could got down to the
action, and we got to laugh, cheer and cringe.
     The blood-splashing was kept to a minimum, mostly at the
beginning.  And they never do show much maiming actually going on ...
just enough to let your imagination do all the work, which I prefer
anyway.  The St.Bernard wasn't actually *shown* attacking complete
people--lots of close-ups of limbs and suggestive action cuts.  But
there was the scene where some kids sic Max on a cat (yea! there's too
many of these foul creatures anyway), where Max ingests the whole cat
in bloodless snake-like fashion.
     They got pretty thick with the animal rights moralizing at times,
(again near the beginning--was their boss watching then?) but it was
bearable.  There were lots of familiar cookie-cutter movie characters,
but that's okay too.
     We hear some classic lines from the doctor: "In the right hands
Max can save lives, but in the wrong hands he can be a deadly weapon."
I've heard *that* one a lot.  The parrot even gets some good wise-cracks
in before he turns into a feathered kibble.  (I wonder if they actually
taught it its lines?)  A security guard with all of three lines gets a
one-liner where he calls the mad doctor "jerk"--I guess you had to
be there.  It did get a chuckle from the audience.
     The plot's not terribly original, and looks rather tattered under
good lighting.  What's up with the laser-sighted dart gun?  Or the
throw-away comment about Max turning on the doctor?  Why'd the police
go from disbelief and laughter to fully supporting the doctor with a
five car chase, a stake-out and blazing guns? Just imagine: "you want
us to shoot the dog??"  But that's just picky afterthoughts.  We don't
need no steenkin plot!
     And the types of -fu were amazing.  We got to see (in alphabetical
order): barrel-fu, bat-fu, brake-line-fu, bullet-fu, cage-fu, claw-fu,
dartgun-fu, elbow-fu, fang-fu, knife-fu, mace-fu, rat-poison-fu,
shotgun-fu, shovel-fu, uric acid-fu, welding torch-fu, and I'm sure I'm
forgetting others.
     A light-hearted, fun, low-gore, love-conquers-all, whup-ass
movie.  Entertainment for the whole family.  This would make a good
installment in your whup-ass matinee diet.  You'll need a break from
all the smarmy feel-good holiday movies coming up anyway.
