Authors
Rod Crawford
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for World, the Flesh and the Devil, The (1959)
MGM, B&W, 95 min.                       Science Fiction/post-apocalyptic
Director: Ranald MacDougall         Cinematographer: Harold S. Marcorati
Wide-screen process credited as CinemaScope, but really Panavision.
Written by the director from a story by Ferdinand Reyher and M.P. Shiel's
1901 novel 'The Purple Cloud.' Co-produced by Belafonte's HarBel
Productions.
Stars: Harry Belafonte, Inger Stevens, Mel Ferrer.
Full details in Internet Movie Database.
Miner Ralph Burton (Harry Belafonte), trapped in a cave-in, waits in vain
for rescue. After several days, he manages to dig his own way out, and
emerges jubilant into daylight...to find a completely deserted world. Not
a voice, not a bird call. The only moving, acting things are wind, water,
fire...and himself. Making his way to New York, he's greeted by
lifelessness (except for a seagull or two that perhaps I shouldn't have
noticed). In a radio station, Ralph plays a tape of the last newscast;
tears roll down his cheeks as he hears the story of humanity's end.
In this first half of the film, with Ralph (as far as he knows) alone on
Earth, compelling and ironic images abound. Bridges jammed with hundreds
of abandoned cars. Panoramic vistas of deserted Manhattan. Cutting to a
different empty street with each toll of the church bell Ralph rings. He
puts litter in a never-to-be-emptied receptacle; his huge shadow dances on
a wall; in a long shot, he looks over the parapet of a windblown
skyscraper roof. Cinematographer Marcorati certainly should have been
Oscar-nominated. As far as I know, this was the last film of his short
career: what a pity! Miklos Rosza also deserves notice for a score that
contributes to dramatic impact without ever becoming overblown.
After a while, ultimate aloneness makes Ralph a little eccentric. But his
super-solitary life is not without touches of humor. When he finally meets
a second survivor, the focus and interest of the film narrow drastically;
with a more familiar type of interpersonal relationship to deal with,
MacDougall sets aside his depiction of one man against immensity, to the
audience's great loss. Ironically, but an obvious source of conflict under
the circumstances, Ralph just can't shake off the 1959-style racial
attitudes of the world that is no more. Race, though seemingly a central
issue to this part of the film, is not dealt with in any depth. Worse yet,
when the population of New York grows to three, MacDougall can think of
nothing more original for them than an "eternal triangle." But wait: the
last minutes offer a brief return to pictorial excellence, and the
conclusion is not as pat as you were afraid it was going to be.
As science fiction, the film is ahead of its time, despite (or because of)
no attempt at high-tech special effects. The explanation for Earth's
depopulation is actually fairly plausible; especially by the standards of
'fifties screenwriters, who seldom rose much above the "radiation grows
giant grasshoppers" level. The biggest "suspension of disbelief" required:
you just have to stop asking where all the bodies are! Really, not showing
the bodies seems to be a convention of post-apocalyptic cinema...
Belafonte's acting is just fine in all respects. And he sings, too. Inger
Stevens, not always considered an outstanding actress, here gives a
competent, if low-key, performance. Besides, she's lovely, and nicely
costumed and photographed. As for Mel Ferrer, he's just a vacuum here, not
even a hissable villain; the film would have been far better without him.
As a whole, The World, the Flesh and the Devil (wonder why this title?) is
badly flawed because of the lackluster second half. But even this doesn't
really dim (for me at least) the sheer brilliance of the first half. It
remains my favorite post-apocalyptic movie.


Title
Review for Laura (1944)
20th Century Fox, B&W, 88 min.                        Film-Noir/Mystery
Director: Otto Preminger (AAN)
Cinematographer: Joseph LaShelle (AA, B&W cinematography)
>From the 1943 novel by Vera Caspary (all 3 screenwriters AAN)
Stars: Gene Tierney, Dana Andrews, Clifton Webb (AAN supporting actor),
Vincent Price, Judith Anderson. Full details in Internet Movie Database.
A notable lack of reviews of classics in the r.a.m. review archives has
led me to try my hand at what may turn into a series...starting with one
of Hollywood's better attempts at filming a mystery novel with atmosphere. 
In fact, Preminger here lays on atmosphere with a trowel. The original
novel is a nice, readable mystery with good character development, but it
falls short of being a classic in its own right. The screenplay adheres
closely to the original story, with necessary compression, but adds
episodes to make the character conflicts (external and internal) more
cinematic and allow for the stormy-night and darkened-room images of the
film noir style. A surprising change is total omission of the crucial clue
(I won't spoil it) that, in the novel, leads McPherson to the killer. This
can't be accidental: in the movie, the mood is the thing, not the mystery.
A very brief plot summary: Homicide detective Mark McPherson (Dana
Andrews) investigates the murder by shotgun of advertising executive Laura
Hunt (Gene Tierney) in her posh apartment. Among the suspects: her fiancee
Shelby Carpenter (Vincent Price) whom she may have been about to dump; her
social mentor and platonic lover, super-cultured and bitterly sardonic
Waldo Lydecker (Clifton Webb); her jet-setting aunt and heir (Judith
Anderson) who is, shall we say, rather fond of Shelby herself.
In physical types, casting made major departures from the novel, where
Waldo was fat (Webb is thin), Laura was thin (Tierney is not), McPherson
limped (Andrews doesn't) and Shelby was a hunk (Price is hardly that,
though in 1944 he was not yet typed in sinister roles). In acting,
however, Webb makes the role of Waldo a dominating one; he thoroughly
deserved his Oscar nomination. He also has most of the best lines in a
script full of delightful zingers like "I'm not kind, I'm vicious. It's
the secret of my charm."  Gene Tierney, whom we meet turning heads in
flashbacks, was not one of the decade's more charismatic actresses, but
her beauty atones for much, and she is here photographed with such
lustrous, flattering skill that we accept without question her devastating
effect on the men in her orbit. Price is believable in a weak role, but
his intermittent attempts at a southern accent are best forgotten. Judith
Anderson is perfect; those whose image of her is conditioned by REBECCA
(1940) will be surprised at how glamorous she looks here. Dana Andrews
starts the film as his usual stolid self, but gets better as he goes
along. He really begins to come to life in the scene where McPherson
realizes he's falling in love with a woman he knows to be dead: a bizarre,
almost necrophilic touch that really gives you an idea of the film's mood.
So here we are, back with mood and atmosphere. David Raksin's haunting
"Laura" theme music (which became a big-band standard) contributes
largely, as do settings, dialogue and all. Scenes like the mob of
sightseers outside the apartment building give a welcome touch of
film-noir cynicism. But pictorial effects contribute most to making LAURA
a true classic (more so on the big screen than in video). As with more
typical film noir, much takes place at night; even by day, cinematographer
LaShelle somehow manages to backlight key characters most of the time. The
high-contrast black and white images are sharper than "real" life. Shadows
are used with skill and precision; the brief scene where McPherson follows
Shelby through a stormy night is a gem of its type. And the key, almost
dreamlike scenes in Laura's apartment are suitably dominated by the large,
watchful-seeming portrait of Laura on the wall. Preminger meant to give
his audience the shivers with a very subtle, non-horror dose of pure
atmosphere. Despite some small plot holes, I think he succeeded.


Title
Review for Night and the City (1950)
20th Century Fox, B&W, 96 min.                        Film-Noir
Director: Jules Dassin
Cinematographer: Max Greene (a.k.a. Mutz Greenbaum)
Screenplay by Jo Eisinger from the 1946 novel by Gerald Kersh.
Stars: Richard Widmark, Francis L. Sullivan, Googie Withers, Gene Tierney,
Herbert Lom, Stanislaus Zbyszko. Full details in Internet Movie Database.
Though filmed in London, with a partly British cast (5 of the credited
players, including stars Widmark and Tierney, were American), this is very
much a Hollywood film, and about as "noir" as Hollywood ever got. If I
were picking the Ultimate Film Noir, 'Night and the City' would be a
leading candidate.
In the gritty underworld of post-WWII London, Harry Fabian (Widmark) is a
small-time shill and all-around hustler. Though completely unprincipled,
Harry remains almost likeable through his childlike, imaginative
eagerness, and because he is the underdog. Yes, success in his chosen
field has eluded Harry; but his certainty that each new scheme will bring
him the "life of ease and plenty" makes him feel justified in swindling or
stealing from anyone, even the woman (Tierney) who inexplicably loves him.
Harry's latest scheme is foolproof (he thinks): he'll wrest "control of
wrestling in all London" away from gangster Christo (Herbert Lom), by
taking on as partner Christo's father Gregorius (Stanislaus Zbyszko,
former U.S. champ), an aging, "legitimate" Greco-Roman style wrestler. But
in execution, this plan makes Harry new enemies, all of whom are harder, 
more realistic, and more dangerous than himself. Caught like a rat in a 
trap?  Harry's plight is more that of a worm in a malevolent chicken coop.
Almost all the performances are just a bit over the top, not least
Widmark's as Fabian, from cringing to cocky bravado to hysterical
enthusiasm (with just a touch of his Tommy Udo laugh from 'Kiss of Death
(1947)'). Francis L. Sullivan, as nightclub owner Nosseross, turns in a
menacing portrait worthy of Sydney Greenstreet. Googie Withers is
spellbinding as Helen, a hard-as-nails former b-girl who married the boss
but isn't above using Fabian (or anyone else) to further her ends; perhaps
the most compelling performance of her career. An array of fine character
actors vividly represent the small-time grifters who constitute most of
Harry's social circle. These larger-than-life performances fit the story
perfectly. Gene Tierney, de-glamorized but still lovely as the nominal
leading lady, does a fine job as Mary, but her more naturalistic acting
seems pallid by comparison. Fortunately, the American actors don't attempt
phony British accents.
Screenwriter Eisinger changed the original novel extensively (at least
partly because of censorship), while remaining true to its spirit. Many
plot events, the ending, and especially the character relationships are
different. In the book, Fabian is a pimp, living with Zoe, a bosomy
prostitute; Mary is Mrs. Nosseross, while Helen is a nightclub hostess
involved in a second main plot with Adam the sculptor. The 'Strangler' is
black, and there is no character Kristo. The novel is well worth reading,
but I'm inclined to think the screenplay in some ways an improvement.
This is cinematographer Greene's only film-noir credit, but his skill at
low-key lighting is also evident in thrillers like 'So Evil My Love
(1948).' In 'Night and the City' Greene has helped director Dassin to
create a brilliant visual style, very different from previous Dassin films
such as 'The Naked City (1948).' The world of Harry Fabian is a maze of
wet cobblestoned alleys, narrow staircases, bombed-out walls, and
subterranean dives, crossed by the blackest, most menacing shadows London
has ever seen. Actors are often photographed from low angles and even lit
from beneath for maximum menace. Location scenes meld so seamlessly with
studio shots that infinite pains must have been taken with location
lighting. From tight close-ups to long shots, the entire film is a
sequence of little masterpieces of visual composition. Editing is
similarly superb, with not a moment wasted. Franz Waxman's music score
swings from unobtrusive to the same hyper-dramatic heights as the acting
and lighting. This is (fortunately) not real life. This is film noir, a
world unto itself.
Not everyone enjoys film noir, as 20th Century Fox discovered when this
one lost money on first release. Perhaps you do have to be slightly
twisted to feel ecstatic over a film as dark as this...who, me?

