Authors
Darren Marrese II
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
THE GAME: Film Review by Darren Marrese
        Ahh, September. I love this time of year. School has resumed; the
leaves on the trees are beginning to change color; and all the
mega-budget, mega-hyped and mega-disappointing summer action films are
finally on their way out of our local cinemas. Thus Fall has officially
begun. So, now that another summer of special effect laden films is
over, what can we expect from Hollywood in the months to come? Here's
your answer: exciting dramas like David Fincher's latest film, The Game.
Following hot on the success of 1995's Seven, Fincher has teamed up with
The Net's scribes, John Brancato and Michael Ferris, to bring us a
spectacular psychological thriller more deserving of your hard earned
loonie than any Batman and Robin movie.
        The Game stars Michael Douglas and Sean Penn as two wealthy but distant
brothers. Douglas plays Nicholas Van Orton, a workaholic facing his 48th
birthday. Penn plays Conrad Van Orton, a recovering junkie who prefers
to live on the wild side of life with his family's money. As Nick's
birthday draws nearer, he finds himself haunted by recurring memories of
his long dead father and the inescapable fact that he's alone. Conrad
recognizes Nick's need for a change of pace and gives him a gift
certificate for a strange and mysterious company called Consumer
Recreational Services which promises their clients a 'profound life
experience'. Sound intriguing? Wait, it gets better.
        In a nutshell, so as not to ruin the movie's fantastic plot twists, CRS
specializes in customized games based on each client's psychological and
lifestyle deficiencies. Based on the data that CRS has obtained about
Nick through a series of physical and psychological tests, they devise a
game so twisted and so dangerous that Nick is brought to the very brink
of his sanity, and forced to reevaluate every aspect of his life. The
object of Nick's game, for instance, is to find out what the object of
the game is. Confused yet? So was I, but that's exactly what Fincher
wants us to feel. 
        Half the fun of the film relies heavily on the audiences' ability to
empathize with Nick. For instance, while Nick struggles to understand
the object of the game, the audience finds themselves struggling as
well. Our questions are Nick's questions, and, like Nick, we become
confused and agitated when no answers are given. Just when we think we
know who is real and who isn't, what's part of the game and what isn't,
the creators deliberately throw a monkey wrench into the mechanics of
our expectations and lead us off towards another dead end-again, and
again, and again. In fact, even the ending is deceiving, but you'll have
to go see The Game to see what I mean. Trust me, if you thought the
ending of Seven was shocking, you haven't seen anything yet!
Just because I'm a nobody doesn't mean that I'm not a somebody!
