Authors
jasanfor
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for One True Thing (1998)
Who wouldn't want a mom like radiant Kate Gulden?
 She's the queen of arts and crafts, with domestic skills that could put
Martha Stewart to shame -- just see how she embroiders pillows and decorates
cribs like nobody's business.
Besides, she's genuinely nice, a veritable fountain of love and
understanding; this is the kind of mother who must have packed cheerful
little notes in every nutritionally balanced lunch she sent to school. When
someone breaks a plate in her kitchen, Kate doesn't rant or weep. She kindly
asks the offender to save the pieces for use in her mosiac table.
 When Kate's daughter Ellen looks at her, though, it's not with affection.
In fact, she's quietly disgusted. This is a woman who's squandered her
potential, thinks Ellen, a New York Magazine reporter who'd rather eat her
word processor than cook up a batch of Mom's zucchini soup.
 Ellen is instead awed by her father George, an English professor who won a
National Book Award years ago and tells her inspirational things like "When
I was working at The New Yorker, I would spend all day working on one
sentence."  George has a pithy line for every situation -- too bad most of
them are unattributed steals from James Thurber.
 "The one thing that I never wanted to do was live my mother's life," Ellen
(Renee Zellweger) confesses early on in "One True Thing," adapted from Anna
Quindlen's keenly observed best-seller. But circumstances force her to do
exactly that, as Kate (Meryl Streep) becomes ill and Ellen is coerced by
workaholic George (William Hurt) into putting her career on hold to return
home to play nursemaid and fill-in housekeeper.
 Quindlen's book was told from Ellen's point of view, with the parents
serving mostly as a backdrop for her story. Karen Croner's screenplay gives
George and Kate greater depth and color while jettisoning the small-town
scandal set-up that framed the novel's action. Ellen is also a bit easier to
empathize with onscreen than she is on the page, where she often comes
across as shallow and uncomfortably self-absorbed.
 Zellweger, fresh from her outstanding work in the little-seen "A Price
Above Rubies," dazzles again as she follows Ellen's arc from condescending
careerist to enlightened daughter. Playing the same league with seasoned
pros such as Streep and Hurt must be a formidable challenge, but Zellweger
admirably rises to the ocassion.
 George's aloofness and inner despair are easily communicated by the
brilliant Hurt, whose talent has been shamefully wasted throughout most of
this decade in second-rate movies like "Trial By Jury" and "Mr. Wonderful."
Obviously some of the production team had a sense of humor about Hurt's
career since "One True Thing" manages to include a timely "Lost In Space"
joke and a copy of Anne Tyler's "The Accidental Tourist" is prominently
featured on George's bookshelf.
 But the movie ultimately belongs to Streep, who illuminates the
extraordinary soul inside an everyday woman. Streep understands Kate feels
just as removed from Ellen as Ellen does from Kate, and the actress hints at
a well of suppressed jealousy and slight antagonistic tendencies behind
Kate's pleasant persona. When Kate hosts a costume party dressed as Dorothy
from "The Wizard of Oz," we're unsure whether it's because she truly
believes "there's no place like home" or if it's just a clever way to jab at
her daughter's ego.
 Likewise George, who comes off as the stereotypical philandering academic
in the book, gets a more sympathetic reading in the film. So much of
Croner's writing is smart and straightforward, it's a shame she couldn't
have freshened up the character of Ellen's faithless boyfriend Jordan (Nicky
Katt) or given brother Brian (Tom Everett Scott) more personality. They're
the film's only glaring weaknesses.
 There's a fine line between the touching and the saccharine, and it's one
many filmmakers find extraordinarily difficult to navigate. Just look at
movies like "Simon Birch" and "Deep Impact," which do everything short of
stomping on your toes in an effort to jerk tears.
 Under Carl Franklin's low-key direction "One True Thing" succeeds where
these pictures fail by maintaining its dignity and, just as importantly, its
honesty. You won't cry out of a sense of obligation, but because Franklin
and his incredible cast drive the material straight to the heart. By the
way, don't bother with tissues: For the last half-hour of this picture,
you'd be better off bringing a sponge instead.
James Sanford

Title
Review for Sweet Hereafter, The (1997)
THE SWEET HEREAFTER
(Fine Line Features)
 The key scene in "The Sweet Hereafter" includes one of the most disturbing
images you're likely to see this year: a schoolbus full of children plunges
over a bank, rolls out onto a frozen lake and pauses for a few seconds
before the ice underneath it gives way and the bus and its passengers
disappear into the frigid water below. It's a  moment that will change the
people of the tiny Canadian town of Sam Dent forever, as the once-insular
community begins to turn upon itself with neighbor betraying neighbor in a
race for justice, money and, the most elusive thing of all, peace of mind.
 Based on the acclaimed novel by Russell Banks, "The Sweet Hereafter" is
both deeply disturbing and almost relentlessly grim, which is hardly
unexpected, given the subject matter. The true surprise is director Atom
Egoyan's approach to the material. In the hands of Hollywood, this might
have been sensationalistic; at the very least it would have been ripe with
scenes of hysterical parents and angry townsfolk. But Egoyan finds in Banks'
book a fable, a story about the journey from shock to grief to renewal, "the
sweet hereafter" of the title. Late in the film, Robert Browning's "The Pied
Piper of Hamelin" is read as a bedtime story, and it becomes a perfect
metaphor for the strange chain of events that have pulled Sam Dent apart.
 The man largely responsible for the dissent is Mitchell Stephens (Ian
Holm), a lawyer from out of town who arrives in Sam Dent hoping to put
together a class-action lawsuit against the manufacturer of the bus. A
seasoned pro, Stephens knows exactly the right words to say to move these
small-towners to his side. "I'm here to give your anger a voice," he tells
the distraught parents of one of the victims. "There's no such thing as an
accident. The word doesn't mean anything to me." That's a lie, of course: To
Stephens the accident means a potential financial windfall if he can win the
case, which will ultimately turn largely on the testimony of Nicole (Sarah
Polley), a gifted young singer who survived the crash but has been left
crippled. Nicole's father Sam (Tom McCamus), with whom she's had an odd and
possibly incestuous relationship, is among the most money-hungry in the
community, although it's difficult to tell whether he wants compensation
because of Nicole's injuries or because of her new aloofness toward him.
 Stephens, too, has a difficult time with his own daughter, a drug-dazed
wanderer named Zoe (Caerthan Banks) who calls him frequently on his cellular
phone, demanding money and attention in between lies. It is this aspect of
Stephens that allows Egoyan to show us the man's secret heart and
well-shrouded grief. Obviously, Stephens' quest for remuneration for the
parents of Sam Dent is fueled at least partially by his realization that he
has in fact lost his own child, who's become one of the living dead.
 The acting is mostly low-key and understated, in keeping with the film's
tone. Holm and Polley are particularly moving, but Bruce Greenwood, as one
of the few citizens to resist Stephens' spell, is also memorable.  As in
Egoyan's previous film "Exotica," the director paints this picture
deliberately and somewhat abstractly, which may frustrate those who prefer
to have everything spelled out and clarified. In some spots, "The Sweet
Hereafter" is almost too oblique for its own good, particularly in a finale
that almost seems to smack of "The X Files." But Egoyan also conjures up
some powerful scenes, such as when Stephens interviews Dolores (Gabrielle
Rose), the bus driver who's become a town pariah since the accident, and
whose living room wall is adorned with framed photos of each of the kids on
the bus, staring out at her like a gallery of little ghosts.
James Sanford

Title
Review for Waterboy, The (1998)

 It's probably damning the picture with faint praise to say "The Waterboy"
may well the best Adam Sandler movie ever. Certainly, for those who can't
abide Sandler even in the smallest doses, that statement won't entice them
into the theater.
 But this gleefully silly movie may go a long way toward swinging the votes
of those who are still undecided about the former "Saturday Night Live"
star; art it ain't, but "The Waterboy" is pure, undiluted Sandler, in the
kind of role only he could pull off. The movie also owes much of its success
to divinely hammy Kathy Bates and the spooky-sexy Fairuza Balk, a zesty and
offbeat love interest. "The Waterboy" is little more than a live-action
cartoon, but it's a pretty funny one.
 Sandler plays Bobby Boucher, a dim but devoted "water distribution
enginner" for the Mud Dogs, a twelfth-rate college football team, who ends
up on the playing field after channelling his years of repressed rage into
some spectacular tackles. Smothering Mama (Bates) will hear nothing of her
baby playing "foosball," as she calls it, so Bobby must keep his gridiron
fame a secret from her. You see, when Mama has to deal with adversity, she
gets "the brain pain" and Bobby loves her much too much to ever hurt her.
 The screenplay by Sandler and Tim Herlihy is full of the kind of twisted
little jokes that turn a passable comedy into a good one. The Mud Dogs'
cheerleaders, for example, have become so depressed by the team's 40-game
losing streak they now spend their time drinking heavily on the sidelines.
And when over-protective Mama tries to scare just-out-of-jail Vicki (Balk)
away from Bobby by remarking that her 31-year-old son still wears Deputy
Dawg pajamas, Vicki replies, in an aroused purr of a voice, "I happen to
find Deputy Dawg very, very sexy."
 Speaking in a voice that sounds like he has a crawfish stuck in his throat,
Sandler makes Bobby appropriately dopey-adorable, easily his least abrasive
screen character to date. Much of the rest of the movie's humor comes from
Bates' willingness to go to extremes in pursuit of a laugh, and while her
more high-brow fans may cringe when they see this Oscar-winning actress
struggling to play badminton with a mule, so what? She appears to be having
a pretty good time, and she's certainly providing the audience with one.
James Sanford
