Authors
Race Mathews
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Tales of Hoffmann (1951)
The action of the Voyager Company in making available the neglected Powell
and Pressburger masterpiece "the Tales of Hoffman" has been insufficiently
acknowledged and applauded. "Hoffman" was released in 1951, at a time when
the gritty realist school of cinema was dominant. The critics of the day
were uncomprehending of the deliberate artifice of what Powell called his
"totally composed" film. The sheer beauty of the production, the brilliance
of the cast and the glories of Offenbach's music as conducted by Sir Thomas
Beecham largely went over their heads. A similar obtuseness has been
expressed more recently by Powell's fellow British director, Ken Russell.
It remained for the young Martin Scorsese to grasp Powell's intention, from
a black and white screening on television. That the film could have so
great an impact, even in the absence of the lush and carefully planned
colour for which Powell and Pressburger were renowned, speaks volumes for
what the critics overlooked.
"Hoffman" was a follow-up by Powell and Pressburger to their earlier
stunning box office success with "The Red Shoes". The theme of the film is
Hoffman's disappointed love affairs with the Parisian mechanical doll
Olympia (Moira Shearer), the Venetian courtesan, Giulietta (Ludmilla
Tcherina), and the Greek singer, Antonia (Ann Ayars). The action occurs in
the context of a fourth affair, with the actress Stella (Shearer again),
whom Hoffman (Robert Rounseville) also loses. The separate tales are tied
together by Hoffman, his muse, Nicklaus (Pamela Brown), and his nemesis,
Lindorf (Robert Helpmann), who appears successively in the guises of the
spectacle-maker, Coppelius, the magician, Dapertutto, and the doctor, Dr
Miracle. Two ballets - the entrancingly beautiful Dragonfly Ballet and the
Ballad of Kleinzach - were created for the film by the leading British
choreographer of the day, Frederich Ashton, who also danced their male
roles. Sets by the great stage and screen designer, Hein Heckroth, were
never better than in "Hoffman". Sequences such as when Guilietta and
Dapertutto move towards Hoffman in their gondola to the music of the
Barcarolle or when Lindorf strips off a series of masks to expose his
various roles in Hoffman's undoing are literally unforgettable.
Unhappily, Criterion's version omits a brief passage from the "Kleinzach"
sequence, and a snippet from the "Antonia" tale is likewise seems to be
missing. Powell also allowed Pressburger to talk him into dropping from the
finale a sequence where Pamela Brown - surely one of the most screen's most
bewitching presences - makes her last appearance as Nicklaus. Powell
recalls in the second volume of his memoirs - Million Dollar Movie -
Heckroth "painting her with gold leaf as the Muse of Hoffman. He had
crowned her with golden laurels and swathed her in the lightest of golden
drapes". It is to be hoped that someday some brave restorer will salvage
these missing fragments from wherever they are currently gathering dust,
and enable "Hoffman" to be seen precisely as Powell intended.
Like Scorsese, I was entranced by my first exposure to "Hoffman", and saw
it seven more times before its season in Melbourne in 1952 ended. It was a
great grief to me that it was never revived in Australia, and I now count
having come across the Criterion discs a few days after their release, in
the course of a short visit to New York, as one of my luckier experiences.
If there had never been a Criterion "Lawrence", "Spartacus", "Kane" or now
"Brazil"  - if the Voyager Company had never produced anything but
"Hoffman" -  movie lovers would have ample reason to be grateful. A classic
movie collection without "Hoffman" cannot be other than incomplete.
Email address:     race@netspace.net.au

Title
Review for Napoléon (1927)
Kevin Brownlow's restoration of the 1927 Abel Gance "Napoleon" should be
more widely available in its most recent up-dated and expanded version.
"Napoleon" is an authentic cinematic masterpiece. Its restoration has been
perhaps the single most important film restoration project so far
undertaken. Film-making can offer few more poignant cameos than that of
Gance as a very old man watching from his hotel room window an outdoor
screening of Brownlow's work-in-progress print at the Telluride Film
Festival in 1979. Thanks largely to the vision and enthusiasm of Frances
Ford Coppola and the Zoetrope Studio, screenings in London and New York in
the early nineteen-eighties enabled "Napoleon" to receive the public
acclaim it so richly merited. Coppola also had a laser disc edition of the
film in a shortened form - four hours as opposed to the five hours and
thirteen minutes of footage than available - produced. Twenty and more
years later, it is an injustice to both Gance and Brownlow that most of the
world's film lovers have no opportunity to see "Napoleon" in the more
extended and closely reflective of Gance's intentions version which has now
been retrieved.
Gance originally intended to cover the life of Napoleon in a series of six
ninety-minute films. What eventuated was a single film of six hours and
twenty-eight minutes, taking Napoleon to the opening of his Italian
campaign. Technologically, "Napoleon" was before its time, at key points
anticipating the introduction of Cinemascope thirty years later through the
use of three projectors to produce a composite triptytch image. Moments
such as when Rouget de Lisle teaches the "Marseillaise" to the crowd
gathered in the Club des Cordeliers, when the ghosts of the leaders of the
Revolution confront Napoleon in the deserted Assembly Hall prior to his
departure to take over the army in Italy or when Napoleon's eagle hovers
over the army in the final triptytch are unforgettable. Gance's inspired
cutting drives the action forward at an often blistering pace. He has even
been lucky with his composers.  Each of the three scores - the original by
Honegger, the Carl Davis version used in London and, perhaps most of all,
the version by Carmine Coppola used for the world tour - has been closely
attuned to the imagery. The feel of the film - its pulsating energy -
cannot be better conveyed than by the final paragraphs of the scenario. The
passage reads:
"'While the Beggars of Glory, their stomachs empty, but their heads filled
with songs, leave history to pass into legend' ... The ragged troops are
interrupted in their rhythm by the sight of a shadow on the road before
them. The eagle! It stretches its wings across all three screens, and the
great advance picks up its impetus. As the images become faster and faster
the triptych becomes one gigantic tricolor flag, and the Chant du depart is
succeeded by the Marseillaise. 'A maelstrom fills all three screens. The
whole Revolution, swept on at a delerious speed towards the heart of
Europe, is now one huge tricolor, quivering with all that has been
inscribed upon it, and it takes on the appearance of a Apocalyptic,
tricolor torrent, innundating, enflaming and transfiguring, all at one and
the same time'".
So eloquent a passage cannot be experienced without emotion or fail to
recall the no less moving evocation of Napoleon at a very different point
in his life which concludes Hilaire Belloc's masterly biography of Danton
and may well have been familiar to Gance. Belloc wrote:
"There is a legend among the peasants in Russia of a certain sombre,
mounted figure, unreal, only an outline and a cloud, that passed away to
Asia, to the east and to the north.  They saw him move along their snows
through the long mysterious twilights of the northern autumn in silence,
with head bent and the reins in the left hand loose, following some
enduring purpose, reaching towards an ancient solitude and repose. They say
it was Napoleon. After him there trailed for days the shadows of soldiery,
vague mists bearing faintly the forms of companies of men. It was as though
the cannon-smoke of Waterloo, borne on the light west wind of that June
day, had received the spirits of twenty years of combat, and had drifted
farther and farther during the fall of the year over the endless plains.
But there was no voice and no order. The terrible tramp of the Guard and
the sound that Heine loved, the dance of the French drums, was
extinguished; there was no echo of their songs, for the army was of ghosts
and was defeated. They passed in the silence which we can never pierce, and
somewhere remote from men they sleep in bivouc round the most splendid of
human swords".
In the event, the distributors in some cases forced Gance to make shortened
versions of the film, or in others shortened it themselves without
reference to him. The versions exhibited in particular in Britain and the
United States were travesties of what he intended, mutilated to the point
of being incomprehensible. A perplexed cinema-going public stayed away in
droves, the picture was a financial flop, and the sequels Gance had
envisaged were never made. Had it not been for the accident which
introduced the young Kevin Brownlow to some random footage, and so
triggered the restoration in which he continues to be engaged, the world
would never have known how great a treasure had been allowed to go missing.
Brownlow writes in his introduction to the first English-language edition
of the script of "Napoleon" in 1990 that a yet more impressive version of
the film over and above the version of twenty years ago is now needed "not
only to restore it to even greater glory on the screen but to make sure it
is shown, at least once a year, for ever".
-------------
Race Mathews is a Senior Research Fellow in the Graduate School of
Government at Monash University. He has served previously as an MP in the
Australian Parliament, a State Minister and a municipal councillor. His
"Australia's First Fabians: Middle-Class Radicals, Labour Activists and the
Early Labour Movement" was published by Cambridge University Press in 1994,
and he is currently writing about the Distributist and Co-operative
Movements.
-------------
