Authors
Michael C. De Masi
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Nightmare on Elm Street 4: The Dream Master, A (1988)
     As an avid Freddy fan, I was a little concerned about whether the folks at
New Line could keep up with their own image.  Would it be possible for the
makers of some of the best (and only) horror in the last few years to once
again treat us to a night with Freddy, the psycho we all love to love?
     Definitely.  Freddy's back once again, and more lovable than ever in A
NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET, PART IV: THE DREAM MASTER, which in my humble opinion
is easily the best episode since the original.  Along with a large group of the
faithful, I saw the film on its opening night.
     There's very little more difficult for a movie maker to do than please a
jaded audience, especially in the realm of horror.  Sure, it's easy to make a
movie or two with enough gimmicks and surprises (and nude co-eds getting hacked
right after sex) to pull in the teenage  crowd, but when your audience has come
to expect good writing, primo special effects and real suspense, all blended
with a dose of good old black humor, it gets a little more difficult.  This is
what we expected, this is what we got.
     It's hard to make me jump, but jump I did a few times in the course of
this little horror fest.  The story, much as one would expect, is much the same
as ever.  Freddy Kreuger, "Bastard son of a hundred maniacs," despite the best
efforts of the folks of his home town, once again decides to come back and show
a few neighborhood kids around his place.  As always, some of the kids realize
what's going on and band together to bring Freddy to the hideous end he must
always face.  In the mean time, a lot of people get whacked in a lot of
different and interesting ways.  So what's so great about all that?  Why of
course, the man himself.
     Once again, Robert Englund (who is in reality the world's most harmless-
looking soul) plays Freddy to perfection.  Unlike some other horror stars I
could mention, Freddy is a real character.  He doesn't just act out of some
brainless and impersonal lust for gore, he kills because he *loves* it.  In
return, his victims don't just fear him, they loath him with the hatred of old
enemies reunited.  This is the payoff for a true Freddy-phile.
     High points?  Apparently, Freddy has decided to expand his horizons and
not rely on the old glove as much as before.  The "high tech" horror fans among
us will not be disappointed at some of the best F/X I've seen in quite a while.
Another aspect I much appreciated was that the "cutesy" aspect of the kids from
DREAM WARRIORS [A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET PART IV] was gone and replaced with a
sort of hip, world-weariness which I find a great deal more appropriate.
     And for those who like Freddy's sense of humor, the man is at his
sarcastic best.  What a wise ass!  Obviously a comic genius.

Title
Review for Dolls (1986)
     For those of you who don't know, DOLLS is another little sickie from the
same folks who brought us REANIMATOR and FROM BEYOND.  Unbelievable horror,
generously laced with gore and a truly perverse sense of humor is their
trademark, and they live up nicely to their reputation with this little gem.
     The story is familiar.  A bunch of assorted characters get stuck on a
winding country road in the middle of a sudden storm and stop to spend the
night at the lavish home of a kindly, but somewhat strange old couple.  Of
course, they have to spend the night, and are soon introduced to the handiwork
of their hosts: Toys, dolls, hundreds of them.  These, of course, are not your
regular Mattel issue Wetsy Betsy's, but a truly fun loving breed of little
playthings that just want to have some fun.  And some fun they have!
     Nothing unusual so far, right?  Basic horror formula with some NIGHT
GALLERY and TWILIGHT ZONE thrown in (Rod, where are you when we need you?)  So
what makes this movie memorable: The casting, it's damn near perfect.  Don't
expect the usual Empire crowd (No Jeffrey Combs, no Barbara Crampton, no
Barbara Crampton's breasts, no big bosomed lady with the Dutch accent.  There's
one vet, though.) but a great ensemble cast with just the right blend of camp
and seriousness.  I love a movie where you can hear the people around you
saying "No, don't go in there, you fool.  Don't you know what's behind that
door?" and this is definitely one of them.
     Another difference between this flick and the other two is that the
psycho-sexual aspect is really toned down.  It's also not quite as bloody, but
probably even more frightening.  *Do not* show this movie to your children,
unless you want to spend at least a few nights awake with them warding off the
"Bad dollies."  I was keeping a close eye on my sister's teddy bear for about a
week, myself.
