Authors
Paul K. Bisson
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Good Will Hunting (1997)
By Paul K. Bisson (THE 'BISSON'S ON' WEB PAGE)
Perhaps it's a metaphor for life. Or, more to the point, perhaps its a
metaphor for what we're all supposed to do with our lives. I'd like to
believe that. Because "Good Will Hunting" is not a new film in every
aspect--in fact, its plot and theme have been given to us many times
at the movies. And we know, almost at least, how it will end--so there
had better be something new and engaging to watch this time 'round.
Matt Damon and Ben Affleck star as two "star-crossed lovers" who set
sail aboard.....Oops! Wrong flick. 
Matt Damon stars as the guy we all know. Maybe its a brother or
perhaps its a best friend--or maybe its even us. Its the guy that is
so certain of his particular talents and potential and so aware of the
fact that he can change the course of his life--if he just chose to do
it--that it scares him.
What also scares him is the fact that he's got it good right now.
Maybe he doesn't have the best job, or the best pay, or the best
recognition, or the best home--but his life is a safe one, a secure
one. And isn't that what makes us so afraid of change? The fear of
losing what security we have now--no matter how much of a dump we know
it to be?
Will Hunting (Damon) is a tough, streetwise 20 year old from South
Boston, Ma, who spent most of his life being shuffled from one abusive
foster home to the next, slowly being stripped of any self-worth or
security of "family." Finally ending up in tiny shack of an apartment
all his own, he created his own world of security--he's got his best
friend, Chuckie (Ben Affleck), a ratpack of trusted, loyal friends and
a pretty good job working at MIT--as a janitor. Not much, but its his
and he's satisfied. Well almost.
See, he's a genius, too. A mathematical wizard, able to dissect the
problems most seasoned math professionals can't. It comes natural to
him, so he is easily ignorant of the possibilities such talent can
create. But its not so easy for MIT professor, Lambeau (Stellan
Skarsgĺrd) to ignore, once he discovers that Hunting has this
ability--and is wasting it.
The professor sees the amazing contradiction in Hunting. He's a wild,
rebellious kid with a chip on his shoulder who just happens to possess
the mind of an Einstein. The professor understands that the only way
for Hunting to excel, is to rid him of that chip. And when Lambeau
tries to coerce the kid into getting therapy, it backfires--as every
psychologist discovers that they can't stand to be in the same room
with him--much less help him.
That's when Lambeau seeks the aid of a long time friend and rival,
Sean McGuire (Robbin Williams in, perhaps, his most dramatic &
powerful role yet). McGuire, a widower and ex-therapist turned college
teacher, grew up in much the same environment as Hunting...and he may
have the key to unlock the kid's emotional doors.
>From here, we are taken on a journey of discovery. Learning about both
McGuire and Hunting, realizing that they may, in fact, be the same
person inside. During their many battles and sparrings of the mind, we
also learn that the kid may be just what McGuire needs to release his
own demons.
As I said, the plot isn't very original. But the performers give us
such riveting and believable characters, that we don't really care.
And the truth about these characters is undeniable. Its easy to see a
bit of ourselves or someone we know in all of them. From Hunting's
best friend, Chuckie, who knows that his life is already written and
who will most likely live and die in the same town, to Hunting's
lover, Skylar (Minnie Driver), a young, vibrant medical student that
finds in Hunting the one thing missing from her seemingly perfect
life, to the professor Lambeau himself, always reaching--never
attaining; "Sometimes I wish I had never met you. Because then I could
go to sleep at night not knowing there was someone like you out
there."
But this is a story about choices. To be satisfied with what we've got
now because its secure and safe or to believe in ourselves and take a
chance on the unknown. And it's also about redemption. Learning to
forgive others, including ourselves, letting go of our shields and
letting people into our hearts--no matter what they might find.
Learning to trust.
For me, it was easy to identify with Hunting. Our lives contain much
the same elements; spending the early parts of my youth in one abusive
foster home after another, then fending off the mean streets of South
Boston, Dorchester and Roxbury in my early teens--to discovering my
talents in the arts and learning to put all my energies toward them.
My life now is the result of change. I'd either be dead or in prison
had it gone any other way.
And there in lies the success of "Good Will Hunting." What it says to
people like me and you about our talents and potential. What it says
about opening up and allowing ourselves to trust someone, letting them
in. What it says about how doing these things may change our
perspective on who we really are and what life is all about, thus, not
denying ourselves of what might be... 
REVIEW COPYRIGHT 1998 PAUL K. BISSON
Taken from the "BISSON'S ON" Web Page at
http://www.harbor.cove.com/~bisson/HuntingReview.htm

Title
Review for Halloween H20: Twenty Years Later (1998)
"HALLOWEEN: H20" -- Reviewed by Paul K. Bisson
What's the difference between a good film and a bad one?  Or, more to
the point, what would make a potentially bad movie good?  If there was
just one element that could make an otherwise mediocre flick worth
it's eight buck admission, what would it be?  And what if this picture
was a sequel?...A sequel with the number "7" in the title?
Well, sometimes, it all comes down to one thing.  In this case:
nostalgia.  That's the reason "HALLOWEEN: H2O" worked for me.  In
fact, that's the only reason it worked for me.
Good or bad, say what you will about the modern horror movie.  But be
sure not to deny the fact that in 1978, John Carpenter's "HALLOWEEN"
changed the face of it with what has since become known as the
"slasher genre."  That's big stuff.  Unusual.  But not entirely rare.
Hitchcock did it with "PSYCHO."  Craven & Williamson did it with
"SCREAM."  But while "PSYCHO" shocked an unprepared generation with it
and "SCREAM" redefined it, "HALLOWEEN" pushed us headlong into the
core of it.
And any Hollywood producer worth his weight in the industry would have
been crazy not to capitalize on the success of it.  There was the
"FRIDAY THE 13TH" franchise, followed by the "NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET"
series.  And, of course, "HALLOWEEN II-VI."  And while some of these
enjoyed moderate to huge successes, it wasn't long before "slasher"
became synonymous with a big fat "yawn."
So what's so special about another "HALLOWEEN" sequel?  Especially
after we've been spoiled by the intelligence and wit of "SCREAM" and
"SCREAM 2?"  Well, like I said, nostalgia.
There's something special about Jamie Lee Curtis returning to her
cinematic roots and reprising her role as Laurie Strode.  There's
something special about rediscovering this character, learning what
has happened to her in the last twenty years, understanding the person
she has become and why.  There's also something utterly fascinating
about a new confrontation with an old nemesis, the Shape she has
eluded all these years, her brother, Michael Myers.
20 years ago, Laurie Strode died in a car crash and Keri Tate was
born.  Now a divorcee with a seventeen year old son, Curtis gives a
credible performance as the older Strode/Tate, an overprotective
mother who holds the position as Head Mistress of a prestigious
private school.  Addicted to drugs and alcohol, she goes through life
seemingly normal on the outside but fighting an emotional battle
within, living in constant fear that one day her brother will track
her (and her son) down and finish what he started.
And as October 31st arrives, her fears become reality.  Most of the
students and faculty have gone on a camping trip for the holiday,
leaving a handful of pickings behind for the kill.  We know, from an
earlier scene, that Myers has located his sister and has set out to
find her.  From there the movie plays out as we expect it to and as it
should.  There's no guessing game here, no tricky surprises.  Just the
Bogeyman and Laurie Strode, together again for the first time in
twenty years.
Yes--kids are killed in a variety of ways, yes--there are stalking
chases, yes--there are bumps-in-the-night and sudden shocks.  But what
did you expect?  This is a horror movie.  It would have been nice to
know what Myers has been up to all these years (especially since the
movie ignores sequels 4-6).  It would be nice to learn more of the
evil that drives him (instead we are treated to a flashback of Donald
Pleasence's haunting monologue).  Yes, this movie could have provided
us with a few more insights and details.  But it doesn't give us that.
What it does give us are wonderful cameos by Janet Leigh (paying
homage to Carpenter's inspiration) and Nancy Stevens (reprising her
role as Dr. Loomis' Nurse Wittington from the original).  What it does
give us is Jamie Lee Curtis.  What it does give us is a final
confrontation between good and evil.  A Do Or Die re-match between the
masked villain that started it all and his, the original, scream queen
heroine.  All to the newly arranged orchestration of that menacing
little tune.
