Authors
Jonathan Abbey
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Powder (1995)
     I left the theater thinking POWDER was one of the best movies I
had seen in a long time.  Seemingly aimed at teenagers, with a moderate
case of children's movie simplicity, the movie nonetheless resonated
strongly for me.
     POWDER was enjoyable to me for the cinematography, for several of
the characters, and for the strong sense and presence of the unknown,
both in terms of Powder's strange powers, and in terms of Jeremy's
unknown identity and place in the world.
     It is the only movie that I can think of that specifically spoke
to being a young adult growing up and feeling isolated for being very
smart and not straight enough.  The movie features an estranged adult
gay son and his father, and a frankly homoerotic scene involving a
character who had already been shown to be interested in women as
well.. that is, a character who does not yet understand his place in
the world in many ways.
     The movie gave the very clear message that it might be okay to be
different.  Really different, not just skinny and awkward around the
cheerleaders.  And the performances by Mary Steenburgen, Jeff Goldblum
and Lance Henrikson felt very earnest and caring.  They seemed to love
and truly accept Powder, different though he be.  This sounds like a
common theme, and it is.  But rarely have I seen a movie that so well
captures the feeling that one has no place or hope for place as well as
this one does.  Certainly I've not seen one that is this brave in the
situation it sets up, nor so caring in the acceptance given to the
differences inside that can keep one isolated and without connection to
community.
     Obviously, how you perceive this movie will depend a lot on the
degree to which you empathize with the main character.  If you are in
the closet or in confusion and turmoil about your sexual identity, you
may find this to be an extremely powerful movie.  I did.
     It troubles me that Victor Salva has done the things he has done,
and that he may continue to be ill.  It troubles me greatly because I
fear that his sickness may be seen as coming through in a movie that is
by it's tone aimed at teenagers and which does feature an explicit and
unapologetic (and unexplained) instance of homosexual longing on the
part of the main character.  Had Salva not had a child molestation
conviction, this movie might well have stirred up a homophobic reaction
among many, but it's loving tone and message may have come through.
With Salva's past behavior and conviction, I found myself wondering
after the fact (after reading every post on our news spool about
peoples' opinions about the movie) if any difference in sexuality
really should be considered to be wrong.  If we all agree that
pedophilia is an illness, however natural it may seem to come about,
then what logical reason is there for accepting that homosexuality is
not itself an illness?  This linkage between homosexuality and
pedophilia, already strong in many peoples' minds, seems unfortunately
likely to be strengthened by seeing this movie.
