Authors
Hal Render
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Breaking In (1989)
     I just saw the movie BREAKING IN last night.  It's the story of Ernie,  an
aging veteran burglar/safe-cracker who meets Mike, a kid with a casual 
disrespect for other people's property.  The story develops as Ernie decides to
show Mike the ins and outs (literally) of what Ernie calls "thieving."  The
result is a gentle comedy that takes a lighter look at crime without lapsing
into slapstick or farce.  The script was written by John Sayles (RETURN OF THE
SECAUCUS SEVEN; BABY, IT'S YOU; EIGHT MEN OUT) and the film was directed by Bill
Forsyth (GREGORY'S GIRL, LOCAL HERO, COMFORT AND JOY).  Those familiar with the
work of the two men will recognize their trademarks: witty dialogue,
understated characters, and quiet humor.
     Perhaps the most pleasing thing about BREAKING IN is the portrayal of
Ernie by Burt Reynolds.  Eschewing his characteristic smirk and unnaturally
curly hairpiece, Reynolds plays Ernie as written: a graying, 61-year old thief
with thinning hair, bad eyes and a limp.  Ernie is a survivor in the world of
crime, a philosophical professional thief who has accepted a low-profile 
lifestyle in exchange for anonymity with the police.  With another actor, Ernie
could just be a rather dull, workaday crook, but Reynolds charm and touch for
light comedy make Ernie an interesting, likable character.
     Mike, well played by Casey Siemaszcko (sp?), is a naive, unsophisticated
kid who is drawn to the apparent glamour represented by Ernie.  The real
interest in the film is watching Ernie, who treats crime as a job, try to
instill in Mike, who treats crime as an adventure, the attitude that will allow
Mike to survive as Ernie has.  The humor comes from Mike's naivete and bumbling
attempts to adapt to the lifestyle of a professional thief.
     While ostensibly a crime film, there is no real violence in BREAKING IN, 
and little serious tension.  This may deter viewers who cannot watch a film 
without at least one car chase or gunshot victim.  However, for those who like
character pieces and the sort of humor found in the films of Sayles and
Forsyth, this film should prove enjoyable.  And for fans of Burt Reynolds, this
will be the chance to seem him in what is probably his best comedic role since
STARTING OVER in 1979.  I recommend it.

Title
Review for Believers, The (1987)
     I just saw THE BELIEVERS last night.  Overall impression: pretty scary.
The film details the involvement of a police psychiatrist (Martin Sheen) in a
string of grisly crimes which involve an ancient Caribbean religion.  The pace
escalates as Sheen's family become threatened, and the power of the forces
against him become overwhelming.  The actors are excellent (Sheen, Helen Shaver
and Robert Loggia head the cast), the plot and direction are strong, and the
story is quite compelling.  My only complaint is the apparent cuts they made in
the original story (from a book called THE RELIGION) which show up as
incongruous elements in the movie.  Several small things (and a few large ones)
seem to be stressed in the early parts of the movie which turn out to have no
real impact at the end.  This could just be a case of intended misdirection,
although I'll have to read the book to be sure.  As for gore, the movie is
discreet by current standards (some mutilated animals), though there is one
scene which got to me even though I saw it coming.  Definitely not for young
kids.  If you liked ANGEL HEART, you should like THE BELIEVERS.  A +2.5 on a
-4/+4 rating.

Title
Review for Planes, Trains & Automobiles (1987)
     I saw PLANES, TRAINS, AND AUTOMOBILES last night and left with mixed
feelings about it.  On the surface it is one thing, in reality something else,
and the dichotomy is not handled as well as it could be.  I think
writer/director John Hughes has made another attempt at a comedy with a serious
underside, but this time the two goals do not mesh as well as in past films.  
     Basically the plot concerns marketing exec Neil Page (Steve Martin) and
his attempts to return home from a business trip just before Thanksgiving.  The
trip starts awful and gets worse, due to a combination of incredibly bad luck
and the presence of Del Griffith (John Candy).  Del is a sales rep and one of
the single most boorish people on the face of the earth.  For the purpose of
this trip he also seems to be an instrument of fate, sent to accompany Neil
through his trials and to have him examine his life and his relations with
other people.
     This is noble stuff, but the movie doesn't always reach the level Hughes
attempts.  The comedy side is quite good.  Hughes can direct a farce as well as
anybody, as he has shown in SIXTEEN CANDLES and FERRIS BUELLER'S DAY OFF.  This
time, with Martin and Candy, he has the additional benefit of two of the best
comedic actors around.  Watching Martin go through surprise, despair, anger,
and resignation is like watching a master musician play his instrument.   And
John Candy, doing a character he has done variations of for years, shows how an
overbearing lout *should* be played.  The two form a comedy team that deserve
more movies together.
     But the drama Hughes strives for sometimes seems forced.  We are made to
see the human side of Candy's cartoon character, and the shift in perception is
jarring.  Candy carries it off as well as I think that any actor could, and in
fact is the best that I have seen him.  But the script doesn't handle the
transition in a natural way, and the audience is left feeling manipulated.  
Martin's character, being less extreme, is not subject to as many shifts, but
it is not always clear from where the attitude changes he does show come.  The
whole idea of a farce is somewhat foreign to this type of introspection, so
maybe Hughes just tried something beyond him.  Still, his teen comedies did a
good job of making us laugh and think, so maybe he just didn't do as good a job
with this film.
     Despite its problems, I liked PLANES, TRAINS, and AUTOMOBILES.  I felt
empathy with the characters, and even if I didn't know where much of the
characters' emotion came from, I responded to it.  I also laughed a lot.  It's
tough to complain about a film which does that.  I'd give it a +1 on the -4/+4
scale.

Title
Review for Dead, The (1987)
     Having just seen John Huston's last film, THE DEAD, I can only report it
as a strange thing.  A group of people gather at the Dublin home of two elderly
sisters to celebrate the Feast of the Epiphany (January 6) in 1904.  There is no
real plot;  the film merely follows the people through the course of the
evening.  We find out a little about each, what their relationships are, and
how they feel about one another.  Summed up this way, you'd think that there is
little to recommend it.  But you'd be wrong.
     THE DEAD is a marvelous picture of a time and a people who are long gone.
From the first shot, each character and scene are framed with loving care, and
I found myself engrossed by every line of dialogue.  The film is suffused with
a wonderful humanity and warmth which draws you into the lives of these
people.  By the end, I was spell-bound by the magic web Huston and the actors
had woven.  In the theater where I saw it, several people were still sitting
silently in their seats when the credits had finished and the lights came up.
The film was that good.
     THE DEAD is based on a short story by James Joyce in his collection
DUBLINERS.  It was adapted for the screen by Tony Huston (John Huston's son)
and stars Angelica Huston (his daughter), among others.  I'm afraid I didn't
recognize many of the other actors, but other reviewers will undoubtedly know
and list them.  The film is not for everyone, but if you feel like hearing a
final bit of poetry from a great voice of the American cinema, I urge you to
see THE DEAD.

Title
Review for Miracle Mile (1989)
     I thought I'd post brief reviews of some good films I've seen recently on
video.  (The release dates I've given are approximate, by the way.)
HOUSEKEEPING (1989) ****
  A Bill Forsyth film, this is a touching, amusing story of two orphaned girls 
  who come under the supervision of their eccentric Aunt.  Beautiful
  cinematography and great performances by the leads, esp. Christine Lahti.
THE LONG GOOD FRIDAY (1979) ****
  Gripping, complex British gangster movie, with great work by Bob Hoskins 
  and Helen Mirren in the leads.  Warning: those who have trouble understanding
  heavy accents (particularly Cockney) may want to avoid this film.
MIRACLE MILE (1989) ****
  A sleeper from last year, this story mixes romance, suspense and the threat
  of nuclear war in a very different, very engrossing film.  (To tell more
  would spoil too much of the plot.)  Stars Anthony Edwards and Mare Winningham.
MR. NORTH (1989) ***
  One of the last films produced by John Huston, this is the film version
  of a Thornton Wilder story (if I remember right).  It tells the story of
  Mr. T. Theophilus North, an engaging young man with some unconventional 
  ideas and a peculiar physical ability to store static electricity.  Despite 
  the good performances and an interesting setting (ritzy Rhode Island during 
  the 20's or 30's), the story on this one never really drew me in.  I can only
  recommend it to fans of the period and the people involved.  Stars Anthony 
  Edwards, Robert Mitchum, Tammy Grimes, Virginia Madsen, Anjelica Huston, 
  Harry Dean Stanton and others.
HOW TO GET AHEAD IN ADVERTISING (1989) ****
  A very weird, very funny comedy about the tribulations of a British Ad
  exec who just can't figure out how to sell a new acne cream.  The stress
  gives him a problem that makes the average case of pimples seem desirable.
  Wonderful performances by the leads none of whom I knew except for Rachel
  Ward who has quite overcome her early typecasting.
THE LION IN WINTER (1967) *****
  A classic that tells the story of "family ups and downs" on Christmas 
  day 1183 in the household of King Henry II of Britain.  An enthralling 
  character study, this film has incredible performances by Peter O'Toole 
  and Katharine Hepburn, with solid support from Anthony Hopkins, Timothy 
  Dalton and others.  This film has probably the overall best dialogue of 
  any movie I have every seen, so good that I watched it twice in a row just 
  to try to remember some of it.  Hepburn deservedly won an Oscar for her 
  performance.  If you haven't seen this film, by all means try to do so.
PRICK UP YOUR EARS (1988) ****
  A solid British drama, this film describes the tragic relationship between 
  playwright Joe Orton and his lover, Kenneth Halliwell.  The film
  covers Orton's rise to success and the emotional struggles of Halliwell 
  to adjust from his early start as Orton's mentor to his later role as 
  Orton's "personal assistant."  Very well acted by Gary Oldman, Alfred
  Molina and Vanessa Redgrave.  (Note: the film may bother those who have 
  a problem with an open depiction of homosexual relationships.)
PASCALI'S ISLAND (1989) ****
  Set just before WWI, this film tells the story of Basil Pascali, a "local 
  character" on a Turkish-governed Greek island.  Basil makes a meager living 
  on the island as an interpreter and government intermediary for residents 
  and tourists.  Basil is also a "career informer" for the Turkish Imperial 
  government, and has been sending secret reports for the last 20 years.  The
  film details a sequence of events that may either expose Basil or allow him 
  to leave a life that has lost meaning for him.  Ben Kingsley (one of my 
  favorite actors) is excellent as Basil, Charles Dance does a fine job as the 
  archaeologist, and Helen Mirren is very good as Basil's best friend.  
