Authors
Afterburner
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Mortal Kombat: Annihilation (1997)
Rating (out of 10):  2 (or 5).  See review for further details.
        A movie like MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION works (and must be
reviewed on) multiple levels.  First, there's the rampant usage of
Randian subtext that pervades the entire movie.  But occasionaly,
almost as if making an ironic, self-depreciating remark, the movie
tosses in clearly Marxist imagery.
        In all seriousness however, and to be fair to the movie, it
*is* necessary to provide two viewpoints: that of a movie watcher
unfamiliar (or only marginally familiar) with the whole Mortal Kombat
phenomenon, and that of a fan of the first movie and/or a fan of the
games.
        The first movie (MORTAL KOMBAT (1995)) concerned itself with a
martial arts tournament that would decide the fate of Earth (and it's
5 billion inhabitants).  The mortals won, and in theory this should
have prevented the Emperor Shao Khan from taking over the Earth.
Unfortunately, Shao Khan was a poor loser, and the very final scene in
MORTAL KOMBAT showed him arriving anyway, ready to take over the
planet, as our heroes assumed a fighting stance.
        The first movie was extraordinarily entertaining for those
(like myself) who are fans of the game.  I'd even go so far as to say
that many folks who didn't know about the game probably enjoyed the
movie.  The writers and directors knew the limitations of both their
cast and of the basic story itself, and they didn't try to
overachieve.  There were a lot of really cool fight scenes (with
really cool accompanying music), intersperesed with some distracting
(but ultimately non-intrusive) bits of fluff passing itself off as a
plot.  And, as we know, the movie was a smashing success at the box
office.
        MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION picks up precisely where that
movie left off, with some introductory exposition to clue in those who
may not have seen the first movie.  Shao Khan has decided that he's
going to take over the Earth *anyways*, and to Hell with some silly
rule about mortals winning the tournament.  Thereafter follows
approximately 85 minutes of film that alternates between being
confused, being trite, being silly, and being just plain stupid.  One
gets the general impression that the producers of the movie thought
"Hey, that last movie was such a success that we can get more money
and make a *real* movie now."  Too bad they didn't simply stick with
the formula from the first movie.
        I could write volumes about the things that are wrong with
this picture, but here are the high points:
        *  The acting is truly bad.  Sandra Hess (playing the Sonya
Blade character) is particularly execrable, especially in scenes where
she tries to convince us that she loved  Johnny Cage (a character from
the first movie who gets greased at the beginning of this movie).
        *  In one of the worst pieces of mis-casting I think I've
*ever* seen, James Remar plays Raiden, the God of Thunder.  In the
first movie, Christopher Lambert played Raiden and played his
character as though he was in on the joke:  A French actor playing a
Japanese thunder god being revered by Chinese mystics.  
        I generally like it when actors are cast against type (Tim
"Tiny" Lister, Jr. being cast as the President of the U.S. in THE
FIFTH ELEMENT, for example), and Remar has always been one of my
favorite "utility" actors  But he's so totally wrong for this part
that he doesn't even have the luxury of amused self-awareness.
        *  There are too many characters that are introduced as being
potentially important, but then never seen again.
        *  There are a number of completely meaningless story
sidetracks, including a muddled scene where Liu Kang (Robin Shou)
seeks out Nightwolf (Litefoot), has a mystical hallucination, and then
wanders off with Jade (Irina Pantaeva).
        ...unless you're a huge fan of the games and/or the first
movie.  In that case, the following critiques also apply:
        *  Sandra Hess, while being an even worse actress than
Bridgette Wilson (who played Sonya Blade in the first movie), is much
more convincing as a fighter.  Wilson looked like she was simply
mimicing some movements taught to her by the fight choreographer.
Hess looks like she actually knows some martial arts, and puts
together a much more believable fight scene.
        *  In the fights, each of the characters does at least *one*
thing they do in the game (and often more).  Sonya does her "Kiss of
Death," Jax does his "Earthquake," Liu Kang does his "Animality," and
so on.  A big bonus for those of us who were looking for similar moves
in the first movie and found them only rarely.
        *  There aren't as many fight scenes in this movie as there
were in the first, because the folks making the movie mistakenly try
to hang a more robust plot in between.  Silly, silly folks.  And the
lamest fight involved two of the women in what turns into a
mud-wrestling match.  Lame and so obviously sexist even I (politically
incorrect, for the most part) noticed and remarked upon it.
        *  The special effects are generally better, except for the
final fight scene between the Emporer and Liu Kang in which both
perform their "Animalities."  Motaro and Sheeva are both more
convincing and lifelike than Goro was in the first movie.
        For folks like myself who loved the first movie and enjoy the
games, I give this a 5.  You'll probably like it, but not nearly as
much as you liked the first one.

Title
Review for Silencers, The (1966)
Rating (out of 10):  N/A.  See review for further details.
        A great many of us will be familiar with the image of Hugh
Hefner (Founder and Publisher of Playboy magazine) at one of his
famous parties.  We can picture in our mind's eye Hef walking around
Playboy Mansion in his robe and pajamas, cocktail in one hand,
cigarette in the other.  (Actually, Hef usually smoked a pipe.  But
for the sake of argument, we'll say it was a cigarette.)  He's
smiling.  He's mingling.  He's making small talk, with amusing bon
mots and double entendres.
        Now imagine that, instead of a robe and pajamas, Hef is decked
out in attire that would have been fashionably casual for an affluent
male in the 1960s.  And while keeping everything else the same (the
cigarette, the cocktail, the utterly casual attitude), imagine Hef in
the underground lair of an evil Arch-Villain ready to visit death and
destruction across the globe.  Oh, and make Hef a James Bond-esque
spy.
        You now have the basic feel for the four Matt Helm movies, of
which "The Silencers" (1966) was the first.
        The Matt Helm movies were made as star vehicles for Dean
Martin.  By the mid-60s, Dino had cemented his reputation as a boozing
playboy, and the Matt Helm role was written with this in mind.  In the
movies, Matt Helm is a super-secret, super-competent spy for the
Intelligence Counter Espionage (ICE) organization.  His cover in all
four movies is that he's also a world-famous photographer of gorgeous
women, and he works for "Slaymate" magazine (which fits in nicely with
the Hugh Hefner analogy...).  And in all four movies, he casually
wanders his way through whatever the bad guys have to throw at him.  
        The plot of "The Silencers" involves an attempt by the evil
"Big O" organization to start World War III.  This involves taking
control of a missile launch via computer and forcing the missile to
impact a spot near Alamagordo, New Mexico.  The catch is that, at
precisely the same time, the U.S. will be conducting underground
nuclear testing at the same spot.  When the missile impacts, the U.S.
Southwest will be covered by a glowing cloud, the U.S. will assume
it's the Russians, and will retaliate.
        It's never fully explained how this will benefit the "Big O"
organization.  Presumably they plan on stepping into the power void
left behind when the two superpowers wipe each other out.  No one
seemed to stop and think about the consequences of being the most
powerful organization in a world ravaged by nuclear destruction.  But
no matter.  One doesn't watch Matt Helm movies in order to enjoy
finely crafted plots.
        So what would you watch these movies for?  Cheese.  Camp.
Corn.  These movies are all that, and more.  The evil mastermind
behind the "Big O" organization is a Chinese man named Tung-Tze.  Of
course, he's played by the very American Victor Buono.  In one scene,
for no real reason I can determine, we see him opening a can of "Low
calorie chop suey."
        Like any super-secret spy, Helm has the gruff boss (played by
James Gregory, whom folks may remember as Inspector Luger on the
"Barney Miller" TV show), the gorgeous babes, and the nifty gadgets.
Among the gorgeous babes are his secretary, Lovey Kravezit (pronounced
"Craves it"), who takes dictation while covered in suds and sharing a
swimming-pool-sized bathtub, his exotic, vampish partner Tina, and the
accident-prone Gail Hendricks, who may or may or may not be an agent
of "Big O."  And among his many gadgets are a gun which fires
backwards toward the person pulling the trigger, a sports coat with
exploding buttons (which make whistling sounds like a falling bomb,
for no reason that can be adequately explained), and a circular bed
that, at the push of a button, will whisk the occupants of the bed to
another room and dump them into the previously mentioned
swimming-pool-sized bathtub.
        Star Trek fans will also be pleased to note that, along the
way, Helm is menaced by an evil assassin played by Roger C. Carmel
("Harry Mudd," from the original Star Trek series).
        By no stretch of the imagination is "The Silencers" a quality
movie.  The effects were lame even for the time the movie was made.
The acting is wooden.  The dialogue consists largely of Martin tossing
off one-liners in response to various other lines and situations.  The
fight scenes are some of the worst ever to be committed to celluloid.
And no matter how dire his situation, Martin ambles through the movie
as though he's looking for the nearest bar.
        But as I alluded to earlier, the folks who will enjoy this
movie will like it *because* of the above flaws, not despite them.  If
you want to see a completely cheezy, corny spy flick, filled with
exaggerated versions of the typical spy trappings (and which inspired
a lot of the riffs in "Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery"),
check out "The Silencers" (and indeed the rest of the Matt Helm
series).  You won't be disappointed.

Title
Review for Lone Star (1996)
        I had trouble watching LONE STAR (1996), but it was through no
fault of the movie.  Rather, I discovered that I've been conditioned by
Hollywood to expect a more-or-less direct line between the introduction of
the conflict and the resolution of that conflict.
        But LONE STAR doesn't take a direct line from beginning to end.  It
meanders.  John Sayles doesn't want to just tell you the story of a
skeleton dug up in the desert; he wants to give you a slice of life of the
town in which the story takes place.  And he does so masterfully.
        The primary plot involves Sheriff Sam Deeds (Chris Cooper) trying
to unravel the mystery of a skeleton found buried in the desert near
Frontera, Texas.  The skeleton is that of Charlie Wade (Kris
Kristofferson), a brutal and corrupt Sheriff of the same county who
disappeared over 30 years ago.  The disappearance happened the same night
Wade was threatened by a new deputy, Buddy Deeds (Matthew MacConaughey),
who refused to partake of the Sheriff's corrupt activities.  Buddy then
went on to become a wildly popular Sheriff in his own right, and Sam lives
under the long shadow cast by his father.
        Intermingled with the main story arc are several subplots.  A young
Mexican worker attempts to get his relatives illegally across the border; a
by-the-book Colonel of a nearby Army base attempts to come to grips with
the fact that his estranged father lives in Frontera; a shooting at a
nearby bar leads the Colonel to increase the frequency of random drug
tests, which may put a young private at risk.  These stories and more are
weaved skillfully into the fabric of the movie, and many are never
resolved.  In the hands of a lesser writer/director, these segments would
be distracting.  Sayles, however, manages to give them purpose despite
their irrelevancy to the central plot, and we find ourselves engrossed in
the lives of this small Texas border town.
        Solid acting is seen throughout the movie.  Kristofferson exudes
malignancy as the corrupt Wade.  Frances McDormand makes a brief but
wonderful appearance as Sam Deeds' "tightly-wound," football-crazed
ex-wife.  And Cooper is perfectly understated as the
not-quite-sure-of-himself Sheriff, trying to escape his father's legendary
status.
        To be fair, there are some flaws in the movie.  For instance, as
the payoff was building to its climax, I found myself thinking "If Buddy
Deeds *did* kill Charlie Wade, I'm going to be disappointed because it was
so obviously him.  And if he didn't, I'm going to be disappointed because
it's so obviously him that it *couldn't* be him."  A more subtle approach
could have heightened the mystery (and thus the enjoyment of the movie)
that much more.
        Also, the cutaways between the present and the past are done
seamlessly.  Instead of a fade, or other traditional flashback sequences,
the camera simply pans across the scene.  When the pan starts, the action
is in one time frame, and when it ends, the action is in another.  While
this was a novelty at first, I confess to being distracted by it later in
the movie.
        Finally, throughout the movie, Sam Deeds' desire to prove that his
father was a murderer seems completely out of proportion to any indications
of Buddy Deeds' personality.  Buddy Deeds seems to be a genuinely honest
and caring man, well deserving of his reputation.  Aside from the
resentment at having a legend for a father, we're given no motivation for
Sam's exceptionally hostile attitude towards Buddy, and I found myself
increasingly confused by this hostility as the movie progressed.
        But these are ultimately minor points.  The movie is well worth
watching, and I highly recommend it.  Especially to those folks like myself
who need to wean ourselves away from more conventional Hollywood fare.

Title
Review for Murderers' Row (1966)
Rating (out of 10):  N/A.  See review for further details.
        MURDERER'S ROW (1966) is the second of the four Matt Helm movies.
For those who haven't seen any of them, the Matt Helm movies answer the
question "What if Hugh Hefner (founder and publisher of Playboy Magazine)
had been a secret agent on the side?"  Dean Martin plays Matt Helm, an
affable, boozing photographer of scantily-clad women who works for
"Slaymate" magazine.  But that's just a cover!  The truth is that Helm is
*really* an affable, boozing, super-competent secret agent who works for
the Intelligence Counter Espionage (ICE) organization.
        Before we go further, I should point out that the Matt Helm movies
are all pretty bad.  But they're wonderfully bad, and they're great,
cheezy, campy fun.  I tend to speak glowingly of the Matt Helm movies
because I enjoy them for their over-the-top campiness, but more
serious-minded viewers will probably be turned off.
        MURDERER'S ROW opens with a scene of Washington, DC.  Suddenly, two
beams of light appear out of nowhere, and within minutes, DC is a charred
wasteland.  But wait!  It was all just a prop; a demonstration by the evil
"Big O" organization of their nefarious plans.  The *real* DC will be toast
as soon as "Big O" can torture a few essential equations out of kidnapped
scientist Norman Solaris.  But just to be on the safe side, several top
secret agents need to be rubbed out, and this task is given to Ironhead
(Tom Reese), a fellow with a big steel plate on his noggin.
        Well, as fate would have it, Our Hero is among the secret agents
slated to be greased, and it looks as though "Big O" is successful at
killing him by boiling him alive in his own swimming-pool-sized bathtub.
But of course, it's all just a ruse.  Helm is still alive.  He faked his
death so that he could investigate "Big O" unmolested.  And thereafter
follows the usual spy stuff, with Helm meeting bad guys, rescuing damsels
in distress, and so forth.
        Of the four Matt Helm movies, this one has the most "Austin Powers"
feel about it.  Several scenes involve Dean Martin (never a big fan of rock
and roll, or the people who sang it) in a discotheque, getting jostled
around by teenagers doing the Frug, and getting called "Dad" by the young
hipsters.  Other scenes involve protracted shots of Ann-Margaret (playing
the daughter of the kidnapped scientist) dancing wildly in a very '60s
fashion.  (I kept hearing the line "This is my happening, and it really
freaks me out!" over and over in my head during these scenes.)
        Of the cast, the best acting job is done by (believe it or not)
Karl Malden, doing the Blofeld role as Julian Wall, head of "Big O."
Malden chews up the scenery left and right, and clearly has a blast doing
it.  Of the rest of the acting, the less said, the better.  :)
        * A talking bottle of booze that activates when Helm tries to drink
it (his bosses knew he'd go there first).
        * A gun with a 5-second, time delay trigger.  Pull the trigger and
it won't go off for five seconds.
        * A nifty hovercraft battle.
        * Some of the worst fight scenes ever committed to celluloid.  The
fight between Helm and Ironhead on the hovercraft is particularly
laughable.
        * The line "I demand an explanation for this nocturnal
assignation."
        If you're looking for a quality, thoughtful film, avoid MURDERER'S
ROW like the plague.  But if you're a fan of camp, MURDERER'S ROW is right
up your alley.  (And if you've seen other Matt Helm movies, I'd rank
MURDERER'S ROW as 3rd best of the four movies.)

Title
Review for Wrecking Crew, The (1969)
Rating (out of 10):  N/A.  See review for further details.
        For those who haven't seen any of them, the Matt Helm movies answer
the question "What if Hugh Hefner (founder and publisher of Playboy
Magazine) had been a secret agent on the side?"  Dean Martin plays Matt
Helm, an affable, boozing photographer of scantily-clad women who works for
"Slaymate" magazine.  But that's just a cover!  The truth is that Helm is
*really* an affable, boozing, super-competent secret agent who works for
the Intelligence Counter Espionage (ICE) organization.
        Before we go further, I should point out that the Matt Helm movies
are all pretty bad.  But they're wonderfully bad, and they're great,
cheezy, campy fun.  I tend to speak glowingly of the Matt Helm movies
because I enjoy them for their over-the-top campiness, but more
serious-minded viewers will probably be turned off.
        In many ways, however, THE WRECKING CREW (1969) is the best of the
four Matt Helm movies.  While it still has a great deal of camp, the series
appeared to be maturing with this movie, and it's a shame that this one
ended up being the last of the series (despite a promise in the closing
credits for "The Ravagers," which was never made).  
        The movie begins with Count Massimo pilfering a few billion dollars
of gold bullion from a train.  The gold bullion belongs to the USA.  It was
on a train heading through Denmark on its way to London.  No, I don't know
why either.  It's a Matt Helm movie.  You just gotta accept it.
        Helm is assigned to find the gold and get it back before the press
finds out and before the world bankers repossess the USA.  And so he
travels to Denmark, meeting up with Lola Medina (a post-"Gilligan's Island"
Tina Louise), and with the accident prone Freya Carlson (Sharon Tate),
ostensibly a functionary for the Denmark Department of Tourism (but REALLY
a secret agent in her own right -- as if anybody didn't see *that* coming).
        There are several things which make this the best of the four Matt
Helm movies.  The villan, Count Massimo Contini (Nigel Green) is easily the
best of the series.  The fight scenes (choreographed by Bruce Lee) are
light-years ahead of the fight scenes in the other three.  And in several
scenes, Martin actually seems to *act*.  Incredible, but true.
        Of course, this is still a Matt Helm movie after all is said and
done with, and so we're also treated to the following:
        * The villanous plan being divided up into approximately 12
"phases," apparently for no other reason than to give Nigel Green an
opportunity to say things like "We're entering Phase 3 of the plan right on
schedule" or "We're precisely 10 seconds behind schedule."  This is because
Nigel Green pronounces "schedule" with a soft "sch," so it sounds like
"shed-ule."  My guess is the writers and the director thought this sounded
really cool and wanted to hear him say it 7 or 8 times during the movie.
        * A mini-helicopter which fits unassembled into the trunk of a car,
and can be assembled in a matter of two minutes.
        * A camera which shoots out a green fog.  This fog instantly blinds
people for 10 minutes unless they're wearing special goggles.  Even if
they're across the room and/or upwind.
        * Copenhagen police officers who sound suspiciously like they were
raised in the USA, and who know that a homicide has been committed even
though they haven't visited the crime scene and the only witness to the
incident is Helm.
        Yes, despite its good qualities, it's still a Matt Helm movie.  But
it's pretty good for all that, and it's a shame that "The Ravagers" never
saw the light of day.  Would have been interesting to see where they went
with the movie.  Hmmm...  Maybe we can convince Tarantino to do a Matt Helm
movie...

Title
Review for Heavy Metal (1981)
        I've only seen HEAVY METAL (1981) twice:  Once on cable back in
1982, and again last night after renting the video on a whim.  I've
discovered that I liked the movie a lot better when I was a pubescent teen
back in 1982.
        Oh, don't get me wrong.  There's still a lot to like about HEAVY
METAL.  But hormonally-charged teen males tend to gloss over subtleties
like plot and story when someone waves a pair of naked 36-D breasts in
their face, even if the breasts are animated.  It was an older, wiser, more
sedate Afterburner that watched HEAVY METAL again last night, and I spotted
some flaws that eluded me the first time through.
        The plot, such as it is, involves the Loc-Nar.  The Loc-Nar is a
glowing green orb of varying size that also happens to be the embodiment of
all that is evil in the universe.  Through a series of animated vignettes,
we learn the story of the Loc-Nar as it tells its twisted history to a
terrified young girl.  We see a cabbie in a futuristic New York get
involved in a plan to steal the Loc-Nar; we see a 18-year old nerd
transported to another dimension and transformed into a muscle-bound hero
try to stop an evil plan involving the Loc-Nar; we see a B-17 pilot menaced
by the skeletons of his dead crew as a consequence of the Loc-Nar.  These
stories and more are told as the movie progresses.
        The problem with HEAVY METAL stems from the fact that the makers of
the movie wanted to get a lot of folks associated with the magazine
involved.  So there are 8 or 10 different vignettes, all representing
different stories which have appeared in the magazine over the years.
Which means that each story has about 10 minutes to explain itself for
those not familiar with the magazine, and then resolve its conflict.  For
some segments ("Soft Landing," "Grimaldi"), this isn't a problem because
the segment is just a set-up for other segments.  But other segments seem
incredibly rushed.  You can almost feel the characters thinking "I've got
to get this over with QUICK before the next vignette!"  The vignette that
suffers the least from this problem is the "B-17" vignette, and it's
frequently cited by fans as the best vignette in the movie.
        The attempt to involve as many people as possible also produces the
problem that not all of the vignettes fit the over-arching plot.  Each
vignette is supposedly a story of the Loc-Nar spreading its evil.  But in
the "DEN" vignette, its plans are thwarted by the hero.  And in the "So
Beautiful & So Dangerous" vignette, it doesn't even appear.  Nor does there
seem to be any connection to the spreading of evil (or the thwarting
thereof) in this vignette.
        I don't think I'll be ruining the movie for anyone by revealing
that the Loc-Nar is eventually killed.  But this is also somewhat confusing
in that the Loc-Nar seems to commit suicide by telling the young girl a
story of Taarna, who (in the story) kills one of its incarnations.  It
seems that the Loc-Nar dies because Taarna kills it.  But Taarna only kills
it in the story.  And yet it dies anyway in the "real world."
        As mentioned, these are all points I missed the first time I saw
the movie.  The good points I remembered are still there, though:  The
soundtrack rocks, and is a great cross-section of the rock-n-roll scene of
the late '70s/early '80s.  (It even contains a song from my all-time
favorite band, Blue Öyster Cult.)  And the stories, while brief, do tend to
convey that sense of "otherness" that sets apart the great SF/Fantasy from
the merely good.  And there's naked, animated 36-D breasts aplenty,
although this might appeal only to a limited audience.
        In short, then, HEAVY METAL is entertaining, but with some serious
flaws.  Recommended for the SF/Fantasy video festivals at the Frat House,
or for popcorn fun on a lazy Saturday night.

Title
Review for Ambushers, The (1967)
Rating (out of 10):  N/A.  See review for further details.
        Of the four Matt Helm movies made, THE AMBUSHERS (1968) is the most
"MST3K-able" of the bunch.  (Meaning that it's ripe for parody by the folks
at Mystery Science Theater 3000, for those who may not get the reference.)
        If you haven't seen any of them, the Matt Helm movies answer the
question "What if Hugh Hefner (founder and publisher of Playboy Magazine)
had been a secret agent on the side?"  Dean Martin plays Matt Helm, an
affable, boozing photographer of scantily-clad women who works for
"Slaymate" magazine.  But that's just a cover!  The truth is that Helm is
*really* an affable, boozing, super-competent secret agent who works for
the Intelligence Counter Espionage (ICE) organization.
        Before we go further, I should point out that the Matt Helm movies
are all pretty bad.  But they're wonderfully bad, and they're great,
cheezy, campy fun.  I tend to speak glowingly of the Matt Helm movies
because I enjoy them for their over-the-top campiness, but more
serious-minded viewers will probably be turned off.
        And let me tell you:  THE AMBUSHERS spares *no* expense in the
"campiness" department.  Try this plot on for size:
        The ICE organization is testing out a new, super-secret flying
saucer.  That's right, a flying saucer.  As MacDonald (James Gregory), head
of ICE points out, if it works it will put the other planets "right next
door," and the rest of the universe will be "just around the corner."  It's
never sufficiently explained why a counter-espionage organization would
need to go to other planets (much less the rest of the universe), but no
matter.  They've made it and they're testing it.
        The test works fine, until the saucer is forced to land by
Mysterious Bad Guys.  The leader of the Mysterious Bad Guys enters the
saucer, and the pilot (a female) screams.  Fade to black.  This all takes
place within the first 10 minutes of the movie.
        Cut to Matt Helm, in Matt Helm heaven.  He's helping to train a
cadre of new ICE agents who, coincidentally enough, all happen to be
gorgeous, scantily-clad babes.  Go figure.  But he runs into a
white-haired, crazed woman who thinks all men are out to kill her.  It's
his old partner!  It's also the woman who piloted the flying saucer!  Will
wonders never cease?  (Answer:  Of course not!  This is Matt Helm!)
        Naturally, Helm is assigned to find the saucer, and he has to take
his former partner (who's now recovered) because only females can fly the
saucer.  The reason is because the saucer uses "electromagnetic fields" to
propel itself around the neighborhood.  And, according to the movie,
electromagnetic fields are lethal to males.  No, I never learned that in my
basic physics classes either, but there you are.
        You can guess the rest.  Typical spy-movie stuff with the usual
Matt Helm twist.  Helm still wanders from place to place as though he's
looking for the nearest bar.  During one fight scene he gets knocked into a
huge vat of beer, much to his obvious delight.  And in a send-up of his
singing career, the very final scene shows him trying to teach an
attractive new recruit how to make love while on the job.  The recruit is
cold and unresponsive, even after Helm puts on a Dean Martin tune.  But
when he puts on Perry Como, she responds amorously, much to his chagrin.
        * The whole "electromagnetic fields are lethal to men" bit, which
had me rolling on the floor.
        * A couple of male bad guys dying from, as near as I can tell,
turning completely red all over.  Even their clothes.  This is, apparently,
the inevitable consequence of exposing men to electromagnetic fields.  (Now
you know why your Mom always told you not to sit so close to the TV...)
        * The obvious set pieces when Helm is supposed to be outdoors.
        * A set of railroad tracks which leads right up to the very edge of
a cliff, apparently for no other reason than to allow a railroad flatcar to
careen dramatically off said cliff.
        * The *incredibly* cheesy effects, which include ray guns that emit
sparks, and radar towers that emit obvious "radar" noises.
        * Helm turning his belt into a sword by the simple expedient of
getting it wet.
        It's true that none of the other Matt Helm movies are pinnacles of
the film-maker's craft.  But the plot and cheesy special effects make THE
AMBUSHERS a cut below the others.  In ranking the four Matt Helm movies in
terms of overall quality, this would be #4 on my list.  But in ranking them
in terms of laughs (both intentional and otherwise), this is easily #1.
