Authors
David Landers
Number of Reviews
24

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Tommy Lee Jones (Agent Kay), Will Smith (James Edwards/Agent Jay),
Linda Fiorentino (Dr. Laurel Weaver/Agent Elle), Vincent D'Onofrio
(Edgar), Rip Torn (Zed) 
DIRECTOR: Barry Sonnenfeld
CERTIFICATION: PG-13 (USA) mild violence and language
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1997
MEN IN BLACK is an explosive mix of science fiction, action, and comedy
that hits the target in every possible way.  Although another alien movie,
MEN IN BLACK succeeds in every way that INDEPENDENCE DAY didn't, and
towers above many other movies of its type.  The brilliant acting,
especially by Tommy Lee Jones as Agent Kay, is also as good as it gets.
Director Barry Sonnenfeld, who was behind the camera for THE ADDAMS FAMILY
movies and GET SHORTY, has crafted a masterpiece.
The story behind MEN IN BLACK is just as interesting as you would want it
to be.  The Men in Black, or MiB, are a top-secret governmental agency
that is not known to exist.  The MiB are responsible for "saving the world
from the scum of the universe".  A though job, indeed.  The film opens
with a truckload of illegal aliens (the human kind) being transported
across the Mexico border and into the United States.  Presumably, these
"aliens" are all migrant workers.  That is, until the MiB show up and
begin interrogating them.  Agent Kay selects a particular suspicious
worker and takes him away from the other local authorities to discover
that he is not an illegal human alien, but a real extra-terrestrial alien.
When the alien makes a run for it, Agent Kay is forced to eliminate the
alien with one of the MiB's very unique weapons, and after one of the
local law enforcement officers witnesses this bizarre occurrence, Agent
Kay is forced to use another very unique device on them.  The device,
described as "out of state", eliminates the memory of anyone it is used
on.
>From here, we are introduced to James Edwards, played very well by Will
Smith.  Edwards, a police officer, is chasing a fleeing criminal.  The
criminal gives a very good chase, and at one point when Edwards confronts
him, the criminal pulls out a very different looking weapon that
disintegrated when it hit the ground.  Edwards continues to chase the very
athletic criminal to the top of a building, where the criminal informs
Edwards that he must let him go, because someone is after him.  Edwards
doesn't take this seriously, but when the criminal shows very non-human
characteristics and leaps off the building, he begins to wonder.
Back at the police station, Agent Kay shows up to ask Edwards a few
questions.  He informs Edwards that is was, in fact, a non-human that he
was chasing, and that the gun he pulled out was definitely not man-made.
He has Edwards identify the gun, and asks Edwards to come to the MiB
headquarters the following day.
Edwards arrives and finds that he is involved in a recruiting process,
along with various other men who seem a bit more qualified than he.  After
goofing up for half of the time, Edwards puts on a show at the firing
range, and Agent Kay notes the reason why he feels Edwards should be the
man to join the MiB: he chased down the "criminal" on foot, which is
something that no one is supposed to be able to do.
In the meantime, an upstate New York farm has a very close encounter.
Edgar (Vincent D'Onofrio), owner of the farm, investigates a strange crash
landing and is attacked by the inhabitant of the flying object, which
presumes to jump inside Edgar and use his body as a human transport.  The
"bug", as he is called, is an intergalactic terrorist who has come to
Earth to attempt to kill two ambassadors.  And it up to the MiB, with
newly recruited Agent Jay (formerly James Edwards) to exterminate the bug
and save the planet from intergalactic war.
MEN IN BLACK delightfully combines fast-paced action with often hilarious
comedy, which is usually from Will Smith, although Tommy Lee Jones opens
up his comedic personality in this film.  The special effects are also
very well done and are not the entire source of the plot, as in another
big alien film from the past summer.  Screenwriter Ed Solomon, writer of
SUPER MARIO BROS. and the upcoming X-MEN film, has surely struck gold with
this story.  All ages will enjoy MEN IN BLACK.  It is an extremely fun
film that you will want to see again.  Although it runs a very quick and
speedy 96 minutes, the entire film from beginning to end is a non-stop
adventure.  The ending of the film, which ties up a few loose ends for one
of the main characters, is also very well done.  A sequel is already being
planned, so there is more to look forward to!


Title
Review for Deliverance (1972)
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Jon Voight (Ed Gentry), Burt Reynolds (Lewis Medlock), Ned Beatty
(Bobby Trippe), Ronny Cox (Drew Ballinger)
DIRECTOR: John Boorman
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for violence, language, and shocking situations
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1972
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Picture, Best Director (Boorman), Best
Film Editing (Tom Priestley II)
Everyone's heard about this movie, and more specifically, *the* scene.
Everyone's heard the famous barnyard animal quote squealed (no pun
intended) over and over.  And everyone's got to admit that they will never
travel down a river again without thinking of DELIVERANCE.  Good!  That's
what you're supposed to do!  Oh, if you are one of the ones who hasn't
seen this yet, or you (somehow) haven't heard about what happens, here's
your spoiler warning.
DELIVERANCE was a real shocker for it's time (1972).  Major advances were
being made in films, and DELIVERANCE made its own advances when it
introduced a new horror into the film industry.  When it was first
released, it literally shocked the audiences.  It was something
that, for the most part, had really never been seen on the big screen
before (among wide-release films with an R rating).  But by today's film
standards and in today's world, such scenes as the one in DELIVERANCE can
be reproduced in a way that isn't as shocking, although they can be even
more graphic (e.g. PULP FICTION).  PULP FICTION did it in a way, and
expanded on it in a way, that it could even be interpreted as funny.  But
in 1972, DELIVERANCE was no laughing matter.
The story centers around a group of four Atlanta men who decide to take a
rafting trip down a backwoods river in Georgia while the river is still
there and in its glory.  The initial leader of the group is Lewis (Burt
Reynolds in his prime), a real outdoorsman and more of a Daniel Boone-type
then any of the others.  Joining him are Ed (Jon Voight), Bobby (Ned
Beatty), and Drew (Ronny Cox).
The group's first objective is to find someone(s) to drive their cars down
the river to the point where they will end their trip.  They make
arrangements with a few mountain men, who accept $40.00 for the task.
Drew also has the famous "dueling banjos" competition with a local who is,
let us say, genetically challenged.
The men then set off down the river, with Lewis, also the master at
canoeing, leading the way.  Everything seems to be going fine, until the
two canoes split up, leaving the unexperienced Ed and Bobby alone.  They
encounter two hillbillies, armed with a shotgun, who captured them.  Ed is
tied to a tree while Bobby is sodomized by one of the men.  Ed nearly
receives the same cruelty, but Lewis arrives just in time to fire an arrow
through the rapist's back.  The other hillbilly gets away, and the men
have to decide what to do with the dead body.  Disposing of dead bodies
is done rather frequent throughout this film.
While attempting to make a quick "paddle for it", both canoes tip over.
Drew, who was without a life jacket, was possibly shot and cannot be
found.  Lewis suffered a rather nasty compound fracture during the
incident and is in serious condition.  This leaves Ed and Bobby.  Ed
decides to go out and look for the remaining hillbilly, alone, with the
bow and arrow.  The question arises if he will be able to handle himself,
as he horribly botched a first shot attempt at a deer, to which his
comment "I wonder how anyone could kill a living thing" will have more
meaning in the future.
DELIVERANCE is definitely a wild ride (oops, I'm doing it again).  It is
extremely tense at some points and very dramatic.  It's definitely one of
those "must see" movies and should be considered one of the classics of
its decade.


Title
Review for Quiz Show (1994)
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.0 out of 10.0
CAST: John Turturro (Herbie Stempel), Rob Morrow (Dick Goodwin), Ralph
Fiennes (Charles Van Doren), Paul Scofield (Mark Van Doren), David Paymer
(Dan Enright), Hank Azaria (Albert Freedman)
DIRECTOR: Robert Redford
CERTIFICATION: PG-13 (USA) for language 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1994
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Picture, Best Director (Redford), Best
Supporting Actor (Scofield), Best Adapted Screenplay (Paul Attanasio)
QUIZ SHOW, an almost perfectly accurate true story, is based upon the
events of the popular television show of the mid-50's, "Twenty-One".  On
this trivial game show, contestants were placed in isolation booths and
then answered questions corresponding to a category of their choice, on
which they wagered an amount of points on.  The game went on until a
player reached twenty one points on felt they had earned enough points to
win.  But, after ratings began to fall when players were struggling to
break the zero mark, the producers decided to fix the game by giving the
answers to a contestant before the game began.  
QUIZ SHOW illustrates the true stories of two particular contestants,
Herbie Stempel and Charles Van Doren.  Stempel (John Turturro), a former
G.I. and your Jewish man raising a family.  Stempel has been the reigning
champion on "Twenty-One" for many weeks and has accumulated thousands of
dollars.  In his mind, he is the best thing on television and the people
love him.  Although, in the mind of the show's producers, Herbie Stempel
is getting old.  Dan Enright (David Paymer), in particular, feels that the
people are tired of seeing a "Jewish guy from Queens with bad teeth" and
that the kids need someone better to look up to.  Therefore, they
need to find another contestant whom would be a worthy role model
and the people will look up to and cheer to win.  Someone who can
defeat Stempel, even if they have to resort to cheating.  Enter Charles
Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes), a well-educated Professor from a widely
recognized family.  Van Doren had decided to try out for the game show "Tic
Tac Dough" because his friends thought he would be good at that sort of
thing.  But when Albert Freedman (Hank Azaria), Enright's assistant, spots
Van Doren, the two decide that they have found their soon-to-be-ruler of
the "Twenty-One" kingdom.  Van Doren is not too keen on the idea of
receiving the answers ahead of time, so Enright tells Stempel that he is
going to give the wrong answer, on purpose, in order to lose the game.
After Stempel loses the "throne" to Van Doren, he starts to feel cheated
(which he should).  Meanwhile, on his own, Dick Goodwin (Rob Morrow), a
Harvard law graduate, has decided to start an investigation on
"Twenty-One" to try and find out if there have been any wrongdoings.  His
investigation yields shocking results and leads to a trial for Enright and
the others involved.
QUIZ SHOW is an extremely well done movie, and Robert Redford's direction
is especially superb.  The performances turned in by John Turturro, Ralph
Fiennes, and Rob Morrow are very good, although it seems that Turturro
stands out more than any.  QUIZ SHOW is also very precise when it comes to
explicating the true events that inspired the film.  Definitely a film you
should not miss.


Title
Review for That Thing You Do! (1996)
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Tom Everett Scott (Guy Patterson), Liv Tyler (Faye Dolan), Johnathon
Schaech (James 'Jimmy' Mattingly II), Steve Zahn (Lenny), Ethan Randall
(The Bass Player), Tom Hanks (Mr. White)
DIRECTOR: Tom Hanks
CERTIFICATION: PG (USA) 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1996
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Original Song
THAT THING YOU DO!, from first-time film director Tom Hanks, is an
enjoyable tale about a fictional band, The Wonders, that goes from a
garage band to the band with the fastest selling album in the country.
But, the question arrises, will the seduction of fame and fortune
corrupt the band and lead them to become just another one-hit wonder, or
will they stick together and become the next teen sensations?
The "Oneders", as they are originally known, have their first gig at a
very small-time contest. Jimmy, the lead singer, has written a catchy song
and intends to play it at the contest.  But, a short time before the
contest begins, the current drummer becomes injured and a replacement is
needed.  Enter Guy Patterson, skilled musician who currently works at his
father's appliance store and is looking to break free from the restricting
clutches that bind him.  He seems to fit in well, until the group takes
the stage.  When they begin to play, Guy's beat is much too fast and the
pace is way off for the intended song.  It looks as though the group is
doomed to failure.  But, the "new" song is a hit!  This leads to another
gig, and soon enough, the group has an agent.  He doesn't do too much for
them, but they do get their song played on the radio.  Eventually, Mr.
White of Playtone records approaches the group, and he informs them that
they want to release a record.
Before you can say "Billboard", the band is now renamed "The Wonders" and
the members are speeding their way to fame.  The gigs are getting better,
their fame is increasing, and they have the fastest selling album in
Playtone Records history.  The band is invited to appear in a feature
film, and, they then fly out to Hollywood to appear on television.  After
the appearance on television, things start to fall apart.  Two of the
members of the band pretty much disappear, and things are not working out
well between Jimmy and Guy.  Will the band work it out, or will they split
up and go on their own separate journeys towards success?
THAT THING YOU DO!, complete with a nifty original song that actually
sounded authentic, is a fun and enjoyable movie that, although it doesn't
become clear if it wants to be a comedy, drama, or romance, is a well-made
look into the world of music.  Tom Hanks' directorial debut was a good one
and should lead to more work for him.


Title
Review for Dog Day Afternoon (1975)
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Al Pacino (Sonny), John Cazale (Sal), Charles Durning (Moretti),
Chris Sarandon (Leon)
DIRECTOR: Sidney Lumet
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for language and violence 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1975
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Picture, Best Actor (Pacino), Best
Supporting Actor (Sarandon)
ACADEMY AWARDS: Original Screenplay (Frank Pierson)
Based on a true story, DOG DAY AFTERNOON is the story of two Brooklyn men,
Sonny Wortzik (Al Pacino) and Sal (John Cazale), who attempt to rob a bank
in a desperate attempt for funds.  The funds they hope to gain will be
used to pay for the sex-change operation of Sonny's male lover, Leon,
played by Chris Sarandon.
Sonny is a former bank employee who knows all the tricks of the trade,
which he shows by being, for the most part, well aware of the surroundings.
He's worked out his plan completely and knows how to take out all of the
bank's possible annoyances.  Everything is working out fine until the
police show up, headed up by Charles Durning (Moretti).  What transpires
from here is a multiple-day circus, including the police, media,
enthusiastic "fans" of the robbers, and a few unusual characters; namely,
a pizza boy and an angry boyfriend of one of the tellers.
DOG DAY AFTERNOON is, overall, a rather enjoyable movie.  At times it
appears it is an action movie, but at other times it leans towards a
comedy/drama.  The best performance is turned in by Al Pacino, as the
crafty leader.  John Cazale also turns in a good performance as Sal, the
dumb-witted sidekick who really isn't "all there".  For example, Sonny is
toying with the idea of taking a plane to a foreign country, and Sal
suggests they fly to the far-off country "Wyoming".  Chris Sarandon plays
a rather odd character as Sonny's gay lover; the one who needs the money
to pay for the sex-change operation.  The group of bank hostages, a number
of female tellers and the manager, also provide a few comical moments
throughout the movie.
Complete with a fairly dramatic ending, DOG DAY AFTERNOON is a good flick
that you should enjoy.  It is agreeable that it could have been better in
many ways, but it is one of the more famous bank heist films of the past
few decades.


Title
Review for Jaws (1975)
RATING: **** out of **** - 8.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Roy Scheider (Martin Brody), Robert Shaw (Quint), Richard Dreyfuss
(Hooper), Lorraine Gary (Ellen Brody), Murray Hamilton (Mayor Vaughan)
DIRECTOR: Steven Spielberg
CERTIFICATION: PG (USA) for shark attacks and mild violence 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1975
ACADEMY AWARDS: Music and Film Editing
JAWS is an unforgettable thriller, pioneer for future filmmaking, and
the main cause for a fear of the ocean.  Steven Spielberg's first big
film, JAWS is one of those movies that you can watch over and over again
and just not get tired of it.  Based on the novel by Peter Benchley, JAWS
is the story of Amity Island, a small resort on the Atlantic Ocean, that
suddenly becomes terrorized by a Great White shark.
The movie begins in a fantastic, thrilling way.  A group of teenagers are
having at night, drinking and having fun.  Two of the party-goers leave the
group for a midnight swim.  Chrissie (Susan Backlinie), who will be
forever known as this role, is the girl who leaves.  Once she begins to
swim, she is attacked.  In a scene that probably made a few movie-goers
leave the theater, a lasting impression is left as to how vicious this
shark can be.
Chief of Police Martin Brody, played very well by Roy Scheider, is
assigned to investigate the mysterious disappearance of the girl.  The
only witness was a drunken man who can't really remember anything.  When
the remains are eventually found, the first assumption (by Brody) is a
shark attack.  But, many town officials don't want it to be classified as
a shark attack, and feel that it is a "boat accident".  The beaches are
closed and many locals decide to take it upon themselves to hunt down the
shark.  Eventually, Hooper, a young scientist portrayed terrifically by
Richard Dreyfuss, is brought in to investigate the possible shark problem.
Once he sees the remains of the first victim, he is one hundred percent
sure that this is no "boating accident" and that the shark they are
dealing with is definitely posses a serious threat to the resort island.
The beaches remain open and the visitors are allowed to swim freely.  
Soon, another victim is attacked by the killer shark, this time a young
boy.  This sets off a manhunt for the shark, led by Chief Brody.  A killer
shark is killed and thought to be the shark responsible for the deaths of
the two victims.  When they find out this shark is not the shark they are
looking for, Chief Brody, Hooper, and Quint (played by the late Robert
Shaw), a veteran shark fisherman, set off to hunt down the shark that is
plaguing the small resort island.  After a while, the shark turns on the
boat and its crew, and the men are left to not only eliminate the shark,
but save their own lives.
JAWS is a seemingly non-stop action/thriller with countless unforgettable
moments and quotes.  Aside from the entire sequence of events when the
crew is attempting to kill this very large fish, Quint's story of the
U.S.S. Indianapolis (a scene written by Shaw) is a very detailed and
memorable scene.  JAWS is, by today's standards, probably not as
suspenseful as most movies, but for 1975, it was a definite
edge-of-your-seat thriller that left the nation petrified of the ocean.


Title
Review for Pete's Dragon (1977)
RATING: ** 1/2 out of **** - 6.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Helen Reddy (Nora), Mickey Rooney (Lampie), Red Buttons (Hoagy), Jim
Dale (Dr. Terminus), Sean Marshall (Pete), Charlie Callas (Elliot - Voice) 
DIRECTOR: Don Chaffey
CERTIFICATION: G (USA) for very mild violence
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1977
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Music
PETE'S DRAGON is a Children's Adventure/Musical that follows the
events of a young orphan, Pete (Sean Marshall).  This film is an
entertaining movie that is a combination of live action and animation.  It
can be viewed as a WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT type movie with less animation.
The movie begins with Pete trying to get away from his cruel owners, the
Gogan family.  He finds his way into a secluded area where we see him
speaking to someone.  But who?  This invisible character then is seemingly
responsible for knocking over a few members of the Gogan family, despite Pete's
warning to not swing his "tail".  After the Gogans give up looking for
Pete, the two companions decide to call it a night.
The next morning, we are able to meet Elliot, a flying dragon.  He's a
large green mass who seems playful and timid.  After breakfast, which
consists of cooked apples (thanks to Elliot and his flaming ability), Pete
decides to journey to the local town of Pasamaquadoy.  That might not be
the correct spelling, but as we'll find out, I'm not the only one who has
problems with the name. 
Once the two make it to the small fishing town, Elliot makes a bad
entrance, causing all kinds of havoc and destruction.  The townspeople
think that Pete is the one causing all the trouble, when it's actually his
invisible dragon.  With this explanation, they think he's either lying or
crazy.  Pete eventually finds his way to a cave near a lighthouse,
operated by Nora (Helen Reddy) and her dad, Lampie (Mickey Rooney), a
drunk who is scared half to death by Elliot.  Of course, when he tries to
explain this to his drinking friends, they give him the same treatment as
Pete.
Pete is eventually taken in by Nora and is allowed to stay at the
lighthouse.  Elliot has to stay in the cave, though, but the two still get
to spend time together.  Soon thereafter, Dr. Terminus (Jim Dale) and his
assistant Hoagy (Red Buttons) arrive in the town in an attempt to sell
their magical medications.  The townspeople are obviously very familiar
with their "work" and do not show the two a kind welcome, either.  The Doc
is eventually able to convince them to buy his remedies, but his biggest
potential seller is not owned by him yet.  When Lampie informs him that
Elliot, a dragon, is staying in a cave by his lighthouse, Dr. Terminus
begins his efforts to capture Elliot and use him to make more medicines.
The Gogans, as well, continually attempt to steal Pete back so that he can
work their farm all by himself like he used to.  Elliot's mission,
apparently to help orphaned kids, is extended when Nora informs Pete that
her soon-to-husband, Paul (Cal Bartlett) has been missing for some time.
Pete is sure that Elliot can find Paul and return him home.
PETE'S DRAGON is a fun movie, especially for younger kids.  Complete with
the Disney-standard songs throughout the movie, PETE'S DRAGON is a very
enjoyable movie that you won't grow too tired of half way through.  Older
kids and adults should find it a good movie, but not as much as younger
kids will.


Title
Review for Pulp Fiction (1994)
RATING: **** out of **** - 9.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Samuel L. Jackson (Jules Winnfield), John Travolta (Vincent Vega),
Bruce Willis (Butch Coolidge), Ving Rhames (Marsellus Wallace), Uma
Thurman (Mia Wallace), Tim Roth (Pumpkin), Amanda Plummer
(Honey Bunny), Eric Stoltz (Lance), Christopher Walken (Captain Koons),
Quentin Tarantino (Jimmie), Harvey Keitel (Winston Wolf), Angela Jones
(Esmarelda Villalobos), Maria de Medeiros (Fabienne), Brett (Frank Whaley)
DIRECTOR: Quentin Tarantino
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for excessive violence, language, graphic
images, and drug use 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1994
ACADEMY AWARDS: Best Original Screenplay (Tarantino), 
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Picture, Best Director (Tarantino),
Best Actor (Travolta), Best Supporting Actor (Jackson), Best
Supporting Actress (Thurman), Best Film Editing (Sally Menke), 
PULP FICTION, Quentin Tarantino's anxiously awaited and superb follow-up
to RESERVOIR DOGS, is absolutely and without a doubt progressing as one of
the most talked about, loved, and hated films of all-time.  In all
fairness, it should be noted that those who love this film greatly
outnumber those who hate it.  As if RESERVOIR DOGS wasn't perfect,
Tarantino went ahead and improved on perfection by creating PULP FICTION,
a fast-paced, hard talking, roller coaster ride of a movie that combines
violence and extraordinary dialogue in a seemingly perfect way. 
Every major character in this film is represented by a terrific acting
performance by the actor.  To begin with, the two hit men: Vincent Vega
(John Travolta) and Jules Winnfield (Samuel L. Jackson).  These two
characters work together perfectly, and the performances by each actor are
nearly perfect.  Travolta, in fact, is still trying to get out of the
Vincent Vega role.
If these two characters were not enough, there's the struggling boxer
Butch Coolidge (Bruce Willis), the two small-time criminals Pumpkin (Tim
Roth) and Honey Bunny (Amanda Plummer), the big man in charge Marsellus
Wallace (Ving Rhames) and his attractive young wife Mia (Uma Thurman), and
the "problem solver" himself, The Wolf (Harvey Keitel).  These are just
the major characters.  
Smaller roles, but equally terrific, are handed to Jimmie (Quentin
Tarantino), a young married man who gets caught up in some
serious gangster business, Lance (Eric Stoltz), the far-out drug dealer,
as well as Maynard (Duane Whitaker) and Zed (Peter Greene), two
hillbillies who are the men "behind" (no pun intended for those of you
who have seen this) a very disturbing scene towards the end of the film.
The film interweaves three stories that, at first, seem to be nothing
alike but later prove to be very critical to each other.  The film begins
with Pumpkin and Honey Bunny in a small coffee shop discussing their
recent robberies and hold-ups.  The two quickly decide to hold up the
coffee shop, unknowing of what lies ahead.
After this, the film focuses for some time on Vincent and Jules and their
hit man lifestyle.  Utilizing the films unforgettable dialogue, the two
men discuss such things as hamburgers and foot massages before they bust
into an apartment to terrorize the occupants.  The two men were sent to
the apartment to recover a mysterious briefcase for their boss, Marsellus
Wallace.  After basically toying with the men, especially the unfortunate
Brett (Frank Whaley), Vincent and Jules complete their mission and recover
the briefcase.  This is not before a man jumps out from a bathroom with a
.357 "hand cannon", shooting at the two gangsters.  He somehow completely
misses them, leading Jules to cite divine intervention.  This is also the
basis for more of the now-famous Tarantino dialogue.
The film then shifts to focus on boxer Butch Coolidge and his boxing
escapades.  Butch was ordered to take a fall in his latest fight, but when
he does not, Marsellus vows to find him, wherever he is, and make sure
that Butch is not able to enjoy his new fortune. 
Vincent, meanwhile, has the honor of taking Marsellus' wife, Mia, out on a
date while the big man is out of town.  Vincent, obviously, is rather
nervous about this, especially after hearing the tale about a man who was
thrown out of a window for supposedly giving Mia a foot massage.  After
their date, which seems to rather smoothly, things take a turn for the
worst at the hands of Vincent's high-priced heroin, dubbed a
"monster" by Lance.
Each story continually progresses, and new and amazing events
occur.  Eventually, the stories all meet each other in the end, with
Pumpkin and Honey Bunny holding up the restaurant, which happens to
contain both Vincent and Jules.
PULP FICTION is definitely one of the best films of the decade, and
possibly of all-time.  Along with its superb dialogue, action, writing,
directing, and acting, this film will not only latch onto you, but it
proves that it does not want to release you until it has sunk its claws
completely into you.  And with most fans of this movie, this is proved to
be a rather easy task, although at times the graphic images,
violence, and language may seem a bit overpowering.  Surely, Quentin
Tarantino's fame was greatly escalated by this film, and he proves not to
be one who will fade from existence very soon.


Title
Review for Dazed and Confused (1993)
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Jason London (Randall "Pink" Floyd), Milla Jovovich (Michelle), Rory
Cochrane (Slater), Sasha Jenson (Don Dawson), Joey Lauren Adams (Simone),
Michelle Burke (Jodi), Wiley Wiggins (Mitch), Ben Affleck (O'Bannion),
Matthew McConaughey (Wooderson)
DIRECTOR: Richard Linklater
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for language, drug use, and mild violence 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1993
First off, I must say that DAZED AND CONFUSED is definitely not my
favorite type of movie.  In fact, the only real reason I saw it was
because of how everyone kept telling me how good it was.  So, I decided to
finally watch it, and I must say that it was actually better than I
thought it would be, but it also could've been better.  
DAZED AND CONFUSED seems to be a type of "hit and miss" in it's portrayal
of the last day of school in a small Texas town in the year 1976.  The
incoming Seniors, now the rulers of the school, inflict the initiation
rituals upon the soon-to-be Freshmen.  For the Senior guys, the hazing is
more physical than that of the Senior girls, who basically humiliate the
younger Freshmen.  The main target of the Senior guys pain-inflicting
services, led mainly by O'Bannion (Ben Affleck), is Mitch (Wiley Wiggins).
Mitch stands up to the hazing as best he can, and proves that he can take
whatever they can dish out.  This proves him well to the Seniors, and he
is invited to "hang out" with them on their night of fun, which includes
drinking, smoking marijuana, fighting, and even more.
Randall "Pink" Floyd (Jason London) is the star quarterback of the high
school's football team.  Basically, all he wants to do is enjoy life over
the Summer.  But, the coach of the football team doesn't want this to be
an option for him or any of the football players, and asks them to
basically sign away their fun in favor of dedicating themselves to the
football team.  Of course, they all blow off this type of dedication and
decide to live it up, especially on the night of the last day of school.
And do they.  Everyone and anyone.  It's a night of fun, in their minds.
One strange thing about the movie is that you really never figure out who
it centers on.  At times, it looks like Randall "Pink" Floyd is the main
character, but then at other instances, it's almost definite that Mitch is
the centerpiece.  In my opinion, I think it is actually both characters
who share the spotlight.  Yet, I feel that the concentration on Mitch is
the best overall.  Here's a young boy, fresh out of junior high and
heading into high school.  After attempting to avoid the hazing of the
Seniors, he shows courage and strength by standing up to them.  Then,
after being accepted into the group, he blends in strikingly well with the
rest of the group.  Very well done, indeed.
For some reason, I really enjoyed the performance of another character in
the movie.  This character, who did not emerge until late in the film, had
a next to meaningless part in the film, yet I found him very likeable.
The character is Wooderson, a high school drop out doing nothing
with his life played very well by Matthew McConaughey.  I guess it was
just something about the character that I liked.  Wooderson, despite his
status, still hangs out with his old high school friends and does whatever
they do.  It was also his character who inspired Mitch to buy his first
six pack of beer, another very good scene.
DAZED AND CONFUSED, which could be argued on its accuracy, seems to be a
very well depicted look into the lives of teenagers of the 70's.  And the
diversity of the teenagers it expands on, from the respected jock to the
pot-head stoner, is extremely unique and well done.  Your interpretation
of this film depends on the way you look at it and the way you look at the
70's, in general.  Many people who experienced this era have said that
this is a very accurate portrayal, but I'm sure there are those who think
just the opposite.  Watch it and judge for yourself.


Title
Review for Muppet Movie, The (1979)
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Jim Henson (Kermit the Frog/Rowlf/Dr. Teeth/Waldorf), Frank Oz 
(Miss Piggy/Fozzie Bear/Animal/Sam the Eagle), Charles Durning (Doc
Hopper), Austin Pendleton (Max), Milton Berle (Mad Man Mooney), Mel Brooks
(Professor Max Krassman), James Coburn (El Sleezo Cafe Owner), Dom DeLuise
(Bernie - The Hollywood Agent), Elliott Gould (Beauty Contest Compere),
Bob Hope (Ice Cream Vendor), Cloris Leachman (Lord's Secretary), Steve
Martin (Insolent Waiter), Richard Pryor (Balloon Vendor), Telly Savalas
(El Sleezo Tough), Orson Welles (Lord Lew), Carroll Spinney (Big Bird)
CERTIFICATION: G
THE MUPPET MOVIE is the first, and the best movie among the ever-growing
list of Muppet movies.  THE MUPPET MOVIE tells the story of how our hero,
Kermit the Frog, came to be a star.  A delightful movie for all ages, THE
MUPPET MOVIE is *bursting* with cameo appearances by countless Hollywood
stars of the 80's and today.
THE MUPPET MOVIE begins in a movie theater, where all of the Muppet stars
are anxiously awaiting the first showing.  Once everyone is settled down,
the movie inside of the movie begins.  It starts out with Kermit in a
swamp, playing his banjo and singing (this shot required Jim Henson to
spend hours underwater).  Kermit is discovered by Bernie, a big-time
Hollywood agent who happens upon Kermit by accident.  Bernie believes that
Kermit holds much potential to become a big star in Hollywood.  Kermit
ponders the idea of becoming a big movie star, where he could "make
millions of people happy".  Kermit decides to leave his swamp and make the
trip out to Hollywood.
Along the way, Kermit befriends his now famous Muppet companions, beginning
with Fozzie Bear, who had been spending his days doing stand-up comedy at
the El Sleezo Cafe, owned by James Coburn.  The two decide to team-up and
continue on their way to Hollywood.  But, Doc Hopper (Charles Durning),
the owner of a chain of french fried frog leg restaurants has a different
idea.  He wants Kermit to be his spokesman, but Kermit is humiliated at the
idea and spends the movie avoiding him and his assistants.
The trip continues, with Kermit and Fozzie meeting Miss Piggy, Rowlf,
Gonzo, the Electric Mayhem Band, and more Muppets who all share the same
wish: to make it to Hollywood.  Oh, and even more celebrities continue to
appear.  Kermit and Miss Piggy continue to get to know each other a little
better, including a rather funny scene at a restaurant with Steve Martin
as the waiter.
Eventually, Kermit and the group make it to Hollywood.  That is, after
Kermit is finally able to elude Doc Hopper and proclaim his freedom.  Lord
Lew, a big-time Hollywood producer portrayed by Orson Welles, gives Kermit
his shot at stardom and gives him the go-ahead to produce a movie.
THE MUPPET MOVIE is definitely a movie that is fun for all ages.  It is
also a sure-deal as one parents can watch, and enjoy along with their kids.


Title
Review for Deer Hunter, The (1978)
RATING: **** out of **** - 9.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Robert De Niro (Michael), Christopher Walken (Nick), Meryl Streep
(Linda), John Cazale (Stan), John Savage (Steven), George Dzundza (John),
Chuck Aspegren (Axel)
DIRECTOR: Michael Cimino
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for violence, language, brief nudity, and horrific
war scenes
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1978
ACADEMY AWARDS: Best Picture, Best Director (Cimino), Best Supporting
Actor (Walken), Film Editing (Peter Zinner II)
THE DEER HUNTER, directed by Michael Cimino, is truly one of the greatest
movies ever made.  A captivating drama about the lives of a group of
friends from a small Russian-American Pennsylvania community, THE DEER
HUNTER promises to be one of those movies that you will never forget.  In
this Academy Award winner for Best Picture of 1978, outstanding
performances are turned in by all actors, and Cimino's brilliant directing
provides the perfect vision into the character's lives.
The first act of the film provides us with an inside look into the lives
of a group of men from a small community who work and hang out together.
Michael, portrayed perfectly by Robert De Niro, is shown early on as the
natural leader of the group.  After a days work, the men leave their jobs
at a factory to head down to the local bar, where John (George Dzundza)
works.  Three of the men, Michael, Steven (John Savage), and Nick
(Christopher Walken) will be leaving shortly for Vietnam, but not before
Steven gets married.  After the marriage, the group, including Axel (Chuck
Aspegren), spend one last day on a hunting trip, one of their
favorite past-times.
This sequence of events enables us to view the lifestyle of a normal group
of men, who will be suddenly and permanently affected by the ravages and
separations of war.  The wedding scenes, although criticized by many as
being quite long, actually enhance even more the purpose of the first act.
The outstanding performances by De Niro, Walken, Streep, Savage, and
Cazale, who died very shortly after the filming of the movie was
completed, really begin to shine through and promise not to halt in the
near future.
The second act of the movie begins with the trio of men on the front lines
in Vietnam, stationed in a South Vietnamese village being attacked by the
Viet Cong.  The men are eventually captured and held in a floating prison
on a river.  This prison, run by the V.C., initiates the horrifying scenes
in the movie, where the prisoners are forced to play Russian roulette
against each other.  Steven, who is emotionally marred by this turn of
events, is secluded in a tiger cage with water up to his face when he
refuses to participate. Michael shows his leadership again by convincing
Nick that the only way that Steven will survive is if the two friends play
against each other, and moreover, they must play with 3 bullets in the
gun.  Personally, I felt that De Niro's absolutely gripping portrayal
really was displayed in a brilliant way in these and the following scenes.
The men are eventually able to escape, but are separated.  Michael is able
to get Steven, who ends up losing his legs, to medical care, while Nick
finds his way to Saigon and a U.S. Army hospital.  Michael returns home
and does not feel at all like a hero.  He wants to avoid the celebrations
and recognition that his friends would like to bestow upon him.  He
assumes that Nick is still lost in Vietnam.
The third act concentrates more on Walken's character, who eventually
stumbles upon a small gambling operation where the game is, again, Russian
roulette. Only in this game, you play for money.  Michael has learned that
Nick is possibly still alive and returns to Saigon to attempt to find him.
The two narrowly find each other at the Russian roulette games, but do not
link up until Michael discovers Nick participating in the games and tries
to bring him home.
A very emotional, and, for many, a very disturbing movie, THE DEER HUNTER
is a truly magnificent movie that should not be missed.  The greatest
performances possible are turned in by all actors, and Cimino's directing,
which is considered to be at his all-time best in this film, is equally
dazzling.  Do not miss this film, it will captivate and astound you.


Title
Review for Scarface (1983)
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Al Pacino (Tony Montana), Steven Bauer (Manolo Manny Ray), Michelle
Pfeiffer (Elvira), Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio (Gina), Robert Loggia
(Frank Lopez) 
DIRECTOR: Brian DePalma
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for excessive language and violence 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1983
SCARFACE, a remake of the 1932 film of the same name, is a very gripping
and, as far as I know, a true-to-life story of how power and violence lead
to corruption.  Al Pacino, as Tony Montana (for whom the movie is named),
also provides a brilliant performance as a Cuban refugee who comes to
America with less than nothing and becomes one of the most highly
respected and feared drug lords in Miami.  Oliver Stone also penned the
screenplay in one of his earlier writing roles.
The film begins by disclosing the story of now Fidel Castro ordered
thousands of Cubans to set sail and head for the coasts of the United
States.  Many of these Cubans had criminal records, such as Tony Montana,
a cocky, fast-talking man who has the look of crime.  Nearly right after
his arrival in Miami, Tony is thrust into the gangster life when he
participates in a cocaine buy that goes awry.
Along with his friend and partner, Manolo (Steven Bauer), Tony rises in
the gangster ranks when he forms a friendship with Frank Lopez (Robert
Loggia), a high-roller in the organized crime field.  Tony also begins to
fall in love with Elvira (Michelle Pfeiffer), who at the time was Frank's
lover.  Of course, sooner or later in this industry, betrayal and
corruption amount into a force greater than anything else, and Tony is one
of the ones who fall victim to this force.  This is not before he becomes
one of the most respected, and often feared, men in Miami.  Tony gets to
the point where he cannot trust anyone, and everyone he knows basically
feels the same way towards him.  No one can trust him, and basically, no
one does.
SCARFACE, although incredibly violent, is one of the best crime films of
its time and stands out as another great performance for Al Pacino.
Although he did not receive any recognition from the Academy for his
performance, it truly is a very good one.  In fact, his accent and facial
movements alone are enough in my mind to win at least a nomination
(although he did get a Golden Globe nomination). 
Another element that stands out when someone mentions this film is the
profanity.  A figure tagged to the film boasts that the word "fuck" and
it's uses are uttered 206 times throughout the film, which is apparently a
record.  The thing is, the vulgarity fits rather well with the movie.  As
odd as it sounds, it's true.  In the end, SCARFACE is a very powerful film
that hits home hard.


Title
Review for Scream (1996)
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.5 out of 10.0
CAST: David Arquette (Dewey Riley), Neve Campbell (Sidney Prescott), Courtney
Cox (Gale Weathers), Rose McGowan (Tatum Riley), Skeet Ulrich (Billy Loomis),
Drew Barrymore (Casey Becker)
DIRECTOR: Wes Craven
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for excessive violence and language 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1996
SCREAM is the present-day version of a horror film directed towards the
teenage audience.  And, like many of the same type of the past, it succeeded
greatly (a sequel began filming while it was still in theaters).  From horror
and thriller director-supreme Wes Craven, SCREAM is a tense, nail-biter of a
movie that, in the words of its director, "everyone really enjoys".
In my opinion, SCREAM is very similar to other works of Wes Craven (A
NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET comes to mind first).  It is about, of course, a
bloodthirsty killer who is out to kill, more than anyone, teenagers.  The
killer will not stop at anything to kill the one person he is really after,
and like all other movies of its type, SCREAM plays this out very well.
The movie begins in the Becker household, where young Casey Becker (Drew
Barrymore) is preparing her favorite movie-watching snack, popcorn.  In the
middle of her preparation, the phone rings, and a very rough, cautious male
voice is on the other end.  At first, the caller seems rather calm and
friendly.  That is, until Casey mistakingly sets off a hidden inner rage in
the caller, who suddenly turns extremely violent.  He makes very serious,
frightening threats to Casey and continues to call after she repeatedly hangs
up.  The caller informs Casey that he wants her to play a game.  The game is
a very sick one indeed, in which Casey answers movie trivia questions.  If
she gets them wrong, the penalty is death.  If she answers correct, well, the
caller *says* he'll leave her alone.  Unfortunately for Casey, she never
escapes the killer alive.
The next day at, the small town is in shock.  The high school is crawling
with police officers and reporters, including the "tabloid twit" Gale
Weathers (Courtney Cox).  Gale Weathers is not liked at all by young Sidney
Prescott (Neve Campbell), for a very serious reason.  Gale was one of the
leading reporters in a murder controversy involving Sidney's mother, who was
brutally raped and murdered in her own home.  Gale continually insisted that
the accused killer was framed and that the real killer is still on the loose.
However, Sidney doesn't believe a word of this and certainly "has it in" for
Gale.
After the school day is over, the kids are basically still in shock, at least
for the most part.  Sidney, probably most cautious due to upcoming one-year
anniversary of her mother's death, does not want to be alone in the house.
Her father is on a business trip, so Sidney pleads with her friend Tatum
(Rose McGowan) to come over.  They agree that at seven o'clock Tatum will
come over.  Somehow, Sidney falls asleep.  She is awakened a little past
seven by the phone ringing.  It's Tatum, informing her that she will be there
very soon.  However, when the phone rings again, it isn't Tatum, but the same
guy who called Casey the night before, and supposedly attacked and killed
her.  Sidney, too, falls victim to the caller, but barely escapes.
After the attack, Sidney's boyfriend Billy Loomis (Skeet Ulrich) shows up
quickly to comfort her.  However, when Sidney notices that he is dressed in
black (as was the attacker) and is carrying a cellular phone, she assumes the
worst.  Billy is arrested and held in jail, but later released because the
phone records show that he did not call her house.  Another interesting fact
is that Sidney's father is missing and cannot be found.  Dewey (David
Arquette), a town deputy and brother of Tatum, takes it upon himself to look
out for Sidney and to help find the killer.  However, it becomes unclear who
will find who first, as the killer stops at nothing to reach his apparent
prime target.
>From here, the terrorizing continues, and it looks rather obvious that it
won't cease until the killer is stopped - for good.  However, the killer's
identity is as yet unknown, and people can only assume.  The rest of the
events in the movie are equally as suspenseful, and the climax is very well
crafted.  If you are a fan of scary movies, as were most of the characters in
this film, then you should enjoy SCREAM.  And if you *really* enjoyed, fear
not, a sequel will be out before you can, well, scream!


Title
Review for One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
RATING: **** out of **** - 9.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Jack Nicholson (Randle Patrick McMurphy), Louise Fletcher (Nurse
Ratched), Brad Dourif (Billy Bibbit), Danny DeVito (Martini), Will Sampson
(Chief), Christopher Lloyd (Taber)
DIRECTOR: Milos Forman
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for language 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1975
ACADEMY AWARDS: Best Picture, Best Director (Forman), Best Actor
(Nicholson), Best Actress (Fletcher), Best Adapted Screenplay (Bo Goldman
and Lawrence Hauben)
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Supporting Actor (Dourif), Best
Cinematography (Bill Butler and Haskell Wexler), Best Music (Jack
Nitzsche), Best Film Editing (Richard Chew, Sheldon Kahn, and Lynzee
Klingman)
ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST is definitely one of the most memorable
films of recent years.  Absolutely brilliant performances are turned in 
by many, although Jack Nicholson's role as Randle Patrick McMurphy stands 
out more than any.  McMurphy is a seemingly common man who just cannot
keep himself out of trouble.  In addition, Louise Fletcher's portrayal as
the evil Nurse Ratched is outstanding.  Moreover, the supporting cast is
full of familiar names in their very early roles, including Christopher
Lloyd (his first appearance ever) and a young Danny DeVito, both
performing as mental patients.  
ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST is a very convincing look into the lives
and events of mental patients and the different world that takes place
behind closed doors of a mental institute.  Milos Forman turns in an
extremely wonderful directorial performance in his first award winning
movie, and, in fact, only the third American movie he directed.  The film
is also a rebellious film, in which Jack Nicholson's character, McMurphy,
leads a "peasant uprising" against the cruel ways of the current
leadership, headed up by Nurse Ratched.  Until McMurphy arrives, the
mental patients do not so much as think to question the authority.  But
that all changes once McMurphy steps in.
On his most recent prison sentence, McMurphy formulates a plan.  His plan?
Pretend that he is insane so that he can get out of doing the standard
prison work.  Apparently, though, his performance is a little too
convincing.  He is sent to a mental hospital and admitted as a patient.
The head doctors of the institute examine and question him.  He is direct
to admit that he may do things that seem "crazy", but he definitely does
not belong in the mental institute.  Alas, the doctors feel that he does,
indeed, belong as a patient, and he is admitted.  Once inside, he is
subjected to the life that is led.  The rules are strictly followed and
the type of activity that McMurphy enjoys is condemned.  
Of course, McMurphy cannot bear to live his life this way, and he bends
the rules every way that he can.  This includes testing Nurse Ratched's
authority and patience every way he can, as well as setting up his own
small "gambling casino" in the washroom.  This does not last long, for
once McMurphy makes away with everyone's cigarettes (the currency), Nurse
Ratched closes his operation.  McMurphy also attempts to befriend Chief, a
very large Indian who is a patient at the hospital.  Chief is "a deaf dumb
Indian who can't say a word" according to the other patients, but McMurphy
is intent on teaching him, to begin with, how to play basketball.  He
teaches him well, for when the patients and workers organize a game, Chief
steals the show.  Chief also assists McMurphy in escaping.  McMurphy
decides to steal the bus and take the group for "a ride".  Once McMurphy
picks up a female friend, he takes the bus to a shipyard where he
convinces watchman that the men are a group of doctors from the mental
institute.  In a very memorable scene, each rather convincing "doctor" is
introduced.  The group then takes a boat for a fishing trip.
McMurphy gets his second strike against him when he gets into a rumble
with a few of the attendats, and he then receives ECT therapy.  But the
third, and most devestating strike occurs when McMurphy decides to host a
little "get together" inside the hospital one night.  The consequences of
this are devestating and lead to a very emotional ending.
ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST is a marvelous, sensational film that will
be long remembered as a film about a courageous man who changes the lives
of a group of mental patients and is not afraid to stand up to authority.
Definitely worthy of the many awards that it and it's cast and crew
members received, ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST should not be missed.


Title
Review for Hackers (1995)
RATING: * 1/2 out of **** - 3.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Jonny Lee Miller (Dade Murphy / Crash Override), Angelina Jolie
(Kate Libby / Acid Burn), Jesse Bradford (Joey), Matthew Lillard (Emmanuel
Goldstein / Cereal Killer), Laurence Mason (Paul Cook / Lord Nikon),
Renoly Santiago (Phantom Phreak), Fisher Stevens (Eugene Belford / The
Plague)
DIRECTOR: Iain Softley
CERTIFICATION: PG-13 (USA) for mild language and some sexuality
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1995
Ever since WARGAMES, the first real computer hacking movie, Hollywood
has attempted to produce more and more films about hacking.  These
films usually show the audience a look into computers that really is
not impossible and is usually ridiculous.  If it's not this, the
exaggeration about what is real is usually greater than you would expect.
HACKERS is guilty of all of these crimes.  To anyone familiar with
computers and/or the Internet, most of the movie is so incredibly stupid
that you can't take it anymore.  Those of you who frequent one of the
greatest sites on the World Wide Web, the Internet Movie Database, are
probably aware of the section for movies entitled "Goofs".  This is the
section for mistakes in the movies.  Well, IMDb sums up HACKERS extremely
well with the first goof listed: "Generally ill-informed and ridiculous to
the extreme regarding the capabilities of computers and technology".  And
truthfully, this is one-hundred percent correct.
The plot, obviously, centers around computer hacking.  More specifically,
it follows the exploits of Dade Murphy, a young computer hacker played by
Jonny Lee Miller.  Miller should be extremely thankful for the film
TRAINSPOTTING, because if it were not for that, who knows where his career
would be now after HACKERS.  The film opens with a young Dade Murphy being
arrested for hacking computer systems.  He was forbidden to use a computer
until he turned eighteen years old.  The film then picks up at that point,
an eighteen year old Dade Murphy hacking away at the computer.
Dade later meets up with fellow hackers Acid Burn (Angelina Jolie),
Cereal Killer (Matthew Lillard), Lord Nikon (Laurence Mason), and the
Phantom Phreak (Renoly Santiago), who are basically trying to do what is
next to impossible: hack the Gibson computer and not get caught by the
FBI.  Oh, and as a little sub-plot, Dade also tries to woo Acid Burn, the
only female hacker in the film.
Really, I can't think of much more to say about the film's plot aside from
what I've said.  It's just a bunch of computer geeks (no, obsessive
compulsive computer geeks a little too advanced for reality) running
around hacking computers and staying away from the FBI.  Thanks to this
movie, the public unfamiliar with computers now has a distorted viewpoint
of computers and what they can do.  This movie makes computers look a
little bit too advanced for their time, and the frivolous suggestions it
makes are too many to list. 
To sum it up, HACKERS is a terrible computer film.  If you're looking for
a film about computers closer to what goes on in the real world, I suggest
SNEAKERS.  Although at times it too may seem a little far fetched, it
should be much more believable than HACKERS to regular computer users.
Hopefully, this film didn't influence too many young computer users out to
think they can do what is portrayed in this 105 minute waste of time.


Title
Review for Graduate, The (1967)
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Craig Warnock (Kevin), David Rappaport (Randall), Kenny Baker
(Fidgit), Malcolm Dixon (Strutter), Mike Edmonds (Og), Jack Purvis
(Wally), Tiny Ross (Vermin), John Cleese (Robin Hood), Sean Connery (King
Agamemnon), Ian Holm (Napoleon), Ralph Richardson (Supreme Being), David
Return-Path: 
Received: by mtgbcs.mt.lucent.com (5.0/EMS-L sol2)
        id AA05530; Sun, 20 Apr 1997 14:04:47 -0400
Received: from cbig1.firewall.lucent.com by mtgbcs.mt.lucent.com (5.0/EMS-L sol2)
        id AA05521; Sun, 20 Apr 1997 14:04:44 -0400
Received: by cbig1.firewall.lucent.com (SMI-8.6/EMS-L sol2)
        id NAA23738; Sun, 20 Apr 1997 13:55:41 -0400
Received: by cbgw1.lucent.com; Sun Apr 20 14:01 EDT 1997
Received: from news.gwis.com by relay3.UU.NET with ESMTP 
        (peer crosschecked as: news.gwis.com [205.133.134.4])
        id QQcmcu25037; Sun, 20 Apr 1997 14:03:31 -0400 (EDT)
Received: (from news@localhost) by news.gwis.com (8.8.5/8.7.3) id OAA08271; Sun, 20 Apr 1997 14:08:50 -0400 (EDT)
To: rec-arts-movies-reviews@uunet.uu.net
Path: gwis.com!dml
From: David Landers 
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Subject: RETROSPECTIVE: THE GRADUTE (1967)
Date: Sun, 20 Apr 1997 14:01:53 -0400
Organization: Gateway to Internet Services
Lines: 51
Message-Id: 
Nntp-Posting-Host: darcy.gwis.com
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=US-ASCII
Content-Length: 2821
Status: OR
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Dustin Hoffman (Benjamin Braddock), Anne Bancroft (Mrs. Robinson),
Katharine Ross (Elaine Robinson), William Daniels I (Mr. Braddock),
Elizabeth Wilson (Mrs. Braddock), Murray Hamilton (Mr. Robinson)
DIRECTOR: Mike Nichols
CERTIFICATION: R (USA)
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1967
ACADEMY AWARDS: Best Director (Nichols)
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Actor (Hoffman), Best Actress (Bancroft),
Best Supporting Actress (Ross), Best Cinematography (Robert Surtees), Best
Adapted Screenplay (Buck Henry and Calder Willingham)
THE GRADUATE, a terrific movie that paved the way for the careers of
Dustin Hoffman and Mike Nichols, whose only previous directorial
experience was in WHO'S AFRAID OF VIRIGINA WOOLF?, will long be remembered
in the years to come.  THE GRADUATE follows the events of recent
college-grad Benjamin Braddock, a young man who is "concerned about his
future", as one of the original theatrical posters put it.  
Benjamin is the son of a businessman, and, when he returns home from
college, he finds himself becoming involved with the wife of his father's
business partner - Mrs. Robinson.  You know, "And here's to you Mrs.
Robinson . . . ".  After a short series of flings with her, Benjamin finds
himself wondering what he is doing.  His parents want him to take out
Elaine Robinson, the daughter of Mrs. Robinson.  Benjamin doesn't think
that she likes him very much, and Mrs. Robinson forbids him to take her
out.  He does anyway, in an attempt to steer her away.  His means for
doing this are driving erratically, walking ahead of her throughout the
date, and taking her to a type of strip-show where he displays more
interest in the performers than her.  His plan works well, but he finds
himself feeling sorry for her and decides to pursue her more.  After
attempting to put Mrs. Robinson out of the picture, Benjamin concentrates
fully on Elaine.  But Mrs. Robinson is determined to put an end to it, and
the events that follow are a great piece of work involving Benjamin trying
to avoid Mrs. Robinson and to regain Elaine Robinson.  Eventually,
Benjamin learns that Elaine is to be married to another man, and he
decides it is upon himself to rescue her.
THE GRADUATE is a very memorable movie with many unforgettable scenes, and
Dustin Hoffman's performance is extremely good.  Definitely a must-see
movie.  You'll need to see it in order to understand all the references to
the "Mrs. Robinson, you're trying to seduce me . . ." line.


Title
Review for Platoon (1986)
RATING: **** out of **** - 9.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Charlie Sheen (Chris), Tom Berenger (Sgt. Barnes), Willem Dafoe
(Sgt. Elias), Keith David (King), Kevin Dillon (Bunny), Francesco Quinn
(Rhah), Forest Whitaker (Big Harold), Reggie Johnson (Junior), John C.
McGinley (Sgt. O'Neill)
DIRECTOR: Oliver Stone
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for violence, language, and disturbing war scenes
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1986
ACADEMY AWARDS: Best Picture, Best Director (Stone), Best Film Editing
(Claire Simpson)
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Supporting Actor (Berenger), Best
Supporting Actor (Dafoe), Best Original Screenplay (Stone), Best
Cinematography (Robert Richardson)
PLATOON, the first film in Oliver Stone's Vietnam War trilogy, is an
extremely gripping and powerful first-hand account of the life of a young
soldier in Vietnam.  Continuing in the tradition of Award winning Vietnam
War films, PLATOON stops at nothing in delivering very emotional,
suspenseful, and horrifying images throughout the entire film.
The story is told from the eyes of Chris, an educated, wealthy college
drop-out played by Charlie Sheen in a role similar to his father's role in
APOCALYPSE NOW nearly a decade earlier.  Chris feels that it is his duty
to serve his country in the tradition of his father and grandfather, who
served in previous wars.  He also feels that it shouldn't be just the
poor, unwanted young men who fight for their country, and that it should
be young men like him out on the front lines.  We are able to visualize
and understand Chris' suffering even more through his narrated letters to
his grandmother.
A very interesting piece of information is that PLATOON is based partly on
Oliver Stone's experiences in Southeast Asia.  Stone claims that this
movie was made based on his first-hand account of what the war was really
like, and that he chose to make this movie unlike the others of that past.
PLATOON is not a surreal, obscure anti-war film that leaves you wondering
what the war was really like.  PLATOON is, shockingly, probably a very
true-to-life account of the Vietnam War.
When the film begins, Chris isn't even a true "grunt", the title given to
an infantryman who has earned his place among his fellow soldiers as a
soldier who can take it.  Chris is in his own personal Hell.  He's lost in
a world unlike no other he has ever seen before.  The constant mental and
physical abuse he sustains is constantly punishing him more than he can
imagine.  He lives in continual fear of what lies ahead.  Since he is the
"new guy", his life is basically worthless, because he hasn't really
suffered like the others have.  Therefore, he isn't told a thing by his
peers, who at the time would just assume care less if he were to be killed
the next day.
Eventually, Chris becomes more and more like the others.  His status is
lifted considerably when he is wounded in combat during an ambush that was
blamed on him.  When he returns to combat, he has obviously adjusted more
to the life of a soldier.  However, when a civil war breaks out between
his two superior sergeants, Barnes (Berenger) and Elias (Dafoe), Chris is
again struggling to realize what is right and what is wrong in this
twisted world.  Chris tends to maintain his sanity, for the most part,
unlike many of his fellow infantrymen, as he strives to always do what
seems morally right.  In a way, Chris is fighting two battles: one against
the visible enemy, and one against himself, in which he fights not to be
entirely consumed by the war.
PLATOON is absolutely one of the greatest Vietnam War films, and possibly the
greatest when it comes to the depiction of a soldier's everyday life.  The
film is, indeed, very graphic and disturbing, but that is the way it was
intended to be made.  The shocking images that the young soldier witnesses
throughout the film will make you glad that you did not have to endure
such awful situations.  The awards given to this film were definitely well
earned and should demonstrate the power of this film in a very suitable
fashion.


Title
Review for Saint, The (1997)
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Val Kilmer (Simon Templar), Elisabeth Shue (Emma Russell), Rade
Serbedzija (Ivan Tretiak), Irina Apeximova (Frankie), Valeri Nikolayev
(Ilya), Lucija Serbedzija (Sofiya)
CERTIFICATION: PG-13 (USA) for violence, language, some sensuality, and
brief drug use
THE SAINT was actually a little better than I expected it to be, in some
ways.  In this theatrical remake of the television series THE SAINT, and
its series sequel THE RETURN OF THE SAINT, Val Kilmer plays Simon
Templar, an elusive thief who makes a living by stealing things from
others for others.  This movie closely resembles a James Bond flick.  It
has the classic Bond symbols: a man who can do just about anything and get
away with it, a woman whom the man persues, a villain out to achieve
something for himself who kills anyone to reach this goal.  Kilmer
actually provides a rather good role in this movie, although at times you
are left to ponder how he actually gets out of the many tight situations.
The movie begins in his childhood in a strict school run by Catholic
priests.  As a young boy, Kilmer's character enjoyed magic and would often
journey away from his schoolwork.  That is until his school teacher finds
him reading a book and demands that the young boy proclaim his name, that
of a Catholic saint.  He refuses to do so and instead announces who he
wishes to be.  This leads to a devestating mistake, which is something
that will stay in his mind throughout his life.
Kilmer's first mission that we are shown is to steal a microchip from Ivan
Tretiak, played by Rade Serbedzija.  During a press conference, he must
make his way into a heavily guarded vault area, avoiding guards, cameras,
and many other potential obstacles.  Once his mission is completed and he
is safely home, the fee is paid.  When he logs into his bank account
and finds that he is only a few million dollars short of $50 million, he
decides to carry out only one more mission, then retire.
Dr. Emma Russell, portrayed by Elisabeth Shue, has discovered a way to
produce energy by way of cold fusion.  This new advancement would change
the world and save thousands of lives in the areas of Russia, where
millions are without heat and are freezing to death.  The only problem is,
Tretiak would like to have this for himself and use it to gain power
amongst the people.  This presents the option for Kilmer to achieve his
goal.  Tretiak hires him to steal the equations, small pieces of paper,
from Shue.
One of the enjoyable features in the film is the disguises that Kilmer
dawns to complete his missions.  They are very convincing, not only to the
characters in the movie, but to us.  Kilmer utilizes one such disguise to
lure Shue's character into getting to know him even more, which would
provide him a means of stealing the energy formula.  When the two meet,
and end up having a sensual experience, Kilmer's character is seemingly
falling in love with Emma Russell, as she is falling in love with Kilmer's
alter-ego, a traveling artist.  Yet, he must reach his goal of $50
million, which requires him to steal the energy formula, putting his
feelings aside.
Shue's character is eventually able to track down Simon Templar by putting
the pieces (the names of the Catholic saints) together, something no one
else is able to do.  When she finds him, they are left to team up and
reclaim the energy formulas from Tretiak.
THE SAINT is very action-packed, with few slow points.  The sound was very
well done and added to the many intense moments.  Along the course of the
movie, there are even a few, although brief moments of comedy.  These
moments are almost always thanks to Kilmer's extraneous, very convincing
disguises and personalities.  All in all, a rather enjoyable movie with
nearly non-stop action.


Title
Review for Full Metal Jacket (1987)
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Matthew Modine (Private Joker), Adam Baldwin (Animal Mother),
Vincent D'Onofrio (Private Leonard 'Gomer Pyle'), R. Lee Ermey (Sgt.
Hartman), Dorian Harewood (Eightball), Arliss Howard (Cowboy)
DIRECTOR: Stanley Kubrick
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for language and violence
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1987
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Adapted Screenplay (Kubrick, Michael Herr,
and Gustav Hasford)
FULL METAL JACKET, very much like every other hard-hitting film about the
Vietnam War, is an shocking, emotional depiction of the war that effected
almost everyone in America.  This film is more like PLATOON than
any other in the way that it chronicles the struggles of a young man
(Private Joker, played by Matthew Modine) during his tour in the Vietnam
War.  However, FULL METAL JACKET gives the audience an insight into combat
life very rarely seen before: boot camp.  These sequences are considered
to be the best part in this three act film, even though I found the later
portions to be equally stunning.
As in PLATOON, FULL METAL JACKET gets off to a quick start.  The opening
sequence is the initiation for the recruits, which is getting their heads
shaved.  From there, they find themselves standing at attention and
receiving their orders from the extremely hard and punishing Sergeant
Hartman, played extremely well by the former drill instructor R. Lee
Ermey.  Apparently, the solution was found for the perfect man to play a
drill instructor in the movies, because Ermey depicts his character
extremely well and will make you thank whomever that you were never
subjected to such horrible situations.
Private Joker gets off on the wrong foot with the Sergeant, as does the
large bodied Private Leonard Lawrence (Vincent D'Onofrio), whom is dubbed
'Gomer Pyle' by Sgt. Hartman.  The film is continually narrated by Private
Joker, in which he explains his visions on what is going on.  The entire
corps, although repeatedly hammered by Sgt. Hartman, continues on.
Private Pyle, however, seems to be the rag doll for the drill instructor.
He continually absorbs the worst punishment and humiliation, and it
basically does not stop.  That is, until Sgt. Hartman comes up with a new
plan.  He will punish the rest of the soon-to-be-Marines for Pyle's
goof-ups, even after Joker was assigned to help him out in the best way he
can.  Pyle then receives punishment from his fellow recruits, and things
take a turn for the worst.  Pyle proves that not everyone is emotionally,
physically, and mentally cut out for the life of a Marine.
After graduation, Joker is sent over to the height of the action in order
to document the war, which is his service.  He is not a member of the
infantry, and it is unclear if he will ever actually find himself in
combat.  When he sets out on a documenting mission, this question becomes
very clear from the start.  Joker joins up with a platoon, along with
his hometown friend Cowboy (Arliss Howard), and follows their everyday
actions, interviewing and filmming them along the way.  He also soon finds
himself in a position in which he must fight, or die.
Again, as in the tradition of Vietnam War films, FULL METAL JACKET can be
debated as to whether it is an anti-war film or not.  A few of the more
powerful scenes toward the end will leave you to decide.  FULL METAL
JACKET succeeds extremely well in documenting the life of a young man in
Vietnam, as have others in the past.  This film, in different ways, also
can be viewed as more powerful than others.  That, again, is up for debate
and depends on your opinion.  One thing is for sure, however; no one ever
wants to experience the absolute Hell that these soldiers are subjected
to.  Unfortunately, many did.


Title
Review for Party, The (1968)
RATING: *** out of **** - 7.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Peter Sellers (Hrundi V. Bakshi), J. Edward McKinley (Fred
Clutterbuck), Herbert Ellis (Director), Claudine Longet (Michele Monet)
DIRECTOR: Blake Edwards
CERTIFICATION: PG
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1968
THE PARTY is one of those classic slapstick comedies that will leave you,
at times, cracking up.  The film takes place, for the most part, in
real-time during an exclusive evening party that is attended only by the
biggest names in Hollywood. 
Hrundi V. Bakshi, played very well by Peter Sellers, is a struggling actor
who just came to America from his homeland, India.  Hrundi tries out his
acting talents, but it seems that he just isn't cut out for the job.  On
the set of his current film that he stars in, Hrundi seems to make
everything go for the worse.  During the filming of this movie set in the
1800's, Hrundi manages to annoy the director (Herbert Ellis) in any way he
can.  This includes a pitiful acting job in many scenes, wearing an
underwater watch in one scene, and accidentally detonating a massive set.
Many of the Hollywood producers and big names want Hrundi out of the
business forever.  And when the director makes a personal phone call to
Mr. Clutterbuck (J. Edward McKinley) pleading for Hrundi's ejection from
Hollywood, everything is pretty much over for Hrundi.  Clutterbuck writes
his name down on a piece of paper to insure that Hrundi will never again
work in Hollywood.  But when this piece of paper turns out to be the guest
list for Clutterbuck's exclusive party, Hrundi is invited, and certain
chaos is bound to occur.
Of course, as predicted, Hrundi causes lots of trouble.  Each scene in
which Hrundi encounters a situation, usually one that he can't handle, is
almost always very humorous.  And each scene with Hrundi and the drunken
waiter, who is alone hilarious, adds to the comedy in a great way.
THE PARTY can be compared to many other films of it's type, specifically
the trio of NAKED GUN movies and the AIRPLANE movies, but THE PARTY is a
delightful movie that incorporates very well played out comedy into
believable situations.  It also includes a number of memorable scenes (can
anyone say "birdy num-num"?).  If you're in the mood for fun and enjoyable
slapstick comedy, check out THE PARTY.  It's not going to be one of your
all-time favorites, but if you enjoy this type of humor, you'll enjoy THE
PARTY.


Title
Review for Conspiracy Theory (1997)
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Mel Gibson (Jerry Fletcher), Julia Roberts (Alice Sutton), Patrick
Stewart (Dr. Jonas), Cylk Cozart (Agent Lowry)
DIRECTOR: Richard Donner
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) presumably for violence, language, and intense
situations
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1997
I was fortunate enough to attend an advance screening for the upcoming
thriller CONSPIRACY THEORY.  This was, of course, a big deal for me
because reviewing movies is basically just a hobby for me and I never get
a chance at something like this.  Not only did I get to see an advance 
screening, I was able to see an advance screening of a *very good* movie.
The very fast-paced film stars Mel Gibson as Jerry Fletcher, a
fast-talking, witty, comical taxi driver in New York City.  Gibson's
performance is terrific, and his character is similar to that of Martin
Riggs in the LETHAL WEAPON films.  Gibson again teams up with Richard
Donner, as he did in the LETHAL WEAPON films and MAVERICK, and this time
around, the combination works even better.  The character of Jerry
Fletcher is indeed unique.  Try to imagine a toned-downed version of 
Travis Bickle who, this time around, is a jittery guy with
knowledge of government conspiracy cover-ups.  If you can imagine that,
then you've basically got Jerry Fletcher.
In many ways, I was surprised by this movie.  To begin with, I was
surprised at how good it was.  Don't get me wrong, it's not going to be
accepting any gold trophies next Spring, but it was a very enjoyable
movie.  Secondly, I was surprised at Mel Gibson's performance.  He
provided a fantastic performance.  The previews of this film led me to
believe it was an all-out action flick, which after viewing, it was almost
the opposite in a certain sense.  Gibson's character has an almost
uncountable number of one-liners, hilarious situations, and his character
is one that the audience tends to side with throughout the film.  For
instance, Jerry's apartment (and especially his security) is memorable. 
And last, I was surprised at how good the plot is.  Writer Brian Helgeland
has created a terrific story, and when watching this film, you are left to
wonder if all of Jerry Fletcher's far-fetched (or so they seem at first)
conspiracy theories are Helgeland's own opinions.
Mel Gibson isn't the only stand-out in the film.  Julia Roberts is
very good in her performance as Alice Sutton, the Department of Justice
employee who can't seem to stay away from Jerry Fletcher, who continually
visits Alice in hopes that she will do something about his theories.  He
also seems obsessed and in love with her.  But whenever he approaches her
with another one of his theories, she shrugs him and his beliefs off,
continually noting that one day she is going to slap a restraining order
on him.
Jerry, obviously determined to continually seek out the truth, continues
to research information for his next conspiracy theory, which will be
printed in his newsletter (same title as the movie).  Although he only has
five subscribers, he puts a large amount of time and effort into his work,
and publishes his next edition.  Very soon after he does so, he is
abducted and tortured by a sinister man who refers to himself as Dr. Jonas
(Patrick Stewart).  After barely escaping alive, Jerry is forced to turn
to the only person he can trust: Alice Sutton.
The remainder of the film is almost always fast-paced and full of action
and suspense, with Jerry's life being constantly put into jeopardy.  And
more along the way, the audience (and Alice) learn more and more about
Jerry's life.  Many things are explained throughout this film, both to the
characters and to the audience.  For instance, the meaning of the book
"The Catcher in the Rye" and its ties to assassins, the reason lone gunmen
have three names (e.g. Lee Harvey Oswald and James Earl Ray), and the real
truth behind the Grateful Dead.  Make sure listen closely throughout the
film, as Jerry is constantly throwing out interesting tidbits such as the
above.
Definitely, when CONSPIRACY THEORY hits theaters August 8th, make sure you
are standing in line to see it.  I am nearly positive everyone should
enjoy this film, especially if you are into an action-thriller with witty
dialogue and numerous suspenseful situations.  And even if you aren't, you
should still like this film.


Title
Review for Apocalypse Now (1979)
RATING: **** out of **** - 9.0 out of 10.0
CAST: Marlon Brando (Colonel Walter E. Kurtz), Robert Duvall (Lieutenant 
Colonel Kilgore), Martin Sheen (Captain Benjamin L. Willard), Frederic
Forrest (Chef), Albert Hall (Chief Phillips), Sam Bottoms (Lance Johnson),
Laurence Fishburne (Mr. Clean), Dennis Hopper (Freelance Photographer)
DIRECTOR: Francis Coppola
CERTIFICATION: R (USA) for language and violence 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1979
ACADEMY AWARDS: Best Cinematography (Vittorio Storaro)
ACADEMY AWARD NOMINATIONS: Best Picture, Best Director (Coppola), Best
Supporting Actor (Duvall), Best Adapted Screenplay (Coppola and John
Milius), Best Production Design (Dean Tavoularis), Best Film Editing, Best
Art Direction (Angelo P. Graham)
APOCALYPSE NOW, based on the novel "Hearts of Darkness", is an
extremely striking, gripping, and horrifying depiction of the Vietnam War
from another angle.  A long debate has surrounded this movie as if it is
actually an anti-war film.  In many ways, this debate could go either way.
APOCALYPSE NOW is probably one of the most memorable Vietnam War films
ever made.  In addition, now film has gone to the extremes that this film
does - a disturbing look at the corruption and terrifying effects of the
most devastating war of recent years.
APOCALYPSE NOW follows the mission Captain Benjamin L. Willard, played by
Martin Sheen, to seek out and eliminate Colonel Walter E. Kurtz, a Green
Beret who is thought to have gone insane and set up his own militant base
in Cambodia.  Captain Willard is ordered to assassinate Kurtz with
"extreme prejudice" because he has been deemed a murderer.  Willard
accepts his mission, but not while pondering the accusation.  Accusing
someone of murder in this situation is like "handing out speeding tickets
at the Indy 500", as he puts it.  It doesn't make too much sense.
Escorting him on his mission are a group of men who operate a riverboat.
The men are Chef (Frederic Forrest), Chief (Albert Hall), Lance Johnson
(Sam Bottoms) and Mr. Clean (a fifteen year-old Laurence Fishburne).
Willard is ordered not to let them know exactly what his mission is, but
they all know it is something big.  The men encounter many exciting,
dangerous and bizarre situations.  But no situation is more bizarre than
the infamous napalm scene with a very eccentric Robert Duvall as
Lieutenant Colonel Kilgore.  Kilgore decides to attack and overtake a 
certain beach area so that his men can surf.  Surf.  This is all inspired
when Kilgore is able to meet the famed California surfer Lance Johnson.
Duvall's portrayal as Lieutenant Colonel Kilgore is terrific, and, he
provides a number of memorable quotes.
Eventually, Captain Willard encounters Colonel Kurtz's frightening
community full of strange things everywhere you look, especially his
followers.  One of his main followers is a freelance photographer (Dennis
Hopper) who attempts to convey the situations to Willard.  But Willard
cannot understand the madness that encompasses the colony.  Kurtz is
actually well aware of Willard's mission, and refers to him as "an errand
boy sent by grocery clerks to collect a bill".  Yet Willard is intent on
completing his mission, no matter what shocking things Kurtz does.
APOCALYPSE NOW, possibly one of the greatest films ever made, is a
stunning vision into the madness that corresponds to the Vietnam War.  A
movie that will hypnotize you with it's brilliant cinematography,
APOCALYPSE NOW is an outstanding epic drama about the controversial 
and horrifying ravages of war.  Definitely on the "do not miss" list.  Be
prepared for a very memorable film.


Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
RATING: ** out of **** - 5.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Jeff Goldblum (Dr. Ian Malcolm), Julianne Moore (Dr. Sarah Harding),
Vince Vaughn (Nick Van Owen), Arliss Howard (Peter Ludlow), Vanessa Lee
Chester (Kelly Malcolm), Richard Attenborough (John Hammond)
DIRECTOR: Steven Spielberg
CERTIFICATION: PG-13 (USA) for excessive violence with little blood 
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1997
THE LOST WORLD is probably one of the most disappointing sequels in recent
years.  Based on the novel "The Lost World" by Michael Crichton, THE LOST
WORLD is the, unfortunately, much anticipated sequel to the box office
smash-hit, JURASSIC PARK.  In a word, this movie is bad and is lacking
many things, but most especially, a good script and a good cast.  If you
enjoyed JURASSIC PARK, you will not enjoy its sequel.
The story revolves around Dr. Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum), one of the
survivors of the incident on the first Jurassic Park island, Isla Nubular.
He is approached by John Hammond (Richard Attenborough) to visit the test
island for Jurassic Park, a similar island 80 miles away from Isla
Nubular.  In the words of the trailer, "something has survived", and Ian,
along with a few others, must visit the island to document what is still
there.  At first, of course, he is not interested.  But when he learns
that his girlfriend, Dr. Sarah Harding (Julianne Moore) is already there,
he must rescue her from the certain doom she is facing.
The problem with this, for me, is rather simple.  Why would anyone go back
to an island that is going to contain the same creatures that nearly
had you for dinner four years earlier?  Unfortunately, this movie is full
of questionable situations like this one, and some of the later instances
are even more unbelievable.
Still another unbelievable situation in this movie is the main plot.
After what happened to the first park on his first island, John Hammond
insists on creating another one, this time in San Diego.  From his
standpoint, it would seem unthinkable to create the possibility of another
disaster.  Yet, he seems to care nothing for what happened earlier.  It
also is quite unbelievable that the United States government would have no
problem with such a situation, either.
Continuing on, many more situations like this are presented to the
audience in a fashion that seems to be perfectly legitimate.  Aside from
the unreal and very unadmirable characters, the dinosaurs themselves, the
main attraction for this movie, are hardly diverse and unique from the
original film.  This film concentrates again on the T-Rex especially, with
second concentration on the Velociraptor.  A small attempt is made to
feature some other dinosaurs, but when it looks like they will be
featured, the concentration shifts back to the two spotlight dinosaurs.
The main reason for this is probably the intended audience: children.
Although this film is not supposed to be intended for this audience, it is
silently being advertised entirely towards them.  The kids don't care for
the plot and dialogue.  All they care about and want to see is the "big"
dinosaurs eating people, which this movie unfortunately capitalizes on in
a large way.
In a nutshell, THE LOST WORLD is a large disappointment.  If you come
expecting a nicely formulated plot with admirable characters, you will be
disappointed.  If you come looking for lots of suspenseful situations, you
will not be as disappointed but you will not be extremely satisfied.
Arguably, the only audience that will really enjoy this movie are children
around the ages of 7 to 13.  THE LOST WORLD is pretty much a lost cause.


Title
Review for Time Bandits (1981)
RATING: *** 1/2 out of **** - 8.5 out of 10.0
CAST: Craig Warnock (Kevin), David Rappaport (Randall), Kenny Baker
(Fidgit), Malcolm Dixon (Strutter), Mike Edmonds (Og), Jack Purvis
(Wally), Tiny Ross (Vermin), John Cleese (Robin Hood), Sean Connery (King
Agamemnon), Ian Holm (Napoleon), Ralph Richardson (Supreme Being), David
Warner (Evil Genius)
DIRECTOR: Terry Gilliam 
CERTIFICATION: PG (USA) for mild violence
YEAR OF PRODUCTION: 1980
TIME BANDITS, from Director Terry Gilliam, is a very different fantasy
Action/Adventure movie about a group of time-traveling dwarves, led by
Randall (David Rappaport), who have stolen a map of the Universe.  This
map contains time hole, that, if exploited, enable the men to travel back
and forth through time.  The Supreme Being of the Universe (Ralph
Richardson) is the former employer of these treasure-seeking bandits, and
he wishes desperately to regain the map..  During the travels, he appears
as a ghostly face, demanding that they return the map that they have
stolen.  But, according to Randall, they are just "borrowing" it.
Kevin, a young boy who seems quite bored with his life, is unexpectedly
brought into the schemes of the little men when they appear in his room,
which has a portal for time traveling.  He joins up with the men and
becomes part of their gang, following them on their robberies.  Their
first victim is Napoleon (Ian Holm), whom they rob during a battle that he
is commanding.  From here, the group travels to the Middle Ages, meeting
up with Robin Hood himself.  Eventually, Kevin is separated from the group
and travels to an Egyptian time where he is taken in by King Agamemnon,
played by Sean Connery.  Kevin accidentally saved the King's life, and the
King wishes to have Kevin as his son.  But the group of bandits find Kevin
and transport onto the deck of the Titanic.  Meanwhile, the Evil Genius
(David Warner) is watching the group from Fortress of Ultimate Darkness,
attempting to find a way in order to bring the men, and the map, to him.
When Randall learns of the Fortress of Ultimate Darkness, which supposedly
contains "the most fabulous object in the world", the dollar signs
seemingly appear on his eyes, as he is convinced that they must travel
there.  Once inside the Fortress of Ultimate Darkness, it is unclear as to
if any of the men will make it out alive.
TIME BANDITS is a fantastically made film that caters to the imagination
of anyone.  With a terrific soundtrack, courtesy of George Harrison, whom
also was an Executive Producer, TIME BANDITS is sure to be a very
surrealistic, time-traveling adventure with unforgettable characters that
is sure to entertain anyone.  Terry Gilliam, however, does not utilize
that greatly his trademark ability in moviemaking during this film,
although this does not affect the film that greatly.  And finally, if you
liked LABYRINTH, you'll love TIME BANDITS.

