Authors
Nick AMado
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Sorcerer (1977)
Starring: Roy Scheider, Bruno Cremer, Francisco Rabal, Amidou
It is said that Hollywood remakes seldom acheive the quality of the
original (especially when the original was NOT a Hollywood picture.)
Sorcerer stands out as one of the sparkling exceptions. It is based on
Georges Arnaud's "The Wages Of Fear" which was filmed by Hitchcockian
French director H.G. Clouzot in 1952. With some minor differences, the
stories are the same. Four cons, desperate to leave the poverty
stricken town to which they have exiled themselves, are chosen for a
life or death job. They must transport highly volatile nitroglycerine
from one part of the mountainous and swampy Southern American terrain
to the other. If they make it, they get the money they need to escape,
if they don't they are dead. The nitro is packed in sand in the backs
of trucks to help reduce shock, the slightest jostle can end it all.
Friedkin does a fantastic job of making the two trucks into a combined
fifth character. We see them being reconstructed from complete junk
early on in the film. As the picture progresses, tension is created by
close up's of the wheels as they roll gently over unstable ground. We
get a feeling of exactly how much each truck can take. The sound of
the trucks are constant, and it is a well crafted soundtrack mix that
lends to the character each.
Schieder shows why he is one of the more underrated performers in the
industry. Though the film is not loaded with dialogue, he does a
marvelous job of showing how his character runs the gamut of emotions
(similar to his character in Jaws.) But Schieder's is not the only
good performance in this film, all of the actors do a great job.
The 1952 version, The Wages Of Fear, is certainly worth a look, but it
is longer, not as tense, and spends more time on the relationship of
the men, rather than the suspense of the situations in which they find
themselves. Another nifty element of Sorcerer is its score by
Tangerine Dream. The funky synthicized tunes are haunting and very
appropriate. It is a great example of how important to a film good
music is. This is a severely underrated film from the most explosive
decade in film history. It was released in 1978 and is a great film
for everyone to see, but it is a can't miss for Friedkin fans.
