Authors
JoBlo
Number of Reviews
43

Title
Review for Serendipity (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A guy and girl meet in a New York City department store when reaching for the
same pair of gloves. They talk, have coffee and it isn't long before the guy is
asking for the girl's number. Unfortunately, for the dude, a gust of wind blows
the piece of paper out of his hand. The girl determines that it was fate which
led to that predicament, and sets up two other possible chance meetings with the
guy, in the hopes of fate intervening once again and this time, proving that
they should be together. Phew. Anyway, it's about love and destiny...
CRITIQUE:
An okay romance with a decent premise and some respectable acting, that gets a
little redundant during its middle stretch, but ultimately comes through as a
cute date movie for adults. Not really humorous, although the great Jeremy Piven
is very funny as the best friend yet again and Eugene Levy shines is his small
role. Not totally dramatic, since we're all pretty sure how things are gonna end
up here. And not all that energetic, as things start falling into a definite
routine, with one twist of fate leading to another coincidence leading to even
more clues to the inevitable. But on the whole, it's easy to watch (barely runs
for an hour and a half), has some nice shots of the gorgeous New York City
during the fall and winter seasons, and gives us John Cusack, who is always
pretty entertaining as a rule. I don't think that this movie is going to become
a romantic classic by any means, but it certainly does take the premise of "fate
determining our futures" and pushes it to the max. For me, it was a little
personal because I actually went through something very similar with a girl back
in 1996. I was Holland, she was in the States, but everywhere I traveled around
Europe, signs pointed her way and we just couldn't wait to meet one another when
I got back home. The resolution of our adventure wasn't as perfect as the one in
this flick, but the idea of signs and fate always being present in our lives,
and our ability to "pick up" on them determining some of the direction of our
existence, is one to which I personally adhere.
Granted, this movie really exaggerates the "coincidences" and definitely
overplays this card, especially during the final scene, in which you just can't
help but say "Oh, c'mon...that just can't be!" but it's not the end of the
world. They're not trying to solve all of the world's problems here and if you
can appreciate the basic sentiment behind this movie, I think you'll be smiling
in the end, and I believe that's pretty much all that they were shooting for
here. The soundtrack is also joyful, the sights picturesque and even though
Beckinsale isn't the shiniest star in the sky, she and Cusack do connect in
their scenes together, and you can't help but sigh lovingly when the end of the
film rolls around. Unless of course, you're not in a "sappy" mood and you
consider the whole film to be utter drivel, which I could understand, since I'm
generally not a fan of the "typical" Hollywood romantic comedy scene either (see
list below). In the end, this fluffy piece is entirely predictable, with small
touches of humor and romance, but might also be what certain couples are looking
for nowadays. 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
America's Sweethearts (3/10) - High Fidelity (7/10) - Message in a Bottle (6/10)
- My Best Friend's Wedding (7/10) - Runaway Bride (5/10) - Sliding Doors (7/10)
- Someone Like You (4/10) - Wedding Planner (3/10) - When Harry Met Sally
(10/10) - What Women Want (4/10) - You've Got Mail (4/10)

Title
Review for From Hell (2001)
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
During a 10-week span in London in the fall of 1888, Jack the Ripper, a man
whose identity was never uncovered, committed five ritualistic, grisly murders
of prostitutes. This film is based on the graphic novel which assembled a theory
behind the century-old mystery. 
CRITIQUE:
Awesome! I love dark movies, I love stylish movies, I love good mysteries and I
love Johnny Depp...so yes, I really dug this movie! The Hughes Brothers are back
with a vengeance, out to show the world that they are directors to be taken
seriously, and this movie, my friends...is very serious! In fact, it's also very
gruesome and bloody and morbid and creepy and black as hell. It ain't for the
kids, I'll tell you that much. And if any of those recent hack directors of
two-bit SCREAM-esque slasher flicks want some advice on effective "kill scenes",
do not look any further, because each one committed to this film is a cinematic
stunner, especially when compared to their generic slice-and-dice contrivances.
In fact, most of this film's structure is very creative, the actors, all solid,
the atmosphere and "feel" of the picture, remarkably real (gotta love those
"unfortunates"), and the descent into darkness, well honed by the filmmakers.
You can almost taste the seediness off the screen and quickly come to appreciate
the politics of the time. But it's also an impressive mystery film, based on the
true-life tale of Jack the Ripper, a man whose identity was never discovered.
The theory in this film is based on the graphic novel "From Hell" written by
Alan Moore and presents a compelling story, which despite being a little Oliver
Stone-ish, did manage to tie up all of its loose ends quite nicely, and present
us with an entertaining bowl of mayhem, sexual depravity, drug usage, insanity,
murders and love? Yes, the Brothers even managed to slip a little "love" story
in here, and despite not truly being developed, I guess it could've been much
worse and taken up more time than was provided already. That's right, there's no
real need to put any "romance" in a film about a mass murderer! But that aside,
you gotta give up the props to actor extraordinaire Johnny Depp, who once again
possesses the strength in character and flawless acting abilities, to center
this movie all the way through. Sure, he's just playing a less goofier version
of his Ichabod Crane character from SLEEPY HOLLOW, but he does it so well and
even added a Michael Caine accent to his mixed bag of tricks in this one. I was
also surprised at how little Heather Graham annoyed me in this film (I was sure
that her presence would ruin this movie, but she was fine) and how little the
dreams/fantasies of Depp's character had to do with the film's development (from
what I had seen in the trailer, I thought the filmmakers were going to make this
the crux of the story, but thankfully, it wasn't).
On the downside, the film doesn't really explain the whole Freemasons cult
organization real well and lacks character development. But then again, a story
about the most mysterious serial killer of all-time is probably not the ideal
spot for character refinement. I mean, the less I knew about each person, the
more suspicious I became of each one's motives, reasons, etc... In fact, I was
actually quite surprised by who was presented as the killer in the end, and that
was in part, due to the distance to which I'd been held from the film's
characters...or am I giving the filmmakers too much credit for something that
might not have been their intention? Perhaps. Overall, this is an extremely
creepy production, with glorious cinematography (reminiscent of Coppola's
DRACULA and Burton's SLEEPY HOLLOW), a grim score and solid acting. But it's not
for everyone. Some may be utterly repulsed by the gory particulars of these
tragic events, and even though the murders aren't shown as graphically as you
might think, there's enough here to send the squeamish right out the doors. But
I for one love movies that blend their eclectic visual style with an interesting
mystery and palpable, gothic atmosphere, and this flick is just that and plenty
more! And God knows that I will certainly not be surrendering the burnt image of
Jack the Ripper's haunting cape silhouette and gleaming silver knife from my
mind anytime soon...brrrrr!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Crow (9/10) - Dark City (9/10) - Dracula (7/10) - JFK (9/10) - The Nightmare
before Christmas (10/10) - The Ninth Gate (8/10) - The Others (9/10) - Quills
(8/10) - Shadow of the Vampire (6/10) - Sleepy Hollow (8/10)

Title
Review for Planet of the Apes (2001)
For more reviews and movie posters, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A human space astronaut accidentally falls upon a planet ruled by apes. He is
taken prisoner along with some other humans, and tries his best to escape his
simian captors. Oh yeah, and did I mention that the apes can talk? Kewl!
CRITIQUE:
Despite this film not looking like a "Tim Burton movie" or its lead human
character showing any signs of being a human being himself, I did find myself
generally entertained throughout most of this film and do recommend it as fun,
summer fare. Although the thing that sets this movie apart from all others is
definitely its incredible ape make-up jobs and characterizations. I mean, I was
completely convinced that every single one of these apes was for real! I also
have to "give it up" to all of the actors inside the costumes, not only for
waking up at three in the morning every day to get make-up slobbered all over
them for 2-4 hours, but for coming through their costumed exteriors and selling
us their characters on the screen as well. I especially enjoyed Bonham Carter's
performance, who I believed to be the most developed character in the entire
film (human or ape) and Tim Roth's bad guy, who chewed up scenery and oozed evil
in every scene in which he took part. Plot-wise, I liked the beginning of the
film, the whole build-up once Wahlberg got into the village, the escape and most
of the fight scenes, but once things got out into the deserted area (and the
final battle sequence), I kinda lost a bit of my interest.
I was much more intrigued by the interactions between the characters and the
whole idea of "human beings as animals" then I was about the end battle
sequence, which just seemed a bit too typical for this kind of film. I also
hated the "kid" character who just got on my nerves and didn't really care for
the way that the battle sequence was resolved (I won't ruin it here but c'mon
guys...you coulda thought of something a little more plausible than that, no?).
But the thing that held this movie back more than anything else was its lead
character, his cold demeanor and the zero chemistry that he shared with either
one of his inter-species love interests. This dude didn't seem to give a rat's
ass about anyone but himself and I ultimately didn't really care about what
happened to him either. Now I'm not sure if this was the fault of the actor or
the script, but the film suffered because of it.
Visually, the movie was also nice to look at (especially the apes!), but I
definitely expected greater coolness from Tim Burton. The "surprise ending" that
highlighted the original PLANET OF THE APES film back in 1968, felt a little
tacked on here, and despite being interesting, didn't really make all that much
sense to me (unless you look at it from a sequel point of view). So overall, I
loved the whole "feel" of the planet, the apes that ruled it, the manner in
which they treated the humans, screamed, shouted and reverted the entire
evolution chain, but didn't appreciate the film's lack of human character
development (why was Kris Kristofferson even in this movie?) and the fact that
its lead male and female humans were just plain boring. But I would still
recommend this film as a fun, summer movie with laughs, creepiness and a really
cool premise.
PS: For anyone who has seen the original, I cannot believe that they didn't AT
LEAST bring back the scene in which the lead human character (in this case, Mark
Wahlberg) goes nuts at the world in which he's suddenly been thrust ("This is a
mad house!"- type of thing). The guy in this film barely seems to be "put off"
by the fact that he's surrounded by apes who can speak English!!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Arrival (8/10) - Battlefield Earth (7/10) - Godzilla (4/10) - Instinct
(6/10) - Mission to Mars (3/10) - Pitch Black (7/10) - (1968) Planet of the Apes
(9/10) - Sleepy Hollow (8/10)

Title
Review for Corky Romano (2001)
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
THE THEORY:
Is it just me or does there seem to be a very distinct pattern to all of these
ex-Saturday Night Live comedians' movies? Let's break it down. They usually use
the name of the main character (the ex-Saturday Night Liver himself) as the
title of the film in two words. Check! They usually star a very dumb character,
who is clumsy, stupid or naďve (or all three) but has a big heart. Check! They
usually don't last more than 90 minutes. Check! They usually feature a total
babe (a no-name) as the co-star, a woman who under any other circumstance (this
being a Hollywood movie production) wouldn't cross the street to spit on the
star of each film, for whom she inevitably falls in love. Check! They are
usually produced by a man named Robert Simonds. Check! They usually have a
cameo, or small role, from a once "high-profile" older guy. Check! They usually
feature the main character in a "fish out of water" plotline. Check! They
usually have the lead come to some kind of understanding near the end, and take
part in an "emotional" scene. Check! Okay, okay...I think we get the picture.
The folks behind these movies aren't exactly driving the originality boat in
Hollywood, but I guess they have recognized some kind of niche in the
marketplace and are ready to jam it full of movies like CORKY ROMANO, BILLY
MADISON, JOE DIRT, HAPPY GILMORE and DEUCE BIGALOW, and hope to reap the
rewards.
PLOT:
Corky Romano's family is in the mob. Corky Romano is an assistant veterinarian
and doesn't speak to his family anymore. But now that Pops Romano is about to be
indicted on racketeering charges, the family needs a "nobody" to go undercover
in the FBI and steal their evidence on Pops. Naturally, they call on their goofy
relative Corky, to help them achieve their goal. Wackiness ensues?
CRITIQUE:
Humor is a very subjective thing. Even more so, movies based on "stupid humor",
which is the type of "funny" that this kind of flick is going for, is even more
subjective, and usually dependent on your mood and your appreciation for the
film's lead actor. In my case tonight, I was looking for some cheap laughs, I
really like Chris Kattan (his fruity smile alone cracks me up) and I got enough
guffaws out of this movie to recommend it to anyone looking for something very
simple, very stupid and pretty funny, for the most part. The movie is basically
Kattan. If you like his goofy characters, over-the-top gesticulations and
idiotic demeanor, you will likely come out of this film with many laughs
registered in your belly. I dug his take on this goofball and especially
appreciated a few scenes in particular, one in which he sees a dead body for the
first time, another in which he faces some skinheads and another, where he is
high on coke. They really cracked me up. The rest of the film is filled with
some laughs every now and then, helped by Chris Penn and Peter Berg, who played
the brothers really well, and I want to especially thank the men behind this
film for once again choosing an extra-sweet babe to star alongside the
big-headed Kattan. Vinessa Shaw, I'm not sure where you've come from, or if
you're actually the brunette sister of BILLY MADISON's own Bridgette Wilson, but
thank you for wearing that sexy nurse's uniform for a good part of the movie.
You've made my night that much easier to download. 
The plotline of this film obviously does not have much of a stranglehold on its
goings-on, but it was surprisingly passable. It did falter a little near the
end, when they made things a little "too easy" on everyone (and that whole Night
Vulture thing wasn't needed), and even went for a tear (what the hell?). See my
SNL-movie theory at the top of this review for more on that. But on the whole,
the story was obviously only there to serve the various "sketch" pieces set up
for Kattan's humor, and you either think they're stupid and funny or stupid and
unfunny. I thought the film was pretty funny for the most part, but noticed that
the biggest laughs came from the moments in which Kattan was given his space to
do "his thing". I didn't laugh when there were big set pieces like when he was
caught on the hood of the car, or when his head was placed in a shaker machine,
and definitely not when the midget kicked him in the head a la MATRIX/CHARLIE'S
ANGELS (guys...please, let's form a committee and stop with the completely
unoriginal MATRIX parodies already!). But most of the time, I laughed just
looking at dumb Corky's face and you gotta give out some massive props to Kattan
for that (whether the movie works or not, the poor bastard goes "all out"
here!). He also had an amazing nemesis on the FBI, who has his own moment to
shine as well (the guy's name is Brick Davis and the scene in which he cracks up
is hilarious!).
All in all, the movie does deliver the basics as described in my SNL-movie
theory above, tosses in the obligatory gay, fart, drug and retard jokes, and I
don't think that anyone should go into this movie expecting much else than that.
Basically, if you dig Kattan and his skits on SNL, you will likely enjoy this
movie. If you don't like Kattan or his skits on SNL, don't bother seeing this
movie and that'll be that. I think I offered the same advice to Tom Green
fans/non-fans for FREDDY GOT FINGERED and it just seems to make sense. 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Billy Madison (7/10) - Freddy Got Fingered (5/10) - Happy Gilmore (8/10) - Joe
Dirt (5/10) - The Ladies Man (6/10) - Little Nicky (6/10) - The Waterboy (4/10)
- Zoolander (7/10)

Title
Review for Fabuleux destin d'Amélie Poulain, Le (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A peculiar French girl grows up lonely with her father and doesn't quite know
what she wants out of life. One day, she falls upon something, and believes that
her ticket to happiness may be in helping others. She starts with the people
around her, but when she suddenly falls for her own guy, she can't act strongly
enough because of her shy and dreamy nature.
CRITIQUE:
A clever, quirky, original French flick set in a picturesque Paris, featuring an
endearing lead with a giant imagination, much loneliness and a little bit of
love for everyone. This is a "feel-good" kind of movie, a fairy tale for
grown-ups who are bummed out about life. It doesn't pretend to be deep, it
doesn't weigh itself down with long expositions or intricate studies of its
characters, it's basically just a "cute movie" in the same vein as CHOCOLAT and
PAY IT FORWARD, with some amazing visuals and incredibly nice intentions (and if
CHOCOLAT was somehow able to nab an Oscar nomination for Best Picture last year
(a sham on so many different levels), you might as well slap this film up for
consideration also, since it's quite a bit better and much more original than
the former). One thing that this film isn't though, at least according to me, is
the best film of the year (it was bestowed the honor of "best" in at least 3
different film festivals so far this year). It actually managed to stagnate a
little bit about halfway through and it just went on for way too long (it's a
little over two hours but it felt even longer), with much of the second half of
the movie devoted to many different characters, all of whom weren't as
interesting as the lead, and a lot of indecisiveness from Ms. Amelie herself,
which got frustrating. Thankfully, this film doesn't bog itself down with too
much of that stuff, and actually goes out of its way to invent new ways to shoot
scenes, to integrate moments of fantasy into its fabric and to transport the
audience inside the imagination of this kind-hearted French girl.
On the whole, it's a lot of fun and it carries a beautiful message of love and
support for your fellow man. The lead, Audrey Tautou, is perfect for the role,
and gives you enough moments of truth to develop her character into someone that
you care about by the end of the film. Unfortunately, the rest of the cast isn't
as well-developed, and even though most of them are pretty appealing, a couple
could've been left out to save time and at least one was left stranded
plot-wise, by the film's end (what happened to the guy in the café who was
spying on his ex-girlfriend the whole movie?). Now I haven't seen too many
recent French films, I will admit, but if this is the kind of "scene" that
they're developing over in "le pays du vin", I wouldn't mind catching more of
their flicks in the future (CRIMSON RIVERS was another French film that I saw
earlier this year, which I really liked- ironically, that film was directed by
Mathieu Kassovitz, who is the co-star in this film). Granted, the English
subtitles got a little tough to keep up with at times (I speak and understand
French also, but some of the local colloquialisms went over my head), especially
since the film's visuals were so intriguing that you just couldn't help but
constantly gawk at them, but the general idea, the background music, the nifty
French neighborhoods, the very creative way of enveloping the audience into the
story-line from the start, were all very easy to appreciate, and I for one was
especially glad to have seen this movie during these trying times in the world.
In fact, I'd recommend it to anyone looking for a jolly ol' time at the movie
house, with a particular emphasis on folks with a lot of imagination, a little
loneliness in their lives and many dreams in their hearts. And this guy directed
ALIEN: RESURRECTION? Get outta here!!
Note: I especially loved the way that the script detailed and showed the
loves/hates of everyone with exact mentions in the film. It was very original,
very well shot and very nostalgic, as many of us were able to relate to the
behaviors described. Good stuff!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Chocolat (6/10) - Crimson Rivers (8/10) - Ghost World (9/10) - Like Water For
Chocolate (8/10) - O Brother, Where Art Thou (7/10) - Pay It Forward (5/10) -
Rushmore (9/10) - Woman on Top (7/10)

Title
Review for Glass House, The (2001/I)
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A brother and sister are orphaned after their parents die in a car crash and
they're left under the guardianship of some close family friends who live in a
glass house (and yeah, their last name is also Glass- corny but true). At first,
things are kosher but it isn't long before the older sister begins to suspect
her guardians of hiding something and becomes quite paranoid. The question is:
does she have the right to be suspicious or is she losing it herself?
CRITIQUE:
Cheap thrills, solid performances and an obvious plotline for anyone who's seen
the trailer make for a decent "old-school" thriller in the tradition of the HAND
THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE and UNLAWFUL ENTRY. Remember those movies in which a
character(s) acts all "nice" at first, but then slowly but surely, begins to
show their true (usually psychotic) colors? Well, here's a flick that follows
those exact footsteps with a couple of nice neighbors taking guardianship of two
kids whose parents die in a car accident. Of course, it isn't long before one of
the kids starts to suspect the guardians of hiding some nastiness about
themselves and lots of sneaky behavior, mysterious late night eavesdroppings and
creepy shots of the guardian "dad" checking out the new young girl in his house,
ensue. But what takes this film above the generic mode in which most of its
script is based, are the performances given here by its three main stars. Leelee
Sobieski is really good here as the confused orphan with a sad heart but sharp
instinct. Diane Lane is also solid as the guardian-ess, with some background
given on her character, to explain some of her kookier behavior.
But the star of this show is definitely Stellan Skarsgard and his consistent
habit of drinking in every other scene (if you've seen TIME CODE, you remember
the great job he did in that film as "the drunk guy") and his capacity to creep
you out, make you laugh and have you wondering about his motives every now and
then. Of course, it becomes pretty obvious at some point as to why he's doing
what he's doing, but Skarsgard is a blast to watch as he walks around in the
shadows of his own glass house with an iced glass of whisky in one hand and a
hazy look across his face. This movie is basically a guilty pleasure. I think
that most anyone could plug some holes into its plot (although I didn't spot any
major ones myself) and certainly fault its "been-there-done-that" nature, but I
enjoyed most of it, laughed at a few scenes (not sure if I was supposed to be
laughing though), dipped into its few cheap thrills (both suspense-based and
Sobieski in a bikini- holy cans, Batman!) and appreciated its somewhat original
ending (the thing about the car, etc...). I did however find certain lags in the
film and felt that it ran a little too long for its own good but can see great
potential for it on the video circuit. Add to that, a solid score and some cool
directing choices, and this film's obvious plotline and cheap thrills can easily
equate a "good time" for most anyone looking for diversion in their choice of
movies.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Arlington Road (7/10) - A Simple Plan (8/10) - Fatal Attraction (8/10) - Fear
(8/10) - Psycho (6/10) -Single White Female (7/10) - Unlawful Entry (8/10) -
What Lies Beneath (8/10)

Title
Review for Rock Star (2001)
For more reviews and movie news, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A young man who loves heavy metal music and especially the band Steel Dragon, to
whom he's devoted a tribute band in which he sings, gets launched into stardom
when the real group get rid of their lead singer and call on him to take his
place.
CRITIQUE:
I'm a sucker for movies like this. A young man with a humble background and
lofty dreams, works hard, devotes the time, the energy and the patience, and
ultimately hits it big-time. In the case of this film, our boy loves a certain
heavy metal band and as luck would have it (yup, luck always finds its way into
these types of equations, although generally tied very closely to hard work),
they need a new singer. His entry and adaptation to the whole "rock 'n roll"
lifestyle fills the rest of the film and is really fun to watch. Although I will
preface this by saying that one thing that would definitely enhance your
appreciation for this film is your own love (or past love) of heavy metal music
and the whole scene around it. Metal was one of my first loves as a teen and
even though the genre of music isn't that prominent anymore, I still check out
my Motley Crue, Twisted Sister and Anthrax CDs every now and again. That's not
to say that you won't like this film if you don't like the music, but the music
and live performances from the band, play a big part in the movie, and I for
one, had a blast watching and listening to it all.
But the even greater draw in this film is the standout performance given here by
Mark Wahlberg. Wow, hand this fella some major props, as he totally becomes this
heavy metal geek/god (incidentally, METAL GOD was the film's original title, and
a much better one if you ask me). He is this movie and I was quite taken by his
character pretty much the whole way through. He came off like a regular guy with
extremely passionate goals and work ethic, who was willing to do anything in
order to fulfill his dreams. Aniston was also surprisingly good as the
girlfriend (and the romance angle between them was sweet), but she didn't pull
me in hard enough during their emotional scenes. I was also impressed by some of
the "real" musicians who played in the film (Zakk Wylde from Ozzy Osbourne, Jeff
Pilson from Dokken, Stephan Jenkins from Third Eye Blind, Blas Elias from
Slaughter), but actor Dominic West as Kirk Cuddy made the biggest impression
among the band members. It's to note that this film was based on a real-life
tale of a young man who used to sing in a Judas Priest cover band and then went
on to become their actual singer (their original singer also admitted to being
gay, as in this film).
Just for the record, I'm certainly not recommending this film for its
originality or surprise elements, since most of this stuff has already been
covered in some way or another in other movies, but because it's a fun,
uplifting, well-paced movie with a solid central showing by Wahlberg and
energetic live performances. Oh yeah, and for those who dig the "heavier" side
of music, the soundtrack also rocks!! You see...dreams can come true...
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Almost Famous (8/10) - Blow (8/10) - Boogie Nights (9/10) - Detroit Rock City
(8/10) - Girlfight (6/10) - Goodfellas (10/10)

Title
Review for Bandits (2001)
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A cool guy and a nervous guy break out of jail and begin robbing banks together,
by kidnapping the bank manager on the nights before their robberies, and getting
them to hand over the money early in the morning. One day, they stumble onto a
woman named Kate, whose life sucks with her husband, and who decides to latch on
to these outlaws. It isn't long before each of the boys has a crush on her, and
their life on the run gets more complicated.
CRITIQUE:
Very ho-hum. This movie isn't about anything original, so that's out the window.
The trailer makes it look funny, but after having seen the movie, I can
guarantee you, it's not a comedy, so let's drop that to the side. The dramatic
elements in the film are few and far between, and to be honest, not all that
interesting either. So that's in the sack. Hmmmm...what else? Oh yeah, the
acting...yes, that's pretty good, but nothing extra-ordinary. So what the hell
is it about this 2-hour movie that makes it worth seeing, you might be asking
yourself? Well, not too much according to me, and you can definitely skip it in
the theatres, because there ain't much here in which you should invest your
hard-earned bucks. Rent it on video, you ask? Sure, it's a decent time-spender
(that is, if you have two hours to kill and don't mind slowly prodding through
this thing) and the opening jail break-out scene is pretty cool, the ending
surprising (although pretty unbelievable) and Billy Bob Thornton, a joy to
watch. But the basic idea behind the film is played out after the first half
hour and the film just goes into major "re-dial" mode soon after that. Alright,
we get it, they're "clever" bank robbers who found a unique way to rob
banks...but what else?!? Is a love triangle really worthy of another plot-line?
Not really. I thought the film was supposed to be about these bank-robbers
(hence, the title), but most of the time, it seemed to rotate around this whole
three-way love tryst, and it rarely stimulated anything original, engaging or
interesting in that respect.
Sure, Cate Blanchett is fun in her role, but how many dysfunctional people can
you fit inside a movie before you lose any true relation to them and stop giving
a crap? I was sorta into this movie the whole way through but it just dragged on
for too long, went over the same things over and over again, and didn't really
have much of a point or entertainment value to it. And what's with all of the
characters being strangely abnormal? Willis' cousin in the movie seems to start
off as a "goofball" but progresses into a full-blown mentally-challenged
individual by the end of the movie. Was that done on purpose or was he just
over-playing his stupidity role? Also, why was his lame little sub-plot in the
film at all...or that bogus "America's Most Wanted"-type TV show? (this was
parodied in NATURAL BORN KILLERS back in 1994, guys...give it a rest!) So why am
I even giving this film that high of a rating? Well, I really dug Thornton's
hypochondriac character and Blanchett is generally pretty solid in anything she
does. I also liked the opening and ending sequences, the latter fooling me into
believing something that wasn't there, and I also enjoyed most of the banter
between Willis and Thornton. But overall, the film goes on for too long, doesn't
bring much originality to the "bank robbing" movie motif and rarely cracked me
up (but comedy is a very subjective thing, so it might just tickle your funny
bone). So are you bored and interesting in seeing a so-so movie in the comfort
of your own house? Look no further, this generic flick might just be the ideal
rental for your basic needs. Now is that a hearty recommendation or what?!? 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Mad City (4/10) - Natural Born Killers (9/10) - Out of Sight (8/10) - The Score
(6/10) - Small Time Crooks (7/10) - Sugar & Spice (6/10) - Where the Money Is
(5/10)

Title
Review for Siunin Wong Fei-hung tsi titmalau (1993)
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
In the mid-19th century, thousands of peasants are being used and abused by the
tyrannical leader of Zhejing, a province in Eastern China. One man (no, not a
monkey) decides to take matters into his own hands by masking his identity and
kicking a lot of bad guy ass. He also steals from the rich and gives to the
poor. But another master fighter has now been hired to bring him to justice (and
to find him, for that matter- who is this Iron Monkey?) Lots of chop-chopping
later...we're breathless. 
CRITIQUE:
What more can I say other than...a whole lotta ass-kickin' fun! And coming from
the dude who choreographed THE MATRIX and the CROUCHING TIGER fight sequences,
what else did we expect, right? Yuen Wo Ping directed this movie back in 1993,
and now Miramax Films and Quentin Tarantino are bringing it back to the big
screen for all the "new" kung-fu movie fans to behold. Is it worth seeing?
Ooooooh, yeah! Especially if you were one of those people who was entranced by
the action scenes in CROUCHING TIGER last year, because this film has a lot of
that and well...a whole lot more of that! It's basically all about the fight
scenes and they do not disappoint. Stunt work like you wouldn't believe, people
flying through the air, kicking each other while falling off rooftops, punching
tables into others, crushing furniture into dust, using every and any means
possible to defeat the enemy. Very creative stuff and very fun to watch, that
is...if you like that kind of thing. The story here isn't the poetic, epic or
romantic one that CROUCHING was, so anyone looking for that kind of vibe, will
likely be disappointed. This movie is basically all about kicking a lot of
kung-fu butt and if you're into that, and don't mind watching it over and over
again, then this movie is just for you. The story is "okay" for the most part,
the IRON MONKEY character is basically like a Chinese version of ZORRO or ROBIN
HOOD, fighting for the poor and all that jazz, and it shouldn't be too difficult
to keep up with the basic plotline ("who is Iron Monkey? We must stop him!").
Although, I suppose that the subtitles might piss some people off, but I didn't
have much of a problem with it.
There are also a lot of different kinds of fights in this movie, a couple of
which include a woman at their center and another one with a kid crunching
bones. I personally could have done without each of the fighters chiming in with
the name of their specific combat stance as they were fighting, but maybe that's
just me. The film also has a few funny moments, like the cooking scene and
another one in which two of the film's lead characters dress up like politicians
and ham it up. But in the beginning, in the end and in the middle of all the
rest of this film, lies a whole lotta punchin', kickin', swingin', proddin',
shovin', jammin' and iron monkeyin', and that's what will keep your eyes open
for the film's quick 90 minute runtime. And just when you think that you've had
enough of the movie's elaborate fight sequences, they finish off with one of the
most amazing action scenes that I have seen in some time. Three men stand atop
poles, with fires flaming on all around them, and proceed to punch, kick and
jump at and over one another for minutes on end. This sequence will leave you
speechless and had me rubbing my eyes over and over again, to make sure that I
wasn't dreaming. Truly spectacular. But this film is not for everyone. It's very
cartoonish, a little cheesy, is packed with action (although there are very few
real deaths (if any?)) and doesn't really give you a lot of meat in which to
grind your mind. But then again, why bother with an intricate plotline when you
can see a man fighting another man with his sleeve?!? Yeah man...it's in
film...see for yourself!
PS: The character of the young kid in this movie is named Wong Fei-Hong, a
real-life, turn-of-the-century martial artist and patriot. He is the same
character as an adult in the ONCE UPON A TIME IN CHINA flicks (in that sense,
this film is like a prequel to that series) and Jackie Chan's DRUNKEN MASTER
movies. And even though very little was known about the real Wong Fei-Hong's
childhood, many legends were told, which is what drew writer Tsui Hark to write
this tale of the IRON MONKEY.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Black Mask (5/10) - Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (7/10) - Kiss of the Dragon
(7/10) - The Matrix (8/10) - The Musketeer (4/10) - Romeo Must Die (3/10) -
Shanghai Noon (6/10)

Title
Review for Ghost World (2001)
For more reviews and movie scripts, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
After graduating from high school, two girl best friends try to figure out what
they want to do with their lives. In the meantime, they make fun of people
around them, attempt to get real jobs and play a dirty trick on an older, lonely
guy. That being done, one of the girls gets a job, hoping to move on with her
life, while the other, falls for the older, lonely guy, and starts hanging out
with him more. Okay, so it doesn't sound all that exciting, but trust me...it's
got some cool insight, great characters and a wonderful ambiance all around. See
below...
CRITIQUE:
There are great movies and then there are movies that hit you on a personal
level and elevate it to an even greater level. Does that make any sense? Well,
either way, I really loved this flick. It's not a "big movie" by any stretch of
the imagination, but its characters, its environment, its authenticity and its
capacity to capture the feeling of an outsider living in society today, well,
really drew me into its story. A story which incidentally, doesn't have a
typical structure. It's basically about these two high school girls who are
trying to figure out what the next step in their lives will be. This leads to
self-discovery, some introspection and an insightful look at the way people use
facades in order to get by in life. Of course, you don't have to be a teenage
girl to be able to relate to any of their feelings of alienation, concern for
their futures, non-conformity and the general notion of not being able to "fit
into" society (do you ever just feel trapped?). For many, there is a fine line
between "putting food on the table" and "selling out".
I've personally always had a fascination with the so-called "weirdos" from high
school (especially the goth chicks and girls with Doc Martens...yeah, baby!)
Maybe because I was kinda weird myself (or maybe I still am...not sure). But the
bottom line with most of these folks, as with the two girls in this film, is
that they're basically just like the rest of us, but with some deeper
insecurities, and a greater need to put up walls. The two ladies in this film
put others down in order to feel better about their own stations in life and
because they cannot seem to pursue their own goals. Of course, they don't do any
of this consciously, but just like in real life (boy, do I ever know a lot of
people like this!), it happens and it's interesting to watch them interact with
the rest of the characters in this movie.
But don't let me make this film sound too profound! It's actually very funny,
clever, extremely well-written and everyone in the cast fits their parts to a
tee. Especially Buscemi and Birch, who are both perfect in their roles, and
really give their respective characters the added layer of vulnerability needed
to pull you in even further. I also appreciated the various plays on stereotypes
in this film, but with a twist. Buscemi plays the typical "collector guy" with
all of his anal habits ("I don't want to meet someone who shares my interests. I
hate my interests!"), but he's surprisingly very conscious of himself being that
person. He doesn't pretend to be anything else. He's honest about it and that's
what makes him that much more appealing. Birch's friend is also very typical of
your know-it-all, sarcastic chickie-dee at the beginning of the film, but as
their lives move forward, she grows, adapts and accepts some of what her life is
offering, as opposed to Birch's character, who simply cannot seem to let go of
her irresponsible teenage self.
Man, but there's so much more in here as well. There's drama, there's a genuine
sense of empathy for the characters, there's an open-ended resolution that could
not have been more ideal for a film as such, there are some nifty old-time tunes
and there is an incredible feeling of loneliness woven deep within the film's
fabric. Mind you, if you've read my entire review up to this point, you should
also note that this is not your typical movie for your everyday moviegoer. Let's
face it...it's a bit of an "art-house" movie, but a damn good one! (in the same
vein of a, let's say...RUSHMORE) Oh yeah, I also forgot to mention the entire
sub-plot with Illeanna Douglas playing the over-the-top "performance artist"
teacher, who skewers all of those pretentious bastards and the whole lesbian
undertone running throughout the entire picture, between Birch and her "best
friend" (or was that just me?). Anyway, as you can see, I really, really loved
this movie, even more so because I'm quite confused about my own dinky future at
this point in my life as well, so it likely struck a chord, or
actually...several chords! Either way, check it out if you're looking for a
sardonic flick with a unique point of view, some great performances, fun
dialogue, a catchy soundtrack, many clever bits and a resounding, heart-felt
message.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
American Beauty (8/10) - Election (7/10) - Fight Club (10/10) - Ginger Snaps
(8/10) - Happiness (3/10) - Magnolia (9/10) - Requiem for a Dream (8/10) -
Rushmore (9/10) - Taxi Driver (10/10)

Title
Review for Cats & Dogs (2001)
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A goofy scientist is about to come up with a formula that will get rid 
of all dog allergies around the world. All of the cats in the world 
aren't happy about this chain of events because they fear that this will 
make dogs even more popular with people, and diminish their power. So 
they come up with a plan to steal the formula from the scientist, invert 
its effects and make everyone in the world allergic to dogs. Woo-hoo!
CRITIQUE:
Not as laugh-out-loud funny as SHREK, not as energetic as SPY KIDS, but 
certainly an all-around fun movie for kids. I say kids specifically, 
because the two films mentioned above also worked for me as someone over 
the age of 12, but this film was a little more kiddie-oriented. Not as 
many inside jokes or mature potshots in this one (other than one of the 
funnier lines in the film in which a pissed off dog exclaims "Son of my 
mom!" (i.e. Son of a bitch!)). Pretty funny, I thought. Overall though, 
the humor and the very basic Disney-esque plot of the film didn't engage 
me as much as I had hoped from the trailer. Having said that, holy 
special effects, Batman! I gotta give out some major props to the 
filmmakers here because the movie is shot impeccably and the effects 
work really well throughout. The dogs really look like they're talking, 
the cats really look like they're smiling and frowning and by God, they 
all really look like they're fighting, punching and pulling the wool 
over every human's eyes. Very, very well done in that respect. I also 
have to mention the great vision of the script, which has to do with 
cats working on a worldwide scale to end the "best friend" token tag of 
dogs, as well as the whole doggie underworld (which is literally 
under-ground) packed with futuristic mobiles, sophisticated 
communication systems, computers and a UN-type organization filled with 
dogs from all around the planet. Sounds pretty cool, eh?
Well, it's definitely cool and admittedly most of the action scenes were 
plenty slick as well. There are two particularly hi-larious characters 
in the film, both of whom spring from feline. One is the night-goggled 
ninja cats who break into a dog's home and kick all kinds of Matrix 
arse, and two, is a Russian pussy who they send in after the first round 
of kitties. A true "professional" hitman with a great accent and some 
real funny lines. The "live" characters on the other hand, Jeff Goldblum 
and Elizabeth Perkins, don't really need to do much in this film other 
than stand around and pretend not to know what's going on (and Goldblum 
acts "weird" as usual), while Alec Baldwin's voice as Butch, the lead 
dog, is impeccable and the dog even looks like him! (pretty neat) 
Overall, I certainly did enjoy myself with this picture, but it didn't 
really blow me away more than that. Most of the time I was just thinking 
to myself "oh, that's clever" as opposed to getting into the whole thing 
and laughing my head off. But like I said earlier, this movie is 
definitely more kid-oriented and even though everyone else is likely to 
enjoy it as well, I don't think that it's gonna strike as many chords 
across the board. BTW, seeing as one of the species comes out the 
"winner" in this film, need I predict a sequel entitled DOGS & CATS? 
Natch. Take the kids, they'll love it!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
102 Dalmatians (5/10) - The Animal (4/10) - Austin Powers (7/10) - 
Gremlins (8/10) - The Matrix (8/10) - Mouse Hunt (6/10) - Shrek (8/10) - 
Spy Kids (8/10) - Stuart Little (6/10)

Title
Review for Session 9 (2001)
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A group of asbestos cleaners get a job removing the gunk from an old insane
asylum. As each day passes, the crew members begin to discover things about the
place and themselves which set other things in motion. Saying anything else
about the plot would be a crime. Have fun...
CRITIQUE:
"I feel like shooting myself in the head" are the first words that came out of
my mouth after seeing this movie, a good indication as to what kind of film to
expect here. This ain't your average "happy go lucky" kind of picture. This is a
deliberately slow-paced mystery-horror film drenched in atmosphere, with a very
creepy insane asylum (in which most of the film takes place), very few clues
up-front and lots to talk about afterwards. Will it bore some people to sleep?
You bet it will! Is it made for the SCREAM audiences of the day? Absolutely not!
I guess you can describe this film as a horror movie for the "cerebral crowd". A
film that patiently unwraps itself frame after frame, giving away very little
with each step and each sound, unwinding itself until its final scenes offer up
a world of revelations and plenty more to discuss later. I've always loved
movies that have me talking about them afterwards like THE SHINING and LOST
HIGHWAY and this film fits right into that group. In fact, I guess I can
pussyfoot around the actual word all I want but the best way to describe this
kind of movie is a "mindfuck".
If you feel like watching a movie that moves very slowly, gives you a handful of
characters with divergent backgrounds, tosses a few very ambiguous and
supernatural cookies your way and is extremely disturbing once you put it all
together, well, then this movie is definitely for you! It's the kind of film
that you actually have to see twice to fully appreciate (damn, I missed that
whole "peanut butter" thing!) and one that will likely creep the shit out of you
if watched alone in the dark. "Brrrrrrrrr...now what was that sound in the
basement? Honey, can you go check?" And one thing this film doesn't have, unlike
its Hollywood-ian counterparts like THE HAUNTING, is special effects. In fact,
that's one of the greater things about this movie: it feels real because it
looks like it's actually taped on video with very credible actors in very
credible circumstances (I did some research and it was, in fact, shot on digital
video...ah-ha!). Another great thing about it is that it's actually very gory
and somewhat violent in theme, and yet we rarely see anything of the sort on the
big screen (it's mostly implied, kids!). And as clichéd as it might be to
say...it's usually much scarier when stuff is left to our imagination or implied
in movies as such.
Other films that this one reminded me of include HENRY: PORTRAIT OF A SERIAL
KILLER and THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT, with that same real sense of dread, brooding
and terror. The film does however move awfully slow and if you really don't get
"into" it completely (you really need to concentrate here), you will lose the
motion of the story and the pent-up tension might be released. But overall, this
film is yet another great example of the horror genre making a very cool
comeback this year with no tight tanktops in sight. And with David Caruso acting
like the king hotshot like only he can, how can you go wrong? Definitely not a
film for everyone but a must-see for anyone looking to throw themselves into the
psyche of the disturbed (count me in!). Stanley Kubrick would be proud! Oh
yeah...so where's that gun again...?
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Blair Witch Project (4/10) - Blair Witch 2 (7/10) - The Haunting (3/10) -
The House on Haunted Hill (7/10) - Lost Highway (10/10) - The Pledge (6/10) -
The Shining (9/10) - The Sixth Sense (8/10) - Unbreakable (8/10)

Title
Review for American Outlaws (2001)
For more reviews and movie games, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Jesse James, his brother Frank and a few of their cousins (better known as the
Younger boys) comprise a gang of outlaws who rob banks, shoot guns and give to
the poor. They don't want people's farms being taken over by greedy railroad
folk and they don't mind killing a few people in their pursuit of that goal. Now
yipee-ka-yay mother...well, something like that.  
CRITIQUE:
A harmless little movie. This film isn't out to hurt anybody. It stars a bunch
of unknowns, a few up-and-comers, a couple of has-beens and plenty of gunpowder,
and asks that you sit down, relax and not expect much from it. If you go in with
that attitude, you will likely be satisfied. Why? Well, the film offers you a
little bit of fun, a little bit of action and a whole lotta nothing. If you're
not interested in an original story...this might be for you. If you're not
interested in getting attached to characters, caring when they die, smiling when
they live...this might be for you. And if you're not interested in feeling
tension, getting swept up by energy or being surprised by anything that happens
in a movie...well, this might be for you. On the positive tip, the film offers
authenticity, a charismatic lead, a great looking babe, a few funny moments, a
nice camaraderie between the band of outlaws, at least two cool gunfight
sequences and not much thinking required. On the downside, the story is pretty
flimsy, the editing and pacing could not be any faster or less engaging, the
deaths and the ending are wrapped up way too quickly and the dialogue is some of
the worst that I've heard in any movie all year.
But then again, I was laughing through most it because it was so contrived, and
actually enjoying it, despite it being for the wrong reason. Does that count or
make any sense? Anyway, my personal favorite line was when one of the James
brothers started shooting up a train and someone asked Timothy Dalton what all
the noise was, and he snapped back, "Revenge!" Hehehehe...had me cwacking up, I
tell you. Which reminds me, James Bond is friggin' hilarious in this movie. He
seems to be playing a character in another movie altogether, hamming it up at
every turn, and following one of the strangest arcs that I've seen in any
character in quite some time (make up your mind, you bastard!). There are also a
couple of complete throwaway roles given to Kathy Bates (and if you look
closely, you can actually see her "cashing her paycheck" for this movie in one
of the bank scenes...seriously...check it out!), as well as Ronny Cox, who
respectively prove that nobody can deliver this awful dialogue and make it sound
genuine.
But you're not gonna see this movie for the characters and the dialogue anyway,
right? I mean, you're going to see it for the action, the gunfights, maybe even
the T&A, right? (okay, so maybe that last one was just me...there is none, btw).
Well, in that respect, the film does offer a few interesting shootouts, a couple
of nice stunts and dare I say...a charismatic performance from Colin Farrell
(oh, have you heard...this guy's going places!). So once again I find myself
stuck in the middle (copyright 1992 Mr. Blonde) of my recommendation meter. On
the one hand, the film offers a few entertaining moments, including some laughs
and decent gunplay, but on the other hand, the dialogue blows, the supposed
"romance" is bogus and the film moves faster than a speeding bullet (but without
letting you catch up!). I'm sooo confused...! Actually, I'd recommend that you
check it out on video where you might just enjoy it for the fluffy western that
it is.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Mexican (6/10) - The Quick and the Dead (7/10) - Shanghai Noon (6/10) -
Tombstone (7/10) - The Way of the Gun (6/10) - Westworld (6/10) - Wild Wild West
(3/10) -Young Guns (6/10)

Title
Review for 3000 Miles to Graceland (2001)
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A bunch of bad guys dressed up as Elvis impersonators rob a Vegas casino
during a Presley convention. The boys eventually get together to split the
money, but as plans change, double-crosses occur, dealing and wheeling goes
down and the crew set up for the road. Who's on the up and up, who's the
real bad guy and who's gonna get to bang Courteney Cox are just a few of the
questions which will be answered by the rest of this movie.
CRITIQUE:
The funnest movie that I've seen so far this year! It's got style, it's got
tough guys talkin' shite and it's got plenty of bullets to go around. A
definite hunk-a-hunk-a burnin' adventure! A guy's guy movie through and
through, and one that'll set your jollies to high if you dig on the rough
stuff. It's not very original, it goes on for a little too long, but Costner
and Russell make it happen, as two shite-kickin' Elvis lovers, who don't
stop till they, more or less, drop. This movie's got some pretty intensive
shoot-out scenes, one of the coolest robbery scenarios that I've ever
witnessed, featuring several Elvises with guns a blazin' and the King's
music playing in the background, and a decent helping of double-crosses,
sharp dialogue and funny moments. In fact, even though the cast is filled
with many name actors (B-actors as they might be for the most part), most of
them do their bit and succeed well in passing the torch onto the next
victim. But the true glue that holds this film together, other than the
spirit of Elvis himself, is Costner and Russell, who play their badass
characters to the T. Sure, Russell's been down this road before, but Costner
surprised me with his nastiness. I guess he's pissed at all the box-office
bombs that he's been in of late, but he sure played a great unstable Elvis
impersonating robber here. In the end, the bottom line with this movie is
having fun, kickin' ass and making sure there's enough bubblegum around to
chew afterwards. And smoke 'em if you got 'em, folks!
There is also this one really great show-down scene between Costner and a
cop, that'll have you crackin' up and lovin' it all at the same time. The
violent scenes in this movie are violent and the entire film is wrapped in a
soundtrack that'll kick your arse from this end of the theatre to the next.
It should actually come to no surprise to anyone that the director of this
movie comes from a music video background, with plenty, and I mean plenty,
of camera tricks, cuts and edits, but for this kind of flick, it actually
works. The film is not perfect though, it starts off with a pretty big bang,
but then pulls a WAY OF THE GUN on us, and slows the pace down somewhat in
the middle, while characters intermingle and disperse. I was personally kept
in the game despite some soft spots, and enjoyed the overall ride for what
it was as well. And did I mention that Courteney Cox looked mega-hot in the
movie? No...okay, well I just did! I coulda done without her whole "romance"
angle, but to be honest, it doesn't take up much of the film, which is
generally covered in blood, explosions, guts and Elvis nods. Try to see how
many "inside" connections to the King you can guess. Of course, it's no
secret that I am quite a big Elvis fan myself so please take this whole
review with that grain of salt in mind. I also like these types of "guy"
movies a lot, and even though the film doesn't bring much originality to the
table, it does offer a pretty coherent story, some nice twists and turns,
humor and a big ol' helping of whoop-ass coming straight from Costner and
Russell's respective boots. Probably not a film for everyone, but definitely
for those who enjoy the guns, the charismatic bad guys and a fun, if
entirely disposable, adventure. Now see how many Elvis songs I've used to
pun my way through this phony review below.
THE ELVIS SONGS ALSO RECOMMEND THIS MOVIE!
So whether you're lonesome tonight or any other night, remember to pack the
teddy bear with bullets, leave your little sister at home, bring your bossa
nova baby and rock out of that jailhouse, cause this movie ain't one to
return to the sender. I really beg of you, whether you're stuck in the
ghetto or crying in the chapel, to slap this cinematic ring around your neck
and love it tender. And no suspicious minds either, folks, cause I got stung
by this movie, I mean it really shook me up, and unless you're the devil in
disguise himself, I think you won't be able to help falling in love with
this lucky charm either. So don't be cruel, don't turn away, don't curl up
with your latest flame tonite (whether she be a hard-headed woman or not)
and surrender to the hound dog of movies that is this film. It's now or
never, folks. Trust me, I did it my way and the heartbreak hotel of crappy
movies that I'd seen so far this year is far behind me. JoBlo has now
officially left the sanity of his mind and this building. Thank you...thank
you very much!!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Get Carter (7/10) - Heat (8/10) - Honeymoon in Vegas (9/10) - Payback
(8/10) - Reindeer Games (5/10) -Reservoir Dogs (9/10) - Way of the Gun
(6/10)

Title
Review for Rat Race (2001)
For more reviews and movie forums, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
An eccentric billionaire places $2 million inside a locker in New Mexico,
assembles a bunch of losers in Las Vegas and tells them that whoever reaches the
locker first, can keep all of the money. And they're off to the races! 
CRITIQUE:
A very cool premise, some half-decent gags here and there, a few major stunt
pieces and a fun score just aren't enough to recommend this movie all the way.
Why? Well, I just didn't think that most of this film was funny, that's why. The
basic idea is a good one, gather a bunch of people and ask them to reach the
same point in order to win $2 million. Check. But once everyone hits the road,
it's basically just a bunch of sketches, each involving one of the characters or
another, getting into outrageous situations (most of which are extremely
farfetched if you really start thinking about them-a Nazi museum in the middle
of the desert?) in order to stir up laughs. Unfortunately for me, I just didn't
think that most of it was all that funny (but being as humor is very subjective,
who knows...maybe you will enjoy the laughs). In fact, I spent the first half of
this movie looking at my watch, other than the scenes with Cuba Gooding Jr.
(who's very funny here), and only started "getting into" it during the film's
second half.
It's basically a matter of the characters being humorous or not, and most just
weren't for me. Rowan Atkinson for example, was abysmally unfunny to me as the
"Italian" tourist, but many in the audience were cracking up at every facial
gesture that he made. Not me! (and don't get me started on that inane bit with
Wayne Knight and the human heart...yeesh!). Whoopie Goldberg and her daughter in
the film were also not funny, and the whole ongoing joke about Seth Green's
brother not being able to speak, was also not a part of my humor list. Cuba
Gooding Jr., on the other hand, did make me laugh, as did some of the Hitler
jokes from Lovitz's camp (although some will be offended, no doubt), and I
really liked how all of the rich guys were betting on pretty much anything under
the sun (the "maid bets" were the absolute tops). I also liked the whole bus
full of Lucy Balls...brrrr, creepy and funny at the same time. But then you had
a bunch of time-filling stunt pieces that just weren't amusing in the least.
Like the whole helicopter thang and the scene featuring Seth Green's car being
pulled upwards by a radar.
And the reason that I'm talking about the characters and the scenes specifically
in my review is because that's basically all that this movie is about. You
either like the characters and think that most of what they're doing is funny,
or you don't. It's not a plot-driven film and it certainly doesn't ask that you
invest anything into the characters (i.e leave your brain at the door). It's
mindless (but it doesn't pretend to be anything otherwise) with some laughs and
a horrible ending. I mean, what the hell is going on with the band Smashmouth
and movies this summer?!? This feels like the umpteenth film to which they've
sold their "hit" single "All-Star". Enough already! Anyway, you just gotta see
the goofy ending to believe it, easily one of the most contrived things that
I've seen in some time. Check it out on video, only because of the cool premise
and some of the gags clicking, but otherwise, stick to the "Whoopie Goldberg"
rule of movies, and stay away from this one in the theaters (for those
uninitiated to the guideline: "If Whoopie's in a film, stay away!"). I think it
would also have been much greater if they had used A to B list actors and made
the chase cross-country, as opposed to the B to C list actors assembled here,
and the state-to-state race. Oh well...it's August, folks, and studios aren't
exactly known to reserve this month for the greatest pictures in their annual
portfolio, so lower your expectations and you might just laugh along.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Airplane (10/10) - A Simple Plan (8/10) - Dirty Work (5/10) - Drowning Mona
(5/10) - Honeymoon in Vegas (10/10) - O Brother, Where Art Thou (7/10) - Raising
Arizona (10/10)

Title
Review for Don't Say a Word (2001)
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A rich psychiatrist with a great home life gets his cute daughter kidnapped by
some bad guys who want him to extract some information from the mind of one of
his nutty patients. Of course, the patient is not cooperative and the doctor
only has a few hours to comply with their demands, before they kill his
daughter. Pretty good premise, no?
CRITIQUE:
If you're not a fan of movies packed with plot holes, inconsistencies and yes,
even more plot holes, heed my words and skip this hollow thriller. And I don't
like saying that either, since this film actually had some potential and started
off pretty well. Sure, the story is basically just an amalgamation of RANSOM,
PRIMAL FEAR and NICK OF TIME pureed into one, but the whole "psychiatrist
working against the clock" thing, actually had me engaged at first. But it's at
about the halfway mark of this movie, that the bottom drops out and all that
we're left with are a lot of questions and very few plausible answers. We get
the overly smart kid who manages to "pull one" over on the bad guys. We get a
weak woman with her leg in a cast beating the crap out of a tough bad guy. We
get Douglas' character, a New York uppedity psychiatrist, suddenly turning into
an action hero, with moves and attitude to boot. And what about the film's main
plot point? Why would the bad guys still give a crap about this thing after 10
years, and even more so, why would they only give the shrink until the day's end
to do his part? (you waited 10 years, what's another few days?- or why not set
up another heist instead?). I'll tell you why, it's because we wouldn't have a
(bad) movie otherwise, that's why! And many, many more.
Ugh, whatever the case, it was just about the time that Douglas' character
suddenly removed Murphy's character from the mental home (and how come she went
with him so nicely? I thought she didn't trust him), that I turned to my buddy
and asked when the movie had turned into a joke. And a few bogus chase and
action sequences later, we were left with a long-winded ending that did little
to answer any other questions I might've still had, and actually brought up even
more contradictions. Badly put together, this movie features some decent acting,
some nice cinematography and an initially interesting premise, but loses it all
in a haze of plot miscues which ultimately leave you with little care for
anyone. In fact, if it wasn't for Brittany Murphy's excellent portrayal of a
traumatized teen, Jennifer Esposito's embarrassing performance as a police woman
(yeah, right! watching her delivering lines was the funniest part of this flick-
but it wasn't supposed to be) and Michael Douglas' cool "regular guy" part,
there would be little reason to remain seated until the end of this picture.
Incidentally, can anyone please give me one good reason why Esposito's character
was in this movie in the first place? She was completely superfluous.
And on top of all that, by the end of this flick, the director seems to have
realized how dumb the audience must be to have bought most of the garbage that
he'd been shoveling out for the hour and a half prior, and decides to add insult
to injury by flashing back to an earlier character's death when one of the bad
guys dies, just so we know (as an audience), that the two are interrelated
somehow. Ooooh, thanks, Mr. Fleder...I appreciate the spoon-feeding, dude...yum,
yum...but how about explaining every other plot point in your film that made no
sense? Whatever. Either way, I don't give a rat's ass because this movie is a
dog and that's unfortunate because it actually did have some good points going
for it. See it if you like dumb thrillers. Incidentally, if you appreciated
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, you will likely enjoy this film as well. They both start
off with interesting premises, only to toss all logic and sense out the window
about halfway through.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Along Came A Spider (4/10) - Girl, Interrupted (5/10) - Kiss the Girls (7/10) -
Primal Fear (7/10) -- Seven (10/10)

Title
Review for Training Day (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
This movie takes place over one day. It's a rookie cop's narcotics training
alongside a seasoned police veteran. The rookie doesn't know much about "street
justice", so the older cop teaches him about the way things work in the "real
world". How even cops like themselves have to "bend the rules" and "break the
law" every now and then, in order to catch the really bad guys.
CRITIQUE:
A pretty intense little movie with solid acting across the board, some ups, some
downs and a thrilling ending, despite a couple of small flaws. I really enjoyed
this movie because it followed two extreme characters and put them in situations
which had me wondering about what I would do if I were in their place. The film
gets right into the "dirty" side of, well...the dirt on the streets, and
proceeds to teach the rookie cop (and us, the audience) how things really work
down there. Of course, we're receiving this lesson from a man who has put away a
lot of scum in his time, but the things he seems to be doing aren't exactly on
the up-and-up either. And therein, lies the fun of the film. Do you agree that
you yourself would need to break a few small laws in order to put away the
people who break the really big ones? Well, as the film moves along, we're given
two points of view in respect to this predicament, and to me, both sides made
sense at some point or another. And you gotta give a lot of credit to the
screenplay for that, the director, who builds the film up wonderfully (with the
darkness of the day leading to the darkness in the script) and the two actors
who deliver their parts in spades. Hawke, first off, because he rarely plays
these "commercial" roles but does so perfectly here, with a vulnerable side
which has you feeling for the bastard right off the top.
And Denzel, well, what can you say about Mr. Washington that hasn't already been
said before? He comes through as per his usual high-level style here, and gives
the audience a completely different side to his talent, of which, I personally
would like to see more. He's nice, he's not so nice, he's smart, he's not so
smart, he's caring and he's a dog all the way. The few problems that I did have
with this film included the redundant nature of the whole thing at some point
(okay, we get it...you have to be nasty in order to deal with these nasty
people...move on) and this one really major "coincidence" which involved a
bathtub, that saved the day for one character, but seemed a little too
"convenient" for my taste. I also never really understood how Washington's
character got out of a certain dire predicament, only to be seen driving his car
in the very next scene. But obviously these small flaws didn't taint my overall
enjoyment of this tense drama, a film that gets you right into the streets, into
the nooks and the crannies, and into the moral dilemma which lies between the
justice system and the day-to-day drug busts. See it if you want to wrestle with
some of these issues yourself, see it if you want to see Denzel and Ethan strike
up a palpable chemistry on-screen, and see it if you like holding on to your
seat-handles real tight during a movie. In fact, see it for the scene in which
Ethan Hawke plays cards with a host of gang-bangers alone...dang, now that's
intense!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Corruptor (7/10) - Crimson Tide (9/10) - L.A. Confidential (/10) - Lethal
Weapon (8/10) - Requiem for a Dream (8/10) - Seven (10/10) - Shaft (7/10) -
Traffic (8/10)

Title
Review for American Pie 2 (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Your old friends from the original AMERICAN PIE flick are back and not much has
changed. Of course, they've all completed a year in College at this point, but
they're still just looking to have a good time and get busy with the ladies. And
with the summer off and good times ahead, the lads decide to take their action
to the beach and hilarity, sexual promiscuity and lots of dick jokes ensue...
CRITIQUE:
This movie should've been called "A Teenager's Guide to Getting Laid!" It's a
decent follow-up to the original with a few laugh-out loud moments, much
hilarity by the way of Sean William Scott and Eugene Levy, a little deja-vu, a
little nostalgia and a weak ending. I enjoyed this movie on the whole and
certainly don't see how fans of the original wouldn't enjoy it either. It's got
all of the same elements working in this one and it manages to pull them all off
rather nicely. The plot is seriously unimportant, it's basically about the same
five guys from the original, all looking to get laid. Period. There are pissing
jokes (probably one of the funniest in the film), sexual embarrassments, some
lesbo stuff, some gay stuff, some tantra stuff, a few patches of T&A and a whole
lot of drinking and partying. Nothing wrong with all that, of course...
The film's also got a great soundtrack, at least to my ears, with pretty much
all of the cooler tunes from this summer making an appearance at one point or
another. But the downside to the film is that there are just too many characters
to cover and seeing as it is only a quickie summer flick, some are basically
relegated to cameo appearances (maybe the DVD will slice more of these folks
into an extended version or something). The girls, for example, are practically
absent during the entire film. Tara Reid, Mena Suvari, Shannon Elizabeth and
Natasha Lyonne barely have any "real" moments in the whole movie. They just come
in from time to time and say a few words. A little disappointing. The film also
seems to lose its steam with about half an hour left. The energy of the
original's conclusion isn't matched in this one, and you just end up waiting for
a cool, surprising moment that never comes (no pun intended, ya'll!). But on the
whole, the film kept me smiling for the most part, had me cracking up whenever
Sean William Scott said anything (!) and definitely scored points for still
being able to give all of these kids a little bit of sweetness and "reality"
beneath all of that horniness and perversion, so I guess that's gotta count for
something! Sniff, sniff...it also reminded me of how irresponsible, sexually
experimental and fun my youth used to be before "adulthood" turned me into the
bitter, horny jerk you see before you...harumph, but I digress. A fun movie for
the kids! ;)
Where's JoBlo coming from?
American Pie (7/10) - Can't Hardly Wait (7/10) - Dude, Where's My Car (7/10) -
Freddy Got Fingered (5/10) - Loser (2/10) - Road Trip (7/10) - Saving Silverman
(5/10) - Say It Ain't So (3/10) - She's All That (6/10) - Tomcats (4/10)

Title
Review for Score, The (2001)
For more reviews and movie posters, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
An impenetrable building houses a very expensive European scepter. A pudgy rich
guy hooks an old school thief up with a new scammer on the block and asks them
to steal it. Once taken, the item would then be sold with monetary compensation
spread to all parties. Of course, the older thief is making sure that everyone
understands that this is his "last job" (yawn) and the rich, pudgy guy is Marlon
Brando. Aaaaaaaaand action! 
CRITIQUE:
Despite its generic title and storyline, this film actually managed to entertain
me a little bit (a little bit, a little bit... ;). I liked watching it, dug the
score and the whole "shadowy" look, but mostly just went gaga over the three
generations of extremely talented and "method" actors appearing on the screen at
the same time. Not since DeNiro and Pacino went mano-a-mano in HEAT have I been
so excited. And as long as you don't go in expecting to see a fresh type of
caper movie, you might just enjoy some of it as well. In fact, the picture is
about 80% setup and 20% payoff, so most of the time you're just sitting there
watching DeNiro and Norton butt heads (which isn't an altogether bad place to
be, mind you). But the payoff paid off for me to a certain extent, and I
actually didn't see one of the twists coming (neat!). But let's not fool
ourselves here, this film would not have been made (or it might've been made but
gone straight to video), had it not been for the fact that it includes the big
three men on campus.
DeNiro, clocking in another solid performance, although not one that necessarily
stands out from his giant repertoire of films. Brando, in only a few choice
scenes, but making the most of his presence in the film by hamming it up,
splashing some French dialogue into his character and drinking water like it's
going out of style. And Norton, who surprisingly not only holds his own among
the legendary actors, but one-ups them with the strongest performance in the
whole movie. Granted, he's basically revisiting the same elements that scored
him an appearance at the Academy Awards ceremony for PRIMAL FEAR a few years
back, but it worked. Of course, I can't finish my review without mentioning the
fact that I was also a little taken with the film because it basically took
place in my backyard here in Montreal (and kudos to Oz for putting so much
French in the movie...yup, it's really like that here!).
But the bottom line with any film, especially those presented under the auspices
of the "heist" genre is that suspense, thrills and drama should be par for the
course, but unfortunately, this film lacked on all counts. Angela's Bassett's
presence was superfluous at best, and other than the film's final 15 minutes or
so, it barely had any tension whatsoever. But I'm still gonna recommend this
movie because I love all three of the main actors in it and had a blast watching
them here. Sure, the story could've used a slight tap of the originality stick,
but even though it was a little boring at times...I was never really bored!
(does that make any sense to anyone?). Anyway, see it if you dig the actors,
otherwise, just wait for video, a medium on which this film will likely be much
better appreciated. 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Dog Day Afternoon (9/10) - Entrapment (6/10) - Reservoir Dogs (9/10) - Ronin
(8/10) - Small Time Crooks (7/10) - Snatch (7/10) - Swordfish (7/10) - Where the
Money Is (5/10)

Title
Review for Hedwig and the Angry Inch (2000)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A little boy born in East Germany (named Hansel) loves the American music. One
day, he gets the opportunity to meet and marry an American G.I., but first, he
must get a sex change (enter Hedwig). Once married, the two move to the States,
but quickly thereafter, get a divorce. At that point, Hedwig starts writing
music and meets another confused boy, who soon turns into a star. That boy also
turns his back on Hedwig, and it isn't long before Hedwig puts together his/her
own band and tours the States via seafood restaurants. This is the story of
his/her life, told via flashbacks and musical numbers.
CRITIQUE:
An artsy-fartsy musical with great songs and a superb performance by John
Cameron Mitchell, doesn't really come together as a whole, with over-the-top
symbolism, incoherence and too much pretension to retain my interest all the
whole way through. In fact, this isn't so much of a realistic, articulate,
behind-the-scenes look at the rise of a rock 'n roll star, as it is an
ambiguous, overly poetic and incomprehensible struggle of a man, his sexuality
and his identity as a whole person on this planet. I guess that I was expecting
the former going in. The film is somewhat interesting to a point, but I was
personally never able to involve myself too much, as the basic symbolic and
incongruent nature of the film left me feeling cold and distant. But it is
definitely tuned to a certain type of audience. Chances are that if you are a
fan of THE WALL, THE ROCKY HORROR PICTURE SHOW or even PRISCILLA, QUEEN OF THE
DESERT, the elements tangled in this movie will likely strike your fancy (some
of the characters in this film even ask the audience to sing along at some
point, and provide the lyrics of their song, on-screen).
Well, I personally don't care for those films, and didn't really get into the
whole "show" atmosphere of this movie either. I guess I might've looked at it
all too literally, but like I said earlier, I just didn't care enough about the
characters to delve into the "so the butterfly represents his freedom?" side of
things. All I know is that the film left me with many questions unanswered and
didn't make me feel any more fulfilled. What was Hedwig's relationship with that
other member of his band (with the beard)? What happened with Hedwig and Tommy
Gnosis at the end of the movie? (was that an actual sequence or a fantasy?) What
ever happened to the lawsuit? And more... All of which were part of the film and
interested me somewhat. If the only idea behind the film was for the main
character to uncover his/her sexuality, then that's one thing, but as many of
the relationships and situations presented themselves in this movie, I wanted
some resolution to those pieces as well. I didn't get it.
The film's humor also didn't tickle my funny bone either. Then again, I've seen
many a film in these art-house theatres in which patrons are rolling down the
aisles with laughter, while all I see is a tiny bit of whimsy on the screen.
Some of these films are also better enjoyed with the added "atmosphere" of a
plant called marijuana, and I can certainly see how this movie ingrains within
itself some nifty visual elements, in order to jazz up that experience. But
being sober as I was and expecting a coherent, funny, musical with a transsexual
twist, I didn't leave the theater very satisfied. I came out having watched an
existential story of a confused man caught up in a musical lifestyle, wrapped in
metaphors, dramatics and more questions than answers. I will, on the other hand,
definitely hand some props out to the lead in this film, John Cameron Mitchell,
who is also the man who wrote, directed and created the play on which this movie
is based, and the tunes, which will likely be enjoyed by anyone who digs The Sex
Pistols, David Bowie and the whole 70s glam-rock scene.
Note: BTW, it seems as though pretty much every single "mainstream" critic in
the United States loved this movie from top to bottom (and thought that it was
really funny to boot!), so you might want to take that into consideration
yourself. But having said that, the main reason that I started this dinky
website in the first place was because films like this would sometimes be
uniformly applauded by the "official" critics, while I, a regular "JoBlo" in the
audience, just wouldn't get what all the fuss was about. This movie is a perfect
example of why I continue to write movie reviews.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Moulin Rouge (8/10) - Grease (8/10) - Everyone Says I Love You (5/10) - The
Opposite of Sex (8/10) - Dancer in the Dark (5/10) - O Brother, Where Art Thou
(7/10) - Love's Labour's Lost (8/10)

Title
Review for Jeepers Creepers (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A brother and sister driving home through the countryside witness a man throwing
wrapped-up bodies down a chute. The two decide to go back and look into the
matter (don't ask!) and fall into a heap o' trouble. You bet!
CRITIQUE:
A definite step in the right direction in respect to the horror genre in films
today, but not without its own set of pitfalls. I really dug the first half of
this film. It was creepy, it was methodically paced yet filled with tension, it
reminded me of films like DUEL and THE TEXAS CHAINSAW MASSACRE and it placed the
audience into realistic situations with some damn scary thoughts. Unfortunately,
the second half of the film fell into the same ol' contrivances that have
plagued horror films from the beginning. We get the leads running out of gas,
having trouble starting their car, cops not believing their story, folks
standing around watching scary stuff go down when they should be running and
basically a lot of goofy decision-making on the part of the protagonists. And to
top it all off, they actually thought that it might be a good idea to toss a
psychic into the second half...that's right, you heard me correctly, a psychic!
Ugh. I hate when screenwriters take the "easy way" out and slap an all-knowing
character into these films, a person who comes into the story to explain the
entire thing to the audience and give the leads advice on what to do next and
tell us what is happening (don't you think we're a little smarter than that?).
This film didn't need that type of character, as its premise alone was a very
credible and scary one.
I mean, here are a couple of good ol' American kids driving through the
heartland and witnessing a creepy-looking man shoving, what appears to be, dead
human bodies down a drainpipe. Scary shit, right? Well, this film does an
excellent job of building up all of that tension early on and keeping the "bad
guy" hidden for the first half of the movie. You wonder what is going on, you
root for the two kids because you appreciate what they might be going through.
Credit director Salva for creating that extra-special strain in the film with
some interesting directing choices and an excellent score for even more creeps.
It's too bad that the second half of the film just doesn't pan out as well as
you might hope. I tend to lose interest in lead characters whenever they start
doing stupidities in horror flicks, like standing around watching when they
should be turning around and running! But there were also a couple of small plot
holes that bothered me here as well, like why the "bad guy" felt the need to
play songs when whacking out his victims (or making correlations to them) or why
he had a namesake license plate? I mean...did I miss something here?
But overall, the film was definitely a nice change of pace from all of the teen
slasher garbage that we've been getting of late, and I certainly appreciated its
"old school" mentality (no MTV soundtrack in sight!). So I would still recommend
that you check this movie out, just to see what will hopefully be the
continuation of more creepy, tension-filled horror movies (SESSION 9, THE
OTHERS, GINGER SNAPS). Oh yeah, and the final shot of this film is one that I
will remember forever. Brrrrrrrr...thank you Salva, for not going "Hollywood" on
us in the very end.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Blair Witch Project (4/10) - The Fly (8/10) - Ginger Snaps (8/10) - I Know
What You Did Last Summer (7/10) - I Still Know What You Did Last Summer (4/10) -
Urban Legend (4/10) - Urban Legends (3/10) - Valentine (3/10)

Title
Review for Ghosts of Mars (2001)
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
The year is 2176 and the planet Mars has been colonized. A bunch of cops are
sent to a village to pick up a killer from prison. Upon their arrival, they find
an empty town filled with decapitated corpses. It isn't long before they realize
that certain "ghosts" from the planet have arisen and are entering human bodies
in order to kill the others. From then on, it's the humans versus the
zombie-like ghost-goths fest!
CRITIQUE:
Do you like playing "Doom" or "Quake" on your computer? Do you like the loud
music...I mean, really loud music? Do you enjoy watching a zillion people get
mowed down by gunfire a la Schwarzenegger movies from the 80s? Do you wanna see
guys and girls get their limbs chopped off by sawblades and shit? Do you enjoy
the kitchiness of the blaxploitation movies from the 70s? Do you like Natasha
Henstridge and wanna see her in underwear and kickin' ass? Are you a fan of Ice
Cube and appreciate his corny one-liners? Have you ever wondered what would come
out if director John Carpenter decided to take elements from all of his previous
films and mix them all up into one (including THE THING, VAMPIRES, ESCAPE FROM
NY, etc...)? Would you like to see Pam Grier's head on a stick? Have you been
waiting for a "fun" Mars movie for some time? Do you believe in the concept of a
mindless movie, a "popcorn" flick created solely for your enjoyment in that
point in time and not expected to be taken any more seriously than that?
Well, if you answered "yes" to most of these questions, then you are likely an
ideal candidate to enjoy this cheesy picture. If you answered "no" to most of
these questions, this film is definitely not for you, please move on and thank
me for it later. I personally went into this movie with super-low expectations
and had a blast. I got into its slow start, appreciated its heavy score and
seriously had fun watching the loads, and I mean loads of killings, maimings and
beheadings in the film (all in the name of ghosts running rampant on Mars, of
course). Now are you supposed to take notes during a movie like this? Of course
not! It's an all-out gang-bang movie for the senses and I was running along side
the whole way. Of course, there are many actual elements of the movie that
aren't really "good". For example, I didn't like the "ghosts" at all. All they
seemed to do was scream and mope around like "Mad Max" rejects. I also didn't
like the over-use of flashbacks in the film, but did get used to them after a
while. I also thought that the whole town of Shining Canyon looked like a giant
movie set, didn't think that the premise was very original and noticed some
crappy CGI here and there, but I honestly didn't really mind it all that much
because I "got into" the cheesiness of it all. A special nod goes out to the
film's final scene which was especially cool.
This is not a "good" movie by the book definition of that word. This is the kind
of movie that you'll really dig when you're drunk with some buddies and just
wanna have a blast! There are no big words in this movie. The plot is very
simple. There are decapitations galore, blood galore and lots of people getting
killed as the good guys fight the bad. If any of that turns your dial, you're
barking up the right tree. If not, don't come crying to me afterwards. This
movie is cheesy, it's fun, it's loud and it's not trying to be 2001: A SPACE
ODYSSEY...it's low-grade entertainment and it works! At least according to me,
and God knows that I've enjoyed a handful of "bad movies" (according to others)
in the past (LAST ACTION HERO, BATTLEFIELD EARTH, HUDSON HAWK). So you've been
warned... ;)
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Battlefield Earth (7/10) - Fallen (7/10) - Lost Souls (7/10) - Mission to Mars
(3/10) - Pitch Black (7/10) - Red Planet (5/10) -The Thing (9/10) - Vampires
(7/10)

Title
Review for Curse of the Jade Scorpion, The (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
Before you read my review, you gotta know that I love Woody Allen. This is a
very important note because Allen's films are generally an acquired taste and
definitely not for everyone. I know folks who believe him to be a complete
genius, while others see him as a dirty ol' schnook who keeps making the same
movie over and over again. I love most of his films, but will admit to having
been quite disappointed by his recent crop during the 90s. In fact, why he felt
the need to make 10 movies in those 10 years is beyond me! If you look at the
quality of those films, you'll hear what I'm saying. The only two films of his
that I really liked during that time were BULLETS OVER BROADWAY and HUSBANDS AND
WIVES. In fact, I secretly hoped that he would take some "time off" at the turn
of the millennium, just to re-energize or something, but it doesn't appear as
though he has any intention of doing that. So here I am again, reviewing yet
another Woody Allen movie and hoping that it brings back the Woody from the days
of old.
PLOT:
The year is 1940 and Woody Allen is a top-notch insurance investigator. His
methods are very old-fashioned and apparently out of date. A new employee (Hunt)
has just been hired to streamline the operations for greater efficiency. The two
do not like each other. One night, they are both put under a hypnotic trance by
a magician, and unbeknownst to them, placed under his control. Soon thereafter,
jewels are stolen, words of love are exchanged and everyone is looking for an
answer. 
CRITIQUE:
A wonderful recreation of the 1940s style movies, with the fast-talking witty
banter between co-workers, a catchy jazz score moving things along, film noirish
elements such as the Veronica Lake-type sexpot, one-liners galore and a fluffy,
if inconsequential plotline. On the downside, the film actually starts off
pretty slowly, with the first hour tossing only a few guffaws out there, but
never really generating any kind of steady flow or energy. The sets, on the
other hand, were amazing, the production design and costumes were perfect, and
the casting ideal, so I kept hoping that the film would pick up and not turn
into yet another mediocre outing for the man. But it wasn't not long before I
was fully engaged by the characters, entertained by the many zingers delivered
back-and-forth between Allen and Hunt, and actually interested in the resolution
of the flick. I also appreciated how Allen played the fine line between homage
to the films of old, parody and actual reinvention (note Theron's entire female
persona that is drenched in film noir- very cool).
Of course, films like this (with little or no real tension in the plot) need
solid actors to keep you interested in the quick-fire dialogue, and once again,
Allen does a great job in playing his character, who for once, isn't his typical
New York Jewish neurotic cheating insecure husband dude. He actually plays a
"macho" guy here and handles it pretty well, especially the scenes in which he's
hypnotized. But the bigger surprise for me in this film was Helen Hunt, an
actress who I was openly "sick of seeing" in movies late last year (sorry babe,
you were just in too many at the same time!). Anyway, she's really great in this
film as the headstrong woman looking to a new era of equality amongst men, and
doesn't miss a beat of Allen's fast-paced dialogue. I didn't care much for her
running joke about him "dying" whenever he left a room, but overall she was
really good and I especially liked the way that her sweaters clung to her
breasts as they did...yum, yum! Harumph, but I digress. So let's recap. A great
looking picture with a nice jazzy score, some funny one-liners, especially in
the second half, a decent plotline, although you shouldn't expect a real mystery
or anything, and some solid acting all around.
I can't say that this is even remotely close to any of Allen's best work, but I
certainly believe it to be a step in the right direction, especially after the
dinky decade of films that he just went through. It's probably better geared
towards Allen fans more than anyone else, but I would still recommend this film
to anyone looking for a cute, "old-school" kind of vibe, with chemistry between
the leads, zippy dialogue and a satisfying conclusion.
Little Known Facts about this film and its stars:
Annie Hall (10/10) - Celebrity (5/10) - Everyone Says I Love You (5/10) -
Husbands and Wives (9/10) - Mighty Aphrodite (5/10) - Small Time Crooks (7/10) -
When Harry Met Sally (10/10) - You've Got Mail (4/10)

Title
Review for Atlantis: The Lost Empire (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A clumsy nerd with a lofty dream to find Atlantis, the lost continent, 
finally finds a believer in his cause, gets a crew and heads towards the 
unknown.
CRITIQUE:
Hmmmmm. Remember when Disney used to churn out animated greatness during 
the 1990s? Well, it appears as though those days are far behind us, as 
this film checks in with rather unimpressive features. First of all, 
this isn't a "kids" movie. This seems to be an animated movie created 
for adults, but one that doesn't completely click on either level. It's 
not a film that will bore anyone stupid, I mean, it does sprinkle a 
little bit of entertainment here and there, but once all is said and 
done, the only thing that I was left with was a nasty case of the 
ho-hums. Which is why I'm not recommending this film to anyone in the 
theatres (especially since the animation in the film is less than 
impressive), but might suggest that you check it out on video one day, 
if the topic interests you. Actually, much like its counterpart opening 
film this weekend, the missed opportunity that was TOMB RAIDER, this 
picture also lacked a certain "energy" about it. It wasn't all that 
funny, all that interesting, all that exciting or all that entertaining. 
Sure, the movie sets up an interesting premise, but why did it have to 
spend half an hour showing us how they all get to Atlantis? We already 
know that they're gonna end up there anyway, and since the development 
of the story up to that point isn't all that interesting (no real funny 
moments, little action, no real "bad guy", etc...), the film just helped 
me shrug my shoulders during its opening half.
They also set up all of these "quirky" side characters (all of whom 
seemed ideally picked to cover as many races/ethnicities sitting in the 
audience), but I really didn't think that any of them were all that 
humorous or interesting. Actually, I did like the "Italian" guy a 
little, he was pretty funny at times, but what was the deal with that 
Mole character? Talk about seeming "out of place" in a movie! Hmmmm, I 
don't know. This movie is definitely not the next SHREK. But to be fair 
to Disney, I guess this film wasn't really trying to be funny or reach 
for the "kids" audience either (at least, it didn't appear to be). I 
guess this film was more of a "serious animation" experiment, which for 
the most part, just didn't do it for me. None of the characters really 
stood out, the story was somewhat interesting, but not really all that 
engaging, and the animation, well...I'm sorry but there was practically 
nothing that was special about the animation in this film. It was quite 
rudimentary, to say the least.
But yeah, I did still appreciate the whole Atlantis "behind-the-scenes" 
stuff, dug the connection between the lead character and the chick from 
Atlantis, and did finally "get into" the movie during its final 15 
minutes or so (which concluded on a pretty touching moment and some cool 
action scenes). But overall, the film just didn't live up to all of the 
previous Disney animated movies, or any of the cooler, hipper 
computer-generated animated flicks that have rocked the box-office over 
the past couple of years. I don't know what it was exactly, but 
something was just missing from this movie. All in all, a 
disappointment.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Emperor's New Groove (8/10) - Hercules (6/10) - The Iron Giant 
(5/10) - Mulan (7/10) - The Road to El Dorado (7/10) - Shrek (8/10) - 
Titan A.E. (7/10) - Toy Story (7/10) - Toy Story 2 (8/10)

Title
Review for Legally Blonde (2001)
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A bubbly sorority girl who gets dumped by her boyfriend because he doesn't think
that she's "serious" enough in life, enrolls in Harvard Law School in an attempt
to win him back. Wow, you mean that she really is smart?!? The message: don't
judge a book by its cover, boys and girls.
CRITIQUE:
The best and only way to describe this movie is with one word and that word is
"cute". Reese Witherspoon is damn cute in this film, the plot is cute, the jokes
are cute, the dog is cute, the outfits are cute, some of the dialogue is cute,
the ending is cute (and a little cuddly) and nothing much in this film is meant
to have any more meaning than what you get out of this word, and that word again
is...yup, you guessed it: cute! But is the film trying to have a deeper meaning
than that? No, not really. This is obviously a remake of many rehashes of many
revisited films in which the main character tries to become something that
they're not (fish out of water, anyone?) and succeeds initially, but then falls
upon harder times later. Does that make the film any less interesting to watch?
No, not really. Does the fact that you could telegraph the entire plotline of
the film really matter in your overall, bottom line enjoyment of the picture?
Well, maybe a little bit, since the film doesn't really offer you many real
surprises, but you gotta give credit to the filmmakers for one thing which takes
this movie to the level of recommendation here and that is...the casting of one
Reese Witherspoon in the lead role! Damn, this girl's got it going on!!
Ryan Phillippe, if I ever meet you in the streets, allow me to shake your hand,
and not necessarily because you're a dude in your own right, but because your
lovely wife is...well, lovely, talented, beautiful, charming, infectiously
attractive and...an all-out movie star! Of course, she also plays this role
perfectly (which is tough, especially since Alicia Silverstone portrayed the
ideal goofy California girl in CLUELESS) and even managed to add another layer
to the cake. And what layer might that be, you're asking? The layer of
conviction, my friends. The layer of believability, intelligence and an actual
person living inside her phony-baloney exterior. I don't think that there's
anyone out in the crowd who will not feel sorry for Reese's character in this
film, especially when she breaks down in front of her boyfriend and says,
"Nothing I can do is ever going to make you love me, is there?" Or something
along those lines. The look in her eyes, the sadness in her face...damn girl,
c'mon over here and let me give you a hug!
Seriously though, I'm slobbering all over Reese here because she is honestly the
one and only reason to see this movie. Is the plot believable or innovative?
Eeeeeh, not really. Are the rest of the characters three-dimensional or
interesting? Eeeeh, not really. But Reese just pops out of the screen and begs
that you love her ditziness (which surprisingly, isn't all that ditzy...she's
actually very smart but just likes "acting" ditzy!) and for that, I would
recommend that you see this movie, especially if you're looking for a confidence
boost yourself (just set your mind to something, and you can do it!). By the
way, I'd also like to officially nominate this picture as the one with the
happiest ending of the year (as if you didn't expect it). So if you're not into
sugar, it goes without saying that you should just skip this sachran-coated
fluff-piece altogether.
PS: Can Ryan Phillippe sue me for harassing his wife from my review alone? Nah,
he couldn't, could he? Dang, I better check with my lawyers...
PSS: If there's even one review of this film out there that doesn't make mention
of the film CLUELESS, I will personally...well, I won't do shit, but needless to
say, it's undoubtedly gonna get compared by everyone!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
10 Things I Hate About You (7/10) - Billy Madison (7/10) - Clueless (7/10) -
Cruel Intentions (8/10) - Election (7/10) - Erin Brockovich (7/10) - Miss
Congeniality (7/10)

Title
Review for Hearts in Atlantis (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A strange old man comes to live in a small town with secrets from the past. He
befriends a young boy whose mom is extremely selfish, and offers him advice on
love, life and girls. But where does this man come from? What's with all the
mystery? Does this movie have any real point? Find out below...
CRITIQUE:
A movie which obviously means well, but doesn't really provide the needed
"oomph" to back up its mysterious build-up. Not the kind of movie that you
should watch when you're sleepy, that's fer sure (unless you wanna fall asleep,
of course). It moves at a slow pace, gives you hints of stuff here and there,
clues behind some of its vagueness but ultimately very little to sustain its
well-established ominous potential. You wait, you wait, you wait...and watch
Anthony Hopkins and Anton Yelchin develop an interesting relationship
throughout, watch as exquisite shots of nostalgia and youth pass before your
eyes, but there's always something telling you that there's gotta be more behind
all of this, a hint of spirituality, a lining of depth, a greater love or
something, but ultimately...well, it just never comes. The ending is too
"ho-hum" and doesn't give you anything more than what it is, which is basically
just a...coming-of-age story? I hoped that this movie would hit me emotionally,
hoped that it would have me wondering aloud, hoped that I might recognize
something in it, which I had never seen in any other movie before, but this film
just didn't provide any of that.
Basically, it was a disappointment. Sure, some of its elements were spot-on.
Hopkins was rock solid as the mystery man, the little boy was perfect and
delivered the goods in both his happy and sad moments, as did Mika Boorem as
Carol, his "girlfriend" in the day. The cinematography and the innocence of the
time were also captured idealistically and damn, if that wasn't one of the
grooviest soundtracks of the year (very Sinatra-esque). But the bottom line with
most films is their story and this one just didn't deliver. It also featured a
very one-dimensional mother character, whom we try to understand, but are given
no reasons to appreciate in any way. We also get an explanation as to Hopkins'
character at some point in the film, but when all is said and done, it doesn't
really seem to be that relevant to the picture as a whole. I mean, whether or
not he is what he is, has little to do with the major drive of the film, so why
build so much into it in the first place? I don't know, I guess what I'm saying
is that I don't think the director did a good job of balancing the different
elements here, and had my focus going one way, when really the film wasn't so
much about that, then it was something else (I'm trying not to spoil anything
here, so bear with my babbling). 
Of course, I'm more than willing to admit that perhaps I didn't "get" the
undertones in this movie, or that there was some kind of "deeper meaning" behind
it all, but the bottom line with the film is that it just didn't bring anything
new to the table, especially when placed against much greater and comparable
films like STAND BY ME (which was also based on a Stephen King story). Then
again, I didn't care for THE GREEN MILE either, and most folks seemed to like
that, so being in the same vein as that flick, you might want to check this one
out just the same, if you enjoyed the latter. Overall, this film provides for
solid acting, a fun soundtrack and wonderful atmosphere, but very little of
resonance or freshness.
And what the heck does HEARTS IN ATLANTIS mean, you might be asking? Well, other
than the fact that it reminds me of that mediocre Disney flick from this summer,
it's apparently something to do with youth and love, but I challenge you to
decipher that one when the film is done. It's a game in itself. 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Dead Zone (8/10) - The Gift (7/10) - The Green Mile (4/10) - Meet Joe Black
(6/10) - Shawshank Redemption (9/10) - The Sixth Sense (8/10) - Stand by Me
(8/10) - Unbreakable (9/10)

Title
Review for Baby Boy (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A big-time momma's boy can't seem to leave his mother's crib and make 
good on the babies that he himself has produced in the world. He visits 
his kids (and their mommas) every now and then, but his main goal in 
life is...well, he doesn't have any goals. Then one day, his mother gets 
an ex-gangsta boyfriend and suddenly he isn't as welcome anymore in his 
own house. It isn't long after that, that his girlfriends start 
realizing what a jerk he really is and well...it's either time to grow 
up or bow down!
CRITIQUE:
First things first! This movie ain't about the "hood" at all, it's an 
intelligent film about love, relationships, family, friendship, maturity 
and growing up. Do not avoid this film because you think it's about 
gangbangers and stuff, because it isn't at all. It's about you, it's 
about me, it's about your girlfriend, your mother, your problems and 
your inability to face up to your responsibilities and to, well...grow 
up! This is an extremely well-written film, with some of the most 
developed characters that I've seen on the screen all year, with superb 
acting performances to match. Granted, the film does start a little slow 
(and go a little long), but hang in there, because once you appreciate 
and get to know all of its characters, you will be glad that you did. 
This isn't a kid's movie. This is about the step that you need to take 
in order to pass into full "adulthood" and some might not appreciate the 
grander theme behind that step. I certainly did, because I too passed, 
and am passing, through many of these very same things right now (yeah, 
yeah, I still live with my momma!!) and related to a lot of the events 
that went down in this flick (oh yeah, and for the record, I'm not black 
but that made absolutely zero difference in this case).
But that's not even half the story. You see, the film is damn funny, 
too...and I mean, damn funny! I was crackin' up at almost every other 
scene, and they weren't "set-up jokes" like your typical comedies 
either, just day-to-day things that we could all relate to (like the 
scene in which Ving Rhames is "drinking Koolaid" in the kitchen and his 
infamously improvised "African Squat F**k" scene, which you just gotta 
see to believe!) And there are the performances, too. Ving Rhames, now 
here's a man who has already established an early lead in the race for 
best supporting actor at the end of this year. Damn dude, you scared the 
shit outta me! Tyrese Gibson, I have no idea where this guy came from 
(an R&B singer and MTV VJ, you say...hmmmm?), but other than his uncanny 
resemblance to Taye Diggs, he nailed this part to the tee. From scene 
one on, I was glued to his performance and sympathized with his 
character as he molded and shaped himself into the person that he hoped 
to become one day. And everyone else, too. Gibson's girlfriend in the 
film, Taraji Henson, made me a backer with her many subtle touches, all 
of which helped raise her character several levels above the "typical" 
bitchie girlfriend that we've seen in many of these relationship movies.
But that's the thing that I liked the most about this movie. Everyone 
seemed real, the situations felt authentic, the characters all came 
across as people like you and me with issues and struggles and hopes and 
fears. I liked this movie a lot because it was masterfully written, 
wonderfully acted and genuinely entertaining to watch. And yeah, I even 
liked the whole homage to BOYZ 'N THE HOOD that Singleton pulled off in 
the end (he called this movie a "companion piece" to that film). A very 
solid follow-up to an ever greater original, BABY BOY is a film to be 
seen by anyone who feels like they never wanna grow up.
Note: The guy who plays Jody's best friend in this movie is Omar 
Gooding, Cuba Gooding Jr.'s younger brother (Cuba starred in 1991's BOYZ 
'N THE HOOD).
Where's JoBlo coming from?
The Best Man (8/10) - Brothers (5/10) - Shaft (7/10) - Summer of Sam 
(7/10) - What's Cooking (7/10)

Title
Review for America's Sweethearts (2001)
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A separated, glamorous, Hollywood couple must pretend to reunite for a press
junket of the last movie that they ever shot together. Kewl...now I only wish
that I could pretend never to have seen this movie...
CRITIQUE:
Trite, unfunny, boring and a waste of everyone's talent. How a premise with such
zest and bite can turn into a movie that doesn't feature any chemistry, any real
laughs, any surprises or any spice is beyond me. How Julia Roberts is used
solely as a "puppy dog" character, puttering around in the background while we
endure the complete bitchiness of Zeta-Jones' character, who is not one bit
funny or romantic (two ideal ingredients in a "romantic comedy"), is also beyond
me. And why they chose John Cusack, a great, quirky actor in his own right, to
play the most bland, uninteresting and unfetching character (with zero chemistry
with either of his leads) is further more, beyond me. And to anybody who decided
that this project was "funny" enough to greenlight featuring the talents
mentioned above, along with Billy Crystal, Christopher Walker, Seth Green and
Stanley Tucci...well, what can I say...I just don't have the words. So is this
the worst movie that I've seen all year? No. But it definitely sucks and it's
basically because...well, it's just not funny. And for the record, allow me to
state a few more problems with it. It starts off slow, it's got no energy, it
doesn't engage you with any of its characters (Julia barely gets somewhat
interesting in the film, everyone else...lame!), it utilizes way too many
flashbacks to move the story forward, it's utterly predictable, standard,
routine, see-through and uninteresting as a plot and it just sits there on the
screen, big and ugly, waiting...waiting for you to laugh or find something in it
that is amusing.
And then Hank Azaria shows up...aaaaaah, the film's savior (mind you, some might
be offended by his exaggeration of a stereotype, but that's another story
altogether). But when an experienced "voice" actor upstages all of the main
stars in a summer "blockbuster" romantic comedy with an over-the-top Antonio
Banderas accent, damn dude...your film's in trouble!! Rent this movie on video
just to see what went wrong yourself. The references to Ricky Ricardo and Senor
Wences (huh!?), the idio-plot points like when one of the characters goes on the
roof to stretch his arms out and relax, but everyone believes that he's going to
kill himself (hardy-har-har) and the cheap way of getting the audience to leave
the theater laughing by bringing back a ball-sniffing dog that has no place
being in the location at the end of the movie, well...I could go on. But I won't
because I do still respect all of the actors in this film and actually did laugh
at Azaria, Green and Tucci's antics from time to time (ironic, eh...what about
the leads, dammit!) and liked the premise behind the film (before I saw the
finished product, of course). A dud all the way around.
BTW, all the talk about this film was that Julia Roberts was to be in a fat suit
for one scene (her character is supposed to have lost 60 pounds), so when the
scene finally came, I did get a little excited about what it might look like and
then...well, it basically just looked like Julia Roberts in a fat suit! Ugh. I
think I'm gonna start drinking again after this lame-ass movie. C'mon Hollywood,
enough with the crud!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Beautiful (1/10) - My Best Friend's Wedding (7/10) - Notting Hill (5/10) -
Pretty Woman (7/10) -Runaway Bride (5/10) - Someone Like You (4/10) - Wedding
Planner (3/10) - When Harry Met Sally (10/10) - You've Got Mail (4/10)

Title
Review for Scary Movie 2 (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Something about a bunch of kids going into a haunted house and playing 
out parodies of other horror and non-horror movies. Oh yeah, there's 
also something about a ghost possessing the mansion and shit, but trust 
me, you won't care much about the "plot" in this film...
CRITIQUE:
Parody movies either work or they don't and this one just doesn't work! 
The laughs aren't as pronounced this time around, the energy level, the 
gags and all of the characters just seem to be going through the motions 
here. It's like they were all in a hurry to finish the film or something 
(wink, wink). And the scariest part of it all? Check out the number of 
screenwriters it took to pen this puppy: seven! I say again, it took 
seven people to write 82-minutes worth of fart jokes, half-assed stunts 
and spoofs of films other than horror. Now I'm not exactly sure if each 
of the writers wrote their own parts separately or just tossed "funny 
sketch" ideas out there while smoking the chronic themselves, but the 
end result is a film that basically plays out like an extended skit on 
"Saturday Night Live". There are a couple of funny one-liners, but 
mostly just rehashed one-joke scenes, a lot of dead silence and lame 
gags. Add to that the very unoriginal title and movie poster and you 
gotta start asking yourself if anybody was even trying here (the film's 
website isn't even up yet!!! What the f***?!?). I do however have to 
give it up to James Woods, the man who opens up this movie with the 
funniest parody of them all (the EXORCIST take-off-- miss this and 
you've missed any reason to see the flick). I especially liked his 
one-liner as he walked in to see the possessed woman's head turning. 
Very funny!
Unfortunately, the film plummets straight down after that, with dumb 
parodies of many teen flicks that have nothing to do with horror such as 
SAVE THE LAST DANCE and DUDE, WHERE'S MY CAR, and other action movies 
like CHARLIE'S ANGELS and MISSION IMPOSSIBLE 2. Now help me figure this 
one out, will you? Isn't this supposed to be a parody film of HORROR 
MOVIES?!? (or maybe that's just the title of the film F-ing with my 
head). Well, I'm sorry to have to say this but the only horror in this 
film is its lame-ass script! The Wayans brothers should have known 
better than to look towards the Weinstein brothers (money) instead of 
the Zucker brothers (comedy) for this sequel. Unfortunately for us, all 
we're left with here is a skeleton of a film which might've been funny, 
had it been worked over a few more times, tightened up here and there, 
and been injected with more solid laughs. But as things stand now, there 
is no doubt in my mind that the obvious greed to capitalize on the 
success of last year's film has led everyone down this path, so screw 
them for not trying as hard (critically speaking, of course). You should 
all be ashamed of yourselves for not putting enough "real" effort into 
this chop-job and for not providing your fans with the ultimate of your 
talents. Pooh on you! (That's telling 'em, JoBlo! Sheesh)
BTW, I'm allotting one point alone to actress Kathleen Robertson, whose 
massive breasts and skanky g-string had me chompin' at the bit. You go, 
girl! Everyone else...stay!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Airplane (10/10) - Airplane II (10/10) - Galaxy Quest (8/10) - Hannibal 
(7/10) - The Haunting (3/10) - Mafia (5/10) - Naked Gun (8/10) - Scary 
Movie (8/10) - Top Secret (9/10)

Title
Review for Rush Hour 2 (2001)
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
They're baaaaaack! Only this time the American loudmouth police officer is in
the ass-kicking Chinese police officer's backyard, Hong Kong. There are some bad
guys, lotsa fights, lotsa jokes and that's pretty much all you need to know.
Have a blast!
CRITIQUE:
First things first...do you think that Chris Tucker is a funny guy? If the
answer to that question is a resounding "no", then don't even bother reading the
rest of this review or seeing this movie because you seriously gotta appreciate
the man's humor if you're going to see this movie in the first place. Alright,
now as for the rest of you, be prepared to have yourselves a b-b-blast with this
picture, as Tucker goes gonzo with his motormouth and doesn't shut up until
you're pissing all over yourself in the aisles. Talk about a "laugh a minute"
movie! Ironically, I went into this picture thinking that its best jokes were in
the trailer, but five minutes into this puppy, I knew that I was in for an
all-around good time. But don't you dare go in expecting originality, dramatic
entanglements or emotional attachments to the characters, because that ain't
what this movie's about.
It's actually one of the "easiest" movies that I've had to watch all year, one
that left me beaming when I left the theater (especially since the outtakes are
almost as funny and cool as the film itself) and still smiling when I thought
back to some of Tucker's one-liners (some of his facial expressions alone
cracked me up!). The film is basically this: Tucker makes jokes, Chan kicks ass,
Ziyi Zhang looks great...repeat...Tucker makes jokes, Chan kicks, Ziyi Zhang
looks great. So if you liked the first film, I see no reason why you wouldn't
enjoy this round of fluff either. They've even slapped some different locations
in this one like Hong Kong and Vegas, and a nifty little cameo by the way of Don
Cheadle (kung-fu master!). The film also flies by at a quick 90 minutes and
rarely slows down to take a break. So as long as you don't go in expecting to
save the world when you come out, you will surely be entertained, especially if
you dig on Tucker's humor because he is all over this one! Damn dude, I started
clapping all by myself at some point...wtf?! Fun shtuff!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Black and White (3/10) - Blue Streak (2/10) - Chill Factor (2/10) - Die Hard
(9/10) - Lethal Weapon (8/10) - Lethal Weapon 4 (7/10) - Rush Hour (7/10) -
Shanghai Noon (6/10)

Title
Review for O (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Odin is a great high school basketball player. He's dating a hot girl and the
coach loves his ass. In fact, the coach even admits to having fatherly feelings
towards him. Unfortunately, the coach's real son, Hugo, isn't too pleased to
hear that. In fact, he doesn't like hearing about any of Odin's triumphs, as
they generally supersede his own. So what does he set out to do? Well, let's
just say that he starts to mess with people's heads and one thing leads to
another thing which leads to...well, you'll see.
CRITIQUE:
A very powerful, thoroughly depressing, well-acted "non-teen" movie starring a
bunch of teens. Credit director Tim Blake Nelson for creating a modern day
version of this Shakespearian classic, set in a realistic high school
environment, with the basketball championships as the backdrop and an impending
sense of doom as it core. You also have to give it up to all of the actors in
this film, who turn over some very convincing performances, taking you through
all of their characters' ups and downs. Hartnett especially should be applauded
for taking on such a despicable character, a dude who you just want to grab by
the throat and beat the shit out of (sign of a good actor, if you ask me).
Phifer also comes to play in this movie, with a nice blend of charisma, fear,
love and anger spread over his character. I was always on this guy's side and
definitely felt sorry for him as things moved along. Julia Stiles was also good,
but her character wasn't much different from others that she's played recently.
I was however very surprised with Martin Sheen's showing, since I hadn't taken
him too seriously as an actor over the past few years. His character is
definitely over-the-top in this film, but I appreciated his fervor, his rage,
his ultimate and blind desire to win above all. A great example of a workaholic
man who cannot see the trees from the forest.
I did have a few reservations about the movie though. First of all, what was
with all of the gangsta hip-hop music used in pretty much every other scene
transition? It was cute at first, but became a little too obvious and annoying
after a few times. The film was also edited pretty choppily...like some scenes
were cut out and no one "cleaned it up" afterwards. I also didn't like the fact
that Hartnett's character, the man behind much of the nastiness that goes down
in this film, was infallible. In other words, pretty much everything he says or
asks of someone, happens automatically and without any goofups. I mean, I know
the guy is smart and all, but I would have appreciated a little more "realism"
under some of the circumstances. But overall, the movie will devastate you. It's
not a "fun date movie". It's not a movie about the high school basketball team
and how its black star falls for the white girl from the other side of the
tracks. It's about jealousy, love, envy, fury, passion, revenge and pretty much
any other negative thought that's ever passed through your head. Is it worth
seeing? Oh, most definitely! (pun intended) It's a moving picture with great
performances, no Shakespearian speak (thank you, God!) and an outstanding
directorial job by Nelson. The final scene alone is enough to send a massive
chill down your spine, and I was especially impressed with the director's choice
of music near the end. In fact, the whole sequence was quite reminiscent of the
final showdown scene from TAXI DRIVER, and I guess that's saying something right
there.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
10 Things I Hate About You (7/10) - Election (7/10) - Hamlet (6/10) - Love's
Labor's Lost (8/10) - Natural Born Killers (9/10) - Save the Last Dance (7/10) -
Shakespeare in Love (5/10)

Title
Review for Hardball (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
First of all, forget the trailer for this movie, because this is not, and I
repeat, not a "kid's movie" or a "comedy" for that matter. It has a few elements
of both but most of all, it's about one adult character's journey to recovery.
There's swearing in the film, violence and the main character smokes like a
chimney, drinks like a fish and gambles like there's no tomorrow. Definitely not
a Saturday afternoon flick for the children.
PLOT:
A gambling man who drinks too much is stuck between a rock and a hard place. He
owes money all over town, and the only way that he could pay his debts back is
by coaching an inner-city kid's baseball team. He reluctantly agrees to do it,
but ultimately cannot fight his own demons and must come to grips with what he
wants for his own life.
CRITIQUE:
Every other year, there seems to be a film that comes out of left field for me
(pun intended). A movie that makes me forget about all of the more reasonable
points on which to appreciate a film on a more "technical" level, and just goes
for the heart. Well, I am human after all and every now and then, a soft spot is
gonna be touched, and as much as REMEMBER THE TITANS was mostly unoriginal and
predictable last year, HARDBALL goes through much of the same material that
we've seen before here, but still manages to work as an all-around successful
movie with its heart so obviously in the right place. Is it sappy? Yes! Is it
predictable? Yes! Does it matter? No. This is the kind of movie that either
pulls you into its web or doesn't. It's a very simple premise (a lost man
looking for a way out of his gambling debts), but it plays all of its cards just
right. The main character in this film, Keanu Reeves, isn't a "nice guy". He
doesn't start off as a nice guy, and even when given the opportunity to redeem
himself, doesn't quickly turn into a nice guy overnight. He has problems in his
life...many problems. He gambles too much, drinks too much and doesn't really
have any goals. But it isn't long before he's confronted with many of the
lessons of life, which most of us already know, but seem to take for granted.
Live for the day. Cherish your loved ones. Create a meaning for yourself. Don't
give up on your dreams. Cliches to be sure, but also very true. Reeves'
character spends a lot of time with underprivileged children in this movie, and
ultimately begins to see the harsh reality of their lives and the tough nature
of being brought up under less groomed conditions. Basically, he gets a second
chance in his own life.
The "projects" shown in this film are a place that would scare the crap out of
any living adult, and sadly, many children live and breathe there every day. I
liked this movie because it gave me my own slap across the face. Life could be
much worse. There are a lot of people who need help out there. Giving back to
the community is important. Life is never perfect, but you can always try and
improve yourself. I also appreciated the superb work done here by the
filmmakers, since the story is essentially one that we've seen a number of times
before, but it's made more relevant here, there's comedy mixed into the drama
and Reeves is given the opportunity to utilize his restrained acting demeanor to
draw us further into his character's inner-struggles (you never really know
where he's coming from or going). But even more importantly, they should all be
commended for pulling off one of the most difficult tasks in the movie biz and
that is the fine line between films that are super-sappy and effectively
poignant.
I was touched by this film and hope to bring some attention to it with this
review. Alright, so maybe I was having an "off-day" or something, but it grabbed
me by the heart-strings and played me like a fool, and this is a very rare
occurrence indeed. By the end of this puppy, I was tearing up like a diapered
child myself. Very odd. So if you enjoyed REMEMBER THE TITANS and don't mind
sitting through a fairly predictable movie with a sound message of hope,
redemption, faith and second chances, I suspect that you will be taken by this
film as well. And the fact that it's all based on a true story (and a book
entitled "Hardball: A Season in the Projects" by Daniel Coyle) makes it all that
much more effective.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Any Given Sunday (7/10) - Baseketball (6/10) - Family Man (8/10) - For the Love
of the Game (7/10) - Mystery, Alaska (8/10) - Remember the Titans (7/10) - The
Replacements (6/10) - Sweet November (6/10) - Varsity Blues (7/10)

Title
Review for Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within (2001)
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Set in a post-apocalyptic future, our planet has been invaded by phantom aliens.
Few humans remain, but a handful of them actually believe that they can survive
the invasion and reclaim the planet as their own. 
CRITIQUE:
Despite some pretty stunning human-looking computer generated characters,
imagery and action sequences, this film's bleak and murky vision, and somewhat
incomprehensible spiritual mumbo-jumbo storyline, just didn't do it for me. And
before any of you "gamers" knock my ass upside down, please note that I have
never played or seen the "game" version of FINAL FANTASY, so I'm basing my
review entirely upon what I saw on the big screen and nothing else. Anyway, back
to what I was saying...basically, the biggest problem that I had with this movie
wasn't the fact that it was produced entirely by computers (human characters et
al), but that I just didn't care all that much about any of the people in the
film, and even more importantly, that I didn't really care about any of the
gibberish that they kept babbling about ("we must find the 7th spirit in order
to..."). Although that might just be a personal thing with me. I know that a lot
of people enjoy these types of themes in movies, but to me, they get a little
annoying, especially when they're made even more complicated than they need to
be. For example, I'm not entirely sure that I understood what went down at the
end of this film, and that's never cool. But enough about my non-appreciation
for the story line, let's talk about what everyone should be talking about with
this film and those are its visuals!
I have to admit that most of this movie's computer-generated images looked great
on the big screen and were perfect for the world created within the script.
Unfortunately, the characters couldn't help but look computer-animated from time
to time, and that usually took me "out of it" for a while. I also had some
problems with the recognizable voices on some of the characters, like Alec
Baldwin's voice on a young man (who looked like Ben Affleck!), Steve Buscemi's
on a good-looking funnyman and James Woods. I really think that I would have
gotten more into these characters, had they used non-movie star voices (as the
lead character Aki, who was also the most developed character). On the whole,
the dialogue wasn't bad and the speech-to-mouth synching either (I'd heard
horror stories on both), but I have to admit that despite my general
appreciation for "darker" movies, I was really quite depressed by the end of
this flick. I mean, why doesn't anybody smile in this movie? There were a few
jokes here and there (thank God!), but on the whole, the entire vision,
storyline and demeanor of the characters was just very, very gloomy.
So I guess that I'm about half-and-half on this movie. I dug most of its amazing
visuals, appreciated the action scenes and some of the real-life qualities of
the characters (the old man with the beard looked life-life in almost every
scene...very impressive), but didn't get into the story about the spirits
invading earth, felt pulled out of the picture from time to time, whenever I
noticed the "computerness" of it all, and definitely didn't buy into any of its
"emotional" scenes (real-life actors needn't worry about computers replacing
them just yet, these actors didn't deliver the goods in any of their "money"
scenes). But on the whole, I do still admire the ambitiousness of this project,
respect its vision and certainly look forward to more ground-breaking stuff like
this in the future. But as a movie...well, it just didn't entertain me all that
much. Wait for the DVD. 
Where's JoBlo coming from?
A.I. (8/10) - Alien (9/10) - Aliens (10/10) - The Arrival (8/10) - Battlefield
Earth (7/10) - The Cell (8/10) - Dark City (9/10) - Mission to Mars (3/10) -
Titan A.E. (7/10) - Virus (5/10) - The X-Files (7/10)

Title
Review for Gangster No. 1 (2000)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A young recruit gets plucked out of nowhere by the number one gangster in London
and quickly becomes a staple by his side. But this new guy is not like all the
others, he's got ambition, he's got goals and he loves everything he sees about
being the number one gangster. Violence, lots of swearing and betrayals ensue.
CRITIQUE:
A very good, serious-minded, unique British gangster flick which misses the
"great" mark by way of an annoying voice-over popping up throughout the film and
a so-so ending. Here's yet another cool crime movie that actually manages to
bring something new into the mix. Okay, so it's not entirely new, but it's
definitely original when all put together as done here. The thing I liked most
about this movie was its authentic portrayal of the time period in which it was
taking place. It's 1968 and these dudes are looking good! Yes, it's all about
the suits, fellas...the Italian shoes, the cufflinks, the ties and the birds
(that's ladies, for those uninitiated) hanging around you. Here are a bunch of
horrible men, gangsters if you will, looking sharp, talking shit and busting
heads all over the place. But that's not the basis of this movie. The basis of
this film comes in the relationship between the number one gangster in the
group, the excellent David Thewlis, and one of his cronies, Paul Bettany, also
extremely good in this film, and how the power, sex appeal and coolness of one,
affects the other.
You know how there are always these "hanger-on" gangster types who latch on to
the godfathers, the leaders, the top dogs of every crime organization? Well,
most of the time, these dudes are screened beforehand and are loyal to only one
person...that is, their boss. So all the gangster number one needs to worry
about is his enemies on the other side of the fence. But this film brings the
betrayals, the messed up loyalties, the honor codes among bad guys into play
within the same group and presents it in quite the stylistic package. Of course,
director Paul McGuigan isn't trying to be Guy Ritchie here, and doesn't
over-stylize his presentation, jazz it all up with a hip soundtrack or add any
humor to the mix. Nope, he goes straight for the serious stuff and develops at
least two particular scenes which are still embedded in my mind as I type this.
The first is a confrontation sequence between Bettany and a man from which he's
attempting to sway some information and it is downright nasty! ("Look into my
eyes!") In fact, the last time that I've seen a guy so scared in a movie was
John Turturro in that forest scene from the Coen brothers' MILLER'S CROSSING.
Scary shite. But there's an ever better scene than that in this film. This one
features Bettany, once again, slowly torturing, hacking and beating the living
piss out of a rival gangster (from that man's point-of-view), but not before
turning on a quaint little tune in the background and removing all of his own
expensive clothes, one by one (that's right, he "does" the guy in his
underwear). That scene is also in tune with some of the obvious phallic and
homoerotic undertones present throughout this film, especially in the
relationship between Bettany and his boss (why does he get so upset when he
falls in love with that woman?).
But the flick's not perfect. In fact, I didn't mind Malcolm McDowell's
voice-over narration at first, but as the film grew into a major flashback (most
of the film is presented as such), he came in every now and then, and rarely
added anything of interest to the plot. All he seemed to do was swear and call
people the c-word umpteen times, and even described one scene as it was
happening ("...so I opened the door, then went up the lift, etc...."-it's like,
yeah, I know that already, I could see it on the screen!! Overdone.). I also
didn't quite "buy" the ending of the movie, which despite being original, seemed
a little unbelievable, especially when you consider that it's supposed to be
taking place 30 years later, and folks still seem to be holding grudges, still
in love, still living in the same apartments??!? I mean, c'mon...it's 30 years,
man!! I don't know, somehow it didn't work all that well for me. But one of my
favorite genres has always been the crime movies, and this one is a decent
addition to the lot. Forget the lame title and Malcolm McDowell's narration of
the obvious plot points, and concentrate on the film's stronger attributes such
as its style, the exquisite atmosphere of the time period, its original look at
the gangster dynamic within the same group, its memorable sequences and the
solid performances from its two main leads, Bettany and Thewlis. Incidentally,
unlike a few of the gangster flicks that I mention below, this one is in no way
a parody or homage to this genre of films...it's the real deal!
Note: This film is packed with strong accents all around, which makes it hard to
make out some of the words from time to time. It's also quite violent and I
don't remember any film that used the c-word as much as this one, so leave the
kids at home for this one... ;)
Where's JoBlo coming from?
American Psycho (10/10) - A Clockwork Orange (9/10) - Donnie Brasco (8/10) -
Fight Club (10/10) - Get Carter (7/10) - Godfather (10/10) - Godfather II
(10/10) - Goodfellas (10/10) - Lock, Stock & Two Smoking Barrels (8/10) - Pulp
Fiction (8/10) - Reservoir Dogs (9/10)

Title
Review for Kiss of the Dragon (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
For our Jet Li interview, visit http://www.joblo.com/interviewli.htm
For our Bridget Fonda interview, visit 
http://www.joblo.com/interviewfonda.htm
PLOT:
Jet Li is a Chinese cop asked to help some French policemen nab a bad 
guy. But one thing leads to another, and the next thing you know, Li's 
being chased by the same French cops with whom he was supposed to be 
working. A lot of ass-kicking, face-whippings, gun fights and...okay, a 
little more ass-kicking ensues.
CRITIQUE:
Very cool! Now here's a movie that gives you exactly what you're looking 
for, if what you're looking for is kickass action, a palpable good 
cop/bad cop story line, some hardcore stunts and Jet Li slam-dunking 
everyone in sight! The film also moves fast (a mere 95 minutes), 
develops a certain "cute" chemistry between Fonda and Li, has nice 
surroundings (Paris, baby!) and gives us one of the best bad guys that 
I've seen all year. Tcheky Karyo is the devil incarnate in this film. He 
is pure evil. They should have called this movie BAD LIEUTENANT 2 as 
Keitel has nothing on this man. What a great, great monster! My favorite 
line of Tcheky's was when Li was explaining the whole "kiss of the 
dragon" thing to him and he cut him off by saying "kiss my ass!" Pure 
action movie poetry. Anyway, other than him, Jet Li also handled his 
"acting" pretty well in this film, with very little real dialogue to 
say, but enough to make us believe his character. Actually, just looking 
into the man's eyes generally tells you a lot. Fonda was also pretty 
good, despite playing one of the most trashy and abused women that I 
have seen in quite some time, but I still felt kinda bad for her, so I 
guess she did her job okay.
But in the end, nobody goes to see this kind of movie for Oscar 
performances. We go to see Jet Li movies because we want to see Jet Li 
kicking a lot of ass from side to side, and this film delivers 
gangbusters on that front. And yes...they have no wire-fu in this 
movie...I say again...no wire-work, no bullshit stunts with Li floating 
around in mid-air for over a minute. It's all straight action, fist to 
fist, boot to face and all around cool stunts. If that's what you're 
looking for, I don't see how you will be disappointed with this film. 
Yes, it's not very original in plot (just take Luc Besson's own LA FEMME 
NIKITA and mix in plenty of his own THE PROFESSIONAL et voila!), does 
have an annoying hip-hoppy soundtrack that just got on my nerves after a 
while (I also would have gotten rid of the whole acupuncture thang...) 
and will have anyone not willing to restrain their disbelief, rolling 
their eyes all over the place. But was I entertained? Thoroughly. Does 
the film feature more gunplay, martial arts and over-the-top kills that 
most recent action flicks? Yes, again. Does this sound interesting to 
you? Well, the answer to that question is entirely up to you. One thing 
that I would definitely recommend is, as Jet Li pointed out himself on 
his website, that you leave the kids at home for this one. In fact, you 
might even wanna leave yourself if you can't handle the more violent of 
sequences. All in all, a rippin', roarin' fun time!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Black Mask (5/10) - Blade (7/10) - La Femme Nikita (8/10) - Lethal 
Weapon 4 (7/10) - The Matrix (8/10) - The Professional (9/10) - Romeo 
Must Die (3/10) - Rush Hour (7/10) - Shanghai Noon (6/10)

Title
Review for Lara Croft: Tomb Raider (2001)
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Lara Croft is British, rich and kicks a lot of ass. She also likes to 
raid tombs but when the Illuminata discover that all nine planets are 
about to stand in alignment for the first time in 5000 years, and that 
Lara holds the key to time, well, needless to say, they want to nab it 
from her. Oh yeah, Lara also likes to sport a lot of tight 
shirts...hummana-hummana-hummana...
CRITIQUE:
Angelina Jolie was great in this movie. There were also about three 
"action scenes" that were pretty cool to look at in this film. Uhhhhhm, 
unfortunately the rest of the movie sucked! Bad dialogue, generic 
sidekicks and bad guys, a lame mystery, Yoda-esque moments with 
mumbo-jumbo being sprouted about and even some crappy CGI near the end. 
All in all, this movie wasn't the horror show that some of the early 
reviews had warned us about, especially since every other scene does 
feature Jolie's torpedoes begging to burst out of her lucky shirts, but 
it was quite the letdown nonetheless, especially when you consider the 
major opportunity that the filmmakers had here to create a cool, hip 
woman hero, based on a popular video game. I don't know, I guess you 
have to put most of the blame on director Simon West, who didn't really 
tie the whole movie together all that well. The film lacked energy, a 
consistent pace and well...a fun time! I felt kinda depressed while 
watching this movie. All that "father" crap was horrible and the 
dialogue given to poor John Voight to recite was just plain embarrassing 
(and I'm not even gonna mention his moustache...hehehe). Why have this 
shite in the movie at all?!?
I especially hated the scenes in which some ghost-like figure, friend or 
child would ramble on about Lara Croft's father while all the time, I'm 
not giving one ounce of crap as to what they're talking about. I guess 
that's called lack of "character development", right? That's when a 
movie builds enough background into the characters on the screen, so 
that we could actually "get into" it and care about them. I didn't care 
about anyone in this movie, and was bored during most of its "let's 
explain why we're doing all this gobbledygook" moments. And even though 
I thought that Jolie kicked some mighty ass (damn, did she look sexy 
blasting those guns or what?!?), everybody else around her was so 
goddamn boring! Her butler was a throwaway with no personality, her 
side-kick was supposed to be funny but just annoyed me every time he 
said the word "bugger" (and he says it a lot, trust me!) and all of the 
so-called bad guys just spewed one-dimension! They had no spark, no 
energy amongst them, and even though a few of the action scenes in the 
movie were cool (see the trailer and you'll know which ones I'm talking 
about), the overall picture was lame and the dialogue and mystical 
bull-crap just buried it even further.
Also, for a movie that's supposed to be about all of these exotic 
locations, I wasn't necessarily impressed by any of its exterior shots, 
and even less so with its interiors, which all looked like they were 
shot in the same room. Mind you, I won't go as far as to say that it's 
the "worst movie of the year" (remember that I actually have to go see 
Freddie Prinze Jr. movies also!), but it's definitely the worst film 
that I've seen during this summer movie season (of course, it's still 
early and I'm sure there are a few more garbage heaps coming down the 
pike). Skip this one altogether and rent any of the INDIANA JONES movies 
instead...trust me, you'll miss the boobs but end your night with some 
rock-solid porn and it's all good!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Raiders of the Lost Ark (10/10) - The Mummy (8/10) - Lost in Space 
(7/10) - The Mummy Returns (6/10) - The General's Daughter (3/10) - 
Romancing the Stone (7/10) - Wild Wild West (3/10) - Mission Impossible 
2 (7/10)

Title
Review for Made (2001)
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Two down-on-their-luck boxers get an opportunity to repay a debt to a gangster
by doing him a favor in New York City. As it turns out, one of them is a goof,
while the other likes to play things serious, and it isn't long before things go
awry and the boys run into even more trouble.
CRITIQUE:
Yikes...talk about a disappointment! This was actually one of the films that I
had been looking forward to the most all year, seeing as SWINGERS, the original
movie starring Jon Favreau and Vince Vaughn, is one of my favorite films of
all-time. So there I was, sitting in the theatre, seeing the two boys straddle
their way into another "hip" movie together, but wow...what a letdown. Very few
laughs, uninteresting and one-dimensional characters all around, a so-so story,
over-directing from Favreau, Puff Daddy "pretending" to be a big shot and one of
the worst endings that I've seen this year. If this flick didn't have Vince
Vaughn and his patented "Vaughnisms" going on, it would have been a total dud.
Thankfully, Vince is there and he is so "on" whenever his character talks or
walks onto the big screen (mind you, his character in SWINGERS was a better
rounded character, but that's another story altogether). They should have made
this whole movie about him, or at least have given the rest of the folks in the
picture something interesting to do or say. Favreau was "okay" as his friend,
but you just didn't care about the guy.
In fact, other than being a couple of knuckleheads who look good in suits, there
wasn't really much to either one of these two guys. A cheap "relationship" is
set up with Famke Janssen and her daughter (who is adorable, btw, but is tossed
into an emotional conclusion for what purpose again?!?), Puff Daddy and his
partner are as generic and lame as they come (was I supposed to fear P-Diddy's
character?), Peter Falk is good, but he's only in a couple of scenes, I
mean...what's this movie about? Well, it's about trying to score a few bucks off
the legend that is SWINGERS and I for one, certainly didn't mind revisiting
these guys in another movie, but hell boys, why not make a good movie the next
time around! This film had very little energy, featured rookie director Favreau
over-playing his directing card (dude, it's a comedy, no need to play the camera
so much), contained way too many montages (sign of a weak script) and basically
gave us only one reason to ever see it again: Vince Vaughn! I will stand up and
applaud this gentleman right now because his lines, his delivery and his
grandiose attitude in this movie were friggin' hilarious...he was soooo money!
(and I think he knew it, too!) It's just too bad that the rest of the movie
couldn't keep up with the man. The big downer at the end of the film didn't help
matters either. Skip this one altogether but watch it on video if you're a
SWINGERS fan, just to see what our ol' friend Trent is still up to...
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Go (9/10) - Out of Sight (8/10) - Swingers (10/10) - True Romance (10/10) - The
Way of the Gun (6/10)

Title
Review for Osmosis Jones (2001)
For more reviews and movie screensavers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
This film takes place in two different worlds. One is the real world with human
beings, starring Bill Murray as the really un-hygienic guy, and the other is the
animated world inside Murray's body, consisting of cells and germs (that talk!)
trying to run his system from within. Osmosis Jones is one of the cells inside
his body.
CRITIQUE:
A very original story told in a very unique manner that doesn't necessarily hold
together as tightly as an overall picture, with limited laughs, tension or
attachment to its characters, and very few memorable moments on which to chew
afterwards. I've been impressed with quite a number of animated movies over the
past couple of years, but this one just didn't do all that much for me. It's a
movie that seemed lost in its journey to find the perfect target audience, by
including bits and pieces for every cultural, age and ratings demographic, but
just not coming together as an effective, cohesive whole in the end. Sure, a
couple of laughs sprout up here and there, the disgusting stuff is really gross
and Bill Murray should be commended for allowing himself to look so bad in this
film, but does it entertain throughout? Not really. It's got its moments and
it's definitely sparked by an original streak, with a very clever look at the
inside of one's body by way of an "underworld" living within, but when all is
said and done, I just sat there and didn't really feel much either way. And even
now, when I look back, there isn't really much about the movie that bowled me
over.
It's actually ideally suited for the video market. The kids will dig on the
gross stuff like snot running out of a man's nose and a zit popping onto a
woman's lips, the teens will likely appreciate the hip-hop soundtrack and most
adults might get a kick out of Chris Rock's voice portraying a white blood cell.
Just don't expect much "oomph" from this film, because that's one aspect which
seems to have been left on the cutting room floor when the picture went from a
PG-13 rating to a PG. In the end, the bad guy is kinda bad, the laughs are kinda
funny and the ending is kinda predictable, all of which equal a so-so film, not
required to be seen on the big screen. In fact, the last sequence in the film
features some really awful CGI work (the eyelash stuff!) that felt like it still
needed about a week's work and for the love of God and all that is holy in this
world, can someone please tell everyone in Hollywood that we are no longer
amused by MATRIX parodies...I mean, c'mon man!! But overall, the film does
contain a handful of clever scenes featuring characters and places set inside
our bodies, which did entertain me somewhat, so I guess I'm about half-half on
this movie. Not a killer flick but definitely not a snoozer either.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Atlantis (5/10) - Emperor's New Groove (8/10) - The Iron Giant (5/10) - Kingpin
(9/10) - Rocky & Bullwinkle (4/10) - Shrek (8/10) - Small Soldiers (7/10) -
There's Something About Mary (7/10)

Title
Review for Original Sin (2001)
For more reviews and movie wallpapers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A rich guy who doesn't believe in love, orders a mail-order bride for himself.
That very evening, the couple is married and fall madly in love soon thereafter.
But what's this? One of them might not be the person they are pretending to be?
Wow...a sin, indeed.
CRITIQUE:
Easily one of the worst movies that I've seen all year. Too long, too boring,
too predictable and too ridiculous for anyone interested in watching a good
movie. What the hell were they thinking when they made this thing? (it's no
wonder that the film has been sitting on the racks for about a year) This felt
like a really bad TV movie of the week, with some nudity stuffed in from time to
time, just to wake up the audience. Have you ever switched channels and fallen
upon one of those ridiculously melodramatic TV movies, one that you just
couldn't help but switch back to from time to time, just to make sure that it
wasn't part of some sick joke? Well, this movie is exactly like that, only it
isn't a joke, it isn't on TV and you are asked to pay money to see it!! I say
again...what the shite were they thinking? Okay, so where do I start? First of
all, the trailer of this film gives away the movie's main plot twist, the
betrayal. So for the first half hour of the film, you're basically just sitting
there, watching these two "lovers" go through the motions until the "betrayal"
occurs. Whoopee, big surprise. Second of all, Angelina Jolie is horribly miscast
in this part. Why? Well, it's like this: not for one second do you ever believe
that she is not a nasty backstabbing woman! I mean, it's like all of those
people who complained about Jack Nicholson being psycho from the start of THE
SHINING, well, the same goes here. Every look in Jolie's eyes screams "psycho"!
Then of course, you have the case of the "patsy" husband, a man who just can't
seem to figure out anything in time. I mean...how boring is that for the
audience? You're watching this guy screw up time after time after time, and
somehow, we're supposed to feel sorry or care about this dude. No, thanks! And
if we don't care about him, and we really don't care about her (she's a beeyatch
and as confused as we are about her actual motivations in the film), who the
hell are we supposed to care about in this film? Well, I'll tell you. The only
thing that I was worrying about the whole way through this picture was whether
or not I'd actually fall asleep before the end credits rolled. No suspense, no
chemistry between the leads, no real love or passion, no sense of surprise,
plenty of plot holes for everyone and an extra moronic ending. So why am I even
giving this film a rating of three points? Well, it's actually pretty simple. I
liked the locations in the movie and the groovy score, but my primary reason for
slipping three notches onto this bedpost is for the gratuitous shots of Jolie's
boobies (that's two points right there!) and another one for Antonio's ass
(hairless, just for the record). Everything else in this movie was pointless,
boring and just plain stupid. Try imagining a soft-porn movie...but without the
plot! That's pretty much what you've got here. A low point in the careers of
both stars.
Oops, I almost forgot to mention the crappy dialogue...God oh mighty...make it
stop!!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
American Psycho (9/10) - Cruel Intentions (8/10) - Eyes Wide Shut (6/10) - Fatal
Attraction (8/10) - Playing by Heart (7/10) - Under Suspicion (7/10) - What Lies
Beneath (8/10) - What Women Want (4/10) - Whipped (7/10)

Title
Review for Fast and the Furious, The (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, check out http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A whitebread outsider joins a local LA street racing gang o' thugs and 
chicks, and falls for the sister of its leader. But it's all good, since 
the man in charge is now buds with the rookie as they race, drink and 
race some more. So what happens when someone from the crew is discovered 
to be an undercover cop? I'm sorry but you're gonna have to see the 
movie yourself to find that one out (giving you the minute 
spoiler-filled details of any film is obviously not my goal 
here...hehehe)
CRITIQUE:
I already said this once in my review of PITCH BLACK, but I'll say it 
again here...Vin Diesel rocks! Phew...and now that I got that out of the 
way, allow me to introduce you to a film that is ideally made for the 
summer season. A hoppin' soundtrack, cool cars, fast races, hot chicks, 
Vin Diesel, bad dialogue, an okay story and some rockin' stunts all add 
up to mucho fun and butter all over your popped corn. Forget about the 
sub-par acting jobs by some of the thespians in this film, put aside the 
fact that there's a dinky romance going on, ignore lines like "...if you 
need more time...buy the magazine!" and strap your ass to your chair and 
prepare to have your eardrums and eye sockets blown to bits! There ain't 
too many feelings better than going to a movie, forgetting about your 
stupid relationship problems, your friggin' boss who won't stop giving 
you shit at work, and delving right into a blast on the big screen! If 
you're looking for an escape from the real world...you've come to the 
right place. This movie delivers just what you're looking for, if what 
you're looking for is a good time. Plain and simple. But get this...not 
only did the movie entertain me, it actually added to that by "teaching" 
me a thing or two about street racing. That's right...I actually 
"learned" something from a summer movie! Wow, what's the world coming 
to...?
Seriously though, I dug the whole "street racing" underworld thang with 
the bets, the pink slips, the gang mentalities and the NOS, baby...the 
NOS!! (you'll get what I mean when you see the movie...ooooooh yeah!!) 
But I can't complete my positive review of this film without discussing 
the man who kept the fort down in this picture. A man whose name alone 
scares the shit out of people and here he is, in all of his glory, 
skinned to the head, buffed to the tank-top and ready to charm the pants 
out of anyone who isn't a fan of his already...the one, the only...Vin 
Diesel! By the way, if you're not a fan of his yet, watch this movie 
twice and call me in the morning. Okay, so maybe I'm exaggerating just a 
little bit, but Vin really did punch in yet another solid acting card 
here and certainly lifted the lesser talents of his surrounding players 
to a higher level. Sure, Michelle Rodriguez was also pretty good as the 
tough girlfriend with the attitude and some of the lines that these poor 
saps had to deliver were just awful, but all in all, I was still quite 
interested in most of the plights of these characters, and God knows, 
the stunts and car chases kept me rockin', so what else can I tell 
you...the movie entertained me, dammit!! I also liked the ending, some 
of the humor elements strung throughout the film, the camera tricks that 
Mr. Rob Cohen surprised me with and the scene where the two girls were 
making out at a party...oops, but that's another story altogether.
Actually, Dr. Drew, who joined me at this screening, noted that this 
film might've worked better if things had been moved into the world of 
the R-rating, and I must say that I agree with the man (he liked the 
film too, btw). A few swear words here and there, some gratuitous nudity 
and some of the "old ultra-violence" might've propelled this film 
directly into popcorn summer movie heaven, but alas, the film was still 
rock solid cheesy fun despite that. And by the way, I'm not "into cars" 
myself, in case you were interested, but damn, some of the stuff in this 
movie was just nitro without the seatbelts. So grab a cold beer, pump up 
your pecs before walking into the theater and don't forget to drop your 
brain off at the entrance. NOS, baby!! Oh yeah, and did I mention that 
Vin Diesel rocks!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Armageddon (8/10) - Deep Blue Sea (8/10) - Driven (5/10) - Exit Wounds 
(7/10) - Gone in Sixty Seconds (6/10) - Grease (8/10) - Mission 
Impossible 2 (7/10) - The Mod Squad (2/10) - Point Break (7/10) - Ronin 
(8/10)

Title
Review for A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Can human beings create robots that will be able to love? That is the 
question that besieges this entire film. A young robot-child is given to 
a real human family. The family attempts to love the child as their own, 
but when their real-life son returns, the jealousy of the real child 
eventually leads the parents to get rid of the robot-child. Left alone 
and in the woods, the young robot sets out on a journey to find a way to 
become real.
CRITIQUE:
In one of the most ambitious films of the year, Steven Spielberg has 
managed to successfully wrestle several key elements together, including 
a great story, amazing visuals, a futuristic landscape, solid acting, 
and emerge with a picture that entertains, touches the heart and digs 
below the surface. It's funny because we tend to take Mr. Spielberg for 
granted from time to time, seeing him more for the movie "businessman" 
that he has become over the past few years, but leave it to him to take 
such a sprawling project, begun by legendary filmmaker Stanley Kubrick 
and then continued by him (they used to fax each other notes and stuff), 
and create an amazing vision to drive the imagination. But Spielberg's 
grown up, too. He tackles big issues in this film. What is love? What is 
emotion? Why does it suck to be lonely? Emotions and queries that we can 
all relate to in one way or another. And even though this film is 
essentially about a "robot", you can't help but draw comparisons and 
connections to moments from your own life, moments in which you felt 
lonely or hurt or let down or misguided. The truth behind this film is 
that it's really about humans...not robots. The cruelty of some humans. 
The love and kindness of others. The world has become a harsh place for 
many people to inhabit, and sometimes our own ability to shut down our 
emotional core enables us to survive from day to day. But doesn't that 
negate what being a human being is all about? Living, feeling, loving 
and even getting hurt? I don't know.
I'm philosophizing out of my ass here, but I think that the power of 
this film, its greater strength, other than its engaging narrative and 
visual delights, is its capacity to harness that deep-rooted fear in all 
humans. That fear of being alone. That fear of not having anybody love 
you. That fear of not mattering in someone else's life. The journey of 
the robot-child in this film is the journey of which many of us are 
presently a part. Will we be happy in our lives? Will we be loved? Will 
our own love be returned by those whom we cherish? Questions that reside 
in our subconscious, and questions that have suddenly imprinted 
themselves in the mind of the robot-child in this film. And will his 
journey end on a happy note? A sad note? Well, being that this film is 
indeed a collaboration between one of the most optimistic moviemakers of 
our time, Steven Spielberg, and one of the most pessimistic in Stanley 
Kubrick, I'll let you figure that one out yourself. I will say this much 
though, I personally would've liked to have seen the movie end right 
after the robot-child went underwater in the heli-sub and hovered before 
the blue fairy (if you haven't seen the movie, this may not mean 
anything to you, but to all those who have, you know what I'm talking 
about). I would definitely have preferred that type of resolution to the 
film, but then again, I'm not necessarily the most "happy-go-lucky" 
person in the world. Also, I felt like the final 15-20 minutes of the 
film, ran it all a little longer than it needed to be.
Emotionally, this film also delivers with two of the three members of my 
own "movie watching crew" bawling their goggles out (sorry, I tinkered 
with my own tears, but didn't go balls-out on them). It's to note that 
this emotional touch could not have been attained as poignantly had it 
not been for the inspired thespianism (that a word?) displayed here by 
Haley Joel Osment, who has seriously impressed me at this point of his 
young career. A superb, loving, real performance which drives the film's 
significance that much deeper. Add Jude Law to that mix, as well as one 
of the coolest toys to ever have been invented named Teddy (give this 
damn bear his own movie!), and you've got a serious recipe for 
greatness. Yes, I thought the film was a little long, it didn't touch me 
as deeply as I thought it might and I would have preferred another 
ending, but those are all very small flaws in an overall sturdier 
picture that definitely needs to be considered for addition to the great 
sci-fi films from both Spielberg and Kubrick's pasts (it was also nice 
to see the many hommages which Spielberg tossed in here, including to 
his own E.T., CLOSE ENCOUNTERS, Lucas' STAR WARS and Kubrick's CLOCKWORK 
ORANGE). In the end, the film strives for so much more than most movies 
coming out these days, that you just can't help but sit up and take 
notice. And once you do sit up and pay attention, you will be enthralled 
by the imagination of it all, the strength of its narrative, its 
emotional spirit and its unique ability to combine great visuals, great 
acting and great insight into the human condition.
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Bicentennial Man (6/10) - Dark City (9/10) - Existenz (8/10) - Eyes Wide 
Shut (6/10) The Fly (8/10) -  Mission to Mars (3/10) - The Sixth Sense 
(8/10)

Title
Review for Joy Ride (2001/I)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
A dude and his brother are driving cross-country and decide to fool around with
a trucker on their CB radio. It isn't long before their little prank gets
someone put into a coma (long story) and the next thing you know, the trucker is
following them too. Lotsa nuttiness ensues and then, they pick up their other
friend, Venna, a girl who the dude has a crush on. But what's this...? The
trucker is still on their tail and is now harassing all three of the young
whippersnappers...? You bet! Buckle up, Dorothy...this is gonna be one bumpy
ride!
CRITIQUE:
A good ol' time at the movies! Here's a film that actually gives away most of
its plotline in its trailer and doesn't really bring anything "new" to the
forefront (if you've seen flicks like DUEL and BREAKDOWN, you've crossed this
path before), but still manages to entertain you gangbusters, with realistic
situations, believable characters, funny moments, thrills, chills, the whole
shebang. Let's give it up for director John Dahl, who continues to put out solid
films every other year (if you haven't seen RED ROCK WEST, do yourself a favor
right now, and jot it down on a piece of paper and rent it at your earliest
convenience). And much like that film, this one has an excellent premise and
sets everything up at an even pace. It gives you a little bit of background on
each of the main three characters, and then shows you how one small prank, can
lead to a whole lotta trouble for everyone! Paul Walker really surprised me in
this movie, since I've never much thought of him as anything more than a pretty
face (and damn, is it ever pretty or what?!) But here, he actually manages to
put some depth behind the looks and that's always appreciated in films in which
you are so closely tied to the main characters. Sobieski is also good, but she
isn't in the movie for as long as you'd think, but the man who really takes this
film to another level, is Steve Zahn.
If you've loved this guy as the "goofball" in most of his previous roles, you'll
appreciate him even more here, as the dude who starts off as one of the most
manic and excited human beings I've seen in quite some time ("This is so
awesome!!"), only to turn into a man scared out of his wits by the end of the
flick. And speaking of the ending, boy, does this movie deliver some chilling
moments during its final 15 clicks or what?!? The Arrow and I were practically
in each others arms (well, maybe I'm exaggerating, but you catch my drift) as
each minute brought about another turn of events which in turn, took it all to
an even higher level. Once again, kudos to director Dahl for being able to
generate that type of intensity, suspense and tension, with a great score,
editing, style and camerawork. Plot-wise, I too did wonder how the "bad guy" was
able to track them so well, but it didn't really bother me all that much (you
can assume that he had bugged their car?). But pretty much everything else in
the story stuck like glue and I couldn't help but put myself in their shoes and
appreciate their thoroughly desperate circumstance. A great movie with an even
cooler ending, this film will likely be remembered as one of the better
thrillers of the year. "This is amazing!!!"
Where's JoBlo coming from?
American Psycho (10/10) - Deep Blue Sea (8/10) - Eye of the Beholder (4/10) -
The Fast and the Furious (7/10) - Final Destination (8/10) - The Glass House
(6/10) - No Way Out (8/10)

Title
Review for Zoolander (2001)
For more reviews and movie trailers, visit http://www.joblo.com/
PLOT:
Derek Zoolander is a male model. He is also very dumb and impressionable. For
that reason, he is secretly hired and trained (so secret, that even he doesn't
know about it) by an underground fashion syndicate to assassinate the prime
minister of Malaysia, who wants to abolish child labor in his country. Will
Zoolander fulfill the dirty deed? Will Zoolander ever grace the world his new
"look"? Is this a funny movie? Find out below...
CRITIQUE:
There's a place in our world for "stupid comedies". Films which don't pretend to
take themselves seriously, are based on idiotic premises and filled with dumb
jokes. There's also a time for them and many would argue that this difficult
period of our history, might be an ideal circumstance during which to "relax" by
watching something so completely frivolous. Well, if you're in the mood for some
seriously mindless entertainment, Ben Stiller and his cast of many have
assembled one of the more original dumb comedies in some time. Of course,
comedies as such are usually very subjective and I could see how some will see
this film simply as stupid and unfunny, while others will grant them the
"stupid", but consider it funny instead. I personally enjoyed it for the most
part, cracked up loudly during a couple of specific sequences and loved the
Derek Zoolander character and the unrestrained whipping they released upon the
fashion industry. Snap! It was also nice to see several real-life models with
small roles in the movie, not taking themselves too seriously. And if you're the
type of person who likes celebrity cameos in films, well, don't look any further
because dozens of famous faces show up here including Vince Vaughn, Billy Zane,
Winona Ryder, Christian Slater, David Duchovny, Natalie Portman and many, many
others. I especially liked Andy Dick's complete make-over as the masseuse.
Hi-larious!
But with all films of this type, there is bound to be some stuff that simply
doesn't work. A few particulars which didn't strike my fancy included the
bulimia and "orgy" sequence with Christine Taylor, the break-dance fighting, and
I also never get why they use real countries in plots like this (why not just
"make up" a country, instead of zeroing in on a certain people?). I also could
have done with less of the Taylor character in general, since she wasn't all
that interesting and seemed to slow things down every now and then (more
Zoolander, dude!). But those few missteps were nothing compared to some of the
more memorable scenes which definitely did work for me! I almost pissed myself
during the "gas station" disaster, absolutely adored the "walk-off" contest
(with David Bowie as the judge, no less) and appreciated many of Zoolander's
moronic one-liners ("I was a Merman...a Merman!!"). And I dare you to get his
"monkey" photo shoot out of your head after seeing this movie ("You're a monkey,
Derek...a monkey!") I also really liked the soundtrack and the pace of the film,
both of which zipped and zagged, and established a nice rhythm to it all. Again,
it's to note that this movie is dumb and not for everyone, but my guess is that
if you laughed at the trailer, you will likely enjoy many of the quips in the
actual picture as well. If you thought the trailer was dumb, skip this dodo bird
and go rent AUSTIN POWERS again or something, a film from which there is an
obvious influence here. Blue Steel, baby...yeah!!!
Where's JoBlo coming from?
Austin Powers (7/10) - Austin Powers 2 (7/10) - Deuce Bigalow (7/10) - Dude,
Where's My Car (7/10) - Freddy Got Fingered (5/10) - Jay & Silent Bob Strike
Back (8/10) - Joe Dirt (5/10) - Meet the Parents (8/10) - Say It Isn't So
(3/10)
