Authors
Allan Toombs
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Beautiful Blonde from Bashful Bend, The (1949)
        This may be old hat to the rest of the world but here in the UK
Channel Four is running a series of Betty Grable musicals and this is one
I've never seen before, perhaps because it's raucous and rollicking tone may
have offended the tastes of past British film buyers. Frankly I found Betty
Grable a breath of fresh air, resplendant in the technicolour of this
hi-budget, low brow, comedy Western. Much is made of the comic talents of
Marilyn Munroe or Doris Day yet Betty Grable appears to have been
overlooked. In this wonderfully stupid film she's ballsy, brash and looks
like she enjoyed every minute.
The comedy arises from her arrival in a frontier town where the
dialectic between a new conservative class and an original rootin' shootin'
underclass is all too familiar. Betty plays a saloon-bar entertainer who
sings and does a trick shooting act. Yet through a comedy of assumptions she
is taken to be the new school mistress. She has to tame two hillbilly boys
whose sheer goofiness prefigures Beevis and Butthead. Ms.Grable controls
every scene she's in and brings the dopey twosome under her power by
adapting her handgun routine hilariously. A running gag throughout the
picture is her uncanny knack of shooting the town judge in the posterior and
much juvenile humour is generated from this which Betty just laps up.
However the film rarely stops for breath and pitches into a
slapstick gunfight with Betty at it's heart smashing, throwing, and shooting
for all she's worth. The history book on female comedy needs rewriting if
the name Grable isn't up there with the likes of Sally Fields. Gorgeous,
vivacious and crude, this could be a cult classic of unintentional camp.
Take your brain out of gear and it's great stuff.
 Allan Toombs
 http://www.cityscape.co.uk/users/bt18/atoombs.html
mailto:toombs@cityscape.co.uk

Title
Review for Twister (1996)
What puts Twister ahead of this year's crop of big action movie's is the
joie de vivre it brings to you. I found it emotionally compelling not just
because of the awesome forces our heroes face but because of the sheer
delight in normality we share with the stormchasers.
        The stormchasing phenomena is very recent; made possible by
affordable mobile communications, modern weather prediction and a certain
fin de ciecle craziness. A cast of (for me) unknowns realisticly portray the
kind of motley crew that are probably out there in Tornado Alley right now.
You quickly start to care for every one of them. Rebels with a
meteorological cause they are united by the need to share information in
order to witness storms, in particular tornadoes.
        Against this band of semi-academic nomads is a corporate sponsored
fleet with the same goal but superior technology. This is, as yet, an
invention, as far as I know. Stormchasing is usually composed of long boring
waits, grinding driving and a few brief moments of adrenaline. Too
unpredictable for anyone other than mavericks and fanatics. However this
strand of rivalry is peripheral and the downtime is there as the team stop
over at Bill's beautifully eccentric Aunt and a drive in that chose a bad
night to show THE SHINING. These two sojourns denote the breaks in a classic
three act Hollywood structure.
        Beyond the mechanics of our audience response there is an inner
journey to this movie and despite an excellent performance from Bill Paxton
it belongs to Helen Hunt's character Jo. Her look is right, you can believe
this woman would camp out in a field with weather obsessed geeks, her acting
talent tells you how much she still loves Bill. Against this she is
demonised by a childhood trauma that motivates her need to research whirlwinds.
        If the chases will have you whooping like an adolescent then the
love triangle at the films heart is soberly adult and should have you
guessing if Jami Getz or Helen Hunt will retain Paxton's affections. Ms.Getz
is another new name to me and conveyed a sophisticate terrified by and
relishing the storm chase. I wondered if her city girl would embrace the
stormchaser's stripped-down lifestyle as an alternative to Jo's
self-destructive energy; that's how much the film involved me.
        There's nothing too fanciful about the plot, the people are drawn
from life, the tornadoes don't need to be made larger than life and Bill's
dilemma is all too typical. The soundtrack is superlative with great use of
pop music, a classical score that doesn't intrude and a scorching end
credits piece by the Van Halens. 
        This film could make weather following alot more converts but the
winds have always been there, a natural destructive force that appears
amidst the flat boredom of the Mid-West landscape. The makers have shown us
our world in an exciting new light, which is one of the best things that can
happen at the cinema. See it on the big screen while you can!
 Directed by Jan De Bont, produced by Kathleen Kennedy,
 Ian Bryce and Michael Crichton. Executive producers are Steven
 Spielberg, Walter Parkes, Laurie MacDonald and Gerald Molen.
 Written by Michael Crichton & Anne-Marie Martin.
"A lie is halfway round the world before truth gets it's trousers on."
 mailto:toombs@cityscape.co.uk
http://www.cityscape.co.uk/users/bt18/atoombs.html
 Copyright 1996 Allan Toombs, email me to negotiate permission.

Title
Review for Johnny Mnemonic (1995)
        The first thing that JOHNNY MNEMONIC did was make me laugh, after
that it was all downhill. The cause of my laughter was a TRON style image of
moving light pathways upon which came the title 'THE INTERNET' and then '-
2021'. This kind of glib acceptance of current gee-whizz predictions for the
future typifies the film's crude approach to the SF genre.
        Johnny Mnemonic began in 1981 as a short story in OMNI by William
Gibson. Over the next few years the kind of bleak near-future vision
embodied by the story would gain itself the label 'Cyberpunk' to distance it
the more optimistic mainstream of science fiction. This tag soon grew to
encompass films like BLADERUNNER which seemed to share the same stark
stylism. Today the term has broadened to become a set of alt. newsgroups
with horrific noise to signal problems and an album by Billy Idol, yet the
hyper-realistic vision posited by that original SF clique continues to exert
a powerful influence.
        It must have seemed a natural winner to adapt Gibson's simple tale
of stakeouts into a big budget movie. Bill himself got to do the screenplay
yet somewhere along the way his intensely cerebral brand of SF excitement
got lost in the morass of action/adventure. Attention to detail is a crucial
part of cyberpunk's effect; 'Fragments Of A Hologram Rose' is another Gibson
short with this close-up view at the heart of it's narrative and it's title.
Similarly Ridley Scott's film drew our attention to a single snake scale or
the reflection in a mirror enhanced and amplified. Yet director Robert Longo
fails to bring any style to the cinematography. The direction is neither
poetic and lingering nor ram-raidingly crude like the MAD MAX series; just
bog-standard direction. Even the soundtrack was neither a stirring classical
score nor a moody synthesiser back-drop but somewhere inbetween.
        The Japanese actors in this piece were impeccable, displaying
well-starched malice and the absolute possesion of the Yakuza. Even the much
maligned Ice-T gave one of the best performances in this movie. Whereas
Keanau Reeves was awful, looking far too much like Harrison Ford and
delivering lines like someone doing a bad Scwarzenegger impression. Right
from the opening scene where is sun-bronzed physique was dwelt upon he seems
wrong as the technophile who has a chip in his head. He is meant to be
fragile, head over full with precious data, yet he slugs into every fight
there is. Towards the end he makes a speech straight out of GRAND CANYON and
sounds like a spoilt child throwing a tantrum. Gibson's words (if they are
his work) are memorable "I want starched shirts like they have at the Tokyo
Hilton" but Reeves makes them risable.
        William Gibson's novels always have a strong woman at the heart of
the action. In the original short story we have Molly Millions, ultra-cool
in mirrorshades that are her augmented eyes and razor sharp blades the
retract into her polished nails. Last year's excellent VIRTUAL LIGHT had the
quick-witted cycle courier Chevette Washington. Dina Meyer is woefully
miscast in this role and drifts through the movie like an extra from
Baywatch. It must be hard keeping your hair blow-dried when you live on the
street.
        Dolph Lundgren portrays a psychopath well, but the character was
surplus to requirements. It's as if Fox's bosses felt that there had to be a
white bad guy in case Gibson's deeply multi-ethnic future confused audiences
or over-use of the Yakuza offended Japanese corporate sensibilities. I would
have prefered alot more of Takeshi who was intensely charismatic and
conveyed loss and redemption very convincingly.
        There are some virtuoso computer animated sequences in JOHNNY
MNEMONIC bringing alive Gibson's vivid conception of Cyberspace (hey, the
man coined the term) yet these seem disconnected from the plot. Beautiful
yet pointless. Cyberspace has become nothing more than a fly-through MTV
video. What we do see of the net's future is couched in lazy gee-whizzery.
Our hero opens a world map, points to Beijing and then goes straight to the
Hotel he wants. Where's the vaunted information overload?
        Some moronic use was made of stock footage including a clip of an
aircraft landing - it's a Concorde. Now where's the attention to detail? I
thought everyone knew the Concorde fleet only has 20 years more life left in
it (many of them are cannibalised already!) and that the successor project
won't have a replacement for alot longer than that. By pitching JOHNNY
MNEMONIC in 2021 it's ensured that the Concorde is out of place. Similarly
there's a pitiful model shot of a communications satellite that is gratingly
cheap  sat next to the computer generated sequences.
        Overall JOHNNY MNEMONIC shows how Hollywood can take a promisingly
cinematic story, chew it up and spit it out without any soul. Evertything
has to be literal and visual. At the end of the movie with the contraband
data safely broadcast Reeves and Meyer kiss (happy ending ahoy!) and the
wicked corporate building bursts into flames, "Somebody getting some early
revenge" he explains. As if anyone can bomb a tower-block on a whim just to
give us a James Bond style ending. This is a tragicly wasted opportunity to
bring a unique science-fiction vision to the big screen and a reminder of
what a mess Hollywood creates when it thinks it knows what the kids want. 
        Everyone want's to cut off Johnny's head but in the end it's the
movie itself that runs around like a headless chicken.
 Allan Toombs
 http://www.cityscape.co.uk/users/bt18/atoombs.html
mailto:toombs@cityscape.co.uk

Title
Review for Strange Days (1995)
THE TIME: It's the end of 1999, just under 4 years in the future and a few
days before the end of the century. Producer James Cameron really has
produced a realistic projection of the millenial celebrations and the
fevered craziness that goes along with it. From the opening sequence with a
radio call-in christian squawking about 'the last days' to the climactic
'2K' party, the atmosphere is right. This movie makes you feel the weird
buzz of the century passing into a new millenium. The only feeling that'll
come close will be the real thing, which gets nearer every day.
THE PLACE: Los Angeles, the wrong side of the tracks; now coming from
Britain I don't know what it's like in the sleazier districts of LA but
that's where this film is based, there isn't much of the suburbs and
mall-culture on display, I guess you'd call it the street. Prostitutes,
bar-flies, pushers; society's flotsam clinging onto that one last dream,
none more so than the film's protagonist - Lenny Nero.
THE HARDWARE: It's called Playback or doing The Wire, officially the acronym
is SQUID, sub-quantum something but all you really need to know is it can
record human experience. No attempt is made to truly provide a technical
explanation for the Playback devices, it's deus-ex-machina take it or leave
it, indeed whatever leap in current research is posited it can fit 20
minutes of 'being there' onto an ordinary Sony Mini-Disc. Stronger than
Crack. An electronic drug made real. 
THE CRIMES: Somebody has murdered Jeriko One, controversial rapper and
firebrand activist for the black community. Glen Plummer plays this
character cross between Snoop Doggy Dog and Louis Farrakhan with conviction.
The rap and the rhetoric are just right.
        Unrelated to this, there is a brutal rape where the Playback
technology is employed with sick inventiness. I'm tempted to condemn
Cameron's sadistic narrative here but I can't, the scene is filmed with
terrifying clarity by Director Kathryn Bigelow, I have to trust her
judgement that the footage included is necessary to establish the prescence
of a sick-killer in the plot. Certainly I felt repulsed and disgusted by the
act and it's voyeurism; nuff said.
THE MAN: Ralph Fiennes is absolutely convincing as Lenny Nero, Playback
dealer, a shameless pimp for little silver discs of people's lives. He's
strung out, making an easy living with a hot, contraband product but unable
to get his life together. He's still in love with his ex-girlfriend Faith,
but she now despises him, a love made no easier by his shoe-box full of
recordings of their moments together. He is pitiably addicted to a Playback
past.
        You may remember that in my review of JOHNNY MNEMONIC
(http://www.cityscape.co.uk/users/bt18/johnnym.htm) I criticised the
reversal of the classic Gibson 'screwed-up man/strong woman' formula. Well
here it is executed perfectly by James Cameron's skillfull storyline. Making
this film more Cyberpunk than the definate article itself. Which brings me
round to Lornette 'Mace' Mason.
THE WOMAN: Angela Bassett is as beautiful and hard as ebony in the role of
Mace. She's a black woman holding down a job driving businessmen round LA
1999's wreck-strewn streets. Lenny is supposed to be a friend; he was good
to her kids the day the LAPD arrested their father. Where Nero is effusive
and spontaneous, she's a woman of reality, a mother and a survivor. Maybe
once he got her set up in the security car line but now he's a leech bumming
one too many free-rides.
        Angela Bassett is a wonderful new talent in a great part. She's
stunningly cool under pressure yet pulls off all the fight scenes with a
sharp grace and calculating intelligence. With her hair in thin braids she's
as sassy as a younger Whoopi Goldberg, as physical as Grace Jones but with
warmth and humanity. A pity Ms.Bassett had to wear a dumb 'hooker' dress as
a subertuge for the film's climax because she looks truly amazing in a
cleancut 'designer chauffeur suit' that is totally in-character. A star.
THE ISSUES: At this movies heart are concerns about emotional truth,
delusion and race. Cameron has obviously been thinking long and hard about
the Rodney King beating and LA's riots. The key question is 'What have we to
celebrate if armed police are necessary for a public celebration?'.
Certainly it's hard to imagine how the millenium parties will take place
without incident in an America which is 'browning' rapidly yet clinging to a
white 'apple-pie' vision of life.
        Lenny Nero is that rare thing a white-guy who's at home in the
racial mix of the inner-city. Yet he's blind to Macey's unselfish devotion.
Instead of seeing her love he sits in a squalid pad fast-forwarding a tape
of Faith making love to him in a beach hut. Fiennes plays a fool dazzled by
the smoke and mirrors of a new technology. Like the men in SEX, LIES &
VIDEOTAPE or FLATLINERS he's getting off on a recording and not confronting
the truth that it's just a more-detailed, personalised form of pornography.
THE VERDICT: This is a James Cameron hollywood blockbuster first and
foremost. High on action, adventure and adrenaline. Cameron knows just how
to work a storyline chock full of twists and surprises. Added to this
Kathryn Bigelow brings a sharp focus, quick-cut sophisticated direction that
avoids cliche then uses it to just the right effect. I was left exhausted by
the sheer pace and relentless punch of STRANGE DAYS. It's just a
hairs-breadth on the right side of OTT but then this is a *BIG* movie
dealing with the big issues of today. It takes the personal, the political,
the sexual, the spiritual and makes them all hang on one split-second
bullet. Maybe this is the last big action movie; I can't see how more is
possible without lapsing into the tongue-in-cheek of TRUE LIES or Bond.
However it deserves support for it's bravery in tackling drugs and race head
on. Movie of the year, so far.
"Tonight we're going to party like it's 1999"
 mailto:toombs@cityscape.co.uk
http://www.cityscape.co.uk/users/bt18/atoombs.html
 Allan Toombs

Title
Review for Waterworld (1995)
     WATERWORLD has suffered some very poor press recently.  It seems
journalists can't resist reference to its cost and many professional
reviewers reveal that either they failed to watch the entire movie
(lazy fools they're paid to do this!) or low IQs.  WATERWORLD rises
head and shoulders above the recent crop of action based blockbusters.
Batman Forever and Judge Dredd merely offer a distorted mirror view of
our crime-ridden urban society whereas WATERWORLD carefully constructs
a scenario where the rules of survival are very different.
     Kevin Costner's character, known in true Campbellian-hero style
only as "The Mariner," is the perfect survival machine for this
all-water environment.  He processes his own urine for the water
content (not as some reports state "drinks his own piss") and the film
opens rather daringly with a back-shot of Costner quite obviously
peeing into a container.  As a drifter he pilots a trimaran and trades
anything the sea gives up to him.  One of the director's real coups
here is to make a yacht chase as thoroughly dynamic on film as any
speed boat race.  Indeed a basic juxtaposition of the film is sail
power versus petrol burning craft.  The (for want of a better term)
baddies are called "Smokers" since they eschew windpower and as their
leader Deacon (Dennis Hopper) dispenses an endless supply of cigarettes
(not a comforting film for the pro-tobacco lobby this as the Smokers
are crude and stupid villains).  In this respect the film is far
clearer than the comparable MAD MAX II where both sides are fighting
over and using oil, yet a world oil-disaster is the cause of their
apocalypse.
     At one point in WATERWORLD there is a moment of pure surrealism
as "Peter Gunn" is played and Hopper and his cronies are pushed around
in the wheeless shell of an automobile.  This underlines the totality
of the water shooting throughout the film.  As you assume the mindset
of a water-bound existence areas of pseudo-solid ground become
surprisingly anachronistic and by the end of the movie when the
legendary "dryland" is found I viewed our world of greenery and
wildlife in a new light of enhanced beauty.
     This film definitely follows the currently dominant 3-Act plotting
model and divides thus: In Act 1 the Mariner arrives at the Atoll and
attempts trade but is captured for being a mutant.  As he is being
slowly put to death there is a mass Smoker attack which successfully
breaches the drift-peoples defenses.  In the ensuing mayhem Costner
accepts heroine Helen's bargain to provide escape for her and the
mysterious girlchild Enola.
     In Act 3 Costner rescues Tina Majorino's little girl from
Hoppers stronghold and because of this he and the remaining
drift-people find dryland, although the Mariner chooses to return to
the sea.
     It is Act 2 which distinguishes WATERWORLD from the its fellow
action adventures such as MAD MAX III; BEYOND THUNDERDOME.  There is
a biting sexual tension between Kevin Costner and Jeanne Tripplehorn
that electrifies the screen, her sudden disrobement amidst the
emptiness of the ocean is as astonishing as his rejection of her.  As
my partner Jackie put it "Kevin Costner beating up women and little
girls!"  Portrayed is no ordinary hero but a brutalised man stripped of
any culture by the need to survive.  Costner takes his anti-hero
further even than Mel Gibson's portrayal in MAD MAX II and I started
to wonder if there was a misogynist subtext to WATERWORLD.  Maybe "a
man's best friend is his boat and there ain't no woman good enough for
him" was the film's message?  Thankfully this was not so and the Mariner
turns out to be waiting for real love rather than the ancient bargain
of sex for shelter.  A thoroughly un-feminist middle then, as
Tripplehorn has nowhere to turn within the claustrophobic confines of
the small boat.  The destruction of Costner's gimmick-rigged trimaran
marks the end of this mid-section and amidst the wreckage left by
Hopper's ambush and abduction of the girlchild our antagonistic couple
finally make-love simply because there is no reason not to do so.
     WATERWORLD is quite a long movie (120 minutes) and it would
have been tempting for the production team to make cuts in this middle
chapter.  Thankfully if there were any cuts made they were from the
Mariner's commando style entry of the Smokers' stronghold (the
revelation of which is one of the films most breathtaking moments and
explains sloppy-criticisms of "where does the fuel for the jet-skis
come from" (Kaleidoscope--shame on you Radio Four)).  This sequence is
given a strange narrative air by Majorino telling the Smoker second in
command how "he (The Mariner) has killed lots of people (as Costner
silently dispatches some guards) and he is going to rescue me."  She
announces this as if it was free-form verse and the stealthy
fight-action gains a bizarre poetic edge.
     Finally WATERWORLD boasts a frisson as moving and yet less
sensationalistic than PLANET OF THE APES's Statue of Liberty buried on
the beach moment.  When we descend beneath the waves we are taken
through the watery remains of a modern city we feel not only the shock
of seeing our civilisation in ruins but Tripplehorn's character's
despair that Costner has no source of soil from dryland only what he
salvages.  To me this underlines the emotional surety of the film as
well as its highly involving projection of the future.  Like SEVEN
SAMURAI you are left wanting more, wondering where the Mariner will go
next and what he will find alone out on the ocean.

Title
Review for Great Moments in Aviation (1993) (TV)
     As the spearhead of the 'Screen Two' season GREAT MOMENTS IN
AVIATION was premiered on television last night in the UK, although it
should receive a full cinema release throughout the rest of the world.
As the work of Jeanette Winterson, writer of ORANGES ARE NOT THE ONLY
FRUIT--a semi-autobiographical account of a teenage lesbian affair in
a parochial, god-fearing middle-England, I expected a certain
magical-realism and feared an excess of pretension.  However I was
impressed by Winterson's restraint and clarity in producing a gorgeous
pseudo-period piece.
     It is the late forties/early fifties and Gabrielle Angel (Rakie
Ayola) a young Grenadan girl boards a cruise liner bound for Britain.
Through an administrative error she finds her cabin-mate is a man,
Duncan Stewart (Jonathan Pryce).  Next door are two jolly Englishwomen,
missionaries returning home to blighty and it looks like they'll all
have super fun en voyage.  However when Professor Goodyear (Jonathan
Hurt) recognises Pryce as Alistair Birch, a long-dead friend, it is
clear that not everyone is who they claim to be.
     Okay, so far it all sounds very Goldcrest, very British, very OUT
OF AFRICA meets MURDER ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS.  Certainly period detail
is all-important, the liner has all the trimmings, ballroom dance bands
and deck-chess.  None of the emergent modern world with it's politics
is allowed to intrude.  However this is used by the director to create
a stunning visual stylisation.  The whole film is drenched in sepia
tones achieved through adherence to the brown decor and clothing of the
period.  Sequences of Gabrielle's folks in the Caribbean are given a
dreamlike quality by use of bleached sepia filters.  It is here the the
films deeper point is made.  As the action plays out over a succession
of brown veneered cabins a deeply sensuous effect is created so that we
become very aware of skin-colour.  Rakie Ayola has a gawky kind of
beauty and a strange sexual tension springs up between her and Pryce.
When they do make love there is an amazing contrast between his palid
flesh and her dark curves.  Their union is very non-phallic and akin to
coffee and cream mixing.  Thus the viewer is seduced into appreciating
Gabrielle as a black woman free from any racial framework.  Indeed I
feel Jeannette Winterson is asking us to appreciate her as another
woman might.  The camera enjoys her, there is none of the objectivity
of say THE COLOUR PURPLE, we become Gabrielle and share her innocence,
hope and triumph.
     There is a second story to the film and that is our two spinsters,
played by Vanessa Redgrave and Dorothy Tutin.  Certainly they add an
eccentric spin to the film and you almost feel Winterson is parodying
her critics when they honestly dismiss the idea that they are
lesbians.  Later Tutin confesses her love of thirty-five years and they
both laugh at just being good friends for such a long time-span.  This
is a very powerfully written scene and works very well given that we
must imagine two old friends beginning a physical phase in their
relationship.  Consider here that the true mood of the time tacitly
approves sexless marriage let alone homosexual love.  Winterson is
exploring her own sexual-politics, where the lack of historical figures
can make a strong case for Lesbianism being a late twentieth century
phenomena.  Obviously Jeanette Winterson feels the mutual longing
between the ladies would have been enough to overcome social taboo, and
who am I to argue.
     Another strong theme of the film and the source of the title is
Gabrielle's fascination with flying.  Apparently her grandfather was a
mail pilot whenever the weather was so bad white pilots wouldn't fly.
He is lost on a run and becomes her dream-icon.  At one surreal
juncture Gabrielle wears a pair of theatrical wings and this reminded
me strongly of a similar image of beauty in the late Derek Jarman's
CARAVAGGIO, another film seeking to create a mode of seeing rather than
tell an absolute story.
     This is not a film to watch for the plot which is uninspiring.
However it's rich warmth has a feminine quality.  You will savour the
colours, the deep burnt umbers, the amber of tea and whiskey, the
nutmeg, the saffrons, the chocolates.  This is a film about
transcending mundane racial and sexual thinking.  It is about the
pigments revealed when you stop labelling people and start really
looking at the world.  As such it is thoroughly uplifting and fresh
enough to suggest new avenues for the future.

Title
Review for Net, The (1995)
A Cyber-Nightmare (Full Discussion With Plot Details)
     I approached THE NET with some trepidation as the vanguard of what
looks to be a deluge of Computer/Internet/VR films Hollywood has in
store for us.  Also if you consider TRON, WARGAMES, and JUMPIN' JACK
FLASH, as it's forebears THE NET could have been just another gee-whizz
hacker romp.
     I'm delighted to report that THE NET is a full-bodied intelligent
thriller that keeps the technology to a minimum and adrenaline levels
high.  The plot again by incident or design is a classic Hollywood
three act.
     Act 1 - Sets up the nightmare, Angela Bennett (Sandra Bullock) is
a bright semi-freelance computer professional working from home,
hanging out on IRC channels but happily without a boyfriend.
Specializing in anti-virus and debug she receives a beta of a
multimedia promo for an awful Wayne and Garth type band called "Mozarts
Ghost."  There's rogue code in the disk but she has just booked a
holiday. Her boss here becomes the first to die in a bizarre
night-flying accident. On the beach she meets the charming Mr. Devlin
(Jeff Northam) and here I began to wonder if this was going to be a him
and her on the run together movie. However it soon becomes apparent
that Devlin is as deadly as he is attractive. The scenes on board his
boat are tense and shot with clarity. Narrowly escaping with her life
Angela's dingy crashes.
     Act 2 - The nightmare begins when she wakes up in a cheap Mexican
hospital without passport, ID or credit cards. At customs control she
is told her social security number makes her Ruth Marx. Still a little
bewildered from the crash and desperate to get back home she signs this
new name. On arrival she finds her car has gone and her house is
stripped of all her possessions and up for sale. When she makes a scene
for the police they check on her ID.  Down the street in a car Devlin
accesses Ruth Marx's file and adds a few wanted for narcotics and
prostitutions. So begins a chase in which Ms. Bullock uses considerable
wit and courage to evade an organisation that effectively deprive her
of any financial/social identity. What they are after is the disk of
'Mozarts Ghost' which contains their comms software and surety that
copies have hot been stashed anywhere on the Internet. In the end she
is imprisoned and speaking to her attorney she sounds like a sad
delusional paranoid raving about super-powerful conspiracies. She calls
her mother who in an clever, novel twist suffers from Alzheimers.  Act
2 ends in the pits of depression as she realises that even her mother
cannot remember her as Angela Bennett.
     Act 3 - Is how our heroine hits back but you really need to see
the movie here. Let me say that it is well executed and Ms. Bennett uses
her considerable intelligence to spread confusion in the enemy's camp.
     Indeed for Sandra Bullock this film is a triumph. THE NET
heroine is a sort of female FUGITIVE at times and any man who helps
her meets an invisibly organised death. Indeed there is a grim contrast
here between the suave, simmering, handsome Devlin who kills without
compunction and the rather literally named Albert Champion a ditched
lover she turns to out of sheer desperation since he is middle-aged,
self-satisfied and subtly obnoxious with a tinge of pathos. As her
supporter he provides the voice of the anti-conspiracist but ultimately
falls foul of a series of medical "mistakes" engineered by manipulating
computers. Sandra Bullock confidently guides the character of Angela
Bennett between the extremes of ball-breaking paranoid(eg. Sigourney
Weaver at the end of Aliens) and wimpering victim (just about anything
with Goldie Hawn). Indeed she has something of an everywoman quality
that compels the audience into identifying with her. I was up there
running with her every step of the way.
     In some ways the film indicts her original semi-reclusive
lifestyle as it is very apparent in Act 2 how few non-Net friends she
has and that the neighbours can't tell her from Eve. After watching
THE NET you might find yourself giving the keyboard a rest and
chatting to next door with a newfound earnestness. The powerful message
of the film is that if we rely on credit-cards for identity we don't
need real people. That is until the day the credit-agency fouls up.
Very 'get involved', very Clinton and absolutely on the button.
     But I hear you cry what of the hardware? Well you won't catch
any howling goofs in this field as most computers are unspecified
PowerMacs/PowerPcs. All graphics front ends used are obvious mock-ups
to make type clearer and the on-line characters more colourful. To
begin with Angela uses a speech synth for the other IRC users however
we soon rely on her speaking all type to give it life, a dramatic
device that works very well. I think the point here is that the precise
look and feel of the technology is irrelevant. There is something of a
near-future feel to the film (without being science-fiction) so maybe
there are bulletin-board/IRC's with glorious technicolour icons. Look
out for Gregg Shaw, a technocrat we only see through TV news, who bears
an uncanny similarity to Bill Gates, an evil twin perhaps. May I also
commend the scriptwriter for not forcing a 'we meet at last Ms. Bennett'
type scene between Bullock and this character.  If you're going to have
remote-control conspiracies then it's right to keep them faceless. This
also keeps what could have been quite a confusing plot simple as the
cast is compact.
     However before I give the impression this is a cyberpunk film
let me emphasise that THE NET is first and foremost a thriller
featuring set-piece chases that Hitchcock would have been proud of. By
inverse compliment I can see this kind of cyber-nightmare scenario
becoming an easy staple for lesser film-makers in years to come.
Computers are pivotal to the plot but do no more than in other 'lost
identity' movies. In this respect there is nothing innovative about THE
NET but it is a pumping, classy thriller firmly footed in the 1990s
and worthy of serious discussion.
