Authors
Louis Butler
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for Sommersby (1993)
     SOMMERSBY is a remake of a wonderful French movie called THE RETURN
OF MARTIN GUERRE, which, in turn, is based on court transcripts from the
16th Century in France.  THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE was the first movie
I saw with Gerard Depardieu, and it is well worth seeing.  However, I am
not sure if it is available on video or not.
     The basic story involves a man (Richard Gere) who returns from the
Civil War claiming to be Jack Sommersby.  It quickly becomes rather
obvious that he is *not* Jack, but, unlike MARTIN GUERRE, that isn't
really the point.  The point revolves around Laurel Sommersby (Jodie
Foster) and her relationship with this man who refuses to acknowledge
that he is not Jack Sommersby.
     What we get is a wonderful interaction between Gere and Foster, an
involving plot, and a perfectly executed ending.  No Hollywood
balderdash, just honest storytelling.  Those of you who saw the original
are in for quite a ride, since the movie does not wind up at all like
the original.
     Foster is magnificent, as always.  Her accent is absolute
perfection again, and in this regard she is beginning to remind me very
much of Meryl Streep.  Foster has an uncanny ability to metamorphose
into anything imaginable.  I'm convinced she could bring dramatic flair
to something as empty as Judy Jetson.
     Gere turns in what I think is his best performance, though I am not
familiar with all of his films.  There is an intensity in him that is
never quite completely hidden, and a slick charm that is disarming and
not at all offensive.
     The courtroom scene with Gere and Foster would be worth sitting
through an agonizingly bad movie in itself, the tension in Foster as
Gere questions her is a perfectly executed balance routine.
Fortunately, the entire movie is not terrible, but rather quite
charming.
     I heartily recommend this movie, and if the Oscars have a good
memory, we may see at least a nomination for Foster out of this.  I
wouldn't be surprised to see Gere gain some respectability from this
role, and I think it would be well deserved.
     Recommendation:  See THE RETURN OF MARTIN GUERRE, and possibly read
the book.

Title
Review for Heart and Souls (1993)
     I can't begin to tell you how much I hate the phrase "feel-good"
when used as an adjective, but I am at a loss to find another phrase
that would be better suited for this movie.  Here we have a film that
is much like IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE or MR. SMITH GOES TO WASHINGTON.
It's an old fashioned movie with a fairly simple story to tell and a
childish innocence in the way it tells it.
     I suspect the movie is a remake of an older film, though I don't
know this for a fact.  Many elements of the story seem rather outdated
in this day and age.  For example, the small-time hood who's really a
pretty nice guy and wants to give back something he stole to the kid he
stole it from.
     Actually, there are many things about this movie that sound like
they would be quite annoying.  It is easy to hear a plot summary and
think, "Oh PUL-EASE!" but in point of fact, the movie carries itself
quite well.
     Robert Downey, Jr., plays a man whose imaginary childhood friends
come back to him when he's about thirty years old.  It seems that they
are actually the ghosts of four people killed at the time of Downey's
birth who were "attached" to him in some way.
     The four are played by Charles Grodin, Alfre Woodard, Kyra
Sedgwick, and Tom Sizemore.  Each is very good, with Sizemore being the
only one who is slightly weak.  Elizabeth Shue (ADVENTURES IN
BABYSITTING) playes Downey's girlfriend.
     Downey gets to be "possessed" by each of the four, and it is just
hilarious watching him.  He has a true comic gift.
     I do have some questions about the movie though.  It takes place
in 1989, is this a movie that was made several years ago and only now
released?  Elisabeth Shue does look a little older than in ADVENTURES
IN BABYSITTING, but I wouldn't swear to it.
The movie opens nationwide this Friday, I believe.

Title
Review for GoldenEye (1995)
     GOLDENEYE is the much anticipated debut of Pierce Brosnan as
everyone's favorite spy.  After a delay of over ten years, we finally
get to see Remington Steel utter the phrase, "Vodka martini, shaken,
not stirred." Was it worth the wait?  Well, yes, overall.  Mr.  Brosnan
was born to play Bond, a realization that first came to me when I saw
him in the middling to poor film adaptation of Forsythe's THE FOURTH
PROTOCOL.  In short, he fills the lines of the tuxedo quite nicely.
He's more of a man's Bond than Roger Moore was, and he doesn't have the
slightly stiff look that Dalton had.
     The plot is typical Bond fare, with a slight twist as we get a 00
agent other than Bond into the mix.  But no one goes to Bond films for
the plot.  These movies are a plethora of action, women, guns, evil
Communists (oh, and good Communists--it's the 90's) and the triumph of
good over evil.
     The gizmos are not nearly as inspired as they have been, but in a
refreshing change of pace, not every single gizmo given to Bond is used
during the course of the film.
     In short, if you like Bond films in general, Goldeneye is a film
worth seeing.  Certainly better then Moondreck (MOONRAKER) and it
doesn't have the presence of Tonya Roberts (A VIEW TO A KILL) to drag
it down into the depths.  The villains are outstanding, and 006 almost
walks away with the film.
     The main Bond woman in this film is Isabella Scorupco, and as far
as I know, this is her first film.  She plays a Russian computer
techie, second banana in her posting to a wonderfully nerdy Russian
Hacker named Boris (Alan Cumming).  There's some posturing about near
the end of the film that looks like the script was trying to establish
and actual relationship between Natalya and Bond, but the scene is
awkward and best ignored.
     Sean Bean, playing 006, almost walks away with the film, as I
said. He's a rotten bastard who is really just a reflection of Bond's
potentially very dark side.  It's fun to watch Bean and Brosnan up on
the screen, because you can easily believe that the characters were
friends.
     All in all, a worthy addition to the Bond pantheon.  No, it's not
one of the best Bond films, but it is one of the better ones.
-- 
kreme@netcom.com
Distribution of this message by Microsoft, its subsidiaries, or its
software shall constitute a violation of my copyrights.  Microsoft may
license copyrights to my messages, for distribution only, for the sum of
$1,000 US per week.

Title
Review for Alienł (1992)
     ALIEN 3 is a dumb movie.  It makes dumb mistakes, and has a dumb
plot.  While ALIEN was an intelligent suspense flick and ALIENS was a
masterful action flick, ALIEN 3 is nothing more than a painfully poor
movie.
     The dialogue is so bad it is distracting at every turn, the acting
is not horrid, but it is uninspired and flat through-out.  There is no
emotion on anyone's part (none of ALIENS "Game over, game over man!")
and the entire mood of the picture is, "Oh, there's an Alien eating
everyone.  Wow."
     The plot is at once simplistic and confusing.  The characters
actions are never explained well, the "plan" doesn't make any sense, and
the entire plot revolves around the Alien being extremely stupid (while
the Alien in ALIEN and the Aliens in ALIENS were demonstrably quite
bright).
     The direction is horrid.  The motion is uneven and badly done.  The
camera is used to compensate for bad plotting by making the shots
confusing and difficult to see.  The dialog is hard to hear in many
places, and there is no sense of suspense or even interest.  With all
the things that are wrong with this movie, the direction is the worst.
It appears this refugee from MTV videos (and supposed to be good at
them) will not be making a strong move to the silver screen.  Everyone
should be extremely thankful of this.
     The best thing about this movie is the title.  ALIEN^3 (Cubed).  It
manages to sneak in a "3" reference, tell you the movie is about a
*single* Alien (one cubed is one) and doesn't repeat the stupidity of
RAMBO III (the sequel to RAMBO: FIRST BLOOD PART II).
SPOILER Alert and Plot nit-picks (serious nit picks):
     The movie starts off badly.  Three of the surviving four people from
ALIENS are killed during the opening credits, with no explanation as to
how or why.  We know from ALIENS that there is no possible way that
Alien eggs could have been on the ship, and yet we have two at the
beginning of this movie.  Why?  Because no one was imaginative enough to
think up an original plot, so they decided on the old monster movie
ploy: "Even though you saw us kill every last monster in the last movie,
guess what?  We missed one, and it's pissed off."
     Lt. Ripley is impregnated with an Alien, even though the integrity
of her hypersleep capsule was intact and no "facehugger" remains were
left with her.
     It is quite obvious Hicks was killed because the producers didn't
want to pay Michael Biehn.
     While the Alien in ALIEN was sly and tended to strike quickly and
then vanish (presumably to eat its prey) this one just runs around
killing people.  It will move from one body to the next live one without
a moments hesitation.  We have no explanation for this other than it
allows for an extremely stupid chase sequence where the characters all
get to act as live bait luring the surprisingly stupid Alien to the "kill
zone."
     In short, the movie violates just about every single rule of making
a successful sequel.  It is not at all true to the original movies, it
changes the rules from what we know, and it is poorly made.
     It is not as bad a movie as HIGHLANDER II, but it is not much
better.  A -3 is pretty generous on my part, and it only rates that
because I liked the character of the religious zealot quite a bit.

Title
Review for Exorcist III, The (1990)
     THE EXORCIST III is the real sequel to what might have been the
single most important horror movie since Boris Karloff portrayed
Dracula.  The original EXORCIST shattered the bounds of what was
acceptable gore and, unfortunately, spawned a generation of slasher
films that were nothing but gore.  Released in 1973 it depicted a level
of violence that I do not believe had ever been encountered before.
     The sequel, THE EXORCIST II: THE HERETIC (I think), was so bad that
it completely submarined the career of Linda Blair (who?).  When I saw
the preview for E III in the theater several months back I heard several
people say, "Three?  Was there a Two?  I don't remember II."  The lucky
few.  The lucky few.
     Now, 17 years later we have a sequel.  Fifteen years have passed
and some very disturbing murders are being committed.  There is none, or
very little of the shocking gore of the original or of the multitude of
"successful" horror movies of the last decade.  The gore is minimalistic
and the emphasis is on scaring the bejeezus out of the audience without
tricks.
     There is one scene where the camera is set up at the end of a
hallway.  A series of miniscares and an earie soundtrack warns you that
something is going to happen.  Something dreadful.  You know what will
happen.  You know to who.  You know to who.  The demon has told you who
is going to die.  You KNOW.  And yet, when the moment comes, I nearly
bolted out of my chair.  A figure in a white flowing gown walks quickly
across the hallway, perfectly erect.  The scene is surreal.  The flowing
robes and the fast soundtrack make the action seem like it is moving too
fast, but it is real time.  The figure has the murder weapon stretched
out in front like an object of rapture.  There is never the scene of the
murder.  No blood is spilled, and yet the audience is truly terrified.
     I highly recommend this movie for several reasons.  It is a return
to the good old fashion psychological thriller (a la ALIEN, or PSYCHO)
with a good dose of horror thrown in for good measure.  It might be a
good idea to see THE EXORCIST before you see this to refresh your mind
as to some of the details.  The plot of the first movie is rather
important.
     Blatty's depiction of Satan is rather disturbing.  There is a
quality there that is so human.  The demon has his points... if you
look just for an instant from his perspective.  Blatty allows the story
to unfold slowly and terrifyingly.  There are long pauses in dialog,
and long speeches from major players in the plot.  The acting is
wonderfull [sic].

Title
Review for Dracula (1992)
     Francis Ford Coppola has once again taken on the task of making a
movie from a classic book.  Where before he created a remarkable film
(APOCALYPSE NOW from HEART OF DARKNESS) this time he has not done quite
so well.  Bram  Stoker's novel is a chilling Gothic horror, recommended
reading for everyone.  What Coppola has done is remove the element of
horror from the story and transform it into a love story.
     Strangely enough, in terms of plot, this version follows the book
far closer than any Dracula movie I've seen.  There are some remarkable
inconsistencies, and the film feels as if it was not quite ready for
release.  The editing is choppy, there are incongruous scenes and scene
changes, and the occasional voice over.  These details add up to a
fairly steady diet of distractions.
     Oldman is a wonderfully powerful vampire.  His performance manages
to bring a certain sympathy, much as Karloff's Frankenstein's monster
did.  Dracula is not evil in this film, just misunderstood.  Perhaps
this film reflects our times in the belief that no one is evil, and no
one beyond redemption.  Interstingly enough, Oldman's undead Dracula
seems to be most alive of all the main characters, with the possible
exception of Hopkins' Van Helsing.
     Winona Ryder is disappointing.  Her performance is not poor, but
it is uninspired.  Though her character seems to be broiling in inner
turmoil, we know of it only through her diary.  The character of Lucy
was far better drawn by Sadie Frost.
     Keanu Reeves is just dreadful.  He is completely dull, and seems to
be walking through the role from start to finish.  By far the worst
performance in the movie.  I am quite disappointed, as I like Reeves,
but it is quite obvious that this role was far beyond his meager
abilities.
     Hopkins turns in an inspired performance as the good doctor, Van
Helsing.  He and Oldman make the film worth seeing.  He manages to be
humorous without quite crossing into something incongruous.  If you are
as impressed with Hopkins as I am, though, THE EFFICIENCY EXPERT allows
him a little more time on screen.
     Tom Waits (the singer?) plays Renfield, and does an amazing job
with him.  It's a shame he wasn't cast as Jonathan Harker instead of
Reeves; I'm quite sure he would have done a much better job.
     The problem with Dracula isn't so much the actors though, it is
that it does not quite work as a love story.  Perhaps it is a failing on
the part of Ms.  Ryder, but I believe it was more a problem with the
script.  The effects are very good (especially the shadows, which never
seem to be in sync with the Count) but still there is something missing.
If Coppola wanted to make a love story, he should have taken a hint from
the makers of GHOST and made us *believe*.
     Still, with all its problems, Dracula does have something going
for it.  Coppola's hand is evident throughout, and Oldman's performance
is compelling enough that I have no doubts the movie will be successful.
Come Oscar time, though, and Oldman is the only one deserving of any
recognition, though I wouldn't be surprised to see a nomination for
Hopkins anyway.  Of course I am not including the effects work, which
certainly deserves some accolades.  Oldman's makeup artists does some
amazing things, but in terms of major recognition, Gary Oldman is the
only actor who might deserve a nomination.

Title
Review for SubUrbia (1997)
A sort of cross between AMERICAN GRAFITTI and CLERKS, subUrbia (note the
capitalization of the central you -- er, 'u') dosen't have a lot in the way
of action, and the plot unwinds itself slowly.  There are many nice
touches, not least of which is the "Circle A" convenience store.  The film
is peppered
subtly with anarchy symbols hiding in background grafitti, and anarchy comes
through as a central theme.  There is an essential lawlessness in this
movie.  The police are shown as ineffectual, and there are several scenes
of near-violent confrontation.
This isn't a violent film.  It isn't a sexy film.  As a matter of fact, I
don't think there is any sex or violence in it at all.  A few cuts for
language and the movie could be on network tv.  This is not an edgy film,
it's just a story about the events of a single night in eight people's
lives.
While CLERKS glorified the slacker as a better-than-thou intellectual with
some sort of secret insight on life, this movie admits quite freely that
it has no answers.  The movie isn't about answers.  It isn't really about
questions either.  It's about futility, maybe.  Or maybe it's about trust.
I saw this movie at a screening, and I don't have a press kit, so I don't
know the names of the actors.  The woman who plays Bebe, currently seen on
the NBC show MEN BEHAVING BADLY, almost walks away with the film.  She is
a peripheral character, and yet, when all is said and done, the movie is
more about her than about anyone else.
The catalyst to this night is a fledgling rock star, coming back to his
home town to play "The Orpheum," a venue he last played for the Senior
Prom.  He shows up, in a nearly surreal way, in a stretch limo with his
puplicist to "hang" at the Circle A with these people he knew in High
School.
Yes, he pulls up on the side of the Circle A in a stretch limo.  And no
one else sees him there.
The movie does drag, though I'm at a loss to suggest what should have been
cut.  Still, perhaps a better editting job could have made the film not
feel quite so lathargic.  On the other hand, the movie's action occurs
between about 11pm and dawn, so to a certain extenet, the pace was surely
intentional.

Title
Review for Howards End (1992)
Review in short:  An excellent movie from the same creative team that
brought us A ROOM WITH A VIEW.  Highly recommended, +3.5 (-4 to +4)
     HOWARD'S END is another film from the same team (Dir: Ivory,
Producer: Ismail Merchant, Screenplay: Ruth Prawer Jhabvala) that brough
us another E. M. Forster book, A ROOM WITH A VIEW.  This film reminds
one very much of A ROOM WITH A VIEW--it has the same feeling to it.
     The direction manages to set a pace that is slow without ever
seeming to bog.  The actors are allowed to unfold the story like a
wonderful origami swan.  Vanessa Redgrave is not in the film very
long, but her presence as Ruth Wilcox is felt throughout the movie.
     This is a better film than A ROOM WITH A VIEW.  The story is
handled better, and there is none of the confusion that seemed to mark A
ROOM WITH A VIEW.  Helena Bonham Carter, who played Lucy in A ROOM WITH
A VIEW seems to have a gift for playing a headstrong late-Victorian
era young lady.  She is more mature in this role, and more head-strong
as well, though she is not the center of the story this time.
     Who is the center of the story is a question that could spark some
argument.  My opinion it must be Ruth Wilcox (Redgrave).  Either her or
Howard's End itself (a charming country estate).
     The plot of the movie revolves around the interconnected lives of
two sisters, Margaret and Helen Schlegel (Thompson and Carter) and a
English family, the Wilcoxes, primarily Ruth Wilcox and Henry Wilcox
(Redgrave and Hopkins), and a young man named Leonard Bast (Sam West).
The plot is involved and interesting, but this is not a plot-driven
movie.
     We see a remarkable performance from Anthony Hopkins as a rich
upper-class Englishman of rather questionable morals.  He is not an evil
man, but he is a hypocrite.
     I must take the time to comment on the film itself, I saw it in 70
mm (from a 35mm print I believe) and was very impressed with the quality
of the image.  The colors are soft and moist looking, and there is a
gauze-like feeling to the outdoor shots.  It is much like A ROOM WITH A
VIEW in this regard.

Title
Review for Remains of the Day, The (1993)
     The only thing I can say in detraction from THE REMAINS OF THE DAY
is that the rather stilted style of the film itself, a series of
flashbacks, detracts from the overall effect of what must be viewed as
a tragic tale.  It would be my guess that the film would have been much
more powerful had we not began the film with James Stevens (Anthony
Hopkins) as an old man, alone.  Hopkins performance is a wonder to
watch.  He plays the stoic butler with such ferocity one can barely
resist the urge to vault up and strangle the man.  Each trace of
emotion is so carefully and wholly hidden that no one in the film has
the foggiest notion Mr. Stevens might actually have feelings.  The
story revolves around Miss Kenton and Mr. Stevens.  Miss Kenton is the
house-keeper hired for a large English manor, Darlington Hall.  Mr.
Stevens is the butler, head of the household.  Master of all the
servants.  The ultimate servant.  Mr. Stevens and Miss Kenton fall in
love, but the requirements of their duty prevent either from
acknowledging their feelings.  Despite Mr.  Steven's one Freudian slip
that he would be lost without her, he is never able to admit his
feelings.  Not for Miss Kenton, not for his father, not even for his
employers.  When one character tries to talk to Mr. Stevens as a
friend, we see a person very uncomfortable with the idea, and unable to
relinquish the stoicism of his position.
     Emma Thompson is Miss Kenton, and she brings her usual charm to
the role.  She finds herself in love with Mr. Stevens, but is unable to
coax him into any sort of reaction except that of the good and proper
servant.  Ms. Thompson's performance is exactly what Hopkins needed;
it allows Steven's character to be softened just a tad.  As the
audience we are not so irritated with Stevens that we loose interest in
his life, because we see what he means to Miss Kenton.

Title
Review for Jurassic Park (1993)
     I didn't write a review of JURASSIC PARK when I first saw it for
many reasons, primary amongst them the fact that I was too busy
standing in wide-eyed amazement at the technological wonder of the
whole thing to pay the slightest bit of attention to the story, the
characters, the dialog, or really any part of the movie beyond the
truly amazing special effects.
     However, after sitting through the movie a second time, several
things came to mind, and I thought I would share them with the net.
     First of all, the movie actually moves along fairly slowly once
you know what's going to happen.  The first time through there is a
frenzied feel to the film, but once the element of surprise is gone,
the movie plods along.  This isn't like ALIENS where each viewing
manages to preach you right back on the edge of your chair all over
again, least ways not for me.
     If JURASSIC PARK is viewed as it should be, a special-effects
extravaganza with a thin envelope of story to hold it all together then
it succeeds marvelously.  If, however it is judged on the same merit
scale as other films, it comes up sadly lacking.
     There is a lot of preaching going on.  Spielberg spends an
inordinate amount of time drilling the same basic "don't f--- with
Mother Nature" theme into our heads.  There's no need, the action in
the movie is sufficient warning to all comers.
     The only characters (beside the T-Rex and the 'raptors) with any
real personality seems to be Dr. Slatter (Laura Dern), the rest are
just cardboard stereotypes that never seem to escape their predefined
molds.  Sam Neill is wasted, I think, in a role that almost any
half-talented actor could have pulled off.  Jeff Goldblum is either
too outrageous, or not outrageous enough -- hovering somewhere in a
morass of ineffectuality.
     I think the mistake Spielberg made was the mistake that Lucas
*didn't* make in STAR WARS, he forgot that no matter how great the
effects are, the movie still has to be about *people*.  With STAR WARS,
the last film to shatter the special effects window, the effects are
just there, literally the vehicles that the story just rides along on,
the story is still a people story.
     Spielberg had a choice, he could either concentrate on the
the 'raptors and make them real characters, as they were in the book, or
he could make a wonderful demo film for ILM.  Too bad he chose the later.
     Perhaps he should have looked at some of the classic
horror/monster flics of the past to see what he did wrong.  KING KONG
for instance, or perhaps more appropriate ALIEN.
     ALIEN was in many ways similar to JURASSIC PARK, "big-bad-monster-
on-the-loose" but it succeeded where JURASSIC PARK failed, in making a
movie that was worth seeing several times.  The only reason to see
JURASSIC PARK again is so you can sit back, relax, and really watch the
effects.  They're perfect.  They're wonderful, and they're all that's
there to see.

Title
Review for Batman Returns (1992)
     The Bat is back, and this time we get to see his nemesis, The
Penguin and the provocative Catwoman.  This movie will disappoint many
people who are hoping to see more of the same movie magic that made
BATMAN so enjoyable.  While the plot has regressed remarkably to a
cartoonish-comic-bookish level, the sexual innuendo/humor has escalated
to a purely adult level.  The movie sends mixed signals throughout and
never fails to miss even the most obvious sexual joke.  Too bad, if the
movie had stayed mostly adult as BATMAN did it would have been much
better; even if it had been purely comic-book it would have been
marginally better.  As it is it tries to straddle the fence between
pleasing the 13 year-olds and pleasing the parents with them.  I think
it misses both.
     Understand me, this is not a *poor* movie.  Not at all, but it is
not BATMAN, and it is not even a particularly worthy successor.  While
BATMAN had a undeniable forcefulness to it and a tightness to the plot
and dialog, this film slowly meanders through an ambling plotline to a
predictable end.  Much of the dialog is spend on jokes, but without the
same humor or strength of BATMAN.  BATMAN RETURNS is trying to show-off.
     Once again the focus of the movie is not Batman himself, but rather
one of the villains.  In this movie it is Michelle Pfeiffer as Catwoman
who steals center stage.  Her performance is wonderfully alive, down to
the soft throaty growl in her voice and the unassuming "Meow."  She is
everything a cat-woman should be, even slightly naughty (though she
tends to sharpen her claws on people instead of furniture).  Selina Kyle
is a perfect foil to Bruce Wayne, and as readers of the Batman comics
have know for years, Catwoman is in many ways Batman's perfect
"villain."
     Danny DeVito is quite good as the Penguin, but I felt that the
screenplay called for a character that was far too much a "freak" and
far too comical.  There is none of the sheer evil of Nicholson's Joker,
just a comical silliness that DeVito never quite manages to shed, even
when he is trying to be the bad guy.  The ridiculous costume hinders him
and reduces the character to a rather uninteresting goon.
     The plot is choppier than BATMAN.  Much of the movie is a bit
confused.  We don't really *know* who the "Red Triangle Gang" is:
children that were stolen or performers from the circus?  There is a
general feeling of slight discontinuity throughout the film.  In short
the editing was not nearly as good as BATMAN.
     But the movie is enjoyable anyway.  The sets are great, though we
never have time to really examine them, and there is no wonderful
architectural focal point like the church in BATMAN.  Instead there is a
Christmas Tree.  Oh well.
     Elfman's score is wonderful and manages to lift the movie during
some of its weaker moments.  The supporting cast is mostly very good,
though I though the actor playing Max's (Christopher Walken) son could
have done better with the three or four lines he had.
     If you are a bat-freak you will see this movie no matter what, and
there are enough bat-freaks out there that this movie will certainly be
successful, though it will play in comparison to the first.  If they
learn from their mistakes in this film and remember the first, the third
should be something wonderful.  (Anyone doubt there will be a third?)
     For the less bat-fixated among you, the movie is worth seeing for
anyone who really liked the first movie and would like to see a great
performance from Michelle Pfeiffer.
     If you disliked the first movie you will probably like this one
even less.
     Oh yes, and one more thing, there is quite a bit more gratuitous
violence and mayhem in BATMAN RETURNS than in BATMAN.
