Authors
Jaideep Mukherjee
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for City of Joy (1992)
     There is no gainsaying the fact that looking at a society from a 
distance can often provide new insights into its underlying dynamics.
However, when a disproportionate amount of attention is paid to the
observer-observed interface, all too often, the messenger becomes more
important than the message.
     This is what happens in CITY OF JOY almost right from the word
"go."  Employing a footage that seems suspiciously contrived (smelt like
herring to me) to produce shock in a Western audience, Roland Joffe 
proceeds to tell a story of the triumph of Western optimism and 
enterprise over a thousand years' worth of superstition and passivity in
a "cesspool of a country."
     A Texas doctor (Patrick Swayze) chooses to seek the meaning of life
in a foreign land, after realising he can't handle death.  Having
reached his destination, Calcutta, he quickly learns that salvation does
not lie in winning speed drinking contests with teenage prostitutes
(okay, so she was 20) but in confronting the evils of destitution and 
hopelessness that seem to be endemic in this "City of Joy."  With a
little help from a British nurse (Pauline Collins), he manages to rescue
assorted poor people (rickshaw pullers, lepers, etc.) from the clutches
of the local don (Shyamanand Jalan) and his crony, played by Art Malik.
(Clearly not an idea as ridiculous, as say, the big B singlehandedly
liberating Goa from Portugese occupation, but this is not a Hindi Movie,
right :-) ).  
     The histrionic abilities of Swayze and Collins, if they exist, 
were carefully concealed from this viewer, thanks to a decidedly
underwhelming script.  The underutilization of an extremely talented
cast was a pity though.  Shabana Azmi, Om Puri, Shyamanand Jalan,
Rudraprasad Sengupta, Anjan Datta, Pavan Malhotra et al have all acted
in better productions than this one.
     I did not find the basic premise of the film disagreeable simply
because it attempts to reinforce the all too familiar stereotype of
white folks delivering coloured people from their collective misery.  In
many Indian films, and even in real life, one encounters this idea in a
different form.  Only there the operating premise seems to be that doing
away with poverty, inequality and exploitation involves shoving superior
morals down the unwilling throats of the huddled masses.  
     This point of view fails to recognize that people's values are,
up to a large measure, determined by objective economic conditions.
Based on similar economic situations, people tend to polarize into
self-contained societal pockets within which values are roughly
constant.  In my book a film, which pretends to deal with marginalized
people as its subject, is a success only when it  recognizes the above
dynamic.  By this yardstick, I would rate Susman and Mandi (both Shyam
Benegal) as examples of successful movies made in this category.
     I don't know why, but as I was walking out of the hall after seeing
this film, I found myself thinking that renaming that street with the
American Consulate after Uncle Ho wasn't such a bad thing, after all.
And by the way, before you proceed to flame me just because I haven't
found anything positive to say about the Hollywood people in this
venture, one need not infer from what I have written here that I hate
everything that comes out of Hollywood.
