Authors
Justin Siegel
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Nil by Mouth (1997)
Intense, harrowing, scary, emotional. All these words apply to Gary
Oldman's debut film, Nil by Mouth. However, overlong, tedious, plotless,
and dragged-out apply as well. Now, I have nothing against plotless films
(witness my love of the films of Kevin Smith) but scene after scene of
absolutely nothing passing itself off as Something Important was just too
much for me. I also have nothing against leisurely-paced films, but,
Christ, this is amazing. No point that could have been established in two
minutes was if it could be equally well established in 15. And, at a 
little
over two hours, Nil by Mouth came dangerously close to wearing out its
wlecome.
It's about one working-class South London family, lead by an abusive,
alcoholic patriarch (Ray Winstone). His wife (Kathy Burke) has a young
daughter and another child on the way. His brother-in-law is addicted to
heroin, and he (Ray) refers to his mother-in-law (to her face) as a 
"stupid
fucking cunt." None of these characters are given any nuances. Oldman 
(who
also wrote the screenplay) just threw them onto the screen and let them 
be
just exactly what they needed to be for whichever scene they were taking
part in at the moment. The junky brother, in particular, is paper thin, 
and
it seriously hurts the film, considering his share of time on-screen.
So I know what you're thinking right now: "If you hate this thing so 
much,
why the fuck are you recommending it?" Well, Oldman, even if he's a
mediocre writer, is a damn fine director. Several scenes struck me as
simply superb (they are, in chronological order, the scene in which Ray
beats the shit out of Valerie, the scene in which Ray has a breakdown and
trashes his house, the scene in which Ray explains the film's cryptic
title, and the scene in which Ray apologizes to Valerie for beating the
everfucking shit out of her), but the whole movie is really well done in 
a
directorial aspect.
After the film fades out but before the credits start to roll, an insert
reads: "Dedicated to the memory of my father." Now, Oldman has gone on
record saying that this film is semi-autobiographical, and it is possible
that this means his father was a Ray-like bastard who beat him and his
mother savagely on a daily basis. If this is the case, I truly feel for 
the
man and respect him for having the courage to make this film. But again, 
if
this is the case, is is not a tad frightening to dedicate the film 
lovingly
to the man's memory? Even though Nil by Mouth tried somewhat to explain
that Ray was simply a product of his environment, its stance was always
clear: he was still a completely evil human-being. Dedicating the film to 
a
man anything like him is kind of sad, don't you think?

Title
Review for Do the Right Thing (1989)
The 1980s, for me anyway, were a surprisingly 
splendid time in the world of film. The competition 
for the best film of the decade is an especially 
heated one: BLUE VELVET, David Lynch's searing, 
gut-wrenching "comedy" about the depravity that 
lurks in the house next door was one choice. 
Scorsese's RAGING BULL was another. BULL's power is 
somewhat muddied by the incredible critical 
response it recieved (I mean come on, is there one 
critic in America that _didn't_ call it the best 
film of the decade?). An "offbeat" choice that I 
could hardly disagree with is LESS THAN ZERO, a 
bleak, nihilistic portait of rich drug-addicts, 
that includes the best performance of the decade, 
by Robert Downey JR. Spike Lee's 
ultra-controversial DO THE RIGHT THING has my vote 
as best film. It seemed to capture a hot-ass 
Bed-Stuy day better than any movie could've, and 
its portrait of racial tensions between blacks and 
Italians was one of cultured thoughtfulness (the 
illiteracy of Pino, for example, which was never 
actually discussed, but easy to pick up by a 
careful watcher).
But the film was the work of a middle-class 
filmmaker (Lee) playing at being poor. While the 
film still has undeniably power, it never fully 
made me believe in Lee's comprehension of the 
lifestyle he was covering. Would a working-class 
twentysomething Brooklynite _really_ start a riot 
over "brothers on the wall"? Would another 
working-class twentysomething Brooklynite nearly 
kill an old man for breaking his radio?
Which brings me to another point. Mookie threw a 
trashcan though Sal's window because the police 
killed Radio Raheem. SAL lost his entire business 
-- his life -- because two asshole police officers 
killed a man in red hot rage. Lee has said that he 
pulled the film away from Paramount (to MCA) 
becasue the studio wanted it to end with "Mookie 
and Sal huging and singing 'We Are the World.'" 
That statement made me think: I felt angered by the 
ending of DO THE RIGHT THING, no only at the black 
rioters, but with the racist store-owners, Pino 
especially. Had the film ended as Paramount 
suggested, though, I would've felt gypped. The mark 
of a good film is that it can leave a bad taste in 
your mouth, but you'll watch it again in a second. 
DO THE RIGHT THING is one of those films.
While not a perfect film, it is as close as 
American film has come in the past 10 years. Spike 
Lee has yet to make a film better than DTRT, and I 
highly doubt he ever will.

Title
Review for Animal House (1978)
**** out of **** for this full-on hardcore manly shit.
NATIONAL LAMPOON'S ANIMAL HOUSE, made in 1978 and set in 1962, remains 
one of the -- no, fuck that noise -- *the* funniest movie ever made. And 
this isn't just my opinion, either; everybody knows this, and that's why 
about a gazillion inferior rip-offs have been made, trying to duplicate 
its success. (PCU anyone? And the first person to bring up GLORY DAZE 
gets decked.)
ANIMAL HOUSE takes place at the fictional Faber College, circa 1962, 
where the Omega frat calls the shots. These guys are wholesome, 
clean-cut, model-citizens... i.e. a bunch of assholes. Greg, their 
leader, is going out with Mandy Pepperidge, but since the silly bastard 
doesn't believe in pre-marital sex, their relationship never goes further 
than a quick jack-off under the stars. Neidermeyer is the supreme-bozo of 
the bunch, walking around with his dick out kicking freshman ass and 
trying to impress the muff. Also hanging around these losers is Babs, 
future Universal Studios employee and serious bitch.
Now let's just take a peak next door, at the Delta house. Over here, 
anything goes: you wanna throw shit out the window? Okay. You wanna crush 
a bunch of beer cans on your forehead and pour honey-mustard all over 
your chest? Go right ahead. The frat's leaders are Otter and Boon (Tim 
Matheson and Peter Riegert). Otter is the ladies' man, going out with 
another girl every night, and Boon is the comedian. He's got a 
steady-date, Katy (Karen Allen), but she's sick of playing second-fiddle 
to a bottle of J.D.
THen there are the others: Pinto, a wimp; Flounder, a blimp; D. Day, a 
biker; Stork, who may or may not have brain-damage; and last but not 
least... Bluto! Bluto, played by the late, great John Belushi, is the 
man. He's the kind of guy who slugs back entire fifths of whiskey then 
proclaim, "I needed that." The kind of guy who puts a cream-filled 
Snowball into his mouth, puffs up his cheeks and spits it out, and then 
says "I'm a zit -- get it?"
The story is as follows: The Omegas are getting the Deltas kicked off 
campus. The Deltas, knowing that fighting the Omegas is stupid, decide to 
go out with style, throwing a wild Toga party and ruining the 
homecoming parade.
This is the fucnniest movie int he history of the world. Do yourself a 
favor and go see it.

Title
Review for Glory Daze (1996)
Let me explain to you this: GLORY DAZE is one of the best films that was 
released in 1996. Read my lips: "GLORY DAZE, a college-comedy about a 
group of pals, in the vein of ANIMAL HOUSE, is one of the very best 
movies of 1996." Is this resinating? Good.
Now before condemning me an idiot who doesn't know a quality film from 
his own asshole, let me qualify my opinion. What on Earth is so great 
about this movie?
You have Jack (Ben Affleck), your main character, who ironically 
describes himself as "happy-go-fucking-lucky as the day I was born" and 
carries a torch for ex-girlfriend Dina, now dating a white dude who likes 
to think he's a Rastafarian. Then there's Micky (Vinnie DeRamus), the 
black comic-strip artist who's "big, clumsy, and never combs his hair." 
Millions of girls find him sexy, but he's too laid back to give much of a 
fuck. Even the gorgeous, flirtatious, virginal Chelsea (Alyssa Milano) 
can't get him off his ass.
Slosh (Vien Hong) is the guy who went from computer-geek to party-animal 
in less than a year, flunked out of school and is now happier than ever, 
getting fired from one shitty job after another and spending most of his 
waking hours drunk as a fuckin' monkey and smoking it up. Dennis ("3rd 
Rock"'s French Stewart) is a professional student, working on his third 
degree and quickly becoming the aplle in his photography-teacher's eye.
And last but not least is Rob (Sam Rockwell), who's moving out with his 
fiancee (Megan Ward), who displays all the traits of a shallow, immature 
bitch. He doesn't really want to live with her, but he can't think of any 
other options.
Jack can think of an idea: just stay at El Rancho Grande, their beloved 
house, and throw more parties and drink more beer. This idea holds up for 
awhile, but soon comes crumbling down with the film's climactic, 
"preservation through destruction" scene. This movie kicks ass, in case 
you don't know.
NoFX, The Vandals, Mudhoney, et al fill the soundtrack. NoFX make the two 
most indelible contributions: "The Moron Brothers," which includes the 
line, "they might not go down in history, but they'll go down on your 
sister"; and "Kill all the White Man," which is particularly funny coming 
from NoFX's four white dudes.
Also, Vien Hong sings "We Are 21," a hilarious punk ode to coming of age, 
and Samn Rockwell sings "Dudes of Steel Theme," which has led to me 
refering to myself as "Romeo-Sid Vicious."

Title
Review for Hanging Garden, The (1997)
Starring: Chris Leavins, Kerry Fox, Peter McNeill, Sarah Polley
Written and Directed by: Thom Fitzgerald
Release Date: 11/14/97 (Saskatoon, Sask.) / Early 1998 (U.S.)
Saskatchewan Classification: 14A (Language, domestic violence, sexuality)
Running Length: 1:34
        I don't think I have ever seen a movie with more flaws that I enjoyed more 
thouroughly than THE HANGING GARDEN. For all its sloppy direction, lapses in smart 
dialogue, amateurish acting and glaring missteps, I must say I was truly taken with this 
powerful and moving film. Canadian director Thom Fitzgerald has crafted a debut film so 
eloquently, that I'm sure his is a name Americans will know as well as Atom Egoyan's by 
the next millenium.
        The hanging garden of the film's title, is a small flower-garden in the backyard 
of a middle-class Nova Scotia family's acreage, where the abusive, alcoholic father 
Whiskey Mac (Peter McNeill) teaches his children the names and blooming seasons of his 
favorite flowers. Mac, it is obvious, cares more for his garden than for his children. It 
is refered to as the "hanging" garden because Mac's overweight, homosexual teenage son 
Sweet William hanged himself there after losing his virginity to a prostitute.
        The film opens, of course, ten years after this fact, when Sweet William (Chris 
Leavins of Saskatoon - it's nice to see a local boy do good for himself) returns to the 
family house for his sister Rosemary's (Kerry Fox) wedding. And right now you're 
thinking, But isn't Sweet William dead? Well, yes, as a matter of fact... or is he? His 
bloated teenage body still swings from a tree in the backyard, and his five-year-old self 
dances through quite a few of the film's scenes, as well. THE HANGING GARDEN is not about 
making sense or answering questions, but about coming to terms with, and (literally) 
burying the past.
        Rosemary (played as a teenager by the Martha Plimpton-ish Sarah Polley, also 
wowing 'em in yet another Canadian masterpiece, THE SWEET HEREAFTER, opening Stateside in 
four days) is a foul-mouthed, chainsmoking, yet loving sister to Sweet William, always 
the most supportive of the family. The fact that she's marrying the very man that William 
shared his first homosexual experience with only complicates matters, and the flirtatious 
bridegroom's passes at Sweet William are making him rather uncomfortable. The way the 
film weaves through flashbacks and present-day is reminiscant of THE SWEET HEREAFTER, yet 
neither the film, nor the direction, is up to par with Egoyan's film.
        The film, however brilliant, has tonnes of obvious flaws. The fact that the 
film's first and second acts have titles, yet the third does not, is one that Fitzgerald 
should've picked up on, as well as the unresolved disapperance of Sweet William's mother. 
The character of Violet (notice the flower-related names here?) is poorly realized as 
well as poorly defined, and Whiskey Mac's mother and sister are never given a chance to 
make any impressions on the viewer.
        I hgighly recommend you see THE HANGING GARDEN as soon as it inches its way to 
American art-houses, which should be sometime in early 1998. It and THE SWEET HEREAFTER 
would make an excellent double-bill, and it proves that, yes, you _can_ go home again - 
even ten years after your death.
