Authors
POSER@vxdesy.desy.de
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Wir können auch anders... (1993)
     Abstract:  Two brothers of very limited intellectual capacity 
     venture into Germany's "Wild East" to claim an inheritance there. 
     What starts out as a short routine trip develops through chance, 
     circumstance and a string of droll mishaps into a very funny road
     movie which has the protagonists fleeing before The Law.  This 
     film is the third major undertaking of director Detlef Buck, and 
     again it is a loving homage to northern Germany and the people 
     and characters found therein.
     The concept of a road movie in Germany admits of being quite a bit
oxymoronic, given the fact that it is almost impossible not to find
comprehensive signs on any road after a couple of kilometres that will
direct anyone towards his destination.  Buck makes this concept work,
however, by making his protagonists illiterates.  The bothers Kipp and
Most are on their way to claim the estate of their recently deceased
grandmother somewhere on the Baltic coast of East Germany.  Kipp, a
dapper slender man in what could pass for an old-fashioned senior prom
suit, is an inmate of a home for the mentally handicapped on leave.
Most, his short and fat brother, is a farm worker who forgot what he
learned in school a long time ago.  Both venture eastwards in an
ancient pickup truck, but very soon find themselves lost in what used
to be the GDR.
     Meanwhile Victor, a Russian soldier of the Western Group of the
Red Army decides that he wants to go home, without the leave of his
superiors.  During his escape, his path crosses that of Kipp and Most,
whom he bullies into giving him a ride.  After an altercation with
latter-day highwaymen, which proves somewhat fatal for some of the
latter, he becomes a trusted companion and genial partner in their way
evermore eastwards.
     One of strong points of this movie is the meticulous development
of the characters.  Kipp (Friedrich Kr'ol), with his delusion of
grandeur, his disregard for reality and his overt innocence, borne out
of a long sheltered life in an asylum, is very clearly mildly deranged,
but this impression is accomplished without resorting to eye-rolling
and suchlike histrionics (I was very strongly reminded of Peter
Seller's underplayed performance in BEING THERE.). The actor spent a
couple of months in a an asylum to acquire the mannerisms of the type
of person he portrays and I consider it time well spent.  Most, on the
other hand, epitomises the suspicious, garrulous and parochial
backwoods type that is, with small variations, found almost
everywhere.  The impression is made subtly, though.  Victor, at first a
kindly bully without malice, afterwards a sunny and agreeable
companion, does not speak one word of German and is thus often a
detachedly amused observer to the frequent quarrels between the two so
disparate brothers.  While Kipp grandiloquently talks and Most
truculently balks, he often takes the lead and acts for the group.
     Such as they are, the heroes of this film are quite unlikely to be
foci for audience identification.  However, whatever they do they do
have the sympathy of the audience.  Even when some people they do
encounter happen not to survive the experience, this falls under
"collateral damage" rather than "malice aforethought."  Their rampage
has a childlike, unreal quality and is innocently funny in
consequence.
     While we watch the progress of our protagonists, we are treated to
a cornucopia of characters, such as adolescents swigging beer to dull
their boredom, picturesque hooligans turned part-time robbers, sharpers
and con-men regarding them as ready prey, truculent and cowardly
skin-heads (Detlef Buck in a hilarious cameo-appearance),
self-important police and all the types one would expect in small
villages and towns in northern Germany.  Buck, a farmer's son from
northern Germany, has a very keen, but sympathetic eye for these people
and while some of the characterisations are quite unflattering, none
them are entirely malicious.  While some characterisations are on the
verge of being a caricature, none of them are entirely overblown and
stereotyped.
     I strongly recommend this film.  Bearing in mind, however, that
the whole mien, subject and realisation are very much German, I wonder
as to the appeal and the chances of distribution outside, specifically
in the US, where the majority of the readers of this group reside. It
is, in my opinion, a very entertaining, slightly paradoxical, movie, a
very interesting document on the Germany that is and a good argument
that German movie industry is not entirely dead.
       Till Poser         Internet: poser@vxdsyc.desy.de
-F35- ZEUS DESY/Freiburg  Bitnet:   POSER@DESYVAX
bldg.1b-235, Notkestr.85  Hepnet:   VXDESY::POSER (13313::Poser)
   D-2000 Hamburg 52      Tel.: -49-40-8998-2004
