Authors
Ross Anthonyy
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Shanghai Noon (2000)
East meets wild west in Jackie Chan's Hollywood latest. Chan, who's as cute
as a toddler in a bathtub, teams up with Owen Wilson, a Seinfeld rambler
with a quick tongue and golden smile. The pairing works like a charm. In
fact, the film nearly blew the top off the theater, save for a few quirks
and the standard fight scene ending.
Lucy Liu (Princess Pei Pei) is kidnapped and held for ransom in Carson City,
Nevada. Chan and three other imperial guards are sent from China to rescue
her. However, Owen Wilson's gang of bandits rob their train, derailing the
original plan. It's a good ol' fashion cowboys, Indians, and Chinamen
picture.
But, after the midpoint, the production becomes more of a sequence of
wonderfully original and funny scenes than a coherent piece. It's too bad,
because had the filmmakers been able to keep both those barrels focused, the
shot would have been a double bull's eye. Still, in a season not graced by
many good films, that one-barrel packs a powerful bullet. I had a great
time!
I'd first seen Owen Wilson in a little film called "Bottle Rocket" a couple
years back. He was as outstanding then as he is now. I'm confident "Shanghai
Noon" will give him the recognition he deserves, "I don't know karate, but I
know Ka..razy and I will use it." Of course, Jackie continues to be
lovable - how could you not like this guy? The cinematography and music are
solid. Even the script is wonderful - save for the climax. Not that it was
bad, it's just that a marvelous cast of characters had been created and
built up well; the climax failed to utilize this huge potential. Aside, from
Wilson's uncommonly rich standoff with the sheriff, the rest of the climax
plays out as you'd expect (in contrast to the freshness of the rest of the
film). And then to top it off the resolution goes way silly.
Best to have ended the film on a freeze frame -- depicted in the picture
above. Despite falling short of what it could have been, "Shanghai Noon"
still kicks butt. I recommend it heartily.
Shanghai Noon. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Jackie Chan, Owen Wilson, Lucy Liu, Brandon Merril, Roger Yuan,
Xander Berkeley, Walton Goggins.
Directed by Tom Dey. Written by Alfred Gough & Miles Millar.
Produced by Roger Birnbaum, Gary Barber and Jonathan Glickman at
Spyglass/Touchstone.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com
