Authors
Nick Lyons
Number of Reviews
24

Title
Review for End of the Affair, The (1999)
  "The End Of The Affair" is a dark and moody romantic period piece, that Neil
Jordan exquisitely writes and directs. Although it's slow and sometimes
confusing to follow, it still manages to give audiences a moving experience.
  Based on Graham Greene's novel of the same name, the film mainly follows 3
characters. There's Maurice Bendrix (Ralph Fiennes) who has an affair with
Henry Mile's (Stephen Rea) wife Sarah (Julianne Moore). Sarah finds Henry to be
a bore, because well, he's just a normal guy. It's all work and no play with
him. While Maurice on the other hand falls madly in love with Sarah, and would
do anything for her. Unfortunately the two break up. This is all witnessed in a
serious of flashbacks, so that leads us to the present. It's a few years later,
and they both still think of each other, so Maurice hires a private detective
(Ian Hart) to see what Sarah is up too. While this may sound straight forward
it's not. It's a deep dark tale of the jealousy that lies in the two men,
unhappiness, and the ever lasting love. 
  All this may sound like a drag, but it really captures your interest. With
great performances by Ralph Fiennes (doing another English Patient type of
film, only this movie is better) and Julianna Moore who definitely deserves an
Oscar because out of all 5 films she did in 1999, I believe this was the role,
she had the most passion for, and you can see why. The story was also well
written thanks to Neil Jordan. Even though I didn't read the book, there's no
doubt in mind that it was just as moving and descriptive. What's so moving
about it you ask? The tragedy of it all. It's not the typical romance, in which
a guy finds a girl, they fall in love and all is well, this is more complicated
and depressing. It really shows the complexity of a relationship, because
nothing is ever perfect. Everyone feels a different way and that is what tears
us to pieces.
  Back to Neil Jordan's script, it wasn't only red roses. There were times when
I felt it too be a little slow, but most Romances are. It also tended to be a
bit confusing, especially at the start. It keep jumping around from past to
present, so it obviously took awhile to get a grasp of things. Also a notable
was the superb direction by Neil Jordan. I'd have to say this is his finest
achievement to date, because quite frankly I've never really found his work to
be up to par. It just never did anything for me, until now.
  When it ends, it leaves viewers a little saddened, but provoked nonetheless.
This is definitely one of the best films of 99, and had some of the best
acting, most notably by Moore. Not for all movie goers, but for those who are
film buffs and want something of value.

Title
Review for Green Mile, The (1999)
"The Green Mile" (which is based on the Stephen King series titled Green Mile)
is one of those films that you get so involved with, that you find yourself
releasing emotions, as if you were right there with Tom Hanks and company. It's
times like these that you know the film is a powerful experience.
   The story basically has 2 sections. The first half shows what life is like
in this such prison, and what the guards do on a regular basis, while the
second half focuses on the mysterious John Coffey (Michael Duncan). In the
first half we are shown the dreadful electric chair (known as Old Sparky) , the
cellmates, the mouse 9Mr. Jingles) the prison guards: Paul Edgecomb (Tom
Hanks), Brutus (David Morse), Percy (Doug Hutchison) , etc., and the tall but
peculiar John Coffey. Apparently he was charged with killing two young girls,
but we have reasons to believe he is innocent. We see that he possesses a power
to heal those who are in pain, and use that power in other situations. He seems
as harmless as Mr. Jingles, but you will have to see it to find out.
   This is by far the most riveting emotional experience since Saving Private
Ryan. Like I stated before, we are just so engrossed with the characters and
situations, that you feel as if you were there. It's attention to detail during
crucial moments in the film kept you on the edge of your seat, because the
characters were written so incredibly well. It's as if it were a deranged
fantasy that you are apart of. Only Stephen King could think of such a thing,
and of course he did. He is truly a talented author. I only wish he would
create more stupendous novels, that are as good on screen.
   Unfortunately however, I have a few minor complaints. The film was a bit
predictable and at times formulaic. It wasn't very complex, but it really
didn't mater that much because everything else flowed smoothly.
   The acting is top notch. Once again Tom Hanks proves why he is one of the
finest actors in the business today. I've never seen an actor who is constantly
putting all of his effort into his role film after film. It's good to see that
some actors do not sell out, simply because a film has a big budget and is a
guaranteed success. Same goes with the rest of the cast. Doug Hutchinson played
a nasty punk who we want desperately to punch. David Morse too was a good
supporting actor to Hanks, but the biggest surprise was Michael Duncan. He was
virtually unknown up until Green Mile, but I'm sure he will get noticed now.
He''s similar to Ving Rhames, only he hasn't really proven his acting ability
as of yet. I could definitely see him as a James Bond villain though. He's very
big and quite strong.
   Director Frank Darabont strikes again. His first and last film (The
Shawshank Redemption) was an absolute masterpiece. The characters were
intriguing and the story was very creative. I didn't know what was going to
happen. Very mysterious. The Green Mile is far from exceeding the quality of
Shawshank Redemption, because of it's lack of pizzazz and because they work on
a different level. Another aspect of the movie that people disregard is the
length. I personally had no problem with the time. I was never bored and always
interested. I guess those with short attention spans have trouble with the lack
of action. That's their loss.
   The Green Mile is by far one of the best films of the year. It's engrossing,
dazzling and a powerful experience. It's everything a solid film should be and
more. A must see.

Title
Review for Mystery Men (1999)
  Usually when a blockbuster comes out, it's loaded with effects, stars, bad
scripts, and plenty of action. Mystery Men may contain an all-star cast, and
efects, but the clever script and characters are what really works, which is
rare to see this year.
  The film is based upon the comic book series "The Flaming Carrot" by Bob
Burden, in which 3 wanna be super heroes try and fight crime, only to be out
done by the real hero of Champion City, Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear). Things
go a little haywire, when the sinister Casanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush) is
released into the city, where he captures Captain Amazing, and plans to wreak
havoc upon Champion City. Well, the trio decide to take matters in their own
hands, by saving the city, but first they need some assitance. This is where
the film takes a turn for the better.
  In the beggining, there were only 3 wanna be heroes. "Blue Raja (Hank
Azaria), "Mr. Furious (Ben Stiller) and "The Shoveller (William H. Macy). Sure
they were enterataining, but their acts grew old fast. that is until they
aquire "Invisible Boy" (Kel Mitchell), and "The Bowler" (Janeane Garafalo) and
"Mr. Splein" (Paul Reubens), 2 of which rescue the film from becoming a
disastorous mess. Thankfully, the original 3 heroes become amusing, with some
support of Reuben and Garfalo on screen.
  The whole premise is rather ridiculous, but packs a few punches to keep
interest. For one, the film is considerably clever. It literally pokes fun at
super hero films, like Batman And Robin, Superman etc. In fact, many scenes are
similar to Batman And robin, including the opening sequence, only altered in a
humorous and superior way. A part of the cleverness comes from the cast.
Sometimes a film with such talent is overblown, but the acting is what keeps it
alive here.
  While Azaria and Macy were enteratining, 2 characters really stood out. One
was Paul Reuben. No matter how disgusting or revolting "Mr. Splein" may be, you
still can't help but laugh. It' so incredibly moronic, it's just a riot
watching Reuben relieve himself of bodily functions. Janeane Garafalo also was
an interesting character. She seemed to be the most outgoing and convincing
character on screem, due to her enthusiasm, that kept the film flowing. Men is
worth seeing alone, for those 2 troubled heroes.
   On the downside, a few of the heroes and especially the villain never really
lift off. Kel Mitchell and Geoffrey Rush, were both utterly useless. Their
parts were so limited, they'd be lucky at all to be on screen for more than 20
minutes. Ben Stiller too was wasted, mostly because of his unlikeable power and
dialogue. None of these characters get a rise out of anybody, but happily they
are lost in the charming flow of the film.
  As far as the budget goes, it was wisely spent on the cast, not the effects.
While the set designs and action all look nice, I'm glad there was a seperate
aspect, that the film focused on, and for that I applaud.
  Slow at times, and rather pointless, Mystery Men still delivers. It forgets
about money making, because it's not likely to make a bundle like it's
proceeders, and that's what works. Stupid? Maybe, but for once I'm not
disappointed. No one expected an intelligent film, but you get a film thats wit
captures your attention and makes you forget this miserable year.

Title
Review for Sleepy Hollow (1999)
  In the past, Tim Burton has taken cinema by storm with the action packed
Batman, and the hilarious Ed Wood, but lately his films just don't cut it.
Sleepy Hollow has some unique features, but the script is a terrible mess.
  For those who remember Disney's fantastic "Adventures Of Ichabod Crane", it
is actually superior to this. Disney's version was at least interesting, while
Burton's film drags on far too long, without any suspense or frights. While the
stories are similar, the new version adds too much to the once likable story,
and throws in some weak dialogue to top it off. Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) is
now apparently a constable, who was sent to New York to investigate suspicious
murders. The victims are headless, and no traces of evidence were found, until
the murderer reveals himself, hence the headless horseman. Now with the help of
Christina Ricci and an orphaned boy, they must stop the headless horseman from
a killing spree, that could destroy the whole town of Sleepy Hollow.
  Sure the headless horseman is an intriguing character, but the story has so
many holes that even he nor Depp can save this disaster. In the original, the
headless horseman was meant to be unstoppable. No one could stop him, not even
Ichabod. By the end of the film, it had audiences in deep thought. Burton
however concentrates far too much on the atmosphere, and how to make the main
characters heroes. He takes no risk what so ever, and this is where he fails.
  Another pathetic element of the film was the script. Like I said earlier, he
just stuffed too much in at one time, and made it look real sloppy, kind of
like the mess the headless horseman made with his victims. He completely
butchered the story to pieces.
  Thankfully there are a few factors that I particularly liked. The acting by
Depp was quite notable. He took the nerdy character of the cartoon, and simply
acted it out in a better manner. If it wasn't for his quirky one-liners, I
doubt I could have remained awake, because quite frankly I was getting sleepy.
Just when I thought Christina Ricci was getting to be a good actress, she winds
up doing this. It just goes to show no actress or actor can pass up a big
blockbuster. It's too tempting to let go, even if the script is mush. The
atmosphere too was quite involving. I should have just gazed at the sets, and
the eerie fog, rather than actually pay attention to what was going on. At
least Burton's films are eye candy, even if they are trash.
  The only real scenes of value were the tree full of heads, and the fight
between the horseman, Depp and Casper Van Dien. Other than that, I wish I could
just fast forward through all the gaping holes in the film, and just sit back
and stare at the scenery.
  By the end, I can only think back and laugh at how bad Sleepy Hollow
developed. This is the biggest disappointment of the year, especially when such
a talented director like Burton handles a project like this. Don't waste your
time or money, because your head will feel hollow.
Grade: D+

Title
Review for Talented Mr. Ripley, The (1999)
  Anthony Minghella's last film (The English Patient) was highly overrated, but
when I heard he had a new project with an intriguing premise, I took notice.
Thankfully, it's neither boring nor overrated, but rather a chilling mystery
that captures your attention.
  The film begins with a nerdy young man named Tom Ripley (Matt Damon) who is
noticed by Mr. Greenleaf. He sees that he attended Princeton the same year as
his son Dickie (Jude Law) and actually knew him, so he persuades Tom to go to
Europe and bring back his son for $1000. Tom accepts and leaves immediately.
When he finds Dickie and his beautiful young girlfriend Marge (Gwyenth
Paltrow), he makes it seem like he knew him and they give in. They become good
friends, or so it seems, until Dickie becomes a little suspicious of his acts.
For example he does uncanny voice impersonations, dresses up in Dickie's
clothes, and he basically wants to become closer to him, even be him. Along the
way Tom also gets to know Freddie (Phillip Seymour Hoffman) and the rich girl
Meredith. The film soon takes a turn for the better, as Tom becomes pushed out
of Dickie's life by Freddie, and ultimately ends up murdering Dickie.
  This stylish thriller is similar to Hitchcock, in fact they share similar
qualities. Ripley's obsession with Dickie reminds me of Jimmy Stewart and KIm
Novac's relationship in Vertigo. Both lead characters were greedy and didn't
realize how much harm they were doing until the end. Unfortunately Ripley has
some problems. The story is rushed too quickly at the beginning and is somewhat
absurd at times. Within the first 5 minutes, he agrees to see Dickie, and that
is that. I just found it a little strange that the beginning wasn't expanded on
more. Also, when I meant that the script was somewhat absurd, I was referring
to Ripley's mind. How could anyone be so smart to get away with a complicated
crime like this? Even I had trouble keeping up, and it's highly unlike anyone
could think up of a scheme like this. It's highly unlogical, that a person can
be one step ahead everytime a conflict arises. Aside from that, the film has
many enjoyable qualities.
  I know some people like to see action films and root for the hero, but I for
one think villains are a tad bit more interesting. Take Star Wars for example,
I find the dark side (Darth Vader and such) to be more interesting and far more
exciting to watch on screen. With Ripley, director Anthony Minghella takes the
approach of making the villain (Tom Ripley) the main focus in the film. After
Dickie was killed, the audience seemed to be more involved with the film,
because Ripley was a fascinating character. Sure he is unpleasant, but which
villain isn't? The fact that becoming someone, is a imaginative idea, and
Minghella exploits it well. Never has nastiness been so pure in a movie, and
for that I applaud. 
  Another wonderful aspect is the acting. Jude Law, Matt Damon and Gwyenth
Paltrow all deserve Oscar nods as far as I'm concerned. Each character had it's
own exquisite features, but Matt Damon was by far the most clever and
appealing. Jude Law played a good rich kid, and afterall, he was Ripley's idol.
If it hadn't been for his good acting ability, we would have never believed
that anyone would want to become him, especially if he was a rich snob, with no
talents what so ever, which leads me to the next character, Freddie. Now I
know, I may be a little harsh, but I honestly despise Phillip Seymour Hoffman.
People are saying how far he has come, but what has he really done? Patch
Adams, Flawless? That's nothing to be proud of. I'm disgusted by him, and
frankly could care less about him. Luckily he isn't in it much. Gwyenth Platrow
however is as good as ever. I actually thought she did better here than she did
in Shakespeare In Love. She was that good.
  Director Anthony Minghella also did an equally notable job. I'm glad he
redeemed himself after English Patient, because I was beginning to think that's
all he was going to be known for. There's also some fabulous camera shots that
are worth taking notice, if you're a hard-core film buff. Good stuff.
  In the end, I get the sense Tom Ripley dug himself a deeper hole. What once
was a simple journey, became a night of living hell for him. No matter how much
he tried to cover up Dickie's death, it just made him feel worse, and he knew
he had no other choice. The Talented Mr. Ripley is a very intelligent thriller,
that isn't simple minded. A must see.

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
  "Being John Malkovich" is the type of film we need to see more. Today's films
are either blockbusters that entertain us with tiresome formulas, or those that
have similar themes. Malkovich falls under none of these categories, and it's
quite refreshing to see that occur.
  This strangely provoking story, is actually somewhat understandable. John
Cusack plays a puppeteer trying to make it to the big time. His wife (Cameron
Diaz) supports the both of them by working at a petstore, which explains the
obscure pets they keep in their apartment. When Cusack finally realizes he
needs to get a job, he finds an ad for a filing clerk. When he reaches the
building, he arrives at a 7 1/2 floor. It's there that he discovers a secret
portal that leads to Being John Malkovich for 15 minutes at a time. Meanwhile,
Cusack meets a business partner (Catherine Keener), in which he falls madly in
love with her. The only problem is, she has no interest in him what so ever. 
  The whole portal thing, isn't just a toy, in fact, it becomes Cusack's dream.
Being inside Malkovich's mind, gave him the opportunity to basically control
Mlakovich, like a puppet, and to fulfill his fantasies. I don't want to give
away too much, but Cusack becomes too attached with his discovery.
  In my opinion, this idea is absolutely brilliant. It's really quite scary to
think that someone could become you, control you, be you. It makes you wonder
why we act like we do, and why sometimes we blurt out things or act out
something out of the blue.
  Even if the script is super sharp, I can't help but find the ending
displeasing. It could have lead up to something more, or at least an amusing
conclusion. It tried to explain a mythology about the portals, that made it
seem rushed. Other than that, I had a very enjoyable time.
  The acting was quite delightful as well. John Cusack has finally been given a
chance to prove his ability, and he does it well. He's by far the most
underrated actor due to a lack of popularity, but I'm hoping that will change.
Cameron Diaz was her usual charming self, although I felt that part was wrong
for her, but she pulled it off. John Malkovich himself continues to creep out
people with his eerie facial expressions and tone of voice. Who else's mind
would be better to explore?
  The director, Spike Jonze, who appeared in last month's Three Kings really
catches my attention with this project. I knew he was bizzare, but not to this
extreme. He too is likely too receive media attention.
  "Being John Malkovich" isn't an excellent film, but it is definitly
entertaining and will eaisly become a cult favorite. What's even better is the
film's puzzling message...Am I Nick Lyons?

Title
Review for Bowfinger (1999)
Bowfinger Review
Starring: Steve Martin, Heather Graham, Eddie Murphy
  Steve Martin and Eddie Murphy are generally known as comic geniuses, but each
have had their hits and misses. During the 90's however, there has been more
misses. Thankfully, that streak has been broken, and it's just happened in the
nick of time.
  In this funny comedy, Bowfinger (Steve Martin) is a lousy director who's only
goal is to make the film "Chubby Rain". The only way it can be distributed
however is if Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) is cast. With a budget of only $2000
there is no way  he is going to be able to cast Kit. So he rounds up a film
crew, and cleverly films the actors going up to Kit whenever they see him.
Unfortunately Kit disappears, so they cast a look alike named Jeff (also played
by Eddie Murphy) to help finish Kit's scenes. This is where the film starts
flowing. It's so outrageously funny the way Bowfinger will literally do
anything to get this film done, even if it means breaking the law, stealing
etc. It really shows how starved some directors are to make a film, at any
cost.
  The whole idea itself is very witty. The type of film Bowfinger was creating
was so ridiculous, it could have passed for an Ed Wood film.  It really shows
how desperate people are for entertainment. Actually in a way, Bowfinger was
like the Ed Wood films. He would steal props, beg on his hands and knees for
the script to get a go-ahead etc. The film's humor though, can't match Ed
Wood's. Bowfinger was witty , and wasn't particulary concerned with anything
besides humor, but even some of the humor was rather amateurish at times. It
was as if the script was desperate for any type of laugh. Ed Wood however was
based on a true story, and that made it all the more stylish and amusing.
  The film started out generally slow, but when Kit's brother appeared, the
film picked up pace. The guy was so nerdy and clueless, you coudln't help but
like him. Without his character, the film would have suffered, because Kit had
too many moronic things revolving around him. The whole Mind Head thing fell
flat, and was not needed. Steve Martin gave a nice enthusiastic performance.
What better actor could create an obsessed director striving for his film to be
finished? Heather Graham was a waste. All she did was sleep around to get her
way, but she was mainly there to look nice, and that's what she did.
  Despite some of it's tiresome humor, the film really gets the general message
across, and for that, it is inspiring. Young directors will appreciate the
film's power, because I'm sure many, like Bowfinger are going through the same
experience, minus
the comedic situations. 

Title
Review for Muse, The (1999)
  Albert Brooks saves the day, just in the nick of time. With a very poor
summer for movies, Brooks is just what audiences were looking for to cheer them
up, and does so in a positive way. While this may not be his finest work, "The
Muse" still shakes up some delightful humor.
  In Albert Brook's latest comedy, he tells a story of a troubled screenwriter
(Brooks) who's losing his edge, as his business partners say. In desperation,
he goes to see his friend Jack (Jeff Bridges), who has been a very successful
screenwriter in the past. He asks Jack for some help, and recieves word of a
real life Muse, that has helped him and many other directors throughout their
career. So Brooks seeks the muse named Sarah (Sharon Stone), and is suckered
into buying her expensive, food etc. as a sort of payment. The real punch line
however, doesn't come until the end. It really makes you wonder, how
screenwriters really get their ideas, could it simply be from a friend or a bum
in the street? The idea itself is provoking and Brooks does it in a  hilarious
manner.
  Speaking of Brooks, he was absolutely hysterical as a screenwriter. Every
time he graces the screen, I can't help but start laughing. Albert has a very
unique sense of humor that makes him a very likeable character . The real
problem with the film lies with Sharon Stone. She wasn't likeable at all.
Brooks had the right idea with her occupation, but she never pulled through. In
a way, she drained energy from the once funny atmosphere and left it bleak.
Luckily Brooks could clean up the mess, and cover for Stone's mishap. It was a
shame that the film went slightly downhill after her appearance, because "The
Muse" had the potential to a be a very authentic comedy. On a brighter note,
Andie Macdowell was also charming as Brook's wife. She is always a nice
addition as a supporting actress, because she has that charisma that seems to
complete the atmosphere to any film she's in.
  The funniest moments in "The Muse" in my opinion were the cameos by James
Cameron and Martin Scorsese. I mean imagine, Brooks seeing these big named
directors in his back yard seeking Sharon Stone for advice, like it was
something out of the ordinary. It was just plain hilarious. It just adds to the
satire joke, of how Directors get ideas. Brilliant move by Brooks.
  As I mentioned before, the film is a satire much like it's proceeder
Bowfinger, which came out a few weeks before. Unlike Bowfinger, this is not a
mean spirited film that's desperate for jokes, it's rather a witty and humorous
look at Hollywood. "Bowfinger" had it's moments, but had quite a few problems
that were never worked out, but "The Muse" still managed to keep the laughs
despite a bit of a detour.
  By the end of the film, you're glad to see a good hearty comedy come out of
it. For once I'm not fully disappointed, because the film didn't slow down, it
kept moving, even with some flaws. Thumbs up to Brooks for his brave effort. I
think he'll still manage to keep his edge around well into the future.

Title
Review for World Is Not Enough, The (1999)
  I have generally been a fan of the James Bond series, and I am always
anticipating a new installment. While Pierce Brosnan is a good Bond, his films,
with the exception of Goldeneye, have suffered greatly from storylines and even
some action sequences.
  In the 19th episode, Bond is sent to protect Elektra King, who's in charge of
an oil company (Sophie Marceau) from the evil madman Renard (Robert Carlyle),
who has a bullet driven into his head, giving him the power to feel no pain. Of
course what is a Bond film without twists and turns, none of which I will
reveal, for your viewing pleasure.
  This film disappoints on so many levels, that I could spend all day
discussing them, but I'll keep it relatively short. First off, the film is
actually quite dull. I thought I'd never see the day, when a Bond film never
delivers an explosive ride. Sure there are some nice highlights. The
Underground Pipe scene, the boat chase at the beginning, but nothing ever
sticks out. In Goldneye there was the tank scene, in Tomorrow Never Dies the
remote controlled car, this one merely follows the formula and never gives us a
treat. Even the ending is pathetic. How many times must a Bond film involve a
submarine! It's time to think of something more elaborate, hint hint, be
creative next time.
  Another element that bugged me, was Robert Carlyle. I was expecting a great
performance, especially when the character has a bullet in his head, and can
feel no pain. I was really hoping they would have expanded on that, but that
never occurred. The Bond girls however were decent. Despite the rumors you've
heard about Denise Richard's acting ability, it wasn't as bad as I thought.
Considering the little amount of screen time she had, there was no way of
telling what she could have done, but hey, she looks real nice. Isn't that what
Bond girls are about anyway? I mean, it's not like she's in the running for an
Oscar. Sophie Marceau however was of value to the film, but she received far
too much attention. The film could have easily been shortened, if it wasn't for
the writer's obsession with her character.
  Luckily, those Bond moments fans all cherish are still here and of course
some new features, that might be of some interest as well. Of course there is
the hero himself, Pierce Brosnan, who continues to do an exceptional job as
Bond. I do hope that he will reconsider, and do another entry, this time, a
more thoughtful entertaining one! Then there's the gadgets. Too be honest, the
vehicles are the main factor in this film and there are very few gadgets. The
BMW, although considered a gadget, looked nice, but you can pretty much guess
what happens to that, and every other vehicle Bond enters. The "fishing boat"
as Q refers to, is also pretty shabby, as it's powered by booster jets.
Speaking of Q, he is now training John Cleese (the latest expert) to replace
himself, for when he retires. When Q does go, it will be a shame to see him
leave. I doubt the series will ever be the same without the help of Q's
priceless one-liners, but Cleese (best known for his work in Monty Python) is a
rather noble replacement. At least it's someone you can rely on to make you
laugh.
  While "The World Is Not Enough" is far from the best in the series, there are
some fast paced scenes, that will keep you strapped to your chair. The familiar
elements are still here, but fans will be undoubtebly displeased.

Title
Review for 13th Warrior, The (1999)
  As you should know, this summer has been less than memorable. With a total of
4 decent films, it's not a surprise that these big budget failures keep
appearing. With that said, you can pretty much predict what my opinion on "The
13th Warrior"  will be.
  The film is based on the Michael Crichton"Eaters Of the Dead", in which Ahmed
Ibn Fahdlan is banished from his country for looking at a wife of a king. After
tarveling for many months, he comes across a gang of NorseMen, who are forced
to pick 13 men to protect a town from mythical monsters who travel in the fog.
So, they start picking men, and are left without 1, thus Ahmed is choosen. So
far it sounds interesting right? Not when all of this takes place in 15
minutes. After that, they basically run around killing. That alone shows how
much a script is needed for a film, because once your story is introduced, you
have the rest of the film to start developing it. Obviously that's not the case
here.
  Even if you are going into the film expecting an action packed adventure, you
will be disappointed. Since all the action takes place in fog, it is constantly
hard to see a scene clearly due to those circumstances, and to poor camera
work. Can't the camera men sit still? I'd like to actually watch a film in
focus, but again, they failed to deliver that as well.
  The film moves on and on until the point, where you can care less about
anything but the popcorn you're eating. With corny dialogue, that the
characters laugh at for some odd reason, a script that goes nowhere, dull
action sequences, a predictable ending, and worst of all weak characters,
there's basically nothing to like here, except for maybe the set designs.
That's the only thing that honestly caught my interest. 
  When I heard that John Mctiernan, the director, wanted his name kept out of
the project, that made me wonder why? Well now I know. Crichton's greed forced
Mctiernan to edit his finished product, which led to a big arguement. What's
there to argue about anyway? The film couldn't be saved, no matter how much
they spent or casted.
  Seeing films like The Haunting and Big Daddy making money, I wouldn't be
surprised to see "The 13th Warrior" become a hit. Please do me a favor and save
your money at all costs, or else you will be lost in the fog, like the film
itself.

Title
Review for Straight Story, The (1999)
  David Lynches latest flick, is similar to Elephant Man emotional wise, but
not as touching. Although Richard Farnsworth was superb as Alvin Straight, the
film depends too much on sentimental moments, rather than paying attention to
the dull script.
  In "The Straight Story," Richard Fransworth is Alvin Straight, a stubborn old
man, with bad knees and vision. When he is told that his brother is in critical
condition, he wants dearly to visit him. The only problem is he can't drive,
nor can anyone drive him. The alternative? A John Deere lawnmower. Alvin
immediately ventures 300 miles  on a rugged road trip down to his brother's
home.
  The film basically plays like Easy Rider on sleeping pills. In both films,
they venture out to see the world, and meet exciting new people. Sure Alvin
meets some friendly people, but they don't keep your interest like Jack
Nicholson did with Easy Rider. Another problem is that Richard Fransworth is
the only real value of the film. Story has it's moments, but Farnsworth is
always there to lift our spirits, with his funny lines and charming stubborn
self. Ever since Anne Of Green Gables, I knew he was going to strike it big in
Hollywood . Unfortunately, he's not in Green Gables anymore. Instead, he's
stuck on a mower with a repetitive script.
  The film itself struggles immensely. If it weren't for Farnsworth, and I can
see no other actor to do the job, this film would make a nice nap. Seriously
folks, it tried too hard to be sentimental, and that's a shame, because I've
seen that kind of film hundreds of times. Also the film dragged on slower than
a John Deere lawnmower. The constant pauses, and uninteresting dialogue just
couldn't keep the audiences attention. This film is not for the
squeamish.
I'm quite surprised that Lynch would take on a project so ordinary. If you've
seen his past pictures (Lost Highway, Eraserhead , etc.), you wouldn't even
know it was him. Usually Lynch makes your head spin with dazzling images and
bizarre scripts, that's why it's hard for me to believe he could do such a
film.
  Going back to Fransworth, I think he can pull off an Oscar nomination. I
think if any actor can carry the film by himself, he without a doubt deserves
recognition, and boy does Richard get that. Sissy Spacek was another annoying
element of the film. Although she had a speech impendement, (which was not the
reason I disliked her) she still managed to get under my skin. She always plays
the most boring character possible, with the exception of
Carrie, but I still dislike her acting.
  Straight Story is a simple film, with a simple story, and a great actor. It's
worth seeing the film for Richard Farnsworth, but I'd wait for video, unless
you want to see a typical feel good film.

Title
Review for Toy Story 2 (1999)
  Good-bye Pokemon, hello Toy Story. The toys are back in town and more
entertaining than ever. With the addition of new characters, and a more
involving story, children and adults are sure to love this animated classic.
  In this sequel, Woody is abducted by a toy dealer named Al (Voice of Wayne
Knight) who is obsessed with the Roundup gang, and is dying to sell them to
Tokyo for a huge price. The Roundup gang includes Jessie The Cowgirl (Joan
Cusack), Stinky Pete the Prospector (Kelsey Grammer), Bullseye the horse and
Woody (Tom Hanks) himself. Now Buzz Lightyear (Tim Allen) and a few of Andy's
other toys are out to rescue Woody. Unfortunately for Buzz and the gang, they
must face a number of dangers on the way, such as crossing the street.
  What's so good about Pixar's films are that they are so imaginative. They
take the audience into another world, and make it charming and highly
enjoyable. I've never had so much fun with animation films until Pixar came
into view. They're an absolute delight.
  Enough of my jabbering and on with the film! There are a number of reasons,
why the sequel is superior to the original. For one, we now know the
characters, so no introduction needs to be made for them, that is if you've
seen "Toy Story." It's a necessity to be comfortable with your characters, so
you know what to expect, much like James Bond or any other film that has made
sequels. There also was some incredibly hilarious homage's to Star Wars and
Jurassic Park, that will keep you smiling. Even the animation is sharper this
time around. The opening sequence is dazzling and is breathtaking to watch, as
well as many other new technical breakthroughs. It's like something out of a
dream.
  The characters are as lovable as ever. Rex (Wallace Shawn) is still my
favorite character. As you know, he attempts to be a frightening dinosaur in
the first one, but in this one he only wants to be a hero. Thankfully the
little dinosaur gets his wish. Hamm (John Ratzenberger), SlinkyDog (Jim Varney)
and the always charming Mr. Potato Head, who now has a Mrs. Potato Head are
their usual rowdy selves. Rounding out the crew are a number of new toys.
Jessie The Cowgirl, Stinky Pete and Bullseye. None of these characters really
stand out except Bullseye. Although he says nothing, his constant licking and
smiling will undoubtedly give audiences a pleasurable time.
  The only thing missing in this sequel, is Randy Newman's music. Instead we
must suffer with 2 minutes of Sarah Maclachlan trying to sing. Aside from that
minor complaint, Toy Story 2 is very refreshing. I'm glad that animated
features aren't overstuffed, and disappointing like these big budget films that
are out now. Disney is simply the best when it comes to making family fun.
  There's nothing left to say except go see it. It's about time we get a
fulfilling movie, that will dazzle our minds and give children something other
to do than talk about Pokemon. In the words of Billy Crystal "It's Absolutely
Marvelous."
  By the way, there's a trailer for the next Pixar film called Dinosaurs. This
could be the most spectacular achievement yet. Worth seeing Toy Story 2 just
for that.

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
  "First rule of Fight Club is, don't talk about fight club." This quote deals
directly with my opinion of this film, because quite frankly, it's not even
worth mentioning.
  Director David Fincher (Seven) has completely gone over the edge. With crude
humor, an intolerable script and 2 hours and 19 minutes of pure torture, I'm
surprised I didn't walk out. This just goes to show that hype kills. It's very
rare that a film so hyped up as "Fight Club" turns out to be noteworthy, and
this is no exception.
  The story goes like this. Edward Norton is an insomniac trying to enlighten
his dull life by going to a variety of  disease therapy sessions, until he
meets Marla (Helena Bonham Carter). Norton claims that she is wrecking his
pleasurable lifestyle, when he spots her at a session that he also attended.
Apparently the disease sessions help them see what life is like, literally
living in pain. Why any person would think of such a thing is beyond me, but
things do get worse. Norton is soon assigned to a job that calls for traveling,
and it's on a plane that he meets Tyler Durden (Brad Pitt). The two men develop
a bond, and go out to a bar, and by golly after they get drunk, the two pitiful
characters fight. How do they come up with this stuff? Anyway, their fighting
catches other pathetic loser's attention, and a club is formed.
  Out of all this mess, there manages to lie a message. Fincher shows us that
society is like robots. We work in our jobs doing things step by step, and want
out. Our insanity gets to our brain and makes things worse than they really
are, and we blame it on others. Call me crazy, but this is common knowledge. I
think Fincher was acting as if the film is moodier and more poignant than it
really is, which is probably one of the reasons it fails miserably.
  Even with two good actors, and a solid actress, they only manage to weaken
the story. I couldn't help but hide my face in shame when Norton beats himself
up into a bloody pulp. It just shows how desperate the script is for attention.
I guess Brad Pitt was right for this role, because I felt like beating him up
myself. His bothersome and depressing character, made me disgusted at his 20
million fee. It only showed me that he was in it for the money and nothing
more. Helena Bonham Carter however really had no purpose. She just popped up on
screen, mumbled some lines, smoked and left. This continues for what seems like
6 hours.
  The film drags on and my headache gets bigger, while "Fight Club" nears what
I think might be the end. Unfortunately by then, the film hits rock bottom.
Though the conclusion kept my interest for a mere 5 minutes, it backs down
again and continues to move at a snails pace. 
  On a side note, the trailer shows the only redeeming elements of the film,
that coincidentally lasts the same amount of time that they did on the trailer.
Fincher will hopefully regret making this film or at least learn a lesson.
Concentrating on the atmosphere or a particular key moment, won't do any good
if everything else is in need of support. Also, I'm afraid that immature men
might respond to the film's violence. The last thing the world needs is people
praising a leader of a pointless cult. 
  When the film ends, I'm just glad to get home and take some advil. You'll
either enjoy what the film has to offer, or agree with Ed Norton when he says
"This is so F***ing stupid."

Title
Review for Bringing Out the Dead (1999)
  With a few exceptions, Martin Scorsese has generally been a favorite director
of mine. With such classics like Raging Bull, Goodfellas and my personal
favorite Taxi Driver, I usually am interested in what his latest project will
be. Bringing Out The Dead may not be up to par to Taxi Driver, but it's by far
his best film since Goodfellas, which might be a relief for hard-core Scorsese
fans.
  If you know Scorsese, there's not much of a plot to his films, because he
likes to explore the characters to his films, like in Taxi Driver, which had a
huge impact on critics. In Bringing Out The Dead, his characters aren't
explored that deeply. Cage's character in this film was deeply disturbed. He
wanders the streets of New York in an ambulance with his fellow medics, as they
rescue dying patients. The first stop is with an old man, who we see throughout
the film. When the old man arrives at the hospital, Cage gets acquainted with
the man's daughter (Patricia Arquette). For some reason Cage runs into her
often, as he runs back and forth in his ambulance. When he's out on the streets
he is haunted by patients he couldn't save. It's like ER in hell for Cage, as
he experiences these horrifying moments on a regular basis. 
  You would think that seeing dead patients would spark more interest for the
viewers, but quite frankly that never occurs. The whole film I was waiting for
something more, but unfortunately Schrader never delivered. It's not like
Scorsese to keep the pace steady the full time. I was quite disappointed by the
film's effort. It should have changed direction, or at least had a unique
climax. 
  On the brighter side the acting was the only enlightening feature that kept
the film flowing. Even though the film was displeasing, Nic Cage still managed
to perform his part rather well. If anyone looks like he's been through hell,
it's him. Those depressed eyes, and dreary look really added to the atmosphere
that Scorsese was shooting for.
The other supporting actors added some enjoyable tones as well. John Goodman is
the serious partner, Ving Rhames the religious one, and Tom Sizemore is as
crazy, if not crazier than Cage. Despite Sizemore's hostility towards others, I
couldn't help but be intrigued by what could possibly posses such cruelty
towards injured or sick patients. Pretty disturbing if you ask me.
  Martin Scorsese turns in a typical directing approach. Some noteworthy
remarks I had were the camera angels, as they speed past the ambulance so that
we get the same rush that the characters feel. There's also some twisted side
shots of the ambulance going down a dark alley. He does this a few times, and
it's quite appealing for those interested in technical uses.
  Like Goodfellas, Scorsese continues to put out a rocking soundtrack with
tunes by the R.E.M, The Clash and Van Morrison. You have to applaud at his
choice of music, because oddly enough, these songs fit the film perfectly. He
definitely chooses wisely.
  Although "Bringing Out The Dead" is a let down, fans will enjoy it's attempt.
Some may hate it's never-ending story, but others may like what it has to
offer. Not for people with low attention spans.

Title
Review for Man on the Moon (1999)
  Milos Forman (Amadeus, One Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest) has always been a
favorite director of mine. When I heard he was doing a biopic about Andy
Kauffman, it sounded promising, especially with Jim Carrey aboard. While Man On
The Moon captures Andy Kauffman perfectly, the film feels as staged as some of
Kauffman's acts.
 The story follows the late Andy Kauffman (Jim Carrey) throughout his career.
We see him singing the MIghty Mouse tune, doing Elvis impressions, as well as
performing a strange foreign character, later named Latka. Latka of course was
Andy's most famous character on TAXI, but he believes otherwise. In fact, that
was Kauffman's greatest struggle, coping with the fact that Latka was his
greatest comedic act with audiences. Of course not everybody liked him. Some
people hated him, others thought he was a genius, but either way no one
understood him. That's what made Kauffman so appealing to an audience, his
originality. He does go overboard by wrestling women, but he just wanted to
entertain people in a different fashion.
  This is indeed a very informative movie about Andy Kauffman. Jim Carrey is
absolutely flawless as he potrays the comedian. Every facial expression and
voice tone is right on the money. Carrey obviously did his research. He
undoubtedly deserves an Oscar nod, especially since he was the only one keeping
the film alive. It's unfortunate to see Carrey's talented wasted on a somewhat
dull biopic. Sure it's interesting, but the pacing is dull. It's hard to get a
feeling of realism here, because it's too staged, like many of Andy's acts.
It's quite frankly better to watch a real documentary to get a sense of why he
did what he did. There really was no point for Milos Forman to direct this,
because it's well pointless. If Andy himself saw this, he would probably be
laughing. It's more like an ode to Kauffman, so we can try to understand him a
little better, but it doesn't work. Nothing is explained as to what drove him
to be so different. Even as a child we see him performing to his kid sister,
but why? Everything's a mystery here, and it leaves us puzzled. There's far too
many unanswered questions that leaves viewers furious and flat out irritated.
There's just no reason for making this film period.
  As I said earlier, Jim Carrey was great. He really showed us what Kauffman
was like up close and personal, but the writers didn't give him enough depth.
That's not his fault at all, but he would have easily been handed an Oscar if
that occurred. The rest of the cast (including Danny De Vito, Courtney Love)
did their jobs, but everyone and everything is outdone by Carrey. Even director
Milos Forman felt as if he were awed by Carrey. Speaking of Forman I have no
idea why he choose this movie. It seems so simple for his type of tastes, but I
guess he needed a hit after his last dude (The People Vs. Larry Flynt).
  Another honorable mention is the soundtrack. R.E.M fans will especially be
pleased, that the song Man On The Moon is more meaningful than ever. You will
never hear the song, the same way again. Good stuff. R.E.M's score is also
great as well. It's possibly the best score this year, right behind Red Violin.
It fits perfectly.
  Man On The Moon isn't a great picture, but it is somewhat empty. It needed
more than just a brilliant performance by Carrey. Maybe next time a biopic
comes out, it won't feel as staged or at least have a decent story constructed
around facts.
Grade: B- to a C+

Title
Review for End of Days (1999)
  Arnold Schwarzenegger has been an icon for action enthusiasts, since the late
80's, but lately his films have been very sloppy and the one-liners are getting
worse. It's hard seeing Arnold as Mr. Freeze in Batman And Robin, especially
when he says tons of ice jokes, but hey he got 15 million, what's it matter to
him? Once again Arnold has signed to do another expensive blockbuster, that
can't compare with the likes of The Terminator series, True Lies and even
Eraser.
  In this so called dark thriller, the devil (Gabriel Byrne) has come upon
earth, to impregnate a woman (Robin Tunney) which happens every 1000 years, and
basically destroy the world, but apparently God has chosen one man, and that
one man is Jericho Cane (Arnold himself). With the help of a trusty sidekick
(Kevin Pollack), they will stop at nothing to let the devil take over the
world! 
  Parts of this are actually so absurd, that they would fit right in with
Dogma. Yes, the film is that weak, but it's better than the other blockbuster
right now (Sleepy Hollow), but it makes The World Is Not Enough look like a 4
star film. Anyway, this definitely doesn't seem like an Arnold movie. It just
wasn't the type of film you can see him doing. Sure he gave us a few chuckles
with his well known one-liners, but he seemed confused as to where his
character and the film was going. It's understandable, especially when the
ending had to be changed according to some sources.  Aside form that, he still
walked through it, much like he has in the past few films. I'm sorry to say
this Arnold but maybe these are the end of your action days.
  Speaking of action, where was it in this film? There was hardly any
explosions or fights. The devil made a few places explode, but Arnold wasn't
kicking some devil butt. The ending was changed to make it more spiritual,
which undoubtedly ruined the film. I was at least hoping for a cool ending if
nothing else occurred, but once again I was let down. I also don't know why the
film took so long and cost so much. There was really no super affects at all,
unless you consider an invisible devil, who was in it for 5 minutes tops, worth
the overpriced budget. The budget should have gone into a better script, where
at least audiences could be somewhat entertained instead of facing boredom.
It's pitiful to see how scripts like these get bought and made into a movie. Do
they even read these things anymore? It sure doesn't seem like it.
  Thankfully Gabriel's performance gave some light to this poor film. When he
walks down the street searching for Robin Tunney, you can't help but feel that
he looked like a devil. The guy is creepy looking anyway! 
  When it's all over, you're just glad it's the end of the movie. Don't bother
to see this, if you're expecting a solid action flick, because it's neither
solid nor does it have action. It's just another movie that we are suckered in
to seeing, due to a strategic marketing campaign. Save your money and see the
World Is Not Enough for an entertaining experience.

Title
Review for Hurricane, The (1999)
  "The Hurricane" is hands down the most powerful film of 1999. Although it has
a few minor flaws, one can't help hide it's uplifting message, not to mention a
breakthrough for both Denzel Washington and director Norman Jewison.
  As you may or may not know, the film follows the life of the famous boxer
Rubin "Hurricane" Carter, Hurricane being his nickname. The film starts out
with a murder that was pinned on Rubin, but only we know that he's been
wrongfully accused. The story then focuses on a young boy named Lesra
(Vicellous Reon Shannon), who is struggling in life as well, until he reads the
autobiography of Rubin Carter, which gives him a little inspiration. So the
background story of Rubin basically unfolds as Lesra reads the novel. After he
finishes the book, he is determined to help Rubin out by any means, and he does
with a little help from his friends (Liev Schriber, Deborah Kara Unger and John
Hannah). This leads us to the 2nd part of the film, in which all 4 people
investigate the crime, so that they can give Rubin Carter a fair trial.
  I'll admit, I thought the trailer was a bit sappy, but I must have came into
the movie with an open heart, because I was blown away by it's emotional
impact. Sure it was formulaic and had a simple premise, but there was far more
to it then. A story is only a small portion of the film. The film's messages
are what really worked here, not to mention Denzel Washington's performance,
which I will get into later. The film mainly deals with the racism (in the
first half of the film) towards black men and woman during the 60's, and how
they were treated improperly, while the second half dealt with the inner
struggle to survive with love and hate by your side. It may not seem like much
in words, but is far more descriptive on screen. Absolutely uplifting.
  Unfortunately there are a few flaws. The whole investigation in the film
seemed to have brought it down a notch. I would have rather seen more of
Washington or something with meaning rather than these empty scenes. It just
didn't quite fit. Also as I said before, it is a typical Hollywood film with a
formulaic story. If it was not for that, it would have easily been an excellent
film, but it falls slightly below that. 
  Now for the real knockout in the film, Denzel Washington. Not only is this
his greatest performance, but it's also the best of 99. If someone else was in
his position, I doubt it would have been as believable, nor as powerful. He
delivered here big time. He's got an Oscar Nomination in the bag, maybe even a
win as well. Everyone else in the film did a good job as well.
  Director Norman Jewison has a hit on his hands for once. I have never really
been impressed with his work (with the exception of Moonstruck) up until now.
He has outdone himself and it's about time he's put his good direction skills
to work.
  I suggest you go see "The Hurricane" ASAP, because quite frankly next to "The
Green Mile" and "Toy Story 2" it's one of the best films playing in theaters
now. A must see.

Title
Review for Any Given Sunday (1999)
  Lately Oliver Stone hasn't been cutting it. His last 2 films were garbage,
and I was hoping he would have a come back here. He partly succeeds, but again
he gets too fancy and ends up fumbling again.
  The story is simple, but messy. Head coach Tony D'mato (Al Pacino) is
struggling to win. He has a beat up quarterback named Cap Rooney (Dennis
Quaid), a severely injured defensive captain named Luther Lavay (Lawrence
Taylor) and an extremely moody owner (Cameron Diaz) breathing down his back
24:7. The Miami Sharks needed help, and they got it. When Cap and another QB
become injured, their last hope arrived. His name, Beamen (Jamie Foxx)a cocky
young player who likes breaking the rules. Even though he helps the team win
some games, he is constantly changing the plays, there by angering the team as
well as the coach. There are also a few subplots, involving the medical staff
(James Woods, Matthew Modine) and a sports writer (John C. Mcginley).
  Any Given Sunday is similar to For Love Of The Game. Both films work on one
level, which is focusing on the game. Outside that, it's one sloppy mess.
That's not to say that isn't bad, but it does indeed have many faults. One
thing I particularly liked was the message. As Pacino says in the film, he
believes there's more to football then winning, but Foxx and other young
talents believe otherwise. I couldn't help but feel this was a jab towards
Hollywood. Like I have been saying in a few of my past reviews, many directors
only make films for money. Profit is all that matters, in other words winning
is a must. Aside from those positive aspects, there are many sloppy moments. 
  Director Oliver Stone uses far too many scenes in which more than 1 objective
is going on. One moment we're watching the football game, the next a scene from
Ben-Hur. His artistic ability has gone down the tubes, and so have his movies.
He is no longer one of the top directors in the business as far as I'm
concerned. He had his moments of fame with Platoon and JFK, but those days are
gone. Another painful element of the film was the length. If it wasn't for
Stone's obsession with his artistic approach, the film could have been cut an
hour. Did they even edit this thing what so ever? I was completely bored the
second half, and even the football matches became a bore. Unlike the Green
Mile, this actually seemed like 3 hours
  Luckily the film isn't a complete waste of time during its 2 hour and 40
minute run, because there's some nice acting along the way, but not by Pacino.
In fact Pacino has never been worse. He lacked any charisma for his role here,
unlike the Insider. I don't know how an actor does the best acting to one of
the worst, it just doesn't seem right. Cameron Diaz however continues to prove
she's more than a good looking actress. It's true she overacted a bit, but so
did the rest of the cast. At least she put forth some energy towards her part.
That's more than I can say for Pacino or even James Woods. They were painfully
dull. 
  Any Given Sunday is a mediocre but dreadfully long effort by Stone. If you
can get pass the length, the many unneeded scenes, the overacting and Stone's
pitiful script, then by all means see it. But for me, it's just another fumble
for the holiday season.

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
Starring: Heather Donahue, Mike Williams and Joshua Leonard
   After months and months of anticipation, Blair Witch has finally gone wide,
playing in more than 1000 screens.  To some, it may be the film you've been
looking for this year, to others, including myself, it's a flawed bone chiller.
   The film begins quite uniquely.  It turns out that 3 people,Heather Donahue,
Mike Williams and Joshua Leonard, went into the forest to do a project on the
mythical Blair Witch, and were never found. The only evidence left of their
trip, was film from an 18mm video camera. The interesting thing about the use
of the camera is the fact that it's 18mm, because it's as if the whole
situation seemed like a reality. Unfortunately it made me a little queezy at
times because it was too jumpy. Motion sickness people beware.
 Another positive note is, that there are no big budget effects or big named
actors to make it a blockbuster, just normal people who act like they do on a
every day basis who get lost in the woods. That itself seperates it from any
other film out there, but with that said, it still feels a bit staged. There
are many unbelivable situations that occur, some of which gets the film lost
itself. For 1 thing, it's highly doubtful anyone would tape themselves when
they're scared to the bone. It just isn't human.
  Many people were saying that the hype would ruin the experience, but it's a
false statement. You are so intensely interested in their venture into the
woods, that you clear you mind of most everything. Not too amny films can put
you in that state. One disappointing thing that I noticed was the lack of
terror. Sure it was chilling to hear blood curling screams in pure darkness,
and eerie sounds, but that's enough to get you frightened. In fact, it spends
more time trying to get to know the character's, that you wind up laughing at
their jokes more than being terrified. Don't get me wrong the characters did a
fine job. We all could relate to the nightmarish time they were having in these
woods, becoming more frightened and paranoid by the minute.
   I have to give credit to the real filmakers though, this film delivers it's
originality. It's not the same old slasher flick, it's a horror film that makes
you cringe in fear at the chilling sounds, pay attention to the intriguing
story, ponder into what is really going on. All these emotions never pop up in
one's mind when they watch a gore infested film. It dares to be different and
doesn't let down.
   By the end, everyone seems to lose it in the audience and on screen. The
film spends a good amount of time building up to the end, where everyone sits
still biting their nails or feeling sick to their stomach, but by then it's
over. It ends so quickly audiences aren't sure what they saw right then and
there until they have a few minutes to think about it. Strange? Maybe, but it's
sure one chill fest, that will be buried in your mind for quite some time,
despite it's unpleasant atmosphere.

Title
Review for Cradle Will Rock (1999)
  Cradle Will Rock is the latest effort from director/actor Tim Robbins. While
he may have had an Oscar worthy film back in 1995 (Dead Man Walking), he gets a
little overconfident and sloppy here.
  The story is confusing, and filled with many subplots, so I'll try my best
and explain it as simply as possible. The film is based on a "mostly" true
story about a Federal theater in the 1930s, that produced a play (The Cradle
Will Rock) that apparently was offensive to some, so the government shuts it
down. It's during the time of the depression, and all this theater wants to do
is entertain and cheer up those who do not have jobs, or are poor. Between this
conflict lies what seems like 10 subplots, about those who work in theater, or
those associated. Also along the way are some other messages mashed together to
create an even more overwhelming experience. Tim Robbin's just keeps piling on
political views, and characters, that we just give up on the film, or in some
cases walk out. For Robbin's it may be a nice achievement, but to me it seemed
more like a friendly get together with slightly more sophisticated dialogue,
and fancy outfits.
  I thought the main reason for seeing the film would be for the outstanding
cast, unfortunately are all uninteresting, except for a few. Let me recap what
each important character does, so please bear with me (it's the least you can
do, especially if you were considering seeing this). I'll begin with those
involved with the play. There's Orson Welles (Angus Macfadyen) who of course is
the director of the play, the producer John Houseman (Cary Elwes), Marc
Blitzstein (Hank Azaria) the writer of the play, Emily Watson, a woman who gets
her break by playing the main part in Cradle Will Rock. Outside the play
there's the: ventriloquist (Bill Murray) who wants a relationship with a
Federal Theater clerk (Joan Cusack), another subplot involving a painter Diego
Rivera (Ruben Blades) who's unhappy that his painting is too be destroyed by
Nelson Rockefeller because he feels it to be an outrage (John Cusack). There's
a few other actresses and actors who have their own stories (Susan Sarandon,
Philip Baker Hall too name a few) but those that I mentioned, were the most
significant to the story. Anyway, most of these talented Hollywood stars were
completely wasted, except for Emily Watson, who does another great job, and one
of my personal favorite actors John Cusack, who always delivers through thick
and thin.
  Now although most of the film was weak to say the least, there were some nice
moments and some involving subjects, but all this is overblown. Sure the free
speech segment was a nice feature, but not when it becomes repetitive. The
whole film is like this, and it's basically nothing but a headache.
  On the brighter side, Tim Robbin's direction was masterful. His camera
direction seemed reminiscent to the works of Paul Thomas Anderson's latest
Magnolia, only smoother In my opinion, but even that can't make a movie that
much better.
  Although it has it's moments (not many of them, but they're there), Cradle
Will Rock stays true to it's title, because the cradle rocked too far and
tipped over.

Title
Review for Dogma (1999)
  After seeing Dogma, I can't get it out of mind. The film is  filled with so
many messages and jokes, that I feel the need to see it again. Although Kevin
Smith brings some of the amateur humor along, he manages to maintain a clever
and sometimes provocative script that dares to be different.
  After all the controversy and arguments over Dogma, it quite surprisingly
paid off. While it is sure to offend some religious protesters, others may
understand what Smith was trying to express. I for one was completely
satisfied. Sure the film may be crude, but if you look closer, you will notice
that Smith was more or less mocking our world, than our religions. Like
Bartebly and Loki were saying, they can't believe how far our world has
dropped. People sinning left and right etc. To me this seems like a mockery of
how we treated God, or maybe not. It's just one of the many ideas floating in
my mind head about this film.
  The film opens with Bartebly (Ben Affleck) and Loki (Matt Damon), 2 angels
cast out of heaven for disobeying their Lord. They receive a letter about a
church that has a loophole that would bring them back to heaven. One thing the
letter fails to mention is the elimination of the world's existence, because
you can't betray God. So now our lives are in the hands of Bethany (Linda
Florentino),  Jay (Jason Mewes) Silent Bob (Kevin Smith), and The 13th Apostle
Rufus (Chris Rock). With the help of the voice of God (Alan Rickman), they can
save the world, but again they face another problem. It appears that Azrael
(The devil's muse) and a gang of thugs, will stop at nothing to let them enter
the church (because they would rather die then go to hell).
  The film is absurd on some levels, but there's so much to absorb here. That
was however a problem. Kevin Smith seemed a bit confused as well. It's like he
had too many ideas and made a mess of putting them together, but Dogma
straightens itself out. The same goes with the jokes. Just about everyone but
Jason Lee and Linda Florentino provide plenty of laughs to keep the film
flowing, especially Chris Rock. Speaking of Chris Rock, if it wasn't for his
presence, the film would have suffered badly. Since Linda Florentino was
totally miscast as the leading character, I was a bit worried that would permit
the film from flowing smoothly. Thankfully Chris came in the nick of time.
Although he wasn't his usual loud mouthed self, he still offered the most
entertaining scenes. The rest of the cast was good, but more notable were Matt
Damon and Ben Affleck. Although they were meant to be the villains, they
created some hilarious scenes, one of which includes a Mickey Mouse type of
animal named Mooby, undoubtedly a reference towards Miramax for turning the
film down because it was a Disney owned corporation.
  As I mentioned earlier, the script is very bold. You have to congratulate
Kevin on his achievement, even if you disliked it. What Kevin did was
brilliant, and this is without a doubt the best original screenplay of the
year. It most likely won't get nominated for an Oscar because of how harsh it
is, but I sure won't overlook it. 
  As for Kevin Smith, it's about time he has matured more. Once a comic book
nerd, now a respected director, I'm glad to see that he has stepped up. I will
be curious as to what approach he might take next. The sky's the limit.
  Crude and offensive it may be, but I love it. For once people should forget
about life and have an enjoyable time. After all, even "God has a sense of
humor."

Title
Review for Deep Blue Sea (1999)
  So far this year, we haven't seen many fast paced or exciting films.  Mummy
fell flat, due to cardboard acting, Entrapment was a laughfest, and The
Haunting failed to work at all.  Deep Blue Sea itself has many faults, but it
entertains, despite a deep hole in it's script.
  In this film we are brought to a deep sea station where scientists (Saffron
Burrows,Thomas Jane, Michael Rappaport) franticly work on a project that may
cure Alzheimer's.  The process is a bit complicated though, and that's where
things go balistic.  The scientists use the shark's brain tissue to see if
there is a way to cure this disease, but there isn't enough time to get into
this storyline.  The sharks are suddenly smarter as they close in on the group
of scientists.  The film quickly becomes a race to get out of the facility, to
avoid these smart sharks. This may sound like a nice thrill-ride, but it
suffers mainly from being a rip-off.
  Many of the key action scenes are exciting, but are worn out.  Why you may
ask? because it all seems too familiar.  The deep sea station looks like
something out of Waterworld, the hallways and some of the water sets look like
a scene from  Alien Resurrection, the sharks of course are much like Jaws, the
race to get out is like a scene out of the Poseidon Adventure, and even with
Samuel L. Jackson aboard, it reminds you of Jurassic Park in ways.  Everything
just feels like a recurring dream here, and that's not even half of the
problems.
  It's not surprising to me the acting was stale.  In every blockbuster this
year, this seems to be a forgotten element.  They roam around and act like
complete airheads until they encounter a creature (usually a digital effect). 
It's then they start running, and by then you could care less about them. Once
again that's what happens here.   Thankfully only Samuel L. Jackson's talent
was wasted, since the rest of the cast haven't been noticed in any other film,
except for LL Cool J.  He too tries to step up, but is only here to provide
comic relief. Cheap relief at that.
  On the brighter side, this film actually was kind of fun, believe it or not. 
Even if the characters were bland, the sharks were there to entertain the
audience while they wreak havoc aboard the station.  Oddly enough the sharks
aren't 50 feet tall like they are on the poster, in fact they're rather small. 
The only problem I had with the sharks were, that they were a bit too animated
during a feast.  Other than that, they were basically the only thing of
interest in this film.
  When it's all over, it's a bit shocking and disappointing. So far this year,
most of the blockbusters have let audiences down, due to lack of characters and
script. It's the closest thing teens will get to seeing Jaws on the big screen,
minus the scares.

Title
Review for Fantasia/2000 (1999)
  What better way to start off the new year, then with some good old fashioned
Disney. That would have been a nice opening statement, but unfortunately
Fantasia 2000 is a mixed bag, with some great acts (The Steadfast Tin Soldier)
and some that will put you to sleep (Pines Of Rome).
  Unlike the original Fantasia, this one has far less appeal. There are 8
sequences that round out the film, some good some mediocre, but all visually
fascinating none the less. The first shows a pack of triangles dancing to
Beethoven's 5th Symphony, secondly is the whale segment, in which they begin
flying and evntually enter space. "The Pines Of Rome" is played throughout that
one. The third is the illustrious "Rhapsody In Blue" by George Gershwin. This
piece is by far the most poignant, showing us the ups and downs of life. The
fourth and finest sequence (The Steadfast Tin Soldier) is played with
Shostakovich's Piano Concerto No. 2. The Fifth piece is Saint Sean's "Carnival
Of The Animals" in which a Flamingo discovers a yo-yo. It is the most charming
and surely the most enjoyable for the kiddies. The sixth section is the only
returning segment from the original Fantasia, and that of course is "The
Sorcerer's Apprentice", in which Mickey Mouse gets in trouble with the power of
magic. The 7th piece is another likable one for the kid's, and that is Elgar's
"Pomp And Circumstance", in which Donald Duck helps Noah on his ark. The final
segment is almost similar to Princess Mononoke, in which an angel like creature
trys to restore the world, until a demon destroys it. Stavinsky's "Firebird
Suite" is played throught this segment.
  For those who have not been to an IMAX theater before, this will be a
delightful treat, but I can't help but find it lacking in interest. Sure, "The
Steadfast Tin Soldier", "Rhapsody In Blue" are very good, but the rest of the
film lacks pizzaz. The original Fantasia had dazzling segments, and it didn't
need fancy animation to help boost it. They were far more imaginative, and were
constantly surprising the viewer, because it was like a dream. Fantasia 2000's
segments however were formulaic. Nothing ever changed, it simply followed a
story line. I personally like the bits in Fantasia that made no sense, because
they were the most enjoyable. It was like one imaginative collection of
dazzling images that didn't need to be pieced together, because it was so
stunning to watch. Plus they were never boring. In Fantasia 2000 I saw people
sleeping through the "Pines Of Rome" story. It was just a complete bore. I
doubt even the children will fully enjoy this movie, even with the giant screen
awing them. They only seemed to pay attention to cute creatures, or someone
recognizable like Mickey Mouse. That only adds up to 4 that they will really
watch. That's not the bad, considering there's only 5 worth watching. The other
3 could have been cut as far as I'm concerned.
  Speaking of cut, Bette Middler (one of the hosts before each sequence) stated
that there were quite a few optional sections that were cut. Soemthing that
caught my attention was the fact that there was a Salvador Dali based act,
supposively using baseball as a metaphor for life. Now, why didn't they use
this one! If you've seen some of his paintings in a museum before, you know
that they are twisted, obviously a perfect match for an animated feature in
Fantasia. They should have replaced that instead of the grainy "Sorcerer's
Apprentice". It looked absolutely dreadful compared to the rest of the film.
Another disappointing feature.
  While it's often magical, Fantasia 2000 lacks pizzaz, and really isn't worth
the $11 price of admission. Take it from me, it's better to wait until it
reaches regular theaters. 

Title
Review for Galaxy Quest (1999)
  At first I was intrigued by the strange cast and odd creatures on the Galaxy
Quest trailer, but that was before I saw the film. Now my view has completely
changed. It's time to embrace for impact, because this is a very bumpy ride.
  The story begins with the cast of Galaxy Quest including: Jason Nesmith (Tim
Allen), Alexander Dane (Alan Rickman), Gwen Demarco (Sigourney Weaver) signing
autographs at a convention. They meet fans who dress up in costumes, fans who
worship the ground they walk on, and a group of aliens called Thermians who
believe that they are the ultimate saviors against the dreaded alien colony
lead by Sarris (Robin Sachs). Of course they are unaware of this until they
actually begin performing their duties, and meet the ugly aliens themselves.
Thus begins the long adventure to help save the Thermians.
  The movie plays like a really bad Star Trek episode, in fact it's worse. I
don't even think Trekkies will appreciate this weak spoof, because quite
frankly it's just not funny. All the jokes are basically collected observations
from the series. One such continuous joke involves a simple crew member who
believes he will die in space, because no extra on the TV show ever lives, as
proven in the Star Trek series. Creative jokes like this may seem like a clever
idea, but not when they are used to death. A person can only take so much. We
do not need to be tortured, especially when you have to pay for it.  
  It's pretty bad when even Tim Allen is pitiful. It's not like I expected an
Oscar worthy performance form him, but a few laughs would have been helpful.
Speaking of acting, 2 fine talents were wasted as well. Sigourney Weaver was
here to show cleavage, well at least it worked. It's pretty bad when the only
entertaining value of the film is cleavage. It just shows you how disgraceful
the film really is. Alan Rickman however was not so lucky. After his last hit
(Dogma) he embarrasses himself by doing this sloppy mess. It's just a shame to
see talented actors and actresses throw their ability away. 
  When the film couldn't get any worse, thankfully some nice special effects
pop up. Like many big blockbusters (Armageddon, The Haunting to name a few)
they rely heavily on effects to help boost the film's box office results. 9 out
of 10 times it works, but unfortunately we have to shell out hard earned money
and suffer through this junk. When will it stop? I am getting tired of being
suckered into seeing such trash. It may look fine and dandy, but we need to at
least have a story. Is that too much to ask? Obviously it is. 
  When Galaxy Quest finally ends, it literally crash lands. Aside from the
impressive looking creatures from Industrial Light And Magic, it's an
embarrassment to the cast, and it's embarrassing to the science fiction genre.
It's not the least bit fun, nor was it entertaining. The only place where this
movie belongs is to infinity and beyond.
