Authors
Aaron Sherman
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Moby Dick (1998) (TV)
As billed: "AT&T presents Patrick Stewart in Moby Dick"
Stars : Patrick Stewart, Henry Thomas, Ted Levine and Gregory Peck
Director : Franc Roddam
Exec. Producers : Robert Halmi, Sr., Francis Ford Coppola, Fred Fuchs
        Herman Melville writes the kind of books that high school
students love to hate. So, how do you turn Moby Dick into a family
movie? USA certainly tackled that one with style. The screen
adaptation is well crafted (I'm tempted to go watch the Gregory Peck
or John Barrymore versions to see how the scripts compare). So why,
given a great script and a purported 18 million dollar budget, do you
make so many mistakes?
First mistake: Patrick Stewart. I love Patrick Stewart. Even after
Babylon 5 ruined me on TV SF, I would still go back and watch re-runs
of Star Trek: The Next Generation for his outstanding
performances. But, now we see him in the one roll he is least
suited to: the insane captain of the Pequod. This is strange because
he does a fantastic job playing someone that he cannot possibly
convince me he is. He delivers the big lines with force, and the movie 
is worth seeing for any Stewart fan, just for those scenes. But,
overall, Stewart just is not Ahab.
Second mistake: The director. I have deliberately not looked up what
Franc Roddam's other credits are. I don't think I want to know. He
falls flat here, and I put almost all of the blame at his feet. There
is a sequence at the end of the film where I had to laugh (if you've
read the book, you should know that laughing at the end of the movie
is just plain out of context). Maintaining continuity is not something 
that Roddam does. Nor is maintaining atmosphere. The scenes in the
very beginning all felt like a set (though part of this may be my
prejudice, having grown up in New Bedford).
Third Mistake: Historical detail. Mr Melville took great pains to put
as much detail about whaling as he could in his book. Let us simply
say that USA did not go to the lengths that Melville did. The harpoons 
are wrong (if I recall correctly, the harpoons that they use did
exist, and were used to cut up the whale, after catching it). The
clothes are mostly all wrong (you can tell that it's an Ausie
production given all of the mountain coats, or leather dusters as we
call them).
Fourth Mistake: Rendering. Ok, so you want to make a movie about a
whale. Clearly computer rendering technology has gotten to the point
that it makes sense to try creating the whale on a computer. Fine. So
you get to the point where you can see that the finished product just
doesn't look that great and what do you do? Well, if you're Franc
Roddam you show way too much of it so your audience has a chance to
see all of the problems. Sigh. However, there are a lot of
computer-aided effects in this film, and most of them are very good
(in that I almost did not detect them, and I *do* look). At the end,
there's some smoke that is a little cheesy, but I happen to know how
hard smoke is, and I was impressed.
Given all of this, can such a movie be worth seeing? If you have never 
read or seen Moby Dick, the answer is yes. Remember that we're talking 
about *the* whaling story here. No other author came close to
describing what it feels like to be on a big ship, and what it means
to hunt whales. This story is not to be missed, for it is part of our
history. On the other hand, if you are a fan of the original book, or
one of the other adaptations, I warn you away. You will be
disappointed.

Title
Review for Nightmare Before Christmas, The (1993)
Directed by: ? (Henry Selick, director of animation)
Music: Danny Elfman
Starring: Danny Elfman, Chris Sarandon, Catherine O'Hara, Glenn Shadix,
         Ken Page, Paul Reubens, Ed Ivory, Sherwood Ball, Debi Durst,
         Randy Crenshaw, Kerry Katz, Susan McBride, Bobbi Page,
         Greg Proops, Carmen Twillie and Glenn Walters
     Others can, I'm sure, point out a lot more technical detail about
this movie than I (this is why I am not giving more credits info).
But, there are a few highlights that I thought I should point out,
after seeing another review in this newsgroup.
     First, NIGHTMARE is about traditional, modern, American holidays.
As such, you will see no note made of the many origins of Holloween, or
anything other than a stereotype witch, etc.  This is unfortunate, but
only to be expected in modern film.
     Second, Elfman is fantastic (IMNSHO)!  He pulls a lot of his work
together for this one, and blends everything well.  I had only a few
problems with his work here and they mostly centered around my
impression that he seemed to be toning himself down, so that he would
not be "too dark."  Other than that, he turned in an incredible
performance, and I hope that this is a real boost to his career.  Of
special notability are: Elfman singing as Jack (the main character,
whose speaking voice was done by Chris Sarandon) in "What's This?";
Elfman, O'Hara and Reubens (Peewee Herman) singing "Kidnap the Sandy
Claws" and Oogie Boogie's Song.  The last, sung by Ken Page and Ed
Ivory which, though it lacked the scariness that it should have had,
made up for it in personality.
     Aside from Elfman, the movie had only the visuals going for it, as
it was a fairly simple story about the towns where holidays are made.
But, what visuals they were!  Tim Burton dropped SOME of his usual
claustrophobic feel, and Selick (director of anim.) pulled off the
slickest stop-motion we're likely to see for a long time.  Jack's
expressions were VERY life-like, and all of the backgrounds made me do
a double-take or three.
     Overall, I give this movie an 8 on a 1-10 scale. (8.5, just
because Elfman didn't let his music get used for the Burger King adds
;-)
