Authors
Rick Ferguson
Number of Reviews
13

Title
Review for Rounders (1998)
Starring Matt Damon, Edward Norton, Gretchen Mol, John Turturro and John =
Malkovich
Written by David Levient and Brian Koppelman
"If you can't spot the sucker at the table in the first half hour, 
then you are the sucker," intones Mike McDermott (Matt Damon), the 
tough-yet-sensitive card shark who narrates his own tale of greed and 
gambling in John Dahl's ROUNDERS. Good advice, considering I've 
never spotted the sucker in a poker game myself, and typical of the 
nuggets of wisdom the screenplay sprinkles along the way. ROUNDERS tries 
hard to draw you into its world of illicit big-money poker games held in 
the back alleys and dank basements of New York City. It tries to dazzle 
you with the torrent of poker slang flowing from the lips of sweaty card 
players who study one another's facial ticks through a haze of murky 
cigar smoke. It wants you to succumb to the allure of high-stakes poker, 
to feel the naked adrenaline rush of letting your bankroll ride on the 
promise of a full boat. The film tries so hard that you can't help but 
root for it. But I'm here to tell you that it just didn't happen for 
me. For all its finely honed performances and the dizzying energy of its 
dialogue, ROUNDERS is ultimately a con job- smoke and mirrors hiding 
weak characters and a derivative, predictable story.
Mike is a law student working his way through school as a truck driver 
after losing a giant wad of cash in a single hand to a seedy Russian 
gangster named Teddy KGB (John Malkovich). As the story opens, He seems 
to have life well in hand- he has a kindly judge for a mentor (Martin 
Landau), and a live-in girlfriend (Gretchen Mol) who is so beautiful and 
intelligent that she's not only out of your league, she's also out 
of the leagues of everyone you know.
But the good times never last. Out of prison steps Worm (Edward Norton), 
Mike's best friend from his rounding days. Worm, the proverbial loose 
cannon, leaves lockup under a mountain of gambling debt and is eager to 
get back to the business of playing cards. Mike makes the mistake of 
vouching for Worm at the local tables. Before he knows what hits him, he 
learns that Worm has racked up 25 G's in debt to Teddy KGB- and the 
juice is running every day. There is nothing for it but for Mike to 
assume Worm's debt and re-enter the life. He must win large, win 
clean, and try to forget the fatal hand against Teddy KGB that sent him 
skulking home with his tail between his legs.
Much is made of the core relationship between Mike and Worm. To Mike, 
gambling is an art. He has spent a lifetime honing his craft, and dreams 
of one day facing off against the best in the World Series of Poker in 
Las Vegas. Worm, on the other hand, is a grifter who never passes on a 
chance to fleece a sucker, and takes chances that could get him killed. 
Will Mike's blind loyalty to his reckless friend finally put his own 
life at risk? You betcha. Damon and Norton, gifted actors both, sell 
this relationship for all it's worth. The problem is that we've seen 
these two guys before, in other films. There's Denzel Washington and 
Spike Lee in MO' BETTER BLUES; Ray Liotta and Joe Pesci in GOODFELLAS; 
Jon Voight and Dustin Hoffman in MIDNIGHT COWBOY. The good-hearted 
anti-hero and his self-destructive alter-ego are classic cinema 
archetypes, and any film that dares trot them out had better dress them 
up in some new clothes. Gritty realism and gambling nomenclature 
notwithstanding, Mike and Worm tell a well-worn tale.
The rest of the film is a hit-or-miss affair. Gretchen Mol is saddled 
with playing a cardboard girlfriend who suffers from the laughable 
delusion that the Law is somehow a more noble pursuit than professional 
gambling. John Turturro has a memorable cameo as a "grinder", poker 
slang for a player who ekes out a living by folding repeatedly until a 
winning hand turns up. And what can I say about Jon Malkovich? His 
performance is either brilliant or astoundingly bad- I can't decide 
which. He affects a nearly incomprehensible Russian accent which makes 
him sound like Boris Badinoff on Nitrous Oxide. Toning it down a bit 
would have been a wise move, but Dahl lets him roll. I did, however, 
enjoy Teddy's Oreo Cookie habit. Before placing his bet, he holds an 
Oreo up to his ear and twists it apart- because he likes the sound it 
makes. Everybody has a secret quirk like that, and it was nice to see 
one on screen.
ROUNDERS is worth a look if you're a fan of Damon or Norton- in the 
Damon-Norton-Affleck-DiCaprio career longevity race, my money is on 
them. But there is simply not enough original material here to warrant 
devoting much of your time to it. High stakes poker would seem to offer 
choice suspense- but there was never any moment when I really felt the 
outcome was in doubt. Part of the problem is in the script and its 
reliance on mossy cliches. But the direction, too, is a little flat. 
Dahl has a good resume; both RED ROCK WEST and THE LAST SEDUCTION were 
tantalizing noir puzzles that kept you guessing until the end. While 
those films were mostly intellectual challenges, in ROUNDERS Dahl was 
asked to create real characters who inhabit a real world, and he 
wasn't quite equal to the task. It doesn't help that he resorts to 
stream-shrouded street shots and other techniques that Scorsese 
discarded twenty years ago. If you really want to experience the 
atmosphere for which this film strives, hit the video store, rent THE 
HUSTLER, and watch Paul Newman square off once more against Jackie 
Gleason's Minnesota Fats. Why settle for a couple of Jacks when a pair 
of Kings is well within reach?
Please visit the FILMGEEK WEB SITE at http://www.filmgeek.com
"The best reviews you'll read online and off!" -- The LOS ANGELES TIMES20

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
Starring Laurence Fishburne, Sam Neill and Joely Richardson
The year is 2047.  The weary crew of the salvage and rescue vessel "Lewis
and Clark" return to Earth only to learn they have to postpone shore leave
for another mission: find and explore the experimental starship "Event
Horizon", which disappeared seven years earlier and which has now
mysteriously returned in low orbit around Neptune with no sign of
survivors.  Captain Joe Miller (Laurence Fishburne) doesn't like it one
bit, and he doesn't like his new passenger Dr. Wier (Sam Neill), who
designed the "Event Horizon" and who seems to know more than he's letting
on.
The crew set course for Neptune and hop into their stasis tubes for the
journey.  A couple months later, they emerge in Neptune space.  From Dr.
Wier they learn that the "Event Horizon" is more experimental than they
knew- it's designed for deep interstellar flight.  Its "gravity drive" in
essence creates its own black hole and then slips through it, thereby
allowing it to travel to any point in the known Universe instantaneously. 
Seven years ago the ship vanished on its maiden voyage; now it's back. 
Where it has been is anyone's guess.  When the "Lewis and Clark" crew dock
with the Horizon and board her, they discover only corpses, and a copy of
the ship's log on CD which may hold the answers to the fate of her crew.
The easy shot against this picture is that it's yet another ALIEN rip-off;
on the surface this is certainly the case.  You have the same band of
misfits who grudgingly function as crew, you have the derelict spaceship
and the claustrophobia and fear which mount as they realize that Something
Else is on board.  The spaceships are grungy and retro (this look owes more
to the "Millennium Falcon", which came first, than to the "Nostromo", which
followed), the crew members chain-smoke and could use a bath.  Same old
story.  But EVENT HORIZON isn't a monster movie- it's a ghost story.  The
crew find not venom-spewing aliens in the deserted vessel, but rather
physical manifestations of their own inner demons.  Captain Miller sees the
crewman he left behind to die in a zero-G fire on his previous assignment. 
Wier sees his wife, who committed suicide.  Peters (Kathleen Quinlan) sees
her dead son.  Suffice it to say that nobody sees any trippy lights or
groovy acid flashbacks.  The ship knows their weak spots, and knows how to
exploit them.
This plot too is nothing new; as other critics have pointed out, it's been
done in outer space before in the 1972 Russian sci-fi film SOLARIS, and
underwater in shameless hack Michael Crichton's SPHERE (also now a major
motion picture, due in December).  HORIZON's twist is to propose that the
ship in question literally went to Hell and back- and has returned
sentient, and hungry.  It needs new souls upon which to feed.
Despite a sketchy set-up and a cast of characters to which the term
"two-dimensional" is a compliment, I rooted for this picture, and pretty
much stuck with it to the end.  This was due in no small part to the
stunning visual effects, which did a lot to overcome my doubts.  I try not
to recommend a film strictly on the basis of its value as eye-candy, but
this summer I've done it twice: first for THE FIFTH ELEMENT, the
lame-brained plot of which is overcome by its HEAVY METAL visual appeal;
and now for HORIZON.  The set design and special effects are staggering in
their beauty.  The clouds of Neptune are awe-inspiring, the spaceships
elegant and majestic, both inside and out.  The core of the "Horizon", in
which is housed the giant concentric rings of the gravity drive, looks like
a medieval torture chamber.  If it is possible for a spaceship to look
evil, then production designer Joseph Bennett has succeeded admirably.
But does the film deliver in the scare department?  Well, yes and no.  The
pernicious influence of Oliver Stone rears its ugly head again in Director
Paul Anderson's use of rapid-fire subliminal editing techniques to deliver
most of the shocks.  No expense is spared in the gore department; when X.O.
Starck (Joely Richardson) finally decodes the ship's log, the images of
what transpired with the former crew will raise the hackles on the most
jaded of Clive Barker fans.  But there is precious little edge-of-your seat
suspense.  Movies like ALIEN and HALLOWEEN scare so efficiently because
they delay the payoff and leave the carnage mostly to the imagination. 
HORIZON trades suspense for shock value.  While the gore is creative and
some of the scenes harrowing to watch, the result is a film of lesser
quality. 
Even so, I kept watching.  The premise of the film grabbed me, and the
visuals kept me hooked even as the execution proved disappointing.  Sadly,
the film looks pared to the bone, as if some crazed editor crept into the
studio at night and hacked off about a third of the footage.  Despite
sturdy work from the cast, particularly Fishburne and Richard T. Jones as
Cooper, the gung-ho security officer, none of them are given enough screen
time to flesh out the characters.  The key transformation of one character
from good guy to villain is handled so abruptly that we're left wondering
exactly when it happened, or why.  The climax occurs twenty minutes too
soon.  When the lights came up I was left wanting more- which is normally a
good thing, but in this case it's not that I wanted the film to go on, I
just wanted to go back and flesh out the film I'd already seen.  Too bad. 
A little more suspense, a little more hellfire and damnation, and EVENT
HORIZON might have become a horror classic.  Still, if great set design and
dazzling special effects are your bag, then it's close enough for jazz.
Grade: B-
Please visit the Film Geek website at:

Title
Review for Hoodlum (1997)
Starring Laurence Fishburne, Tim Roth, Vanessa L. Williams and Andy Garcia
The Harlem Renaissance must have been one of the more exciting times in
history to be alive.  The people of Harlem achieved heights in music,
literature and the arts which have been duplicated by no other city in the
United States.  Yet this cultural boon was of benefit mostly to the white
audiences which ventured uptown; this was still the Depression, after all. 
Even the Cotton Club, Harlem's showplace, was off limits to blacks unless
they played in the band or worked in the kitchen.  Harlem's main source of
revenue in those days was the Numbers racket, an illegal lottery run under
the auspices of Stephanie St. Clair (Cicely Tyson), known as the Queen of
Policy.  HOODLUM proposes that the Policy racket was a legitimate form of
black free enterprise, indeed the only enterprise open to a black man or
woman in a time of severe economic hardship.  In the guise of a gangster
epic, the film makes a strong case.  Even so, while HOODLUM has the benefit
of a compelling central character and a story begging to be told, it loses
much in unconvincing detail.  
HOODLUM opens in 1934, as Ellsworth "Bumpy" Johnson (Laurence Fishburne),
chess player, poet and Renaissance gangster, is released from Sing Sing. 
Upon returning to Harlem, he finds himself in the middle of a range war: 
Dutch Schultz (Tim Roth), the downtown Numbers king, has developed a taste
for Harlem money and is determined to move in on the Queen.  Dutch is held
in check by Lucky Luciano (Andy Garcia), the true underworld authority in
New York, but just barely.  Bumpy, who knows trouble when he sees it,
convinces the Queen to make him her lieutenant after she is arrested in a
graft-funded police raid.  He's determined to keep Dutch out of Harlem, and
is prepared to match him gun for gun and corpse for corpse until one of
them goes down.  Naturally, a bloodbath ensues.  As Bumpy watches the
bodies pile up, he must weigh his personal hatred of Dutch against its cost
in innocent lives, and must also justify his actions to his saintly
girlfriend Francine (Vanessa L. Williams), a Harlem relief worker. 
Director Bill Duke is shooting for a Depression-era Western, and he mostly
hits his mark; you could easily transport this whole cast of characters to
Tombstone in 1874 and tell the same story.
Duke comes as close as possible to making a great movie without actually
making one.  For a change, the problem isn't in the script.  Chris
Brancato's screenplay keeps to the narrow path as it focuses on themes of
pride, betrayal, and the obstinacy of rival Kings.  Bumpy Johnson is the
classic flawed hero of Greek Tragedy; he cannot give up is vendetta against
Dutch even if victory requires that he lose his soul.  His good intentions
are quickly useless.  As the Queen points out, this war will not be fought
downtown, but in the streets of Harlem.
Neither are the actors at fault.  Oh, I admit it takes a while before you
can understand what the hell Tim Roth is saying.  Englishmen should not
attempt Brooklyn accents; they can only embarrass themselves.  Vanessa L.
Williams may look fantastic in her bleached-white and pressed nurse's
uniform, but she brings the grace of a crowbar to the film's weakest role. 
Andy Garcia succeeds only in utterly draining the life from whatever scene
he's in.  But the cast grows on you, until you're rooting for them as if
they were the cast of a spunky community theater troupe.  As always,
Fishburne is aces; the man understands the value of subtlety.  When he
raises his voice, you listen to him, because he hasn't shouted and mugged
his way through the whole movie like some actors I could name.
No, what this picture lacks is atmosphere.  How you define atmosphere, I
don't know; but like comedy, I know it when I see it, and this picture
doesn't have it.  It's lacking in the gleam of the shiny period
automobiles, which are all showroom clean and without a spot or blemish. 
Didn't they have rust in the Depression?  It's lacking in the subtitle
"DECEMBER 1934" shot over a scene in which the trees have leaves on them,
and followed by a scene in which Dutch listens to a baseball game in his
office.  And it's sorely lacking in the tiger-striped pillows and
love-daddy decor of Bumpy's estate. How else Duke could have added
atmosphere, it's hard to say; black-themed pictures are notoriously
low-balled by Hollywood studios, so maybe there would have been another $10
or $20 million in the budget if the picture had been about Irish gangsters
so that Brad Pitt could have tried out his brogue again.  Duke's use of the
camera could stand to grow beyond the standard tracking and crane shots we
see in every TNT made-for-cable film.  But I believe this film was made
with noble intent, and I believe cast and crew gave it everything they had,
so I was able to walk away from it without feeling swindled.  HOODLUM is a
good story which could have been told more artfully.  So infrequently do
good stories emerge unscathed from Hollywood, we should be thankful it was
told at all.
Please visit the Film Geek web site at:

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
Starring Jim Carrey, Ed Harris and Laura Linney
Sometimes you just have to tip your hat to a film. Sometimes you just 
have to jump on the bandwagon and enjoy the ride. I saw THE TRUMAN SHOW 
with an audience full of teenagers, most of whom were no doubt drawn by 
Ace Ventura himself and hoping to see his latest take on fart jokes. 
Surprised, they may have been, when they realized that this picture 
actually had something to say. But by the attentiveness of the crowd 
I'd say they were won over - as was I. I can't tell yet if Truman 
really is that good, or if it only seems that good in comparison to the 
awful mountain of crap spewed forth from the bowls of Hollywood so far 
this year. Time alone will make that call. But by the end of the film we 
were all on Truman Burbank's side. We were concerned for his 
well-being, and wanted him to win. That we felt as we did is a tribute 
both to the film and to Jim Carrey, who has achieved legitimacy at last.
THE TRUMAN SHOW is a film best viewed cold, with as little foreknowledge 
as possible about the plot. Unless you're under a media blackout, 
however, you probably know the basics. Carrey stars as Truman Burbank, a 
Capra-esque Everyman insurance agent living with his beautiful wife 
Meryl (Laura Linney) in the South Florida island town of Seahaven, which 
looks like Michael Eisner's idea of the perfect American small town. 
Truman would seem to live the perfect middle class lifestyle, complete 
with a working wife, a best bud, friendly neighbors and interesting 
co-workers. There is tragedy in his past - his father drowned in a 
horrible boating accident, leaving Truman with a dreadful fear of water, 
and of travel in general - but overall, life is good.
But then one day as Truman leaves his house for work, a klieg light 
falls magically from the sky. This curious event may lead Truman to 
discover what the rest of the world already knows: that he is a prisoner 
on the world's biggest soundstage, that his wife, friends and 
relatives are all actors paid to interact with him, and that his life 
has, for over 10,000 days, been broadcast as the world's most popular 
television program.
What makes the first hour of TRUMAN so enjoyable to watch is the magical 
verisimilitude painstakingly constructed by Niccol and Weir. The 
soundstage, we're told, is "only the second man-made structure visible 
from space." Truman's movements are tracked ceaselessly by 5,000 
cameras scattered throughout the town: button cams, dashboard cams, 
mirror cams, wife cams, big cams and small cams. Weir cuts the film so 
we're never quite sure if we're watching Truman through the camera 
of director Weir or through the camera of the show's omnipotent 
creator Christof(Ed Harris) who oversees the show from a control room 
built into the man-made moon in Seahaven's sky.
The second act offers a plethora of clues for Truman as to the truth of 
his existence. His best friend Marlon (Noah Emmerich) always has a six 
pack of beer with him. His wife seems to exist in an eternal commercial 
in which she is always endorsing the latest hot household product. He 
sees the same people walking in the same set patterns all over town. One 
wonders why he didn't pick up on any of this earlier, but Christof has 
an answer for this: "People tend to accept the reality with which 
they're presented." Nevertheless, Truman begins to grow restless, and 
dreams of escape to Fiji, where an old college sweetheart (Natasha 
McElhone) supposedly lives.
This convincing reality of television as progenitor of reality is a 
magical and provocative concept; the best thing Jim Carrey does is stay 
out of its way. By underplaying Truman, he allows the subtle 
manipulations of the film to take over. There is a particularly poignant 
scene in which Truman confides his fears to Marlon, and Marlon answers 
with best-friend sincerity, "I'd gladly step in front of a bus for 
you." But that line was fed to Marlon through an earpiece by Christof. 
The abject cruelty to which Truman is subjected to hits home - and from 
that moment, we're on his side.
THE TRUMAN SHOW derives much of its success from playing to our own 
secret paranoid fantasies - haven't we all, at least once, doubted 
our place in the world, doubted the sincerity of those closest to us? 
Ultimately, however, the picture rises above its own artifice to raise 
some real questions about the relationship of humankind and our creator. 
What does God really think of us? Does He resent our abandonment of 
paradise? Who exactly is watching us, up there in the sky? If you enjoy 
the picture as much as I did, credit Weir for allowing the magic of the 
screenplay to work. As for Carrey - well, Truman Burbank is the kind of 
role that Jimmy Stewart was born to play. Carrey is no Jimmy Stewart; to 
his credit, he doesn't try to be. He just tries to feel the way you or 
I would, if we suddenly found out that the whole world was watching us.

visit the FILM GEEK Web Site at: http://www.filmgeek.com20

Title
Review for Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998)
Starring Johnny Depp and Benicio del Toro
Written by Alex Cox, Tod Davies, Terry Gilliam and Tony Grisoni
I've always preferred mushrooms to blotter acid. Dropping acid is like 
riding a roller coaster blindfolded; you have no idea where the peaks 
and valleys are, no idea when the next terrifying decent will send your 
stomach into your throat, and no idea how long the ride will last. Then 
there's the hard knot in your gut and the clenched teeth that come 
with ingesting a strychnine-laced dose. Mushrooms, on the other hand, 
offer the psychedelic equivalent of a leisurely ride on a Ferris wheel: 
a steady, reassuring assent, a short period of thrilling motion and 
color, and then a smooth landing. Acid is for daredevils; mushrooms are 
for refined seekers of joy.
My point is that in FEAR AND LOATHING IN LAS VEGAS, director Terry 
Gilliam has made an acid movie, when I wish he would have made a 
mushroom movie. Full of shocking sight gags, aggressive images and 
grotesque comic performances, the film certainly offers something for 
those fans of Hunter S. Thompson's book who want to experience its 
twisted pharmacological world-view from the inside out. But for those of 
us who just want to enjoy a well-made film, Gilliam has produced a mixed 
bag.
FEAR AND LOATHING tells the ostensibly true story of how self-professed 
"gonzo" journalist Hunter S. Thompson (Johnny Depp) and Hispanic 
activist attorney Oscar Zeta Actosta (Benicio Del Toro), came to Las 
Vegas to cover a motorcycle race and found themselves trapped in the 
middle of a District Attorney's convention while ingesting every 
conceivable drug available to a man of means in 1971. Operating under 
the pseudonyms of "Raoul Duke" and "Dr. Gonzo", the two men careen into 
Vegas on an acid and mescaline bender, then hole up in a hotel suite to 
binge on amyl nitrite, cocaine, tequila and a rainbow of multi-colored 
uppers and downers. They terrorize every one they meet, mostly because 
every one they meet terrifies them. Duke hallucinates giant bats on the 
way into town, then is attacked by horrifying lizards in the casino 
lounge. Dr. Gonzo becomes enamored of a thick-bladed hunting knife and 
begs Duke to throw the tape player into the bathtub with him just as 
Jefferson Airplane's "White Rabbit" reaches its climax. And these guys 
don't just trash hotel rooms - they rape them, humiliate them and 
leave them for dead. That neither of them ends up dead or in jail is 
testament to blind luck or Providence, depending on your point of view.
Thompson's book, besides being a hilarious read, has stood the test of 
time as an important historical document. It simultaneously exposed the 
60's drug culture for the sham that it was and exposed Las Vegas as 
the place where the American Dream came to die. Pontificate all you want 
about how the film illustrates Thompson's message, but the truth is 
that, stripped to its bare essentials, what Gilliam has wrought is a 
drug comedy. It's a Cheech and Chong movie. You're there to watch 
Depp and del Toro ingest a lot of chemicals and then laugh at the 
results: see Johnny take drugs, see Johnny fall down.
There's nothing wrong with this concept, but Gilliam tries too hard. 
This is a frantic movie - all sweaty close-ups, wide-angle lenses, 
Dutch tilts and other-worldly lighting schemes. There are times when 
Gilliam really does put a convincing representation of an acid trip on 
the screen. But to what end? Much of the dialogue comes verbatim from 
Thompson's book, and there are some priceless comic observations. But 
you're hard pressed to hear or digest them amidst all the jumbled 
camera work. This brings us to the performances, which strike me as all 
wrong. Depp plays Thompson as Groucho Marks filtered through George C. 
Scott in PATTON - a gimmicky performance which works against the biting 
satire of Thompson's dialogue. In between his several puking scenes, 
Del Toro fares better as Dr. Gonzo, but he also mumbles and sputters so 
many of his lines that their weight is lost. Watching these two made me 
wish that the movie had been made twenty years ago, with Dan Akroyd and 
John Belushi as the leads - now that would have been something to see.
It's interesting to note that Alex Cox, credited as a co-writer on the 
screenplay, was originally slated to direct before Gilliam took over. As 
much of a fan as I am of Gilliam's work, Cox would have been the 
better choice. SID AND NANCY, Cox's best work, covered essentially the 
same subject matter, but Cox was able to pull back and allow the 
characters of Sid Vicious and Nancy Spungen to carry the film. Gilliam 
commits the compound sin of over-directing his film while being 
uncertain of his purpose. What kind of movie was he trying to make, 
anyway? It doesn't try to be a cautionary tale, and it doesn't work 
as broad comedy. If he had considered more carefully his purpose, the 
result would have been a much more interesting film. But I don't want 
to be too hard on it. There are some truly funny moments, and if 
you're in a good enough mood you might get a kick out of it. I do, 
however, recommend watching FEAR AND LOATHING IN LAS VEGAS under the 
influence of your favorite controlled substance - I guarantee it will 
enhance the effect.
Please visit the Film Geek web site at:

Title
Review for In the Company of Men (1997)
Starring Aaron Eckhart, Stacy Edwards and Matt Malloy
IN THE COMPANY OF MEN made a splash at the Sundance Film Festival because,
in a year plagued by BROTHERS McMULLEN-style, earnestly shallow Gen-X angst
pictures, it seemed to be actually ABOUT something.  It angered people,
started arguments outside the theater, riled things up.  It ignited a spark
of excitement in what otherwise has been a disappointing year for
independent film.  Having endured my share of the hype, I waited calmly for
MEN to reach the hinterlands wherein I reside, and then checked in to see
what all the fuss was about.  Does MEN live up to its press?  Well, yes it
does.  And it may make you think twice before you consider dating anyone
your office.
For the uninitiated, newcomers Aaron Eckhart and Matt Malloy play Chad and
Howard, two corporate drones who are dispatched by their nameless company
to a remote branch office for a six week assignment.  Chad and Howard are
archetypes, examples of which you can no doubt find in your own place of
business.  Chad is the blond golden boy, genetically engineered for
success, the natural charmer who seems to glide effortlessly up the
corporate ladder.  Howard is Chad's boss, but he is weaker of will, the
clumsy practitioner of office politics who has achieved his position
through dogged persistence rather than raw talent.  We first meet them
awaiting their flight in a drab airport lounge.  There Chad suggests a
scheme worthy of a Shakespearean villain: he and Howard will find a
vulnerable single woman at the branch office, woo her simultaneously, win
her love, and then dump her.  The reason?  Both men have recently been
dumped themselves, and Chad sees an easy route to revenge against the
fairer sex.  "It'll restore a little dignity to our lives," he says.
Howard, helpless against the force of Chad's will, agrees to the plan. 
They quickly spot their prey in the form of Christine (Stacy Edwards), a
fragile deaf woman working as a temp.  Chad moves in for the kill, flashing
his golden boy smile, plying Christine with lunch, then flowers, then
dinner.  Howard follows suit, though his efforts are in contrast ham-handed
and desperate.  Flattered to have the attention of two eligible men,
Christine dates them both.  You can guess which one she falls for.  Soon a
tragic lovers' triangle develops: Christine loves Chad, Chad loves himself,
and Howard loves Christine on the grounds that, since she's handicapped and
shy, she just might be wretched and lonely enough to settle for him.  Adult
social interaction never really progresses beyond the level of junior high,
does it?
In Chad, writer/director LaBute and actor Eckhart have created one of the
most chilling monsters ever committed to film-Hannibal Lector may eat human
flesh, but Chad is an eater of souls.  His evil is as subtle as a viper's,
and as easy as his smile.  We watch in stunned disbelief as he back-stabs
coworkers, humiliates his subordinates, and works his deadly venom into
Christine's heart.  His character would be a joke if he wasn't so
chillingly real- all of us have worked with a Chad, and some of us may be
him.  He's the guy who takes your job and then laughs at you for your
weakness.  If one of his co-workers should happen to go postal and walk
into the office with a bag full of handguns, he had best have his escape
route clearly in mind.  Politics is his game, and the modern cubicle-filled
office is his playground.
MEN wears the guise of a black comedy, but it functions best as allegory. 
The most controversial moment in the film happens when Chad humiliates a
black temp by asking him how badly he wants to succeed in the company, then
forces him to prove it in a manner I won't describe.  The scene is charged
with racism and fraught with peril.  Could it happen in the real world? 
Probably not.  Taken as allegory, however, it is representative of the
treatment of the meek by the powerful in all facets of society.   Maybe
it's just the English major in me, but Chad, in his motiveless cruelty
towards Christine and his careful manipulation of Howard, can be seen as a
symbol of unbridled capitalism, of greed without conscience.  The entire
film is a metaphor for social Darwinism- only the strong will survive.  
The marvel of LaBute's multi-layered script is that it can disturb each
member of its audience in an entirely different way.  But does the film
work as entertainment?  Its darned funny in spots, particularly in the
men's room scenes, which demonstrate the lengths to which guys will go to
hold a conversation while engaged in the most basic of bodily functions. 
It works less well as drama, since by necessity the characters in an
allegory tend to be flat ciphers.  Stacy Edwards gives a measured dignity
to Christine, and succeeds in making us care for her, but by the end of the
film we still know nothing about her.  Likewise, Chad and Howard are simply
the sum of their actions.  By the end of the film you'll feel as if you've
met a genuine monster in Chad; perhaps we can also classify MEN as a horror
film.  Certainly those expecting a conventional Hollywood resolution to the
story will walk away disappointed.  But the picture is often mesmerizing,
and the script is a work of fine craftsmanship, which makes it well worth
your time.  Like all good films, it offers a myriad of parallels to the
outside world.  While watching Chad in his moment of triumph, I couldn't
help but think that Bill Gates must have felt the same sort of cold,
merciless satisfaction when he finally stuck it to Steve Jobs. There may be
a little bit of Chad in all of us, but some of us have taken Chad-ness to
the level of art.
Please visit the Film Geek web site at:
"Reviews for the discriminating movie fanatic"

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
Starring David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson
Written by Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz
Let me preface this review by stating up front that I am not a fan of 
THE X FILES. Not that I have anything against the show - it's just 
that I watch so many movies that if I watched TV too, I'd really have 
no life. I am wired into pop culture enough to know the basics: about 
abducted sisters and black ooze and a cigarette-smoking villain who may 
be Mulder's father. I know that the show has grown more popular every 
year it's been on, making it the first serious rival to the 
uber-fandom of STAR TREK that has consumed the lives of so many 
otherwise rational adults. A movie version of this phenomenon was 
perhaps inevitable, but its success was by no means guaranteed. Series 
creator Chris Carter and director Rob Bowman had, really, a daunting 
task before them: to make a feature film that would satisfy their core 
constituents, entertain newbies and make enough money to avoid 
embarrassing themselves. Did they succeed? From this outsider's 
perspective, I'd say they did. THE X FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE is an 
entertaining piece of fiction, and the first truly original release of 
this otherwise lackluster summer movie season.
If you're a fan of the series, you will no doubt have already seen the 
picture by the time you read this review. On the off chance that 
you're reading this from your hospital bed or on a cruise ship, 
however, I'll refrain from spoilers. Suffice it to say that the plot 
stems from events which occurred in the last couple of episodes of the 
series, events which involve a "black oil" which is really the vanguard 
of an extraterrestrial viral invasion of Earth. The film opens in Texas 
in 3500 B.C., in which two primitive travelers stumble upon the virus in 
an icy cave. This is some virus: it mutates rapidly into a deadly 
intelligent humanoid life form which seems to exist solely to disembowel 
unsuspecting humans.
We fast-forward to the present day, when a Texas youth falls into the 
same cave and releases the same virus. This event leads us to Dallas, 
where we find FBI agents Mulder (David Duchovny) and Scully (Gillian 
Anderson) relieved of their X-Files duties and reassigned to an 
anti-terrorism unit. The death of the infected boy leads directly to the 
destruction of the Dallas Federal building, which in turn leads Mulder 
and Scully back into the massive alien-invasion cover-up helmed by the 
mysterious Well-Manicured Man (John Neville) and the 
even-more-mysterious Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B. Davis). Before 
they know it our two intrepid agents are back in the familiar territory 
of illicit autopsies, nervous informants, unmarked black helicopters, 
secret government installations and sublimated sexual energy. It looked 
to me like you X-philes out there had everything your paranoid hearts 
could desire.
Like the STAR TREK movies, THE X FILES works in a cinematic shorthand of 
sorts, introducing its main characters without the typically-required 
exposition because they already have a long history together. This 
history resulted in a lot of enthusiasm in the friendly audience with 
which I saw the film: they cheered Mulder when he appeared, cheered 
loudly for Scully when she started barking orders at the security guards 
in the Federal Building, and laughed at all the in-jokes. They didn't 
seem to mind that the plot is all a lot of hokum. There are a couple of 
tense and clever set-pieces, including a brilliant one involving a 
monstrous swarm of bees and a field of corn (don't ask). But the 
picture was hurt by the lack of a true villain and the need to keep 
things open-ended enough to avoid interfering with the on-going series. 
Carter and company can't really wrap things up when there's a new 
season's worth of skullduggery to consider.
But the plot is beside the point. What I learned from watching this 
picture is that the alien conspiracy is really just window dressing for 
the true key to THE X FILES' success: the central love story. Mulder 
and Scully are passionately in love with each other. To succumb to their 
feelings would be to destroy their working relationship and thus imperil 
the fate of the Earth; it is therefore our treat to watch them 
physically strain against the chains wrapped around their libidos. These 
two make Sam and Diane look like pikers. Duchovny and Anderson, five 
year series veterans both, are in full command of this knowledge and are 
thus able to inject real emotion into their scenes together. If you 
watch closely, you'll realize that the picture is even structured like 
a traditional love story. It doesn't matter whether your setting is 
the Civil War, the Bolshevik Revolution, a doomed ocean liner or a vast 
government conspiracy - the point is to keep the lovers apart as long 
as possible, because that's where the drama comes from.
So THE X FILES seems to satisfy old fans and create new ones - at least 
on the night I saw it. It offers a refreshing sci-fi vision that stands 
head and shoulders above all the Alien clones and refried INDEPENDENCE 
DAY-style claptrap splattered on the movie screens this decade. It also 
has a future as a franchise, if its creators can maintain this level of 
quality. Not only did it demonstrate exactly what drives the show's 
success, but it made me a believer. I just might have to start 
scheduling time on Sunday nights.
Please visit the FilmGeek website at: http://www.filmgeek.com

Title
Review for Misérables, Les (1998)
Starring Liam Neeson, Geoffrey Rush, Uma Thurman and Claire Danes
If you go into LES MISERABLES with the expectation that the Valjean or 
Fantine or any of your other favorite characters are going to burst into
song, you're in the wrong place.  This umpteenth version of Victor Hugo's
classic morality tale is not, I'm sorry to say, the long-awaited screen
version of the famous Broadway musical.  It is rather a well-intentioned,
if bloodless, dramatic version: a top drawer production, made by an
internationally-renowned director, populated by A-list Hollywood stars who
know their way around a period drama.  It is full of acts of heroism, grand
ironies, tragic falls and stunning acts of repentance- all the elements
which have made the novel such a gripping read to each successive
generation.  So why does it ultimately leave such a dusty taste in the
mouth?  For all the artistry that went into its making, this LES MISERABLES
is missing something.  Passion?  Spice? A little of the old Grand Guignol? 
It's hard to say.  This version flirts with greatness, but as any high
school lothario can tell you, flirting is not the same as scoring.
Just in case you missed out on reading the Cliffs Notes for your Sophomore
English report, here's the short version of the story.  Liam Neeson stars
as Jean Valjean, a convicted thief who is released into 19th Century France
after spending 19 years at hard labor.  After an encounter with a kindly
Bishop whom he tries to rob, Valjean becomes a changed man, and nine years
later he has become a prosperous businessman and the mayor of the city of
Vigau.  The fruits of success turn bitter upon the arrival of the new
Prefect of Police, Javert (Geoffrey Rush), a fanatically moral man who was
a prison guard during Valjean's incarceration.  Javert knows Valjean's
origin, and becomes obsessed with denouncing him as a convict.  Meanwhile,
Valjean becomes caretaker to a dying woman named Fantine (Uma Thurman), who
was forced into prostitution after Valjean unwittingly had her fired from
her job at his factory.  Valjean, now a kindly soul, promises Fantine that
he will care for her daughter Cosette, whom she was forced to leave in the
care of cruel foster parents.
Soon Javert's unrelenting pursuit of Valjean forces he and Closette into
hiding in Paris.  Another decade passes, Cosette grows up to become Claire
Danes,  Valjean has taken on another new identity, and Javert has become
the Chief Inspector of the Parisian police.  Cosette's love affair with the
fiery revolutionary Marius (Hans Matheson), brings Javert back to Valjean's
trail, and the hunt begins anew.
Literary purists will no doubt chafe at the liberties taken with the novel,
the absence of key characters and the reduction of Hugo's deeply complex
leads into their lightweight Classics Comics doppelgangers.  But let's face
it, as literary adaptations go, we've all seen worse.  Anybody recall the
hatchet job Demi Moore wrought upon THE SCARLET LETTER?  Critics have
called this story a 19th Century version of THE FUGITIVE, which is unfair-
after all, Hugo came first.  Sure, the book is a lot more complicated, but
you can hardly fault screenwriter Rafael Yglesias for focusing on Javert's
obsession with Valjean.  As depicted here, Javert is a 19th century
Terminator, programmed by law and damnable pride to bring Valjean to
justice no matter who is destroyed in the process.  This central conflict
is as good a place as any for a filmmaker to hang his hat, and there is
ample opportunity to forge great cinema from this rich source material.
Yet Bille August's film misses the mark.  Why so?  You can't blame Liam
Neeson; his Valjean is yet another variation of the character he has played
for most of his career: the mythical, larger-than-life hero whose most
valuable possession is his honor.  Oskar Schindler, Rob Roy, Michael
Collins, even Briar Gates from that old Patrick Swayze dog NEXT OF KIN-
they're all the cut from the same cloth, really, and Jean Valjean is part
of the same heroic tapestry.  I still say Neeson would have made a better
William Wallace than Mel Gibson, but I suppose I'm in the minority.
No, if I have to pin it down, I'll blame the film's failure on a singular
lack of an emotional arc to go along with the story line.  I can't blame it
solely on the script or on the direction, so let's just say both are at
fault.  Valjean is simply kind and brave, when he should be a tragic figure
haunted by the demons of his past.  Javert should personify those demons. 
This leads us to a serious misstep on the part of August and Geoffrey Rush.
 Fresh from his showy performance in SHINE, Rush seems determined to
underplay Javert.  Where madness and fiery passion are called for, Rush
gives us quiet restraint; instead of functioning as Valjean's tormentor, he
comes across as that one guy in your circle of friends who nobody likes but
who nobody can seem to get rid of.  This wrong decision is carried clear
through to the final confrontation between the two men on the banks of the
Seine, which is an utter failure.  Hugo knew better than to end his story
there, and the filmmakers should have know better, too.
But I'll still recommend the film, because it provides an easy introduction
to Hugo for those who have never read him, and who might like to after
seeing the film.  Besides, I'm a big Liam Neeson fan- he was the right
choice for the lead, and he more than carries his weight.  My only other
complaint is that, like all Hollywood costume dramas, this one suffers from
a smorgasbord of accents: everything from Neeson's Irish brogue to the
cockney-sounding peasants to Claire Dane's affected English boarding school
accent.  I suppose this solution is better than having everyone speak like
Inspector Clouseau.  The brave choice, of course, would have been to film
it in French with subtitles.  But in Hollywood, that has about as much
chance of happening as a comet striking the Earth.  Oh, I forgot- that
movie opens in a couple of weeks.
VISIT THE FILM GEEK WEBSITE AT: http://www.filmgeek.com

Title
Review for Gingerbread Man, The (1998)
Written by John Grisham and Robert Altman (as Al Hayes)
Some time ago, a young director was given the opportunity to direct the 
screen version of a popular novel. The novel was a summer smash, topping 
best-seller lists across the country and already drawing speculation as 
to which popular actors of the day might play the leads. The only 
problem: the novel wasn't very good. It was far more pulp than 
Pulitzer. But the director realized that, no matter how pedestrian the 
prose, this book really grabbed people - that the author, while not a 
great writer, was a fantastic storyteller. So he took on the project, 
convinced he could make something happen on screen.
The director? Francis Ford Coppola. The book, of course, was Mario 
Puzo's THE GODFATHER. The rest, as they say in showbiz, was history.
By bringing up THE GODFATHER, I don't mean to suggest that Robert 
Altman's THE GINGERBREAD MAN is destined for that level of greatness. 
But the parallel does suggest that it is possible to create great cinema 
from questionable source material. Can you get any more questionable 
than John Grisham? Depends on whom you ask. But there's no question 
that Grisham's work grabs people. Like Puzo, Grisham is a better 
storyteller than a writer - unlike fellow hack Michael Crichton, who is 
a good idea man but who can't tell a well-constructed story from a can 
of Spam. So something in Grisham's unpublished story of a cocky 
Savannah lawyer who gets involved in a deadly family squabble drew the 
attention of Robert Altman, who at 73 years old remains one of 
America's greatest living filmmakers. The result is a gripping 
thriller that, while falling short of classic cinema, deserves its place 
in the Altman canon.
>From its opening shot to the closing credits, THE GINGERBREAD MAN is 
permeated with a sense of dread, with a fear of the natural destructive 
forces of the universe. This terrific sense of mood is a classic Altman 
touch. Witness said opening shot: we see an aerial view of coastal 
Georgia with its writhing, undulating landscape while the soundtrack 
grumbles ominously in our ear. We roll over the hills into the town of 
Savannah, then zoom in close on a red sports car speeding over a bridge 
while its driver chatters oblivious on his cell phone. Right away we 
know that the driver of that car is in for a few surprises. Pay 
attention, boys and girls - this shot was not conceived by John 
Grisham, but by Altman. This is what a great director can do for 
questionable source material.
The sports car belongs to Rick Magruder (Kenneth Branagh), the 
aforementioned hotshot attorney who specializes in police brutality 
cases. Magruder has just won a high profile case and celebrates that 
night with a catered party at his office. Outside after the party he 
meets one of the waitresses, Mallory Doss (Embeth Davidzt), just as she 
realizes her car has been stolen. Driven by Southern chivalry, a driving 
rainstorm and his unspoken attraction to the fragile waitress, Magruder 
offers her a ride home. There he learns more about Mallory's life than 
he bargained for. Her car was stolen by her schizophrenic father Dixon 
(Robert Duvall), a Ted Kyzynski-style whacko who has been stalking and 
terrorizing his own daughter. Magruder, perhaps influenced by 
Mallory's decision to strip off her wet clothes in front of him, is 
sympathetic to her plight, and offers to help her get her father 
committed - right after he sleeps with her, of course.
This simple offer of help leads Magruder down a dangerous path with a 
black end. He succeeds in having Dixon incarcerated in a mental 
hospital, and for a moment all appears well. But then Dixon's crack 
team of homeless commandos bust him out of the lockup - and suddenly 
Magruder finds himself, Mallory and his own children in danger. The cops 
won't lift a finger to help a liberal attorney. His only allies are 
his faithful assistant Lois (Daryl Hannah) and his bumbling private-eye 
sidekick Clyde (Robert Downey Jr). If this predicament wasn't bad 
enough, Hurricane Geraldo is bearing down on Savannah and throwing the 
world into chaos.
Altman may provide the atmosphere, but Branagh's performance holds THE 
GINGERBREAD MAN together. An accomplished actor when he isn't 
directing himself in vanity productions, Branagh does a fine job of 
making Rick a sympathetic hero while casting doubt upon his motives. Is 
his offer of help to Mallory an act of kindness, or of egotism? Magruder 
is so sure of his place in the world that he never considers that he has 
bitten off more than he can chew until he has to swallow it - and by 
then it's too late. As the plot unfolds, Magruder learns that none of 
us are as secure as we think we are. And life is never so bad that it 
can't get worse.
If you're familiar with Altman's work, you'll recognize several of 
his signature techniques. Characters are not introduced in establishing 
shots, but rather are allowed to wander in the background of scenes 
until their importance becomes apparent. Crucial scenes are shot from 
the outside through windows, making the audience unwitting voyeurs of 
the action. Dialog overlaps and the actors seem to slip naturally into 
an improvisational style. And of course there's my favorite Altman 
technique - the Obligatory Nude Actress shot. Thanks to Altman, here 
are some of the actresses I've had the pleasure of seeing naked: Sally 
Kellerman, Julianne Moore, Madeline Stowe, even Frances McDormand. And 
now I can add Embeth Davidtz, who looks quite healthy in the altogether. 
The naked actress shot has become as ubiquitous to the Altman film as 
the director cameo was to the Hitchcock film. Is it old-school sexism, 
or a clever in-joke? You be the judge.
But back to the picture at hand. In the hands of a mere mortal, THE 
GINGERBREAD MAN would have been a routine thriller, no better or worse 
than the countless others we've all endured. In the hands of a master 
like Altman, it becomes an exercise in existential doom, in its own way 
far more successful than Scorsese's CAPE FEAR remake, which tried for 
the same result. What may prevent it from enduring with Altman's 
greatest work is a weak third act - in fact, there really is no third 
act in Grisham's story, so it appears that Altman had to throw in the 
hurricane just to jazz things up. But there are true moments of riveting 
suspense, and great performances by Branagh, Davidzt and Downey Jr - 
more than enough to see you through. That Polygram so hated this picture 
that they tried to steal final cut from Altman, and then buried the 
marketing campaign when he won it back, should tell you how utterly 
clueless of quality most studios are. They probably wanted it to look 
more like A TIME TO KILL. And that, my friends, should make you very 
afraid.

Visit the FILM GEEK web site at: http://www.filmgeek.com

Title
Review for Bulworth (1998)
Starring Warren Beatty, Halle Berry and Oliver Platt
Written by Warren Beatty and Jeremy Pikser
Watching BULWORTH was an educational experience. I learned a new slang 
term: nappy dugout. If you don't know what a nappy dugout is, then 
I'm not going to tell you - I try to keep FILMGEEK a family site, 
more or less, and I sure don't want to be responsible for some 
6th-grader running around telling his friends what a nappy dugout is. 
But I hadn't heard it before, and I thought it was pretty funny. 
BULWORTH is full of such surprising moments - surprising because you 
don't necessarily expect this level of energy in a film written and 
directed by a sixty-something actor like Beatty. Check out the recent 
films of Beatty contemporaries Clint Eastwood and Paul Newman, and 
you'll see what I mean; you could show some of these pictures in the 
Geriatric ward and you wouldn't even roust the old folks from their 
checkers games. But BULWORTH moves. It's far from a perfect film, but 
it's sharp, witty and has something to say - three elements that most 
of the pictures released this year have been sorely lacking.
Here's the story. California Senator Jay Bulworth (Beatty) is at the 
end of his rope. A career politician, he finds himself in the middle of 
his latest re-election campaign without hope or moral compass. He's a 
slave to the big insurance companies who finance his campaigns. His 
liberal idealism has long since succumbed to the choking rhetoric of 
Washington which he is forced to spout ad nauseam to keep his place at 
the Federal feed trough. Even his marriage is a sham. Despondent, 
Bulworth makes one last, desperate attempt to break free: he takes out a 
contract on his own life. Beats going to work in the private sector, one 
supposes.
But then something odd happens. Bulworth finds his self-imposed death 
sentence strangely liberating. Fueled by delirium brought on by a lack 
of sleep, he spends his next few campaign stops saying exactly what's 
on his mind. To a congregation of black churchgoers: "If you don't put 
down the malt liquor and the chicken wings and get behind somebody other 
than a running back who stabs his wife, you'll never get rid of 
somebody like me." To a gathering of big-money Hollywood Jews: "Your 
pictures really aren't very good, are they?" And so it goes, until 
Bulworth has drawn the attention of the national media and sent his 
campaign manager Dennis (Oliver Platt) into a cocaine-induced panic. He 
picks up three young black women at the church, including Nina (Halle 
Berry), who seems to take a special interest in him. He parties with 
them at an underground nightclub, where he discovers rap music. The next 
day, he starts rapping his message instead of giving speeches. Suddenly 
he's a hip-hopping, straight-talking sensation, and life is fun again. 
But that pesky hit man is still out there somewhere.
BULWORTH's first act is nothing short of sensational. As actor, writer 
and director, Beatty is in full command; the dialogue is crisp and 
arresting, the story moves swiftly and the performances by Beatty, Berry 
and Platt are right on the money. Those of you who thought WAG THE DOG 
was a good satire should put it up against the first thirty minutes of 
this picture and admit the error of your ways. For a short time, it 
looks as if Beatty is really going to break through with an important 
film. It takes a lot of guts to use studio money to convey the awful 
truth about American politics: that because the same five or six 
multi-national corporations who funnel all the money into political 
campaigns control not only the means of production in this country, but 
also the media outlets which purport to give us an impartial 
dissemination of the facts, American democracy has become simply another 
mindless diversion designed to give us the illusion of freedom. Makes 
you proud to be alive, doesn't it?
Unfortunately, BULWORTH doesn't sustain the same level of brilliance 
throughout. The story literally gets sidetracked in Watts. On the lam 
from the hit man, Bulworth hides out with Nina in her family's home, 
where he gets a good dose of quality black family life. He befriends 
some grade-school drug dealers and confronts their supplier L.D., played 
by BOOGIE NIGHTS alumnus Don Cheadle. Suddenly it seems as if Beatty has 
wandered into another film entirely. By the time the press finds him and 
the political theme gets going again, it's too late; the picture's 
over, and we're left with some fuzzy notions about the inherent good 
of the inner city versus the unrepentant evil of big business. Yadda 
yadda yadda, we've all seen this before.
But for a while, at least, BULWORTH is daring and brilliant. I wish 
Beatty had honed in on his message, had hammered on it until audiences 
left the theater screaming for blood. Film has that power. It's true 
that if a politician who spoke the truth like Bulworth ever actually 
came along, he'd most likely be ignored. These are boom times, after 
all, and as long as there are SUVs to lease and mutual funds to dabble 
in, we're not likely to pay much attention to what goes on over our 
heads. But the good times won't last forever. HMO's, banks, media 
companies, even manufacturers are gobbling up one another in an orgy of 
unbridled capitalism. Every day we have a little less control over our 
lives than we did the day before. BULWORTH could have been a warning 
sign, a harbinger of doom or a prophetic look at the abyss of the 21st 
century. It settled for being just a decent little film which, while 
enjoyable, will ultimately have no impact. Oh well - at least I can 
amuse my friends at parties with my new vulgar slang terms.

visit the FILM GEEK Web Site at: http://www.filmgeek.com

Title
Review for Conspiracy Theory (1997)
Starring  Mel Gibson, Julia Roberts and Patrick Stewart
I know guys like Jerry Fletcher, Mel Gibson's whacked-out protagonist in
Conspiracy Theory.  Maybe they aren't so overtly insane, maybe they don't
keep padlocked coffee containers inside their padlocked refrigerators to
avoid poisoning by their enemies.   But they believe that black helicopters
watch us from the skies  (there is supposed to be a secret United Nations
air field in Butler County, Ohio, near my hometown of Cincinnati), and they
believe the CIA sold crack to street gangs in Los Angeles and that the
Elders of Zion control all international monetary transfers.  Spurred on by
the raging paranoiac floodwaters of the Internet and the need to find
patterns in the violent chaos of human existence, these would-be Jim
Garrisons are either permanent residents of the lunatic fringe, or they're
right.  Conspiracy Theory posits the latter premise.  It's a clever idea
for a film, and screenwriter Brian Helgeland must have had goosebumps when
he came up with it.  But then a couple of 500-pound A-list actors came and
sat on the project, and Warner Brothers brought in hack Hollywood insider
Richard Donner to direct, and Helgeland's clever idea was buried in an
avalanche of rewrites and test screenings.  Conspiracy Theory is a tragic
example of how quickly a good idea can become a mediocre film once it falls
into the wrong hands.
The picture begins promisingly enough with a clever opening credits
sequence that promises hip, quirky action, Get Shorty meets Taxi Driver. 
The cabbie in question is Jerry Fletcher, a jumpy, mostly harmless crank
who regales his passengers with tales of dark conspiracy and the
interconnectedness of every sinister event in world history.  NASA is
trying to kill the President by causing earthquakes from the space shuttle.
 Jerry Garcia was a CIA agent.  The Vietnam War was fought over a bet
between Howard Hughes and Aristotle Onassis.  You get the picture. 
Fletcher publishes a newsletter called Conspiracy Theory, which he
faithfully mails to his five subscribers.  He also worships from afar
Justice Department attorney Alice Sutton (Julia Roberts), whom he saved
from a mugging several months back.  Jerry's life as a bottom feeder seems
set until one day a couple of thugs kidnap him, take him to a deserted
warehouse (kidnappers in the movies always take the hero to a deserted
warehouse), tape his eyes open and subject him to torture at the hands of
sinister Dr. Jonas (Patrick Stewart).  Apparently one of Jerry's theories
is true, though Jerry has no idea which one, and Jonas wants to know who
else knows about it.  Jerry bites Jonas on the nose, escapes and winds up
in the care of Alice, who is understandably skeptical- until all of Jerry's
subscribers turn up dead.
There's good stuff here, and Mel Gibson does a lot with the plumb role of
Jerry, a man to whom cocaine would function as a sedative.  His performance
is at times comic, at times touching.  The best scenes in the film are the
quiet ones, particularly in Jerry's apartment, which is the cramped
exoskeleton of his paranoia.  It's filled with file drawers, books,
manifestos, clippings, and wall to wall posters of assassination victims
and revolutionary heroes.  When he brings Alice to the place for the first
time, we are touched by his shyness and frantic sincerity as he tries to
make her coffee and fails because he can't remember the combination to the
canister.  This scene shows the intelligent character film buried beneath
the veneer of money and star-power.  If the film had focused on the
relationship between Jerry and Alice, and if it had created a plausible
conspiracy within a labyrinthine plot, it might have worked.
But the script is derivative and formulaic.  The crucial torture scene is
lifted from Marathon Man.  The plot is pinched from The Manchurian
Candidate (though the having the characters themselves point out this
comparison keeps the movie from crossing the line from homage to rip-off). 
The nature of the premise leads you to believe that you're in for a
joy-ride into the right-wing fantasy world of shady government agencies,
freemasons, Bavarian Illuminati and the Tri-lateral Commission.  But the
script never opens up into these larger possibilities- it just ambles along
on its well-trodden path, never reaching a crescendo or shocking us with
unexpected twists.  And the love story between Jerry and Alice is a
complete contrivance, unnecessary to the plot, illogical in terms of the
characters, but present because the producers think we want to watch Gibson
and Roberts get the thigh-sweats for each other.
As mentioned before, Gibson's performance mostly works.  Roberts does what
she can with the role, but her character is underwritten and held prisoner
to the plot.  It's fun to see Patrick Stewart step off the bridge of the
Enterprise to play a villain, but he never really develops any sort of
menacing presence.  The supporting performances are perfunctory and
forgettable.  Richard Donner fashions a few interesting scenes,
particularly Jerry's drug-induced delusions during his torture and escape,
but more often then not the action scenes go nowhere and the ending looks
phoned-in.  For all the cash funneled into this picture, it's a
surprisingly flat and uninspired piece of work.  It was probably doomed
from the moment Gibson signed on.   There is the seed of a good idea in
Conspiracy Theory, but it has been strangled by the weeds of Hollywood
packaging.  If you see it, enjoy it for its few quiet moments, and for the
many and varied crackpot theories it tosses around.  And if you have a copy
of The Catcher in the Rye on your bookshelf, you may want to get rid of it-
it could come back to haunt you.
"Reviews for the discriminating movie fanatic"

Title
Review for G.I. Jane (1997)
Starring Demi Moore, Anne Bancroft and Viggo Mortensen
Written by Danielle Alexandra and David N. Twohy
Man, I have never seen a movie choke in the last half-hour the way GI JANE
does.  Remember the ball rolling between Red Sox first baseman Bill
Buckner's legs in the 1986 World Series?  Remember the Buffalo Bill's four
fruitless Super Bowl appearances?  Remember Waterloo?  All are famous
examples of the Big Choke, but all pale in comparison to the utter failure
of this picture to bring its story to an original and satisfying
conclusion.  Okay, so maybe I'm guilty of hyperbole.  But I simply can
recall no instance in recent memory in which director, screenwriter and
star all conspired to create such a bankrupt conclusion to an otherwise
competent, if unremarkable, production.
This collapse can even be pinned down to a single shot.  Lt. Jordan O'Neil
(Demi Moore), super-buff Navy Intel officer turned hard-core SEAL cadet,
has found herself, along with her fellow trainees, on a real-life Special
Ops mission on Libyan soil.  There's some premise concerning weapons-grade
plutonium falling into the wrong hands, but who really cares?  It's the
same sort of tacked-on, credibility-straining climax used in every
military-training film from Top Gun to Stripes.  Would real SEAL cadets
actually be sent into live combat?  No way.  Still, I was willing to accept
this premise all the way up until the point that Demi, her bald head
gleaming in the desert sun, leapt out from behind a rock- in slow motion,
no less-  with her assault rifle blazing.  It was a shot lifted straight
out of any one of the RAMBO movies.   The sight was so ludicrous that I
laughed out loud.  Whatever viable message the film might have had was lost
forever.  GI JANE is TOP GUN, set in a different branch of the service and
with a pair of surgically-enhanced breasts where Tom Cruise's nose used to
be.  All that was missing was a Kenny Loggins song on the soundtrack.
It's really too bad, because until that fateful shot, GI JANE does a decent
job setting up its premise and making a case for its heroine.  Cantankerous
Texas senator Lillian DeHaven (Anne Bancroft), presumably a Democrat,
decides to court popularity by testing the Pentagon's proscription against
women in combat roles.  From a list of overachieving candidates she chooses
O'Neil to serve as a test case:  if she can cut Navy SEAL training, the
most rigorous combat training on the planet, the Pentagon will be forced to
alter its policy.  DeHaven operates on the assumption, however, that no
woman could actually pass the course.  By setting up O'Neil to fail, she
will walk away a hero to women voters without actually rocking the Navy's
boat.  The duplicitous cunning of this scheme would make any actual
politician proud to be alive.
But O'Neil is no Shannon Faulkner.  As embodied by Moore, she is a
committed, iron-willed officer who sees the SEAL course as a path to real
career advancement.  She tells her lover and fellow Naval officer Royce
(Jason Beghe) to back her or step aside.  She demands equal treatment with
her fellow trainees, and bristles at the sight of the step-box placed for
her benefit on the obstacle course.  When it becomes clear that she is
receiving special treatment, she shaves her head and moves into the
barracks with the men, who panic at the sight of her tampons.  Hers is an
impressive display of chutzpah, and you can't help but root for her.
The Navy refused to give their blessing to his film, so we can only take
the filmmakers' word that SEAL training is as sadistic and thuggish as
presented here.  Recruits are deprived of sleep for days on end.  They are
forced to eat out of garbage cans.  They must do push-ups in the freezing
surf and spend hours holding heavy landing craft above their heads.  When
their drill instructors aren't humiliating them or beating the living hell
out of them, they're firing live machine gun rounds over their heads.  If
SEAL training were even half this brutal in real life, there would be
Congressional hearings on C-Span for the next twenty years.  This little
summer camp is presided over by the Command Master Chief (Viggo Mortensen),
a weasely little sadist who feels disdain for O'Neil but nonetheless
intrigued by her mettle.  The script gives him a few quirks (reading DH
Lawrence, for example) to distinguish him from the horde of cinematic drill
instructors which preceded him, but he remains a stick-figure nonetheless. 
That the script finds it necessary to create ominous sexual tension between
O'Neil and the Chief gives you an idea of the kind of wrong turns it takes.
The fact is we are in Fantasy Land for most of this movie, and the only
thing that makes it watchable is, surprisingly enough, Moore herself.  Her
acting talent is modest, to put it mildly, and she has demonstrated a
nearly flawless ability to choose bad projects.  If there is a common
thread to Moore's career, however, it is that all her projects, from her
"Vanity Fair" covers to her Letterman appearances to the woeful STRIPTEASE,
are built around a common object of worship: her own body.  In this sense
GI JANE is the ultimate Moore vehicle, for it exists solely to allow us the
privilege of  watching her buff up.  The key to this picture lies in the
shots of Moore doing one-armed push-ups and vertical sit-ups hanging from
her bunk.  We are to admire her physical perfection.  Director Ridley Scott
seems to understand this purpose and so wisely keeps the focus on the gal
herself; her fellow recruits are an anonymous chorus of male admirers,
there to be won over by her grit and determination.  GI JANE is Moore's
love letter to herself.
But it's a well-made love letter. Accepting it on this level, I actually
enjoyed it- until Moore came out from behind that rock with gun blazing. 
Then I hung my head and wept for Ridley Scott, the man who gave us BLADE
RUNNER, ALIEN, and the inspiring female characters of THELMA AND LOUISE. 
For Scott has now sunk to the level of his less-talented brother Tony, who
gave us TOP GUN.  He choked- he gave us ninety minutes of the most
awe-inspiring narcissism ever to hit the big screen, and then tacked a
clichéd action-movie climax on the end.  I would have enjoyed GI JANE so
much more if only, like its main character, it had maintained the courage
of its convictions.
Please visit the Film Geek web site at:

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
Starring Matthew Broderick, Maria Pitillo and Jean Reno
Written by Dean Devlin, Terry Elliott, Rolland Emmerich and Terry Rossio
I can probably come up with a dozen reasons why GODZILLA doesn't work. 
We could start with the script, which redefines the term "lightweight." 
Then we could move to the performances: Matthew Broderick's nutty 
professor routine never quite works, Hank Azaria thinks he's a 
recurring character on "Sesame Street," and Maria Pitillo's 
performance has the weight and texture of that powdery sugar they 
sprinkle on funnel cakes at the county fair. The special effects, while 
serviceable, in no way push the envelope. The filmmakers have even taken 
it upon themselves to not only alter Godzilla's appearance, but to 
change the whole concept of the beast from its original Japanese 
incarnation. The script even resorts to lame Siskel and Ebert jokes. I 
could go on. But despite its many flaws, I have to admit that I kind of 
dug it. The film walks a tightrope, to be sure, and very nearly plunges 
into awfulness at every turn. But you know what? If I was twelve years 
old, I would have walked away completely satisfied. When you're 
talking about a Godzilla movie, isn't that what counts?
Much has been written about how the original 1954 Japanese film GOJIRA, 
debuting not even ten years after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, represented 
the self-inflicted punishment the Japanese felt they deserved after 
losing WWII, as well as their dreadful fear of the Atom bomb. But little 
has been said about why the films caught on in the States. To the 
millions of American boys and girls who watched Godzilla rampage through 
Tokyo on low-powered UHF stations in the 70's, Godzilla represented 
the primitive, destructive Id which our parents and school teachers 
demanded we keep in check. What kid didn't stomp on his army men in 
the backyard sandbox, fantasizing that he was 300 feet tall and able to 
do pretty much whatever the hell he wanted? Godzilla was just a big ugly 
kid throwing a temper tantrum-- and he had atomic breath to boot.
So INDEPENDENCE DAY creators Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich, the latest 
inheritors of the Godzilla legend, had a pretty clear task before them. 
Give us a cool monster, updated for the Digital Age, have him destroy a 
major metropolitan area, give him some army men to stomp on, and come up 
with a couple of semi-interesting human characters to help us pass the 
time while we're waiting for the Big Guy to show up. Not too tough 
when you have Sony footing the bill, right?
The first calculated risk they take, as previously noted, is to 
completely alter the whole concept of the Lizard King. The Japanese 
version was nigh on invulnerable; he'd stand there and let the 
Japanese army take its best shot, then he'd wipe them all out with one 
blast of his atomic breath and continue on toward Tokyo. The new 
Godzilla, while equal in size, is more vulnerable and considerably more 
mobile than his predecessor. When the army starts shooting at this guy, 
he doesn't stick around' he hauls ass. Most of the destruction he 
wreaks on Manhattan is more or less a side effect of his need to outrun 
missiles and jet planes. Consequently, it takes a long time before we 
get a good look at him. We see a tail here, a foot there, but I kept 
waiting for a money shot, which never really happens. When we do get a 
good look at him, he turns out to be much more lizard-like than the old 
version. I can only compare the shock of his new look to the shock of 
comparing the new VW Beetle to the old model' not better, exactly, but 
different.
This Godzilla can also burrow, and ends up hiding from his human hunters 
deep in the New York City subway system. This turn of events leads us 
into a long dry stretch where we're forced to spend a lot of time with 
the sketchy human characters while they try to outwit a horde of baby 
Zillas which have hatched from eggs laid by their asexual parent in 
Madison Square Garden. The whole baby Zilla stretch is a dead rip-off of 
the Veloceraptor attack in JURASSIC PARK, only the special effects 
aren't as good. These scenes are saved, however, by the presence of 
Jean Reno, who plays a steely French secret agent who leads a team of 
commandos dispatched by the French government to kill Godzilla after 
they unwittingly created him with their nuclear tests in the Atlantic. 
As if the French would give a damn whether Manhattan gets flattened or 
not' they'd be laughing so hard that champagne would squirt out of 
their noses.
Broderick, as nerdy scientist Niko Testopoulos, is a game presence, but 
he really wouldn't be missed if someone else had taken the part. The 
rest of the cast is fairly anonymous, which reminds us of how much the 
success of INDEPENDENCE DAY depended on Will Smith and Jeff Goldblum. 
Devlin and Emmerich reasoned, not illogically, that they could forgo 
star power, since Godzilla was the only star they needed. But then they 
limit Godzilla's screen time to a couple of extended cameos. It 
doesn't make sense, and yet it worked. There's just enough humor, 
just enough Godzilla, just enough destruction and mayhem to pull it off.
Even so, I couldn't fault anybody for giving this picture a 
thumbs-down. I bought it; you may not. Devlin and Emmerich are competent 
filmmakers, but their true genius lies in their ability to take a high 
concept and market the shit out of it until you feel like an utter rube 
if you don't pony up your eight dollars at the box office to take the 
ride. It's almost more fun to watch them market a film than it is to 
sit through the finished product. GODZILLA delivers, though just barely. 
The twelve-year old in me had a good time, anyway.
Please visit the Film Geek web site at:
