Authors
Gary Jones
Number of Reviews
34

Title
Review for Mission to Mars (2000)
"OK. Astronauts go to Mars. Encounter strange alien forces. Fate of crew
unknown. Rescue mission sent to Mars. Meet aliens."
It probably wasn't quite like that, but I shudder to think that people
with the intelligence to tie their own shoelaces might actually have sat
down and thought this thing through. However Mission To Mars made it to
the screen, the result is a film which is not only as offensively stupid
as Armageddon, but which in an attempt to be spiritually uplifting has
an alien encounter even more crass and syrupy than the one which ruined
The Abyss. But the saddest part of all is that it's a Brian De Palma
movie. I've grown up watching his films, and although he has never
achieved the same artistic credibility as his fellow New Yorker Martin
Scorsese, he has always been a fine technician, as demonstrated in films
such as Carrie, The Untouchables, and the under-rated Blow Out. He has
also made a near masterpiece in Carlito's Way, but his technical skill
can't protect him from making the odd stinker, such as Body Double and
The Bonfire of the Vanities. And now Mission To Mars.
The film is crammed full of implausibilities, such as the re-boot of the
spacecraft's entire computer system, and the astonishing and quickly
glossed-over way the astronauts of the rescue mission, seemingly doomed
themselves, make their way to the Martian surface. Perhaps the funniest
is the survival of an astronaut who has lived for a year in a scrappy
windblown tent on the Martian surface - his oxygen and food being
provided by a few houseplants. Even if you buy this, the climate on Mars
might pose some other difficulties that are completely overlooked. Off-
hand, I don't know what the pressure and temperature of the Martian
atmosphere are. I'll just check. Temperatures vary from around minus 120
to minus 20 Fahrenheit and atmospheric pressure is around 0.7 percent of
Earth's. That took about three minutes to find out. Looking stuff up in
books. It's obviously a lost art in Hollywood. 
Does scientific accuracy on movies matter? It depends. When the
spacecraft whoosh past us in Star Wars and the explosions roar, we can
forgive the film-makers for adding the sound effects because they
presumably took the view that the silence of space would detract from
the excitement. Scientifically inaccurate, but fair enough. Often,
however, getting the science right is as easy as getting it wrong and
will only help the dramatic impact of the story. There are no real
excuses for howlers like those in Mission To Mars. A message is coded in
the form of a DNA sequence. (The coding method used is ludicrous, but
we'll let that pass.) On seeing a few turns of the resulting DNA double-
helix displayed on a monitor, an astronaut concludes straight away that
the genetic information is "missing the last two chromosomes". OK, so
the writers don't have a clue about biology, and maybe neither do the
majority of moviegoers, but to get this sort of thing so hopelessly
wrong is pure laziness and is insulting to everyone.
If you can fight through the boredom and embarrassment, you'll find much
of the film strangely familiar. The opening sequence is straight out of
Apollo 13, and the references to 2001: A Space Odyssey are too many to
be accidental - the shape of the spacecraft, the rotating living module,
the dull but precise voice of the computer, the word-for-word reference
to "voice-print identification", and the astronauts in a white room
during their alien encounter. A knowing reference or two is fine, but
this is all a bit much.
The score by the once-great Ennio Morricone is simply awful - when it
isn't crashingly inappropriate it's spacey wallpaper for the ears. The
only thing in the film's favour is the lovely photography by long-time
De Palma collaborator Stephen H. Burum. In fact, his photography is so
good, it almost made the film worth watching. Despite the wonderful
images he has produced, I suspect he won't be introducing himself at
parties as the guy who shot Mission To Mars.  Neither can I see Tim
Robbins or Gary Sinise looking back on this movie as a high point in
their acting careers, although they are to be congratulated for managing
to keep a straight face throughout.
The biggest, but prettiest, heap of interplanetary hooey you'll ever
see.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Three Kings (1999)
Kelly's Heroes in Iraq - that's what you might think having seen the
trailers and other publicity for Three Kings, but you'd be wrong, even
though the films shares the same plot premise of renegade soldiers from
a conquering army trying to liberate (for which read "steal") a fortune
in gold from the vanquished army's looted treasure.
Three greedy but likeable grunts - Mark Whalberg, Ice Cube, and Spike
Jonze - are joined by officer George Clooney on their mission to help
themselves to Saddam's gold. (Eagle-eyed readers will have spotted that
there are actually four main characters. If you want to know who the
three kings are supposed to be, just check out the poster.) Clooney is a
born movie star, and although he's had some trouble finding the right
vehicles, Three Kings will at last make his agent very happy. Mark
Whalberg has shaken off his pop-star turned actor tag - he's now an
actor, and a very good one, which is a bit more than can be said for Ice
Cube, who might be wise to retain the option of going back to the day
job. Spike Jonze (the director of Being John Malkovitch which I'm
looking forward to seeing soon) provides light relief as Wahlberg's
trailer-trash sidekick. Guided by a map retrieved from a prisoner whose
methods of hiding documents looked extremely uncomfortable, the four go
AWOL and set off into the desert.
Despite its large budget, Three Kings maintains an indie sensibility,
with startling flashes to the soldier's lives back in America, a
wickedly black sense of humour, and some wildly varying picture quality
- as if the film stock from some sequences had degraded in the Iraqi
heat. Director David O. Russell presents his action sequences in
refreshing new ways. One shootout in particular is horrifically
entrancing, played out in near silence as the camera follows bullets
from gun to victim with blurred and jerky slow-motion whip-pans. And in
a couple of shots that have caused some controversy because of their
rumoured use of a real cadaver, we see, from the inside of the body,
just what a bullet does. (It turns out that the rumour was false -
Russell had told the cadaver story to Newsweek, got the publicity he
wanted, then admitted he'd lied.)
Apart from the film's technical qualities, what makes it particularly
impressive is the way the story makes serious points about modern
warfare and makes them well. I know it's just an action movie, but this
action movie really does manage to deliver a savage critique of US
foreign policy during and immediately after the 1991 Gulf War. The
thieving incursion of the four soldiers is seen as a metaphor for the
wider conflict, and Three Kings does what few films do, let alone
mainstream blockbusters - it considers the effects of war on a civilian
population. In 1991, George Bush urged Iraqis to rise up against Saddam
Hussein and strongly implied that America would give the rebels more
than just moral support. In Three Kings, the members of the raiding
party are faced with the consequences of that promise and have to choose
whether or not to break it. 
The issue of western involvement in the Gulf is also addressed in a
scene in which Whalberg's character is tortured by an Iraqi. The mild-
mannered interrogator asks what the Americans are doing in his country.
When given the usual (and pretty reasonable) response that it is to
defend Kuwait, he suggests another reason for American interest in
Kuwait by a rather nasty use of some crude oil. Even the manner in which
the oil is administered is suggestive of unwanted western influence. 
The script (by Russell from John Ridley's story) is full of dark humour,
such as when the soldiers discuss the terms they should use to describe
their Iraqi foe: a black soldier understandably objects to the use of
"sand niggers" and "dune coons", and is happier with "towel-heads". The
film occasionally lets itself down and threatens to turn into a dull
Hollywood action movie, and the ending is indeed a bit hackneyed and
sentimental, but Three Kings is still a fine film which delivers its
ideas in a package perfectly designed to capture the imagination of the
post-Tarantino audience.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Deep Blue Sea (1999)
Deep Blue Sea is a big budget 'B'-movie in which scientists in an
undersea medical research laboratory produce super-smart sharks and pay
the price as the fiendish fish decide to get their own back on the pesky
interfering boffins. (As is usual in Hollywood movies, scientists are
portrayed as brilliant but misguided, and blinded by ambition to the
consequences of their actions.) 
Director Renny Harlin is a competent action film helmsman, but seems not
to care too much about the quality of the script he is working with or
the performances of his actors - his Die Hard 2 was a poor sequel mainly
because its script didn't come close to matching the wit and detail of
character of the original film. In Deep Blue Sea, Harlin seems to have
abandoned any notion of believable plot or convincing characters. The
dialogue piles cliche on cliche ("give me 48 hours"... "it's your call")
and much of the plot is idiotic. Samuel L. Jackson plays the financial
backer visiting the laboratory to check up on his investment. Most of
the time he looks as if he has just wandered onto the set, bewildered
about how he's ended up appearing in this movie. The rest of the cast is
generally pretty lame, although Michael Rapaport is fine as an irritable
and jumpy engineer. The most memorable portrayal, though, comes from
Saffron Burrows, who as the lab's unfeasibly attractive chief scientist
gives what must be one of the worst leading performances of the year.
Given the lines she has to deliver, and the credibility-stretching
things she has to do, such as stripping off to her microscopic underwear
in order to avoid an electric shock, a good performance was probably
unimaginable.
If Deep Blue Sea were just that little bit worse, it could be taken as a
parody, but unfortunately it's not quite that bad. The defence that it's
all just a bit of fluff - a bit of lightweight hokum - is no excuse for
laziness. In an apparent attempt to take the wind out of the sails of
criticisms that this is just a Jaws rip-off, the film-makers have
included some clear references to the mother-of-all fish movies,
including a similar opening sequence and Samuel L. Jackson's spoof of
Quint's USS Indianapolis speech. But such winking at the audience
doesn't really excuse the film's shortcomings.
The one interesting feature of the film, and the thing which nearly
saves it, is the way monster-movie conventions of who gets killed, and
when, are turned on their head. After a few characters have been turned
to fish food in some quite startling ways, we really don't know who's
going to get ripped to shreds next. The sharks themselves are nicely
done - if sometimes a little too obviously CGI'd - and the suspense and
action sequences in the sunken laboratory are handled well, as we'd
expect, but the good things about the film can't disguise its essential
tackiness. Deep Blue Sea tries for a similar feel to the year's other
lightweight Hollywood blockbuster The Mummy, but whereas The Mummy seems
to be the work of smart people having some whimsical fun, Deep Blue Sea
appears to have been produced by people too dumb or too lazy to do any
better. 
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Bringing Out the Dead (1999)
In 1976's Taxi Driver, director Martin Scorsese and writer Paul Schrader
examined the sordid and violent street life of New York through the eyes
of the increasingly disgusted and deranged cabbie Travis Bickle,
memorably played by Robert De Niro in his star-making role.
In Bringing Out The Dead, Scorsese and Schrader have teamed up again to
examine a similar theme. Nicholas Cage plays Frank Pierce, a New York
ambulance driver and paramedic. He works in the same awful urban
environment as Travis Bickle, and the New York tourist board cannot be
at all happy with the portrayal of their city there is no sign here of
the dramatic recent repackaging of New York as a safe and friendly city,
and the hospital scenes are more reminiscent of MASH than ER. The grim
setting is matched by Frank's mood. He is on a bad streak. He is
drinking and he has not saved a life for months. One death in
particular, that of a teenage girl, is haunting him, and he sees her
face everywhere he looks.
Scorsese's early work, such as Mean Streets and Taxi Driver, relied for
its power on a documentary approach to depicting a frantic and
overpoweringly scary reality. With Raging Bull, his enduring
masterpiece, he developed a more technically sophisticated approach.
While fellow New Yorker Brian De Palma is an equally good technician (if
we forget such incompetent tripe as Body Double), Scorsese uses his
mastery of the medium to produce movies that convince while they dazzle.
Films such as Goodfellas, for example, drop us in a world of believable
characters whose story we want to follow, regardless of how repulsive
the characters often are. And despite Scorsese's brilliance, and
Schrader's talent as a writer, it is the lack of a compelling story that
spoils Bringing Out The Dead. Frank is screwed up. He meets a girl. He
sorts himself out. That's about it. This lack of a narrative structure
makes the film a bit limp. There are some typically exhilarating
Scorsese sequences, but they seem almost bolted on because the audience
will expect them, not because they are called on by the story. The most
interesting characters are Frank's fellow ambulance drivers played by a
dream team of Hollywood character actors: a laid-back take-it-or-leave-
it John Goodman, a sweet-talking evangelising Ving Rhames, and a violent
manic Tom Sizemore, who inflicts as much pain and injury as he treats.
Although the film has an original score by veteran Elmer Berstein, the
most striking use of music is found in the use of some wonderful tracks
from such bands as The Who and The Clash, but the relevance of these
British bands from the 70s to a story set in 90s New York was lost on
me. This disjointed and inappropriate use of music perhaps contributes
to the feel of a movie that just doesn't work as a whole.
Bringing Out The Dead is a good film, but not a great one, and with a
master such as Scorsese, anything less than great is a let-down.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for East Is East (1999)
Set in 1971 in Salford, East is East concerns the mixed race Khan family
in which George, the Muslim father of the family, struggles to maintain
the traditions of his native Pakistan while running a fish and chip shop
with Ella, his English wife. George's children refer to him as Ghengis
and are intimidated into conforming with the expectations of Pakistani
culture, a culture which they feel as foreign. Apart from one son who
takes his Islamic instruction seriously, this next generation of Khans
sees little value in dietary restrictions, circumcisions and arranged
marriages, but is instead attracted to bacon, visits to the local disco
and snogs in the back alleys. Although we are aware of the racial
tension conflict between the Khans and some of their neighbours, this
never threatens to overwhelm the story - we are more concerned with the
struggles within the Khan household, and this saves the film from being
overly worthy.
Adapted by Ayub Khan-Din from his own play, the film centres on the
patriarchal George (Om Puri) and the no-nonsense Northern housewife Ella
(Linda Bassett). Both lead performances are excellent. George is at once
a monster, capable of beating his wife and children, and a victim of his
fear of betraying his cultural heritage. The situation is not one that
obviously lends itself to comedy, and we are always aware of the
grimness of the family's situation, but much humour is found in the
daily routine and conflicts in the Khan household, and in George's
efforts to arrange a suitable marriage for his sons.
Partly a harrowing social drama and partly a comedy of family life, the
film never quite stands out as either. It is nevertheless encouraging
that the British film industry can make films that are very much home-
grown product in the tradition of socially-aware British film-making,
and provide the distribution and marketing to make them commercially
successful, at least in the UK domestic market. It will be interesting
to see how the film performs elsewhere.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Green Mile, The (1999)
Writer-director Frank Darabont has obviously got a thing about
inspirational period prison dramas based on Stephen King stories. With
The Shawshank Redemption, he made a film which, although not a great
commercial success on its original release, has since had a strange
cultural impact, making it onto many moviegoers' lists of all-time
favourites. With The Green Mile, Darabont has taken a superficially
similar King story and tried to tap into the same popular appetite for
uplifting tales of decent human beings rising above brutality and
injustice, but I think The Green Mile will disappoint many admirers of
Shawshank.
Tom Hanks stars as a death row prison guard who takes delivery of an
unusual new inmate to await execution - a gentle and slow-witted black
giant (played by Michael Clarke Duncan) convicted of the murder of two
young white girls. The prison regime, with its mundane distractions
filling time between the horrifying electrocutions, is nicely developed
and impeccably crafted. Then the relationship between the guard and his
new charge takes a mystical turn, at which point the film basically
falls apart, and none of the top-drawer production design, acting and
photography on display can save it.
Apart from Kubrick's The Shining, which King hated, I've always thought
that the films based on King's non-spooky stories, such as Shawshank and
Stand By Me, have worked better than those inspired by his supernatural
tales. But with The Green Mile, we get an ill-judged mixture of the
magical and the earthly. First, we're asked to accept that rather than
sitting in a multiplex surrounded by popcorn-munching filmgoers, we are
in a prison in 1930s Louisiana. Fine. I'll go along with that. That's
what I'm here for. Then, disbelief nicely suspended, we are asked to
abandon the alternative reality we've agreed to inhabit and construct a
new one so we can swallow a bunch of miracles, complete with bright
lights and spooky manifestations. Give me a break. In fantasy films, the
impossible thing we're meant to believe in for a couple of hours must be
introduced, or at least alluded to, from the start so we have a chance
to get used to the idea and give ourselves over to it. Introducing
unexpected miraculous elements into an established earthly story is to
trample on well-established conventions. Imagine an episode of NYPD Blue
in which Andy Sipowitz is abducted by aliens. Doesn't work, does it?
Even if the mystical thrust of the story had been established from the
start, our credulity would still have been severely tested by the sheer
niceness of the prison staff - apart from one enjoyably sadistic and
slimy guard (played by Doug Hutchison) they are probably the most
thoughtful and decent bunch every to fry people for  living.
Although beautifully made, The Green Mile is let down by its bolted-on
mystical elements and its crude religious allegory. It also suffers from
the sort of sentimentality that Steven Spielberg is criticised for,
often unfairly. After a bum-numbing three hours plus, I felt I'd served
my time and was glad to be released.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
14th and 17th September 1999: Cineworld, Bristol 
I first heard about Eyes Wide Shut in March 1996. I had been an admirer
of Stanley Kubrick for twenty years, and in that time had only twice
been able to experience a new Kubrick release, so it was good to hear of
a new film starting production. It was nevertheless a bit of a
disappointment that Kubrick's next film would not be his much
anticipated project A.I., but would instead be a drama starring Tom
Cruise and Nicole Kidman.
For three and a half years, the Internet has been awash with speculation
and rumour about the cast and content of Eyes Wide Shut. Cast
replacements and secretive and protracted principal photography fuelled
the gossip, much of it outrageous, and nearly all of it incorrect.
Finally the film itself here, and in the most tragic of circumstances.
This is the last time we will ever see a new film from Stanly Kubrick.
He was a legendary figure - one of the few truly great film makers - and
a much misunderstood man. And now he's gone. 
In Eyes Wide Shut, Tom Cruise plays New York doctor Bill Harford and
Nicole Kidman plays his wife Alice. Their marriage seems perfect, but
one night Alice admits to having had sexual fantasies about another man.
Bill is deeply disturbed by this revelation and in his jealousy and
desire for revenge enters a sexual underworld, the heart of which is a
masked ritual orgy that takes place in a country mansion and at which
things turn very dark for Bill and very weird for the viewer. 
Is Eyes Wide Shut the fitting end to a great career that some reviewers
have claimed, or the monumental turkey that others have reported? I
think it depends on whether you get Kubrick films or not. Some are put
off by the feeling of cold detachment in many Kubrick films - we often
don't empathise with the characters or feel we are in the presence of
real people, but instead we observe the characters as subjects on a
microsope slide. This clinical formality can either be deeply off-
putting or can be the price you willingly pay for letting Kubrick in to
mess with your head. Personally, I'm willing to go along for the ride.
After first seeing Eyes Wide Shut, I wasn't sure what I thought of it.
Now it's had a chance to bed down a little, and I've seen it again, I
think it is marvellous, but overlong. The film is full of subtleties of
plot and theme that endlessly turn over in the mind. Questions are
raised in the film and apparently answered, but ambiguities remain, and
multiple interpretations are possible. A second viewing raises as many
questions as it answers.
The centrepiece of the film is the masked orgy sequence. From the moment
Bill arrives at the mansion gates to the moment he leaves, this
20-minute sequence is as good as anything Kubrick has ever done. The
interplay of image and music to evoke mystery, eroticism and fear is
spellbinding (although occasionally I had to wonder how satisfactory
oral sex can be when the participants are wearing masks). The American
release of Eyes Wide Shut was altered by placing computer-generated
figures over certain of the more vigorously copulating orgy-goers. This
was done to get the film an 'R' rating, rather than the more appropriate
but commercially difficult 'NC-17' rating. This has become known as the
"Austin Powers" version of Eyes Wide Shut. The digital cover-ups were,
apparently, approved in principle by Kubrick before his death. In the
U.S., hardcore porn is freely available, yet commercial considerations
mean that adults cannot see a serious mainstream film featuring
simulated sex in which no genitals are visible but which includes an
unacceptably vigourous level of thrusting. What a strange country
America is. 
The film has an extraordinary visual quality. As he has done before,
Kubrick shot Eyes Wide Shut using low lighting levels. The film was
deliberately underexposed during shooting and overexposed during
developing to compensate. This produces a dream-like washed-out grainy
feel to the image. At times the scene seems alive with an orange glow,
and during some close-ups, the grain is so prominent that the image
seems to shimmer. (On a more practical level, low lighting levels also
means a relatively small crew, so daily rates can be kept low, thereby
allowing longer shooting schedules.) The look of the film is also
influenced by a recurring motif of christmas tree lights and many other
examples of similar tiny lights, such as in shop displays and cafes, and
in curtains of beaded light.
Although there are few of the obvious trademarks, such as dramatic
tracking shots through interior spaces, or the full-face shots of
characters on the edge of insanity, the film still has the distinctive
Kubrick feel. Interiors are framed and lit to provide not just a place
where the action is set, but a psychological location for the
characters. Colours scream out at you with significance. What that
significance is it is hard to say, but perhaps any attempt to put it
into words is to miss the point. Kubrick films work at a deep
subconscious level, creating moods and reactions in the viewer that are
not meant to be explained or understood.
As is usual with Kubrick films, the choice of music is eclectic and
mixes original compositions with existing recordings. The original
pieces are by Jocelyn Pook, whose sombre chamber music is central to
several parts of the film, including the masked orgy sequence. Kubrick
has again made use of the music of avant-garde composer Gyorgy Ligeti.
The use of Ligeti in 2001 was spot on, but the use of his piano music in
Eyes Wide Shut has come in for some criticism. To the untrained ear,
such as mine, it sounds like little more than a child playing individual
notes with little concern for melody or rhythm. Listening to the music
in isolation, it is austere and foreboding, but in the context of the
film, that damned piano music struck me at times as just plain
ridiculous and nearly destroyed what it sought to augment. 
Another noteworthy aspect of Kubrick films is the performances he gets
from his actors. Tom Cruise is not an actor that seemed a likely choice
for a Stanley Kubrick film, having neither the emotional intensity of a
star like Jack Nicholson, nor the relative anonymity of the cast of 2001
or Full Metal Jacket. The casting of Cruise is reminiscent of that of
Ryan O'Neal in Barry Lyndon. In defending his casting of O'Neal, Kubrick
said in one of his rare interviews that "the personal qualities of an
actor, as they relate to the role, are almost as important as his
ability". Presumably similar considerations lay behind the casting of
Cruise, who carries the main acting burden, appearing in virtually every
scene. He is nevertheless hamstrung by his narrow range. Nicole Kidman
is generally fine, but even she sometimes seemed to chew the scenery a
bit. The minor roles are the usual collection of Kubrick eccentrics.
None of this is meant to be critical - it's the peculiar nature of the
performances, even those that would be deemed stilted or just plain bad
in other films, that contribute to the disconcerting other-worldly
appeal of Kubrick films. Sydney Pollack's performance as Bill's friend
Ziegler does, however, seem slightly out-of-place, his being the sort of
naturalistic performance we'd expect in a normal film.
The pacing of the film is often painfully slow. Scenes are dragged out
and lines... are... often... delivered... with... great... big...
gaps... between... words. Kubrick has been known to trim slow sequences
after critical test audience reaction (he did it with 2001 and trimmed
the European release of The Shining) and it is interesting to speculate
whether he would have similarly tightened-up Eyes Wide Shut if he had
had the chance. With his death, the film became untouchable. Despite
being half an hour too long, Eyes Wide Shut is the work of a master
whose ambition and vision makes a trip to the movies an experience that
transcends mere entertainment. It is magnificent, but occasionally a
magnificent bore.

Title
Review for Election (1999)
28th September 1999: The Watershed, Bristol 
Election tells the story of Tracy Flick (Reese Witherspoon), a Nebraskan
high-school student who is brilliant and hard-working, and who takes
part in all manner of worthy student activities. She is a perfect
student - prim, chirpy, and ambitious. And her teacher, Jim McAllister
(Matthew Broderick) has had just about enough of her - he is not an
ambitious man, is quite happy with his simple life and finds Tracy's
intensity very wearing. 
The high-school election for President of the student body is about to
take place, and although Tracy is so far the only candidate, she
conducts a businesslike campaign with drive and efficiency. Mr.
McAllister doesn't like the idea of having Tracy as the student
President, so he arranges for a rival candidate to enter the election.
Soon, a third candidate throws her hat into the ring. Tracy is not best
pleased. As the election campaign progresses, things take a bad turn in
Mr. McAllister's private life, and he becomes inclined to take his
frustration out on Tracy by scuppering her ambition. 
Matthew Broderick is not a heavyweight actor, but he does a fine job
here as an underachieving teacher haunted by an overachieving pupil. But
the film belongs to the ever-excellent Reese Witherspoon, who is fast
establishing a reputation as one of the finest young actresses around.
Her performance as Tracy Flick is simply magical, stealing every scene
she's in. And when Miss Flick lets rip with one of her outraged, tight-
lipped scowls, take cover - those nostrils are so scary they could
curdle milk at thirty paces.
Simply but effectively directed by Alexander Payne, who also co-write
the snappy and witty screenplay with Jim Taylor (from Tom Perrotta's
novel), Election is a high-school comedy drama, a political satire and a
study of jealousy and the price of ambition. It's quite disheartnening
that Election wasn't distributed more widely here in the UK. I can't
imagine anyone not enjoying this film and it deserved a shot at the
multiplex audience. It's a gem of a movie and is my film of the year so
far.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Happiness (1998)
Happiness, written and directed by Todd Solondz, won the International
Critics' Prize at Cannes last year. It is an extremely frank and
disturbing look at the emotional horror stories that exist under the
surface of the lives of several apparently everyday American
suburbanites. The characters' lives intersect in various ways, as if to
suggest that the film has not just chosen a few freaks to examine, but
that the awfulness of what goes on in the film is quite normal.
The interweaving stories show the ways in which the characters seek
happiness and uniformly fail. These include a woman's doomed romances,
an obscene phone caller who stumbles into a pathetic relationship with
an overweight and lonely neighbour, the breakdown of a late middle-aged
couple's marriage, an 11-year old boy's first experiments with
masturbation and, most unsettling of all, the boy's father's appalling
sexual abuse of two of his son's friends. It is this aspect of the film
that is truly shocking. The son, embarrassed and confused about his
stirring sexuality, goes to his father for advice. The father's calm but
frank comments can be seen either as a model of open and supportive
parenting, or as an attempt at a gross seduction. The scenes in which
the father plots his assaults are uncomfortable enough to watch, but the
scene in which he admits to his son what he has done, and describes it
with brutal candour, is almost unbearable. Despite the monstrous things
this paedophile does, he is not portrayed as a monster, but rather as a
pathetic character whom we can almost feel some sympathy for. It is this
that has provoked some to call the film morally repugnant.
The other story lines are hardly light-hearted, and there is a rape and
murder thrown in for good measure, but there is nevertheless a strange
humour, fuelled by embarrassment, running through much of the film. The
cast is uniformly excellent, although Dylan Baker deserves special
mention for his portrayal of the paedophile father.
I was not looking forward to seeing Happiness, but felt it was a film I
had to see. I can't say I enjoyed it very much, but it is as emotionally
involving and challenging as cinema can get.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
In The Matrix, writer-directors the Wachowski Brothers have taken a
familiar science fiction idea - that what we perceive as reality is
merely an illusion - and from it have constructed a high-tech action
flick that is as cool as it is dazzling. 
The film seems to start out with a major handicap: it stars Keanu Reeves
- surely the worst actor ever to make it as a major Hollywood star. He
plays Neo, a gormless computer hacker who finds his world turned inside
out and himself transformed into the best hope for liberation of an
enslaved mankind. Keanu can do gormless OK, but the rest is heavy stuff.
Mercifully, his thesping is kept to a minimum and he is called on
instead to look good while flying through the air and dodging bullets.
We, and Keanu, are also lucky that there are some real actors in the
film to help out. Laurence Fishburne plays Morpheus, the leader of a
band of freedom fighters who explains to Neo, and to us, just what the
hell is going on. Hugo Weaving plays chief bad guy Agent Smith, a Man In
Black who is so spookily menacing he steals every scene he's in. But the
real star is newcomer Carrie-Anne Moss, who as Trinity, a ballsy and
resourceful gun-toting sexpot in black PVC, gives us an action heroine
to rank with Sigourney Weaver in Aliens and Linda Hamilton in Terminator
2.
In the illusory world in which much of the action of The Matrix takes
place, those who have realised that the world around them is not real
can, with training, manipulate the physical nature of that illusory
environment. This provides our heroes with the ability to run up walls
and leap between buildings, and gives the film-makers an excuse to let
rip with some fantastically imaginative use of technical wizardry. The
"flo-mo" process is used, in which the camera seems to move around
frozen action, as are a whole raft of effects of the kind that seemed so
revolutionary in Terminator 2. When such techniques are used in action
sequences that are as well choreographed and constructed as those in The
Matrix, the result is like seeing something genuinely fresh and
exciting. Such sequences are helped by the excellent soundtrack
featuring such heavyweight noisemakers as The Propellerheads, Ministry
and Rage Against The Machine.
Towards the end, The Matrix seems to abandon any exploration of the
interesting ideas at its core, and it doesn't have the mythical weight
of a film like Blade Runner, but at least is has some ideas, and as
action eye-candy it's hard to beat.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
In Being John Malkovitch, the world is a very strange place. We start to
realise just how strange when struggling puppeteer Craig (John Cusack)
takes a job as a filing clerk on the seven-and-a-halfth floor of a New
York office building. Now that's pretty weird. He has an equally
peculiar home life, sharing his cramped apartment with his wife Lotte (a
remarkably frumpy Cameron Diaz) and half the sick roster from the Bronx
Zoo. That's also pretty weird.
But the Alice in Wonderland factor really kicks into overdrive when
Craig discovers a slippery gloopy portal from his office into the head
of actor John Malkovitch. Now that's really weird. Being in need of cash
to support his puppeteering, he teams up with his smoulderingly sexy and
self-assured co-worker Maxine (Catherine Keener) to exploit this
metaphysical rollercoaster ride, and they start selling trips into
Malkovitch's head. Craig is keen to point out the serious philosophical
questions that the Malkovitch portal raises, such as issues about the
nature of self, but everyone, including the audience, is having too much
of a wild time to care. When a truly bizarre and hilarious sexual
triangle develops, things get very complicated for Craig and his
concerns shift from the metaphysical to the personal. 
In a wonderfully self-parodying and self-effacing role, Malkovitch
portrays himself as a vain and pompous thesp, and his success as a film
actor is called into question when some characters haven't even heard of
him, and nobody can name any films he's been in. The other performances,
including some surprise guest appearances all as self-mocking as
Malkovitch's, add to the fun.
Director Spike Jonze and writer Charlie Kaufman have concocted an indie
comedy that's wildly original and wildly funny, but it has its dark
side, particularly in Craig's later treatment of Lotte, but never fear -
justice is seen to be done in the end. Like the travellers into
Malkovitch up there on the screen, we're sucked into a fabulous
experience and spat out, exhilarated, at the other end. It all could so
easily have fallen flat after the initial joke wore off, but the quality
of the ideas and the performances sustain interest right to the end,
although as is usually the case with plots based on gimmicky ideas, the
ending can't quite tidy up the story as neatly as we'd like, but that's
being waaayyy too picky. If David Cronenberg and Franz Kafka had got
together to make a screwball comedy, they could hardly have come up with
anything better than this very weird and very wonderful gem. 
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for American Beauty (1999)
Kevin Spacey is one of the few actors whose name in the credits alone
would make me want to see a film. Even in his smaller roles, such as his
portrayal of serial killer John Doe in Seven, he makes an impact far
beyond his screen time, but here he is given the chance to move from
being the king of character actors to being a movie star. He probably
doesn't think of it in those terms, but that's what's happened. Spacey
plays Lester Burhnam, a bumbling inconsequential man in a joyless
marriage to Carolyn (Annette Benning) and with a daughter (Thora Birch)
who hates him for being so pathetic. Lester considers himself to be
half-dead.  Then he meets his daughter's pretty friend (Mena Suvari) and
his life is transformed. But this is not just a film about a middle-aged
man falling for a young girl. The film's main theme is developed by
Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley), the Burnham's new neighbour, who sees beauty
all around him and captures this beauty on video.
Although Sam Mendes is a first-time movie director, he has worked in the
theatre, notable directing Nicole Kidman in the London production of The
Blue Room. Given this background, it is not surprising that he has
obtained such fine, emotionally revealing performances from his cast,
but what is striking is that he has not just directed a play and filmed
it - he has made a technically sophisticated movie and had fun playing
with the medium, but he never falls into the trap of being gratuitously
tricksy. Given that this is a film about beauty, it is appropriate that
the film itself is often astonishingly beautiful. The idea of finding
beauty in unexpected places is taken to an extreme in some grainy video
footage of a plastic bag blowing in the wind;  one of the most gorgeous
images I'd ever see in a movie. And in the use of colour and the framing
of characters in their environment, such as the Burnhams at their dining
table, Mendes and cinematographer Conrad Hall produce images that could
have been by Kubrick.
There are moments of utter delight in the screenplay by Alan Ball
(another first-timer), which shares some thematic similarities to David
Fincher's Fight Club - even the leading characters' names (Lester
Burnham and Tyler Durden) have a similar ring. Lester echoes Tyler in
his rejection of society's obsession with material goods, telling his
wife that "it's just stuff" and seeking fulfilment in less conventional
ways. There are also similarities to Todd Solondz's Happiness, which
also frankly examines middle-American family life and sexual mores.
American Beauty, however, has found an audience Happiness couldn't,
maybe because Solondz's film was a little too brutal.
I've seen American Beauty film twice - once with a typical suburban
multiplex crowd and one with an audience made up almost entirely of
students. Both times the cinema was packed and both audiences seemed to
love the film. Lets hope the Hollywood bean-counter take note - serious,
intelligent and accessible movies can be made by new writers and
directors. And these films can make lots of money.
Although it contains much to admire and enjoy, American Beauty is not
perfect. It works better in pieces than as a whole and there is a clumsy
sub-plot and framing device involving Ricky's father, a homophobic ex-
Marines colonel. Although finely played by Chris Cooper, this character
seems to have no relevance to the substance of the film and his
existence in the story seems contrived to provide a dramatic and tidy
end. Its structural flaws aside, American Beauty is a fine film - it's
just not quite the masterpiece that the generally ecstatic critical
reception would suggest.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for End of Days (1999)
I have no objection to mindless action movies, but End Of Days is so
truly brain-dead, so utterly moronic, that it sets a miserable new
benchmark of awfulness for Hollywood blockbusters. Compares to End Of
Days, Die Hard was Hamlet and True Lies was Finnegans Wake. The film is
not technically incompetent like some zero-budget straight-to-video
actioner, but is a big-budget mainstream Hollywood studio production
directed by dependable journeyman Peter Hyams all of which makes the
direness of this movie much more depressing.
Arnold Schwartzenegger plays security man Jericho Cane (Jericho
Religious reference. Geddit?) who is part of the team protecting a
mysterious figure whom they suspect is a powerful Wall St. businessman.
He is actually the Devil, who has come to earth and taken the human form
of Gabriel Byrne. Lucifer is on a mission to impregnate a young woman,
chosen from birth to bear his demonic offspring, thus fulfilling a
biblical prophecy and bringing about the end of days. For reasons
unexplained, the diabolic coupling must take place on the stroke of
midnight on 31st December 1999. We know all this, but Cane doesn't, so
his departure into action-movie cliche-land makes no sense. But then
nothing much makes sense in this movie. The selected Bride of Satan
(played by Robin Tunney) is called Christine York. The way in which Cane
figures out this name is as staggeringly stupid as the explanation by
Father Kovak (played by an suitably embarrassed-looking Rod Steiger)
that the number of the beast is not 666, but is actually 1999 because
that's what you get when you turn 666 upside-down and stick a 1 in
front. Sheesh.
Having mysteriously decided to track down some unknown woman, and
amazingly concluded what her name is, Cane turns up just in time to save
her from a Vatican hit-squad. (Trust me, I cannot possibly make this
movie sound any more stupid than it actually is.) Then all he has to do
is protect the virginal Miss York's honour and thereby save the world.
Arnie's limitations as an actor are cruelly exposed by the script, which
laughably attempts to draw Cane as complex character wrestling with his
loss of faith after the deaths of his wife and daughter. Gabriel Byrne
is actually rather good, and is the only person involved in this piece
of junk who survives with credibility intact.
I do not know how much Andrew H. Marlowe was paid for his original
screenplay, but whatever it was, it was too much. This crude amalgam of
The Exorcist, The Omen, and Terminator 2 could have been written by any
college student with a free weekend and a supply of beer and pizza.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Sleepy Hollow (1999)
Washington Irving's story The Legend of Sleepy Hollow has been dusted
down and given the Tim Burton treatment. Burton excels in bewitching us
with bizarre, dark, yet light-hearted visions - Edward Scissorhands and
the Batman films (before the series was effectively ruined when Burton
gave up the helm) are wonderful movies, and the new Tim Burton movie was
a must-see. The story is set in 1799, in the village of Sleepy Hollow
near New York. A series of ghostly and gruesome murders has taken place
in the village and Ichabod Crane, a police constable from the big city,
is sent to investigate. Crane (played by Johnny Depp) soon finds that
there really are some otherworldly goings-on in the village and realises
that he might not succeed in his attempt to bring science and reason to
the investigation and debunk the villagers' spooky tales of the
butchering Headless Horseman.
The film is absolutely gorgeous to look at, the action sequences are
fine and the score shows Danny Elfman on top dramatically-whimsical
form, but unfortunately the movie fails owing to seriously ill-judged
screenplay and performances fundamental problems which no amount of
technical skill can overcome. The film is written by Andrew Kevin
Walker, who wrote Seven with its brilliantly novel construction, but the
source material here ties Walker down to an old-fashioned ghost story,
and in his attempt at producing authentic period dialogue, what we get
sounds horribly forced and unconvincing.
Johnny Depp is a fine actor, but his performance here is little more
than a reworking of his Edward Scissorhands, the similarity between the
roles highlighted when Ichabod wields various spiky investigative
gadgets. But what worked in Scissorhands strangely fails here. Perhaps
Burton's talent for malignant delight works best when it plays against a
contemporary background. Here it just seems a bit silly.
The murderous Headless Horseman is played, in the scenes before the
horseman loses his head, by Christopher Walken, but for the bulk of the
horseman's screen time, the headless figure is played by Ray Park. Park
played Darth Maul in Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom Menace and as the
bonceless butcher he brings a savage grace to his frequent dismemberings
of Sleepy Hollow's inhabitants. Christina Ricci is usually worth
watching and has a knack for taking on interesting roles, such as her
parts in Fear And Loathing In Las Vegas and The Opposite of Sex. Here
she is completely wasted, and it hard to see anything in the script that
can have attracted her, so perhaps she let the attraction of working
with Burton and Depp get the better of her.
The whole film seems to be a homage to Hammer horror films. (The Hammer
connection is strengthened by the use of such fine British character
actors as Christopher Lee, Michael Gambon and Michael Gough.) Such films
can be fun to watch and I have fond memories of sneakily staying up late
to watch them on TV, but even their greatest fans would find it hard to
deny that they were melodramatic, overacted nonsense. In this regard,
Tim Burton's film has captured their essence all too well.
All in all, Sleepy Hollow is a big disappointment.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
In 1994, three young and inexperienced documentary film-makers set off
into the Maryland woods to investigate the story of the Blair Witch, a
creepy figure of local folklore, said to be responsible for
disappearances and deaths over several decades. All that was ever found
of them was the footage they shot. This material was edited and the
result is presented here. It tells the remarkable story of how they
became lost in the forest and were tormented by strange unseen forces.
There's one often-overlooked aspect of this spooky tale that's worth
bearing in mind... it's not true. Let's just let that sink in a moment.
It's a story. They made it up. It didn't happen.
Some low-budget films have a structure or technical approach which flows
from a single cost-cutting idea. The excellent 1998 Canadian science
fiction film Cube was set in a huge maze of interconnecting cubic rooms.
A set was constructed of one such room, 18 feet on a side, and that's
where the whole film was shot. The Blair Witch Project takes a similarly
simple and retrospectively obvious idea to make a virtue of necessity:
the whole film is presented as the edited footage shot by the three
documentary makers and all this material was recorded by the three
actors playing the documentary crew. The actors were given a 16mm film
camera, a Hi-8 video camera and sound recording equipment, and each day
they were given some minimal direction and left to improvise a day's
shooting. The footage was collected at the end of each day in exchange
for food and the next day's story line. The real film-makers crept
around the actors' tent at night producing scary noises and preparing
strange artifacts for the increasingly uncomfortable cast to discover
the next day. The originality of this idea has been questioned, with
films such as Cannibal Holocaust and The Last Broadcast cited as earlier
examples of the mockumentary approach to horror movies.
The nature of the film lends itself to confusion about the reality of
the events depicted. When we see tired, hungry, cold and scared
characters on the screen, we are watching actors, but we are watching
tired, hungry, cold and scared actors. Many people seem to have had a
problem grasping the idea that the film is a work of fiction. Feeding
off the pre-millennial appetite for spooks and demons, the film-makers
deliberately fostered this confusion by using the actors' names -
Heather, Michael and Josh - for the characters and presenting the film
as a true story in promotional material. The official web site, for
example, provides extensive "factual" background material on the
(completely made-up) Blair Witch story and the unfortunate trio. The
story is also presented as truth in many of the unofficial web sites
which fuelled interest in the film. These sites were supposedly produced
by fans of the movie, but it has been suggested, although the film-
makers deny it, that some were actually professionally-produced
publicity sites masquerading as fan sites.
There is no violence or gore in the film (apart from a small lump of
unidentifiable bloody matter), no special effects and no visible
monsters or spooks - the story is told purely through the reactions of
Heather, Michael and Josh to what goes on around them. The three
performances are convincing, but it is hard to know to what extent we
are watching acting or a recording of three very uncomfortable people.
The story goes that the actors had to sign releases indicating that they
would not hold the film-makers liable for any psychological damage they
might suffer as a result of the harsh shooting conditions. In order to
see the performances, of course, the characters had to film each other
when they might have been expected to have more important things to do,
such as make their documentary, find their way out the woods, or run
around screaming. This is explained by the pushy Heather, who does much
of the most personally intrusive filming and claims to want to record
their experiences as well as make a documentary. I wasn't really
convinced by this explanation, but how else could we have a movie to
watch?
The film has so far made around $140,000,000 in the US - not bad for a
movie that cost around $40,000 to make (although the distribution
company that picked it up spent an extra $100,000 on the film, mainly on
improving the sound quality). It is hard to know what the film's writer-
directors, Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez can do next. They have made
one of the most successful films of all time, and the money people will
be throwing cash at them, yet they've made an unrepeatable freak of a
film, with no evidence that they will have a clue about how to make
another movie.
The Blair Witch Project is a triumph of marketing, and raises some
interesting issues about what's real and what isn't in movies. The
technical approach is novel, but this in itself isn't enough to sustain
a feature film. There are a few creepy moments, and a the final scene is
pretty chilling, but the scariest film ever made? Hardly. When the
making and marketing of a film is more interesting than the film itself,
you know there's something wrong.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Sixth Sense, The (1999)
The Sixth Sense is an excellent psychological ghost story with a human
heart. Bruce Willis plays Malcolm Crowe, a child psychologist trying to
understand what's going on in the head of Cole, a disturbed schoolboy.
Cole lives with his mother (Toni Collette), and although she senses her
son is very different from other boys, and is aware of the strange
events that occur around him, she does not understand what is wrong and
is frustrated because she cannot help him.
Dr. Crowe befriends his young patient and eventually Cole reveals to him
his secret - that he sees dead people. Crowe is sympathetic and
supportive but does not believe in ghosts. Instead, he thinks Cole is
haunted by spooks constructed from his own imagination, and seeks to
help Cole by getting him to confront the tormented dead of his visions
and find out what they want. We are drawn into Cole's world, seeing what
he sees and sharing his fear at these unwanted visions. 
As Cole, Haley Joel Osment gives a truly memorable performance, and I
don't just mean he's good for a child actor - I mean he's good. "All the
time" - it doesn't sound like much of a line, but the way he delivers it
makes it creepier than anything the Blair witch could throw at us.
M. Night Shyamalan directs his own wonderful script with flair and
sensitivity, and Tak Fujimoto's dark but crisp photography contributes
the sense of menacing reality it brought to The Silence of The Lambs. As
well as being as scary as any ghost movie you're likely to see, the film
is very moving in its examination of Cole's relationships with Dr.
Crowe, with his mother and, indeed, with the dead and the loved ones
they leave behind. Even if you see the twist ending coming, The Sixth
Sense is a cracker of a movie and its success shows that Hollywood can
make thoughtful popular entertainment and make lots of money at the same
time. And that can't be bad.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
In Don DeLillo's novel Underworld, one character argues that "Rage and
violence can be elements of productive tension in a soul. They can serve
the fullness of one's identity. One way a man untrivialises himself is
to punch another man in the mouth." This is the subversive idea at the
heart of Fight Club.
Edward Norton plays The Narrator. He has a respectable job and an
apartment full of nice furniture and clothes, but he is troubled - his
job is unsatisfying and he cannot sleep. He seeks comfort in attending
self-help groups for people with diseases he doesn't have, finding
particular solace in a support group for victims of testicular cancer.
Just as The Narrator's life seems a little more settled, he meets Tyler
Durden (Brad Pitt), an anarchic crazy-man with several night-time jobs
who spreads a little chaos with everything he does. As a waiter he
urinates in the soup. As a cinema projectionist he splices subliminal
frames from pornographic movies into family films. As a soap salesman
he... but that would be giving away too much.
Outside a bar, Tyler invites The Narrator to hit him. He is reluctant at
first, but they soon start brawling. They find a strange satisfaction in
their cuts and bruises and meet every week to fight. Other men gather to
watch, and eventually one of then asks to join in. The first Fight Club
is born. Men from all walks of life gather in a dingy basement and take
turns at fist-fighting, beating each other to a pulp, and in the process
fighting back against their emasculation at the hands of society and
finding out what it means to be a brutish primaeval man again in an
over-civilised world. The club is an instant success and fight clubs
start appearing all over the country. Tyler Durden becomes an
underground hero, but is unsatisfied and seeks to inspire further chaos
through the sinister Project Mayhem.
David Fincher directs with a manic hyperactive inventiveness.
Astonishing images illustrate throwaway ideas, such as The Narrator's
apartment seen as items in an Ikea catalogue, or for a few seconds, a
terrifyingly realised mid-air plane collision. The medium of film itself
is played with: barely noticeable images appear only for a frame or two,
fake cue dots are used, and the film appears to judder and slip in the
projector showing its sprocket holes on the screen. And yet none of this
comes across as being tricksy: it all makes perfect sense in the context
of this surreal wham-bam beat-em-up world. Jim Uhls' screenplay (from
Chuck Palahniuk's novel) crackles along providing deliciously dangerous
fun. The film contains many jokes, but laughing is rarely an option -
the context of the jokes is so dark and the film so quickfire that by
the time you've had time to register that something was actually pretty
funny, the story has moved on.
Some have expressed outrage at the violence in the film. The fight
scenes are indeed very hard to watch, the savageness heightened by the
sounds of fist splitting flesh and breaking bone and tooth. One beating
in particular is so brutal and bloody that I was glad it had been
slightly cut. But like A Clockwork Orange nearly thirty years ago, Fight
Club is not so much a violent film as a film about violence, so its
disturbing depiction of savagery is more justifiable than the
meaningless violence in the average Hollywood action movie. Stanley
Kubrick's film raised the question of whether it is right for society to
suppress a man's natural brutality. Fight Club takes as a premise that
it's too late - social changes have already done it to men on a huge
scale - and tells the story of some men's reaction to this denial of
their true nature.
Both Norton and Pitt are magnificent, with Norton perhaps just coming
out on top given the more complex character he has to play. Excellent
design, sound and make-up all contribute to the film's impact and a fine
soundtrack from The Dust Brothers provides a perfect hard-but-cool
backdrop. There is a staggering and quite bizarre twist in the plot
which some people will find harder to stomach than the film's violence,
but I thought it gave the film a mythical, fantastical edge and provided
a retrospective justification for the film's wild visual style.
Dangerous and dazzling, Fight Club is as near as makes no difference a
masterpiece and beats Election into second place as my film of the year.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Topsy-Turvy (1999)
Lars von Trier makes a science-fiction epic. Tim Burton makes a romantic
comedy. Hardly less shocking is the idea of Mike Leigh, the master of
bitter-sweet contemporary kitchen-sink dramas such as Life is Sweet and
Secrets and Lies, making a period piece with musical numbers and
involving historical characters. But he has, and has done it
wonderfully. Leigh's admirers can rest easy that despite the beautifully
realised Victorian costumes and interiors, the usual Leigh elements are
there - the wry sad humour, the pain of disappointments profound and
mundane, and the delight in people and their idiosyncrasies.
In Topsy-Turvy, Leigh uses the first production of Gilbert and
Sullivan's The Mikado to explore his familiar themes. After the
lacklustre reception of their Princess Ida, composer Sullivan (Allan
Corduner) states his intention to abandon the musical theatre for his
more serious symphonic work. Librettist Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) seeks to
persuade him to change his mind and produce yet another opera at the
Savoy theatre for Richard D'Oyly Carte (Ron Cook), but Sullivan is
unimpressed by Gilbert's stale ideas for the new opera and it looks like
the legendary partnership is over. Gilbert then visits a Japanese
cultural exhibition, and the seed of the idea for The Mikado is sown in
his mind.
Despite his ambitions as a serious composer, Sullivan is a bit of a
party animal, while Gilbert, in contrast to his delightfully funny
lyrics and dry wit, is a fairly joyless soul whose only moments of
spontaneity occur in private. Leigh manages to explore the complexities
of his characters in ways that few other film-makers can match. Leigh's
films are scripted, but the script is the result of lengthy rehearsal
sessions which are largely improvised. This gives his films a
distinctive combination of spontaneity and discipline. Both lead
performances in Topsy-Turvy are a joy, as are the supporting turns,
particularly that from Leigh regular Timothy Spall. During the
preparation for The Mikado's first performance, we are treated to
several musical numbers from the show. You do not have to be a Gilbert
and Sullivan buff to enjoy the songs' hilarious, and utterly British,
interplay of stoicism and eccentricity. 
There is a moment in Topsy-Turvy which is even more of a departure for
Mike Leigh than the historical setting and the music: the camera moves
in under Gilbert's face and tilts up to look at him from below as he
beams with joy at the moment his is struck by the inspiration for The
Mikado. For Mike Leigh to actually draw attention to the camera in this
way is astonishing. Maybe he'd just watched The Matrix and came over all
funny. Steady on, there Mike. 
Topsy-Turvy is a long film, and could perhaps have benefited from a bit
of tightening-up here and there, but it is nevertheless delightful and
confirms Mike Leigh as one our national cultural treasures. (8/10)
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Magnolia (1999)
Magnolia is writer-director Paul Thomas Anderson's follow-up to Boogie
Nights. This time, Anderson has come over all Robert Altman, resisting
traditional notions of narrative and instead taking a huge cast of
characters and weaving together a series of vaguely interconnected
stories, some of which come to a resolution of sorts, others of which
are left dangling. Story hardly seems to matter in this swirling mix of
rejection, death, loneliness, coercion, unfulfilled promise, abandonment
and coincidence.
The film has a cast to die for, and includes particularly good
performances from Jason Robards, who plays a dying man and looks really
very ill indeed, Phillip Seymour Hoffman (surely Hollywood's new
superstar among character actors) as Robards's nurse, and John C. Reilly
as a lonely cop. There are, though, a couple of disappointments from
usually excellent actors. William H. Macy plays an ineffectual man
turned bungling criminal and gives what is little more than a reprise of
his performance in Fargo, and Julianne Moore plays a character so whiney
and unstable that she descends from being merely unconvincing and
laughable to being positively annoying. Perhaps surprisingly, given the
acting talent on show, the standout performance is given by Tom Cruise,
who has never been better. All teeth and flashing eyes, he plays a
motivational guru promoting his monstrous Seduce and Destroy program for
predatory males. Cruise excels as he repels, explaining to his whooping
followers that he is about to show them "how to fake being kind and
caring". Later, when an interviewer offends him with a line of
questioning about his family background, the smile fades and he grows
silent. "What are you doing?" she asks. "I'm quietly judging you," he
replies. I have always had my suspicions that Stanley Kubrick's methods
were not suited to getting the best out of actors. All that time locked
away making Eyes Wide Shut and at the end of it Cruise was middling at
best. Here he is simply terrific, and all credit to him for taking this
part in an ensemble piece, rather than just signing up for more obvious
star-vehicles such as Mission: Impossible 2.
Technically, Magnolia, is big-budget American indie at its best and is
beautifully photographed by Robert Elswit. Some haunting songs by Aimee
Mann feature in several key sequences, including an effective scene in
which we cut from one strand of the film to the next and see each of the
main characters singing along to the same melancholy song. In some
scenes, the songs are so high up in the sound mix that the dialogue is
virtually inaudible, suggesting that the lyrics have more to say than
the characters. The opening pre-credits sequence, narrated by
actor/magician Ricky Jay, establishes the theme of meaningful
coincidence in people's lives, and is the best short film the Coen
brothers never made. This macabrely funny sequence, and the
magnificently bizarre meteorological conditions near the end of the
filmThis macabrely funny sequence, and the magnificently bizarre
meteorological conditions near the end of the film, are moments of light
relief in an otherwise pretty oppressive movie. (The strange climactic
weather event is a delightful surprise, although those with a detailed
knowledge of the Old Testament are given a couple of clues to what's
coming.)
If I had my sarcastic cynic head on, I might suggest that Magnolia must
be important because it's over three hours long, and it must be profound
because it's so depressing. In a fairer mood, I'd say that although
Magnolia teeters on the edge of self-indulgence and pretension, it is
still an ambitious and impressive mosaic of failed and corrupt but
ultimately redeemable lives.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Metropolis (1927)
I suppose like many people, I knew Metropolis less as a movie than as
the source of some iconic images, so it was interesting to see the whole
film, even if it was the hour-and-a-half international release version
which was crudely cobbled together from Lang's original cut.
Metropolis was first released in 1927 and depicts a futuristic city in
which armies of oppressed workers slave in huge underground power plants
to support the easy lifestyle  of the surface dwellers. The owner of the
power plant incites revolt among his own workers to provide a pretext
for further repression. He does this with the help of a crazed inventor
and his robot-woman creation (played by Brigitte Helm).
Silent films were never silent, and this showing featured an original
score performed live by Bristol band Angel Tech. This versatile three-
piece filled the small Arnolfini stage with keyboards and electronics
but also used guitar, bass and drums to provide an accompaniment
reminiscent of Orbital, Pink Floyd and Nine Inch Nails. The music
properly treated the film as a serious piece telling a serious story,
and never sought to trivialise the film as a quaint relic. 
It is impossible now to see the film as its original audience did,
regardless of which version is available. The political ideas in the
film now seem hopelessly naive and what prompted audiences to gasp in
amazement seventy years ago now often seems tacky and wildly
unconvincing, but there is plenty of cinematic invention to enjoy and
some of the power of the film remains - the depiction of the mechanical
underworld in particular is still very impressive.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Erin Brockovich (2000)
In Erin Brockovich, Julia Roberts takes the title role of an outwardly
trashy single mother who takes a menial job in a small law firm and,
despite her lack of legal training or experience, bluffs her way into
investigating the apparent connection between chemical discharges from a
power plant and the health problems experienced by families living
nearby. Like The Insider, the film purports to tell a recent true story
of corporations whose attempts to cover up their illegal activities are
foiled by determined individuals.
Director Steven Soderbergh is effective but unobtrusive and lets
Susannah Grant's script and the central performances carry the film. As
the foul-mouthed Brockovich, who desperately tries to provide for her
young family while finding a new kind of fulfilment in her
investigation, Julia Roberts has a meatier and tougher role than her
usual fluff. She handles it all very well, while still making the most
of any opportunity to display that smile and those legs. With Erin
Brockovich, Soderbergh has probably given Julia Roberts the kind of
boost he gave George Clooney's stalled career in Out of Sight.
Romantic interest is provided by Erin's biker neighbour George. I had to
wonder whether the real George could possibly have been as warm,
generous and understanding as he is portrayed on screen. As William
Goldman points out in his book Adventures in the Screen Trade, writing
screenplays based on real events and characters is plagued by the
problem that reality does not necessarily make convincing drama -
sometimes real life is just too corny to be believable. Erin Brockovich
is pretty corny, but maybe so is life. When movie stars play characters
based on real people, there is always the suspicion that the actors are
considerably better-looking than the people they're playing (Bonnie and
Clyde were no Beatty and Dunaway) but the real Erin Brockovich has a
cameo in the film as a waitress and she genuinely is a very attractive
woman, so maybe George really was as wonderful as shown here and this
whole rags-to-riches fairy tale in which the bad guys get their
comeuppance is a faithful adaptation of what actually happened.
Erin Brockovich tells a truly remarkable story. As a piece of filmed
drama, though, it's efficient but unexceptional.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Summer of Sam (1999)
In the sweltering summer of 1977, New York was terrorised by the serial
killer known as Son of Sam. Although the killer and his crimes feature
in Summer of Sam, Spike Lee's film is more concerned with the squabbles
of a group of young Italian lowlifes and misfits who hang around on
street corners, swear a lot and beat each other up. 
It is the year of Saturday Night Fever and punk. Philandering
hairdresser Vinnie (John Leguizamo) takes his wife Dionna (Mira Sorvino)
to the disco, while Ritchie (Adrien Brody) has embraced the punk
movement and started wearing spiky hair and affecting an atrocious
English accent. They live in a Bronx neighbourhood where, it is thought,
the killer might live, and suspicion soon falls on the increasingly
estranged Ritchie, whose punk look and lifestyle is making him an
outsider.
Certain sequences, such as the killings themselves, are stylishly
realised, but the film succeeds or fails by the character studies of
Ritchie and Vinnie. Ritchie is an interesting character we can believe
in and sympathise with, but the characterisation of Vinnie is utterly
tiresome. The character is a louse, sure, but he could have been made an
interesting louse, instead of which he bores while he repels. And this
is a long film. The characters must also have something to do that
interests us and develops the story or relates somehow to the film's
themes. I suppose the film was about loyalty and suspicion, but it took
an awfully long time to say, well... not a lot really.
It is possible that the film was not properly projected the day I saw it
(the BBFC certificate before the film did not have the customary
brilliance and clarity I've come to expect from the usually excellent
Warner cinemas) but the film seemed poorly photographed, and this dull
look added to the feeling of gloom and tackiness the film inspired. 
With Summer of Sam's New York setting and its cast of Italian wiseguys,
Spike Lee must have known he was inviting comparison with Martin
Scorsese. Despite some good performances and some interesting moments,
its script ensured that Summer of Sam could never be anything more than
a brash but ultimately dull Scorsese pastiche.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Insider, The (1999)
Based on events on the early 1990s, The Insider tells how CBS television
producer Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino) persuaded tobacco industry whistle-
blower Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe) to break the confidentiality
agreement he had with his ex-employer and spill the beans on the
management's knowledge that their product was indeed addictive, despite
their sworn public declarations to the contrary. Getting the interview
with Wigand taped was only half the battle, and the film shows the
further struggles Bergman had persuading CBS to air it.
Michael Mann's film finds high drama in telephone calls and faxes, and
his distinctive slick visual style, which was a large part of the appeal
of his TV series Miami Vice, is evident here, although the flashiness
has evolved to take into account the (literally) broader canvas and more
leisurely pace of film. For example, as in his films Manhunter and Heat,
characters are shown in long contemplative silence, framed off-centre in
widescreen fields of garish colour. At times the style threatens to get
in the way of the content, but Mann mostly manages to keep himself in
check.
Al Pacino has in recent years tended to chew the scenery in histrionic
fits, but here he turns in a more carefully controlled performance,
perhaps his best since The Scent of a Woman. But it can't beat Russell
Crowe's terrific performance as the tormented executive. A complex
character, Wigand comes across as a decent principled man without being
particularly likeable. Crowe put on weight for the part, and it is
astonishing that this is the same actor I'd seen in a trailer for
Gladiator a few days earlier. 
The Insider has proved controversial largely because the names of the
individuals and corporations have not been changed in this
dramatisation, and a few feathers were understandably ruffled. In
particular, Mike Wallace, the 60 Minutes front-man played by Christopher
Plummer, objected to the way he is portrayed failing to back up
Bergman's attempts to convince the CBS suits to broadcast Wigand's
interview. The tobacco company involved was also miffed, and insisted
that the film include a disclaimer pointing out that the source of the
death threats against the Wigands was never established. 
How accurate the film is in its details is open to question, but it
seems that the film successfully communicates the broad truth of the
case. Does it really matter? I think it does. All The President's Men,
with which The Insider is bound to be compared, was a similarly talky
but compelling tale of investigative journalists persuading reluctant
witnesses to reveal their inside knowledge of the dirty dealings of
powerful interests, in this case political rather than corporate. Such
films can have a dramatic influence on public perceptions of such
events. Although I've read Woodstein's book, my memories of what
Watergate was all about come mainly from watching Robert Redford and
Dustin Hoffman. Probably the same is true for many US citizens, for whom
these events are not just the stuff of casual interest but form an
important part of recent history. I think filmmakers have a
responsibility with material of this sort, and The Insider and All The
President's Men are both honourable films which discharge this
responsibility. At the other extreme, Oliver Stone's JFK is an example
of the damage that can be done by a talented but misguided filmmaker
meddling with sensitive historical material.
Tackling a tricky subject head-on, The Insider is a stylish and
compelling drama with two excellent lead performances, confirming
Michael Mann as one of mainstream Hollywood's most interesting
filmmakers.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Tierra (1996)
Tierra was Julio Medem's next film after The Red Squirrel, and shows the
emergence of a real talent. While the Red Squirrel might be still seen
as an apprentice piece, Tierra is the work of a film-maker ready to take
the world stage.
The film tells the story of Angel (Carmelo Gomez) who is a fumigator,
visiting a wine-growing area to eradicate the woodlice that infest the
soil. Paradoxically, the locals seem to like the distinctive flavour
which the woodlice give to the wine, yet they consider the insects to be
pests and the town approves Angel's plans to fumigate the vineyards. He
stays and soon inspires passion and conflict.
Tierra is Spanish for "earth", and just as in English, can refer either
to the planet or to the soil. Beautifully photographed by Javier
Aguirresarobe, Tierra addresses both meanings, presenting the landscape
in glowing browns and oranges and taking the viewer down into the soil
to burrow with the woodlice. The alien nature of our home planet is made
all the more explicit in the fumigating sequences in which Angel and his
hire hands progress over the bare landscape wearing white protective
suits like astronauts exploring a bleak unfamiliar world.
Angel himself is an enigmatic stranger, talking about himself and to
himself as if he is not completely connected to this world. He considers
himself to be only half-alive, partly inhabiting some other place, and
he is accompanied by the angel of his half-dead self. Whether this has
any reality other than in Angel's head, we are never sure.
Writer-director Medem relishes the disconnectedness he creates - within
people, between people, and between people and the world around them.
Reminiscent of the films of Andrei Tarkovsky, Tierra is magical, strange
and a delight on the eye.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars Episode1: The Phantom Menace (4/10)
Written and directed by George Lucas. What a scary credit. Who was going
to take his lordship to one side and have a quiet word? "Now I hope you
don't mind me saying this Mr. Lucas, sir... but, well, ummmm.... this
whole story is crap and there are no decent characters in it." 
The film (which his Georgeness has decreed shall at all times be
referred-to by its full title of Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom
Menace) has plenty of computer generated material that is very
impressive, especially the spectacular italian-oriental panoramas of the
planet Naboo, the many sequences featuring the evil Trade Federation's
robot troops and guards, and the zoo-load of new creatures. Having seen
him in the trailers, I was not looking forward to getting to know Jar
Jar Binks, an annoying computer-generated cross between a rabbit and a
cow who is presumably meant to provide the film with some humour as the
witless comic sidekick. He turned out to be not quite as irritating as I
feared, and I nearly, but not quite, actually liked him. But there are
just no decent human characters. Instead we get Liam Neeson as Jedi
knight Qui-Gon Jinn, Ewan McGregor as his apprentice - a young Obi-Wan
Kenobi - and Natalie Portman as the pretty but dull Queen Amidala.
Neeson is as wooden as usual and McGregor's clipped upper-crust Alec
Guiness accent does not suit him and his performance is very flat.
Natalie Portman is probably the only one of the three whose credibility
will benefit from appearing in the film, which suffers from the lack of
a loveable scoundrel like Han Solo and a feisty princess like Leia from
the earlier films. There is an excellent bad-guy in the form of Darth
Maul with his red and black face, horns and double-ended light-sabre.
Maul is played (but not voiced) by martial arts exponent Ray Parks, who
does a great job as the athletic villain who is on screen all too
briefly.
The plot is much too complicated and much too thin at the same time. The
endless talk of tax wars and trade disputes and negotiations involving
the senator from here-or-there and the commssioner of this-or-that
confused me completely. I had no idea what planet I was on half the
time. As best as I could figure it out, the film makes no sense as a
dramatic whole and is just a giant set-up for what happens in episodes
two and three.
The pod race sequence is a fairly exciting rip-off of the chariot race
from Ben Hur, and the battle sequences are well constructed and
animated. There are also some nice little touches for film nerds, such
as the pod from 2001 appearing in a scrap yard, but overall this is a
film that's much too worthy and virtually humourless, despite the best
efforts of Jar Jar Binks and other supposedly comic creatures. But worst
of all, the film is just plain dull. George Lucas has lost the plot and
someone should have a word before it's too late to save the next two
films in the series. The first Star Wars trilogy ended with a stinker.
Let's hope this second trilogy has just got the stinker out of the way. 
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Toy Story 2 (1999)

If someone states as a Golden Rule that sequels are never as good as the
originals, the automatic response is usually "The Godfather Part II",
with references to The Empire Strikes Back, Star Trek II: The Wrath of
Khan, and Bride of Frankenstein held in reserve. Superior sequels are
pretty rare, but Toy Story 2 is perhaps the best example there is. For
while Toy Story 2 can't possibly carry the impact of its predecessor, it
is a better movie all round.
In the toys' second screen adventure, Woody (voiced by Tom Hanks)
discovers he is no ordinary cowboy toy but is a valuable collectible.
Buzz Lightyear (Tim Allen) has now recovered from his delusion that he
really is an intergalactic superhero but is still pretty heroic as he
and Woody's other friends try to rescue the cash cowboy from an evil
toy store owner trying to toynap Woody to complete his collection of
cowboy toys and sell him to a museum. 
Co-director John Lasseter, whose company Pixar made the Toy Story films,
has always been an animator who happened to use technology, rather than
a techno-nut dabbling at animation. This means that propeller-head gee-
whizzery never gets in the way of the requirements of traditional story-
telling - character and plot are everything, and instead of showing us
how clever they are, Lasseter and co-director Ash Brannon properly
concentrate on thrilling us and making us laugh. There have nevertheless
been significant technical advances in rendering software and sheer
computing brute strength over the last four years, and the level of
textural detail and naturalistic movement on show here is amazing.
Toy Story 2 was originally planned to have an undignified straight-to-
video release - the traditional route for animation feature sequels -
but the suits at Disney and Pixar decided it might be worth a shot at a
theatrical release. After the film's eighty-million-dollar opening
weekend, they were probably pretty pleased with themselves.
Although sometimes a bit syrupy, Toy Story 2 is very impressive
technically and, much more important, it's great fun. (8/10)
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Galaxy Quest (1999)
What happens to the stars of a long-cancelled TV show that still has a
devoted following? In the case of the tacky science fiction adventure
show Galaxy Quest, the actors, now forever associated with their roles,
scratch out a living attending fan conventions and opening stores. Tim
Allen plays the actor who portrayed the starship commander (the show's
James T. Kirk). Now a boozy has-been, he glories in the adulation he -
or at least his character - receives from the show's obsessive fans.
Sigourney Weaver was the show's sexpot who now bemoans the fact that her
sole responsibilities were repeating whatever the ship's computer said
and displaying the maximum amount of cleavage. Alan Rickman plays a
British acting knight who was the show's equivalent of Mr. Spock and is
mortified at the depths to which his career has now sunk. But things are
about to pick up for the clapped-out Galaxy Quest cast. Transmissions of
the TV show have been picked up by the Thermians, a meek alien race
persecuted by nasty giant locust-like baddies. As if the Thermians
weren't in enough trouble already, they interpret the show as
documentary material and believe that the Galaxy Quest crew are genuine
intergalactic heroes. Oops. Obviously a race lacking in locust-stomping
ability, the Thermians come to Earth to seek the crew's help.
Spoof science fiction films can be truly awful. (Spaceballs. I rest my
case.) In fact, good science fiction comedy films are as rare as
Klingons with good table manners. The sci-fi porn epic Flesh Gordon was
pretty funny, but that hardly counts. Although Galaxy Quest could easily
have been a one-joke film that relied too heavily on its premise, the
idea is developed and sustained in David Howard and Robert Gordon's
script, which skilfully exploits the conventions of TV science fiction
series to comic effect. And the fans, who could so easily have been made
the butt of jokes and dismissed as spotty propellerheads with poorly-
developed social skills, are actually treated with considerable warmth
and good-humour.
The lead performances are fine, but the standouts are in two of the
lesser roles. Sam Rockwell plays "Crewman number 6", who was only ever a
minor character in the show and, knowing the facts of TV show life,
fears he's expendable and likely to perish at any moment. The most
memorable turn, though, comes from Enrico Colantoni, who in his
performance as the grinning Thermian with his bizarre sing-song version
of spoken English, manages to be both endearing and very funny. Dean
Parisot's direction is competent in a low-key way, though the production
never threatens to rise too far above the cheesiness of the material is
seeks to affectionately poke fun at, which is perhaps just as well.
Although Galaxy Quest is never going to win bucketloads of awards, it
succeeds in its modest ambition to be a lightweight but extremely
enjoyable science fiction comedy.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Gladiator (2000)
If ever a genre was dead beyond hope, the sword-and-sandal epic was it.
Who on earth would consider making such a film again, and, more to the
point, who could raise the mountain of cash required to make such a
movie? Director Ridley Scott and Dreamworks, that's who. If Gladiator
had been a monumental flop, everyone would have shaken their heads and
commented on the amazing stupidity of the whole idea. "Who wants to see
a gladiator movie? A gladiator movie ferchrissakes!" Well actually,
based on the film's performance at the box office, we do. Forget the
cheesy and homoerotic Steve Reeves movies that inspired the pilot in
Airplane! to ask "Do you like gladiator movies?", this is a full-blooded
action drama for real men. Quiche-eaters should stay away.
The film opens with Maximus (Russell Crowe) about to launch the attack
that will seal victory in the Roman empire's campaign in Germania. The
dying emperor (Richard Harris) intends to end the line of imperial
succession and restore the republic, and he calls on his friend Maximus
to use his army to protect the new government. The emperor's son
Commodus (Joachim Phoenix) has no intention of relinquishing his
birthright, and assumes power as the new emperor. Instead of being the
protector of Rome, Maximus finds himself a slave, competing as a
gladiator and nursing the mother of all grudges against Commodus.
Action heroes of the recent past have tended to be musclebound airheads.
Russell Crowe is a new breed: a believable hero whose pores ooze dignity
and testosterone in equal measure. Crowe's effectiveness on screen is
nothing to do with time spent in the gym - he's built like a pretty
average guy - but has everything to do with being a magnificent actor
who can excel in physical roles. Joachim Phoenix is an effective slimy
scheming villain, but he sometimes delivers lines so flatly it's as if a
take from a read-through made it into the final cut by mistake. Oliver
Reed, who plays Maximus's owner and trainer, died during production and
in one scene a performance had to be coaxed from a pseudo-Ollie
fashioned from a body-double and some fancy CGI work. Reed's public
image was, probably unfairly, that of an appalling drunken buffoon, but
at least his career ended on a high note - he has rarely been better
than he is here. At one point his character tells Maximus, "I'm an
entertainer." He was certainly that, and he could not have chosen a more
appropriate film to be his last.
The scenes of gladiatorial combat are breathtaking. Limbs are hacked,
heads are smashed, torsos are skewered and the air is full of blood.
Comparisons have been made between the combat sequences in Gladiator and
the Normandy landing sequence in Saving Private Ryan, but the approaches
are completely different. Whereas Spielberg used camera and post-
production techniques to give the combat scenes the look of a
documentary and presented the carnage as might a journalist - there it
is, now look at it - Ridley Scott never dwells on the blood and gore,
but instead uses an impressionistic approach to give flashes of brutal
savagery and cutting away immediately. Not only does this solve problems
with scissor-happy censors, it's very effective - in this form of
combat, a new mortal threat is hardly more than 1/24 of a second away,
so there's no time to waste dwelling on the mess you've just made of
another person's body. The smell of fear and sweat and blood leaks from
the screen. The battle sequence that opens the film is equally
impressive. Shot in a gloomy and muddy English forest, the scale and
savagery of the fighting makes for heart-pounding movie-going.
The CGI team worked their magic in creating a completely convincing
interior for the Colosseum. When the gladiators first enter the arena,
they are amazed at the scale and spectacle of what they are seeing. As
they look up and around this vast amphitheatre, the viewpoint tracks
around them and as we see the entire stadium with its thousands of
spectators, we share the gladiators' amazement. The film also benefits
from John Mathieson's photography and the stirring musical score, mainly
by Hans Zimmer, which borrows from varied sources, notably the Mars
segment of Holst's suite The Planets. 
The script (by David Franzoni, John Logan and William Nicholson) sticks
to genre conventions and gives the characters plenty of overwritten
stagey dialogue in which to plot their various intrigues and revenges.
Maybe that's the way it has to be in this sort of movie. If centurions
and emperors talked like real people, the whole thing might,
paradoxically, become less believable. I don't know if any general would
really say "at my command, unleash hell" - but it's great stuff. And as
is usual with such traditional epics, there is plenty of chat between
the memorable set pieces, but the film hardly ever drags - we are really
made to care about Maximus, through his fall and rise and eventual...
well I'll only say that the script provides a satisfying but poignant
resolution, only slightly spoiled by the implausibility of the final
showdown. 
Although the script could have been written during Hollywood's last
fling with this genre nearly forty years ago, Gladiator is still a
technically astonishing entertainment of the most spectacular kind and
demands to be seen on the biggest screen you can get to.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for World Is Not Enough, The (1999)
The World Is Not Enough is a James Bond film. The rest of this review is
optional reading, since you now know all you need to.
The film, the third in the series to star Pierce Brosnan as 007, is the
familiar mix of outrageous globe-trotting action, eye-popping gadgets
and unfeasibly beautiful girls. The plot is hardly worth mentioning
since you've seen it 18 times before, the traditional lunatic villain
played this time by Robert Carlyle. The whole thing is utterly barmy,
but if we accept that the best the Bond series can offer is a silly but
stylish romp, then James Bond XIX succeeds as well as any of its
predecessors. 
We know what to expect from a Bond film, and the production team has to
balance the need to deliver the goods against the danger of the formula
becoming stale. There never was a time when the Bond films were
realistic - they have always taken place in a world constructed in the
fantasies of teenage boys, so the film-makers also have to preserve
Bond's timeless quality yet make the film relevant to a modern audience.
The team behind this Bond have got it just about right. Director Michael
Apted is better known for his documentaries and character-based films
such as 'Nell' and 'Gorillas In the Mist', and he handles this change of
pace well, although much of the credit should probably go to editor Jim
Clark and second unit director Vic Armstrong.
Pierce Brosnan is at least the second-best Bond there's been, but it's
probably sacrilege to even suggest he might be better than you-know-who.
He brings a cool, suave viciousness back to the role that went out of
fashion for a decade or two but can work again in our ironic post-
feminist post-modernist post-everything world.
There are three main female characters. We are meant to believe that
Christmas Jones (Denise Richards) is a physicist helping to dismantle
nuclear weapons in the wastes of a former Soviet republic, but our
credulity is severely tested by her jaw-dropping Lara Croft costume
which barely contains her jaw-dropping Lara Croft figure. Given the
concentration demanded of the work she and her male colleagues are
carrying out, her T-shirt would surely have been banned on grounds of
safety. Pleasing on the eye though Dr. Jones is, she is a depressing
throwback to the Bond bimbos of the past, and like the character she
plays, Denise Richards is pretty but pretty useless. Thank goodness for
Elektra King (Sophie Marceau), a much better-drawn and more complex
female character than those 007 usually encounters. The other leading
lady, and the classiest of the lot, is the wonderful Judi Dench, who in
her third outing as M gets more involved in the action that the
character ever has before.
Despite its lapses into some unfortunate features of Bondage past, The
World Is Not Enough confirms that the dismal days of the later Roger
Moore films are now just a bad memory, and the franchise that once
seemed culturally if not financially bankrupt is once again in good
shape. But then again, it is just a Bond film.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Return to Me (2000)
Thank goodness for Return To Me. My mother came to visit and this was
the only film showing on any of the sixty screens in Bristol that I
thought my mother would enjoy. The film choice is restricted to avoid
anything remotely scary or exciting, as she's easily overwhelmed by a
big screen and a good sound system - I thought she was going to pass out
during the trailer for The Perfect Storm.
On reading the review in Empire magazine, I discovered that Return To Me
concerns a widowed man who falls for a young woman without realising
that she's the recipient of his dead wife's heart. My eyes rolled.
Sheesh... give me break... there must be something else I can take her
to see. Gladiator? U-571? Final Destination? Hmmm... maybe this heart
thing doesn't sound so bad... actually it's not at all far-fetched... it
could happen...
The guy - Bob (David Duchovny) and the girl - Grace (Minnie Driver) are
perfectly sweet and nice, as is virtually everyone in this film, and
even the bad stuff that happens to the characters is only there so they
can come out the other side even sweeter and nicer. Grace lives with her
father (Carroll O'Connor) and works in his restaurant. She also hangs
around with his gang of elderly friends, and much of the warmth and
humour in the film comes from the loveable old folk trying to help
romance blossom between Bob and Grace. (Did I mention that these good-
naturedly meddling senior citizens are very sweet? And nice?)
In Return To Me, director and co-writer Bonnie Hunt (who also appears in
the film as Grace's friend) has produced an unashamedly old-fashioned
weepy romantic comedy, and Duchovny and Driver are appealing enough to
just about pull off this unfeasible confection. It pushes the right
buttons, but occasionally the button-pushing is just a bit too obvious.
The film is also let down its bland cinematography - a point only worth
mentioning because the film was shot by the usually-reliable veteran
lensman Laszlo Kovacs. 
Despite a lack of publicity for the film, it attracted a good crowd, so
such lightweight feel-good movies seem to have a sizeable audience who
are not currently being well served. (If anyone wants to fly me or my
mother out to Hollywood for consultancy services, they can e-mail me.)

Title
Review for Final Destination (2000)
These days, teen slasher flicks are expected to be self-referential and
ironic. But in a strange reversal, Final Destination seeks to defy the
new convention by approaching the genre straight (although the writers
couldn't resist naming characters after film-makers such as Hitchcock,
Lewton, Browning and Murnau).  In this return to pre-Scream horror movie
making, characters just go about the traditional business of getting
hacked to bits without spending half the time discussing what would
happen if they were in a slasher flick.
The story has a premise that could have come straight out of The
Twilight Zone. A group of high-school students is about to leave on a
school trip to France. While in the aircraft on the tarmac waiting to
take off, Alex (Devon Sawa) has a premonition in which the aircraft
explodes after take-off. He panics and is removed from the plane, along
with a few fellow students and a teacher. Sure enough, the plane
explodes, and all onboard are killed. When bizarre and wickedly
entertaining accidents start disposing of the survivors one by one, Alex
realises that the killer is not one of those Freddie Krueger or Candyman
amateurs, but is the scythe-wielding Big D himself, determined to
restore natural order by dispatching those who cheated death in the
aircraft. 
As the film progresses, we wonder not only which member of the young
cast is next going to meet his or her end, but what grisly new twist on
slicing, mangling or skewering is going to be involved. Some of the
deaths are ludicrously protracted and involve everyday objects taking on
a life of their own, controlled by the unseen killer like a deadly and
perversely funny game of Mousetrap. Just to keep us on our toes,
director and co-writer James Wong, who cut his teeth on the X-files,
gives us one death that is shockingly abrupt.
Final Destination is a formulaic horror flick for the Saturday night
popcorn crowd, with flashes of inventively gruesome fun.

Title
Review for Talented Mr. Ripley, The (1999)

Written and directed by Anthony Minghella, and based on Patricia
Highsmith's novel, The Talented Mr. Ripley is a psychological thriller
of jealousy and confused identity among the privileged classes. Tom
Ripley (Matt Damon) is paid by a wealthy businessman to persuade his
wayward layabout son Dickie (Jude Law) to return home from Europe. Tom
travels to Italy, meets Dickie and girlfriend Marge (Gwyneth Patrow) and
is soon sharing their bohemian tourist lifestyle, but the friendships
formed are not all they seem and soon come under strain. 
The film is deliberate but compelling, its restrained pace punctuated by
a couple of moments of extreme violence, including one of the most
effective screen murders I've ever seen. The best aspect of the film,
though, is Matt Damon's magnificent performance as the scheming and
manipulative but strangely pathetic Tom Ripley, whose talent, and
compulsion, is to take on the identity of those around him. This is not
an easy role to have taken on and was a very brave choice for an actor
with a career as a pretty-boy movie star ahead of him. Such actors might
be tempted to rebelliously take on a role against type, such as Leo de
Caprio's rumoured but abandoned casting as the killer in American
Psycho. Damon's role here is that of a subtle and sympathetic monster,
something much more difficult and carried off brilliantly.
With The English Patient, Anthony Minghella was likened to David Lean.
Such comparisons with great British film-makers seem not to have
irritated Minghella, because The Talented Mr. Ripley shouts its
Hitchcock influences from the rooftops. Apart from its Hitch-like plot
and themes, the film's original score, by Gabriel Yared, is frankly
little more than a Bernard Herrmann pastiche (although if you're going
to copy anyone, you might as well copy the best). Some trademark
Hitchcock shots are used, as when the viewpoint rotates as we close in
on a tormented character from above, and when the camera travels over
the heads of a formally-attired opera audience to tightly frame the main
character in one of the boxes with the Yared/Herrmann score driving the
allusion home. Even the opening credits have a similar look to the
distinctive credits created for Hitchcock by Saul Bass.
The current fashion is for long films - it seems that nobody thinks a
film less than two hours long will be taken seriously. At 139 minutes,
The Talented Mr. Ripley drags occassionally and could have been more
effective if it was half an hour shorter. Hitchcock famously once said
that the length of a film should be directly related to the endurance of
the human bladder. If his bladder could have taken the strain, he would
have been proud of Ripley. (8/10)
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for Go (1999)
7th September 1999: Cineworld, Bristol 
Set in a world of sex, drugs and clubbing, Go tells three stories whose
characters and action intersect with each other at several points,
giving us different perspectives on the same events throughout the film. 
Simon (Desmond Askew) works in a supermarket and is minor drug dealer.
While he's away on a trip to Las Vegas, two strangers arrive seeking to
make use his services. In his absence, fellow worker Ronna (Sarah
Polley) sees an oportunity to make the money she needs to avoid
eviction. She tells the strangers she can get the drugs they want.
Meanwhile, Simon and his mates are upsetting some Las Vegas villians.
And aren't those strangers a little familar? In this film, nothing goes
to plan and much is not what it seems. 
The structural similarities to Pulp Fiction are glaring, and the
director Doug Liman, whose previous film was the indie minor classic
Swingers, must have been aware that Go would be branded a Pulp Fiction
rip-off. But he went ahead and did it anyway. Which is lucky for us,
because Go is great fun, with the characters in the three stories
finding themselves deep over their heads in criminal entanglements,
forcing each to make a hasty exit from their own sticky situation, hence
the film's title. 
A problem with the film is that most of the the main characters with
whom we are meant to identify are singularly unappealing, each being
involved in their own little scams or crooked deals. The film is far
from amoral, however, as comeuppances fly in from all directions. There
are a few implausibilities in the film, but that is more than made up
for by some clever confounding of audience expectations, especially in
the the last segment, which tells the story of Zack and Adam, a pair of
actors who in order to have a minor drugs charge dropped are helping the
police with some undercover work. The police office they work with,
excellently played by William Fichtner, becomes increasingly creepy, but
his motives are not what you expect. 
Go doesn't have the crisp exuberant visual style of Pulp Fiction, but
has a grittier, seedier feel which better suits the somewhat sordid
world in which the stories take place. It is fast-paced, well-written
fun, but is a little hollow and very derivative.
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)

Title
Review for American Psycho (2000)
Some outraged self-appointed guardians of public morals have been
getting their knickers in a twist about the very idea of a film being
made of Bret Easton Ellis's novel, with its reputation (apparently well-
deserved) for stomach-turning descriptions of violence, often against
women. Now that we can see the film itself, this outcry seems rather
silly, because instead of a puke-inducing gore-fest, what we get is a
dark satire on the 1980s with not much on-screen violence. Thanks to the
screenplay co-written by Guinevere Turner and director Mary Harron, the
film is also a very funny critique of men and their vanities, while
shaming them for their treatment of women as possessions. American
Psycho is a slasher movie with the slashing taken out and feminist
analysis put in. The audience's expectation of violence is cleverly
exploited in the opening credits, and similar teasing takes place in the
film's use of a clip from The Texas Chainsaw Massacre. Blood-and-guts
fans will be very disappointed.
Christian Bale is very impressive as psycho super-yuppie Patrick Bateman
- a master of the universe who has a fabulous job doing... well... very
little, it seems, except arranging his social calendar. Bateman and his
fellow ubermenschen are not materialists in the sense that they value
possessions, but their lives revolve around appearance and one-
upmanship. Bateman's narration details, with a complete lack of irony,
the various body scrubs and facial creams he uses as he performs his
morning grooming and workout routine. This stuff is important to him.
Rather than comparing penises, these men express superiority over one
another by their relative ability to book a table at this week's
fashionable eatery. The best scene in the film occurs when Bateman and
his friends, if friends they are, compare business cards and the bottom
falls out of Bateman's world when he realises that a colleague's card is
classier than his.
Bateman's scary shallowness is also demonstrated in the scenes in which
he prepares to indulge in murder or joyless professional sex by giving
those he is about to butcher or bed an admiring and pseudo-intellectual
analysis of the music of Whitney Houston, Phil Collins or Huey Lewis and
The News. It's hilarious stuff, but will audiences today get it? Tom
Wolfe satirised the 80s in The Bonfire of the Vanities, but he did it
before the decade was over. A typical movie-goer in his or her mid
twenties would have been ten years old in the mid eighties, so might be
too young to have the appropriate cultural reference points. Too young
to remember the 80s. What a thought.
The film's ending leaves things confused and unresolved. I have no
problem with ambiguous endings, and I do not know whether the ending is
taken from the source novel, but the trick anti-resolution to this
thinly-plotted movie was a big let-down. After my initial confusion at
the end of the film, there is only one explanation that seems to make
sense, and it's a complete cop-out.
American Psycho is a fine satire wrapped up in a mediocre thriller. And
it seems to have a commercial problem: the people who would probably get
most out of it are the very people who would be least likely to want to
see it. The marketing boys have done nothing to address this problem and
if the movie bombs, it's they who should get chopped into little pieces. 
-- 
Gary Jones 
Homepage: www.bohr.demon.co.uk
PGP public key available from servers (DH/DSS key ID: 0x11EAE903)
