Authors
Nigel Polhill
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Tomorrow Never Dies (1997)
A friend of mine from California suggested I post a review of this movie
here since it doesn't open in the States until Friday.  Speaking as a
devoted movie buff and avid 007 fan - don't hold your breath!
Advance publicity hadn't exactly won me over with listening to the
Sheryl Crowe single on Capital Radio for the last 2 weeks.  Perhaps, I
thought, it will seem better when accompanied by the visuals of the
opening credit sequence.  Oh dear!  An entertaining enough pre-credit
action sequence leads into the worst opening titles of the entire Bond
series - accompanied by a very indifferent title track.  And somehow
that just set the tone.
A potentially imaginative idea about having a media mogul as the
villain of the piece is completely wasted by a wafer-thin story line
involving a stealth ship (Oh pleeaase!!!!), some GPS satelite
technology and World War 3.  Jonathan Pryce struts around as the mogul
looking, for the most part, not very menacing at all.  His sidekick is
a blond German guy who looks as though he's just stepped off the set
of a Die Hard movie.
The film does have some redeeming features.  As usual there are some
neat stunts and some exciting action sequences - the best involving
cars and bikes.  The BMW 750 easily steals the show for best gadget
and best action sequence and is definitely the high point of the
movie.  Pierce Brosnan puts in another solid performance.  Judi Dench
as 'M' delivers the one and only decent one-liner at the expense of a
certain deceased media mogul.
There are 2 Bond girls.  The first is played by Teri Hatcher (Lois
Lane from The New Adventures Of Superman) - looks great but never gets
a chance to do much other than shrug off her dress.  The second is
Michelle Yeoh as a Chinese secret agent - cue lots of martial arts
action stuff which is also entertaining.  Also gets the most
gratuitous moment in the movie when she stands under a shower in a
white top.  Titillating yes, but not exactly Bond's style.
Even the exotic locations seem wasted.  The Vietnam stuff with the
bike chase is probably the best.  Kowloon is woefully under-used -
sailing around all those tiny little islands looking far more romantic
in The Man With The Golden Gun.
Bond films are never a complete waste - the production values are
generally high enough to see to that - but this one certainly won't be
a DVD purchase. (Incidentally the bass on this soundtrack is even
stronger than Goldeneye).
Rates about a 5 out of 10 and comes as a great disappointment after
Goldeneye. Makes you wonder whether this is a sign of things to come
now that Cubby is no longer at the helm!
