Authors
Jerry Bosch
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
THE DEEP IMPACT OF ARMAGEDDON - RANDOM THOUGHTS
It is summer and the sky is falling. Hollywood has been deeply impacted and
it has met the celestial army head on.
When space shuttles are launched from Cape Canaveral hardly anything ever
goes wrong but when they are launched from Hollywood we can expect lots of
trouble because trouble is what summer blockbusters are about. Impending
doom is not enough; you must deliver doom, as in Deep Impact; or experience
near doom in the process of avoiding it, as in Armageddon.
Deep Impact and Armageddon use different approaches to the problem of
delivering disaster. If you are going to have Armageddon, then you must (a)
have a flawed plan to avoid it and (b) limit Armageddon to less than
Armageddon, since total oblivion is much too bleak for summer fare. That is
the case with Deep Impact, which delivers a watered down version of
Armageddon. On the other hand, if you are going to avoid Armageddon
altogether, as is the case with Armageddon, you must (a) satisfy the
disaster expectations with shallow impacts and (b) dedicate yourself to the
proposition that every solution has a problem. The world finally survives,
but the devil is in saving it.
If disbelief is the coin of admission, Armageddon comes at a higher price.
Deep Impact can afford to be realistic, because it plans to deliver the
goods (Armageddon). Armageddon, however,  after getting the minidisasters
out the way, must strain credulity to the limit and well beyond in terms of
tactical crises as a substitute for Armageddon. In Armageddon you get not
one digital countdown but two. Taking both to the last second would have
been in terrible taste, so the blue and the green wires, or the red and the
yellow or whatever the colors, are cut with 3 seconds to spare in the first
case. That significant sacrifice is the price that the screenwriters paid
for the indulgence of avoiding the end of the world in the second case by
the slim margin of just one second, which is the accepted standard.
Both films are curiously faithful to the notion of a sacrificial lamb. I
would be loath to accuse Christ of setting a bad precedent, but perhaps out
of respect Hollywood refused to spare the world without the sacrifice of a
hero. The fact that Hollywood felt compelled to put Christian formula ahead
of Hollywood formula may be credibly used by the religious crowd as another
example of the deep stronghold of the value-trader ethic in our culture. As
a result we have two perfectly good actors, Robert Duvall and Bruce Willis
going down in a style completely foreign to the image of the indestructible,
infallible summer superhero.
Any film in which humanity is bracing itself for imminent death will become
a corn field at some point. The poignant good byes in Deep Impact involve
characters that we either don't know or care little for. As a result the
sentimental farewells are maudlin and slightly annoying. By contrast, the
corresponding scenes in Armageddon are integrated in the story. For the most
part they are effective and well acted.
In Deep Impact Robert Duvall delivers the competent job that is expected
from a veteran of his caliber. Tea Leoni played her part too well for her
own good. She was transparent: we saw the character and not the actress,
which is good, and she played without Pacino hysterics or Nicholson
histrionics, which should also be good. However, Hollywood (read audiences)
does not reward that kind of integrity. The character was authentic and
unfortunately, as such, not terribly likeable and a little bit dull. Ron
Eldard was well behaved but lacked the gravity that is expected from a
mission commander. Perhaps it is his voice, or it may be that asking him and
us to make the transition from tubal imebecility to wide-screen rocket
science is more than he and we could handle. In Armageddon, Bruce Willis and
Ben Affleck, neither of which aspire to make us forget Maurice Evans,
communicated surprisingly well the dimensions that should surface when
substantial men of action face moral dilemmas. The inevitable
father-daughter conflict  was dead serious business in Deep Impact.  In
Armageddon it fluctuated between comedy relief and real emotion. This was
just one case of the tongue-in-cheek approach with which Armageddon
mollified the core of conflict which was none the less communicated in full
measure. Steve Buscemi and Bob Thornton contributed strong performances in
Armageddon.
Deep Impact's supporting cast was star studded, some of them burned out and
others still (elsewhere) incandescent: Vanessa `The Van' Redgrave,
Maximilian Schell, Morgan Freeman, James Cromwell. Good actors with little
to do but stay ahead of their creditors or advance the custodial accounts as
the case may be. The Oscar however goes to MSNBC, who steals the show with
its unseen but pervasive presence. Shades of Rebecca.
The chances that any of my readers may let the summer pass without seeing
either or both of these films are less than the chances of an asteroid hit
on Earth. But if by force of the gravity of unusual circumstances you may
find yourself so impacted, don't go into a deep depression; it is not the
end of the world . Raise your  arms and head on to the next show. After all,
the films are likely to re-orbit.

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Perhaps somebody way out in Patagonia is seeing TITANIC for the first time
today, but for the rest us it is a memory threatening to dissolve in the
mist of passing, prematurely distant, weeks.
I remember TITANIC as a sleek and glossy film which in a way is just as
phony as the society beetles that infested the doomed ocean liner on its
maiden and only voyage. That is not to say that it is not a triumph of
technique and virtuosity, polished to a high sheen and  resplendent from
start to finish. The seeming dichotomy brings home the realization that a
movie can be devoid of any trace of imagination and all suspicion of
originality and still be a tour de force. TITANIC represents a triumph of
the stereotype; it is the epitome of cliché elevated to dogmatic
proportions. (For another example of unadulterated cliche risen to the level
of virtue one is reminded of Kramer Versus Kramer). And yet, despite its
phoniness and brainlessness, it is still a damn good movie because it
entertains pleasantly and is beautiful to watch. That one of the most horrid
maritime disasters of all time can be transformed into a pleasantly
entertaining film which is more beautiful than disturbing is an interesting
commentary on the virtuosity of the Hollywood alchemists.
But I overstate my case. The juxtaposition of the contemporary with the
historical was indeed a fine creative touch (albeit not astoundingly
original); but standing by its lonesome outside of the story, it is
insufficient to save the rest of the film from the rap of wall to wall
cliches and lack of imagination. Beyond that, I searched my recollection for
flashes of originality and came up with nothing more than the whistle scene.
Even the touted device of spiriting out an old survivor to tell the story of
a long-ago disaster is hardly an immaculate conceptus.
Still TITANIC succeeds splendidly as a fairy tale. It is De Caprio's second
crack at the Romeo and Juliet thing, and this time he gets it right. I can
understand why he boycotted the Academy Awards; he was robbed. It is not
often that an actor can flesh out a cardboard character and make it vibrant
and compelling. Leo unlocked the usually unrealized power of cliches; which
is based on the fact that nothing which is not profoundly human can ever
become a cliché. It may be that TITANIC was unsinkable, but without Leo it
would not have floated as majestic; it would have been just another well
made superproduction. Kate was nominated and she was a fine Juliet, but it
was Leo, not Kate, who stirred the juices of TITANIC and gave a heart to the
tin man. His failure to get even a nomination is a travesty. How often does
one get to see a flawless piece of work?
James Cameron deserves full credit for steering TITANIC past a plethora of
icebergs, some of his own making; but in proclaiming himself King of the
World he went clearly overboard. I also fail to understand the wisdom or
merit of carrying the authenticity concept beyond the simulation of
splendor, which is all that the camera can see. The camera doesn't care if
it's real mahogany; it just wants it to look like mahogany. Cameron could
have saved a bundle by simply growing up. After all, his crown and scepter
ARE phony.
TITANIC is not an important film the way GONE WITH THE WIND and GHANDI are.
It is important only as a big, well made film; it is another triumph of
style over substance. Not that there is anything wrong with that. If one can
not be both skillful and original, mere skill can still deliver a worthy
product.

Title
Review for Deep Rising (1998)
I can't imagine what's wrong with my fellow reviewers. Here' the most
entertaining, best put together action film of the last 12 months, and they
trash it. It may be that they were expecting to find Sir Lawrence Olivier
or that they came in yearning for a transcendental experience. Well, to the
gentle readers who go to the movies looking for solid entertainment let it
not be said that in this here newsgroup an encouraging word will not be
heard. 
Deep Rising is everything that a full budget
action/adventure/monster/disaster movie should be: an elaborate production,
superb cinematography, flawless casting, very good acting and above all,
that sensitive element in which even Titanic failed and Speed 2 crashed and
sank: pacing. The pace and rhythm of the action is the one critical element
that most often makes or breaks a disaster movie. There is in disaster
movies a point at which "sustained hectic" starts to yield diminishing
benefits quickly followed by negative returns. Titanic transgressed the
line, but not to the egregious degree of Speed 2. Deep Rising achieves near
perfection in this respect. Hectic situations are resolved before they get
boring and the gore is briefly seen but not flaunted. The premise is
internally consistent and the monster will satisfy your expectations. 
The characters are one dimensional, perhaps as they should be and who
cares, if the acting is good? (Not at all a contradiction.) And anyway,
Treat Williams does wander into another dimension as you might expect from
such a fine actor. Famke Johnson is a Sandra Bullock look-alike with talent
to match. Kevin O'Connor fine tunes his character with inconspicuous
virtuosity.
That this level of intelligent, thoughtful moviemaking should get trashed
by would-be critics is beyond forgivable. So the dialog is deliberately
simple and direct; it is not Hamlet. All in all it the most satisfactory
flick of its genre to come by in many a month and perhaps in years, the
Alien series not excluded. Don't let my praise raise your expectations to
the level of a great film; it does not try to be that. It tries to be a
satisfying action and adventure film, and it succeeds splendidly. I
recommend it highly. 3 ˝ stars out of 5.

Title
Review for Wo hu cang long (2000)
As I walked out of CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON I thought to myself that I
had had just seen a great film. With the passage of a few hours I tempered
my enthusiasm and started pondering the question of whether a masterpiece
must implicitly be a "great" piece of work and viceversa. Attempting to make
a distinction may be a matter of splitting hairs. I avoided a commitment by
appealing to etymology. As the word implies, a masterpiece is any work which
embodies the skills of a master. As such it should suffice to say that it is
a product of exceptional quality. CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON fits
comfortably in that category.
CROUCHING TIGER, HIDDEN DRAGON immerses the viewer in an idealized world of
oriental folklore, with the requisite blend of legend, fantasy, magic and
mythology. It is reminiscent of a Wagnerian epic with characters which might
as well be half-gods - greater than life, purer than life, stronger than
life, physically invincible and able to accomplish superhuman feats, but
with a human soul that makes them ultimately vulnerable. All the classic
elements of the oriental mystique are thrown into the mix, including the art
of contemplation and the concept of martial dexterity as the physical
equivalent of spiritual advancement. The classic struggle between good and
evil is the inevitable backdrop, with advanced masters of each and a golden
pupil, which must choose between the two. It is the gifted pupil who, under
the influence of the evil master steals the Holy Grail in the form of a
magic sword which is the focus of the conflict at the heart of the legend.
The elements of romance at two different levels of enlightenment (a pair of
masters and a pair of  youngsters) are poignantly represented.  The paradox
of oriental restraint existing side by side with all consuming passion in
the same breast is projected effectively.
The fight scenes are stunning balletic tours-de-force, not to be taken
literally but clearly to be enjoyed as superb cinematic art, as are the
prodigious leaps and flights to, from and between rooftops, the martial
combat at the top of swaying bamboo branches and the combatants skipping
like pebbles along the surface of a lake. There need be no question of
suspended disbelief when one is in the presence of poetry.
As in a Wagnerian opera there is a substantial story line, which takes place
at an ordinary human level, yet the entire project is to be accepted as a
work of art rooted in fantasy. Do not assume, however, that the art is
limp-wristed. For those who are put off by the "art" label this film can be
confidently recommended as engrossing entertainment at the levels of
adventure, action and romance.
There are no weak performances in this movie. Michelle Yeoh imbues her
character with depth, humanity and wisdom. Chow Yon Fat projects dignity and
purity of heart. Zhang Ziyi is a budding superstar. She is radiantly
beautiful and totally persuasive in a multifaceted role. Cheng Pei Pei as
the evil master and Chang Cheng as the bandit prince acquit themselves
admirably. Kudos to screenwriters James Schamus, Wang Hui Ling and Tsai Kuo
Jing, choreographer Yuen Wo-Ping, photography director Peter Pau and music
director Tan Dun, each of which contribute quality components to this
extraordinary film. Ang Lee as the director, co-producer and mastermind of
the project gets the lion share of the credit.
This is destined to be one of those films that everybody likes, including
those who hate martial arts movies. Don't miss it.

Title
Review for Sphere (1998)
The thing to fear about SPHERE is not fear itself. Or to put it
differently, if it is fear that you fear, never fear; SPHERE will not
interfere.
Ouch. Not for the puns; for the movie. I can round up the review with one
word: weak. Take a B plot, inflate it  with a big budget, surround it with
three of Hollywood's brightest stars  and what have you done? You have come
full circle, back to B. There's no getting around it, this sphere is on a
downhill roll. What we are trying to say in a roundabout way is that both
Crichton and Levinson dropped the ball. (Michael Crichton wrote the book
and Barry Levinson directed.) This is a sphere that won't get a Golden
Globe. A lead balloonmaybe.
It is difficult to say what is wrong with this movie without going deep
into the plot. And deep is where the plot takes you, into the ocean. It
also tries to take you deep into the mysteries of the mind, but alas, the
mind is an empty sphere. It seems that an American space mission from far
into the future had retrieved a spherical object from outer space, and
traveling in time missed its target and landed 300 years behind our
present, crashing to the bottom of the sea. That spoils some minor
surprises but will give you a helpful handle on the proceedings. Watching
this movie I learned the difference between puzzlement and suspense. I was
bewildered by the strange goings on, so much so that I could hardly yawn.
(I also caught a wink or so, but that is not necessarily a reflection on
the movie. I've been known to do that in some of the best.)
On the positive side, Dustin Hoffman's mature professionalism is always a
pleasure to watch and Sharon Stone delivers a meticulously crafted
performance. The scene of her emotional confrontation with Hoffman is
outstanding. Hoffman fights hard for this scene, but he loses by a nose.
Samuel L. Jackson was so bored with the whole affair that he slept through
most of the action. When he was not really asleep, he was sleep-walking.
What a waste.
SPHERE is not a terrible movie, it is OK. If it were offered as a B movie
we would forgive, enjoy  and forget. But given the budget, the cast, the
promotion and the promise, forgiving is impossible, enjoying is
questionable and forgetting is inevitable. For better entertainment than
SPHERE you may want to turn an ear to the President's affairs or Monica
Welinski's coiffure; or go out and have a beer. Double ouch. 2 ź stars out
of 5.
Jerry

Title
Review for Dark City (1998)
Bad, bad, bad. Am I talking to a dog? In a word, yes.
Amnesia can be a curse or a blessing. To a guy who can't even remember who
he is not, amnesia would be a bad thing, but to a movie audience, at times,
it can be an unforgettable benediction.
Dark City wants to be a serious movie. It wants to probe the mysteries of
the soul by addressing the issues of identity and alternate realities
through a novel and not uninteresting variation on the amnesia theme. But a
cinematic style that aims for Kafkaesque obscurity and ambiguity succeeds
only in projecting a comic book atmosphere due to the flatness of the
characters and the sharp demarcation of the plot line. You know that the
characters are confused, but you don't feel their pain. And should you feel
confused about their confusion, not to worry, everything is explained via
dialogue or voice over. But alas, the mysteries of the soul can not be
plumbed in the absence of pathos. So we end up with a moderately
interesting premise that services the plot line without probing the thesis
to any substantial depth.
It seems that Alex Proyas (director) was unable to decide between the
fractured logic of a dream-like state and his desire to clarify the
situation. What the characters fail to show us they tell us in so many
words; which seems like a commitment to logic, yet the premise is rife with
logical inconsistencies. The busy metropolis has millions of inhabitants,
yet the good bad doctor in charge of human experimentation shows no signs
of having a staff. He seems to operate by himself in motel rooms. And why
should the hero's brain mimic the powers of the Strangers, when he was not
exposed to the substance of their minds? And why were those powers not used
in a consistent manner?
The water connection could have been used as a powerful symbol of the soul
which, like water, will slip between your fingers when you try to grab it.
However water does not play a major role in the defeat of the aliens. The
victory weapon is not any element of the human soul, but elements
indigenous to the aliens themselves, which is not particularly flattering
to the human spirit. The final psycho-kinetic duel is a "been there; done
that" experience which contributes nothing to the premise, and certainly
does nothing to support a dualistic argument about the mind and the soul. 
Regarding William Hurt, the bank that holds his mortgage is glad to see him
working again. Keifer Sutherland limps an affects a halting speech in the
finest tradition of high school melodrama. Rufus Sewell and Jennifer
Connelly turn in workman-like performances.
Dark City will be OK to watch at home when it comes to Blockbuster. Just
make sure to gather many friends in order to justify the expense. As food
for the mind, it is little more than psy-fi pizza.
I have been known to doze off in Titanic and other worthy epics. This often
happens when my allergic conjunctivitis meets a darkened room. In Dark City
the house was dark, the screen was dark, the action was slow and my
conjunctivae were eyelash deep in memories of pollen. Perhaps I missed the
good parts. It would be nice if there were such a thing as conjunctival
amnesia.

Title
Review for Man on the Moon (1999)
The idea of starting with the end is hardly brimming with novelty; it lacks
the originality and outrageousness of  Kaufman's devices to keep the
audience off balance, but in Man On The Moon it is a suitable harbinger of
things to come. If Kaufman had used this device he would have extended the
dead time long enough to get a strong reaction from the audience. The movie
makes you wait a while, but they barely push the envelope where Kaufman
would have torn it and thrown it to the air in pieces.
Nevertheless, a Hollywood project that is driven by integrity is a rare
thing indeed, and when it achieves the level of quality and entertainment
value of this movie, it easily stands out as one of the finest efforts of
the mature American film industry. That this project came right out of the
heart of its creators is exemplified by the fact, unprecedented to my
knowledge, that the members of the cast of TAXI played themselves as they
look today, without apologies for the age discrepancies. The audience is
expected to understand that this is a nostalgic tribute, a contrite act of
belated appreciation and formerly denied respect. Other people also play
themselves whether their recapitulated actions were flattering or
unflattering.
But a great movie must entertain greatly, and Man On The Moon delivers solid
entertainment, keeping your attention and curiosity from start to finish (or
is it finish to finish?), and in the process it captures the essence  and
the tragedy of an exceptional entertainer.  Man On The Moon proves that
Hollywood can abandon the straight jacket of formulas and still succeed.
Even Apollo XIII (man not on the moon) can not escape the formula rap,
because in its case real life was true to formula, but Kaufman broke all the
molds, and the absence of a detectable formula is one of the movie's great
virtues.  Hollywood's serious masterpieces tend to be sophisticated, its
adventure blockbusters tend to be frantic, its sensitive masterpieces tend
to be soft and soulful. But Man On The Moon is  pathos without bathos, a
serious movie that is very funny, a real movie that is not artsy, much less
fartsy. Throw in Academy worthy performances by Jim Carey and Danny de Vito
and the sense that you are seeing weird things that actually happened, mix
it with total integrity and a lot of heart, add technical elements at the
top of Hollywood's present capabilities, subtract special effects, dirty
words, nudity, sex scenes and explosions, top if off with hearty laughs and
a sense of tragedy,  and the result is a movie worthy of your intelligence;
assuming that you have enough, since it takes a little more than is needed
to love Titanic and The Green Mile. Those two are four star movies in a
scale of five, but Man On The Moon gets 4 ˝.

Title
Review for Species II (1998)
My son and I share a perverse predilection for bad movies. We are amused and
entertained by the cheap thrills, the corny dialog, the ludicrous premises
and the bad acting. Since other family members aspire to higher forms of
entertainment, we usually wind up indulging our proclivity together. I can't
remember when we disagreed on the relative merits of a clunker until SPECIES
2 came along. He was not amused. I on the other hand was able to easily
suspend the applicable requirements in the usual manner and declare myself
suitably entertained. Perhaps the evident skills that were brought to the
process of producing a bad product was what prevented him from extracting
fun out of mediocrity. I on the other hand appreciated the fact that the
producers and director knew exactly what they were doing: insulting my
intelligence, and brought adequate movie-making skills to the project  A
movie does not have to be good to be well made, at least in terms of the
craft.
The movie could have been better if it were not so brusque. This movie slaps
you with conception, pregnancy, delivery and young childhood in consecutive
frames, without pausing for infancy. The producers of NESCAFE have nothing
on this alien race in which a woman's womb balloons immediately after the
male orgasm, and a few seconds later a young child tears its way out of her
abdomen in a sloppy and gory version of an inside-out Cesarean.
An autopsy scene in which a buzz saw cuts through the cranium was not the
kind of indulgence that I condone, to say nothing of the fact that it was
scientifically incorrect. In a real autopsy the saw does not cut through the
scalp; it is used only after the skull has been exposed.
The opening sequences of exploration of Mars were very good. The writers
showed excellent skills for ceremonial speech writing but the spontaneous
dialogue would qualify for a subtitle: `As Bad As It Gets'. As the movie
progressed I vowed to remember the lines that made me cringe but only one
stuck. Eve (Natasha Henstridge) was cloned from Sil, the original alien
sexual predator, but her mating instinct was artificially attenuated, which
was all that was needed to turn her into a noble and cooperative prisoner.
In a wistful display of resignation and understanding she tells her friend
and jailer (Marg Helgenberger): `I think of all the places that I will never
see and all the people that I will never meet.' It's enough to melt the most
callous heart. At another point she protests: `I'm human too, you know.' She
is only half right.
Peter Medak, the director, knows his business. Justin Lazard as the doomed
astronaut does nothing to enhance his Hollywood credentials. James Cromwell,
his father, is perfect in a short role. Marg Heldenberger, the DNA scientist
is pleasant and beautiful. Natasha is an exquisite ornament. George Dzunza
knew and delivered what was expected of him as the dumb general that messes
things up. Michael Madsen was there. Black buddies do not usually survive in
this type of movie but Mykelti Williamson  manages to stay around for the
final credits, which is more that we can say for Lazard..

Title
Review for Talented Mr. Ripley, The (1999)
I frequently twist my son's arm to go with me to an early show. We normally
seat one seat apart. As the show progresses, if the movie is boring me  I
lean hard across the empty seat and whisper in his ear, more or less after
the priest's sick mother in THE EXORCIST: `Son, why you do this to me? Why
you brought me here?'
Have you ever received a trivial present that is beautifully wrapped? Italy
is a spectacular place to photograph.
a well directed movie does not have to be good.
At The Talented Mr. Ripley I watched a shipping tycoon engage a poor young
man to go to Italy to persuade his son to return to New York. Then I watched
the young man stage the circumstances of his meeting with the mark and his
girl friend, and then I watched them be rich and lazy and grow friendly. In
the process I watched the poor young man share and get to like the good
life, conspiring with the rich playboy to deceive the father while not fully
acknowledging his deceptions to the son. Fill in a few similarly pedestrian
details and that is not a synopsis but all that happens in this movie for
about an hour. Fascinating? Hardly.  Son, why you do this to me?
The plot of The Talented Mr. Ripley is standard
murder-followed-by-assumed-identity fare with the usual hazards of inquiring
police and navigating between identities to avoid the usual contrived
perils. Of course in order to give novelist Patricia Highsmith a plot for 5
books and director Anthony Minghella a movie, the character stupidly stays
within reach of all who knew one or the other of his identities and they
keep bumping into him at inconvenient times. Yawn.
One of the reasons why the movie fails as intelligent entertainment is that
this kind of deception would be impossible to maintain while functioning in
the environment of the previous identity; and the resort to serial killings
does not overcome the objection. The plot is predicated on a transparent
contrivance which is unimaginative and unoriginal to boot, therefore
reducing the movie to ordinary, forgettable fare. Why you do this to me?
Matt Damon manages to get some measure of your support for his nefarious
plots, which means that he did a competent job of playing his part. A little
more make-up for the close-ups might have helped to conceal his bad facial
skin. Gwyneth Paltrow was lovely as ever. Although her part was paltry
(ouch!) she had two strong scenes which were the acting highlights of the
movie. Cate Blanchett's acting skills were pretty much wasted in a smallish
part, although she did a conscientious job of getting into the mental set of
her character. The part of an irresponsible rich playboy is well played by
Jude Law, except for the fact that when the Paltrow character tells us that
he was also charismatic we just have to take her on faith, which according
to the apostle Paul is the manifestation of things not seen.
Did I wonder sometimes how the writer would get him out of one or another
predicament? Of course; am I not human? Do I not bleed if you cut me? They
did throw me some bones, but not the Monaco cut. Nor the New York strip for
that matter.
A 2 star movie which is well photographed and well directed deserves another
1/2 star (out of 5).
