Authors
Jeff Shooman
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
First Impressions:  Everything in this film is riveting, from the action to
the actors.  Wolfgang Petersen's ability to make the obvious suspenseful and
his use of the element of surprise are huge pluses.  Harrison Ford delivers
probably one of his best performances, if not his best performance, ever.  A
remarkable film. 
The plot in AIR FORCE ONE is very simple:  A group of Russian psychopaths
hijack the President's plane in the effort to secure the release of one Gen.
Alexander Radek whose release could spawn the death of hundreds of thousands.
 If they United States doesn't comply, Oldman will shoot a hostage every half
hour.  
There is a lot of code and honor involved in this simplistic plot.  At one
point, Glenn Close's Vice President and all of the cabinet members know that
the President is alive, but the question remained whether or not he was
legally capable of leading the nation.  Under a technicality, it all comes
down to whether or not the Vice President will decide to override an order of
the President.  This scene is very enjoyable and it will make a lot of people
think.
Moving on from plot, I've heard that some people think that Wolfgang
Petersen's action scenes were sloppy and cheesy and very fake-looking.  If
this is true, which I doubt it is anyway, I plead ignorance:  I thought Mr.
Petersen's action scenes, while maybe not up to the standards of such
technological extravaganzas such as FACE/OFF or even INDEPENDENCE DAY, he
made everything in this film suspenseful and he had me guessing until the
end.  
Harrison Ford's President is a true family man.  He is also a man capable of
firing weapons (Uzis) and beating up people, as he was a Medal of Honor
winner in Vietnam.  He is the ideal President, even shying away from the text
of a speech to the dismay of his advisors.  Mr. Ford gives this performance
more than it needed.  He added honor, he added glory, he played it to
perfection.  I often think Mr. Ford is weak in some of the characters he's
played, such as in PRESUMED INNOCENT or even THE FUGITIVE.  His presence just
didn't leave me with memories like strong performances of DeNiro and Pacino
have done.  He was a good actor, but not a strong and powerful actor.  Now,
my opinion chances.  The audience feels a bit empty (at least I did) when Mr.
Ford is not on screen for when he is on screen, you get this feeling that
everything is going to be right.  And even knowing that, Petersen still kept
me guessing until the end.  
This, my friends, was a great movie.  Again, as in a lot of movies I've seen
this summer, a very micrscopic complaint was that I thought the movie lagged
for about 10-15 minutes at the end.  But hey, we can't all be perfect.

Title
Review for Breakdown (1997)
Kurt Russell -- Kathleen Quinlan -- J.T. Walsh 
A Jonathan Mostow Film
Now, while this is a qualm of mine, it is my only qualm about this slick
piece of filmmaking by Jonathan Mostow.  Breakdown is a gripping movie and
Mostow should be praised.  While his ideas for the film aren't original (he
borrows elements from THE VANISHING and DUEL, while also using other ALFRED
HITCHCOCK devices), he crafts them into a film which doesn't once let up on
the thrills and the chills.
J.T. Walsh's character kidnaps Russell's wife, Amy, played with an appealing
vulnerability (like Drew Barrymore in SCREAM) by Kathleen Quinlan.  He and
his other kidnappers then engage in a series of evil doings and Russell must
solve the problem by a) getting back his wife and b) maybe knocking off the
bad guys while he's at it.
While it does seem a stretch, the film's catch phrase, "It could happen to
you" made me think.  I thought how nieve Mr. Russell's character was in
letting his wife head out alone, with a stranger, in an 18 wheeler, in the
middle of absolutely nowhere.  This predicament had (and still has) an eerie
effect to it.  Trust no one, I think.  This element of the film is very
useful.
What also is hauntingly chilling is the crime itself.  Ms. Quinlan is kept in
a small compartment of a truck, with only inches of breathing room.  I got
the chills when I saw the way she was entrapped, and I thought of myself if I
were in that situation.  It was at that point which I knew Mostow had done a
great job of startling the viewer.
All in all, Mostow crafted a great film here.  Not quite a "white-knuckler",
I left the theatre in a sweat.  A //cold// sweat no less.  The movie ended
very effectively.  IT was one of those deals where one thinks the movie will
further resolve itself, but it doesn't.  Funny, my friend sarcastically
remarked to me before the credits, "And that's it...the END."  He was
obviously expected more.  And then when the credits rolled, he sat there
stunned.  Whoa, it's over?  he remarked.
Absolutely, I replied.  And what a way to end it.

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)

There's not much to say about Steven Spielberg's latest venture into the
dinosaur world, except that its sole purpose is to make money.  Now you pose
the question, don't all other movies aim to make money?  Yes, I agree, it is
the goal of the film execs to make money.  However, most of the time, with
few exception, it is the goal of the filmmaker to make a good movie.  Here I
must speculate, with the brilliant talent of Mr. Spielberg, his sole purpose
in making this "sequel" was to make money.  
Here, however, the filmmaker didn't concentrate on making a good movie.  He
concentrated on making a loud movie where digital dinosaurs eat people,
providing that sporadic jolt that this movie so desperately needed.  There's
no plot here, unless you think that David Koepp's attempt at it, trying to
entangle greed and science, consists of a plot.  
Still, the film passes some muster.  Why?  The effects.  The effects here are
astounding, and it is no wonder why Mr. Spielberg and others stand to make
millions from it.  The technological display here is absolutely second to
none.  
And do you know what was also a plus with this film?  John Williams's score.
 I was roused at certain moments, where the music was one note away from the
Luke-Darth Vader scene in RETURN OF THE JEDI music.  Williams proves again
why he is such an invaulable asset to Hollywood, and why his scores leave the
audience humming for hours and hours.  
So, this movie turned out average.  Again, the effects are marvelous.  The
plot is non-existant.  And the ending descends to that of a "B" monster movie
(MOTHRA).  All in all, this movie is like Spielberg's JURASSIC PARK (1993),
except here, the plot has worn thin, and the concept has grown old.

Title
Review for Face/Off (1997)
First Impressions:  Truly, a good action flick.  John Woo is a master at
pulling off an action scene, even if the movie did overexaggerate that last
boat scene a tad bit.  Performances by Nicolas Cage and John Travolta are
truly remarkable -- Cage is in top form and Travolta continues to exhibit his
great acting skills.
Meaningless commentary aside, Sean Archer (Travolta/Cage) is an FBI agent who
dedicates his whole life to catching a psychopath by the name of Castor Troy
(Cage/Travolta).  Archer finally catches Troy and his equally evil brother.
 This sets off a series of events which leads Travolta's Archer to take the
face of Cage's Troy.  Through awful means, Cage's Troy then assumes the face
of Travolta's Archer.  The result is Nic Cage playing Sean Archer and John
Travolta playing Castor Troy.
Here, Troy's one-dimensional, slick-"cajun-bizarre" antics are brilliantly
portrayed by Mr. Travolta, who also played a psychopath in Mr. Woo's earlier
BROKEN ARROW.  However, Mr. Cage has the tougher part here:  He must deviate
from playing the wieldy sociopath to the family-loving Archer.  He lives up
to the task -- his performance is also nothing short of brilliant.  Like in
LEAVING LAS VEGAS, he plays the Archer part with a cheery sort of edge, and
the audience knows he's smarter than everyone.  That's the message that was
supposed to be conveyed:  Mission accomplished there.
The violent scenes in this film have led some people to denigrate movie
critics for their immense liking of the film -- they claim that the violence
in this film is dispicable, reprehensible, and a bunch of other
long-worded-adjectives.  I have to say however, that the scenes in this film,
while gory, are poetically directed by Mr. Woo.  Mr. Woo has such an eye for
action that he even pulls off the first scene in the movie, which is
disturbing as it is, with such finesse and flare that it makes you wonder
whether or not he was "born" to do this.  This first scene and the other
action scenes, especially the church scene ("Weee...what a predicament") are
masterfully directed.  If there was an Oscar for Action, Mr. Woo would make a
clean sweep.
The plot, inventive and unique, did suffer a bit at the end however from that
extremely drawn out boat-scene.  Again, this scene was truly remarkable,
however, some of it probably unnecessary.  This movie did not have to be two
hours and twenty minutes long, so that last scene didn't help.  But, it was
there, and the audience member must appreciate the ability to pull this
caliber of scene off.  The action here was "awesome."

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
First Impressions:  Critically, a close-to-awful film, but money-wise, it has
been doing (and will continue to do) great.  A sometimes-funny film that sags
and lags and oftentimes gets boring.  An orginal plot that grows old real
fast.  One of the only 90 minute films that I've gotten bored through.
MEN IN BLACK has defied the odds.  When I first saw that the flick was
89 minutes long, I thought maybe that this was a poor attempt at an
INDEPENDENCE DAY type film that just ran out of gas.  However, I now
realize that not only did MEN IN BLACK run out of gas, but the film in
90 minutes manages to show off a very original idea (which summer
audiences have embraced) that becomes old about 25 minutes into the movie.
Tommy Lee Jones and Will Smith play two "government" agents who are
responsible for keeping order in alien society.  The ridiculous plot begins
when an alien "bug", played weirdly by Vincent D'Onofrio, who was so great in
FULL METAL JACKET, lands on Earth to retrieve a galaxy that's somewhere on
"Orion's belt."  Anyway, the basic plot revolves around Jones and Smith to
stop this bug from getting the galaxy, or a higher power will blow up the
earth.
The premise is ridulous, but that is not why I didn't like this film.  I love
original plots.  This one had an original one.  But director Barry Sonnenfeld
did something to this film that ruined its plot:  He made the film drag and
also put in unncessary elements in it that are found in romance films.
 Whenever I saw D'Onofrio's bug stomp and eat people in the film, it got
terribly boring after a while.  While Smith's wise-cracks did fill in the
gaps, it wasn't enough.  And also, I cannot believe the screenwriters elected
to have a sub-plot where Tommy Lee Jones missed his former lover because as
an alien agent, they can't have contact with any humans really.  And here I
see Jones, at a satellite computer, watching his lover plant the garden?  A
sentimental moment in an alien movie?  Nice try, but I don't think so.  It
doesn't work here.  It just makes the movie even more ridiculous and even
more boring:  We don't only have aliens to worry about, but now we have
Jones's conscience.  
I came into the movie not wanting to see Jones's conscience, but wanting to
see a real action movie that had lots of aliens in it.  Maybe it's unfair
that I partly judged this movie on what my expectations were.  Nevertheless,
even though some parts are indeed funny, the plot in this movie grew old and
boring -- quick.
