Authors
Richard Bean
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland, The (1999)
This was a happy film concerning the red furball from Sesame St, Elmo,
and how he learns about unselfishness from the negative example of a
"greedy selfish villain" called Huxley, played by Mandy Patinkin.
Elmo loves his blanket but won't allow his friend Zoe to hold it, and
through a series of misfortunes ends up in Grouchland ("Positively NO
Smiling!") where everyone is very unfriendly and Huxley (singing "I
Make It Mine") is the most selfish of all. Elmo needs to retrieve his
blanket from Huxley's castle and encounters a series of difficulties
along the way, including a meeting with the "Queen of Trash", played by
Vanessa Williams, who teaches him about giving.
I am 22 and I enjoyed it, particularly the musical parts.  The signs in
Grouchland are funny for adults, e.g. a movie theatre "Sharon Groan in
Basically It Stinks", and the self-deprecating comments made about the
show - Huxley, "I bet you have a grand old time together just saying
the alphabet and counting *all day long*." Grouchland saying - "You
look like a million yuks." In jail, some people are told, "You have the
right to scream your head off, and if you choose not to exercise that
right, you can have someone scream their head off for you."
At one point Elmo encounters a humongous chicken. This scene, in the
tradition of Gonzo the Great (_The Muppet Show_) and his bohemian flock,
lends itself readily to Freudian analysis. We can see Elmo retreating
into childish verse to flee his realisation, in light of his dawning
sexuality, of a prepubscent Oedipus complex.
Grouchland is like a ghetto, so the producers had to be careful to
avoid any racist suggestions at that point (witness the outcry over
Phantom Menace). The background music is a Latin/South American
rhythm.  The Queen of Trash's dump has an African/Andean rhythm with
the pipes in the background.  This could be intrepreted as symbolic of
North American hegemony over Third World countries.
The incipient bourgeois mentality evinced throughout the film was its
most disturbing aspect; apparently we are supposed to find both the
ghetto dwellers and the prosperous of Grouchland (the socialist,
Huxley) reprehensible.  The writers attempt to de-emphasize this
dialectical tension in the aforementioned jail scene.
Also, had this film been made in any country except the U.S., there
would surely have been some reference to recycling.  When Sesame Street
first screened in November 1969, trash cans were omnipresent in the
inner city street; however, today's film producers should be more
environmentally conscious.
Postmodernist doctrines are blatantly promulgated in the Queen of
Trash's song concerning her dump (or creation?) "It's all about your
point of view".
Bert and Ernie often break in and get the audience to "participate".
They are very fond of using each others' names in their conversation in
every sentence, even more than once.  My friend detected homosexual
overtones in this tendency and in their interaction generally, although
I failed to notice.  I don't think kids would either.  Jerry Falwell
might.
Another unusual aspect of this film is that Elmo refers to himself in
the third person all the time.  "Elmo loves his blanket", "Elmo wants
to find his blanket" etc.  This may promote narcissism in children.
The opening scene with Elmo's blanket is endearing and yet his
selfishness should be censured.  Kids will quickly notice that the main
characters are abstractions of children's moods.
My conclusion, though, is that this is a funny film suitable for all
ages.
Richard Bean (rwb@maths.uq.edu.au)
Thanks to Raymond Smith for helping me with this review.
