Authors
thomasl@silver.ucs.indiana.edu (thomasl)
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Night on Earth (1991)
     Jim Jarmusch's newest film, NIGHT ON EARTH, is an example of what
an independent talent can do with a budget.  In this film, we get great
production values, and accessibility, but a lot more.  The look is
superb; the stories are entertaining, thoughtful and moving.  Although
this film is staged in five locations throughout the world, it's pure
Hollywood at it's best.  Jarmusch joins the big leagues with this movie
as he tackles the heavy themes.  In this complex smorgasbord of life,
he makes the bittersweet completely palatable.
     The movie is a series of five vignettes, each of which takes place
in a different city in the world, simultaneously.  The stories, like
the lives of people in different places, have nothing to with one
another, although there are some lovely lose connections
(sister-in-laws, for example).  The encounters all involve a cab driver
picking up a fare.
     The opening credits, over a globe beautifully, set the theme, and
the music, by Tom Waits and Kathleen Brennan, is perfect for this
whistle-stop sideshow tour of the human carnival.  That familiar
Hollywood device (one of my faves, along with the calendar with the
pages drifting to the floor, showing passage of time), the newsroom 
clocks which show simultaneous times for various cities, cues us in to
time and place.  They run backwards to reset, between cities.  The
establishing sequence in each city gives us the flavor of the city
through the buildings and streets the cabbies intimately know.  We
always see a clock in the sequence.
     We travel east, and the earliest sequence in the film, L.A., is the
slowest.  As the Hollywood story set on its ear, it sets the tone with
its commentary about reality, movies and the chances of life.  It is the
stagiest.  
     As always, it's the quirky and individualistic characters, the
mundane yet strangely striking situations, that distinctively mark the
Jarmusch pictures (as well as the soundtrack, this time beautifully
restrained and so more effective than usual).  The characters in this
picture are Everymen and women, but the short stories are some of the
most compelling seen in recent memory.  The New York story and the
Helsinki story are both humorous and beautifully emotional.  Rome, about
living lustily, has a wonderful character driving.  Each location really
captures the flavor of the people and the place.  Notable performances
include the fares in New York and Helsinki,and the cabbie in Rome,
although they are all excellent.
     Jim Jarmusch has a keen, sweet eye, and through it we lightly
caress what he sees, as he winks.  What a night, what a movie, what a
world!
