Authors
Donlee Brussel
Number of Reviews
12

Title
Review for Magnolia (1999)
Cast: Jason Robards, Philip Baker Hall, Tom Cruise, John C. Reilly,
Melora Walters, Julianne Moore, William H. Macy, Philip Seymour
Hoffman, Jeremy Blackman, Melinda Dillon
Director: Paul Thomas Anderson
Screenplay: Paul Thomas Anderson
185 minutes
Rated R
"There is the story of a boy genius, Stanley Spector.  And the game
show host, Jimmy Gator.  And the ex-boy genius, "Quiz Kid" Donnie
Smith.  There is the story of the dying man, Earl Partridge.  His lost
son, Frank T.J. Mackey.  And the dying man's wife, Linda Partridge.
The caretaker, Phil Parma.  And there is the story of a mother, Rose
Gator.  And the daughter, Claudia Wilson Gator.  And the police officer
in love, Jim Kurring.  And this will all make sense in the end."
The successor to "Boogie Nights" is mindblowingly
brilliant.  "Magnolia's" detractors will impute that this kaleidoscope
of avant-garde originality is too long.  Roger Ebert would say, "Those
who say it is too long have developed cinematic attention deficit
disorder."  Half the people who witness "Magnolia" will cherish and
extol it; the other half will hate it with a passion.
"Magnolia" is a collage of about ten separate stories.  Stanley Spector
(Jeremy Blackman) is the current wunderkind on the hit TV show "What Do
Kids Know" which is in its 33rd year hosted by Jimmy Gator (Philip
Baker Hall).  Stanley is three days away from breaking the record set
by "Whiz Kid" Donnie Smith (William H. Macy) decades ago.  Donnie is
currently working for Solomon Solomon (Alfred Molina), an electronic
store that uses Smith's celebrity status to lure customers.
Jimmy Gator's got issues; he's just been diagnosed with cancer and has
been given only two months to live.  His estranged daughter, Claudia
Wilson Gator (Melora Walters), is a coke-sniffing slut who hates him.
Walters is a stand out in "Magnolia" as a cracked and derailed twenty-
something.  She engages in meaningless anonymous sex and disturbs the
peace in her neighborhood.   Her mother, Rose Gator (Melinda Dillon) is
worried about both of them.  Jim Kurring (John C. Reilly) is the pious
cop who just happens to meet and falls in love with Claudia at first
sight.
Then, there's the Partridge Family.  Earl Partridge (Jason Robards) is
in his last days in a deathbed, all he has is his wife, Linda Partridge
(Julianne Moore), and nurse, Phil Parma (Philip Seymour Hoffman).  He
tells Phil his dying wish is to see his lost son, Frank T.J. Mackie
(Tom Cruise).  This is easily the most engrossing story in the film.
The best dialogue and acting comes from this tale.
Two-time Oscar winner Robards delivers several affective monologues,
Moore is at her PMSing best, and Tom Cruise gives the best performance
of his career as the cocky macho misogynist guru of "Seduce and
Destroy."  He plays a character oozing enough sleazy, slimy charisma to
earn my pick for "Best Sexist Performance of the 90s."
The man behind it all, Paul Thomas Anderson, is perhaps the most
talented writer in showbiz today next to Quentin Tarantino.  This guy
has more ingeniously clever ideas than Charlie Kaufman (Being John
Malkovich).  For example, each act in "Magnolia" is labeled by the
weather forecast.  He opens the film with a prologue made up of three
unrelated vignettes to prepare us for the forthcoming coincidences.
P.T. Anderson said, "The goal there was to have a lot of cinematic fun.
But it's also a promise that can be made very quickly- weird stories,
weird coincidences, and fucking strange shit will happen."
Indeed it does, one of the highlights of "Magnolia" is a sing along to
the oracular "Wise Up" by all the characters in different scenes.  It's
one of several idiosyncratically whimsical moments in this
masterpiece.  Jon Brion's score or one of Aimee Mann's mellifluous
songs usually accompanies these moments.  P.T. Anderson said, "I really
set out to write an adaptation of her songs... Her songs become the
built-in voice of the movie, tying all the stories together."  That and
a spectacular climax of biblical proportions that makes "Magnolia" all
the more a pičce de résistance.
Like a Kubrick film, some at first will hate "Magnolia."  However, 20
years from now, those same people who said they hated it will realize
its groundbreaking brilliance and say they loved it all along.

Title
Review for American Beauty (1999)
"American Beauty" is the impressive off the wall, jet-black magnum opus
dramedy debut from writer Alan Ball and director Sam Mendes.   It's the
story about Lester (Kevin Spacey) and Carolyn Burnham (Annette Bening).
They're an extremely happy couple like Mike and Carol Brady with their
friends, neighbors & co-workers.  They go to company events; they look
the look, talk the talk and walk the walk.  As the tagline says, "Look
closer'
The Burnhams are actually a dysfunctional couple deteriorating.
Carolyn has an "I just took Prozac" look on her face as a real estate
saleswoman and she's thinking about cheating on her husband.  Lester on
the other hand, is sedated.  Spacey's character is a "colossal loser"
hated by his wife and adolescent daughter.  He's a man dead on the
inside, the highlight of his day is jerking off in the shower.
Lester Burnham's life changes when he develops a crush on his
daughter's best friend, a vixen cheerleader (Mena Suvari).  It brings
back his mojo that's been missing since college ended.  Meanwhile, his
daughter Jane (Thora Birch) develops a relationship with the enigmatic
boy next door named Ricky (Wes Bentley).  Bentley's character is a
voyeur who lives with his military-minded homophobic father (Chris
Cooper) and estranged mother (Allison Janney).  Throughout the film, we
will see all the characters go through numerous changes.
Kevin Spacey and Annette Benning seem to only get better with age.
They give Oscar-worthy performances that remind us why they were so
remarkable in the first place.  They're so good in fact, that you'd
think in a movie like this, only the leads would be impressive.
Surprisingly, the supporting cast matches the main characters blow for
blow.
At the beginning of the year, people were talking Oscar for Cooper
because of his role as a controlling father in "October Sky."  Now
he'll have to get it for his truly stand out work in "American Beauty"
that is far superior to anything else he's ever done.  Then there are
the three young adults in the film, all of which hold their own with
these seasoned vets with highly respectable performances.  It's safe to
say that all the players here invigorate a lot of life into the already
wonderfully three-dimensional characters that Alan Ball created for
them.
"American Beauty" is that rare film, one with both crackling dialogue
and intricate character development in addition to everything else.
Though some think it is impossible in this day and age, Ball has done
it.  He's concocted one of the most gleaming scripts in a long time.
Chances are, he'll be picking up an Oscar or at least a nomination for
Best Original Screenplay.  This scribe has dialogue up there with Kevin
Smith, David Mamet and David Rabe.  He's taken the old dysfunctional
family plot and given it enough clever and adroit twists to make it a
gem amongst all the wannabes.
Sam Mendes masterfully directs scenes here with beautiful imagery and
style in stride.  He is only complemented by Conrad L. Hall's superb
brand of cinematography that includes close-ups of the actors and
actresses at their most emotional.  His distinctive touches contributed
to the film make it all the more unique.    "Beauty" also has another
hauntingly effective score from the always refreshing Thomas Newman
that is genuinely sublime.
There are many other admirable traits in "American Beauty."  I'd like
to list them all here.  However, I'd rather just recommend that you all
witness this thought-provoking tour de force yourselves.

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
David Fincher's latest cold, bleak, depressing masterpiece is a 139-
min. adrenaline rush. It's a film that stabs you in the heart with a
rusty knife and then sprays it with 100% proof alcohol. It's one that
goes straight for the jugular and leaves you gasping for its entire
run. And did I mention how funny this macabre comedy is?
Based on Chuck Palahniuk's intensely provocative first novel of the
same name and armed with innovative visual techniques, jaw-droppingly
superb performances from its stars, and a darkly satirical & original
screenplay, `Fight Club' proves that it's one of the best films of the
decade.
Hype for this film has been incredibly high and so have the stakes for
everyone involved. The book has become a cult classic and rightfully
so. Having read the novel myself, I can honestly say the movie is as
good, if not better than the book. The brilliant wordplay, the
monologues, its originality, all has been brought to life and Fincher
has taken them to the next level after that. David Fincher's career
hits a peak with this film, with `Fight Club' he becomes the best
director at combining style and substance and never has it been done
this well. Fincher has also gotten the best performances out of all his
players.
Edward Norton gives another superior performance as the everyman
Narrator and once again proves he is one of the most versatile actors
working in Hollywood today. Not only that, but Brad Pitt is back, going
all out in anti-mainstream mode as Tyler Durden, delivering his best
performance to date. And Helena Bonham Carter portrays her sardonic
character with such deadpan panache that if she doesn't get an Oscar
nomination in February; I'll be bitching for a very long time.
`Fight Club' starts out about a group of yuppies that start a club
where each week they take their aggressions out on each other by
fighting. However, that's only the beginning. Later on, Tyler takes
Fight Club up a notch with Project Mayhem, a terrorist group that
rebels against society in many ways. Their antics get more and more
extreme, right up until its tremendous first-rate climax. Unlike other
recent releases, the film's ending is very satisfying. `Fight Club'
doesn't end abruptly with no conclusion, it doesn't end with a
predictable twist, it ends with a nice and twisted dark ending.
To tell you any more about the plot would be wrong of me, so stop
reading any reviews and go see `Fight Club', the best film I've seen
all year.

Title
Review for Meet Joe Black (1998)
Cast: Brad Pitt, Anthony Hopkins, Claire Forlani, Jeffrey Tambor
Director: Martin Brest
Screenplay: Ron Osborn & Jeff Reno and Kevin Wade and Bo Goldman
179 minutes
Rated PG-13
In case you didn't know by now, "Meet Joe Black" is a remake (rip off)
of the the 1934 film "Death Takes A Holiday." There are a couple of
differences between the two. One, which is mentioned by most critics
and people, is that "Meet Joe Black" is unduly extended at 2 hours and
59 min.  With their 3 hours of film, I got to listen and watch insipid,
prosaic dialogue and situations involving lamb sandwiches, peanut
butter, and party arrangements.  I got to hear banal one-liners come
out of the characters that seemed to be from the last Pauly Shore
movie's cutting floor.
The other thing "Black" had that wasn't used to its advantage was a $95
million budget that was wasted on... Hell, I don't think anyone knows.
Maybe it was on the 8 writers who gave this film six sub-plots.  Maybe
it was on the CGI of all the actors and actresses besides Anthony
Hopkins in the film (There's no way real people are that cardboard).
Don't interpret this as me saying this film has no saving graces.
Anthony Hopkins gives a respectable performance here, and as always,
Martin Brest directs a few good scenes in `Meet Joe Black.'  However,
the only real thing that could've saved this movie is spending more
time in the editing room.  Avoid this and go see the 1934 original
that's much better than what I saw.

Title
Review for Hurricane, The (1999)
Cast: Denzel Washington, Vicellous Reon Shannon, Liev Schreiber,
Deborah Unger, John Hannah, Dan Hedaya, David Paymer, Rod Steiger
Director: Norman Jewison
Screenplay: Armyan Bernstein and Dan Gordon, based on "Lazarus and The
Hurricane" by Sam Chaiton and Terry Swinton, and "The 16th Round" by
Rubin 'Hurricane' Carter
150 minutes
Rated R
In this corner, the master of playing the Negro oppressed by the white
man, the two-time Oscar nominee (Cry Freedom & Malcolm X) and once
Oscar winner (Glory), the thespian, the one and only Denzel
Washington!  And in the other corner, the master craftsman of the
clichéd & manipulative (Bogus), the thrice Oscar nominated (In The Heat
of the Night, Fiddler on the Roof & Moonstruck) and Irving G. Thalberg
Memorial Award recipient, the man with the plan, Norman Jewison!
Together for the first time since "A Soldier's Story," in a film based
on "Lazarus and The Hurricane" by Sam Chaiton and Terry Swinton, and
on "The 16th Round" by Rubin 'Hurricane' Carter.  Ladies and
gentleman, "The Hurricane!"
The film opens on December 20, 1963 with an awesome black and white
boxing match (shot elaborately by Roger Deakins) between Rubin and
Griffith.  From that point on, the film never ceases to amaze us.
Presented in a non-linear form with a heavy dosage of drama, and solid
acting across the board, "Hurricane" ends up a real KO.  Of admirable
merit are Jewison's top-notch directing, Denzel Washington's superbly
complex and multi-layered performance and the fascinating story of
Carter adapted for the screen by Armyan Bernstein and Dan Gordon.
Rubin "Hurricane" Carter was a great boxer, possibly one of the
greatest of all time.  The film chronicles his life from childhood to
his wrongful murder conviction because of a corrupt cop (Dan Hedaya) to
his triumphant release from prison.  How he got out of jail after being
imprisoned for 20 years is an "incredible" true story.
After reading Carter's book, Lesra Martin feels a deep connection
between himself and the author and decides to seek him out.  He writes
a letter and after getting a reply, visits Hurricane in jail.  The two
have a meaningful conversation that makes Lesra enlist the help of the
three Canadians (Liev Schreiber, Deborah Unger & John Hannah) he's
living with to come and help him free Rubin "Hurricane" Carter.
Denzel Washington does a great job of playing African Americans
oppressed by the Caucasian race as evidenced by his multiple awards for
playing those kinds of roles.  He's the best at doing characters like
Malcolm X in "Malcolm X," Trip in  "Glory," or Rubin Carter in "The
Hurricane."  He has the ability to transform into these characters,
both physically and mentally.  Washington gave this film everything he
had and it shows.  Throughout "Hurricane," there's not one scene where
we're watching Denzel Washington, we're always watching Rubin.  In my
humble opinion, I think he gives the best male performance of 1999.
In addition to Washington, there's a great supporting cast headed by
Vicellous Reon Shannon.  It gives me a warm and fuzzy feeling inside to
say that this is a talented young actor that we should keep an eye on,
especially with this being the year of praise heaped upon such
overrated prodigies as Haley Joel Osment.  Shannon shows a skillful
amount of range in his role of Lesra Martin, a role that will probably
go underrated.
Then there's Dan Hedaya, resplendent as always as the conspicuous
police lieutenant who's trying to keep the black man (In this case,
Rubin Carter) down.  There's nothing like a really good antagonist to
make a film complete.  Unless of course, it's the king of over the top
actors, Rod Steiger!  Fresh from the ruins of "End of Days," he's here
in a superincumbent role as the judge for the big courtroom climax.
With so many biographies being made into films these days, it's
refreshing to see one as good as this.  "The Hurricane" is one that
actually had everyone pour their heart and soul into it.

Title
Review for Any Given Sunday (1999)
Cast: Al Pacino, Cameron Diaz, Dennis Quaid, Jamie Foxx, James Woods,
LL Cool J, Lawrence Taylor, Jim Brown, Bill Bellamy
Director: Oliver Stone
Screenplay: John Logan and Oliver Stone, based on "You're Okay, It's
Just A Bruise" by Rob Huizenga, and "Playing Hurt" by Daniel Pyne
Rated R
165 minutes
In the grand tradition of Tyler Durden and Frank T.J. Mackie, I give
you the ultimate penis power spokesperson of the new millenium, Oliver
Stone. Men's Journal calls him "the premier macho filmmaker of modern
times." He's the main man behind the football movie to end all football
movies, "Any Given Sunday."
What is it about football that intrigues America more than any other
sport? Why of all sports do more than 100 million people watch
football? Maybe because wrestling is faker than cubic zirconians,
baseball's only exciting when you're drunk, hockey is Canadian and
boxing doesn't allow ten guys to pile on top of opponents while their
face is in the ground holding a football for dear life because if they
don't keep the ball in their hands by the time the cameras or the ref
comes, that $10 million dollar contract they just signed is void. With
Oliver Stone, we know we will get one of the best sports films of the
90s as well as his name brand "cinematic masturbation" as my colleague
James Berardinelli puts it.
"Fight Club is not football on television. You aren't watching a bunch
of guys you don't know beating on each other halfway around the world
via satellite with a two minute delay, commercials pitching beer every
three minutes and applause now and then for station identification.
After Fight Club, watching football on television was like watching
pornography when you could be having great sex."
Today, Stone feels that the game is endangered: "I was talking to Jim
Brown about it, and he says TV money has had a pervasive influence.
Commercials interrupt the game's momentum. They have taken a one-hour
game that was beautiful and original and turned it into a three-hour
exercise in American style. It wrecks the concentration of the players."
Welcome to the playing field of "Any Given Sunday." Included in Stone's
all-star line-up is Tony D'Amato (Al Pacino), an over the hill
traditional coach; Christina Pagniacci (Cameron Diaz),his ball-busting
team owner; Jack "Cap" Rooney (Dennis Quaid), the fallen legend
quarterback; Willie Beaman (Jamie Foxx), his arrogant young
replacement; Julian Washington (LL Cool J), the millionaire star
running back; and Harvey Mandrake (James Woods), the mercenary team
doctor. Here for support are Montezuma Monroe (Jim Brown), the
defensive coordinator; Luther 'Shark' Lavay (Lawrence Taylor), a
blocker; and Jimmy Sanderson (Bill Bellamy), the wide receiver.
They're all a part of the Miami Sharks family, and what a happy family
they are! These guys are involved in the most family friendly things:
drugs, greed, ageism, blackmail, racism, sexism, medical malpractice
and my favorite, prostitution. Yes, we all know Stone has been
directing subtle G rated family films like this for a long time. This
one is especially noble because of a full frontal shot of a black
football player that puts Marky Mark's prosthetic to shame.
"Any Given Sunday" also has the honor of being the most stylish MTV
music video ever. Oliver uses just about every visual effect known to
man while wigger music from DMX, Mystikal and Trick Daddy plays in the
background along with "original" music composed by Casio keyboard demo
user extraordinaire, Swizz Beatz. Also on the soundtrack are headbanger
favorites from Kid Rock and Hole. Stone probably has the best team of
editors working today because there is not a single dull moment in this
film. From minute one Oliver throws us right onto the field, right into
the game and never lets us off. Sadly, this is a prime example of a
style over substance film.
Dialogue in this film sparkles with poignancy and the acting is strong.
Al Pacino is at his intense best and Jamie Foxx provides a biting
dramatic breakout performance. So where did "Sunday" go wrong? What
happened? Clichés happened. Every sports film cliché is here. There's
the torch handing between the seasoned veteran and the rookie
phenomenon. There's the Big Speech before the Big Game which ends with
the Big Play where we see the Big Clock letting us know that the player
only has fill in the blank seconds left to make the Big Score during
which, a Robin Williams-type score plays in the background. Worst of
all, "Any Given Sunday" has a scene where it completely rips off "Jerry
Maguire."
Do I recommend seeing "Any Given Sunday" despite the flaws? You betcha.
It's the most realistic football film you'll ever see because all the
hits are real, all the plays are real. "Sunday" is the closest you will
ever get to the field without really being there.

Title
Review for Girl, Interrupted (1999)
Cast: Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea DuVall, Brittany Murphy,
Elizabeth Moss, Jared Leto, Jeffrey Tambor, Vanessa Redgrave, Whoopi
Goldberg
Director: James Mangold
Screenplay: James Mangold and Lisa Loomer and Anna Hamilton Phelan,
based on the book by Susanna Kaysen
Rated R
127 minutes
It's time to soak up the estrogen with the chick flick version of "One
Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest."  "Girl, Interrupted" stars the dynamic
duo of homely Winona Ryder and Power Puff Girl Angelina Jolie.  Also
along for the ride are the latest pseudo-teen stars, Clea DuVall (the
dyke in "The Faculty") and Jared Leto (Angel Face in "Fight Club").
Thrown in for ethnic sprinkling is Whoopi Goldberg.  So get some
Kleenex and the Spice Girls CD because Girl Power rules for two hours.
The year is 1967; Susanna (Ryder) is dazed and confused.  She's the
only senior not going on to college.  She attempts suicide, fails and
is sent off to Claymoore by her parents.  Claymoore's a Boston
psychiatric ward with several colorful patients.  There's Georgina
(DuVall) the compulsive liar who's Susanna's roomie; Daisy (Brittany
Murphy), the stuck up daddy's girl with an eating disorder; Polly
(Elizabeth Moss), the deformed pyromaniac; and Lisa (Jolie), the sultry
sociopath.  It's the job of Valerie (Whoopi Goldberg), the head nurse,
to keep them all in line.
"Girl, Interrupted" chronicles Susanna's 18-month stay at Claymoore and
at times, it's an intriguing one.  Don't think for a second that it's
because of Winona Ryder.  She seems almost monotonous compared to the
extravagantly prodigious Angelina Jolie who is going to get the
recognition she deserves come award time.  Since Jolie won a Golden
Globe for her ardent performance in "Gia" she seems to only get better
with age.
Goldberg gives an a-OK performance as the nurse who watches Susanna
shave her legs.  Jared Leto struts around topless as Susanna's
boyfriend who mutters some "this is not right" BS in an after school
special manner midway through the film.  Jeffrey Tambor delivers
a "square" performance as Susanna's psychiatrist.  And Vanessa Redgrave
provides us an unnecessary mediocre performance that should've been
edited out.
Winona Ryder has been trying to bring Susanna Kaiser's autobiographical
book to the screen for years.  And now that she finally has, she can go
back to doing ping-pong ball tricks.  James Mangold does an admirable
job of helming "Girl, Interrupted."  He takes an attenuated and
conventional approach at the film. Often it works.  Often it doesn't.
Dig the groovy tunes on the soundtrack and behold the historical clips
of 'Nam and Martin Luther King Jr. in this seemingly ambitious 60s
period piece.  Dread the all-too-predictable basement confrontation
finale that is "Girl, Interrupted's" most fatal flaw.
Crazy people are people too...despite my proof that they aren't!  Don't
judge a book by its cover.  It doesn't matter how you look on the
outside, it's what's on the inside that counts.  Most of you know the
cliched moral of the story already.  Therefore, the only real reason to
see this film is Angelina Jolie's magnetic performance.  If that
doesn't interest you, pass on this formulaic work and get yourself some
Maxi Pads with wings.

Title
Review for Bringing Out the Dead (1999)
"Bringing Out The Dead" opens with a title card that says "This film
takes place in New York City in the early 1990s" as if it's not evident
in the next 2 hours.  It seems unnecessary, since I doubt anyone will
mistake Scrosese's latest opus as a 2 hour episode of "ER."
It's film about 3 days in the life of Frank Pierce (Nicholas Cage), a
paramedic in Hell's Kitchen. From Martin Scorsese, we have come to
expect only the best, just like Terrence Malick, Stanley Kubrick or
Steven Spielberg.  Who set the bar for these directors?  The answer is
evident when you look at their films from the 70s and 80s. They each
did groundbreaking films that set the bar too high for
themselves. "Raging Bull" and "Taxi Driver" are considered two of the
greatest films of all time.  That's the reason "Dead" disappoints.
The first thing we hear in the film is a voice over from Frank Pierce
in an ambulance with his partner Larry (John Goodman). The opening
makes "Bringing Out The Dead" seem like a continuation of "Taxi
Driver."  There's a voiceover from our protagonist who's seeking
redemption in NY with a late night job in a mobile workplace.  He meets
a woman set to get his life back together.  Behind the scenes we have
Martin Scorsese giving Paul Schrader's (Taxi Driver) screenplay his
Midas touch. With those features, it's inevitable to have a sense of
deja vu.  One of the problems with "Bringing Out The Dead" is it tries
to play out as a dramedy.  The dramatic moments so cliched they seem
amateurish.  And the comedic elements that are present are so good, we
wonder why they're criminally underused.
The film gives Frank Pierce three partners. The first is a compulsive
overeater named Larry, played by John Goodman. Trailers, posters, ads,
none mention his name or character. Why? Maybe because he gives the
second to most lackadaisical performance in the film; it doesn't
require much range or acting chops and his segment is the worst easily
dismissable.  It doesn't have any suspense or the tension we've grown
to expect from Scorsese.
Ving Rhames has always been one of my favorite actors. He has a
slickness, a sly coolness that only he can achieve. Every one of his
roles has been great because of him.  He throws his all into each of
them and this is no exception.  The second act of "Bringing Out The
Dead" is definitely the best.  Rhames injects the film with life as
soon as he ignites on the screen.  His character Marcus is a great
contrast to Frank Pierce.  Marcus is a ladies' man whose ego is as big
as the city he lives in. A man who's also a strong believer in God.
Ving Rhames' performance alone is worth the price of admission or at
least a rental.  "Dead" is hilarious, kinetic, in a word, Scorsese-
esque.
And for its final act, the film concentrates on Cage's love interest
and his third partner, Tom Sizemore.  Tom Walls is a psycho-sociopath
and he's played to a tee by Sizemore. His exit scene is just so
sensationally idiosyncratic that I just have to give Tom his props. His
character turns the film into what it should've been in the first
place, a darkly comedic 2 hour MTV video. When he or Ving Rhames are on
the screen letting it all hang out for everyone to see, I'm watching a
good movie. When they're not on, we're left with Patrcia Arquette.
Arquette gives one of the blandest performances I've seen so far this
year. She drags down "Bringing Out The Dead" so much that it will leave
viewers tempted to leave the theatre. I suggest that they don't because
the film does have its admirable traits that should be seen.

Title
Review for Doing Time on Maple Drive (1992) (TV)
What do you say about a film about parents who desperately want their
children to be perfect, so much so that it brings one of them to almost
committing suicide?  A movie about skeletons that come out of the
closet ever so gracefully, it's shocking?  Ken Olin and James Duff have
collaborated to create one of the most involving family dramas of our
time.
Each character in "Doing Time On Maple Drive" is given just enough time
to develop to make us care.  The family is made up of the parents and
their children, two sons and a daughter.  This, not "The Truman Show"
was Jim Carrey's first dramatic performance and definitely one of his
best.  He gives an extremely intriguing portrayal as Tim, the oldest
son, a high school drop out and an alcoholic.  Every scene Carrey's in,
he steals.  It came as a surprise to me when I noticed he wasn't handed
an Emmy nomination for this role.
William McNamara is impressive as the gay son who has to be perfect.
There's a monologue he delivers towards the end of the film that is
just heartbreaking.  The other characters also throw in intense
performances but the spotlight is on Carrey and McNamara.  See the film
for their veteran work, everything else is just icing on the cake.  Who
knew Lifetime TV-movies could be this good?

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
David Fincher's latest cold, bleak, depressing masterpiece is a 139-
min. adrenaline rush.  It's a film that stabs you in the heart with a
rusty knife and then sprays it with 100% proof alcohol.  A film that
goes straight for the jugular and leaves you gasping for its entire
run.  And did I mention how funny this macabre comedy is?
Based on Chuck Palahniuk's intensely provocative first novel of the
same name and armed with the most innovative visual techniques, jaw-
droppingly superb performances from its stars, and a darkly satirical &
original screenplay, `Fight Club' has convinced me that it's one of the
best films of the decade.
Hype for this film has been incredibly high and so have the stakes for
everyone involved.  The book has become a cult classic and rightfully
so.  Having read the novel myself, I can honestly say the movie is as
good, if not better than the book.  The brilliant wordplay, the
monologues, its originality, all have been brought to life and Fincher
has brought them to the next level after that.  David Fincher's career
peaks with this film, with `Fight Club' he becomes the best director at
combining style and substance and never has it been done this well.
Fincher has also gotten the best performances out of all his players.
Edward Norton gives another heavily audacious performance as the
everyman Narrator and once again proves he is one of the most versatile
actors working in Hollywood today.  Not only that, but Brad Pitt is
back, going all out in anti-mainstream mode as Tyler Durden, delivering
his best performance to date.  And Helena Bonham Carter portrays her
sardonic character with such deadpan panache that if she doesn't get an
Oscar nomination in February; I'll be bitching for a very long time.
`Fight Club' starts out as a film about a group of yuppies that start a
club where each week they take their aggressions out on each other by
way of fights.  However, that's only the beginning.  Later on, Tyler
takes Fight Club up a notch with Project Mayhem, a terrorist group that
rebels against society in many ways.   Their antics get more and more
extreme, right up until its climax where the film peaks.   Unlike many
other films, the film's ending is very satisfying.  `Fight Club'
doesn't end abruptly with no conclusion, it doesn't end with a
predictable twist, it ends with a nice dark ending.
To tell you any more about the plot would be wrong of me, so stop
reading any reviews and go see `Fight Club', the best film I've seen
all year.

Title
Review for Bringing Out the Dead (1999)
"Bringing Out The Dead" opens with a title card that says "This film
takes place in New York City in the early 1990s" as if it's not evident
in the next 2 hours.  It seems unnecessary, since I doubt anyone will
mistake Scrosese's latest opus as a 2 hour episode of "ER."
It's film about 3 days in the life of Frank Pierce (Nicholas Cage), a
paramedic in Hell's Kitchen. From Martin Scorsese, we have come to
expect only the best, just like Terrence Malick, Stanley Kubrick or
Steven Spielberg.  Who set the bar for these directors?  The answer is
evident when you look at their films from the 70s and 80s. They each
did groundbreaking films that set the bar too high for
themselves. "Raging Bull" and "Taxi Driver" are considered two of the
greatest films of all time.  That's the reason "Dead" disappoints.
The first thing we hear in the film is a voice over from Frank Pierce
in an ambulance with his partner Larry (John Goodman). The opening
makes "Bringing Out The Dead" seem like a continuation of "Taxi
Driver."  There's a voiceover from our protagonist who's seeking
redemption in NY with a late night job in a mobile workplace.  He meets
a woman set to get his life back together.  Behind the scenes we have
Martin Scorsese giving Paul Schrader's (Taxi Driver) screenplay his
Midas touch. With those features, it's inevitable to have a sense of
deja vu.  One of the problems with "Bringing Out The Dead" is it tries
to play out as a dramedy.  The dramatic moments so cliched they seem
amateurish.  And the comedic elements that are present are so good, we
wonder why they're criminally underused.
The film gives Frank Pierce three partners. The first is a compulsive
overeater named Larry, played by John Goodman. Trailers, posters, ads,
none mention his name or character. Why? Maybe because he gives the
second to most lackadaisical performance in the film; it doesn't
require much range or acting chops and his segment is the worst easily
dismissable.  It doesn't have any suspense or the tension we've grown
to expect from Scorsese.
Ving Rhames has always been one of my favorite actors. He has a
slickness, a sly coolness that only he can achieve. Every one of his
roles has been great because of him.  He throws his all into each of
them and this is no exception.  The second act of "Bringing Out The
Dead" is definitely the best.  Rhames injects the film with life as
soon as he ignites on the screen.  His character Marcus is a great
contrast to Frank Pierce.  Marcus is a ladies' man whose ego is as big
as the city he lives in. A man who's also a strong believer in God.
Ving Rhames' performance alone is worth the price of admission or at
least a rental.  "Dead" is hilarious, kinetic, in a word, Scorsese-
esque.
And for its final act, the film concentrates on Cage's love interest
and his third partner, Tom Sizemore.  Tom Walls is a psycho-sociopath
and he's played to a tee by Sizemore. His exit scene is just so
sensationally idiosyncratic that I just have to give Tom his props. His
character turns the film into what it should've been in the first
place, a darkly comedic 2 hour MTV video. When he or Ving Rhames are on
the screen letting it all hang out for everyone to see, I'm watching a
good movie. When they're not on, we're left with Patrcia Arquette.
Arquette gives one of the blandest performances I've seen so far this
year. She drags down "Bringing Out The Dead" so much that it will leave
viewers tempted to leave the theatre. I suggest that they don't because
the film does have its admirable traits that should be seen.

Title
Review for End of Days (1999)
There are a lot of devil worshippers in New York.  These Satan servants
are everywhere; I'm talking about the psychiatrists, cops, nurses and
hobos.  They're all here to revere Gabriel Byrne in a role Al Pacino
was born to play.  Welcome to Schwarzenegger's long anticipated return
to celluloid, "End of Days."   It's also Arnold's first foray
into "drama" as he plays a suicidal alcoholic bodyguard who's here to
save us all from the devil himself.
In a nutshell, End of Days' plot is simply this: Satan needs to find
the girl he marked as his mate twenty years ago and impregnate her with
the Anti-Christ between 11:00 PM and 12:00 AM, Eastern Standard Time on
December 31, 1999 to initiate the "End of Days."  Only Jericho Cane (Ah-
nuld) can save the world from Lucifer and his flammable urine.  How
will he kill Mephistopheles when he has only ten seconds to nail Robin
Tunney?  Only if you're willing to part with your hard-earned cash will
you find out and I seriously recommend that you don't.
Now some of you may be asking yourselves, "What the hell is Gabriel
doing back in another pisspoor religious movie?"  You'd think after
Stigmata he'd learn to pick better scripts.  Byrne just doesn't have
the intensity to pull this role off.  Pacino had it and used it well in
the guilty pleasure "The Devil's Advocate."  Playing a heavy like the
Prince of Darkness ain't easy, so why didn't casting director Jackie
Burch put as much time into "End of Days" as he did "Lost & Found," "I
Still Know..." and "Judge Dredd?"
Every action film these days requires a sidekick, so why should a
cliché-layered film like this be any different?  They have Kevin
Pollack spewing cheesy one-liners from the "Die Hard" trilogy's cutting
room floor, and according to the audience I was with, they're
hilarious.  I mean come on, lines like those are golden!  In the stark
reality of the world Gabriel Byrne and Kevin Pollack haven't done
anything respectable besides "The Usual Suspects."  That is the only
one good film they starred in, everything on their resumes preceding
and following it are comatose.
It's important to mention Arnold Schwarzenegger's big performance.  Let
me tell you, this guy never has been able to act, he's not acting
in "End of Days" and I truly doubt he'll ever have any talent in
acting.  Maybe, it's in the accent, you know, Arnold's voice just
doesn't seem capable of tugging at my emotions.  He just doesn't have
the skill to do anything properly in a dramatic fashion.  All he can do
is look the role, but looking it just isn't enough nowadays.  There's a
scene in the film where Schwarzenegger's getting his ass whooped by
Miriam Margolyes in an inconceivably hilarious approach that makes me
question whether or not Arnold Schwarzenegger is getting a little weak
around the edges or he just thinks getting a beatdown from a 58 year
old is hilarious.
And of course, let's not forget Peter Hyams, the "acclaimed" director
of "Timecop," "Sudden Death" and "The Relic" doing a pretty sloppy job
of helming this film.  If I were the exec at Universal, I would've
really pushed Sam Raimi to direct this.  In a year of groundbreaking
special effects fests like "Star Wars" and "The Matrix, "Days" looks
incredibly lame.   Those looking to see another Jar Jar Binks
or  "bullet time" will be disappointed.  The $100 million budget used
here was spent on the same old fireballs and explosions we've seen
several times before, directed by a hack with no sense of style or
artistic ability.
"End of Days" is nothing but another scab on everyone involved's
already wounded careers.
