Authors
Sang W. Park
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Feiying gaiwak (1990)
Movie:  Armour of God II: Operation Condor (1990)
A review by: Sang Park (http://www.geocities.com/Tokyo/Towers/2713/)
As many reviewers and all Jackie Chan movie buffs know by now,
"Operation Condor" is hardly a "new" movie in that it was released
previously some seven years ago in Asia and in Chinatown theater/video
stores everywhere.  Personally, I was surprised six months ago when I
found out through Miramax's website that they are planning to release
this in theater since most Jackie Chan fans probably have seen this film
in one form of video or another.
Jackie (once again dubbed in English as himself) reprises his role as
"Flying Dragon (or Condor or whatever his code name is)" seeking a lost
bundle of gold stash somewhere in the Sahara Desert.  This time there
are three leading ladies that he must deal with.  As in the case of just
about all of his movies (except for Supercop and Young Master) women are
of no help to him; rather, they are the reasons in which he gets into
troubles and slapstick blunders.
Of course his fighting choreography and stunts are spectacular.  Why
else would you want to watch his movies if it wasn't for his
over-the-top eye-popping in-your-face actions.  Operation Condor does
deliver in that sense right from the start.  For the benefit for those
who have not seen the film, I won't describe the stunt/action sequences,
except that it involves large beach balloon, cars, motorcycles,
windtunnel, guns, and towels, no name a few.
Most Jackie Chan directed films has a bit more of himself as a slapstick
clown than his other movies.  Operation Condor, too, has a heavy dose of
that as well.  If don't care much about his farce, you have been warned
here.
Personally, I'm still waiting for an original Jackie Chan movie made
here in the US that would match the grace and intensity of the Drunken
master II or the over-the-top excitement of Dragons Forever.  Until
then, I'm willing to support his quest for the US action greatness by
recommending Operation Condor.
(comments??  reply to this posting or email me at: sangwpark@juno.com)
