Authors
Foong Ngai Hoe
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Kokaku kidotai (1995)
 When Ghost in the Shell (GitS) was released in 1995, it was probably
one of the most eagerly-awaited full-length anime (Japanese animation)
films since Katsuhiro Otomo's 1988 cyberpunk hit, Akira. Jointly
financed by Manga Video, Kodansha, and Bandai Visuals, GitS became the
first anime project to receive financial support outside Japan, and was
subsequently launched simultaneously on both sides of the Pacific - in
Japanese and English. Based on Shirow Masamune's manga (comics) series,
the film was directed by Mamoru Oshii, one of Japan's top anime
directors.
Major Motoko Kusanagi is an elite officer in the Section 9 security
force, and along with fellow-cyborg Bateau and the mostly human Togusa,
she is ordered to track down an illusive computer-criminal known only as
the Puppet Master, a hacker who can hack into the minds of cyborgs. But
the conspiracy unravels after Kusangi realises that the Puppet Master is
in fact a renegade program belonging to one of the ministries which
claims it's born "in a sea of information". As the ministries try to
out-maneuver each other in a political game to retrieve the Puppet
Master, the latter now turns its attention to Kusanagi. When the Major
begins to question her own existence as a cyborg, the Puppet Master
offers her a merger which will bring about a new life. This is where the
story derives its name from - the 'ghost' being the soul a cyborg feels
inside his or her shell (body).
Masamune's GitS is part political thriller, part social satire that
access society in the digital age. Those familiar with his comics are
quick to acknowledge the footnotes he attaches to his stories - some of
them taking up chapters even. GitS is a difficult manga to read, made
easier only by Masamune's brand of black humour.
GitS the movie isn't so much an Oshii's adaptation of Masamune's comics,
but rather the director's own vision of it. Like in his Patlabor movies,
Oshii brings to GitS a shade of noir that's become his trademark - tight
camera angles, heavy shadow outlines, depressing colours, and a story
that plods ponderously along.
Which is precisely the problem, depending on whether you like Oshii's
style of direction or not. Too much of GitS involves either Kusanagi
soul-searching, or long spells of dialogue off-screen while audiences
are left staring at the backdrop. To be fair, Oshii's unique directional
style does give many of the scenes a kind of poetry, but a
less-appreciative audience might end up squirming uncomfortably in their
seats. However, when the action does take place, it's often intense and
gripping in ways many Hollywood action films aren't. Blood splatters
across the screen, heads get blown off, but the violence is so well
integrated into the action they don't seem too gratuitous.
The immense detail in the animation is breathtaking (even by today's
standards) - from the dark and moody backdrops of Hong Kong in the 21st
century, to the gunfights that punctuate the film. Kenji Kawaii's
etheral score also lends to GitS the meditative feel the story needs.
In short, GitS is a technically brilliant and stylish animation, with a
thought-provoking story you'd not find in western animation.
Unfortunately, it's also a film too entrenched in its genre for its own
good - with a plot so murky you might need a second viewing to fully
understand it.
I'm not saying GitS is a poor production - on the contrary, it's a
marvellous aural and visual treat. Yet as art often does, GitS will win
many admirers but not converts. Neither is it likely to convince the
west that Japanese animation's a lot more than robots, babes, and sex.
And when you consider the amount of money poured into making this film a
blockbuster, that's self-indulgence.
All said, GitS is still worth the watch if you've always wondered how
Terminator 2 or Johnny Mnemonic might have turned out if animated.
Without any doubt this a great work of art - it's how entertaining it is
as a film that's open to debate.

Title
Review for Perfect Blue (1997/I)
SPOILERS AHEAD - When it comes to battling inner demons - the
doppelgaengers, the alien others - the Japanese literary circle takes it
on almost with an obsession. The anti-hero in Abe Kooboo's 1964 Tanin no
kao (The Face of Another) confronts his new, unfamiliar face, while the
protagonist in Endo Shusaku's 1986 novel Sukyandaru (Scandal) has to
face his murderous double in Tokyo's red light district.
Based on Yoshikazu Takeuchi's 1991 novel, Satoshi Kon's (Roujin Z,
Patlabor 2, Memories ~ Kanojo no omoide/Magnetic Rose) anime, Perfect
Blue (1997), deals with the double of a former pop idol who returns to
torment the singer, when she seeks to become an actress instead.
Mima Kirigoe is a member of the idol group Cham. Quitting the trio, she
decides to take up a career as an actress, and gets her first role in
the murder-mystery Double Bind, playing the sister of a murder victim in
the show. Already uneasy about her new life - especially having to
appear in a rape-scene, as well as posing nude for photo magazines -
Mima's life starts to fall apart when those involved in the film are
brutally murdered one by one. On the Internet, an alter-ego posts every
minute detail of her life onto her fan site. And more ominously, a
malevolent double appears to taunt Mima for turning her back on her
singing career.
Perfect Blue is an interesting dig at Japan's pop-idol industry, and its
teen idorus whose careers and lifestyles are at the mercy of the clean,
wholesome images their marketers and adoring fans come to expect of
them.
When Mima chooses to part with her idol-singing career, not only does
she earn the scorn of her former fans, but her own guilt also returns
back to haunt her in the form of her pop-idol double. Her rocky start in
the film business, coupled with the success of Cham, soon affects her
morale -- to the point that Mima wonders if she herself could be behind
the gruesome murders.
Further irony is also found in Double Bind, the movie Mima is acting in
when the crimes began. Called 'the looking-glass of Perfect Blue' by the
staff of the anime, Double Bind is almost a mirror-image of the turmoil
going on in Mima's head.
Takeuchi's novel seems set for what should have been an intriguing film
adaptation. But despite Kon's competent direction, Perfect Blue is less
the psychological thriller than it is another murder-mystery to feature
a celebrity being stalked.
The film fails to work up enough scenes inside Mima's head to suggest
that as her acting career takes a turn for the worse, Mima's begins to
yearn for her past. There are flashes of that in the film - like when
she fantasies herself among her former group mates, as they celebrate
their single making it to the charts - but such moments are few and
brief.
In another scene, Mima wakes up to the news of the murdered
photographer, and subsequently finds the blood-stained attire tucked
away in her closet. A terrified Mima hastily hides them away when
someone comes knocking on her door, and that is the last we hear of the
matter. Such a discovery would have undoubtedly traumatised the girl,
and yet its psychological impact is again played down.
By dealing inadequately with Mima's own ambiguity, Perfect Blue loses
that cutting-edge in this sort of film. By the time it is revealed that
Mimamaniac, an obsessed Mima fan, and Rumi, Mima's own disillusioned
manager were behind the killings, the ending has become disappointingly
run-of-the-mill.
"I am the real thing," a confident Mima takes off her shades as she
smiles into the car's rear-mirror. Not that there was much before that
had one guessing otherwise. Not that there is much after to indicate
that it's all but one bad dream for Mima either...
I'm not looking for another Freudian trip - a la Neon Genesis Evangelion
- but for a show touted as a 'psychological suspense-thriller', the way
the film ended, and how it got there, left me feeling rather
short-changed.
Also, the screenplay by Sadayuki Murai (Eko Eko Azarak) is engaging as
far as mystery-dramas go, but again it's more pulp fiction than a
thinking-man's anime. Some of the scenes in the later half of the film -
with Mima's mind traversing back and forth between acting and reality -
gets a little disruptive and incoherent as well.
But criticisms aside, Perfect Blue is, nevertheless, well worth the
accolades and awards it's received. It's an unmistakably disturbing and
absorbing work -- gripping (and perhaps gory) enough to keep fans of the
genre happy. Some scenes -- like the one where Mima's double stabs a
photographer to death -- are visually powerful. And Mima does come
across as an anguished and confused character.
Being a fan of horror-mysteries myself, I enjoyed Perfect Blue. But
being a demanding anime fan, I;m also left thinking if this could have
been something more, especially when the industry's heavyweights such as
Katushiro Ootomo and Hisashi Eguchi have lent their expertise to the
film.
Perfect Blue is good, no doubt. It just ain't perfect.
