Authors
Cisco's Buddy
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Return of the Musketeers, The (1989)
     I actually saw this film.  It's just been released on video in
Britain.  I'd been hearing mumblings that it was a very poor follow-up
to the other films, and that's why it never got released to theaters
here.  Sad to say, it's true.
     A few facts first.  It *is* an adaptation by George Macdonald
Fraser of TWENTY YEARS AFTER, rather than an original sequel, and it's
directed by Richard Lester.  The cast members returning from the
previous films are York, Reed, Chamberlain, Finlay, and -- surprise upon
surprise -- Christopher Lee (it was only a flesh wound :-) -- no, that's
not a direct quote).  Oh, and Roy Kinnear of course, though it should be
noted that he died in a horse accident while this film was being made
(the film is dedicated to him).  Jean Pierre Cassell reappears as well,
though not as Louis XIII, but in a brief role as Cyrano de Bergerac.
And I *think* that the actor playing Cardinal Mazarin is the same as the
one who played M. de Treville in the first film.
     The other two major cast members are C. Thomas Howell as Athos'
adoptive son, the Vicomte de Bragelone, and Kim Catrall as the vengeful
daughter of Milady de Winter.
     The trouble with the film is that it's completely listless.
Everyone plays their roles as if they don't really want to be there.  It
doesn't have half the adventure or humor of either of the previous
films.  The most amusing piece in the film is the little-more-than-
a-cameo performance by Cassell as Cyrano, and what makes it even more
aggravating is that that bit doesn't seem like it even belongs.  Catrall
did an excellent job in the fencing department, but as a villainess,
she's no Faye Dunaway, and just wasn't convincing.  Howell did well, but
it seemed as if he felt he was just a hanger on rather than a true part
of the proceedings.
     No doubt that if the film is released on video in the US, anyone
who is a Musketeers fan will feel obliged to rent it.  I feel bad about
not recommending it, but...I don't recommend it.
--- jayembee (Jerry Boyajian, DEC, "The Mill", Maynard, MA)
UUCP:        ...!decwrl!ruby.enet.dec.com!boyajian
ARPA:        boyajian%ruby.DEC@DECWRL.DEC.COM

Title
Review for Hamlet (1990)
     Zeffirelli's ROMEO AND JULIET was what sparked my interest in
Shakespeare over 20 years ago, so I was looking forward to this very
much.  I thought this film version was more than good but less than
great.
     (For the record, it might be worth noting that I've never seen a
production of HAMLET -- even the Olivier film version! -- though I have
read the play a couple of times and studied it as part of a college
course.)
     The heart of the production is in the performances, and here the
film gets generally high marks.  Gibson was, on the whole, adequate.  It
comes as no surprise that his better moments in the film were those
moments of action and passion (I mean strong emotion here, not
romancing), but I found his quiet moments too dry and uninvolving.  Most
of his soliloquies came off relatively poorly (the most notable
exception in my mind being the "conscience of the King" soliloquy).  The
worst aspect of his performance to my mind was the fact that he almost
always came off as second banana to me whenever he was playing against
someone else.  Even the lesser parts, such as Horatio and Laertes, seemed
better to me than Gibson's Hamlet.  But as I said, in the scenes that
required more "action" and emoting, he worked better, with his best
scene being the aftermath of the play-within-a- play.
     Glenn Close, however, was wonderful as Gertrude, playing her as a
sincere and passionate woman who was, unfortunately, totally without a
clue about anything (which is a nice switch from the usual
interpretation of Gertrude as being co-conspirator with Claudius).  I've
never been a particularly big Close fan, but this is the best of her
performances that I've seen.
     My favorite of the cast was Ian Holm as Polonius.  I'd never
pictured Polonius as the "comic relief" character of the play, but Holm
does a great job of playing it this way.  Paul Scofield has, lamentably,
too small a part (as the ghost of the dead king).  Helena Bonham-Carter
came alive as Ophelia descends into madness, but unfortunately played
the character as so thoroughly dull as dishwater earlier in the film
that I was almost (note: almost) unable to feel much for the character
later.  I think, though, that Zeffirelli purposely had her play it that
way to contrast with the later madness.
     Zeffirelli's direction was pretty straightforward for the most
part, so much so that when he occasionally threw in a "trick," it seemed
totally out of place.  The more obvious examples were the circular
tracking shot around Hamlet and Ophelia during their meeting in the hall
when he "dumps" her, and the exterior shots of her leading up to her
drowning made me feel like I was watching a Swedish "art film" (I was
almost expecting the camera to pull back and reveal Death standing there
in black cloak, right out of THE SEVENTH SEAL).  Still, he did a good
job of "opening up" the play from the confines of stage sets.
     I'm not a purist, so a lot of the cuts didn't bother me overmuch,
other than my occasionally reacting, "Waitaminute ... isn't there
supposed to be a scene with so-and-so here?"  And I was a bit thrown
when the entire first scene of the play was missing (as contrasted to
ROMEO AND JULIET, which starts out exactly as the play).  The only part
that really threw me was hearing Hamlet's "Get thee to a nunnery" speech
during the play-within-a-play scene.  I'd *thought* that it came in the
scene where he "dumps" Ophelia, and flipping through the play after I
got home, I saw that I was correct.  But the cut-and-paste aspects of
the screenplay will most likely affect only the purist.
     Overall, HAMLET is worth seeing, but don't expect to be overawed.
