Authors
Sean Siska
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Terminator, The (1984)
THE TERMINATOR (1984)
108 min.   R
Directed by James Cameron
Written by James Cameron and Gale Anne Hurd
With Acknowledgement to the Works of Harlan Ellison
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger  Michael Biehn  Linda Hamilton
James Cmaeron's breakthrough feature was the first of his films to 
showcase his obsession with technology and more specfically technology run
amok. For those of you who do not know the plot: in 2029 machines have
engineered a nuclear for the expressed purpose of wiping out the human
race. Human survivors are systematically hunted down and destroyed.
However, some humans are fighting back led by the heroic John Connor. To
stop Connor, the machines send a Terminator (Arnold Schwarzenegger) back
to 1984 to murder Connor's mother, Sara (Linda Hamilton), and thus prevent
Connor from ever being born. In response, the humans send a protector,
Kyle Reese, played by Michael Biehn.
Images of machines and of humans' reliance on machines
dominate the film. Even though the characters know that the benign
oil drillers of 1984 will become the ruthless hunter killers of 2029,
humans continue to use the machines. In the climax of STAR WARS, Luke
relies on the Force alone--his own spiritual power--to destroy the Death
Star. In THE TERMINATOR, however, Sara must use another machine--a giant
hydraulic press--to vanquish her enemy. Cameron seems to be implying that
this reliance on technology is inescapable--and he's not happy about it.
Unabated technological growth brings about THE TERMINATOR's other
obsession: the apocalypse. We have plenty of imagery regarding armageddon:
thousands of human skulls line the streets of future LA. Children watch
the flames in a burning television. When the Terminator arrives in 1984 an
almost Biblical lightning storm precedes him. 
Even though the "future is not set," there is no doubt about where
the world is headed at the end of the movie: the machines will rise and
the humans will have to struggle for their very existence. All Sara can do
is await it. (Cameron doesn't wimp out like he does in TERMINATOR 2)
The end of the world is the human race's own fault, too. After all
it is the humans that created in the evil machines in the first place.
Back in 1984, when the Cold War was still in full effect, the film must
have been seen as a very apt metaphor for nuclear war (another obsession
of Cameron's). 
These days, one can read a criticism of machine-like behavior in
humans. True, humanizing touches are put into Paul Winfield's and Lance
Henriksen's detective characters, but the Terminator is also able to move
through the city undetected. Cameron also draw parallels between the
mechanical efficiency between the Terminator and Reese when they first
arrive in 1984 LA.
From a technical standpoint THE TERMINATOR is very well done.
Arnold Schwarzenegger is a perfect antagonist--unstoppable, merciless,
obdurate. We are not meant to empathize with this ultimate killing machine
as we are in some of Schwarzenegger's later works (eg, COMMANDO), but fear
him.
Cameron and Hurd's script basically depicts a one hour and
forty-five minute chase, taking a few moments here and there to explain
time travel and develop the romantic subplot. While we do see the
hackneyed dialogue Cameron is now so well known for, there is also
considerable suspense especially for the first time viewer who may
be unsure of Kyle Reese's intentions.
Cameron directs the film at a rapid, kinetic pace. Either the
camera is moving or something within the frame is moving--usually
both occurs. The violence is not particularly graphic (TEMPLE OF DOOM's
heart-pull scene outgrosses THE TERMINATOR's), but it is brutally staged
making it that much more effective.
For a low budget film, THE TERMINATOR's special effects and art
direction (especially in 2029 LA) are remarkably well done. Special
mention should be made of the stop motion effects work at the end of the
film depicting the Terminator Endoskeleton. It is some of the best stop
motion I have ever seen.
One thing that doesn't hold up after all the years, however, is
Linda Hamilton's hairdo.

Title
Review for Urban Legend (1998)
        I'm not sure if Silvio Horta wrote URBAN LEGEND before or after
the success of SCREAM, but I'm guessing after just because it seems he
may not have had time to write a second draft. Seriously, this idea--a
psycho bumping off people in the style of urban legends--is a great one
and I wish it could have been pulled off. The first sign of trouble comes
with the painfully insipid dialogue. An example: "That [car crash] must've
been awful...for everyone involved." You can tell that the writer intended
that something a little more airy was supposed to have been said,  just no
one figured out what.
I know in slasher movies there isn't supposed to be a lot of great
characterization and I myself don't mind cardboard cutouts, but please
don't let the cutouts be so damn bland. One reason movies like SCREAM,
STAR WARS and DIVA have become so treasured is because they feature
charismatic actors playing interesting characters. Aside from Jared Leto
and Joshua Jackson (who aren't on the screen long enough) no one in URBAN
LEGEND makes the grade. Alicia Witt shows none of the acerbity or wit she
displayed on CYBILL, Rebecca Gayheart actually looks unattractive (not to
mention as dumb as a post through 3/4 of the film) and Robert Englund just
cruises on auto pilot.
Good thing Brad Dourif is here, but wait...he's only in the movie
for five minutes _and_ he's just redoing his good-natured
stuttering character from ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST. Which brings me
to another aspect of URBAN LEGEND: it's unoriginality. The film most
blatantly ripped off is SCREAM (another reason that makes me think Silvio
Horta wrote this after Craven's and Williamson's great success). URBAN
LEGEND tries to deconstruct modern-day folklore much the same way SCREAM
deconstructed slasher films, but it doesn't quite succeed. It's best
stab at self-reflexivity is poking fun at "that girl in the Noxzeema ad"
(ie, Rebecca Gayheart) We also have another
killer-taunting-his-victim-on-the-phone routine in URBAN LEGEND and quick,
what movie is this exchange of dialogue from:
Villain: Why? WHY?!?
Congratulations to those of you who answered SCREAM and/or URBAN LEGEND.
Like I said, this movie could've been great. If only Silvio had
worked or been allowed to work a little longer on the script. Still,at
least URBAN LEGEND had some pretty cool death scenes and a somewhat
realized whodunit angle which makes this slasher is waaaayyyyyy better than 
I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER.
