Authors
George V. Reilly
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Junior (1994)
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Danny De Vito, Emma Thompson,
         Frank Langella, and Pamela Reed.  Directed by Ivan Reitman.
     Perfunctory is the word that sums up JUNIOR for me.  It's a
by-the-numbers exercise in movie-making, and never inspires much more
than an occasional chuckle.
     It must have been easy to position this as a high-concept movie:
Schwarzenegger Gets Pregnant.  The concept is fine as far as it goes,
but it doesn't go very far.  With a more imaginative and subtler script
it might have been quite a good film.  But JUNIOR shows little
imagination: stock characters doing stereotypical things in a
role-reversal.
     Schwarzenegger is a dour Austrian fertility researcher.  De Vito
is his partner, playing yet another character who's sneaky and greedy;
this time he's a good guy.  When their experimental fertility drug is
axed by the FDA, they decide in desperation to conduct their first
human trial on a man: Schwarzenegger.  The trial is supposed to run for
only three months, but Schwarzenegger, by now volatile with
hormone-induced mood swings, decides to carry the baby to
term---without telling De Vito.
     De Vito eventually realizes what has happened, of course.  In
time, so too do Frank Langella, the villain who first shut down their
project, Emma Thompson, the clumsy researcher who is falling in love
with Schwarzenegger, and Pamela Reed, De Vito's pregnant ex-wife.
     Of the cast, only Thompson manages to rise much beyond the
limitations of the material, being both very funny and endearing as the
perennially cack-handed love interest.

Title
Review for Delicatessen (1991)
     DELICATESSEN is a film directed by Jean-Pierre Jeunet and Marc Caro
and written by Jeunet, Caro, and Gilles Adrien.  It stars Dominic Pinon,
Marie-Laure Dougnac, and Jean-Claude Dreyfus.  French with subtitles.
     DELICATESSEN calls to mind all sorts of adjectives: surreal,
bizarre, grotesque, hilarious.  It has been likened to Terry Gilliam's
BRAZIL.  To me it's more like Gormenghast---a huge, rambling house, set
in mysterious isolation, peopled with the oddest characters.
     In the post-apocalyptic world of DELICATESSEN, food is at a
premium: fresh meat is impossible to get.  Clapet (Dreyfus) the butcher
has hit upon the answer.  He lures unsuspecting young men to the house
which he runs, fattens them up a little, then kills them, and sells the
meat to his tenants.
     Such an innocent is Louison (Pinon), a clown who lost his job when
his partner, Mr.  Livingstone the chimp, was killed and eaten when he
strayed.  Louison is taken on as a repair man in exchange for free food
and board.  Soon he meets and enchants Julie (Dougnac), Clapet's timid
short-sighted daughter.
     Julie falls in love with Louison and decides to save him.  She gets
in touch with the Troglodytes, who are literally the Underground
Resistance.  They are unwilling to help her, fearing a trap, but she
convinces them with the intelligence that her father's cellar is filled
with food.
     The Troglodytes, who are howlingly inept, mount their combined
attack and rescue on the next night, the same night that the butcher has
decided to kill the unwitting Louison.  The events of this night take up
the latter half of the film.
     The characters are delightful.  Louison, the circus clown, with his
funny-ugly face is gravely hilarious.  Julie, is shy and innocent but
determined to save her love.  Clapet is both malevolent and insinuating.
Much of the first half of the film is devoted to a series of vignettes
about the minor characters.  Aurore Inteligator who hears voices and
attempts suicide with a succession of ever more elaborate Rube
Goldberg--like devices.  The two men making a collection of toys that
moo when they are turned over.  The old man in the half-flooded basement
surrounded by snails and frogs which he eats.  The two boys who steal
and sabotage their neighbours' property in ingenious manner.  The
Troglodytes, like taller Time Bandits.  The Postman, Clapet's crony and
Julie's would-be lover, who acts like Dirty Harry and who always get the
mail through.
     Perhaps the funniest scene is when the butcher is making love to
his mistress.  We never see them directly, just the underside of the
bouncing bed and the squeaking springs.  The sound of the springs is
conducted all over the house by the pipes and the airvents to Julie
playing her cello, to a woman beating a carpet, to Louison painting the
ceiling with a roller while attached to the wall with his braces
bouncing back and forth, and to a metronome.  As the butcher increases
his speed, the springs squeak faster and faster, louder and louder,
pulsing through the house, and we cut more and more quickly from the
springs to the cello to the carpet beating to the rebounding painter to
the metronome and back to the springs, until finally we have reached a
throbbing intensity which is released---at last---when the butcher
climaxes.  The audience laughed themselves silly as this happened.
     Visually, DELICATESSEN is interesting too.  The house is dark and
gloomy, suggestive of what goes on there.  Only Julie's room is bright,
an oasis amidst the evil.  The characters are dressed in 1940s styles
and would not have looked out of place in France under the Nazis.
     I greatly enjoyed DELICATESSEN and I recommend it.
________________
George V. Reilly
GeorgR@microsoft.com  (formerly gvr@cs.brown.edu)

Title
Review for All the Vermeers in New York (1990)
     ALL THE VERMEERS IN NEW YORK is a film written, directed, edited,
and photographed by Jon Jost.  It stars Stephen Lack and Emmanuelle
Chaulet.
     I hated VERMEERS.  I found it to be self-indulgent, vacuous,
irritating, boring, and pretentious.  About a quarter of the audience
disliked it enough to walk out before the end.
     The plot, if the mishmash of disjointed scenes can be thus
dignified, concerns a Wall Street stockbroker, Mark (played by Lack),
who is smitten by a young French actress, Anna (played by Chaulet), whom
he encounters at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.  She is staring
intently at some paintings by Vermeer, and he is taken by her likeness
to one of the portraits.
     The film is full of pointless scenes.  A long scene at the
beginning of the film takes place in a gallery: an artist is arguing
with the owner, desperately, angrily trying to get her to advance him a
loan, while elsewhere in the gallery, a woman is looking intently at the
large canvasses on display.  None of the characters ever appear again in
the film, save the receptionist who only has a minor part in the scene,
nor do the events there have any bearing on what happens subsequently.
Then there's the whirlwind tour of the columns and the opera singer
roommate whose only role on the couple of occasions that she appears is
to irritate her other roommates (and the audience) by practicing her
voice exercises.
     I disliked the photography: the subjects were often out of focus;
Jost likes tight, tight closeups of his subjects' heads; he pans across
various scenes in a jittery, almost stroboscopic fashion; and in one
irrelevant scene in a hallway full of tall columns, he moves the camera
through the columns in a random fashion, stopping here, panning there,
turning suddenly to the left or the right, so that by the end of the
scene I felt slightly motion-sick.
     The characters are remote and unappealing.  Anna is distant and
aloof; the closest she comes to showing some warmth or interest in the
other characters is her occasional quirky smile.  Mark snaps his way
through work, snarling down the phone, hectoring his colleagues.
Outside of work, he becomes somewhat more likable, if hardly appealing.
     This film won the L. A. Film Critics Award for Best Independent
Film.  I hate to think what the competition must have been like.


Title
Review for Batman Returns (1992)
     BATMAN RETURNS is a film directed by Tim Burton from a screenplay
by Daniel Waters.  It stars Michael Keaton, Michelle Pfeiffer, Danny
DeVito, and Christopher Walken.  Rated PG-13 for violence and sexual
innuendo.
     BATMAN RETURNS is the latest sequel to hit the big screen this
summer.  A followup to 1989's hit BATMAN, it again stars Michael Keaton
in the title role.
     The film opens slowly, explaining the origins of the Penguin (Danny
DeVito, unrecognizable under heavy makeup), a horribly deformed little
monster cast adrift by his parents into the sewers who ends up living in
the penguin enclosure at the Gotham City Zoo, and of Catwoman (Michelle
Pfeiffer), a harassed, timid secretary named Selina Kyle who survives a
near-fatal fall after being pushed from a high window by her boss
because she knows too much.  Selina, roused by cats, transforms herself
into the sexy, feline Catwoman.  Meanwhile, her boss, evil megalomaniac
megatycoon Max Shreck (Christopher Walken), has joined forces with the
Penguin to take over Gotham City by ousting the mayor and electing
Oswald Cobblepot (the Penguin's real name) in his place.
     Batman (Michael Keaton) and his alter ego, multimillionaire Bruce
Wayne, has several run-ins with the Penguin and Shreck, and feels
compelled to stop them.  Catwoman, after being beaten by Batman, allies
herself with the Penguin to destroy Batman.  They attempt to frame him,
by making him appear to be one of them.  In a subplot, Selina Kyle and
Bruce Wayne have become attracted to each other.  And so it proceeds, up
to the inevitable orgiastic climax of violence and destruction.
     This is a worthy successor to BATMAN.  The sets recapture the feel
of the first film, despite the suicide last year of the original
designer, Anton Furst.  Gotham City is, well, Gothic; a sombre 1940s
view of the city of the future.  The special effects, especially those
involving the Batmobile and the Batplane, are spectacular.  There is
violence aplenty, much of it gratuitous; if that's your thing, you
should be satisfied.
     The dual character of Batman/Bruce Wayne has been fleshed out and
become more interesting: Wayne is troubled by his bizarre hidden
identity and his compulsion to hide behind Batman's mask in order to
violently effect change.   Unfortunately, as with the Joker in BATMAN,
he is overshadowed by the characters of the Penguin and Catwoman.
     Michelle Pfeiffer, as Catwoman, is delightful, particularly in her
early scenes after becoming Catwoman, when she gambols and frolics like
a kitten.  Throughout the film, she moves with feline grace, she slinks
then attacks savagely; reclining langourously, she stretches sensuously.
As Selina Kyle, she is mostly scattered and harebrained, soft and
vulnerable.
     Danny DeVito is less satisfying as the Penguin; he is mad, savage,
brutal, with only the thinnest veneer of civilization.  He is humourless
and rarely funny, lacking the Joker's demented capacity for japes.
     Christopher Walken's character resembles that of the villain he
played in the Bond movie, A VIEW TO A KILL: depraved and suave.
     My main problem with the movie is the number of plotholes.  There
is a distressing number of them, some of them gaping wide, but I won't
go into them to avoid spoilers.
     In summary, I recommend it.  I'm sure it's going to be a big hit,
much to the relief of the merchandisers.


Title
Review for Unforgiven (1992)
     UNFORGIVEN is a film directed and produced by Clint Eastwood, from
a script by David Webb Peoples.  It stars Clint Eastwood, Gene Hackman,
Morgan Freeman, Richard Harris, Jaimz Woolvett, Saul Rubinek, Frances
Fisher, and Anna Thompson.  Rated R for violence.
     I went to see UNFORGIVEN with fairly high expectations, having
heard that it was Eastwood's best picture--as director or star--in
years.  I wasn't disappointed.
     There are no white hats and black hats in this Western; all of the
characters wear grey hats, though some hats are darker than others.  No
character is without flaws.  Revenge begets revenge, and brings out the
worst in everyone.
     Eastwood is Will Munny, a former gunslinger and drunkard, saved
eleven years before by the love of a good woman.  Freeman plays his old
partner, Ned Logan, another killer-turned-farmer.  Hackman is Little
Bill Daggett, a brutally sadistic sheriff, none too fastidious about how
he enforces law and order in his town.  Harris plays English Bob,
another old killer, with an ego so large that he travels with his own
biographer in tow.  Woolvett is the Schofield Kid, a callow,
bloodthirsty, myopic, would-be bounty hunter, who lures Will and Ned
back to being killers.  Rubinek is Beauchamp, the fickle biographer who
transfers his allegiance from the Duck, er, Duke of Death to Little Bill
after the sheriff beats English Bob to a pulp and discloses his feet of
clay.  Thompson plays Delilah, the scarred young prostitute whose
mutilation serves as the starting point for the story.  Fisher is Alice,
the tough senior prostitute who puts up a bounty for the lives of the
two cowboys who cut up Delilah.
     For the first hour, the film is somber in tone, leavened with
occasional humour: Munny fumbling in the mud of the pigsty, the old
killer who can't even get on a horse or shoot straight anymore, and the
young killer who can't see more than a few feet.  Thereafter UNFORGIVEN
becomes much darker, indeed unrelentingly grim, as death follows upon
death.  If there's any message to be drawn from all of this killing,
it's that violence solves nothing; quite the contrast to most of
Eastwood's earlier films.
     Those who go to UNFORGIVEN in the expectation of seeing a
Dirty-Harry-kicks-ass-in-the-West movie will be disappointed.  There is
violence aplenty, but it is not glorified.  When Little Bill starts
beating up English Bob or Will Munny, they go down and they stay down,
rolling in agony, taking days to recover.  When people get shot, they
are hurt, and sometimes they die, often with a great deal of noise.
     The rest of us will take pleasure in seeing a dark, moral tale, a
story of the West as it probably was instead of the simplistic good
guys/bad guys tales that Hollywood used to so revel in.
     Eastwood excels, both as star and director.  His character is old
and often pathetic, a washed-up has-been, and quite unglamourous.  He
progresses from being a somewhat befuddled pigfarmer who has forgotten
all of his old killing skills to being a lethal instrument of vengeance
after the sheriff kills his longtime partner, all the while staying
wholly believable.  As a director, he keeps the film focused.  There are
no wasted scenes and he coaxes fine performances from the rest of the
cast.
     Hackman too gives a first-class performance.  His competent, brutal
sheriff commands attention.  Little Bill runs the town of Big Whiskey
and has no compunctions about discouraging any killers who hope to
collect the bounty on the cowboys who cut up the prostitute.
     Freeman and Harris are the other two stars of the film who receive
top billing, but neither is on screen long enough for my liking.
Indeed, English Bob is run out of town before Will, Ned, and the Kid
ever get there and is seen no more.  While they are present however,
they also give of their best.
     Woolvett, a newcomer, has a big role as the young would-be killer
who discovers too late that he has no stomach for killing, and he makes
a good start.  Fisher plays the tough, loyal prostitute to perfection,
and Rubinek and Thompson are good in their supporting roles.
     The photography is worthy of note, particularly that of the
countryside and the high country.  The film was shot in Alberta, though
the story takes place in Wyoming and Kansas.

Title
Review for Playboys, The (1992)
     THE PLAYBOYS is a film directed by Gillies MacKinnon and written by
Shane Connaughton.  It stars Robin Wright, Aidan Quinn, and Albert
Finney.
     Tara Maguire (Robin Wright) is a young unwed mother living in a
small village in Ireland in 1957.  Her state is the cause of much
scandal---the parish priest demands from the pulpit that she reveal the
name of the father---though she is being courted assiduously by the
local police sergeant and others.  Tara is defiant and independent, and
she withstands local opinion hardily.  She wants no man's help in
bringing up her child and supports herself by working as a seamstress
with her sister and occasionally smuggling goods across the nearby
border with Northern Ireland.
     Sgt. Brendan Heggarty (Albert Finney) is the unnamed father of the
child.  The sergeant is a middle-aged recovering alcoholic who has been
posted to this small village as a punishment for his former
transgressions.  Dark, brooding, and jealous, he repels Tara more than
he attracts her.  He is determined that if he can't have her, no one
else will either.  
     Matters continue in this uneasy fashion until the arrival of the
playboys, a troupe of itinerant actors.  The last of a waning tradition,
now made obsolescent by the arrival of television, the playboys wander
from village to village, setting up their tent on the green, where they
treat the villagers to their cheesy renditions of OTHELLO, GONE WITH THE
WIND, and music-hall songs for a few days before moving on.
     Tom (Aidan Quinn) is the advance man for the playboys and also
their young male lead.  Cocksure and handsome, he attracts women easily,
so he takes it as a challenge when he is rebuffed by Tara.
     Predictably, Tom and Tara start to fall in love after a while.
Sgt. Heggarty, equally predictably, does everything that he can to win
Tara for himself.  The centre of the plot revolves around the three, Tom
and Tara's burgeoning love and Heggarty's ever more determined efforts
to destroy Tom, including framing Tom for arson and (wrongly)
imprisoning him for being an IRA bomber.  
     Robin Wright gives a surprisingly good performance as Tara.  Wright
is best known for playing the title role in "The Princess Bride", but
here she proves that she has some talent as well as a pretty face.
     Aidan Quinn is also good as a likable rogue.  His role is
undemanding for the most part, but he plays it well.
     Albert Finney gives the most interesting performance as the proud,
jealous, driven lover.  He is quite believable as a man in pain,
tortured by his inner demons and his unachievable love.
     Milo O'Shea, as the vain, aging actor-manager of the playboys, is
mostly there for comic relief.  Niamh Cusack, as Tara's sister Bridget,
also gives a good performance.
     Many films set in Ireland have an unfortunate tendency to be
patronising and pander to stereotypes---leprechauns, drunken brawls in
the streets, smiling rogues, and so on.  THE PLAYBOYS more or less
succeeds in avoiding these temptations.  The three leads also succeed in
adopting fairly convincing Irish accents.

Title
Review for Highway 61 (1991)
     HIGHWAY 61 is a film directed by Bruce McDonald from a story by Don
McKellar.  It stars Don McKellar, Valerie Bulhagiar, Earl Pastko, and
Peter Breck.  Canadian.  Rated R: restricted due to language and nudity.
     HIGHWAY 61 is, as the title suggests, a road movie, the tale of a
young couple driving from a small town in Ontario down the length of
Highway 61 to New Orleans, 1500 miles to the south.   With a coffin on
the roof.
     Pokey Jones, played by McKellar, is the town barber, one of the few
young men left in a small, dying town.  Orphaned at the age of nine, he
has grown up alone, with his father's 1963 Ford Galaxie as a surrogate
parent of sorts.  Pokey is a naif and a would-be musician who wants to
go to the America of his dreams and become a famous trumpeter.
     The catalyst comes when he finds a frozen corpse in his backyard.
The local newspaper, desperate for news, proclaims him a hero for trying
to revive the corpse and catches the attention of a fugitive roadie.  A
quick-witted opportunist, Jackie Bangs (played by Bulhagiar) claims the
corpse as her brother and seizes a few minutes alone in the funeral
parlor to stuff the corpse full of drugs.
     By force of will, she convinces Pokey to drive her and her
brother's corpse to New Orleans for the funeral.  With the coffin
strapped to the roof, they head south, talking their way past the US
Customs, but not without some difficulty.
     Although they don't realize it at first, they are being pursued by
Mr. Skin (Pastko), who also claims to be Satan.  Satan has a contract
signed in blood by Jackie's "brother" in which he was sold the young
man's soul upon his death.  Satan wants to collect and follows them,
buying up a few more souls along the way.  Most of them come cheap: a
bottle of bourbon, $20, or a promise of fame and beauty.  He's also
uncannily lucky at bingo.
     Pokey's initial high spirits are reinforced by the pilgrimages he
makes along the way---Bob Dylan's childhood home, St. Louis,
Memphis---but are then dampened as he comes to realize Jackie's true
character.  He is especially shocked when Jackie steals the lifesavings
of the Watsons, three untalented little girls and their showbiz father
who travel around the country, "bringing pop to the people."
     The film is quirky and often funny, treating its characters in a
good-natured fashion.  Both McKellar and Bulhagiar give strong
performances, as do Pastko and Breck (as Watson).  The main problem is
that the film is too long to sustain itself and begins to plod: the
scene with the drugged-out rock stars for whom Jackie was once a roadie
could have been cut with little loss.
     If you like offbeat films, you'll probably like HIGHWAY 61.
     (Of note: I have been told that the jingoistic US Customs guard is
played by Jello Biafra of the Dead Kennedys, who is apparently known in
real life for his anti-American views.)


Title
Review for Da hong deng long gao gao gua (1991)
     RAISE THE RED LANTERN is a film directed by Zhang Yimou.  It stars
Gong Li and was nominated for this year's Best Foreign Film Oscar.
     Zhang Yimou is probably best known in the West for his previous
film, JU DOU, which also starred Gong Li as a young woman married to a
rich older man.  There the similarities end.
     In this film set in 1920's China, Gong Li plays Songlian, a young
woman who has been forced to leave the university after the death of her
father and who must find a husband.  She becomes the Fourth Mistress of
Master Chen.  The household is divided into several wings and each of
the Mistresses holds court in her own wing.  Each night, the Master has
the concubines stand in a common courtyard where he chooses the one with
whom he will sleep that night by placing a red lantern in front of her.
As red lanterns are raised all around her house so that mistress goes
into the ascendant.
     The Mistresses are engaged in a never-ending power struggle.  First
Mistress, who has a grown son, is not an active participant: she is
accorded the respect due to her seniority.  The Second Mistress, who has
only a 'worthless' daughter, is sweet and charming.  The Third Mistress,
with a son the same age as his half-sister, is catty and jealous of
Songlian.   Meishan is an ex-opera singer and the Master's former
favourite, and doesn't take kindly to the usurper.  She pretends to be
ill on Songlian's wedding night, so that the Master will come to her
bed.
     Gradually, though, Songlian comes to realize that her real enemy is
the Second Mistress who "has the face of a Buddha, but the heart of a
scorpion."  By now determined to win power over her "sisters", Songlian
pretends to be pregnant.  Eventually, she is found out---betrayed by her
maid upon whom she wreaks vengeance.  The stakes are raised ever higher
and tragedy ensues.
     RED LANTERN has been banned in China as being ideologically
incorrect, presumably because it can be viewed as an allegory about
China.  The household is bound by a unyielding set of rules and
strictures, disobeyed only by the foolhardy.  One of the Mistresses is
discovered in adultery and taken away; another happens upon a group of
the servants taking the adulteress to her death.  When she discovers the
body, she screams "Murderers!", but the Master blandly denies the
accusation, tells her that she is mad and that she saw nothing, just as
the Beijing government denies Tiannamen Square.
     Like JU DOU, RED LANTERN is beautiful.  In particular, Zhang Yimou
makes very effective use of sunlight.  The pace of the film is slow and
assured, like a formal dance, each step proceeding inexorably from what
has gone before.
     Gong Li is excellent as the Fourth Mistress, as are the actresses
who play Second and Third Mistresses.

Title
Review for Wind (1992)
     WIND is a film directed by Carroll Ballard from a script by Rudy
Wurlitzer and Mac Gudgeon taken from a story by Jeff Benjamin and Roger
Vaughan & Kimball Livingston.  It stars Matthew Modine, Jennifer Grey,
Stellan Skarsgard, Rebecca Miller, with Cliff Robertson and Jack
Thompson.
     WIND is a lot of spectacular footage of sailing interspersed with a
lacklustre comeback story.  The story is loosely inspired by Dennis
Connor losing and subsequently regaining the America's Cup in the 80s.
(Every four years, a collection of international teams battle it out for
the Cup in 12-metre sailboats.  Apart from the Australian victory a few
years ago, the Cup has been held since the start over a century ago by
America.)
     Modine is a hotshot sailor who gets picked for the America's Cup
team by wealthy skipper Robertson.  As the tactician, he makes a
miscalculation in the final race, losing the cup to the Australian boat
(which is skippered by Thompson).   Months later, he rejoins his
aeronautical engineer girlfriend Grey (who had been forced off the Cup
team by sexism) in the desert where she is building gliders with oddball
European designer Skarsgard.  Eventually, they decide to build a boat to
win back the America's Cup from the Australians, and Robertson's flaky
daughter Miller forms a syndicate to fund the effort.  The Geronimo,
skippered by Modine, wins through to the finals against their old
rivals, the Australians, and the film ends with the final race between
them.
     The boats are the real stars of WIND.  Sleek and elegant, they cut
through the waves, tacking and overtaking each other heroically.  The
photography of the sailing scenes is marvelous and the races are
compelling.  This should be seen in a cinema; a television screen simply
can't do the photography justice.
     The sailing is noteworthy (I don't know anything about sailing but
I was impressed) but the plot leaves much to be desired.   Most of the
overlong middle portion of the film could have been chopped with no
loss: presumably it was cheaper and easier to film in the desert.
Modine and Grey and the others turn in reasonable performances, but the
script doesn't allow them to become interesting, engaging characters.
(The writers apparently think that making the supporting characters be
eccentric will make them interesting.)
