Authors
Sharon Connolly
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Patch Adams (1998)
Cast:  Robin Williams, Monica Potter, Bob Gunton, Daniel London, Philip
Seymour Hoffman, Josef Sommer and Peter Coyote Directed by Tom Shadyac
Written by Steve Oedekerk Released by Universal Pictures
This film is based on real-life doctor Patch Adams of Virginia who tried to
reinvent the medical practice through humor and a free clinic.        Patch has
been described as an iconoclast, a pattern-breaker and professional clown,
and who could play Patch any better than Robin Williams, who's proven to the
world over and over again that he's a comedic genius! Williams also has that
unique ability to make you laugh and cry almost within the same scene.
With a Christmas premiere, the timing is perfect because it's a "feel-good"
film for the holidays.        Now I ask you - what's wrong with that?  Its clever
script brings rich humor poking fun at the medical establishment and the myth
of doctors as godlike creatures. And that's something nearly every one of us
can relate to.        Described as a drama/comedy, the script focuses on five years
of the doctor's life. As an amateur film critic, I have to declare "Patch
Adams" a definite winner DESPITE the influx of complaints from national
critics who have referred to it as syrupy, beyond belief and toying with the
emotions with a heavy hand, even going so far as to say that the soundtrack
was also manipulative.        Well, name one that isn't.  At the sneak preview I
attended, the audience responded with a round of applause, highly unusual. I
think moviegoers have had their share this year of action and special-effects
films, which demand total suspension of disbelief for a solid two hours! 
Therefore, "Patch Adams" has a refreshing appeal and can be embraced as a
story of joy and hope in the face of illness and death, which we must all
eventually succumb to.
Bob Gunton plays his villainous role with fervor as Dean Walcott (remember
him as the prison warden in "Shawshank Redemption"?) while Monica Potter
delightfully plays Patch's love interest despite her Julia Roberts'
look-alike image.  Kudos also goes to Daniel London as Patch's geeky pal as
well as to Philip Seymour Hoffman as the earnest but pompous and humorless
roommate. (A bit like some of these film critics, eh?)        And, yes, the
cantankerous, dying patient in Room 305 is indeed Peter Coyote, whose awesome
voice can still be easily recognized.
As a final note, this film has received two Golden Globe nominations, one for
Best Picture in the musical/comedy category and one for Williams as Best
Actor. Guess there must be plenty of other folks out there who agree with me.
-----------== Posted via Deja News, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://www.dejanews.com/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own    

Title
Review for Bridges of Madison County, The (1995)
     Not having read the book, I cannot comment on its transfer to the
big screen, but THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY is certainly a film worth
seeing, if not just for Meryl Streep's mesmerizing performance alone.
True, the film has its flaws like poor character development of Robert
Kincaid but the essential theme is relative to most anyone especially
those of us who have taken marital vows.  Yes, it's possible to fall in
love again, feel young again and experience that sexual huner and
yearning no matter how old we are.
     Someone mentioned having a problem believing this frumpy housewife
could begin lusting after this world-traveled photographer.  Well, I'm
51 years old and I'm sure I'm regarded as a frumpy housewife and yet,
what I felt at 20 has not disappeared.  Why do some people think only
the young and beautiful have cornered this market on sex?  We saw this
happen to another ordinary English housewife in BRIEF ENCOUNTER.  In
fact, the more ordinary the woman, the more meaningful the story.
     I will admit it's much more a woman's film.  The emotional content
is highly volatile and will perhaps provoke some sentimental and sad
memories as well as some happy ones.  How many of us go through life
feeling we could have had more?  There are always an infinite number of
"if only's" in our lives.
     Meryl Streep certainly became Francesca to her audience over the
135 minutes we watched her.  Her accent was superb - as usual.
(Remember OUT OF AFRICA?)  Even her physical appearance seemed
changed.  Yes, Meryl carried the film.  She was well directed by Clint
but I agree with many others that he didn't fit the role.  He could
have more easily played the quiet and laid back husband.  Don't we know
Clint as a man of few words?  I envisioned someone with a really sexy
voice and it was ironic that someone mentioned Sam Elliot though I
prefer the likes of Peter Coyote.  Now there's a man you could think
about bathing with by candlelight!!
     Most men will probably find this film very dull, much too long and
not too relevant.  Women, however, love romanticism and never seem to
get enough and never lose their yearning for it no matter how realized
it is in their own lives.  If you feel unfulfilled, you'll leave the
theater feeling a little better in the way you related to Francesca or
if you're like me and  was fortunate in finding a "soulmate" in a
husband, then you'll feel really blessed.  (But I'm still going to
dream and yearn)
