Authors
Chris Hilkene
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Die Hard: With a Vengeance (1995)
     It's no wonder that Hollywood wanted to cash in on the success of
the "Die Hard" legacy, but I would have thought that they could have
produced something much better than DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE.  I got
the same feeling watching this film as I did watching THE
SPECIALIST.  Actually, it wasn't a feeling, I just plain fell asleep
in both films.
     After waking up I tried to piece together why this film is so
bad.  Poor editing is one reason I came up with.  Even though there is
lots of action and special effects the editing makes the film drag.
Another problem is that the film is so cliche that it verges on
banality.  But perhaps the biggest flaw of the film is the
re-orientation of the John Maclaine character.  In the previous films
Maclaine was the wrong guy, in the wrong place, at the wrong time, who
was forced to take action because his wife was in danger.  It was the
chance element and his ablility to persevere even though he was
overwhelmed by his situation, and in doubt about his ability and
motives that made the Maclaine character captivating.  In the new film,
Maclaine is the super human cop (despite efforts to portray him as
burned out).  The bad guy specifically makes Maclaine a target because
of his prowess.  This is where the movie falls apart.  The film makers,
and Bruce Willis, do not develop a mechanism by which to negotiate the
two radically different personalities.
     The chance element enters into the story via Samuel Jackson.  For
all intents and purposes he is the Maclaine of the earlier "Die Hard"
films.  He is thrust into the plot by unfortunate circumstance.
However, his character's ability to immediately fit into the role is
too contrived.  Jackson's acting in the film is commendable, but even
this doesn't help to make the character believable.
     DIE HARD 3 is a pathetic offering that detracts from, rather than
adds to, the "Die Hard" saga.
