Authors
Ed Nilges
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Tucker: The Man and His Dream (1988)
     This movie dealt with a desperately sad subject in a way that avoided
moral complexities and so much of the sadness.  Coppola's formula seems to have
started in THE GODFATHER.  This is to present characters with moral ambiguity...
mobsters and, in the case of Tucker, entrepreneurs, as completely good people.
Note that I don't think that Don Corleone, or Preston Tucker, were evil people.
I think, however, that Coppola ignores the evil things they may have (almost
unavoidably) done as members of out-groups in his anxiety to portray them as
heroes.
     Tucker was winging it in asking a postwar government (still under almost
Socialistic controls) for a factory to produce his car.  Many things could have
gone wrong; for example, the labor issue is ignored.  Tucker may not have been
able to get enough workers in what was expected to be a labor glut as the vets
returned from the war, but what turned out to be a shortage.  Tucker was taking
a calculated risk.  This could have been interpreted as dishonesty.
     By the end of the Second World War, you needed major bucks to produce
cars.  The era of producing cars in garages had ended.  The government's case
could have rested on the charge that Tucker was dishonest, not as an out and
out con man, but as someone who fooled himself in thinking that a startup would
work in the postwar economy.  The possible validity of such a charge is not
addressed in the movie, for it would confuse audiences.  Tucker is not shown
either agonizing, Hamlet-like, over this possibility, or deliberately ignoring
reality.
     But it is manipulative to make a movie of an American innocent who is
destroyed by those big bad car companies.  It is manipulative because Coppola
is himself part of another big bad system for producing products for mass
consumption...Hollywood.  Interestingly, Coppola likes to think of himself as a
Tucker, with a loyal staff of retainers (each of whom knows his or her role and
never steps outside of it) dedicated to *his* goals...a few years ago, Esquire
published a rather dictatorial memo, from Coppola, in which he stated that the
whole purpose of his studio was to support *him*.  However, his operations
dovetail quite nicely, I'm sure, with the Hollywood system, for otherwise his
films would not be distributed.  In short, Coppola's Zoetrope is really a part
of the system Coppola criticizes.
     There is something unavoidable about this, for it is impossible to make
movies (or cars) without a certain highly-organized and, let's admit it,
dictatorial system.  But that does not reduce the manipulativeness of the
process in the slightest.  When Francis makes a movie and we pay money to see
it, and he presents us with gosh all fish-hooks American innocence, it is, I
believe, incumbent on us to maintain a certain ironic distance.  Tucker was
like any man, a compound of good and evil...and like any entrepreneur perhaps a
bit of an operator.  I don't know.  I do know that he seems, in the movie
itself, to have bit off more than he could chew and to have wasted a lot of
people's valuable time.
     Actually, gosh-all-fish-hooks American innocence is getting to be just a
bit of a geopolitical problem.  We ignore the Palestinians for lo these many
years, we overthrow democracy hither and yon, then we get all flustered when
people hit back and hit back hard.  Boyish grins (a la Reagan and Tucker)
eventually wear thin.  I'm reading a biography of Margaret Thatcher and
(although I am no fan of either), I am saddened by the contrast between Ron and
The Thatch.  Ron dithered in Beirut, and lost 260 Marines; Thatcher made it
crystal clear what the result of Argentine conduct would be in the Falklands
nonsense, and backed up her words with deeds.  She lost only 100 more British
soldiers over a much longer period, and each man who fought knew what the hell
was going on.  The difference is the difference between childhood and
adulthood.
     I am especially saddened that many would-be computer entrepreneurs will
see TUCKER, for the computer industry is currently in somewhat the same phase
of consolidation as was underwent by the auto industry.  Software is reaching a
state of complexity where it may be impossible to go back to the garage to
produce good systems (which is not to say that good systems will be produced by
big companies).  I hope that I am wrong; I hope that the computer industry will
not be dominated by a big three.
     Good cars, cars with seat belts, engines in the back, disk brakes, were
eventually produced, not by entrepreneurs in garages, but by Japanese and
Germans in labor unions in great big factories.  Actually, this is finally
starting to happen in the USA.  In 1981, Ford and the AFL/CIO agreed that
Quality is Job 1, and I now own an 85 Escort that runs great, gives good gas
mileage, didn't cost an arm and a leg, and (gasp) doesn't have a spot of rust
without being Rusty Joned.  This happened because management and the unions
finally got off their butts, under the lash of Japanese competition.  Of
course, I now understand that the Taurus has a lot of bugs...my Escort is an el
Strippo, and the Taurus is a return to the car with a lot of (high profit)
extras, and Rome wasn't built inna day.  Point is, Tucker (and deLorean) had
nothing to do with this.  Management and (gasp) labor unions did it.
     Manipulating the hopes of the little man (to become a big man to his
family), ignoring moral complexity and depth, is what Fascism is all about.  I
like watching Coppola's films, but I am disturbed by what they've always said
about life; that real men prevaricate and kill to protect their families.
Maybe they do, but the function of art is to try to purge us of the Beast
through laughter and terror.  Coppola, like Dostoeyevsky's Grand Inquisitor,
seems to want to saddle and mount the beast (and raise the cup on which the
word MYSTERY is written?).

Title
Review for Metropolitan (1990)
     METROPOLITAN is about a group of TwentySomethings, self-described
as "Urban Haute Bourgeois."  However, it's not yet another movie about
rich people.  Most movies made today, *unless* they are explicitly about
an underclass or a Dark Side, are made about fictional characters with
enough money to decorate a set.  The makers of movies, for the most
part, lack the imagination to see that there is any sort of interesting
freedom in characters explicitly constrained by the need to earn money.
This is perhaps because the lives of such people have a highly iterative
character (get up, catch the bus, work, go home: da capo): but a
Minimalist composer such as Phillip Glass has made something out of
sheer iteration, and the film My Dinner With Andre has as a secondary
character one who (quite unusually) practically makes an appeal for
personal financial salvation in his own movie.
     Although the characters in METROPOLITAN are not immediately worried
about paying the rent, there is an interesting tension between their
elite background (shopping at Brooks Brothers) and the rather humdrum
prospects they enjoy.  The movie makes the point that even an expensive
education is no guarantee of self-fulfillment, or even of an interesting
or rewarding job.  One of the best scenes in the film takes place at
T. J. Melon's, an East Side watering hole where two of the main
characters meet up with a semi-failure in unfashionably wide lapels and
a Princeton tie.
     More poignantly, one of the characters of the film is the son of
divorced parents.  Divorce, of course, introduces steep decline in the
lives of the ex-wife, and the children, who usually stay with the
ex-wife.  It's hard for the characters in this situation not to at least
try to keep up appearances, and the note of shabby gentility is a new
element in American film.
     For films up to now have been stories of social ascent, whether
legal or illegal (cf. THE GODFATHER).  Somewhat more innovative are
stories of recovery (as in POSTCARDS FROM THE EDGE) where a character
finds that her decline is due to character flaws which she can herself
change.  Any decline undergone by the characters in METROPOLITAN is not
due to character flaws.  The people in this film are noble in a fashion
that reminds the viewer of Jane Austen, a writer discussed in the movie.
The men, in particular, clumsily try to behave as paladins in a way
thought outdated even in F. Scott Fitzgerald's time, which is decried
as "sexist" by the women, but which provides the (slightly
disappointing) resolution of the movie.
     Underneath the modulated voices, the chivalry, I sensed a low key
and smoldering anger in METROPOLITAN.  This is an anger at fathers who
absented themselves from families in their own search for self-
fulfillment.  Unlike the modal fathers of my generation (I'm 40), who
came home to their families and who exhausted themselves meeting their
needs, the father of the generation of METROPOLITAN is presented as one
overly concerned with his own needs...who moves, for example, to New
Mexico without telling his son, and who leaves his son's old toys in the
street for his son to stumble upon (Manhattan is a small place in its
way.)
     Since it's too hard to confront the Father directly, we get instead
a large, aristocratic figure in a pony tail who is the same age as the
characters in METROPOLITAN, but who comports himself, according to one
of them, in a despicable way.  This involves treating women as sex
objects.  Although the male characters, in making this charge, are
themselves charged with sexism by the women in the film, they are
obviously reacting to the economic sexism of fathers who left their
families in the financial lurch in a way described by Barbara Ehrenreich
(see her books THE HEARTS OF MEN and THE WORST YEARS OF OUR LIVES).  A
hundred years ago, the character who confronts Lord PonyTail would have
charged him with toying with the affections of women.  I half-expected a
challenge to a duel in one drawing-room scene.  Now, the charge is that
Lord PonyTail is treating women as sex objects.  Are the two charges
actually equivalent?
     But Lord PonyTail (whose long hair now marks him as Out Of The
Past) is not *really* the hero's father, any more than the gun the hero
pulls is a real gun.  Audrey is at once amused, and impressed by her
parfit, gentil knight's assault on The Dark Tower.  Perhaps this leaves
room at the end for forgiveness of the *real* father.  Can the *real*
fathers of that generation redeem themselves?  Question for discussion:
is the *real* father that generation which treated child support as a
non-starter for much the same reasons they treated energy conservation
as a non-starter?  That generation which has several divisions of
TwentySomethings in the Persian Gulf at risk as I write, for this
reason?

Title
Review for JFK (1991)

discussion of the conspiracy is being held.  If you are discussing
the *movie*, feel free to change the followup line to
rec.arts.movies. -Moderator]
     * The political question ("is Stone right about the assassination?")
     Yes, you *will* be entertained by this movie unless you are
braindead.  Folks old enough to remember the terrible weekend of 1963 (I
was a high school freshman) will relive the pity and terror as Costner
sits in Napoleon's (a N'Awlins bar) watching the news reports, including
Walter Cronkite breaking down as Cronkite is passed the news of
Kennedy's death.  
     Folks too young will get a history lesson in the fact that the
Sixties were not all sex/drugs/rock and roll...they were also an
expression of cynicism in a system in which it at least appeared that a
President with a demonstrated commitment to peace (as evinced by his
test ban treaty and by his honorable handling of Bay of Pigs) was
replaced by a President who (while committed to civil rights) did not
share Kennedy's commitment to peace.  It at least appeared to us
antiwar protesters that Johnson was, to a greater degree than JFK, a
creature of the defense establishment.  This history lesson is made
effectively, using a combination of newsreel footage and reenacted
incidents the pacing of which keeps the attention of the MTV set.
     Should you wait for the video?  I think not.  You may not be able
to follow the important scenes that demand you close-read the grainy 8MM
footage of Abraham Zapruder's film.
     ...can be dispensed of quickly.  Yes, Oliver Stone knows how to
make a good film.  In particular, I liked the pacing in Costner's
summation at the end of the trial, for it treated the audience as mature
adults able to sit still for far, far more than a sound bite.
     This is the hot potato.  Having seen the film, I believe that JFK
was killed in a "silent coup" by elements of the defense establishment.
It is true, as an article on page 1 of the NEW YORK TIMES indicates
today, that Stone could be faulted for combining "real" footage
including the Zapruder film with "fictional" footage such as an
imaginary recreation of the autopsy.  I'd say that given the fact that
the government won't release documents on the assassination until 2029,
Citizen Stone is perfectly justified in reconstructing incidents, for he
does not have access to the facts.  That is, secrecy creates a poetic
license.  
     Readers should note that the assassination of JFK and possible
dealings in October 1980 between the Reagan reelection team and Iran
mean that essentially the same elements *may* be responsible for not one
but two silent coups.  On the other hand, when Costner (speaking
obviously for Stone) speaks of "fascism" I did reflect that it is an odd
sort of Fascism in which the film JFK can be shown.  Perhaps I speak too
soon; perhaps there still will be a violent reaction to the film, with
attempts to keep it from being seen, if the snotty and condescending
tone of the New York Times article I mention earlier fails to convince
people that it is unhip to believe Stone.  
       Noam Chomsky describes ways of Manufacturing Consent which are far
more sophisticated than merely preventing a movie from being shown.  For
example, one troubling question raised by the movie is the fact that the
day of the assassination marked the creation of a modern urban legend,
that of the crazed, murderous loner.  If Stone is right, Oswald was a
schmoe, caught up in nut politics; but he was a fall guy, not a
murderer.  It is a troubling thought that almost every assassination and
almost every mass murder since the JFK assassination (a sort of Ur event)
has been given the following spin by the press: "folks, something
terrible has just happened.  A popular leader (or many people) has/have
just been tragically murdered.  The guy who dunnit, however, is a crazed
loner or (at best) a cult leader ... not one of us or our leaders."
Such is the power of the "crazed loner" theory that almost any American
male is at risk for being associated with the outcast group of "crazed
loners" unless he is careful to lead a circumscribed and above all
married existence.  Any intellectual interest outside of careerism puts
one at risk for association with this outgroup.  Perhaps, however, our
murderers are *not* crazed loners (just as, statistically, our child
abusers are upstanding married men).  Perhaps our murderers are our
kindly father figures like Stormin' Norman.  Perhaps are murderers are
the Texas schoolchildren who cheered when Kennedy's death was announced,
who grew up to be upstanding members of the community (not crazed
loners).  Perhaps our murderers is us.

Title
Review for Barton Fink (1991)
     Note: this review may spoil Barton Fink for those of us who go to
the movies primarily for the cheap frisson of surprise.  This review is
therefore best read *after* seeing Barton Fink.
     BARTON FINK is a movie I think the French will like; I understand
it's already won several awards at Cannes.  It is an extremely,
surprisingly intelligent movie which at the same time is eminently
watchable, despite descriptions of it which make it sound fairly boring.
Our expectations of BARTON FINK is somewhat like our expectations of MY
DINNER WITH ANDRE.  It would appear that a movie about a blocked nerd of
a writer in a fleabag hotel would be about as boring as, well, spending
time with a blocked nerd of a writer in a fleabag hotel.  BARTON FINK
surprises in somewhat the same way as MY DINNER WITH ANDRE.
     Structurally speaking, BARTON FINK has hints of THE DAY OF THE
LOCUST and of Dashiell Hammett as East Coast (Barton Fink, a
Depression-era writer on the model of Clifford Odets) meets West Coast
and confronts an astonishing spiritual wasteland in himself.  There is
the criminal common man in the form of John Goodman, who has become
since Roseanne a sort of King of the Slobs, there is a dame, a corpse,
and a pair of lowlife cops (who I predict the French will especially
like.)
     Fink is a screenwriter, which is a central and crucially
self-reflexive fact.  The Hollywood screenwriter views himself, perhaps
with some justification, as the creator of the entire dream, for of
course a script has to be much more than a collection of dialogue: it
has hopefully adequate descriptions of camera angles, lighting and a
myriad of other details.  In some sort of Leninist screenwriter's Land
of Cockaigne or Big Rock Candy Mountain, the screenwriter would work
poolside, attended by hordes of willing female slaves (for his gender
would be unreflectingly male) and doted upon by studio moguls.
     This is of course bunkum, and hooey.  A movie is a social art,
constituted in the labor of thousands of people...actors, extras, and
those mysteriously named gaffers and best boys.  It is also constituted
in the paradoxical but real labor of management as studio executives
acquire hardened arteries in marshaling the forces that make the movie.
Even more paradoxically it can be argued that, beyond the ushers and
ticket collectors (and beyond the video store clerks) the very audience
is laboring to produce LA GRANDE ILLUSION as it sits munching popcorn in
the darkened multiplex or in its cluttered parlor.
     The explicit rejection of Barton's pretensions is defiantly
philistine yet necessarily implied by the very content of those
pretensions.  The ringing cry of 1789 for the rights of man and the
radical equality of all our dreams when taken up by women and by
non-Europeans gives the lie to Barton's attempt to privilege himself vis
a vis insurance salesmen and GIs.  1789 became 1989, with its myriad
calls for self-determination and an end to screenwriting and
scriptwriting of *all* sorts, including top-down, dirigiste models of
economic development, in Russia, in Latvia, and in Ethiopia.
     There is more than one marvelous cut to Barton's blocked and
painful attempt to write the story of a Hegelian confrontation he knows
nothing about ("a grade B wrestling picture with Wallace Beery") to the
ease and effortless flow of a secretary's typing.  Ordinarily, the
"male" struggle of the writer, nonwithstanding that it may use the
identical tools as the labor of the secretary, has nothing to do with a
secretary's work, although the same brand names may appear on their
typewriters or, now, their personal computers.  The Barton/secretary cut
undermines this distinction.  The secretary and Barton, the cut seems to
say, are *both* "writers" if all we look at is their behavior of typing
(and isn't behavior all there is?).  If there is any difference, the
secretary is the better, more effortless writer.  When it is of course
objected that the secretary is merely transcribing another's words
whereas Barton is being creative, we might do well to side with the
managers in the film, who decry any such pretension on the part of
screenwriters and who have decried it ever since the days of F. Scott
Fitzgerald's Pat Hobby Stories.  "Creative x," where x has a strong
commercial component, has always had a suspicious odor in America (try
"creative accounting" for example.)  And screenwriters have always been
reminded by studio moguls that they are replaceable parts of what is a
machine, first and foremost, for making money.
     Such is the lowly position of the writer (screenwriter or other-
wise) that modern-day productions of Shakespeare, such as Kenneth
Branagh's HENRY V, eschew mention of Shakespeare's name anywhere on
their publicity posters.
     This review is addressed to a computer net which perforce consists
not completely but preponderantly of computer programmers, support
specialists, and that ilk.  These would do well to reflect that the
position of programmer in our industry is structurally identical
(isomorphic) to that of the Hollywood screenwriter and it inherits the
poignance of writing.  The old-fashioned programmer viewed him- self as
productive of the entire software illusion, only to be continually and
consistently reminded both by computer-resistant ordinary people and the
moguls of his industry (located also in California) of the social nature
of his work.
     The secretary's position brings us to that of the character played
by John Goodman, who, despite his name, has played such ambivalent
roles...a fat common man with a voice like Arthur Godfrey, an attractive
bear, who nonetheless is capable in this movie and in movies like THE
BIG EASY (in which he played a minor role as a corrupt New Orleans cop)
of turning into ursus horribilis at a moment's notice, and then (in this
movie) of even more abrupt and dizzying reversals.
     BARTON FINK refuses to privilege John Goodman; for to replay Aaron
Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man" at this late date, when it is the
common man who has destroyed rain forests and who has marched in Pol
Pot's legions, is to repeat Barton's essential mistake: the illusion
that *any* unitary voice can speak for "the people" when it is essential
that "the people" speak duplicitously and often repeat stories they've
heard elsewhere.  The movie appears in an era when the very idea of a
positive and held-in-common signifier is a cruel mockery in places with
names like Zagreb and Addis Ababa.
     The burning question is whether people can live with this negation
and not restore their Czar (which, along with the restoration of the old
name of Leningrad to St.  Petersburg, has been a seriously considered
possibility in recent weeks) or their old religious illusions.  The
message of BARTON FINK (if it must have a message) is fairly bleak for
those who, Prufrock-like, would wear white flannel trousers and walk
along the beach (very likely fouled by Saddam's oil spill).  It is as
bleak as Marlowe's, in THE JEW OF MALTA:
     "...thou has committed fornication, but that was in another
     country: and besides, the wench is dead."
