Authors
David Butterworth
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for I Married a Strange Person! (1997)
        You may be familiar with his politically incorrect cartoons and
illustrations in publications like the "New York Times," "Vogue," and
"Rolling Stone" (you might have seen them in "Penthouse" and "Screw"
magazine but are less likely to admit it).  Perhaps you've seen his short
animated subjects--"Microtoons"--on MTV.
        The man in question is cult animator Bill Plympton, and his latest
and most ambitious project to date is a full-length animated feature with
the provocative title "I Married a Strange Person!"  It's Plympton at his
most deranged.
        Technically speaking a "feature" defines a film of over 34 minutes
in length.  "I Married a Strange Person!" runs seventy-four and it's easy
to see why this is only Plympton's third entry into the feature-length
field: he draws each and every frame himself.
        Whether or not you've seen anything by this world-renowned artist
before, "I Married a Strange Person!" is an eye-opening change of pace for
anyone brought up on Road Runner cartoons.  Heavy on the sex and violence
(in fact, there's not much else, save for a handful of clever, irreverent,
and extremely funny songs by Maureen McElheron), this sexy, violent "adult"
film tells the often hilarious tale of newlyweds Grant and Kerry.
        As the film opens, a pair of coupling birds (there's a lot of
coupling in this film, often by inanimate objects) spiral out of control
and crash land onto a satellite dish, sending a bolt of energy into the
nape of our angular hero.
        From this point on Grant, who wears a suit and tie almost
exclusively and looks like he was chiseled from a chunk of granite, is
blessed with superhuman powers that turn his inner-most thoughts into
reality.  This makes him feared by his lovely wife and sought after by a
megalomaniacal communications mogul, Larson Giles, who sends a slew of
heavily armed forces after him following Grant's successful appearance on a
late-night comedy show.
        Grant and Kerry run, hide, and have sex, all in an effort to thwart
their evil oppressors.
        That's the story in a nutshell but it plays second fiddle to
Plympton's extraordinary imagination and distinctive visual style.  The
director crams so much into the film's comparatively brief running time
that it's actually a little bit exhausting at times; however, among the
bang bang bangs and the blam blam blams, Plympton's impeccable sense of
comic timing shines through.
        "I Married a Strange Person!" isn't rated but its graphic visual
style is definitely not for kids.  The film's highlight is an outrageous
sex sequence in which, among other things, a woman's breasts are squeezed,
kneaded, and twisted into balloon animals.
        If you're a connoisseur of ultra sex and ultra violence, "I Married
a Strange Person!" should satisfy your basic instincts.  It's a memorable
journey through the tormented, talented mind of Bill Plympton.

Title
Review for Shattered Image (1998)
        She was the femme in "La Femme Nikita."  He was the Baldwin in
"Backdraft," "Sliver," and "Fair Game" (with Cindy Crawford).  Together,
Anne Parillaud and William Baldwin conspire to make "Shattered Image" the
biggest piece of hooey since the Stallone/Stone "thriller" "The Specialist."
        The film poses the question "what if the life you're living now is
really a dream, and your dreams reality?"  It's either about a woman who's
haunted by a recurring (and recurring and recurring) nightmare that she's a
hired assassin, or it's about a hired assassin who's haunted by a recurring
(and recurring and recurring) nightmare that she's honeymooning with
William Baldwin in Jamaica.
        It doesn't much matter and believe me by the time "Shattered Image"
runs its painful and pedestrian course you won't care.
        These two lives, with Parillaud looking like Siouxsie Sioux with a
black wig, black emotionless eyes, and black leather clothing in the
Seattle-based assassin scenes, and moping around like Karen Carpenter in
the Jamaica scenes, play out endlessly throughout the film and the result
is it's now *twice* as boring as it might have been.
        It's not that complicated plots can't be entertaining.  Of course
it helps if you have interesting characters, crisp dialogue, and a modicum
of style.  "Shattered Image" isn't complex, it's just stupid.  And boring.
Parillaud and Baldwin, who aren't exactly Shakespearean material to begin
with, are saddled with such leaden dialogue that their characters have zero
chance of breaking free of their cardboard confines.  Lines like:
        "You're not the reason I couldn't care less about you."  Huh?  And
this wonderful bathroom interchange early in the film:
        Talking of pants, Parillaud has her clothes off faster than you can
say "Point of No Return."  We have come to expect this from Billy Baldwin,
but it might have been nice to have learned something about their
characters first.  But there's nothing to learn.  Karen is as interesting
as a cereal box, a someone's-out-to-get-me crybaby who imagines the voice
at the other end of the phone, the stranger who sends her flowers, maybe
even her husband himself, is her would-be killer.  Siouxsie is the chromium
cool, tough-as-nails crack killing machine who shoots out a couple of
mirrors in order to justify the film's meaningless stock title.
        Baldwin seems more interested in Parillaud's nest egg (so that he
can pave paradise and put up a parking lot) than he does in her.  Each time
Graham Greene shows up he gets killed.  Barbet Schroeder ("Reversal of
Fortune") co-produced and should be ashamed of himself.
        Every now and again it's fun to watch a really bad movie.  And
every now and again, as "Shattered Image" makes agonizingly clear, it isn't.

Title
Review for Out of Sight (1998)
        Allen, star of many a Brian DePalma movie in the early eighties,
has a brief, throwaway part towards the end of "Out of Sight," as the maid
of a crooked financier.  In keeping with her past performances, Allen wears
little more than a green velvet Victoria's Secret ensemble which begs the
question, did they really need a costume designer for this?
        "Out of Sight" is not likely to secure Ms. Allen the kind of
plaudits bestowed upon Pam Grier, who likewise returned from out of
obscurity to appear in another recent Elmore Leonard adaptation, "Jackie
Brown," but it is intriguing to see her name kicking off the "also
starring" credits given her limited screen time.
        The real stars of "Out of Sight" are George Clooney ("Batman &
Robin" by way of "E.R.") and Jennifer Lopez ("Selena"), whose winning
chemistry, coupled with Steven Soderbergh's freeze-frame directorial
technique, help the film retain the charismatic charm of Leonard's original
work.
        With the success of "Get Shorty" three years ago, filmmakers have
realized that adapting an Elmore Leonard novel can be an easier proposition
than trying to dream up a storyline from scratch.
        In "Out of Sight," Clooney stars as Jack Foley, a career criminal
who specializes in unarmed robbery--he just waltzes into banks and politely
makes a withdrawal, claiming that his "partner" (just another customer it
so happens) will shoot the manager if the teller doesn't comply.  For all
of Jack's nice-guy charm though, he's not very lucky.  His latest scam
lands him in Florida's Glades Correctional Facility.
        Federal Marshal Karen Sisco (Lopez) coincidentally arrives at the
prison just as Jack and his buddy (Ving Rhames, typically appealing) are
breaking out.  There's a brief struggle and Jack bundles himself and Karen
into the trunk of the getaway car.  It's in these cramped confines, pressed
intimately together, that Jack and Karen start falling for one another.
        The mutual attraction continues as the couple on opposite sides of
the law slip in and out of one another's grasp.  Karen follows Jack to
Detroit, where he's about to pull off another heist, this time a cache of
uncut diamonds from incarcerated businessman Richard Ripley (played by a
toupee-sporting Albert Brooks, almost unrecognizable in the prison scenes).
        It's during this final caper-gone-awry that Allen makes her scant
appearance.
        Clooney's range as an actor is limited, but he has undeniable
charm.  Lopez, too, is easy on the eyes, but she demonstrates more depth in
her portrayal of Karen, a tough yet tender professional.  She dispenses
with hit men as easily as she out-maneuvers sleazy pick-up artists in a
bar.  Especially cute is a sequence in which Karen fantasizes about Jack in
a motel bathtub.
        Admirably supporting Clooney and Lopez are Don Cheadle as fellow
felon Maurice 'Snoopy' Miller, Steve Zahn as the perennially stoned Glenn
Michaels, and Dennis Farina as Karen's dad, who affectionately buys her a
piece.
        Add a couple of uncredited cameos from "Jackie Brown" cast members
and "Out of Sight" proves to be a lot of fun.  Not as hip and clever as
"Shorty," perhaps, or as complex and colorful as "Brown," but loads of fun
nonetheless.

Title
Review for Psycho (1998)
        You have to admit it's a pretty nifty tagline.   But you'd have to
*be*  a psycho to review Gus Van Sant's redo of the Alfred Hitchcock
masterpiece, so I won't even attempt it here.  I mean, what are you going
to say?  "Van Sant's picture surpasses the original "Psycho" in style,
substance, and shock value."  Or "Director Gus Van Sant has thrown together
a disastrous film that makes the 1987 television movie "Bates Motel" appear
Oscar-worthy by comparison."
        No.  Chances are your comments are going to fall somewhere in
between.  And that's the basket into which I'm putting all my eggs.
        Van Sant is no hack, and has been slowly gaining a reputation as a
mainstream filmmaker since his early directorial days, when controlled
substances featured as heavily as the characters in his films ("Drugstore
Cowboy," "My Own Private Idaho," "Even Cowgirls Get the Blues").  Many
people missed the fact that Van Sant was the man behind "Good Will
Hunting"; his star was eclipsed by two young up-and-comers named Matt Damon
and Ben Affleck.
        Given his off-beat but critical success ("Cowgirls" excepted), Van
Sant isn't likely to trash Hitch's classic film (although one of his
reasons for remaking it is "to do it in color"--sounds a tad suspect to say
the least).  His version of "Psycho" is less a remake and more a
scene-by-scene reconstruction, with all of the original dialogue intact.
        In fact, Van Sant's goal was to "update" the story by taking
advantage of some of the innovations in the medium that weren't available
in 1960 (a helicopter's eye view of a motel room, for example).
        The story, by Robert Bloch, was inspired by the real life exploits
of Ed Gein, a cannibalistic mass-murderer who turned his picturesque
Wisconsin farmhouse into a human abattoir (Gein was also the inspiration
behind "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre" and the lesser-seen "Deranged").
"Psycho" tells the tale of Marion Crane, a disenchanted real estate worker
who embezzles $40,000 and escapes town in order to marry her boyfriend,
Sam.  On her way to meet Sam, Marion stops at the Bates Motel run by a
troubled young man called Norman who, it turns out, is very much tied to
his mother's apron strings.
        Crane (played by Janet Leigh in the original and Anne Heche in the
update) buys it in the first few reels--an innovative and rarely imitated
idea--and Norman Bates was so immortalized by Anthony Perkins in the 1960
film that Perkins couldn't get any non-psycho offers for a long while
afterwards.  Vince Vaughn plays Norman in the remake.
        If you haven't seen Hitchcock's "Psycho" (and still want to having
read this far), I implore you to rent it *before* settling down to watch
Van Sant's interpretation.  The version that hits the theaters December 4th
doesn't have Saul Bass' superb editing (the infamous shower sequence,
arguably), Bernard Herrmann's screeching violins, or John Russell's eerie
black and white photography but, for better or worse, it does have that
very satisfying publicity campaign.

Title
Review for Rugrats Movie, The (1998)
        "Rugrats."  It's the most popular children's series on television,
according to the Nielsen ratings, a show watched by more that 23 million
viewers each week.  So it would seem only natural that after seven
successful seasons on the Nickelodeon cable channel, America's favorite
toddlers--Tommy, Chuckie, Phil, Lil, and Angelica--would make the leap to
the big screen.
        "The Rugrats Movie" is a just-in-time-for-Thanksgiving expansion of
the weekly program, a commercial-free, 90-minute feature blown up from a
heavily-sponsored, 15-minute television segment.  The result is
surprisingly watchable for kids and adults alike, producing only minimal
fidgeting.
        Judging from the closing applause, a sequel shouldn't be long in
coming.
        There's not much of a story--the irrepressible urchins get lost in
the woods--but the plot set-up is fun and gets most of the film's big
laughs.  Stu and Didi Pickles are expecting and, with the birth of baby
Dylan (aka Dil--get it?), big brother Tommy has to face sharing his
parents' attentions for the first time.  So demanding is Dil that Tommy and
his pals conspire to return his bawling baby brother to the "hop-sickle"
ASAP.
        The hospital in question is a humongous, international airport of
endless corridors, check-in lines, and tv monitors indicating due, delayed,
and arrival times.  The delivery room options are very creative, and the
nursery provides one of the film's first of many musical montages, and the
first of many references to bodily emissions, which had the under-twelves
rolling in the aisles.
        While the creative team behind "The Rugrats Movie" enthuse about
the themes of family loyalty, bravery, and friendship that run through the
film, the audience seemed more responsive to any and every reference to
poop, pee, or spit-up.  And Tommy getting hit on the head by a bottle or a
rattle--well, that just cracked them up too.
        Grown-ups are more likely to appreciate the first half of the
film--when the writers take amusing potshots at the universally-recognized
chaos that surrounds the birth of a baby--than the second.  Once Tommy and
his pals head for the great outdoors aboard Stu's latest invention, the
fire-breathing, Darth Vadar-sounding Reptar Wagon, the humor gets a little
more predictable.
        In the forest, pursued by the tempestuous Angelica and her
"butthound" Spike, the Rugrats encounter a variety of dangers, including a
"lizard" (some guy in a big pointy hat who grants wishes?), a wily wolf
("Red Riding Hood got eaten by one, but they got her out"), and a bunch of
simian escapees from the Banana Brothers Monkey Circus.
        Fortunately one of the savvier Rugrats must have planned ahead
because there's a never-ending supply of bottles and "diapees" on hand.
With little help from a couple of park rangers (guest voiced by Whoopi
Goldberg and David Spade), the toddlers finally make it back to the safety
and the security of their parents.

Title
Review for Strangeland (1998)
        "Dee Snider's Strangeland."  To movie buffs, it doesn't have the
familiar ring of, say, "John Carpenter's The Thing," "Russ Meyer's Vixen,"
or "Sidney Sheldon's Bloodline."  And it's not nearly as funny as the
recent "Jane Austen's Mafia!"
        I wonder what made Dee Snider, best and perhaps only known for his
heavily made-up persona as the front man for the heavy metal outfit Twisted
Sister, associate his name with this film directly.  Because he stars in
it?  Because he co-produced it?  Because he wrote the sick and twisted
thing?  Maybe because he thought his name alone would rock the box office.
        So what was going on in Snider's mind when, perhaps while awaiting
the encore during the latest Sister tour, he sat down at his word processor
and dreamed up "Strangeland"?  Did he plan to revolutionize the horror film
by conjuring up a uniquely shocking movie-going experience, or did he
simply hope to cash in on a genre made profitable by those undiscerning
enough to tell a "Scream" from a "Scream 2"?
        If you said B then go to the top of the class: "Strangeland" is as
by-the-book as horror movies come, but as such it's no less watchable than
any number of "Psycho" rip-offs.  No less watchable if "gross body
piercing, nudity, sexual situations, profanity, psychosexual themes,
near-naked women, and tortured men" happen to be your cup of tea.
        As it turns out, "Strangeland" owes more to "The Silence of the
Lambs" and the "Hellraiser" series than it does "Psycho" (if you were
hoping for a little mother fixation, the remake of Hitchcock's classic
shocker with "Return to Paradise"'s Vince Vaughn and Anne Heche is coming
to a theater near you this Christmas).  In "Strangeland," Snider plays a
sadomasochistic deviant who prowls the Internet's teen chat rooms with the
handle Capt. Howdy (Twisted Sister fans thrill away), luring unsuspecting
minors to his basement of body-piercing depravity.
        The online conversations are a little difficult to follow,
visually, but it doesn't much matter since Capt. Howdy wastes little time
in handing out the party invites.  One victim proves to be the daughter of
small town cop Mike Gage and his wife Toni (played with equal and adequate
concern by Kevin Gage and Elizabeth Peńa) and it's
find-and-nail-the-psycho-before-he-kills-again time.
        There's a strange climax of sorts halfway through the film, when
Howdy is tracked down and arrested rather easily.  But if you've seen
"Halloween" 1 through 7, you'll know you can't keep a good psychopath down.
Howdy is reformed and rehabilitated as Carleton Hendricks who looks like he
crawled off the pages of a Nathaniel Hawthorne novel, and this meek,
apologetic personality is almost as creepy as his "Spawn"-like,
rhetoric-spouting alter-ego.
        Of course the townsfolk hassle Carleton and his medication
accidentally gets run over.  Oops.
        The body-piercing focus and Snider's eerie dual performances keep
the film interesting.  While it's nice to see Robert Englund (aka Freddy
Krueger) on the receiving end of the suffering for a change, there ain't
buckets of creativity here.  As for Dee Snider's drawing power, well, there
was only one other person in the audience and he left before the film's
closing metal track banged to an end.

Title
Review for Simon Birch (1998)
        A cinematic version of one of John Irving's novels is always cause
for celebration even if, as in the case of "Simon Birch," the treatment is
merely "suggested by," rather than strictly based on, the book.
        Suggested means that Irving, author of the acclaimed "The World
According to Garp," sold the rights to his novel "A Prayer for Owen Meany"
to the Disney machine for $1 million, but wouldn't grant them permission to
use either the title or any of the character names.  That's an odd
decision--Irving claims it's to protect both himself and the novel--but
it's one that doesn't unduly harm the finished product.
        Irving's books are rich and complex works, full of intriguing,
colorful characters.  "A Prayer for Owen Meany" is no exception; it tells
the story of an unusual boy--called Simon Birch in the film version--who is
uncommonly small in stature and possesses a high-pitched falsetto voice,
"like strangled mice."  Simon believes himself to be "God's instrument,"
placed on this earth to somehow effect God's plan.
        Simon is played by Ian Michael Smith, who suffers from a rare
enzyme disorder known as Morquio Syndrome which, among other things,
prevents bones, ligaments, and joints from developing normally.  Smith's
debilitating disease makes him an obvious physical choice for "Simon
Birch"; however, the producers unwisely favored form over function--Smith's
acting abilities are limited at best.
        Another drawback is that in the book, Simon's condition is
described the way Irving describes any of his characters--in careful,
loving detail.  Watching "Simon Birch," however, creates a different
feeling altogether; the audience is forced into a voyeuristic relationship
with the character, surely something Irving would not have intended.
        Simon himself tends to be too cute and irritating, a combination of
Smith's rookie status as an actor and the precocious one-liners he's forced
to deliver, courtesy Mark Steven Johnson, the film's director and
screenwriter.  Fortunately, Simon Birch isn't the real star of the film
that bears his name.  Simon is more of a catalyst, allowing his co-stars to
shape the story, and the actors who fill those roles to turn in outstanding
supporting performances, saving the film from an obsequious, manipulative
destiny.
        First and foremost is Joseph Mazzello ("Jurassic Park"), who is
nothing less than remarkable as Simon's best friend, Joe.  Mazzello turns
in a wonderfully layered performance for a 14 year old, ripe with laughter,
pain, and tears; he is certainly an emerging talent.  Ashley Judd
positively beams in her role as Rebecca, Joe's single mother, and Oliver
Platt is warm and tender as her boyfriend, Ben.  David Strathairn and Jan
Hooks play the town's reverend and Sunday school teacher respectively and
their contributions uphold the high standards set by the others.
        There's even a surprising yet effective uncredited cameo
performance from...  Well, that would be telling.
        Perhaps "suggested by" the novel is the appropriate way to go after
all, since "Simon Birch" only focuses on one chapter, one year, of Simon's
extraordinary life.  The film also changes the book's ending to one that is
more melodramatic, yet necessary given Simon's lot.
        The flavor of Irving's original novel remains, however--the
passions, friendships, and insecurities that come with a change of seasons
to the little community of Gravestown, Maine, and the engaging oddballs,
both big and small, who reside there.

Title
Review for Knock Off (1998)
        Jean-Claude Van Damme movies tend to be, if nothing else, a lot of
mindless fun.  His latest film, "Knock Off," skips on the fun part leaving
a wildly incoherent exercise that is, well, simply mindless.
        You can't really blame Van Damme.  No one, I suspect, has ever
expected "the muscles from Brussels" to contribute a heartfelt performance
brimming with introspection and delicate shades of gray.  And even his
sidekick co-star, "Saturday Night Live" alumnus Rob "makin' copies"
Schneider, does what's expected of him, although neither appear to want the
role of straight man.
        No, the problem with the film is its direction.  The first five
minutes of the film are incomprehensible ... and it goes downhill from
there!  Five hundred characters, it seems, are introduced within the first
fifteen minutes.  Van Damme doesn't land his first kick until after
thirty--too late for most action fans--and by the time the hour mark has
rolled around, your jaw will be on your cup holder and you'll be wondering
why you elected to spend seven dollars on this mess.
        Director Hark Tsui, whose previous film was the Van Damme/Dennis
Rodman teamed "Double Team," films at such a frenetic pace that it's hard
to know what's going on, who's on whose side, and what the point of all
this is.
        Faster than you can yell "fruit stand!" we're watching a crazed
rickshaw race with Schneider being bounced along by an energetic Van Damme.
When Schneider starts whacking Van Damme in the behind with a four-foot eel
while enthusing "move your beautiful big ass," the movie takes an
unprecedented turn to the bizarre.
        Every now and again "Knock Off" will deliver some truly ingenious
directorial flourishes--inventive camera shots and angles, wild rides down
gun silencers and from the tops of buildings to the sprawling street below,
revealing cut-ins within the frame--but they all happen too quickly, and
within such a furious frame of reference, that they're wasted.  If only
Hark could have slowed things down just for a minute.
        If you're interested in the plot, you're better off reading a
capsule review than trying to extract any meaning from the on-screen
shenanigans: "Jean-Claude Van Damme plays a shady bluejeans manufacturer
who uncovers a Russian Mafia plot to terrorize the world with "nanobombs"
hidden in Cabbage Patch knock-offs.  Maybe.  With Paul Sorvino."  A more
accurate summary would be "Jean-Claude Van Damme bums around Hong Kong
failing to avoid large, blatant Coca-Cola product placements."
        The fact that the film is staged during Hong Kong's last days under
British rule gets some lip service but doesn't figure in at all.
        Perhaps "Knock Off"'s most intriguing credit is that Ron and
Russell Mael composed the frenzied music score.  Some of you might remember
the Mael brothers as the '80s synth pop duo Sparks; their contributions
here are as confused as the accompanying action--"Kimono My House" indeed!
        Like the cheap jeans and "Pumma" sneakers manufactured in Hong
Kong, Van Damme's latest is a real phony.
