Authors
Brian Lehr (Brian Lehr)
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Congo (1995)
     Um ... what? Being the sucker for Michael Crichton that I am, I
rushed out to see this on the opening weekend, much as did with BATMAN
FOREVER the following week.  Unfortunately, this film isn't even in the
same league with the Caped Crusader.
     As the movie starts off with a guy finding his friend's eyeball
and then getting killed hinself, the "predictable" suspense just keeps
on coming.  People turn around slowly in fright and then scream so many
times it gets laughable (or in the least, downright boring.  If the
fake gorrila suits don't turn you off, the fake actors should.  I
understand using "nobodys" (except for Tim Curry; love the accent), I
mean ... it worked with JURASSIC PARK.  But as with BATMAN, JURASSIC
PARK towers above this ... not in plot structure or deeper meaning, but
in basic entertainment of the audience.  Frankly put, I didn't enjoy
this movie, no matter how hard I tried, and I have been known to enjoy
many a film despite its lack of plot, etc. (take ACE VENTURA, PET
DETECTIVE).  But you'd think for what is supposed to be a big-money
film they could have gotten better sets than something you might see at
Disneyland.  The cinematography is good, with great shots of the
jungle.  But when we land back on earth for more bad acting and cheesy
lines, you can tell we're in a set again.
     CONGO sacrifices any point and goes for the quick kill, hoping the
scary apes will freak the doubts out of us.  With most of us, that
shouldn't work ... I never found myself truly concerned or frightened
by this movie.  A little startled, perhaps, like you are when a car
backfires, but nothing that stays with you like velociraptors jumping
in your face.  And after a while, even that ran out, as the @*%^#ing
annoying mechanical voice of the main ape's mechanical arm got to me.
She (the ape) looked bored too, not even trying to do sign language,
just hitting her chest in the same way every time, perhaps thinking
"Duh!  This movie is insulting even my intelligence!  Duh!"
     For those of you who have read the book, and just *have* to see
the movie, go ahead; it's your money.  But let me also forewarn you
that CONGO goes on a no-holds-barred charge full speed backward from
the book.  Characters are changed and plots are lost.  But as movie
makers grab hold of certain authors, and then their books, we must be
prepared for stinkers such as CONGO.  And the public doesn't help,
considering the amount of $ CONGO grabbed at the first-weekend box
office because fools like Yours Truly went and saw it before I looked
at the reviews.  In fact, by now we should probably expect them.
     This movie squeezed a reluctant 1.5 (*1/2) apes out of me, mostly
because of a good scene with Ernie Hudson in an airport (one of the
*few* good scenes). "Run man, run!"  Do that when you see this movie.

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
     Riddle me this ... which film which is already one of the biggest
hits of the year made just about as much money on it's third weekend as
POCAHONTAS did on its first?  Holy Big Bucks Batman!  But was this film
as good as it's marketing?  Yours truly went on the opening weekend
(and had to buy tickets two hours early, then arrive at the theater
half an hour before the movie began to get a decent seat) to find
out....
     I have to say that I was pleasantly surprised when I saw this
movie.  From the very start, with the WB logo morphing into the bat
shape and the credits flying all over the screen, you knew this was
definitely different.  And after the McDonalds intro with the "new"
Batmobile zipping off to get drive-through on its way to stop Two-Face
...  I blinked when I saw Gotham.  It had been transformed from
Burton's gothic, mysterious town into Tokyo, with neon lights flashing
in every corner.  But let me be one of the first (or not) to say I
didn't give a rip.  The movie certainly doesn't wait for you, it zips
right to the action, maybe a little too quickly, but after awhile the
audience gets used to it.
     As for the *big* change in Batmen, all you can see are the lips
when they're in those suits, so who cares?  I felt Val Kilmer did fine
in his role as the Dark Knight, though the Knight wasn't so dark
anymore, along with the rest of Gotham.  He even cracked a few jokes,
while Keaton's Batman just kept his mouth shut and stayed off the
screen for as long as possible.  Possibly Keaton did a better Bruce
Wayne, but the movie's called BATMAN, right? :-)  Tommy Lee Jones did
pretty well as Two-Face, screaming out his lines with a flourish that
he doesn't get to as lawyers or police officers (THE CLIENT and THE
FUGITIVE, both good).  A little more history about him would have been
nice, instead of another of those news clips that Bruce Wayne watches
all the time to give us plot points.  Jim Carrey certainly got his
background stuck in there as the Riddler, and more.  He played very
nicely off of Jones, every once in a while stealing the stow entirely
with his charisma.  Chris O'Donnell did pretty well for the role he
was cast for, as a 20-something teen idol for the girls in the audience
to ooo and aah over (when they weren't showing off the Bat Buns).
Nicole Kidman was just *there*.  She wasn't all that bad, she just
lacked Michelle Pfieffer's oomph ;-) (possibly the only good thing about
Batman Returns).  She has lost some of her own oomph from great flicks
like MALICE; and along with it, she has lost all of her Australian
accent in this film.  I mean, when you don't get your own McDonalds
collectible glass, you know something's gone wrong (Holy Licensing
Agreement Batman!).  Returning from the first two "Batman" movies are
Michael Gough as Alfred (who is superb!) and Pat Hingle as Commissioner
Gordon (who is as okay as his 7-8 lines and static character let him
be).
     Joel Schumacher does job directing this, with new, interesting,
and strange shots of things from every angle, along with decent special
effects.  The score is great, so great I bought it ... well worth the
US$17.99.  Elfman's theme from the first two movies isn't in here, but
Elliot Goldenthal makes up for that nicely by making his own recurring
themes heard throughout the movie.
     All in all, I'd say this is a movie worth seeing, even though the
first two films might scare you away.  Let me tell you this if you
haven't figured it out: This is nothing at all like them.  The plot is
light as fluff and has no "deeper underlying purpose or story" like
Burton tried to convey in his films, but that's the beauty of it.  It's
not made for the meaning, it's made for the ride!  It reminds me
distinctly of another movie with dinosaurs I saw awhile back ...
