Authors
Kelvyn Harris
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Kids (1995)

I have recently rented the movie "Kids" and have to say that  this film
was "real to life" than any other film focusing on teens.  The story is
about a day in the lives of three New Yorkers.  In the beginning of the
film, the very promiscuous Telly engages in sex with a girl.   After
this encounter, he brags about it to his friend, Casper.  The two drink,
steal from a grocer, hangs out with teens, and engage in illegal
activities.  One of Telly's girls discovers that  she contracted  HIV,
thus she tries to find Telly and tell him.  
In my opinion, as I said in the beginning, this is very true and
in-depth as if "Kids" was filmed like a documentary.   If I am not
mistaken, this was released at the same time as "Clueless" and
"Dangerous Minds."  Although "Dangerous Minds"  is based on a true
story, the film had typical aspects that were portrayed in other films:
concerned teacher, unappreciated students, etc.  The acting in "Kids" is
wonderfully portrayed ;  the direction was original, and it was told
uniquely by the writers.
The film raised controversy about its subject matter.  If I'm not
mistaken, Miramax was under fire for being involved with this film(
since The Walt Disney Co. bought it.)  Instead of being scrutinized, it
was released under the banner "Shining Excalibur Films" and was released
in some cities.  When movies are released in limited cities, it is like
a response to studios that "Middle America" will not accept it.
(Remember "Henry and June"  and  "The Last Temptation of Christ")  They(
film industry) are scared to release socially conscious films because of
losing money and being boycotted by groups. 
If you ask me, I think that we, as moviegoers, should wirte to
film/video/TV distributors  and tell them to make films that have  and
make a difference rather than tell cliched tales, especially television.
To finalized, "Kids" should be watched by older, mature teens and
adults( with caution.)    
NOTE: I would appreciate it if you do not send any unsolicited e-mail to
this address.
This is a simple request one can follow and apply. Thank you.
