Authors
Scott Marcus
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Twister (1996)
Review for the MTV-generation: Great effects, adequate story, and some
good performances make TWISTER an enjoyable ride. Caveat: Make sure to
see it on the big screen, because much of the power of the film will
undoubtedly be lost when it comes to video.
Two groups of tornado-chasers (it's hard to believe that anyone would
be crazy enough to go looking for tornadoes, let alone *two* groups of people)
are racing to try to deploy a bunch of sensors into the heart of a tornado.
The purpose is to learn enough about these storms to predict their paths.
If this can be done, people in danger will be able to get fifteen minutes
warning before one strikes.
TWISTER is just about what you'd expect, and what the ads promise. The
tornado effects are awesome. The F/X people on this film did everything they
could to bring the awesome destructive power of tornadoes to the audience,
short of actually creating one in the theater. Whenever a twister is on
screen, I was completely captivated; completely caught up with the characters
who were placing themselves in the path of these beasts of nature.
The question remains, though, what about when the effects stop, and the plot
and characters and screenplay take center stage? After all, two hours of
tornadoes might be enough to sell videos for the weather channel, but it's
no way to make a film.
The answer is, more or less, that the rest of the film is worthwhile. Two
of the three leads are excellent -- Bill Paxton and Helen Hunt. Both are in
top form, Paxton as the tornado-chaser turned reluctant weatherman, and
Hunt as the tornado-obsessed scientist. The rest of the rag-tag band of
chasers is also good, with several familiar faces from TV. They are more
reminiscent of a college fraternity than of a group of scientists, which
helps lighten the mood effectively.
The other lead, Jamie Gertz, as Paxton's current fiancee, is drawn a little
lightly. I'm not sure if the problem is the actress or the part, but
whichever, the character has too little substance. And the other somewhat
sour note is the rivalry between Hunt's amateurish group, and a
well-financed group of storm chasers led by Cary Elwes. Elwes is a former
associate of the college group, but has gone pro, as it were, by getting a
lot of money through corporate sponsorship. The film would have been tighter 
without this unnecessary plot device.
Overall, though, the effects are what will bring people to the theater, and
the effects are what will be remembered as they leave.

Title
Review for Faithful (1996)
First question: why does anyone let Ryan O'Neal act in their movies
anymore? And, not only let him in, but give him a starring role. He's
at best a has-been, though many would consider him a never-was.
Anyway, he ruined any chance this movie might have had in my mind.
The setup is about the most interesting thing the film has going for
it. A couple, Margaret O'Donnell (Cher) and her husband Jack (Ryan
O'Neal) are celebrating their 20th anniversary. They've each got a
little surprise for the other, though. The movie is based on
Palminteri's play, where it may have worked better than on the big
screen.
Tony (Chazz Palminteri) shows up at the couple's mansion, claiming
that someone - he believes it's the husband, Jack - has hired him to
kill Maggie. Tony has problems: he constantly has to stop and talk to
his psychiatrist - played adequately by director Paul Mazursky - over
the phone. It's no surprise that the emotionally confused hit-man is
the strongest character: Mr. Palminteri wrote the film, after all,
and saves the juiciest lines for himself.
There are some very good moments, reminiscent of the film SLEUTH, when
the audience doesn't know which way things are going to go, or if
everyone is really who they claim to be. These moments, however, are
not enough to save the film. There are numerous plot holes, and quite
a few developments that make little or no sense, once the denouement
comes. For instance, why are there no servants? This really bothered
me. The O'Donnell's live in a huge mansion, own a Ferrari and a Rolls
Royce, and yet he makes his own breakfast, and she does her own
shopping.
It also bothered me that the characters would switch between being
clever and being stupid from scene to scene. I just didn't see any
consistent characterizations; transformations came at will, with no
justification. Contrast this with SLEUTH. In that film, Michael
Caine and Laurence Olivier are both extremely clever, and continually
outmaneuver each other. Here, the characters mostly seem to fumble
over one another, except for a few times when they act intelligently.
The bright spots of the film - Mr. Palminteri's performance, some of
the dialogue, and the set-up - are not enough, ultimately, to save the
film. I grade it a mediocre C.
Review written: Thursday, 4 April 1996

Title
Review for Girl 6 (1996)
GIRL 6 is, in a word, a mess. I was never able to determine what
Spike Lee was trying to accomplish with this film. There was no sense
of where the film was going, or any kind of coherent narrative.
If there was a point to the film, I missed it. Girl 6, by the way, is
the way Theresa Randle's character is addressed in the phone sex
workplace; all the girls are known by their numbers.
The plot, such as it is: Theresa Randle is a struggling N.Y. actress,
and eventually takes a job as a phone-sex operator. She begins to lose
contact with reality, as her job consumes her.  Also, she must deal
with the advances of her ex-husband (Isiah Washington). He is an ex-
con thief, and she tries to keep him away, while at the same time,
it's clear that she still harbors feelings for him.  Her neighbor,
Jimmy (Spike Lee) functions as the observer; mediating between the ex-
husband and Girl 6. He also functions as a point of stability, as he
watches her become seduced by the lurid world of phone sex.
The soundtrack, consisting of songs by Prince, was jarring. It kept
taking my attention from the film - not altogether a bad thing, I'll
grant you, as what was transpiring onscreen wasn't that riveting. For
parts of the middle of the film, the music stayed blissfully in the
background. In the opening sequence and one scene later in the film,
however, the music was particularly loud and distracting. Of course,
I've never really cared for Prince's (or TAFKAP if you like) music.
Prince fans might love the soundtrack, but it will probably be
distracting, even to die-hard fans.
Of the performances, the only one that stood out was Spike Lee's buddy
character, Jimmy. He was excellent as the always-broke neighbor of
Girl 6. He should have stuck to acting in this film. There are several
sequences that gave me the impression that he'd like to be Oliver
Stone when he grows up. There are scenes shot with different types of
film, which are purposely grainy, and reminiscent of some of the
scenes in Oliver Stone's NATURAL BORN KILLERS. In that film, they
worked to propel the narrative. In this film, they just made me more
confused.
There are some amusing moments, and a few insights into the lives of
the women who use their voices to make the phone-sex industry the
multi-billion dollar industry that it has become. Other than that,
though, nothing much happens. There are a few intense moments, as when
one caller becomes frightening, but even that is rather lackluster.
I'm not the biggest fan of Spike Lee, though I'd agree that he has
done some very good work in the past. In GIRL 6, though, he seems to
be floundering. He had an interesting idea, a fairly good setup, and
seemed to wander aimlessly from there. GIRL 6 earns a grade of D.

Title
Review for Mulholland Falls (1996)
Cast: Nick Nolte, Chazz Palminteri, Chris Penn, Michael Madsen,
Jennifer Connelly, Melanie Griffith, Treat Williams, Andrew McCarthy,
John Malkovich, Bruce Dern, Louise Fletcher, Daniel Baldwin
Director: Lee Tamahori
Writers: Peter Dexter, Floyd Mutrux
Running Time: 107 minutes
Grade: B-
     One word review: unsatisfactory. This is a movie that that could
have been much more than it is. From top to bottom, the cast is good.
Every part, large or small, is filled with a name actor. None of the
performances stand out as either extremely good or extremely bad.  The
dialogue is okay, though it tries to be more hip than it should,
considering that the film takes place in post-World War II LA
MULHOLLAND FALLS tries to be too much; it alternates  between the
gritty, conspiratorial atmosphere of CHINATOWN, and the in- your-face
violence of PULP FICTION, and it can never make up its mind about which
to be.
     Just how many Baldwins are out there, anyway? In this film, one
that I havent seen yet pops up; in every movie I see, it seems that
another unfamiliar Baldwin shows up. Its almost like deja vu, as they
all sound alike, and resemble one another; it just remains to figure
out if Ive seen this one before.
     Four cops, Nick Nolte, Michael Madsen, Chazz Palminteri and Chris
Penn, make up a special unit in the LA police force. They are charged
with keeping LA clean for the upstanding citizens the city needs wants
to attract. A young girl shows up murdered, under vaguely strange
circumstances. It turns out that one of the cops is acquainted with the
victim, and solving the homicide becomes the focus of the film.
     Along the way, there are pornographic home movies, villainous Army
officers, obnoxious FBI agents, atomic bomb tests, and hats--lots of
extremely stylistic hats. Style seems to be the main reason the film is
set in the late 40s or early 50s; so that the group of buddy-cops can
drive around LA in period outfits with neat-looking hats, and exchange
witty banter.
     The four main characters, the cops who make up the special unit,
are definitely the most interesting part of the film. When theyre
together, MULHOLLAND FALLS works. None of the other characters, with
the possible exception of General Timms (John Malkovich) is very
interesting. The murder victim, Allison (Jennifer Connelly), seen in
flashbacks, is beautiful (and she has some rather impressive
attributes), comes the closest to holding our attention--but thats
probably only because Im a heterosexual male. Melanie Griffith, Treat
Williams and Andrew McCarthys characters are all uninteresting, despite
being fairly well developed. The story is nothing special; the solving
of the murder, while ostensibly the point of the film, becomes almost
an afterthought.
     This is a near-miss; with a little sharper plotting, and more time
spent with the four cops, MULHOLLAND FALLS could have a very good film.
As it is, it is only slightly worthwhile.

Title
Review for James and the Giant Peach (1996)
Cast: Joanna Lumley, Miriam Margolyes, Pete Postlewaithe, David
      Thewlis (voice), Simon Callow (voice), Glynis Johns (voice),
      Susan Sarandon (voice)
Writers: Roald Dahl (based on his book), Steven Bloom, Karey
      Kirkpatrick, Dennis Potter, Jonathan Roberts
Producers: Tim Burton, Denise Di Novi, Jake Eberts, John Engel, Brian
      Rosen, Henry Selick
Director: Henry Selick
Running Time: 80 minutes
Grade: C+
One word review: innocuous. As a children's movie, JAMES AND THE GIANT
PEACH works. It shouldn't be either too frightening or too complex for
even little kids to enjoy. For adults, however, the film is too
simplistic. Some of the animation sequences are striking, but the
story and the characters don't really develop enough to be interesting
to adults.
I wanted to like this movie, but the problem was that my expectations
were probably a little high. I went in expecting a film more akin to
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS. The only thing in JAMES AND THE GIANT
PEACH that is close to being as good as in NIGHTMARE is the
stop-motion animation, and that is not enough to carry the entire
movie, especially since only about 1/2 the film is done this way.
JAMES AND THE GIANT PEACH is based on the children's story by
Roald Dahl. We see James, the progagonist, in both live-action and
animated versions. The story follows his escape from his nasty
aunts, Aunt Spiker (Joanna Lumley) and Aunt Sponge (Miriam Margolyes),
into a - what else - giant peach. He and his new friends - a bunch of
giant bugs - head off for New York. Their adventures on this journey
comprise the majority of the film.
The dark characterizations and satire that made NIGHTMARE work on an
adult level are not present in this film. Also, Randy Newman will
never be confused with Danny Elfman. The music in JAMES is too
schmaltzy, and doesn't have the edge that Elfman's score provided to
NIGHTMARE. The music is instantly forgettable, and adds nothing to the
film. On a positive note, Newman writes great elevator music.
All of Tim Burton's films have a darkness to them that makes them
interesting. This film lacks that vision, and seems to show us a
kinder, gentler Burton - a well-adjusted, but boring Burton.
The best sequence in the film takes place underwater, when events take
a dark turn. There's a character very reminiscent of Jack Skellington
(from NIGHTMARE), which is perhaps why I enjoyed this scene. If the
rest of the film had the same bite, it would have been a more
interesting experience.
My recommendation is to find a neighbor, baby sitter, or favorite aunt
to take the kiddies to see JAMES, while the adults stay home and watch
THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS on the VCR. Grade: C+.

Title
Review for Kids in the Hall: Brain Candy (1996)
Cast:  David Foley, Bruce McCulloch, Kevin McDonald, Mark McKinney,
Scott Thompson
Director: Kelly Makin
Writers: : Norm Hiscock, Bruce McCulloch, Kevin McDonald, Mark McKinney,
Scott Thompson
Running Time: approximately 90 minutes
Grade: C-
     The Kids in the Hall are an acquired taste. It took at least a
season of watching their show on HBO before I became a believer.  Maybe
after watching a half dozen Kids in the Hall movies, they would grow
into the big screen. My recommendation is that, unless you are a big
fan of The Kids, skip the film.
     As it is, their first--and most likely only--attempt at a full
length film lacks the qualities that made their comedy work on TV.  A
big-budget and glossy production can not make up for a lack of
spontaneity that permeates their TV show. The Kids go through the
motions, but you get the feeling that they arent really having fun
doing so. And this makes it more difficult for the audience to enjoy
their antics.
     BRAIN CANDY is a bunch of skits tied together by the story of a
pharmaceutical company that develops a new drug to cure depression. In
typical sketch-comedy tradition, each actor plays several roles. Doctor
Cooper (Kevin McDonald) and his team create the drug. Then, under
pressure from Don Roritor (Mark McKinney), founder and president of
Roritor Pharmaceuticals, Dr. Cooper releases the drug into the
marketplace. The ensuing distribution of the new happy pill throughout
the populace drives the rest of the film.
     At about 90 minutes, BRAIN CANDY still seems long. The best thing
about sketch comedy--and The Kids are no exception--is the ability to
quickly deliver the laughs, then go on to another quick skit. But with
the additional set-up necessary in telling a longer, coherent story,
the laughs just dont come fast enough.
     Strangely, the show is even more tame than it was when on cable
TV. The movie makes several attempts at risqueness--mostly by pointing
up the gayness of one of Scott Thompsons characters--but they seem
almost forced; As if they have to live up to a PG rating. One of the
best bits, though, does make use of Thompsons naked buttocks; we see
him charging into battle--going to have sex with some guys taking a
shower.
     In the classic of this genre, Monty Python pulled off this
delicate balancing act between plot advancement and punchline delivery
for most of THE HOLY GRAIL. The Kids, unfortunately, are not up to the
task.  There are some amusing moments, to be sure, but not enough to
make the experience an enjoyable one.

Title
Review for Primal Fear (1996)
Cast: Richard Gere, Edward Norton, Laura Linney, John Mahoney, Alfre
      Woodard, Stephen Bauer, Frances McDormand
Director: Gregory Hoblit
Screenplay: Ann Biderman, Steve Shagan, based on William Diehl's
            novel.
Running Time: 130 minutes
Grade: B+
Richard Gere is not one of my favorite actors. However, I like
courtroom dramas, and this film looked good enough to take a chance
on. I wasn't disappointed. It wasn't a great film, but it was
interesting, and took several unexpected turns. One thing: what's with
the title? Not only is it extremely forgettable, it doesn't really
have much to do with the film, as far as I could determine. In the
long run, it will probably hurt the film, as people won't be able to
think of or remember it.
Martin Vail (Richard Gere) is a grandiose defense attorney. He loves
the money and the fame that go along with defending (successfully)
rich scum, such as mafia men and drug-dealers. Once he sees that the
accused killer of a prominent Chicago Archbishop is a baby-faced alter
boy, he wants in on the case, presumably for the press he'll get. We
soon find out that the prosecutor assigned is a former lover, Janet
Venable (Laura Linney). Vail himself is a former prosecutor, and quit
because of tensions between himself and the District Attorney, played
very well by John Mahoney (Frasier's father on the TV series).
There is an underlying theme of dichotomy in the movie: people have
public faces, and private faces. We see this in the murdered
archbishop, in the accused, and, most strongly, defense attorney
Martin Vail.
Richard Gere does a fairly good job. At first, he appears to be a
money- and attention-grabbing lawyer, with no consideration of the
truth. But we see another side, as he becomes a seeker of justice, and
comes to believe in his client.
Alfre Woodard, as the judge, is capable, though somewhat wasted in a
standard role. Laura Linney also does journeyman work; nothing
spectacular, but acceptable. Her relationship with Vail is believable;
their verbal fencing adds to the film. The actor who playes Vail's
investigator (unfortunately, I don't remember his name) is quite good.
His female assistant (she looked very familiar, but I can't remember
where I've seen her) was also capable, but unspectacular. The best
performance in the film was by Edward Norton.  He was excellent, as
the timid altar-boy turned alleged "Butcher Boy of St. Mike's".
I was impressed by the depth of the plot; there are red-herrings, and
dead-ends, that in a lesser film would lead to a predictable ending. I
liked the plot twists the film took, and most of the supporting
characters, thus I give PRIMAL FEAR a respectable B+ rating.
Review written: Thursday, 4 April 1996
