Authors
John R. Mellby
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Fierce Creatures (1997)
John Cleese, Jamie Lee Curtis, Kevin Klein, Michael Palin
Directed by Robert Young, Produced by Michael Shamberg, Steve Abbot
http://www.fierce-creatures.com/
As I watched this film it struck me that there aren't many funny movies
being made any more. Oh, we have comedies (some of them even good) such
as Steve Martin's films, and we have silly films (a painful lot of silly
films), but not very many movies which are just trying to be funny.
I can't remember a funny film I saw since "A Fish called Wanda",
which brings us back here.
Some nice friends gave us tickets to a preview of FC. This unites the
cast, producer, and some writers of "A Fish called Wanda". This movie
isn't a sequel but a totally new, and *very* funny picture. The
stars, along with a fierce supporting cast (love the lemurs), along with
some great actors, in running a zoo.
The film centers upon a pair of twits. No, this isn't a misprint
referring to Jamie Lee Curtis, although her twits (oops, er ummm, you
know what I mean) do have a few prominent scenes. We have a ruthless
New Zealand Twit (Kevin Klein) running a business empire where
everything makes 20% profit or it get destroyed, and his son, a
hapless twit (also Kevin Klein) who pretty much stumbles through life.
The son, Jamie Lee Curtis, and John Cleese all try to run an English
zoo.
First Cleese trys to make the zoo popular through violence. "All the
creatures must be fierce", hence the title. This fails with many
comic problems. Next, Kevin Klein trys a marketeering approach
where Celebrities sponsor the animals. (I couldn't see who Saddam
Hussain sponsored, so if anyone figures it out, please tell me.)
Along the way, mishaps lead them to think that John Cleese is sleeping
with 3-4 women (and animals) at a time, which attracts Jamie Lee,
and disgusts (and impresses) Klein. The naked tarantula scene was almost
painful to watch.
The take old ideas (people trapped in a hotel room trying to escape
the notice of the real occupants, and do them astoundingly well.
You think they have escaped, and at the last minute they don't
get out. They they almost escape again, and ... well, you get the
picture.
Overall Cleese is as funny as ever. Michael Palin is oddly wedged in,
as if they wrote the movie and discovered they hadn't a role for him,
so they patched him into random scenes. Still he is funny. The
supporting actors (too many to name) are good (even if they
occasionally the bundle so many into a scene that it just gets too
busy).
IMHO this is the funniest movie I've seen in several years.
P.S. You wouldn't think that licking blood of an injured woman's leg
would be funny - but it is!

Title
Review for Switching Channels (1988)
     Although it was not highly publicized, the new comedy SWITCHING CHANNELS
had a (not so) sneak preview last night.  It stars Burt Reynolds, Christopher
Reeves, and Kathleen Turner.  I went, really expecting to be disappointed by a
star-vehicle, and found myself enjoying it immensely!  This is not
sophisticated comedy, and I found myself comparing it more or less to a modern
version of the 50s-60s love-comedy movies.  All the characters are rather
broad, if not blatant, caricatures, but the actors did a good enough job, that
the characters worked.
     The main story is a love triangle.  (Why is it that everyone in a movie is
involved in a love triangle and I have never known anyone in real life who was
in a love triangle?  Don't I hang out with the right kind of people?)
     Kathleen Turner is a TV anchorperson.  She is concerned, intense, and very
involved with her job.
     Christopher Reeves is rich, easy-going, and just a little self-centered,
although this isn't immediately obvious.  Turner meets Reeves on vacation and
decides to marry him, and move to NYC where Reeves has gotten her a job as a
morning talk-show host (the assumption in the film is that a talk-show host is
a real WIMP of a job for a hard-hitting newsperson).
     Her ex-husband, Burt Reynolds, is her boss.  He plays one of his stock
characters, which he does very well.  He is the good-old-boy, lovable
scalliwag.  He does outrageous things in a way that let me ignore the fact that
they were totally silly, such as rushing to one of his gofers and shouting
"Call the Airlines!  Book every seat between here and New York for the next 24
hours!"  Reynolds keeps trying to do things to separate Reeves and win Turner
back for himself.  The badinage between Reeves and Reynolds, especially when
they first meet was very good.
     As a backdrop, and parallel plot, Artie Johnson is about to be
electrocuted for shooting a cop who sold his son drugs.  This is part of the
comedy.  Really!
     A race for Governor is going on (in Illinois) and the crooked politician
is on the LAW-and-ORDER platform, trying to win the race by getting the man
electrocuted.  All the political characters are charicatures, whether it is the
Chicago-machine politician, the upscale-rich-and-cannot-think-for-himself
Governor, or the prison warden, who is guilty of so many crimes that he is
jerked backwards and forwards by practically everyone.
     Along the way they do a send-up of everyone in the news business, from the
brainless-blond announcer, to the vulture-reporters (who would just LOVE to
film an electrocution live), to the accuracy of their reporting.
    Anyway, if you are willing to suspend your disbelief over the
impossibilities, this should prove to be an excellent movie.  This is not HIGH
ART, but it has good characters, and a lot of humor.  They even throw in some
tension, and a few chases for your $5.  Go see this one if you like basic
comedies.
