Authors
Rose "Bams" Cooper
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Violon rouge, Le (1998)
"The Red Violin (1998); aka "Le Violon Rouge"
Rated R; running time of 126 minutes
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Title?0120802 
Official site: http://www.redviolin.com/ 
Written by: Don McKellar and Francois Girard 
Directed by: Francois Girard
Starring: Samuel L. Jackson, Don McKellar, Carlo Cecchi, Irene Grazioli,
Jean-Luc Bideau, Christoph Koncz, Jason Flemyng, Greta Scacchi, Sylvia
Chang, Liu Zifeng, Ireneusz Bogajewicz
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 1999
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsredvi.html
Movie-wise, today was a day of Color for me--in more ways than one: first,
"Blue Streak" with Martin Lawrence, and now "The Red Violin", featuring
Samuel L. Jackson. I might just get used to having so much Color on the
screen. The question is, were these Colors just eye candy, or something
more?
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below):
First things first: if you're not the type that likes Films (as Steve
Martin said so well in "Bowfinger", "I don't make films, I make movies!"),
ya might want to Exit, Stage Right. Do so quietly, please, so as not to
disturb the other patrons[1]. Ok, now that that business is done... 
The excellently-executed website for this Film says it much better than I
ever could (do yourself a favor: if you don't plan on seeing this
movie--heck, even if you do--read through the Storyline on that page; it
helped to clarify a lot of things that I saw but didn't quite Get at
first; plus, it's extremely well-done. Kudos to all involved with this
website):
  "THE RED VIOLIN is a stirring and sumptuous epic about a fabled musical  
   instrument that changes hands - and lives - over the course of three 
   centuries. Depicting signature chapters in the violin's history, from its
   creation in seventeenth-century Italy, to the court of Imperial Vienna in
   1790, to Victorian England in the late 1800s, to the People's Republic of
   China in the mid-1960s, and, finally, to an auction house in modern-day
   Montreal, THE RED VIOLIN is a grand tale that spans five countries, four
   languages, and more than three hundred years of history and cultural change.
   These successive movements, each evoking a different musical style, from
   Baroque to modern, combine to tell a tale filled with poetry, pageantry,
   tragedy, romance, adventure, and intrigue."
I need to admit my bias: as a writer of primarily short stories and
poetry, I'm a sucker for a well-told story; given one, I could sit through
almost anything. I went in knowing that this film was somehow Different,
but I didn't quite expect what I saw (including the subtitles, which I
very much appreciated). And since I stayed up all night working on various
3BC projects, I was incredibly sleepy before the film started (having just
finished watching "Blue Streak" less than an hour before this one, my
weariness was all the more pronounced). That "The Red Violin" could cut
through all of that and hold me enthralled for two hours, is a tribute to
the quality of this film.
As much as I loved this movie, I find it hard to describe it adequately.
It had action, passionate sex/romance, intrigue (if only in how the violin
changes hands over centuries), humor, pathos--but not like your
standard-fare mainstream flick.  Neither, though, is it dry and lifeless
as Films tend to be. It took a couple minutes to get into the
story--during the Italian segment, I was distracted[1] for a few minutes
and didn't quite follow what was happening there--but by the time the
violin, and the viewer with it, moved on to Vienna, I was hooked. 
The storytelling was done beautifully both in the narration and in the
filming itself; the flashbacks necessary for this movie were done well and
made perfect sense, leaving the viewer wanting to know more and more about
what happens next. As it went back (forward?) to present-day Montreal, the
camera angles revealed repeated scenes from viewpoints that we didn't see
before as it advanced the tale; the shifts in focus were done subtly
enough so as not to confuse the viewer, but didn't insult the viewer's
intelligence (as, unfortunately, far too many flicks I've seen this
summer, did). The events that took place in each vignette tore at my heart
(especially the one in Vienna, with Christoph Koncz as Kaspar Weiss; I
just wanted to take that poor boy home with me!), made me laugh, made me
angry in turn--but not in a manipulative way. Each one was like a puzzle
that fit almost perfectly near the end. I had Issues that I'll address in
a minute, but most of them were resolved by reading carefully through the
story (and The Story Behind The Story) on the Official Website. I can't
recommend a read-through of that page, highly enough.
The actors were equally outstanding, each in his or her own right; having
the overall story told in small vignettes helped to make each segment's
featured players get the highlight they need. Standouts include the
aforementioned Koncz, Jason Flemyng as Fredrick Pope (the passionate
"devil"), Sylvia Chang as Xiang Pei and her own mother, and Ireneusz
Bogajewicz (Cesca the tarot reader). The violin itself didn't impress me
(and the supposed "secret" about it was pretty transparent from the
start), but I suppose I could see the obsession in, say, a rare Mac clone
being passed down through the ages and...uh, never mind. I liked most of
all that it wasn't until nearly the end that everything came together; and
did so logically, not clumsily so-we-can-END-this-thing! like most of
today's flicks [can you say "The Muse"? I knew you could!] 
Do you get the vibe that I liked this film? "Liked" isn't strong enough.
It now holds a rare spot alongside "The Matrix", "Mystery Men" and last
year's "What Dreams May Come", as the only movies I cared to spend my
hard-earned dough on to see again before they went to video. I am
surprised at myself, though, for liking it as much as I did; not that I'm
not Cultured--I have Kulcha oozing from my sweet lil' pores--but because
violins normally don't Do it for me (unlike the film's producer, I think
the saxaphone is the most romantic instrument). Maybe I'm getting more
conservative (Blacktionary time: bougie) in my Old Age, but give me more
Red Violins over "Chill Factor" and its bretheren, any day.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]
    As a Black woman, I see the "Black Factor"--things that affect me as a 
    "consumer of color"--in many aspects of life; movies included. Whether 
    from the standpoint of noting Black (and other "minority") cast and crew
    members (if any), to the (lack of) focus toward "people of color" (dag, I
    hate that term), to the out-and-out antagonistic attitude toward Us 
    (Jar-Jar, anyone?), the "Black Factor" (BF) is something that plays as 
    much a role in my film enjoyment as any other aspect of the movie itself.
As promised, my Issues: Samuel L. Jackson; more specifically, his
character's actions in this film.
(WARNING: some spoilers contained below.) Of all the actors in this film,
Jackson sticks out like a sore thumb at first viewing. Point blank, it
felt like he did not belong there. Don't get me wrong: I'd pay to listen
to The Man read a telephone book, but his was the only role that didn't
synch for me. And don't go assuming that it's because he's Black; that
wasn't it. It's because he's so GOTdam intense--which, ironically enough,
seems to be exactly why he was cast in the role.
For me (until I read the story on the site, anyway), both his
unreasonable, Jules-like anger, and his out-and-out thievery in the end,
were misplaced. After reading the story, though, both are explained;
still, it changed the timbre of the movie as a movie for me. Having gone
to see the movie primarily because he's in it, I left the theater bothered
by his actions within it, and feeling that something just wasn't right.
Maybe if it wasn't for the situation I'm about to Dish about, I would've
been able to Feel him more immediately; who knows...
Bammer's Bottom Line    
[1]A Bammer Rant, if I may...I finally found something more irritating than 
Black Folks bein' Loud in the theater (oh, don't look at me like that; y'all
know it's true): a big fat greasy nasty IRRITATINGLY LOUD man--who
happened to be of the Caucasian Persuasian--suckin' down a HUGE vat of
popcorn as if he hadn't eaten in days. That fool was smackin' his lips
like he was eating filet mignon or something, like his mama didn't teach
him better than that. Next time I go to an art flick, I'm takin' my belt,
daggonit.
That, and other issues with Jackson aside, I encourage my readers to spend
a few bucks on something they might not normally go to see; it's worth it
(and if you're one of my cherished Ghetto Readers, just wait'll you see
this pasty paleface do it with a violin! He so nastee!)
"The Red Violin"--high marks for both the film and its accompanying
website.  I may have finally found my movie review niche: foreign
artsy-fartsy films. Who'da Thunkit?

Title
Review for Best Man, The (1999/I)
"The Best Man" (1999) 
Rated R; running time of 120 minutes
IMDB site: http://us.imdb.com/Title?0168501 
Official site: http://www.universalpictures.com/bestman/ 
Written by: Malcolm D. Lee
Directed by:Malcolm D. Lee
Starring: Taye Diggs, Nia Long, Morris Chestnut, Harold Perrineau Jr., 
Terrence Dashon Howard, Sanaa Lathan, Monica Calhoun, Melissa DeSousa
Review Copyright Rose Cooper, 1999
Review URL: http://www.3blackchicks.com/bamsbest.html
Remember what I said about "The Wood"?  Well, ditto for this one. Get up,
get out, and get tickets to "The Best Man", NOW.  Sooner than that, even. 
Because as good as "The Wood" was, "The Best Man" runs circles around it.
The Story (WARNING: some spoilers contained below):
Reminiscent of "The Big Chill", "The Best Man" tells the story of a group
of old college friends who've come together for the weekend for the
wedding of their friends Lance (Chestnut), a professional football player,
and Mia (Calhoun), the love of his life. Complicating matters is the fact
that Harper (Diggs), a writer, has written a book called "Unfinished
Business", a barely-fictionalized account of the group's time together on
campus--including the unfufilled night that the character otherwise known
as Jordan (Long) spent with Harper's character, and more importantly, the
character otherwise known as Mia's tryst with Harper's character. Since
the book wasn't to be published until well after the wedding, Harper
didn't sweat it too much--except unbeknownst to him, up-and-coming TV
Producer Jordan had an advanced copy of the book and shared it with Murch
(Perrineau), a law student who can't keep a secret (not to mention not
being able to keep Shelby (DeSousa) off his tip long enough to straighten
out his spine around her), and Quentin (Howard), a "ne'er-do-well
professional student" (in Harper's eyes, the group member most wasting his
talents), who can't wait to bust on Harper (since Harper constantly
berates him for his life-choices). Further complicating matters is the
Thing that Harper and Jordan still have for each other--much to the dismay
of Robin (Lathan), Harper's girlfriend of two years with whom he can't
quite bring himself to make a full committment. 
The Upshot:
Never--not after "Soul Food", not after "love jones"; not even after the
aforementioned "The Wood"--never have I come out of a mainstream motion
picture feeling like I felt after seeing this one; feeling as if I saw
myself and my college friends again. This movie touched on so many of the
situations we all went through, it was scary. Though it was, of course,
exaggerated (none of us seemed to have wound up with the football star,
and I'm still working on that first novel), "The Best Man" rang true to
me, on a personal level. And the funny thing is, not all of my college
buddies were Black (I'll get back to that later).
Without having the "luxury" of being able to rely on the trickery of "thug
life" or "booty call" flicks, the success of "The Best Man", and movies
like it, depends on a strong, talented cast, writer, and director. This
movie has all three in...uh, abundance. There wasn't a clunker amongst
them, though Diggs (in my opinion, the second-weakest of a strong group)
kept reminding me of both his "The Wood" and "How Stella Got Her Groove
Back" characters. Still, he held his own, as did the rest: Chestnut (who
looked yummy with that facial hair of his goin' on) was not only
convincing as the former playboy baller turned committed groom, who
believed in God and wanted his best man--Harper--to Feel Him too, he was
also very funny in the role. Long's "Jordan" (who reminded me in many ways
of our own Diva!) was on it as the professional Black woman who, unlike
way too many of her sisters, did need a Black man in her life...if only
for one night. Perrineau could swing those locks of his my way, any day;
though he surpassed Diggs in the "needed to stretch the acting chops"
category, his character was quite sweet in dealing with the hilarious
Shelby--and DeSousa should win something for that performance of hers; she
had me rollin'! Calhoun's "Mia" seemed otherworldly, especially in her
first appearance; right away, I knew there was something more there than
meets the eye. And as Robin, Harper's long-suffering girlfriend, Lathan's
plea of "I'm not perfect [in comparison with Jordan]" to Harper, hit home
with me, after all of the arguments I've had on various Black lists about
how some Black men say they want "A Good Black Woman", but mean they want
"The Closest Black Woman With Good Looks And A Slammin' Body That I Can
Find Right Now". 
But by far, my most favorite character was that of the oldest-looking one
of the bunch, Quentin; which is saying a lot, because he was my least
favorite character to begin with. The trash that fell from his lips (see
below), annoyed me--until I realized that it was just much talk and
bravado, covering up the deeper side of Q (the bid whist scene is what
turned it around for me; and that these characters chilled over a game of
bid whist, warmed me all the more to this movie). The more Q made me
laugh, and the more I saw his instigating for what it was meant to be, the
better I understood him (and like Jordan, Q reminds me of a scaalister who
shall remain nameless, but everybody who follows scaalist, knows who I
mean, I bet), and by his closing scene, I found myself wanting to hang
around this great character--and his friends...
...none of whom could've been realized without the writing and directing
talents of Malcolm Lee. Last week, before the movie opened, Lee and some
of the cast members of "The Best Man" were on the campus of Michigan
State, and because of a previous committment, I missed it, to my
detriment. I sure would've liked to have met this man, who has all of the
skills of his famous cousin, Spike, but none of the harsh (and sometimes
misplaced) anger and overzealous storytelling (though you can indeed see
shades of Spike's groove in Malcolm's work. Case in point: during the
bachelor party, when Lance reads the passage in Harper's book that
addresses Harper's and Mia's book character's involvement, the screen
colors shift to a pot-boiling red, and you can see and feel the anger
welling up in Lance without a word having to be said. If that wasn't a
Spike-ism, my name ain't Bammer). Spike, I loves ya, hon, but Malcolm
could teach you a thing or two about telling Our [non-monolithic] story.
And so as not to negate Spike's rightful place in Black filmmaking, I'd
love to see a more collaborative Spike and Malcolm joint; as my son is
wont to say, I bet it'd be tight.
Aside from my personal joy in watching it, this flick told a story that
was good in its own right, without the added "...for a Black movie" that
is bound to come up in various reviews and general chatter about it. From
the very nice opening titles, to the music (more on this in a minute,
too), to the smart, sexy, and real characters and equally smart, sexy, and
real story, "The Best Man" gets my early nod for one of the best movies of
1999. I'll put it this way: "The Matrix" is no longer standing on its "up
there" platform alone.
This is not to say that there weren't problems with this flick, number one
being its overuse of the term "nigga" and "bitches" (especially the
former). Had they kept it to a single character--Q, in this case--I coulda
dug it; but to hear that falling liberally from the lips of Harper (who,
as a professional writer in his chosen genre, should've known better) and
to a lesser extent, Lance, it just didn't fit the general positive groove
of the movie. I also took Issue with the underuse of the extremely
talented Perrineau (oh! the beauty of his locks! I could spend hours
playing in th...oops. Caught digressing again). Surely there had to be
more to him than his lack of balls, Malcolm! The final nitpick I had--that
the wedding reception had a cliched live band "playing" obvious recordings
of (nevertheless great) tunes by Earth Wind & Fire and Cameo--was
completely wiped out by everyone at the reception doing the Electric
Slide. Our audience cheered loudly at that, and I must say, I was amongst
the cheerers. Good thing I stayed around for the credits too; I would
otherwise have missed one of the best scenes in the whole flick.
All of which to say, if you are still reading this and haven't gone out to
see the movie yet, shame on ya. Get up. Get out. Get tickets. NOW.
The "Black Factor" [ObDisclaimer: We Are Not A Monolith]
    As a Black woman, I see the "Black Factor"--things that affect me as a 
    "consumer of color"--in many aspects of life; movies included. Whether 
    from the standpoint of noting Black (and other "minority") cast and crew
    members (if any), to the (lack of) focus toward "people of color" (dag, I
    hate that term), to the out-and-out antagonistic attitude toward Us 
    (Jar-Jar, anyone?), the "Black Factor" (BF) is something that plays as 
    much a role in my film enjoyment as any other aspect of the movie itself.
The term "...for a Black movie" (along with its cohorts, "the Black
[insert White movie or star's name]" is rife with (not-so-hidden) meaning.
Taken one way, it could be seen as dismissal: "oh, that was good--'for a
Black movie'". Taken another way, it could be seen as pleasant surprise:
"Damn, that did well as the box office--'for a Black movie'" (and while
we're on the subject, I wonder what the pundits will say about TBM being
number one on its opening day? Hmmm...). But a curious thing happened
before this one opened: I had just made mention on the "3BC Scheduled
Reviews" page of how this flick was being favorably compared to "The Big
Chill", when I saw Taye Diggs on one of the entertainment TV shows,
blasting a reviewer for saying that TBM is "The Black 'The Big Chill'".
And it made me pause, because I understand what Diggs was saying, and to a
certain extent, agree with it: why did "The Black" have to be added to
that statement? Does the fact that Blacks make up the majority of the
cast, delegate it to being a "Black" movie (on the same lines as, say,
"Carmen Jones" or "The Wiz", were?) And what of the Whites who enjoyed it?
There were Whites of all ages in our audience; should they not have been
there since it was seen as a "Black" movie? And what does that say about
"White" movies? After all is said and done, as Diggs said, "I thought
we've gotten past all that".
...but you see, on that ubiquitous Other Hand, past that "certain extent",
I think Diggs was either being naive, or purposefully stirring up
controversy to generate publicity for the movie. Because if you're Black
In America (or White, for that matter, not to mention Latino, or Native,
or, or, or...) and don't see that there are experiences that are unique to
the culture in which you were raised, you are blind indeed (and man, do I
hate the term "colorblind", for all that it denotes. "Color Indifferent",
I can get with. But once again, I digress.) That doesn't mean that one
can't appreciate or experience other situations; but that does mean that,
for now, "The Best Man" is seen as "The Black 'The Big Chill'". The extent
to which you say, or internalize, that as being racist or being something
"we've gotten past", is the measure of where We are as a People, and as a
country.
Bammer's Bottom Line:
There's a new Lee in town, and his name is Malcolm. We'll be watching for
more good stuff from you, my brother (and hoping that some of you will rub
off on your cousin).
"The Best Man" (rating: greenlight) 
I have a space on my DVD shelf reserved for this flick--right next to "The
Matrix".
