Authors
Susan Granger
Number of Reviews
455

Title
Review for Billy Elliot (2000)
Beginning with an exuberant title sequence, this charming,
off-beat, coming-of-age story revolves around Billy Elliot, the
younger of two sons of a widower coal miner in Northern England. It's
1984, and the miners are engaged in a long, bitter strike. Following
the family tradition, Billy is expected to learn boxing at the
Everington Boys Club where, instead, the 11 year-old becomes
enthralled by the girls' dancing class, led by a chain-smoking teacher
who recognizes his raw talent. But when his macho father and
rabble-rousing brother discover he's taking ballet lessons, they
ridicule Billy ("Lads do boxing and football and wrestling, not
friggin' ballet."), forcing him to hide his slippers under the
mattress and sneak off to class.  Then come the auditions for the
Royal Ballet School and Billy's joyful, foot-stompin' "I Want to
Boogie" sequence. What makes this heartfelt English import such a gem
is the collaboration of writer Lee Hall, cinematographer Brian Tufano
and director Stephen Daldry, who - despite the simplistic
predictability of the plot - create eccentric, lovable characters and
evocative imagery. As Billy, Jamie Bell embodies awkward
determination, juggling grim reality with a surreal fantasy
world. ("Just because I like ballet doesn't mean I'm a pouf!") As his
father, Gary Lewis is tough-yet-tender, and Julie Walters scores as
Billy's crusty yet compassionate teacher. Jamie Draven and Stuart
Wells lend strong support with Jean Heywood touching as Billy's senile
grandmother who recalls, "I could have been a professional dancer."
While the bleak setting is reminiscent of "The Full Monty," the
energetic mood evokes "Flashdance." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Billy Elliot" is an exhilarating 8. Combining comedy and
poignancy, it's all about being yourself.

Title
Review for Beautiful (2000)
Mark Twain once said, "A soiled baby with a neglected nose
cannot be conscientiously regarded as a thing of beauty." As a
corollary, this clumsy satire forces audiences to spend two hours with
Mona Hibbard, a vain, self-centered, thoroughly disagreeable
protagonist, played by Minnie Driver, in her grating quest for the
Miss America-like beauty pageant crown. Mona was born in a shack in
Naperville, Illinois, to white-trash parents who apparently tolerated
her passion for entering beauty contests while fostering her low
self-esteem. Now the mother of an illegitimate daughter, she passes
off the little girl (Hallie Kate Eisenberg, instantly recognizable
from Pepsi TV commercials) as the daughter of her best-friend/
room-mate (Joey Lauren Adams) - which becomes a problem when the
maternal care-giver implausibly winds up in jail. And we're supposed
to believe that the precocious child doesn't know who her real mother
is! Jon Bernstein's manipulative, cliche-filled screenplay sinks below
soap-opera, as Mona's secret could be exposed by an inquiring TV
reporter (Leslie Stefanson) whose own ambitions were thwarted by Mona
several years earlier in an incident involving dumping
industrial-strength adhesive on her flaming, twirling baton. Actress
Sally Field makes her directorial debut with this film; mercifully,
she can never sink lower. Nor can Kathleen Turner, inexcusably chewing
up the scenery as Mona's pageant mentor. There is one funny moment,
though, when Mona sings "The Wind Beneath My Wings" to a pregnant
woman about to give birth in a supermarket. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Beautiful" barely manages a shallow 2. If you're
intrigued by beauty contests, rent Michael Ritchie's satirical "Smile"
or the more recent "Drop Dead Gorgeous."

Title
Review for Boys Don't Cry (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "BOYS DON'T CRY" (Fox Searchlight Pictures)
         First-time writer/director Kimberly Peirce was so appalled
when she read a newspaper account of how and why 21 year-old Teena
Brandon was shot dead with two friends in a farmhouse just outside
Falls City, Nebraska, back in 1994, that she was determined to bring
this true story to the screen. Teena Brandon - a.k.a. Brandon Teena -
so desperately desired to be a boy that she posed as one. She
"strapped and packed" by flattening her breasts beneath surgical
bandages and inserting socks into the crotch of her jeans. Not only
did she get away with the pathetic masquerade but, amazingly, she
seduced several young women who, when they questioned her sexual
identity, were told that she was a hermaphrodite. Brandon adamantly
insisted that she was not a lesbian, explaining that she was really a
boy trapped in a girl's body and often spoke of plans to have a sex
change operation. Actress Hilary Swank (TV's " Beverly Hills 90210")
delivers an incredibly believable performance as the troubled
"pretty-boy" Brandon with Chloe Sevigny as the gullible girl who
adores her. The problem is that all of the characters are essentially
repugnant for one reason or another, so it's difficult to relate to
any of them. (Giving a toddler beer to drink is hardly an endearing
quality.) Plus, there's a gratuitously violently brutal rape scene in
which two local boys (Peter Sarsgaard, Brendan Sexton III) take their
revenge on the deceitful "dyke" - and that, in particular, is
distasteful and difficult to watch. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Boys Don't Cry" is a pathetic, sad 4. It's a tragic, depressing
tale of prejudice and hatred.

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
"Off to the movies we shall go...Where we learn everything
that we know...'Cause the movies teach us what our parents don't have
time to say." That's the "Mountain Song," which begins this rude,
raunchy, animated musical, starring Comedy Central's most corrupted TV
third-graders. The cheeky tykes - Cartman, Stan, Kyle and Kenny -
bribe a homeless man to take them to an R-rated movie, "Asses of
Fire," starring a foul-mouthed, flatulent Canadian duo. Armed with a
scatological vocabulary, which they don't truly comprehend, the boys
start spewing such profanity that their once-peaceful South Park
community launches a vindictive anti-smut campaign which grows into a
national movement, resulting in the United States declaring war on
Canada.  In one of the most cynical vignettes, one of the boys has a
behavior-modification V-chip implanted, delivering a severe electrical
shock each time he utters a bad word. How is the movie different from
the TV series? It's a musical with nasty, dirty parodies of "The Sound
of Music" and "Les Miserables" with some inspirational ballads tossed
in. Writer/director Trey Parker, along with Matt Stone, Pam Brady, and
composer Marc Shaiman have devised a cleverly scathing, if crude,
social parable, mocking our fear of and distaste for toilet humor,
Satan, and Saddam Hussein, plus making some biting points about
censorship, tolerance, and freedom of speech. Celebrity voices include
George Clooney, Minnie Driver, Brent Spiner, and Eric Idle. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "South Park" is an obscene, offensive,
smutty 7. Warning to parents: this funny, fast-paced, irreverent film
pushes the envelope of its R-rating and, while childish, is definitely
for adults, not children.

Title
Review for Waterboy, The (1998)
Adam Sandler summarized this and his whole string of
lightweight movies ("The Wedding Singer," "Billy Madison," "Happy
Gilmore") when he said, "We're just having fun, and I hope everyone
has fun right along with us." And there's something funny and
endearing about Adam Sandler, even if his moronic movies are simply
variations on each other and he always plays the nerdy, hapless
hero. This time, he's a seemingly dim-witted, socially inept 31
year-old from the swamps of Louisiana who works as a lowly water boy,
although he loves dispensing H2O to dehydrated athletes and truly
believes that it's life's greatest calling. His over-protective
mother, Kathy Bates, has home-schooled him in the bayou, so his only
contact with his peers is his job, where the jocks rib him
relentlessly and his coach won't let him fight back. Then, one day, he
gets a new coach, Henry Winkler, who consults "The Idiot's Guide to
Coaching." After years of holding in his fury, Sandler's finally
allowed to release his pent-up Cajun rage, and he's suddenly
transformed into the most devastating tackle on the team. Problem is:
he has to go to college at the same time - behind his mother's
back. And Kathy Bates is hilarious, cookin' snakes 'n' biscuits 'n'
'gators, shootin' off her mouth, and muggin' in front of the TV
cameras at a game. Fairuza Balk is amusing, too, as his wacko,
knife-wielding, jailbird girl-friend. Directed by Frank Coraci,
written by Tim Herlihy and Adam Sandler, the comedy is primarily
visual, and the zaniest bits are often at the edge of the main action
- like the depressed, unkempt, bourbon-drinking cheerleaders on the
loser football team. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Waterboy" is a silly, fumbling 3, delivering a bucketful of laughs.

Title
Review for One True Thing (1998)
       With all that has been written about the feminist movement, it
took Pulitzer Prize-winning Anna Quindlen to write an engrossing story
that dramatizes the complex difference between our mother's generation
and us, a confrontation between a woman whose expectations never
extended beyond her home and her children and her husband's career,
who viewed her life as an adjunct to those things, and her daughter,
whom she raised not only to work but to expect the world. Renee
Zellweger ("Jerry Maguire") plays an ambitious Manhattan journalist
who is forced to move back home to help her middle-aged parents -
Meryl Streep and William Hurt - through a cancer crisis. Not only does
she discover who her parents really are - their strengths, their
weaknesses - but the gutsy, gritty emotional journey she undertakes as
a care-giver is a complicated rite-of-passage to her own
maturity. Superbly adapted for the screen by Karen Croner and directed
by Carl Franklin ("Devil in a Blue Dress"), the performances are
dazzling, except for Tom E. Scott's bland younger brother character
which is grossly underwritten. Renee Zellweger, in particular, is
captivating; she is irresistible as an actress, while Meryl Streep is
luminous, perceptive, and courageous. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "One True Thing" is a wise, resolute 8.  It's a remarkable,
intimate film that reverberates with love for an unbroken generation
of stay-at-home mothers who knew how to have fun within a limited
arena and to love the life they made for the mselves.

Title
Review for American Beauty (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
       This surprisingly dramatic black comedy goes for the jugular as
it examines with bruising intensity two dysfunctional families in
American suburbia. Oscar winner Kevin Spacey ("The Usual Suspects")
stars as a cynical advertising exec who hates his job and resents his
controlling wife, played by Annette Bening. She's a fiercely
ambitious, high-strung perfectionist, intoxicated with success, as she
passionately devotes herself to selling real estate and tending her
rose garden. Thora Birch is their daughter - and she loathes them. In
fact, the film opens with videotape footage of the teenager
complaining about her father, wishing someone would kill him. Early
on, we discover someone does. Spacey will be dead within the year - at
least that's what he tells us. Who? How? When? Why? That's what's
eventually revealed on the screen. It's a classic suspense device -
and it works. Meanwhile, Spacey's lusting after his daughter's
flirtatious high school chum (Mena Suvari) and Bening's bedding a
realtor (Peter Gallagher), as Birch becomes involved with the "psycho
next door" (Wes Bentley), who is - in turn - terrorized by his stern,
abusive father (Chris Cooper).  In this satiric, sophisticated social
commentary, first-time screenwriter Alan Ball and first-time film
director Sam Mendes (Broadway's "Cabaret," "The Blue Room")
cinematically capture the hilarious, hedonistic, and heartbreaking
desperation of a marital mid-life crisis and struggle in depth with
the ironic definition of beauty. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "American Beauty" is an amazing, powerfully disturbing 10, as it
skewers the '90s. Let's talk Oscar nominations - this is one of the
best pictures of the year!

Title
Review for Your Friends & Neighbors (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "YOUR FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS" (Gramercy Pictures)
        Neil LaBute's caustic, dark comedy about sexual politics is a
follow-up to "In the Company of Men" and similar in its edgy,
tough-talking bitterness and emphasis on emotional isolation. Rather
than the singles scene, this time he attacks marital relations,
focusing - like a voyeur - on two upper middle-class couples. Ben
Stiller plays an analytical, pretentious college drama professor with
the disturbing habit of talking continually during sex. Catherine
Keener is his cynical, live-in girl-friend.  "Love," she says
succinctly, "is a disease." His buddy, Aaron Eckhart, suffers from
sexual dysfunction, leaving Amy Brenneman, as his gentle, dissatisfied
wife, with perpetual tears in her eyes. The guys work out at the gym
with Jason Patric, a calculating misogynist who enjoys humiliating the
women in his life and tape-recording raunchy sexual banter while he's
exercising. And Nastassja Kinski meets the other five characters in
her job as an assistant in an gallery; clearly, she's desperate for a
significant relationship wherever she can find it. Basically, this is
a nasty, sexually explicit social commentary about selfish,
egocentric, abrasive losers who love to verbalize about the awful
choices they make that wreck their lives. The steam-room scene in
which the men brag about the best sex they ever had is one of the most
appalling I've seen on the screen. Obviously, what Neil LaBute is
trying to communicate is that these hateful on-screen people are not
larger-than-life; instead, they're similar to the excruciatingly
vulnerable people we all meet every day, at home and at work. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Your Friends and Neighbors" is a
slow-moving, often disturbing, bleak 5. Hey, if these folks were real,
I'd be outta the neighborhood.

Title
Review for Affliction (1997)
Despite its superb performances, this is a bleak film about one
of life's dissolute losers. Set in a tiny New Hampshire town in the
dead of winter, Nick Nolte is the local cop and snow-plower who's
brow-beaten by the town's real-estate power broker, unhappily divorced
from his wife, and painfully alienated from his pre-teen
daughter. Except for his waitress girl-friend, Sissy Spacek, no one
wants to be around him, even his drunk, sadistically violent and
emotionally abusive father, James Coburn, who allowed his mother to
freeze to death in their isolated farmhouse.  As the story unfolds,
solemnly narrated by his younger brother, Willem Dafoe, we find out
how he came to be who he is and why, when a local union boss is
accidentally killed in a deer-hunting accident, he is told to just
look the other way - if he wants to keep his job. Instead, he indulges
his conspiracy theories involving foul play and discovers some
devastating truths about himself, his past, and his future.  Adapted
from a novel by Russell Banks, this sanity-to-madness saga should be
more emotionally affecting than it is, but writer/director Paul
Schrader ("Taxi Driver," "Raging Bull") invests so much coldly
calculated gloom, doom, and foreboding into every cruel scene that
there are few highs and lows. From the beginning, Nolte's life is one
of tortured, desperate rage.  With no self-esteem, he is spiritually
adrift and neurotic, unable to maintain a relationship with anyone. In
short, he's a wreck. His life is in shambles. All his dark angst is
symbolized by a persistent, throbbing toothache which he suffers
throughout. Both Nick Nolte and James Coburn deliver remarkable
performances, but on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Affliction"
is a desolate, uncompromising 6. One of the most harsh, depressing
movies of the season.

Title
Review for Impostors, The (1998)
 Stanley Tucci's "Big Night" was one of my favorite films of
1996 and, incredibly, his second comedy is a genuine delight. No, it's
not as witty as "Big Night." That's a hard act to follow. But it is
genuinely wacky and hysterically funny. Conceived as a madcap
screwball farce, it stars Tucci and Oliver Platt as two out-of-work
theater actors who, after bumbling a big audition with a
writer/director (Woody Allen), accidentally stow away on a luxury
ocean liner in the 1930s. No, not the Titanic, the
S.S. Intercontinental, sailing to Paris. Masquerading as stewards,
they try to avoid a pretentious British actor (Alfred Molina) whom
they have unwittingly offended. Dashing down the corridors, they
encounter various crew members: the German Head Steward (Campbell
Scott,) who is in love with the Head Stewardess (Lily Taylor), who is
in love with the ship's detective (Matt McGrath), a shy young Italian
who is terrified of hurting anyone. Then there are the passengers: a
suicidal singer (Steve Buscemi), a deposed Queen (Isabella
Rossellini), an obsessed sheik (Teagle F. Bougere), an impoverished
socialite (Dana Ivey), her morose daughter (Hope Davis), and a tennis
pro who plays a better game off the court (Billy Connolly). And when
they discover that the nefarious First Mate (Tony Shalhoub) has
planted bombs to go off at midnight, chaos reigns. Written and
directed by Tucci, at times it resembles a silent movie but with
sound. There's Buster Keaton slapstick and Charlie Chaplin
pantomime. Tucci's Laurel, Platt's Hardy. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "The Impostors" is a frothy, zany 7, as bubbly and
intoxicating as a glass of vintage champagne.

Title
Review for Road Trip (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
         This is a silly, sophomoric sex comedy - and, if that's what
you're in the mood for, line up at the popcorn counter. But it's not
as good as "American Pie" or "There's Something About Mary." And it's
not as funny as "National Lampoon's Animal House" or "Porky's."
Breckin Meyer stars as Josh, who's been in love with Tiffany (Rachel
Blanchard) since they were kids. He's committed to her - except for a
college fling with sexually aggressive Beth (Amy Smart). But his
infidelity was recorded on videotape - and that tape has been
accidentally mailed to Tiffany. Which necessitates a spontaneous,
desperate three-day, 1,800-mile road trip from Ithaca, New York, to
Austin, Texas, to intercept the incriminating sexcapade and save his
romance. He's accompanied by his bumbling best-friend, played by Seann
William Scott, plus pot-smoking Paulo Costanzo and the requisite
nerdy-guy-with-the-car, DK Qualls. So much for plot. MTV comedian Tom
Green serves as the cryptic narrator/tour guide named Barry
Manilow. (That moniker is typical of the lame humor.)
Co-writer/director Todd Phillips wallows in the gross, crude antics as
the four guys in a Taurus experience all the gratuitous nudity
(a.k.a. bare breasts) their testosterone levels can conjure
up. Unfortunately, none of this is very original if you've ever seen a
dumb teenage sex comedy before. It's 91 minutes long - which only
seems like three hours. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Road
Trip" is a trashy, raunchy 3, determined to offend as many people as
possible.

Title
Review for Where the Heart Is (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Attention, Wal-Mart Shoppers! Princess Amidala's been sleeping
in your store. Well, not exactly, but in this chick's flick Natalie
Portman plays a poor, pregnant 17 year-old named Novalee Nation who
moves into an Oklahoma Wal-Mart when her wannabe musician/boyfriend,
Willie Jack Pickens (Dylan Bruno), abandons her. In the discount
chain-store, she finds everything she needs. She sleeps in a sleeping
bag on a fake lawn, bathes in the bathroom, and keeps careful record
of everything she's used so she can pay it back some day. And when her
daughter, Americus, is born she's celebrated in the media as "the
Wall-Mart Baby."  Intrigued by her celebrity, Novalee's dysfunctional
mother (Sally Field) appears and makes off with some cash. So what's
the girl gonna do? Like the Beatles' song - she gets a little help
from her friends. Like a perpetually pregnant maternity nurse (Ashley
Judd), who become her best-friend, and a nurturing surrogate-mother
(Stockard Channing). Novalee even finds a fella, a shy, gentle
librarian (James Frain), and an empowering career as a
photographer. But then Willie Jack resurfaces as country singer Billy
Shadow, now the protege of a Nashville agent (Joan Cusack). Based on
Billie Letts' 1996 best-seller, adapted for the screen by Lowell Ganz
& Babaloo Mandel, and directed by Matt Williams (TV's "Roseanne,"
"Home Improvement"), this episodic story of love and the meaning of
family unfolds in a relentlessly likable, sudsy soap opera
style. While Natalie Portman is obviously a sophisticated, refined and
talented actress, she's woefully miscast as raw Southern trash, which
is the way her role is described. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Where the Heart Is" is a sweetly banal, schmaltzy 5, just the
number that Novalee considers ominous.

Title
Review for Triangle, The (2001) (TV)
Susan Granger's review of "THE TRIANGLE" (TBS)
   The Bermuda Triangle, that dreaded area off the Florida coast where
countless mysterious disappearances have occurred, is the setting for the
original supernatural thriller, "The Triangle," set to premiere on Sunday,
August 12 at 8 p.m. (ET) on TBS Superstation. It's the story of a close group of
friends whose annual fishing trip to the Caribbean becomes a voyage of terror
when their boat enters the legendary Bermuda Triangle, where a mysterious ocean
liner, Queen of Scots, which disappeared 60 years ago, appears to pull them into
an abyss of horror.  Friendships shatter as the companions turn against each
other, in a spirit reminiscent of "The Shining."
   Luke Perry stars as the ring-leader, a junior exec living beyond his
means, with Dan Cortese as a lawyer who's been reading about the West Indies.
Polly Shannon plays Perry's dippy, insipid fiancee, who pleads, "Please, let's
go back," while David Hewlett mutters, "I haven't really decided what I want to
do when I grow up." Dorian Harewood is the hapless charter boat captain with
Olivia D'Abo as the first mate with the frightening gift of premonition. "Do you
think something can be evil, unto itself" she muses. "I believe everything
happens for a reason." 
     Written by Ted Humphrey, directed by Lewis Teague, and filmed in
Barbados, it makes you grasp for the rational explanation for the dark,
tormented forces that are at work. Since he poses provocative questions and
attempts to answer them in a realistic way, perhaps Humphrey can be forgiven for
having his characters repeat, "I have a really bad feeling" so many times. On
the Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge, "The Triangle" is a spooky, scary 6. It
premieres Sun. but repeats next Wed., Sat. & Sun., along with Sat. & Sun., Aug.
25 & 26th.

Title
Review for Rounders (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "ROUNDERS" (Miramax Films)
 In "Good Will Hunting," Matt Damon played a young genius who
secretly wanted to get off the streets and get an education. This
time, he plays hustler, or "rounder," who secretly wants to get out of
law school and back into the viciously competitive world of
high-stakes poker. John Dahl, who directed "Red Rock West" and "The
Last Seduction," quickly makes us familiar with the dark caves where
fortunes change hands as fast as the time it takes you to say "card
shark."
Damon plays a hotshot who was paying for his New York law
school education by playing poker until, one night, he lost his entire
savings - $33,000 - on one hand to John Malkovich as an Oreo
cookie-chomping Russian mobster named KGB. After that stunning defeat,
he promises his live-in law-school girl-friend, Gretchen Mol
(cover-girl, Sept. issue of "Vanity Fair"), to give up cards. But,
once his old friend, Edward Norton, aptly called "Worm," is paroled
from prison after serving a sentence for a scam they pulled together,
you know the deck is stacked for him to return to his passion - the
gaming tables. And he does - with a vengeance, as Martin Landau scores
as a rabbi-like professor and John Turturro as a shrewd gambler. The
problem is: poker is not much of a spectator sport. While it's
fascinating to see how the players calculate who holds what cards and
who can play malevolent mind-games best, the pumped-up testosterone of
David Levien and Brian Koppelman's script affects the participants far
more than the observers. It's John Dahl's brilliant direction and
clever casting that propels "Rounders" into a bet-it-all "Rocky"
showdown. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Rounders" is a
seductively savvy, suspense-filled 7, proving what Landau says: "We
can't run from who we are. Our destiny chooses us."

Title
Review for Instinct (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Violence has become a negative catch-word recently, so it's
refreshing to see how the concept is explored in this psychological
thriller, based on Daniel Quinn's book "Ismael." Anthony Hopkins plays
a highly respected primatologist who has been jailed for killing two
Rwandan rangers and injuring others after choosing to live in the wild
with mountain gorillas for nearly two years. Held captive in an
overcrowded maximum security prison for the criminally insane, he is
interrogated by a bright, ambitious psychiatrist, Cuba Gooding Jr.,
who is eager to understand the mysterious truth behind the scientist's
actions in anticipation of writing a best-seller. While simplistic,
Gerald DiPego's script is intelligent and thoughtful, delving into the
concepts of illusion and freedom, combined with the lust for
domination and control, ultimately dividing people into "givers" and
"takers." Director Jon Turtletaub ("Phenomenon") integrates the brutal
reality of prison life with memories of what transpired in Africa to
motivate Hopkins' violent behavior. The challenging, combative
chemistry between Anthony Hopkins and Cuba Gooding Jr. is palpable,
escalating the tension level, which is already elevated by the hostile
sadism of the prison's guards and warden. But a subplot involving
Maura Tierney as Hopkins' daughter never jells, and the conclusion is
cloyingly melodramatic. Arguably the most versatile and talented actor
on the screen today, Anthony Hopkins evokes a volatile power and fury
reminiscent of Hannibal Lechter in "The Silence of the Lambs," while
Cuba Gooding Jr. displays a forceful, bruising intensity. And
special-effects wizard Stan Winston works wonders with the
gorillas. On the Granger Movie Gauge, "Instinct" is a compelling 7,
commanding attention from start to finish.

Title
Review for Dead Man on Campus (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "DEAD MAN ON CAMPUS" (Paramount Pictures)
      This tongue-in-cheek glimpse of college life is timed for the
opening of classes and specifically aimed at its target audience -
which is over 18 (because of its R-rating) and under 30 (after which,
presumably, maturity beckons).  Given that window of view-ability,
this quirky story is built around a popular urban legend. Namely, the
obscure "dead man's clause" that goes: If your college roommate
commits suicide, you get straight A's for the semester.  Meet Tom
Everett Scott ("That Thing You Do!"), a former honor student on
scholarship, and Mark-Paul Gosselaar (TV's "Saved by the Bell), a
hard-core party animal. After a couple of months of drugs, drink, and
casual sex, they're flunking freshmen who realize that this obscure
loophole, buried in the college charter, may be their only hope of
staying in school. Forced to take desperate measures, they embark on a
bleak mission to recruit the most emotionally unstable people on
campus to agree to move in to their three-man dormitory suite and then
fervently hope that one of them will commit suicide so they can get
their automatic 4.0 grade average "as a consolation prize." The
candidates include a paranoid computer whiz (Randy Perlstein) who is
convinced Bill Gates wants to steal his brain, a dour British punk
rocker (Corey Page) with a death wish, and a manic, self-destructive
frat man (Lochlyn Munro) whose idea of chivalry is to unzip his fly
and offer his services after he accidentally sets a co-ed's hair on
fire. Directed by Alan Cohn from a satirical script concocted by a
quartet of screenwriters, the murderous mischief consists entirely of
one-liner drivel, bathroom humor, and boisterous, childish pranks. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dead Man on Campus" flunks with a
funereal 3. What else would you expect from a demented comedy about
suicide?

Title
Review for Who Killed Atlanta's Children? (2000) (TV)

Susan Granger's review of "WHO KILLED ATLANTA'S CHILDREN?" (Showtime
TV - Sunday, July 16, and Wed., July 19, at 8 P.M. )
  "It's not quite justice, but it's a start..." notes James
Belushi at the conclusion of this powerful, provocative exploration of
the conspiracy and cover-up that diverted the search for the truth in
the Atlanta child murders of 1979-1981. Belushi and Gregory Hines play
two Spin magazine journalists who went to Atlanta in pursuit of
answers to a case that had left frustrated mothers, haunted by grief.
"There's something hanging over this town," Hines says. "I can feel
it." While Wayne Williams was convicted of some of the slayings, it
was obvious that he was not the primary culprit and parents of the
slain African-American children were critical of the way the case was
abruptly closed.  Integral to the reporters' investigation are tips
from an Atlanta police officer about the incompetence of 14 different
law enforcement agencies, including the Georgia Bureau of
Investigation and the FBI. That leads them to uncover the secret
investigation Task Force which developed evidence from reliable
informants that members of a Ku Klux Klan "Death Squad" were involved
as part of a child prostitution ring.  Meanwhile, both men - husbands
and fathers - are concerned that their own families may be in danger,
particularly when they're run off the road in a terrifying encounter
with angry locals one night. On the Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Who Killed Atlanta's Children?" is a sad, controversial 7.
Writer/director Charles Robert Carner reveals that this secret
investigation actually occurred but that some names and some details
have been changed. Wayne Williams' appeal case is currently going
through the legal process before the Georgia courts.

Title
Review for Sixth Sense, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE SIXTH SENSE" (Touchstone Pictures)
 It's very important that you be in your seat for the
beginning of this psychological thriller and stay all the way through
to the end to comprehend the nuances of the twisting plot. Bruce
Willis plays a renown child psychologist who is emotionally torn
between spending time with his lovely wife (Olivia Williams) and
helping desperately needy eight year-old named Cole (Haley Joel
Osment), who is haunted by dark visions that terrify him. He sees dead
people, restless spirits. These eerie ghosts appear everywhere - at
home, at school, on the street - and they reach out, trying to
communicate. Often they actually wound him. Cole lives with his
stressed-out single mother (Toni Collette), who is empathetic, but he
is terrified to tell her his secret, to reveal his unexplainable
paranormal powers. Then Willis comes on the scene. Slowly, the young
boy opens up to him. A trust develops, as the psychologist wrestles
with how the fragile child can cope with the harrowing, unresolved
problems that surround him. Philadelphia-based, 28 year-old
writer/director M. Night Shyamalan ("Wide Awake") and cinematographer
Tak Fujimoto ("The Silence of the Lambs") create an intriguing,
elliptical visual style, building a melancholy aura of suspense and
creating a tense, slowly building menace. Combining his spiritual and
mystical Indian roots with his American upbringing, Shyamalan achieves
a subdued, provocative balance between what's real and what's
imagined.  Bruce Willis drives the story with a strong, poignant
performance but it's Haley Joel Osment whose talent is an
amazement. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Sixth Sense" is
an ominous, unsettling, subtle 9. Only after the film's chilling
conclusion will you be able to fit the pieces of this ingenious
supernatural puzzle together.

Title
Review for Glass House, The (2001/I)
Susan Granger's review of "THE GLASS HOUSE" (Columbia Pictures)
Actor Stellan Skarsgard single-handedly makes this sinister thriller more
effective than you might expect. When the parents of 16 year-old  Ruby Baker
(Leelee Sobieski) and her 11 year-old  brother Rhett (Trevor Morgan) are killed
in a car crash, they're placed in the custody of their parents' best friends and
former neighbors, Erin and Terry Glass (Diane Lane, Stellan Skarsgard). The
Glasses'  lavish, contemporary, gated glass house in Malibu offers a
sun-drenched California distraction, complete with trendy clothes,
state-of-the-art TV and video games. Squabbling Ruby and Rhett must share a
bedroom, temporarily, but the estate lawyer (Bruce Dern) assures them that
there's $4 million to insure their comfortable future. If they have a future,
that is, since Ruby begins to suspect that the Glasses may not be the ideal
guardians they seem to be. Erin, a doctor specializing in pain-management, is a
moody drug addict, while Terry is heavily in debt to loan sharks. Working from
Wesley Strick's hackneyed script, television director Daniel Sackheim ("Law and
Order," "The X-Files") propels the creepy melodrama, unnecessarily underscoring
the malevolence, aided by production designer Jon Gary Steele and
cinematographer Alar Kivilo, who drenches the screen with cold, watery blue
imagery. There's one almost-surreal, amusing moment when a group of Valley teens
emerge from a showing of "Prom Nightmare," and one notes, "That actress was no
Meryl Streep." "Who's Meryl Streep?" another asks. "She's like Katie Holmes to
our parents" is the reply. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Glass
House" is a scary 6 - at least until the final transparent moments when it
shatters into a formulaic teenage horror flick.

Title
Review for This Is My Father (1998/I)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THIS IS MY FATHER" (Sony Pictures Classics)
This Irish romantic drama is a uniquely personal collaboration
between first-time writer-director Paul Quinn and his brothers Aidan
Quinn ("Michael Collins," "Practical Magic") and Declan Quinn
(cinematographer on "Leaving Las Vegas," "One True Thing"). It's the
bittersweet story of a Chicago schoolteacher (James Caan) who travels
to Ireland to discover his roots and learns the sad, true "Romeo and
Juliet"-type tale of his mother and the father he never met. The
screenplay stemmed from a story the Quinns' Irish-born mother used to
tell about ill-fated lovers in her village. The couple's secret is
something the tight-lipped locals still refuse to discuss - 50 years
later. Told in flashback, Aidan Quinn plays Kieran, a shy tenant
farmer, who meets Fiona (Moya Farrelly), a lovely, free-spirited 17
year-old, and they fall in love. But her alcoholic mother, who owns
the farm on which Kieran works, disapproves because he's poor and a
bastard child.  Eventually, the community, mobilized by a tyrannical
priest (Stephen Rea), manages to separate them. The acting is
admirable with a stalwart supporting cast that includes John Cusack,
Colm Meaney, Brendan Gleeson, and Donal Donnelly.  The weakness of the
film is the contrived structure. Paul Quinn's tragic story-line is so
full of hackneyed interruptions that it loses its power - which is too
bad since the poetic imagery evokes a society smothering under the
weight of doomy superstition and inevitable tradition. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "This is My Father" is a gentle, moving 6. And
the family collaboration will continue as the Quinn brothers'
Ireland-based sister Marian is developing a script about four Dublin
girls.

Title
Review for Bamboozled (2000)
   In this satirical fable, Spike Lee tackles race, television
and how blacks are depicted in the media. Taking its title from a
Malcolm X speech about how black people have allowed themselves to be
hoodwinked and led astray, the story revolves around Pierre Delacroix
(Damon Wayans), a frustrated, black, Harvard-grad TV writer who, under
orders from his boss (Michael Rapaport), comes up with a truly
offensive concept - a postmodern minstrel show - that immediately
becomes a hit. Incorporating all the shockingly bad taste possible,
"Mantan: The New Millennium Minstrel Show" stars homeless street
performers (Savion Glover, Tommy Davidson) in blackface cavorting in a
watermelon patch on a plantation. Smearing one's face with charcoal
suddenly becomes the chic, "IN" thing to do. The theme is Lee's
assertion that today's successful black entertainers (Cuba Gooding
Jr., Whoopi Goldberg, Will Smith, Diana Ross, etc.) are no more than
participants in racist minstrel shows.  But they're not the only ones
under attack. Lee also goes after Mother Teresa, President Clinton, Al
Sharpton, Johnnie Cochran, various networks, athletes and the NAACP.
Lee's use of digital video with multiple cameras creates the quality
of a documentary expose - and popular culture is the villain. The real
hero is Junebug, Delacroix's father (Paul Mooney), a racy comic who
refused to comply with Hollywood. But Lee allows his (justifiable)
anger to run rampant over reason in the final tedious third of the
film. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bamboozled" is a
scathing 6. If you want to see the most perceptive indictment of
TV-spawned culture, rent Elia Kazan's "A Face in the Crowd" (1957),
written by Budd Schulberg, starring Andy Griffith, or Paddy
Chayefsky's chilling "Network" (1976).

Title
Review for Living Out Loud (1998)
Richard LaGravanese is one of the most talented screenwriters
around, having won an Oscar-nomination for "The Fisher King" and high
praise for his adaptations of "Beloved," "The Bridges of Madison
County" and "The Horse Whisperer." Now, he's also a first-time
director, fashioning an adult romantic comedy around a wealthy Fifth
Avenue divorcee (Holly Hunter) who has been dumped after 16 years by
her unfaithful doctor-husband (Martin Donovan) for a younger
woman. She's antsy and alone, given to concocting feisty, elaborate
fantasies of what the future holds in store. Longing for human
contact, she hangs out at Jaspers, an Upper West Side jazz club where
she drowns her loneliness in martinis while listening to the soulful
Queen Latifah. Inevitably, she ends up in the arms of a stranger,
Elias Koteas, who thinks he passionately desires her. But it's a case
of mistaken identity. However, his ardor re-awakens her interest in
someone other than herself - which then turns to the chubby elevator
man (Danny DeVito) in her apartment building. She discovers that he,
too, has a life filled with loss and dreams. He's a gambler with debts
and a dying daughter, and she unexpectedly finds comfort in his
company. Wearing a blonde wig, Holly Hunter once again delivers a
touching performance, filled with charming vulnerability, and Danny
DeVito has a gentle poignancy.  When the movie ends, you don't know
what's next for these multi-dimensional characters but you're
satisfied that some kind of contentment has come out of their
emotional chaos. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Living Out
Loud" is a bittersweet 6, a sentimental story about lost souls and
middle-aged friendship in Manhattan.

Title
Review for Eye of the Beholder (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 It's strictly surrealistic style over substance in this
weird, wannabe psychological thriller about a man's journey into
obsession. Ewan McGregor (Star Wars: The Phantom Menace) plays a
lonely British intelligence agent, known as The Eye, whose wife has
left him, taking their daughter, whom he adored. His current mission
is to track a woman - that's Ashley Judd (Double Jeopardy) - who is
suspected of blackmailing the son of a prominent official in
Washington D.C.. He locates her, plants the kind of sophisticated,
high-tech surveillance equipment that would make James Bond drool with
envy, and starts his spy mission - only to observe her brutally stab
the young man in question to death. Instead of apprehending her,
however, The Eye follows her as she subsequently lures more men to
their gruesome deaths. He becomes totally obsessed with her, even
protecting her from arrest on several occasions. His ludicrous,
deranged, stalking behavior is inexplicable and writer/director
Stephan Elliott (The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert)
doesn't give us many clues - except astrology and numerology
symbols. Yeah, The Eye's haunted by his little daughter whose
apparition appears often during the first half of the film, pleading
"Let her go, Daddy." But then, even the child-ghost disappears -
without an explanation. And The Eye's only human contact seems to be
with a telephone supervisor named Hilary (k.d. lang - also heard on
the soundtrack, along with Chrissie Hynde) and a psychiatrist
(Genevieve Bujold), who knew Judd 'way-back-when. And Ashley Judd's
sexy, slashing serial killer is desperately looking for the "Daddy"
she never had. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The Eye of the
Beholder is a moody, murky 4. Incoherent is an operative word. So's
bizarre.

Title
Review for 13th Warrior, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
       For more than two years, this cliche-ridden action adventure
has gathered dust on the shelf at Disney's Buena Vista Pictures. No
one knew quite when to release it or how to market its blood 'n' guts
content to the public. Antonio Banderas ("The Mask of Zorro") plays
Ahmed Ibn Fahdlan, an urbane Muslim poet-diplomat banished from his
Egyptian homeland during the 10th century, along with elderly Omar
Sharif, who acts as his translator.  Fleeing from Baghdad in a caravan
after Banderas has indulged in a foolish sexual liaison, they join up
with some growling, swaggering, blond Nordic warriors with names like
Helfdane the Large (Clive Russell), Skeld the Superstitious (Richard
Bremmer), and Herger the Joyous (Dennis Storhoi), among
others. They're led by Buliwyf (Vladimir Kulich) on a quest to
liberate a kingdom across the sea from a mysterious, marauding tribe
of bear-like savages who have been terrorizing everyone - at least
when it gets foggy. (They filmed it in British Columbia where the
mists obviously rise on cue.) Based on Michael Crichton's 1976 novel,
"Eaters of the Dead," it combines rowdy, swashbuckling brutality with
a hint of the supernatural as they pursue the ferocious "terror that
must not be named." Director John McTiernan did this long before "The
Hunt for Red October" and he would be wise to leave it off his
resume. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The 13th Warrior" is a
ridiculously bloodthirsty 3, proving grisly gore has no limits.

Title
Review for Out of Time (1998)
I'm usually impressed by Showtime's made-for-television movies
but this family-oriented updating of the Rip Van Winkle legend is just
dull. The story begins in 1980 in the tiny town of Suttersville,
Oregon, where Jack Epson (James McDaniel) is married to Annie (Mel
Harris) and they have a ten year-old daughter (Brittany
Moldowan). Jack's a dreamer, a romantic who is lured into the woods by
magical spirit guides who have been monitoring the uneasy balance
between nature and development for 250 years. As a political activist
and deeply caring man, Jack's been chosen to be their mortal spokesman
to save Suttersville from itself.  The spirit guides entice him to
drink from a mysterious spring so he sleeps for 20 years. When he
awakens, he returns to the disturbing, high-tech world of 2000.  His
family believes he deserted them, and his daughter (Karen H. Holness)
has a ten year-old of her own now; it's this boy (Neil Denis) who
helps Jack understand not only what's befallen him but what he must do
to prove his worth. The villain is a real-estate developer (John
Novak) who is secretly planning to build a condominium complex on a
pristine mountain. Co-written and directed by Ernest Thompson ("On
Golden Pond"), it's filled with stilted, flowery platitudes and sappy,
contrived emotions. In a peculiar nod to political correctness, Jack
and Annie are a mixed-racial couple, as are the grown daughter and her
beau, yet this fact is never acknowledged, as if it presented no
conflict to anyone in rural America in 1980 nor in the present. On the
Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge, "Out of Time" is a slow-paced,
forgettable 4 with an admirable, if heavy-handed, environmentalist
message about the questionable advances of progress.

Title
Review for Dancing at Lughnasa (1998)

Susan Granger's review of "DANCING AT LUGHNASA" (Sony Pictures Classics)
 Give two-time Academy Award winner Meryl Streep a juicy role
with a foreign accent and, once again, she delivers a performance that
shimmers with Oscar gold. In this screen adaptation of Brian Friel's
Irish play about five unmarried sisters living in Donegal in 1936, she
plays the self-righteous eldest, an imperious schoolteacher whose
determination holds the family together - until, one magical August,
everything changes. After spending 25 years as a missionary priest in
Africa, their befuddled brother (Michael Gambon) returns. It's a
family reunion complicated by the re-appearance of the wandering
Welshman father of the eight year-old love-child of one of the sisters
(Catherine McCormack) and the festival of Lughnasa, a pagan ritual to
celebrate the harvest with music and dance. All of this emotional
upheaval is set against a time of change - the first radio, which
brings music into the modest farmhouse - and the industrial
revolution, which puts an end to two sisters' occupation of knitting
woolen gloves at home. Director Pat O'Connor not only delves into the
hardscrabble beauty of the rural Irish landscape - aided by the
magnificent cinematography of Kenneth MacMillan - but also elicits
remarkably strong performances from each of the actors. Nevertheless,
this is primarily a cerebral piece, not a cinematic one - which may
prevent it from reaching a wider audience. How does the film compare
with the play? It's better in that, on-stage, several of the Irish
actors spoke with such thick brogues that - while the concept was
clear - individual speeches were often indecipherable. On-screen, with
the added advantage of close-ups, each word is easily
understandable. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dancing at
Lughnasa" is an eloquent 7, a gritty tale of hardship and heartbreak.

Title
Review for Rage: Carrie 2, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
       This sequel is so forgettable you probably won't even want to
bother renting it on video. "Carrie," the powerful 1976 film based on
the best-selling Stephen King novel and directed by Brian DePalma,
spawned a number of teenage-slasher pictures but this travesty,
written by Rafael Moreu ("Hackers") and directed by Katt Shea ("Poison
Ivy"), tarnishes the memory of the original.  Bright-eyed newcomer
Emily Bergl plays Rachel, a nasty high-school outcast bursting with
adolescent rebellion and rage. Her mother is confined to a sanitarium;
she lives in a trailer with emotionally abusive foster parents; and
her best friend just committed suicide by jumping from the school's
roof after the girl was humiliated as a sex object by a group of
football players who made a competitive game of seducing girls for
points. A whiny guidance counselor, Amy Irving (the only token
original "Carrie" alumna), recognizes the potential destructiveness of
Rachel's telekinetic powers - meaning she can move objects with her
mind - but fails to get out of the way when Rachel's emotions explode,
ignited by her relationship with a football jock, Jason
London. "Sometimes I wish I could be one of the shiny, happy people,"
muses Rachel before she begins her post-homecoming game party massacre
- causing one of many unintentional laughs. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "The Rage: Carrie 2" is a viciously predictable 2 with a
fiery, bloody, gruesome conclusion.

Title
Review for Girlfight (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "GIRLFIGHT" (Screen Gems)
Curiously coinciding with the culmination of the summer Olympics, this is a
female twist on the perennially popular, "Rocky"-genre underdog tale. Written
and directed by Karyn Kusama, the coming-of-age story focuses on Diana Guzman
(Michelle Rodriguez), a sullen, tough, pugnacious, young Latina who is
determined to carve a different future for herself. But in Brooklyn's Red Hook
projects, there are not many choices. If she doesn't get pregnant, she's going
to wind up in a dead-end job. "Your mother was a receptionist in a very nice
office," her widower father (Paul Calderon) reminds her. So - without parental
consent - she sneaks into the ring and immediately views boxing as a viable
ticket out of poverty. The shabby gym becomes her sanctuary. She's encouraged by
her paternal coach (Jaime Tirelli) who recognizes her featherweight potential
and channels her rebellious rage into the discipline of the sport, despite the
inevitable ridicule and harassment. There's even a romantic twist provided by a
fellow boxer (Santiago Douglas) who competes with her in the ring. But the
climactic fight is too long and predictable. Plus, the script is burdened with
heavy-handed dramatic confrontations and awkward dialogue. Nevertheless, with
her mean left hook and a big mouth, Michelle Rodriguez - who's reminiscent of a
youthful Marlon Brando - exhibits all the unaffected feistiness necessary to
make her a winner. Indeed, this feminist fairy-tale was highly acclaimed at
Sundance, Cannes, Deauville and Toronto. And it's not surprising that the
brilliant independent film-maker John Sayles lent his expertise as executive
producer. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Girlfight" is a poignant,
satisfying 7 - if you like seeing a muscular girl pummeling and pounding her
opponents.

Title
Review for Payback (1999)
Mel Gibson's back, and he's grimly determined to wreak revenge, utilizing every bit of firepower and brutality available in this over-the-top 'noir' action thriller that's set in some dank, crumbling, art deco city. Gibson plays a nasty professional thief who was shot in the back left for dead in a garage by a double-crossing partner (Gregg Henry) and deceitful, junkie wife (Deborah Kara Unger) after they successfully heisted $140,000 in cash from Chinese money launderers. But he's alive and determined to pursue his perverse sense of justice, taking on a shadowy, corporate crime syndicate known as The Outfit (Kris Kristofferson, James Coburn,
William Devane) and aided by an old girl-friend (Maria Bello), a high-priced call-girl. All the women in this movie are sleazy and unsympathetic - but, then again, so are all the macho men. There's lot of  fighting, shooting, and endless gratuitous violence - some quite sadistic and graphic, like the industrial pedicure, which involves smashing toes with a sledgehammer, and seeing a person's nose ring ripped out. In fact, the torture, incinerations, slicing and dicing is all there is.  Based on the novel, "The Hunter" by Richard Stark, adapted by Brian Helgeland ("L.A. Confidential," "The Postman," "Conspiracy Theory") and Terry Hayes, and directed by Brian Helgeland,  it's also a re-make of John Boorman's "Point Blank" (1967) which starred menacing Lee Marvin. And Mel Gibson is no Lee Marvin. Basically, Gibson's miscast, delivering a dull, portentous narration and desperately looking for wit where none exists. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Payback" is a loud, lethal!
 4. It's what they call "comic book violence" but it's so choppy, cheesy and crude that no one's laughing.

Title
Review for Blade (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "BLADE" (New Line Cinema)
  Watching "Blade" made me wonder what parents are thinking
when they give their youngsters "movie money" and drop them to see
this sci-fi horror film. Rated R, "Blade" had more kids in the
audience than adults.  Kids who were not only hearing a steady stream
of vulgarity and profanity spew from the screen but watching frenzied,
non-stop violence, perpetually drenched in blood. Wake up, parents!
Even though it's based on a Marvel comic book series, "Blade" is not
appropriate for kids.  In fact, Blade is a vampire, an extraordinary
dude with an attitude. In a prologue, set 30 years ago, there's a
woman dying from a vampire attack just as she gives birth to a
son. Flash forward to today and that baby has grown up to be Wesley
Snipes, a hybrid who has all the strength of a vampire but none of its
weaknesses. Which means he can walk in daylight and eat a pizza with
extra garlic. Given his supernatural genetic disposition, his career
counselor headed him in the right direction. He's a leather-clad
vampire slayer, skilled in the martial arts as he wields a samurai
sword made from titanium. Adapted for the screen by David S. Goyer and
directed by Stephen Norrington, the story goes for the jugular,
meaning that it opts for mindless violence, action over coherence. It
seems the Eastern European vampire race, led by sadistic, sneering
Stephen Dorff, has moved into pivotal positions of financial power -
and must be stopped. Snipes's mentor in this quest is a chain-smoking,
idealized father-figure, named Whistler, played by Kris Kristofferson,
and his romantic interest is a doctor, N'Bushe Wright, who happens to
be a hematologist. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Blade"
barely bites a 3. It's a gruesome, gore-filled fang-fest.

Title
Review for American Outlaws (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "AMERICAN OUTLAWS" (Warner Bros.)
    Thomas Edison's "The Great Train Robbery" (1903) was the first
Western ever made and "Jesse James Under the Black Flag" (1923) first introduced
the outlaw folk hero. Now, more than 20 similarly-themed pictures later, Jesse
James and his notorious gang of outlaws ride again in a banal MTV spin on an
American legend. The story begins as Jesse (charasmatic Colin Farrell) and his
brother Frank (Gabriel Macht), Cole and Scott Younger (Scott Caan, Will
McCormack) and trusty Comanche Tom (Nathaniel Arcand), after four years of
fighting for the Rebs in the Civil War, return to Liberty, Missouri - only to
discover Union troops are occupying their hometown. And an avaricious East Coast
railroad baron, Thaddeus Rains (Harris Yulin), is forcing farmers to sell their
land at less than true value, aided by Allan Pinkerton (Timothy Dalton) and his
infamous detectives who, back then, were just thugs who provided security. But
when Ma James (Kathy Bates) becomes one of their victims, Jesse and the rest of
the guys (Gregory Smith, Ty O'Neal, Joe Stevens) form the James-Younger gang to
wreak revenge by attacking the railroad's supply lines, sabotaging track and
robbing the banks where the payroll is kept. Plus there's romance - between
Jesse and a spunky hometown gal, Lee Mimms (Ali Larter). Working from a
politically-correct, clich-drenched, sanitized and revisionist screenplay by
Roderick Taylor and John Rodgers, director Les Mayfield keeps the action
fast-paced and goes for lightweight laughs when he can. The choppy editing hurts
but Russell Boyd's cinematography, Luke Reichle's designer duds and Trevor
Rabin's music lend authenticity. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"American Outlaws" is a galloping, formulaic 3. It's the Wild West re-visited as
a date movie.

Title
Review for Whatever It Takes (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Screenwriter Mark Schwahn updates "Cyrano de Bergerac" in this stereotypical teenybopper comedy that's so stupid, crass, even misogynistic, that it's insulting to the vulnerable audience for whom it's intended.  And, for his cast, director David Raynr has recruited TV stars whose generic personas can barely fill the big screen.  Shane West of  "Once and Again" plays a nerdy, sensitive Gilmore High School senior who lends his poetic ability to the hunky jock - that's James Franco ("Freaks and Geeks") - who's smitten with West's next-door neighbor, Marla Sokoloff ("The Practice"). In turn, Franco helps West score with his cousin, the bra-less, bodacious Jodi Lyn O'Keefe ("Nash Bridges").  And, of course, the senior prom's just around the corner. What's inevitable is that West will realize that his true soul-mate is his best-friend Sokoloff and vice versa but it takes 92 excruciating minutes to get there. Not that I don't like teen comedies - but let's go back to the Joh!
n Hughes' "Breakfast Club," "Pretty in Pink,"  genre, where at least the actors had some charm. The only attempt at cleverness comes when the accordion-playing West does a riff on Tom Cruise's "Risky Business" lip-sync, dressed in boxer shorts and a cowboy hat. Then there's Julia Sweeney, as West's mother/school nurse, delivering a guaranteed giggle with a safe-sex demonstration. And as an alum of Beverly Hills High School, I was surprised to see that its famous hydraulically retractable dance-floor over the Olympic-sized swimming pool is still in good working order, as shown in the perverse "Titanic Dreams" prom finale. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Whatever It Takes" flunks with a 3. Well, duh!

Title
Review for "Total Recall 2070" (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's Preview of Upcoming SHOWTIME TV movie: "Total Recall 2070"
 On Sunday night, March 7, at 8 p.m. SHOWTIME launches its
stylish new sci-fi thriller series, "Total Recall 2070," with a
two-hour premiere movie, entitled "Machine Dreams." Michael Easton
("Ally McBeal") is moody and intense as police detective David Hume
with Karl Pruner as his benign android partner, Ian Farve. As members
of the Citizens Protection Bureau, their mission is to defend innocent
people from corporate domination while exploring the android/human
dynamic. Think "Alien Nation." Michael Anthony Rawlins ("NYPD Blue")
plays Hume's boss with Cynthia Preston as Hume's wife, Judith Krant as
a forensics expert who's heavily into gadgets, Matthew Bennett as the
head of a special internal affairs unit, and Nick Mancuso as the
villainous Richard Collector. The concept is inspired by the work of
writer Philip K. Dick, whose original short stories were the basis for
the films "Total Recall" and "Blade Runner." Indeed, the best part of
this new series is its futuristic "Blade Runner" setting, a dreary
cityscape which encompasses a cacophony of cultures. Plus there's the
machine that can create temporal vacations, induced dreams that are
indistinguishable from the real things. The weakness, however, lies in
the flimsy characters who are not fully developed before the seemingly
obligatory sex scenes and confusing plot kick in. Like "Strange Days,"
the characters seem subordinate to the bizarre special effects and the
rapid MTV editing adds to the confusion and emotional detachment. A
staggering $1.7 million was spent on each episode, obviously on the
post-apocalyptic atmosphere rather than actors or writers, and
SHOWTIME has committed to run 20 additional one-hour episodes.

Title
Review for King and I, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
This is a multi-part message in MIME format.
You cannot compare this 90-minute animated feature with 1) the
2 1/2-hour Rodgers & Hammerstein Broadway musical, 2) the two-hour
live-action movie, starring Deborah Kerr and Yul Brynner, which won
five Oscars in 1956, or 3) the 1943 novel, "Anna and the King of
Siam," based on the real Anna's authentic memoirs.  This is a cartoon
aimed at rugrats who could not possibly sit through either of its
stage and film predecessors. It's an introduction to the enduring
musical classic, that's all. Viewed in that light, it's fun but
Broadway musical purists will hate it, calling it a travesty.  The
story begins, not when widowed British schoolteacher Anna Leonowens
(voiced by Miranda Richardson with singing by Christiane Noll) and her
son (Adam Wylie) arrive in Bangkok to meet the King (Martin Vidnovic),
but while they're still at sea. They're threatened by a typhoon and a
huge, fire-breathing sea serpent, conjured up by the Kralahome (Ian
Richardson), the King's evil advisor. Anna brings Western culture to
the splendor of Siam (now Thailand), and she finds its stubborn,
irascible ruler quite attractive.  "Whistle a Happy Tune,""Getting to
Know You," and "Shall We Dance" still sound lovely, and parents should
know that, in this version, the King doesn't die. Instead, more
emphasis is placed on silly animals - like Tusker, a baby white
elephant; Moonshee, a mischievous monkey; and Rama, a regal black
panther. The animation is colorful and pretty but shows little of the
depth and detail of Disney features. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "The King and I" is a juvenile 4. But, unless you're desperate
for a G-rated movie, I'd advise waiting for the video.

Title
Review for Sleepy Hollow (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Tim Burton fans are gonna relish this fantasy horror story,
especially the creepy beginning. It's 1799 on a misty road near the
small village of Sleepy Hollow in New York's Hudson River Valley when
a coach carrying the region's richest man (Martin Landau) is attacked
by a mysterious Headless Horseman wielding a deadly sword. Whoosh! Off
goes his head!  Then the killer strikes again. Each time, the victim
is decapitated. Understandably, the insular Dutch locals are upset,
many convinced that they're being haunted by the demonic spirit of a
Revolutionary War mercenary (Christopher Walken) who died in the West
Woods, a place where no one dares go. Then an inquisitive, if
squeamish, new constable, Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) appears, sent to
track down the murderer. He scoffs at the idea of a supernatural
being, focusing his forensic attention on hunky Brom Van Brunt (Casper
Van Dien) but soon learns that, perhaps, there are vengeful
supernatural forces at work. In the meantime, he falls in love with
Katrina Van Tassel (Christina Ricci - in a blonde wig), the bewitching
daughter of his landlords (Michael Gambon, Miranda Richardson).  While
the first few Horseman attacks are scary - thanks to stuntman Ray Park
- it soon becomes evident that all the women are witches and a crazed
serial killer is on the loose. Seven screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker
revises Washington Irving's classic ghost story, concluding with a
millennial flourish, and Emmanuel Lubezki's sepia-toned cinematography
is impressive. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Sleepy Hollow is
a grim, gruesome 6 - a belated Halloween treat with more style than
substance. Be warned: nearly everyone's head rolls and the brutal
beheadings are graphic and violent - not suitable for young children.

Title
Review for "Girl Thing, A" (2001) (mini)
            Aptly named because of its appeal to a female audience,
this star-studded, four-hour mini-series revolves around the troubled
patients of a savvy, perceptive Manhattan psychiatrist (Stockard
Channing).  In the first story, an confused, uptight attorney (Elle
Macpherson) with a fear of intimacy is unexpectedly attracted to a
bisexual advertising executive (Kate Capshaw). Written and directed by
Lee Rose, it's sensitive, spirited and spunky - as are the subsequent
stories. But this is the most intriguing with its insightful dialogue
and daring, nude seduction scenes.  The second segment centers on
three estranged sisters (Rebecca DeMornay, Alison Janney, Glenne
Headley) with unresolved issues who are forced by their dead mother
(Elizabeth Franz) to confront the real meaning of family. In the third
tale, a wife (Lynn Whitfield) suspects her husband (Scott Bakula) is
cheating, so she hires a "top-of-the-line decoy" (Linda Hamilton) as
bait but, instead, discovers he's having an affair with a waitress
(Mia Farrow). A bottle of tequila later, the three furious women plot
their revenge. In the final episode, an unstable, seriously disturbed
woman (Camryn Manheim) threatens the doctor and a fashion model (Peta
Wilson). All four stories deal with challenges of love, trust,
vulnerability, betrayal and our fragility as human beings trying to
establish and maintain relationships despite our own insecurities. In
a memorable supporting role, the caustic owner of a coffee shop (Margo
Martindale) provides another link as another "ambassador of lost
souls." On the Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge, "A Girl Thing" is an
engaging 8, airing in two parts - Sat., Jan. 20, and Sat., Jan. 27 -
at 8 PM on SHOWTIME TV with additional playdates Jan. 29 and 30th, at
8 PM.  If this were a continuing series, like "Sex and the City," I'd
watch every week.

Title
Review for Cider House Rules, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE CIDER HOUSE RULES" (Miramax Films)
   Adapted by John Irving from his own best-seller, this is
the extraordinary story of one boy's journey into maturity in the
1940s. Homer Wells (Tobey Maguire) grew up in a sheltered existence at
an orphange in St. Clouds, Maine, under the kindly, paternal care of
ether-addicted Dr. Larch (Michael Caine) who, each night, after
reading a chapter from Charles Dickens, bid the wistful, unwanted boys
a poignant "Good night, you princes of Maine, you kings of New
England." As Larch's favorite, Homer learns a lot about performing
safe, if illegal, abortions but less about right and wrong. Which is
why he decides to explore the outside world, hitching a ride with a
young woman (Charlize Theron) and her fiance (Paul Rudd), an Air Force
pilot. Taking a job as an apple picker, he joins a black migrant
worker crew, headed by Mr. Rose (Delroy Lindo) and his daughter
(Erykah Badu).  Director Lasse Hallstrom is sensitively and
affectionately in tune with Irving's off-beat, idiosyncratic
characters, eliciting substantial, Oscar-caliber performances as Homer
copes with a crisis of conscience involving abortion, medical ethics
and racial prejudice. Wide-eyed and impressionable, Tobey Maguire is
delicately convincing, particularly as he's dazzled by luminous
Charlize Theron. Michael Caine not only masters the elusive accent but
captures the fierce intensity and enormously touching vulnerability of
Larch. And edgy Delroy Lindo is tender yet terrifying, never hitting a
false note. The fable-like quality is greatly enhanced by Oliver
Stapleton's vivid, impressionistic photography. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, The Cider House Rules is a haunting 10. Mixing
quirky humor, menace, and pathos, it's an emotionally uplifting
experience - one of the best pictures of the year.

Title
Review for Crazy in Alabama (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Before he came to the United States. Antonio Banderas was a
star in Pedro Almodovar's sex comedies in Spain. So it's not
surprising that Banderas's first directorial effort reflects
Amodovar's style of directing, beginning with the opening credits
which are similar to "Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown" and
"Dark Habits," and continuing with an amalgam of wacky whimsy and
genuine emotion throughout the narrative. Written by Mark Childress,
the film attempts to interweave two stories, set in 1965. One
chronicles the Civil Rights awakening of a young Southern boy called
Peejoe (Lucas Black), who lives in a funeral home with his mortician
uncle, and the second revolves around his zany, flamboyant Aunt
Lucille (Melanie Griffith, Banderas's real-life wife). As the tale
begins, Aunt Lucille decapitates her abusive husband, puts his head in
a hatbox, and sets off to pursue her dream of a show biz career in
Hollywood - just as Peejoe sees the sheriff (Meat Loaf Aday) kill a
black boy during a protest at a segregated municipal swimming
pool. Will Peejoe tell the truth to the authorities - or cover up the
crime? That's his moral dilemma. And will Lucille be convicted of
murder? All the various story elements come together in a big
court-room finale, dominated by the gavel of an eccentric judge (Rod
Steiger). The problem is that the shrill, farcical humor of Aunt
Lucille distracts from the intimate drama of the teenager's coming to
terms with bigotry and racial prejudice in his own hometown. And one
simply cannot ignore Melanie Griffith's incongruous jet-black wig and
scarlet, collagen-infused lips. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Crazy in Alabama" is a fanciful if uneven 5, offering a few lively
moments of clever insight.

Title
Review for Vertical Limit (2000)

Susan Granger's review of "VERTICAL LIMIT" (Sony Pictures Entertainment)
 I must confess that I am vertically challenged, meaning that
when I peer down a deep crevasse, my palms get sweaty and my knees go
weak. So, despite its inherent implausibility, this suspenseful
excursion into mountain-climbing had my heart pounding - but it was
more my acrophobia than the cliffhanger by writers Robert King and
Terry Hayes and director Martin Campbell ("The Mask of
Zorro"). Lifting liberally from "K2," "Wages of Fear" and the IMAX
film "Everest," the story begins with high drama on a cliff in Moab,
Utah, where Peter Garrett (Chris O'Donnell) and sister Annie (Robin
Tunney) survive a rock-climbing accident that costs the life of their
father (Stuart Wilson). Flash forward several years: Peter has traded
his carabiners for cameras, photographing snow leopards in the
Himalayas for National Geographic, while Annie, now a hotshot
mountaineer, has joined with another expert (Nicholas Lea) to lead
Elliot Vaughn (Bill Paxton), a millionaire entrepreneur - think
Richard Branson, to the summit of the world's second highest peak, a
commercial stunt perfectly timed coincide with a fly-over of a plane
from his new airline. But when they're trapped in a cavern by an
avalanche with just 36 hours to live, Peter assembles his own motley
team, led by a Jeremiah Johnson-like recluse (Scott Glenn), to lug
canisters of nitroglycerin up to blast through and rescue them.
    The outdoor scenes are quite realistic and cinematically spectacular, but the stereotypical characterizations are mundane and mediocre. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Vertical Limit" is a dizzying 6. The title refers to the high, oxygen-deprived altitude of 26,000 feet above sea level, where the human body cannot survive for long.

Title
Review for Watcher, The (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "THE WATCHER" (Universal)
Just what we need: another lurid, trashy serial killer saga. This time, Keanu
Reeves plays an elusive homicidal maniac who engages in a gruesome ticking-clock
cat-and-mouse game with James Spader, a burnt-out FBI agent who has suffered a
traumatic nervous breakdown after too many years on the job with the LAPD. To
taunt Spader, who has relocated to Chicago, Reeves packs up his trusty piano
wire and moves too. Before long, he starts mailing photographs of the lonely,
unsuspecting young women who are his intended Windy City victims, challenging
Spader, along with the Chicago Police Department, to stop him within 24 hours
before he strikes again. In the midst of this murderous frenzy, there's Spader's
psychologist, played by Marisa Tomei, who is even less convincing as a medical
professional than Jennifer Lopez in "The Cell." Writers David Elliot, Clay Ayers
and Darcy Meyers, along with first-time director Joe Charbanic (helmer of music
videos for Reeves' band Dogstar), dwell on the warped thrill of the methodology
and the chase, revealing, early on, exactly whodunit since the killer says he
and the cop "need each other to give meaning to our lives." Plus, as Reeves
explains, "We're all stacked right on top of each other, but we don't notice
each other any more." After that, it's all sound effects and tricky camera-work,
along with a muddled, discordant soundtrack. James Spader's acting technique can
be described as 'wooden deadpan' while Keanu Reeves maintains his perpetually
monotone 'dude' persona which sometimes works, sometimes doesn't. Chris Ellis,
as Spader's self-important colleague, is the only cast member who manages to be
convincing. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Watcher" is an
appallingly awful, amateurish 2. The real torture is watching it.

Title
Review for Trixie (2000)
  With Robert Altman as his mentor/producer, Alan Rudolph is
truly an experimental film-maker and, as with any innovator, he has
some hits ("Choose Me," "Afterglow") and misses ("Breakfast of
Champions," "Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle"). Unfortunately,
"Trixie" - an attempt at screwball comedy-turned-film noir - is one of
the latter. Oscar nominee for "Breaking the Waves" and "Angela's
Ashes," Emily Watson plays the title role of a quirky, gum-chewing
undercover casino security guard-turned-detective. It's supposed to be
cute that she's confused and mangles metaphors like "I'm a little
green behind the ears," "You can't just sit there like a sore thumb,"
"Take the bull by the tail," "Fish or get off the pot," "I've an ace
up my hole" etc. but this malaprop device soon grows very, very, very
tiresome. Trixie stumbles on a porn racket and a political cover-up
involving a swaggering, corrupt State Senator, played by Nick
Nolte. Supposedly, all of the Senator's garbled, inane dialogue is
culled verbatim from actual political slogans but that doesn't make
the double-talking gibberish easier to listen to. Credit Alan Rudolph
for lining up stellar talent, because Lesley Ann Warren plays a sleazy
aging showgirl who mysteriously disappears with Brittany Murphy as a
sleazy wannabe starlet, while Dermot Mulroney is a womanizing gambler
and Will Patton is a sneering, scheming developer. Nathan Lane is a
boozy lounge comedian who does celebrity impressions and spews lines
like "We're all tap dancers in the canoe of life." On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Trixie" is a tortuous, trivial 3. Don't be
tricked into spending your entertainment dollar for this
self-indulgent garbage.

Title
Review for Up at the Villa (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  If you weren't besotted by the beauty of Italy in "The
Talented Mr. Ripley," this screen adaptation of a novella by
W. Somerset Maugham should send you directly to your travel agent for
tickets to Tuscany. The story, unfortunately, doesn't live up to its
glorious setting. Set in the 1940s, lovely Kristin Scott Thomas is an
impoverished British widow who has a weekend to decide whether to
accept the marriage proposal of a wealthy but stuffy suitor, played by
James Fox, the recently appointed Governor of Bengal in colonial
India, or the amorous advances of a rakish, married American
adventurer - that's Sean Penn. So, instead of making any commitment,
she indulges in a duplicitous night of passion with an Austrian
refugee, Jeremy Davies, who worships her. She thinks it's a flighty
one-night stand but Davies has other ideas, which result in a
confrontation at gunpoint. So much for the pulp melodrama plot. The
most pleasurable moments come from Anne Bancroft and Derek Jacobi,
Anglo-American expatriates who amuse and entertain Florentine society.
Philip Haas ("Angels & Insects," "The Music of Chance") directs from a
screenplay by his wife, Belinda Haas, who is partial to having actors
exclaim, "by Jove!"  Very little is mentioned about the rise of
fascism and the horrors of Mussolini's regime except to acknowledge
its inconvenient intrusion into the leisurely pleasures of Florentine
life.  Pino Donaggio's swelling, soggy score is best described as
"elevator music," but Maurizio Calvesi's cinematography is
sumptuous. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Up at the Villa" is
a glossy but dull 4 - basically, it's Masterpiece Theater at the
movies.  Better choice: rent the video of "Tea With Mussolini."

Title
Review for Thirteenth Floor, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
          Since movies, on the average, take a year - from the
beginning of filming to theatrical debut - it's interesting that three
similar glitzy, high-tech, virtual reality thrillers - "The Matrix,"
"eXistenZ" and this - overlapped. Loosely based on Daniel Galouye's
'60s sci-fi novel "Simulacron 3," the idea revolves around a computer
that enables its user to time-travel. Only a story never develops from
the original concept of juxtaposing sepia-toned Los Angeles in 1937
with the full-color reality of the present time. Blame it on director
Josef Rusnak's and Ravel Centeno-Rodriguez' underwritten screenplay,
riddled with wooden dialogue.  Computer visionary Armin Mueller-Stahl
is the first to download time-travel but he runs into foul play, which
brings his over-wrought assistant, Craig Bierko, to the rescue. Then,
when more trouble ensues, technie Vincent D'Onofrio goes back in time
too. All three encounter lovely femme fatale Gretchen Mol, who is
trying to pass herself off as Mueller-Stahl's daughter. Or is she a
check-out girl at a local grocery store? That's a question bothering
Dennis Haysbert, a detective. The visually stylish, art deco
atmosphere in the somber, cavernous simulated world is appealing but
it's not enough to sustain interest as the plot evaporates.  Craig
Bierko seems like a poor man's Alex Baldwin, complete with a two-day
beard growth, while Gretchen Mol works hard at evoking Marilyn Monroe
but she's weak. Neither displays an ounce of screen charisma in this
ultimate bad trip. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Thirteenth Floor" is a self-destructing 3. Cyberspace confusion 3D
Existential poppycock.

Title
Review for Best in Show (2000)
    There's something about dog shows that's terribly
amusing. I know those who show off their purebreds take them very,
very seriously, but for onlookers, like Christopher Guest, the
possibilities for comedy are endless. In fact, sanity goes to the dogs
where Best of Breed trophies are concerned. This wacky mockumentary, a
worthy successor to "Waiting for Guffman," centers on Philadelphia's
annual Mayflower Dog Show, similar to New York's Westminster Dog Show.
Diverse contenders include, from Illinois, a bickering, neurotic
yuppie couple (Parker Posey, Michael Hitchcock) with Beatrice, their
depressed Weimaraner; from Florida, a milquetoast menswear salesman
(Eugene Levy) with, literally, two left feet and bubbly, his
promiscuous wife (Catherine O'Hara), showing Winky, their Norwich
Terrier; from North Carolina, a fly-fishing shop owner (Christopher
Guest) with his beloved Bloodhound Hubert; from New York, a
flamboyantly gay couple (John Michael Higgins, Michael McKean) with
Miss Agnes, one of their Shih Tzus; and from the Main Line, a trashy
trophy wife (Jennifer Coolidge) and her hired handler (Jane Lynch)
with their two-time champion Standard Poodle, Rhapsody in White. Plus
there's the show's President (Bob Balaban), chairman (Don Lake), and
mis-matched commentators (Jim Piddock, Fred Willard), along with a
long-suffering hotel manager (Ed Begley Jr.)  Guest and his
co-scripter Eugene Levy obviously encouraged their ensemble cast into
improvisational riffs that are executed with somewhat predictable but
barkingly loony, fast-paced finesse, particularly the one-liners and
non-sequiturs. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Best in Show"
is a dementedly funny 9. It's a hilarious howl - a walloping woof!

Title
Review for Waking Ned Devine (1998)

Susan Granger's review of "WAKING NED DEVINE" (Fox Searchlight Pictures)
Every now and then, a movie reviewer discovers an absolute gem
- and this is a sparkler! In the remote Irish village of Tulaigh Morh
(pronounced Tullymore), population 52, someone holds a winning lottery
ticket worth almost seven million pounds (more than $11 million) - but
who can it be? That's the question that obsesses Jackie O'Shea (Ian
Bannon), his wife Annie (Fionnula Flanagan) and their friend, Michael
O'Sullivan (David Kelly). Determined to discover and befriend the
lucky winner in order to share some of the prize money, they entice
and ingratiate themselves to their 49 neighbors, including a
malodorous pig farmer (James Nesbitt), his poetic lady love (Susan
Lynch), and nasty Lizzy Quinn (Eileen Dromey).  When they think
they've canvassed everyone, they discover one man is missing: Ned
Devine (Jimmy Keogh). And a search quickly determines he, indeed, is
the winner - only, the sweet, old geezer has dropped dead from the
shock of his good fortune. "They say money changes a man and there's
no greater change than moving a man from life to death," they
muse. So, what's a sod to do? Jackie and Michael slyly decide on a wee
tad of fraud and a crazed bit of blarney, determining that one of them
should impersonate Ned Devine and claim the winnings, which will then
be equally divided among the villagers if everyone will go along with
the crazy charade. Writer/director Kirk Jones cleverly creates quirky,
charming, genuinely touching characters who embark on a wonderfully
exuberant adventure. And some scenes - like the men's naked bicycle
ride and re-arranging the corpse's facial expression - are truly
laugh-out-loud funny. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Waking
Ned Devine" is a whimsical, mischievous 8. Enjoy the fun and you'll
feel like a winner!

Title
Review for Bone Collector, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE BONE COLLECTOR" (Universal Pictures)
This is yet another urban thriller about a sadistic serial
killer. Denzel Washington plays a bedridden, suicidal, quadriplegic
forensics expert and best-selling author who teams up with a former
fashion model-turned-rookie cop, Angelina Jolie, to capture an
imaginative murderer with a penchant for cryptic clues. And each
killing is uniquely horrific, just like in "Seven." Inexplicably, the
NYPD uses Washington's SoHo loft as a base of operations while Jolie
acts as his eyes and ears, exploring the grisly crime scenes,
describing them to him, and following his instructions
precisely. "You've got to saw her hands off at the wrist line! I've
got to have those cuffs for prints!" he barks into her cell phone from
his motorized bed. As his devoted nurse, Queen Latifah imbues the role
with a special sassy quality, while the stereotypical supporting
characters include Ed O'Neill, Mike McGlone, Luis Guzman, and Michael
Rooker as Washington's former boss. Utilizing Jeremy Iacone's
cliche-ridden, uneven screenplay, adapted from the novel by Jeffrey
Deaver, director Philip Noyce ("Clear and Present Danger," "Patriot
Games") cleverly keeps the cinematic tension taut as the hapless
victims are buried alive, scalded by steam or devoured by rats. But
the final confrontation between the immobilized Washington - using
"one finger, two shoulders, and a head" - and the deranged killer is
utterly preposterous. Angelina Jolie is woefully unconvincing,
particularly when she's crying, and her pouting lips have been so
puffed up with some kind of silicone concoction that they look
ludicrous.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Bone
Collector" is a dopey, diabolical 6. It's basically a grisly, gruesome
whodunnit.

Title
Review for Love Letter, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  If you've seen the previews of coming attractions, you've
seem the best parts of Kate Capshaw's (Mrs. Steven Spielberg)
lackluster foray into producing. Set in a picturesque New England
coastal town, Lobolly By The Sea, this romantic fantasy revolves
around a mysterious love letter that is discovered by a number of
people. Kate Capshaw finds it first. She's the emotionally celibate
proprietor of the local bookstore and thinks it was written to her by
Tom Everett Scott, a hunky college student working there for the
summer. When her assistant, Ellen DeGeneres, discovers the anonymous
note, she thinks it was meant for her, sent from a gentle, goofy
fireman, Tom Selleck. (Which is odd, since Selleck obviously has a
long-time crush on Capshaw.) Then, while the local eccentric
(Geraldine McEwan) named Miss Scattergoods, bicycles around making
caustic comments, Capshaw's estranged mother (Blythe Danner) and
semi-senile grandmother (Gloria Stuart) arrive for a visit. Wretchedly
underwritten by Maria Maggenti and sentimentally directed by Hong
Kong's Peter Ho-sun Chan, this choppy, heavy-handed, slowly paced,
picture-postcard film disappoints. Ellen DeGeneres is the only one
with sense of humor but her self-deprecating wisecracks are derived
from her highly publicized off-screen life, rather than the story. And
there's no way Blythe Danner could be Kate Capshaw's mother, given the
obvious ten-year difference in their ages. Indeed, Kate Capshaw could
be Gwyneth Paltrow's mother. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"The Love Letter" is a fumbling 4. Kevin Costner's "Message in a
Bottle" was a different spin on a similar story, released earlier this
year.

Title
Review for Nutty Professor II: The Klumps (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "NUTTY PROFESSOR II: THE KLUMPS" (Universal)
When audiences went wild for the "Nutty Professor"
dinner-table sequences in which Eddie Murphy played various members of
the Klump clan, the idea for a sequel was born. So, although heavy-set
Professor Sherman Klump remains the central character, his
dysfunctional family is fleshed out, literally, each member with
his/her own subplot. Last time, Sherman Klump came up with a way to
lose weight; this time, he discovers a youth serum. Annoyingly
neurotic Dean Richmond (Larry Miller) wants to sell the formula to a
drug company, while romance comes in the form of Janet Jackson as a
shy, sweet professor who's in love with Sherman.  Aggressive, skinny
Buddy Love is still in Sherman's system, bursting out unexpectedly,
until Sherman extracts him from his body.  It's like Jekyll and Hyde
separating. Buddy is no longer a sexist, mischievous alter-ego; he's
an evil ego trying to steal Sherman's "youth juice". The clash between
Buddy and Sherman as separate entities gives the plot tension because,
when Buddy's DNA goes so do Sherman's IQ points. With the help of
make-up genius Rick Baker, Eddie Murphy is chameleon-like. Mama holds
the family together; she's the most like Sherman. Papa and Ernie
Jr. are more alike. And Grandma's sexually voracious. What's amazing
is the seamless interaction of all Eddie's characters: how the eyeline
movement of one is combined with physical action of another in a
complicated digital ballet. But, despite four writers and director
Peter Segal, it's is incoherent. Clever, yes. Funny, no. The visual
gags and crude jokes are stale and predictable, and the 'space dream'
scene is downright stupid. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Nutty Professor 2: The Klumps" is a raunchy, gimmicky, forced 3.
It's tour-de-force Eddie - all over the screen!

Title
Review for Rugrats in Paris: The Movie (2000)

Susan Granger's review of "RUGRATS IN PARIS: THE MOVIE: (Paramount Pictures)
   In this animated sequel to the highly successful "Rugrats
Movie" which sprang from the Nickelodeon TV series, the focus is on
Chuckie (voiced by Christine Cavanaugh), rather than baby Tommy
(voiced by E.G. Daily). It seems Chuckie's mommy has gone to heaven
and he really, really, really wants a new mommy, which puts pressure
on his dad Chas (voiced by Michael Bell). The theme of wanting to have
a complete family is particularly resonant today - what with death,
divorce and remarriage so prevalent. Somehow, a trip to Paris is tied
into opening your heart and moving on. But it's not the touristy Paris
of the Louvre, the Eiffel Tower or the Seine. Most of the action takes
place in an amusement park, EuroReptarland, which is an obvious poke
at EuroDisneyland. The main Reptar attraction has broken and only Stu
Pickles (voiced by Jack Riley) can repair it - hence, the family trip
which includes Chas and Chuckie. Sparks fly from the nasty, Cruella
DeVil-like park manager, Coco La Bouche (voiced by Susan Sarandon),
who realizes that she must marry in order to get a promotion. Spurred
on by meddling matchmaker Angelica (voiced by Cheryl Chase), with the
aid of her pretentious assistant, Jean-Claude (voiced by John
Lithgow), Coco plots to wed Chas, even though she loathes
children. There's potty humor and a kid-pleasing climactic chase
involving the Rugrats on the repaired dinosaur and Jean-Claude in his
huge, mechanical Escargot, plus cameos from Debbie Reynolds, Tim Curry
and Casey Kasem. Musically, there's Sinead O'Connor's rendition of
"When You Love" and the BahaMen's catchy "Who Let the Dogs Out." On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Rugrats in Paris" is a
fast-paced, amusing 6 for tiny tykes - and it's quite tolerable for
adults.

Title
Review for Coyote Ugly (2000)
Adding a new finale, a flashy musical number at the hip, rowdy
bar where the exhibitionistic young women work, caused this Jerry
Bruckheimer film to almost miss its August 4th opening date. And - who
knows? - perhaps it was the only fitting conclusion to this cinematic
amalgam of Hooters, "Cocktail" and "Flashdance," written by Gina
Wendkos and directed by David McNally, a veteran of TV
commercials. Newcomer Piper Perabo stars as a naive, 21 year-old
aspiring New Jersey singer-songwriter who ventures across the Hudson
River to seek fame and fortune as a barmaid in Manhattan's gritty,
high-energy Coyote Ugly bar, strutting her seductive shots-and-beer
stuff under the watchful eye of bar owner Maria Bello, who mandates:
"You are to appear to be available but never be available. Other
tantalizing, dancing "coyotes" include Izabella Miko, Bridget Moynahan
and model Tyra Banks. Coyote Ugly's a treasure chest (pardon the pun!)
of unruly, bizarre behavior - like hosing down the crowd if someone
orders water, even setting fire to the bar - but that's about the only
interesting thing in this otherwise dull, wretchedly cliche-filled
movie. Predictably, there's a skeptical guy Piper falls for - Adam
Garcia.  Her apartment gets robbed and her nice-guy, widower dad,
played by John Goldman, is hospitalized - yawn! There's a sexual tease
with tight, revealing costumes but no nudity. It's rated PG-13. The
sound-track rocks loudly even if it doesn't exactly roll - with singer
LeAnn Rimes dubbing Piper Perabo's voice and making a cameo appearance
near the end of the film. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Coyote Ugly" is an undulating, sappy 3. If you want to find the REAL
Coyote Ugly watering hole, it's on 10th Avenue in the East Village.

Title
Review for 10 Things I Hate About You (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "10 THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU" (Touchstone Pictures)
Geared toward teenagers, this updated version of Shakespeare's
"Taming of the Shrew" is fresh, sheer fun as the Stratford sisters -
vapid, beautiful Bianca (Larisa Oleynik) and crass, ill-tempered Kat
(Julia Stiles) - confront romance at Padua High School. Confounded by
her father's strict rules, Bianca, a sophomore, knows she cannot date
until her older sister, a senior, does so her wannabe boyfriend
(Andrew Keegan) bribes a sullen transfer student with an infamous
reputation, Patrick Verona (Heath Ledger), to woo the notorious Kat.
The scheme becomes convoluted, of course, as the Bard of Avon leads
the students on a merry chase.  "People perceive you as a heinous
bitch," observes the guidance counselor who spends most of her time
writing a sex novel. "I prefer 'tempestuous,'" tartly replies Kat,
who's reading "The Bell Jar."  Screenwriters Karen McCullah Lutz and
Kirsten Smith retain Shakespeare's morals and complicated conventions,
while director Gil Junger keeps the pace fast, dodging cliches as
often as he can. Bright young actors with fresh faces from TV shows
enthusiastically strut their stuff as rebellious misfits, desperate
malcontents, and prospective prom queens, discovering the truth about
themselves and finding love amidst a surreal Tacoma/Seattle setting -
and handsome hunk Heath Ledger from Australia seems headed for
stardom. Above all, the music rocks, particularly "Save Ferris" and
the Boston-based band "Letters To Cleo," as the dastardly cynical
politics of high school are revealed. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "10 Things I Hate About You" is a witty, definitively cool
8. There's lots of sly, sophisticated, acerbic humor, even for
non-teens.

Title
Review for Malna (2000)
   From Giuseppe Tornatore ("Cinema Paradiso"), this
coming-of-age W.W.II allegory is told from the perspective of a 13
year-old Sicilian boy who is sexually obsessed with Malena, the local
beauty played by Monica Bellucci. Set in the seaside town of
Castelcuto, the story begins as Mussolini rallies his
countrymen. While Il Duce's voice drones from every radio, the mind of
young Giuseppe Sulfaro concentrates only on fantasies of love and lust
for this young woman whose husband is off fighting. As the war
escalates, so does the town's disdain of Malena's voluptuous
appeal. First, she's rumored to be a hussy, the town tart. Then, after
her beloved husband is reported killed in North Africa, she's censured
for brazenly consorting with German soldiers, resulting in a spiteful,
brutal beating by an angry mob of women. Malena's beauty becomes her
curse. Throughout it all, Giuseppe watches her with dark, soulful eyes
from afar - either atop his bicycle or perched in a tree outside her
small villa. Based on a story by Luciano Vincenzoni, Tornatore's
screenplay switches abruptly and annoyingly from broad comedy to stark
tragedy, and his direction often echoes Fellini's "Amarcord," laced
with a frustrating overdose of sentimentality and Ennio Morricone's
over-blown score. But Bellucci and Sulfaro deliver appealing, if
wooden, performances, and fans of Tornatore's ability to evoke an
enchanted atmosphere of intimate, melancholy nostalgia, within a grand
scale of stucco, stone and local color, will find plenty of that. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Malena" is an idyllic, poignant,
sensual 6 - in Italian with English subtitles. And, if you missed
Tornatore's "Legend of 1900" (1999) about a piano virtuoso who lives
his life on a luxury ocean liner, rent the video.

Title
Review for Rocky Marciano (1999) (TV)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ROCKY MARCIANO" on SHOWTIME TV
 On Saturday, May 15, the 8 P.M.debut of a new "Rocky
Marciano" movie is part of a boxing theme night which will include the
classic films "Rocky" and "Raging Bull," plus a live boxing match. Jon
Favreau stars as Rocky, the only world heavyweight boxing champion to
retire undefeated in the history of the sport. Set in the summer of
1969, a few days before his 46th birthday, the story begins with the
fighter on a promotional tour, demanding cash, not checks, for each
personal appearance, and phoning home to his wife (Penelope Ann
Miller). It then flashes back to his childhood in the blue-collar town
of Brockton, Mass., where, as Rocco Marchegiano, he learned the value
of saving money from his immigrant father (George C. Scott) who worked
in a shoe factory. Vowing never to make shoes, young Rocky, as he was
called, realized the incredible power he packed in his right arm. A
devoted fan of Joe Louis (Duane Davis), he decided to become a boxer
but, without formal training, he lost many fights before he finally
won a big one - after he turned pro. Boxing was his ticket out of
Brockton when his raw talent was recognized by two corrupt "managers"
(Judd Hirsch, Tony Lo Bianco). Rocky never lost a professional
fight. He quit the ring in 1956 and, unlike many boxing greats, he
stayed retired. So, without a comeback to dramatize, the film
highlights two pivotal fights: one in which he seriously injured an
opponent and his match against Joe Louis. Actor Jon Favreau tries hard
to capture the underdog appeal of this not-very-colorful icon and the
supporting cast is superb. So, on the Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Rocky Marciano" punches a creditable 6, but it doesn't
pack a wallop.

Title
Review for End of the Affair, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE END OF THE AFFAIR" (Columbia Pictures)
What a disappointment! Writer/director Neil Jordan, who gave us
The Crying Game, Mona Lisa, and In Company of Wolves, totally misses
the mark with this soggy romantic tale, grimly adapted from one of
Graham Greene's most autobiographical novels. Looking like a leftover
from the '50s, it's a staid, stodgy drama set during W.W.II, when the
Nazis were bombing London and adulterous couples carelessly cavorted
in bed instead of seeking shelter during the air-raids. One such
couple is Ralph Fiennes and Julianne Moore. He's a moody novelist,
tortured by jealousy, and she's a troubled married woman, trapped by
circumstance in a dull, loveless marriage to a career civil servant,
glumly played by Stephen Rea. They enjoyed many lusty encounters
until, inexplicably, she broke off with him. The story explores how
that happened and why. It would be helpful if we cared but we don't,
because neither character is even remotely interesting and, without
revealing too much, suffice it to say that the explanation revolves
around Catholicism, the power of prayer, the existence of miracles,
and the virtue of sacrifice. Julianne Moore spends considerable screen
time cavorting naked, having shocked audiences with her full frontal
nudity in Robert Altman's Short Cuts. She's actress who obviously
enjoys anatomical revelation and seeks roles in which she can show her
body off.  Delicate, skinny Ralph Fiennes, on the other hand, suffers
when his clothes are removed; plus, he seems totally self-absorbed
which renders the love scenes lifeless, even depressing. This same
story was filmed unsuccessfully before in 1955 with Deborah Kerr, Van
Johnson, and John Mills. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
End of the Affair" is a plodding, dreary 4. It's a murky, misguided
melodrama.

Title
Review for Planet of the Apes (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "PLANET OF THE APES" (20th Century-Fox)
  In Tim Burton's re-envisioning of Pierre Boulle's novel which became a
1968 cult classic, the sci-fi premise remains the same: an astronaut (Mark
Wahlberg) crash-lands on a bizarre, brutal world where apes are the dominant
species and humans serve them. When captured, he's taken to the misty mountain
kingdom of Ape City by the orangutan slave trader (Paul Giamatti). He meets
defiant human rebels (Kris Kristofferson, Estella Warren) and discovers the
socio-political conflict between the tyrannical General (Tim Roth) and his
intimidating aide (Michael Clarke Duncan) and a passionate, liberal Senator's
daughter (Helena Bonham Carter) who believes humans should not be subjugated by
simians. Tim Burton's iconoclastic vision of this fascistic,
chimpanzee-dominated society is brought to life primarily by six-time
Oscar-winning make-up artist Rick Baker ("Gorillas in the Mist," "Mighty Joe
Young") who, incredibly, in a tour-de-force, transforms the actors into apes.
Credit production designer Rick Heinrichs and cinematographer Philippe Rousselot
too. Unlike the original, in William Broyles Jr.'s rather dull screenplay, the
humans are not mute and, despite the rumors, there's no inter-species sex.
Clunky Mark Wahlberg is hardly a heroic figure, as Charlton Heston was in the
original. But Heston does turn up as an aged, ailing ape, and once again, in a
quite different context, utters his famous line: "Damn them all to hell!" But,
basically, Paul Giamatti steals the picture, offering much needed comic relief. 
The conclusion, while not the Statue of Liberty, offers a surprising, if very
contrived, twist. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Planet of the Apes" is
a dark, primal, action-packed 5, proving "The smarter we become, the more
dangerous we get."

Title
Review for Placard, Le (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "THE CLOSET" (Miramax Films)
    In this hilarious French farce, a shy, boring accountant (Daniel
Auteil) named Francois Pignon discovers he's going to be fired from his job at a
condom factory. Lonely and distraught, he contemplates suicide. But then he runs
into Belone (Michel Aumont), an elderly homosexual neighbor, who suggests a "sex
discrimination" lawsuit to intimidate management. As evidence, Belone concocts
provocative photographs of Pignon locked in a leather-clad embrace with another
man and mails them anonymously to Pignon's boss. When the racy snapshots start
circulating around the factory, not only does Pignon get his job back but he
suddenly finds himself  the focus of attention as an openly gay man. His lusty
supervisor (Michele Laroque) is so intrigued that she wonders if, perhaps, she
could change his sexual preferences. Even his ex-wife (Alexandra Vandernoot) and
indifferent teenage son (Stanislas Crevillen) drop their disdain. But not
everyone is enchanted. A mucho macho co-worker Felix (Gerard Depardieu), a
self-righteous  homophobe, is stunned and repulsed when he's forced by the PR
director (Thierry Lhermite) to grovel and court Pignon's friendship or risk
losing his own job. Writer/director Francis Verber artfully milks the farcical
comedy as he dissects the hypocrisy of political correctness, veering off-track
only occasionally into pedophilia. Daniel Auteuil ("The Widow of Saint-Pierre")
is delightful - particularly with a blown-up condom perched on his head, riding
on a float in a gay pride parade - and Gerard Depardieu delivers one of his most
restrained, and effective, performances. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"The Closet" is a frankly sexual, adult 8. It's so clever, in fact, that
Hollywood is already planning to re-make it in English, like "La Cage Aux
Folles."

Title
Review for Holy Smoke (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "HOLY SMOKE" (Miramax Films)
With last year's Hideous Kinky and now Holy Smoke, Kate
Winslet seems determined to reach beyond her classic Titanic
heroine. In this psychosexual drama, Kate plays Ruth Barron, a young,
vulnerable Australian tourist in India who succumbs to the spiritual
"enlightenment" of a charismatic guru. Ruth thinks she's found
salvation and transcended into bliss, but her horrified parents are
sure she's lost her mind. So they lure her back home to a Sydney
suburb and hire an American "cult exit counselor," P.J. Waters, played
by Harvey Keitel, to deprogram her. Dressed in black from his dyed
hair to shiny cowboy boots, the tyrannical P.J. is a jaded, slick,
persuasive brain-washer who demands to be left alone with sari-clad
Ruth in an abandoned shack in the Outback for three days. There, they
play brutal mind-games while exploring their carnal lust, engaging in
a fierce battle of wills and, oddly, reverse roles. Ruth uses her
voluptuous body to sexually dominate and mentally control P.J.,
dressing him in drag and then savagely humiliating him, leaving him
whimpering. Australian writer/director Jane Campion (The Portrait of a
Lady, The Piano, Sweetie) collaborated on the script with her sister,
Anna Campion (Loaded) and, despite a few moments of comic relief from
Ruth's grotesque family of wackos, they're heavily into the
provocative issues of religion, sex and power. Brooding tough guy
Harvey Keitel is simply overmatched by willful, outspoken Kate
Winslet. You know from the beginning that he doesn't stand a chance
against her, particularly when cinematographer Dion Beebe exquisitely
bathes her nude body in sensual, shimmering light. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Holy Smoke is a bizarre 4, presenting a
frustrating battle of the sexes that seems unfairly matched.

Title
Review for Blood Simple (1984)
 First shown at film festivals in 1984, "Blood Simple" was the
first feature film by brothers Joel and Ethan Coen, who went on to
make not only "Fargo" but also "The Hudsucker Proxy," "Barton Fink,"
"Miller's Crossing," and two of my favorites, "Raising Arizona" and
"The Big Lebowski." This is the newly restored and re-edited
Director's Cut of their stylish crime thriller, introduced by
enigmatic Mortimer Young, a pseudo-film restoration expert who inanely
informs us that this version takes advantage of technological
breakthroughs made possible in recent years. It seems writer Dashiell
Hammett originated the slang phrase, "blood-simple," meaning the state
of fear and confusion that follows the confusion of murder, as in
"He's gone blood simple."  So the grim, sleazy story begins in Texas,
where a jealous saloon owner (Dan Hedaya) hires a cheap divorce
detective (M. Emmet Walsh) to kill his wife (Frances McDormand) and
her lover, a bartender (John Getz). But the detective gets a better
idea....and I'm not going to tell you what happens and ruin the greed,
lust, double-cross and betrayal plot if you never saw the original. So
how does this so-called Director's Cut differ? Not much. The running
time is still almost the same, so whatever revisions were made are
subtle. In fact, in the "New Yorker" magazine, Ethan Coen irreverently
quips, "A pace that was once glacial is now merely slow. Scenes that
were once inept are now merely awkward." Nevertheless, on the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Blood Simple: Director's Cut" still scores an
8, remaining an amazing, ironic debut thriller. I suspect its
re-release is a marketing device to whet our interest in their new
film, "O Brother Where Art Thou?" starring George Clooney, which will
be released this fall.

Title
Review for Captain Corelli's Mandolin (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "CAPTAIN CORELLI'S MANDOLIN" (Universal)
  Based on Louis de Bernieres' epic novel, this romantic drama begins in
1940 on the idyllic Greek island of Cephallonia, where Pelagia (Penelope Cruz),
the serious, proud daughter of Dr. Iannis (scene-stealing John Hurt), the
village physician, is engaged to Mandras (Christian Bale), a fisherman who
leaves to fight Mussolini's forces in Albania. Soon the island is occupied by
hedonistic Italian troops and Captain Antonio Corelli (Nicolas Cage) is billeted
in the Iannis's house. Believing that Mandras has died in battle, Pelagia falls
for the charming, fun-loving Corelli, who's a translator between the Germans and
the Greeks. He trains his men to sing, not fight, and says, "I've never aimed a
gun in my life." But Mandras has - and he is very much alive, hiding out with
the partisan guerrillas. Eventually, Pelagia must choose between the two men. As
Dr. Iannis puts it: "When you fall in love, it is a temporary madness. It erupts
like an earthquake, and then it subsides. And when it subsides, you have to work
out whether your roots have been so entwined together that it is inconceivable
that you should ever part, because that is what love is."
    Shackled by Shawn Slovo's shallow, under-developed,
overly-simplified screenplay, director John Madden concentrates on the formulaic
romance amidst W.W.II conflicts, utilizing John Toll's sweeping cinematography
and Stephen Warbeck's luscious score. But there's little on-screen sexual
chemistry between Nicolas Cage and Penelope Cruz, even when he woos her with
music by seductively strumming his mandolin, and the conclusion seems
anti-climactic. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Captain Corelli's
Mandolin" is a picturesque, escapist 5. Rent Gabriele Salvatore's "Mediterraneo"
(1991), a similar story that's far more emotionally effective.

Title
Review for 6th Day, The (2000)
      Beginning with a quote from Genesis - "and God created
man on the sixth day" - this sci-fi fantasy revolves around a
billionaire entrepreneur (Tony Goldwyn) who is determined to conquer
death: "I'm just taking overwhere God left off."  To this end, he's
funded Replacement Technology where genetic research is done by a
highly respected, if conflicted scientist (Robert Duvall). In this
world of the near future, animal cloning is accepted but human cloning
is strictly forbidden. So when an assassination attempt goes wrong and
a charter helicopter pilot (that's Arnold) is unwillingly cloned,
indomitable Arnold teams up with his duplicate to reveal a sinister
corporate conspiracy.  "I'm going to take my life back," he vows. So
much for the plot concocted by Cormac and Marianne Wibberley. What's
likely to catch your interest is the sexy holographic girlfriend that
Arnold's buddy, Michael Rapaport, has created; she's compliant with
his desires and disappears when she's no longer needed. Or perhaps
you'll like director Roger Spottiswoode's ("Tomorrow Never Dies")
mega-budget array of high-decibel explosions, gunfire and car
crashes. Amusing moments occur when the relentless, virtually
indestructible assassins (Michael Rooker, Sarah Wynter) keep
reappearing - "Doesn't anyone stay dead anymore?" - and when Arnold,
the family man, quips, "I don't want to expose (my daughter) to any
excessive violence. She gets enough of that from the media." But the
real humor, or drama, inherent in having someone meet his clone is
never explored. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The 6th Day"
is an action-packed 5. It's ironic that a movie that puts a spin on
the dangers of cloning looks like a clone of other, better Arnold
Schwarzenegger movies like "Total Recall."

Title
Review for Charlie's Angels (2000)
  Their mission? To have fun and entertain you. Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore and Lucy Liu are covert investigators working for Bosley, played by Bill Murray. They're assigned to foil an elaborate murder-revenge scheme that could destroy individual privacy worldwide. A technology mogul (Sam Rockwell) has been kidnapped, along with his voice-recognition software. The prime suspect (Tim Curry) owns the world's largest telecommunications satellite network. So much for plot. The fun is in the goofy action adventure as the sexy trio jumps out of planes, masters high-tech gadgetry, kicks, punches, and cavorts, while donning various disguises, under the direction of McG, whose previous experience was in fast-paced music videos/commercials - and it shows. In this riff on the old action/comedy TV series, writers Ryan Rowe, Ed Solomon and John August put the emphasis on bright, bouncy, clever and, most of all, empowered contemporary women, not on weaponry. Actually, only the evil!
 guys, like Crispin Glover, use guns. Credit Chinese martial arts master Cheung-Yan Yuen ("The Matrix") for training the Angels. It's great when Drew takes out thugs while tied to a chair with her hands bound and when Cameron chats on a cellphone while battling baddies! Tom Green adds little as "The Chad," but he's Drew's real-life fiance, as well as her on-screen beau, and she not only stars but produces. Luke Wilson and Matt LeBlanc play the other Angels'  dumb boy-friends, and John Forsythe still voices Charlie. Too bad there's so little of Bill Murray, that the plot's so convoluted, and that many of the hokey '70s jokes fall flat on the youthful audience. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Charlie's Angels" is a sleek, sassy, sexy 7. It's packed chock full of jiggles and giggles as the babes kick butt.

Title
Review for Election (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
The appeal of this intelligent, witty social and political
satire should extend far beyond the teenage years. It's classified as
a "high school flick" because virtually all the characters are
students or teachers, but its sly intrigue should appeal to a
sophisticated young adult audience. Set in Nebraska at George
Washington Carver High, the story revolves around an aggressive and
loathsome young woman, Reese Witherspoon, who is running, unopposed,
for president of the student government. She's a cocky, irritating
over-achiever with a sizable chip on her shoulder, cast in the mold of
Richard Nixon and Bill Clinton. Matthew Broderick, as a popular
faculty advisor, is so alarmed by her brazen determination that he
convinces a gentle but dumb super-jock (Chris Klein) to run against
her. Their rivalry becomes even more complicated when the jock's
younger sister (Jessica Campbell), a sophomore, declares her
candidacy, based on a promise to do nothing as student president but
abolish the idiocy of student government. It's a platform that seems
to have great appeal. Written by Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor, and
directed by Alexander Payne ("Citizen Ruth"), the theme is profound
cynicism about today's democratic process in which someone must be
ruthlessly ambitious, not to mention hypocritical, in order to win
votes and attain public office. Add to that a disdain for the state of
love, sex, and marriage in the '90s and you have a subversive,
wickedly clever premise which is fully realized by the artful
casting. Both Reese Witherspoon and Matthew Broderick are completely
believable in their parts, as are Chris Klein and Jessica Campbell. To
me, this comedy rings with malevolent teenage truth. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Election" scores an audacious, acerbic
8. It's a winner.

Title
Review for Permanent Midnight (1998)

Susan Granger's review of "PERMANENT MIDNIGHT" (Artisan Entertainment)
         There are two primary pitfalls in making movies about drug
addiction. First: the subject matter has already been covered,
beginning in the '50s with "The Man With the Golden Arm," so the
audience knows the protagonist will inevitably collapse. Since then,
the real-life dramas of Janis Joplin and John Belushi have already
been explored and exploited. Second: if the story proceeds through
rehabilitation, there's the challenge of not being preachy. "Clean and
Sober" (1988) is one of the few films that avoided
this. Writer/director David Veloz's "Permanent Midnight" falls into
both pitfalls - and worse - as it chronicles TV comedy writer Jerry
Stahl's real-life recovery from heroin addiction in the form of a
confessional, filled with flashbacks. Stahl was one of the writers for
"Alf" and other sit-coms. Ben Stiller, who has made a career out of
playing nice guys who are losers, plays Stahl. He's graphically shown
shooting himself up with smack, complete with blue-hued skin,
blackened eyes and drops of blood squirting onto the bathroom ceiling.
He behaves like an idiot and epitomizes decadence. Once he gets into
rehab, of course, this predictably changes. Problem is: he's miscast
and it's all very episodic and ultimately boring. British
model/actress Elizabeth Hurley appears briefly as his ambitious
wife-in-name-only, the result of a green-card marriage, as do Cheryl
Ladd, as a TV star who recognizes his problem, and Janeane Garofalo as
an inquisitive agent. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Permanent Midnight" is a sordid, junkie 3. Just say no.

Title
Review for Men of Honor (2000)
    Based on a true story, this is an old-fashioned,
inspirational military drama - which works for it and against it. Cuba
Gooding Jr. effectively plays Carl Brashear, who became the Navy's
first African-American master diver, while Robert DeNiro, as Billy
Sunday, is the manic redneck instructor who torments and humiliates
him before becoming his mentor. "Why do you want this so badly?" he's
asked. "Because they said I couldn't have it" is Brashear's meaningful
reply. Hal Holbrook adds to the rampant racism as the terrorizing
commander of the Naval Diving School. Powers Boothe is the first
officer to acknowledge Brashear's deep determination to succeed, and
David Keith is the sympathetic officer who's there when a freak,
shipboard accident cripples Brashear, causing the eventual amputation
of his leg.  Executive produced by Bill Cosby, written by Scott
Marshall Smith and directed by George Tillman Jr. ("Soul Food"), the
film obviously fictionalizes rather than depicts the various
biographical incidents that transformed Brashear's early life as a
Kentucky sharecropper's son ("Don't end up like me," his father
warns.) and his military career which began in the '60s with mess
duty. Gooding's and DeNiro's wives are predictably played by Aunjanue
Ellis and Charlize Theron, respectively, while Michael Rapaport,
Joshua Leonard and Holt McCallany portray other trainees. Credit
cinematographer Anthony B. Richmond for capturing the danger and
undersea isolation of the divers and the taut tension of the diving
program's final exam. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Men of
Honor" is a well-intentioned, if melodramatic 5, slipping into sloppy
sentiment a bit too often as it extols Brashear's courage and
indomitable spirit. The R-rating comes from salty language and racist
comments.

Title
Review for Pushing Tin (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "PUSHING TIN" (20th Century-Fox)
"The current (air traffic control) system is 99.4% reliable," according to an FAA spokesman, but how do the air traffic controllers, who have the ultimate high pressure job, let off steam?  The title, "Pushing Tin," refers to a phrase that air traffic controllers use to describe their work - and that's the theme of this dark romantic comedy in which John Cusack plays a vain, fast-talking "jet jockey" at New York's Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON) center on Long Island that handles up to 7,000 flights a day into and out of LaGuardia, Kennedy, and Newark airports. He's the manic, self-absorbed, dominant "top dog" until the arrival of Billy Bob Thornton ("A Simple Thing"), a mysterious, motorcycle-riding, half-Indian cowboy from Oklahoma with a laconic demeanor and a wild reputation ("Did you really stand on a runway and let a 747 part your hair with weight turbulence?"). Fueled by caffeine and machismo, a fierce, obsessive and disruptive rivalry emerges.  It's a !
contest of wits and wills, where stress is the great equalizer and bravado is the lowest common denominator, a game where the winner - not the loser - could lose it all: his marriage, his job, and his mind. Cate Blanchett ("Elizabeth") and Angelina Jolie (TV's "Gia") are the wives who serve as the escape routes in their husbands' emotional and psychological lives.  Director Mike Newell ("Four Weddings and a Funeral," "Donnie Brasco") keeps the chaotic comedy fast-paced, while Glen & Les Charles's (TV's "Taxi," "Cheers") relationship-oriented screenplay is based on a New York Times Sunday Magazine article, "Something's Got to Give," by Darcy Frey. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pushing Tin" is a frantic, funny 7. It's an inventive, intense, irreverent look at the prevention of mid-air and mid-life collisions.

Title
Review for Cruel Intentions (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Writer/director Roger Kumble has transposed Choderlos de
Laclos's 18th century French novel "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," which
became a movie called "Dangerous Liaisons" (1988), into Manhattan's
teenage uppercrust, where two wealthy, manipulative step-siblings
(Sarah Michelle Gellar and Ryan Phillippe) specialize in emotional
cruelty and betrayal within their prep school. When Gellar's dumped by
her beau for a naive girl (Selma Blair), Phillippe wickedly seduces
the awkward interloper, deliberately ruining her reputation. But that
conquest was easy, so, in a nasal, whining voice, Gellar challenges
the strutting Phillippe to a diabolical wager.  Can he seduce the new
headmaster's virginal daughter (Reese Witherspoon) who has written an
article for "Seventeen" magazine about how she intends to stay pure
until marriage? If he wins, Gellar agrees to have sex with him. If he
loses, he must give her his vintage 1956 Jaguar convertible.  How
vindictive, perverse and callow can you get? In Christopher Hampton's
"Dangerous Liaisons," Glenn Close and John Malkovich were, at least,
sophisticated adults, even though their behavior was sinister and
vicious at a time when a woman's "reputation" was crucial to her very
existence.  In this exploitative film, which is peppered with
profanity, snide, silly, spoiled brats are behaving like...well,
snide, silly, spoiled brats, and the parlor game plot unfolds more
like the recent "She's All That," in which a guy bets he can get a
girl, gets her, and then realizes he loves her after all. And, as if
that weren't enough, here there are self-consciously incongruous
subplots involving homosexuality and inter-racial sex.  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Cruel Intentions" is a ridiculous, fumbling
4. It's a lame, trashy teenage soap opera.

Title
Review for How the Grinch Stole Christmas (2000)
      It's like Christmas coming early with this heart-warming
gift of a live-action comedy fantasy. Ron Howard's enchanting screen
adaptation of Dr. Seuss' story not only tells the tale of the Whos in
Whoville but the imaginative screenplay by Jeffrey Price & Peter
S. Seaman, narrated by Anthony Hopkins, delves deeply into the
backstory of the grouchy, gruff Grinch (Jim Carrey), revealing what
made him so bitterly malevolent, living alone in a cavernous cave on
the top of Mr. Crumpit with only his dog Max as company. The plot
revolves around little Cindy Lou Who (Taylor Momsen), whose parents
(Bill Irwin, Molly Shannon) are immersed in the crass commercialism of
Christmas, particularly besting a neighbor (Christine Baranski) in the
Whobilation lighting competition. Curious about The Grinch and his
contemptible behavior, Cindy Lou investigates what seared his soul,
made him an outcast, and inspired his vengeance. Buried under layers
of rubbery make-up and green fur with his eyes covered by contact
lenses and his mouth full of false teeth, Jim Carrey is, nevertheless,
delightfully zany. Production designer Michael Corenblith has created
a visual Who world worthy of the genius of Theodor S. Geisel, who
wrote as Dr. Seuss. Clustered like a medieval European village,
Whoville's haystack houses are decorated with, literally, thousands of
twinkling lights. Rick Baker's make-up and Rita Ryack's padded
costumes, particularly the hats, are inspired, and James Horner's
music is terrific. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dr. Seuss'
How THE GRINCH Stole Christmas" is a classic 10. Children will adore
it, teens will find it hip, and adults will flock back to see it. This
magical package of pure pleasure leaves you a bit happier to be
alive. Don't miss it!
--part1_be.bb4a9e2.273ef1af_boundary--

Title
Review for Bring It On (2000)
 It's not all pirouettes and posing for the razzle-dazzle
pom-pom squad! Cheerleading is competitive and this exuberant teen
comedy never lets you forget it. Kirsten Dunst plays the perky,
newly-elected captain of the Toro cheerleading squad of Rancho Carne
High School in San Diego. It's a prestigious position since the
squad's won the national championship for five years and is heading
for its sixth trophy. That is until Dunst befriends a transfer student
(Eliza Dushku) and her brother (Jesse Bradford) and discovers that the
Toro's perfectly-choreographed routines were, in fact, stolen by the
ruthless former captain (Lindsay Sloane) from the Clovers, a hip-hop
squad from East Compton. A visit to that inner-city school confirms
the theft and the ire of the understandably angry captain (Gabrielle
Union) of the African-American team that's also taking part in the
upcoming national championships in Daytona.  It gets kind of awkward
and rah-rah rough here as Dunst laments, "My whole cheerleading career
is based on a lie." But Dunst is a good enough comedienne to carry it
off, gamely switching moods with a mischievous myriad of
expressions. Written by Jessica Bendinger and directed by Peyton Reed,
it's a silly, slangy and ultimately conventional spoof, touring the
girls' locker room with an unusual skirmish involving
teeth-brushing. No doubt, cheerleading is a sport that requires
discipline, timing, strength, and concentration but that and the edgy,
moral racial angle is neither emphasized nor deeply explored here, nor
was it part of the trailer. Instead, the racial tension arises
unexpectedly. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bring It On" is
a bouncy, energetic 4, filled with gymnastics, dance and PG-13 sex
appeal.  As Dunst says: "This is not a democracy - it's a
cheerocracy."

Title
Review for Firelight (1997)
         Oscar-nominated screenwriter William Nicholson ("Nell,"
"Shadowlands") makes his directorial debut with this historical
romance, starring beautiful Sophie Marceau ("Braveheart," "Anna
Karenina") as a Swiss governess who, in 1838, agrees to a secret pact
with the only son (Stephen Dillane) of a British aristocrat. He is
married to an invalid who cannot conceive and he desperately wants to
sire an heir, while she needs to pay of her father's financial
debts. They meet at a picturesque yet remote hotel in France, sharing
three days and nights of passion. Nine months pass and she gives birth
to a daughter who is immediately taken away from her. Seven years
later, she is unwittingly hired as a governess to a snobbish spoiled,
stubborn young girl (Dominique Belcourt) on a remote Sussex estate. Of
course, the hateful child is her own and the stunned aristocrat swears
her to secrecy - as their clandestine affair begins once again. With
the help of cinematographer Nic Morris, most of the pivotal scenes
take place in that haunting time when the sun has gone down and the
candles have been extinguished, creating a lush, intimate atmosphere
as flames flicker in the fireplace. This is one of those
old-fashioned, slow-moving, over-wrought bodice-rippers that once were
the staple of Gainsborough Studios in England. It's like a screen
version of a paperback Harlequin romance. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Firelight" is a melodramatic 4, a soap opera targeted
specifically at women.

Title
Review for In the Company of Spies (1999) (TV)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "IN THE COMPANY OF SPIES" (SHOWTIME TV)
         On Sunday night (Oct. 24) at 8 PM, Showtime TV presents an
original espionage thriller that revolves around the CIA in this
contemporary era of increased openness and accountability. Tom
Berenger stars as a retired operative who angrily resigned five years
ago from his position as head of the East Asian division and has since
opened a Thai restaurant in Washington, D.C... He's brought back into
action by his former boss, Ron Silver, to save a colleague who has
been captured by the North Korean authorities.  Korean Internal
Security (KIS) knows the suspected agent possesses valuable knowledge
of a covert operation but they don't know its nature, nor does the
CIA.  Berenger's assignment is to find out what the spy knows and to
try to save his life. As the story unfolds, a small team of American
spies, whose remarkable talents combine the newest technological
techniques with old-fashioned infiltration work, reveals that, indeed,
something sinister and critical is brewing in North Korea, something
that could conceivably threaten the United States. The believable
story portrays today's CIA in a realistic light, which helped the
producers become the first film-makers to receive true access to the
operational world of the Agency, filming some of the scenes at CIA
Headquarters in Langley, Virginia. But its really the meticulously
developed, character-driven script by Roger Towne ("The Natural"),
expertly directed by Tim Matheson, that makes this presentation so
compelling. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "In the Company of
Spies" is a compelling, suspenseful 8.
 This made-for-TV spy saga is as good or better than any you'll see at local
 movie theaters.

Title
Review for Jurassic Park III (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "JURASSIC PARK III" (Universal Pictures)
  This third installment continues the story of a paleontologist, Dr.
Alan Grant (Sam Neill) who, eight years ago, accepted an invitation from InGen
industrialist John Hammond to preview a new tourist attraction featuring
genetically engineered dinosaurs on an island near Costa Rica. After barely
escaping from that nightmare, he vowed never to return - but he didn't count on
his research money becoming extinct. So when a wealthy adventurer (William H.
Macy) and his ex-wife (Tea Leoni) offer to fund his new theory on Velociraptor
intelligence if he will accompany them on an aerial tour of Isla Sorna, a new
InGen site that has become both a dinosaur breeding ground and a magnet for
thrill-seekers, he agrees to go, bringing his gung-ho protg (Alessandro
Nivola). But when their plane unexpectedly lands, he discovers that the couple's
14 year-old son (Trevor Morgan) is lost in the dense jungle in a para-gliding
accident. Meanwhile, they must fight for survival while under attack by
rampaging reptiles, particularly the massive, menacing Spinosaurus that briefly
battles with a Tyrannosaurus Rex, the flock of flying Pteranodons and, of
course, the wily Velociraptors. Dr. Grant's still a crusty curmudgeon but the
brutal behemoths are the stars and that's reflected in the direction by Joe
Johnston, who first collaborated with Steven Spielberg on "Raiders of the Lost
Ark," and screenplay by Peter Buchman, Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor, based on
Michael Crichton's characters. While this is a predictable, by-the-numbers film
with a ridiculous climax, CGI fans will relish the 140 visual effects, as
compared with 54 in the original and 78 in "The Lost World." On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Jurassic Park III" is a scaly, scary 6. It's formulaic
but fun, a third-generation thrill-ride.

Title
Review for In Crowd, The (2000)
         The kindest way to describe this teensploitation movie is to
call it "a time waster." Violence-prone nymphomaniac Adrien Williams
(Lori Heuring, looking just like Madonna) has spent time in a
psychiatric hospital learning to come to terms with "erotomania" and
her troubled past. Nearly recovered and on the recommendation of her
physician (Daniel Hugh Kelly), she emerges to build a quiet,
anonymous, new life as a lowly cabana-girl at an exclusive seaside
country club. But she's too lovely not to be noticed by "the
in-crowd," a privileged clique led by perky, psychopathic Brittany
Foster (Susan Ward, looking just like Denise Richards), whose lip
gloss glows for the tennis pro (Matthew Settle) who, predictably,
flirts with Adrien. Amidst the simmering feuds, there are lethal
secrets that threaten to emerge. Is this world-shaking, or what?
Directed by Mary Lambert ("Pet Sematary"), this wannabe girl-on-girl
thriller is definitely a hard-bodied loser with great credit going to
the imbecilic, homo-erotic screenplay by Mark Gibson and Philip
Halprin. Even the climactic cat-fight between Adrien and Brittany
isn't clearly delineated since it's photographed by Tom Priestley in a
storage room with gloomy, dim lighting.  The message of the movie:
appearance isn't everything...i.e: all that glitters is not gold. Duh!
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The In-Crowd" is a sluggish,
ludicrous, barely tolerable 1. It gives melodrama a bad name - and
it's not gonna get better on video.

Title
Review for eXistenZ (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "eXistenZ" (Dimension Films, a division of Miramax)
The title, "eXistenZ," is the name of a virtual reality video
game in this psychologically disturbing sci-fi horror tale. Like
"Naked Lunch," "The Fly," "Crash" and other David Cronenberg films,
it's ghoulish, grisly and grotesque, filled with slimy, squishy,
repugnant creatures and cryptic sexual imagery. Jennifer Jason Leigh
stars as Allegra Geller, the supposedly brilliant designer of the
world's most awesome and challenging games. Accusing her of being a
"goddess" and "demoness," an enemy of reality, various people are
attempting to assassinate her, using a gristle gun, defined as "A
pistol made of bone and gristle, almost like the half-decayed body of
a small mammal, whose snout is the barrel and whose rigid hind leg is
the trigger. Instead of bullets, the gun shoots human teeth." So she
retreats to a throbbing fantasy world by stroking a "game pod," a
fleshy lump with various indentations and nipples, that is attached to
a "bioport" that is surgically inserted in game players' spines and
connected by an umbilical cord. She is accompanied on this wild
journey by a bland, bewildered companion, played by Jude Law, and her
most memorable trippy encounter is with Willem Dafoe, as a demented
mechanic. Allegedly, David Cronenberg was inspired by the plight of
Salman Rushdie when he concocted the exaggerated "writer in jeopardy"
premise and asked his actors to read philosophy of Sartre, Camus,
Kierkegaard, and Nietzsche to get into the mood of the picture. But
much the same satiric concept was already explored in "Strange Days"
(1995) and the final, eerie, macabre plot twist is painfully
obvious. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "eXistenZ" is an
artsy, absurdly weird 5. At one point, Jude Law says, "I find this
disgusting but I can't help myself." Me, too.

Title
Review for Loser (2000)
 Give credit for honesty in advertising: the title becomes a
self-fulfilling prophecy, as writer- director Amy Heckerling lifts
elements from the brilliant Billy Wilder film, "The Apartment" and
transfers them to college students in New York City.  Jason Biggs
("American Pie") plays an earnest, shy scholarship student from a
small upstate town. In his plaid hunter's cap with his kind,
good-natured personality, he doesn't fit in with the big-city
pseudo-sophisticates, particularly his odious, rich roommates (Thomas
Sadoski, Zak Orth, Jimmi Simpson) - but he's not a really a
loser. Escaping from dorm life, he finds refuge in a downtown
veterinary clinic, where he falls for another penniless student, Mena
Suvari (the rose-petal fantasy of "American Beauty"), whom he rescues
from an overdose of a date-rape drug. She works as a waitress in a
strip club and is having an affair with their cynical English lit
professor, Greg Kinnear ("As Good As It Gets"), who's more into
manipulation than marriage. Do the hero and heroine finally fall in
love? You guess. Perhaps the most idiotic moment occurs when Kinnear
says: "I'm sure if she were alive, Betty Friedan would applaud your
epiphany." It's a line that may stun the very-much-alive feminist,
Ms. Friedan. Misspelling "financial aid" as "aide" is another
blooper. The message is supposed to be: trust yourself, take a chance
and turn your back on people who take advantage of you - but the
cinematic sizzle just isn't there. There are cameos from Steven
Wright, David Spade, Andy Dick, Andrea Martin and Everclear, plus a
trendy soundtrack filled with '90s hits. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Loser" is a tepid, lackluster 4. If you want to see good Amy
Heckerling teenage romantic comedies, rent "Clueless" and "Fast Times
at Ridgemont High."

Title
Review for Blue Moon (2000)
  In the rush of fall releases, don't overlook this gentle romantic
fable that blends comedy, drama and romance.  The opening sequence at the christening of their first grandson sets the stage for an examination of the 40 year-marriage of Frank (Ben Gazzara) and Maggie (Rita Moreno). Frank's uncommunicative, fearing retirement, confessing: "I haven't been sleeping too well and I've got butterflies in my stomach." At Maggie's insistence, they drive to the Catskills for a magical weekend at their cottage in the mountains, where, curiously, on a crystal clear night when the sky is filled with stars and there's a gigantic blue moon, they discover a bickering young couple (Brian Vincent, Alanna Ubach) who reminds them of what they were to each other when they were courting. Writer-director John Gallagher has come up with a classy, clever concept, filled with gentle pleasures, whose supple structure allows time-lines to cross in flashbacks. Ben Gazzara delivers an emotionally rich performance marked by unflinching honesty, as does Rita Moreno, as th!
ey reflect on their relationship, having survived, among other things, his mother, her father (whom even she called "the Ambassador"), three children, three mortgages, seven cars, nine Presidents, six recessions and a cranky parrot. It's a triumph of intelligent acting and film-making with the most poignant scenes set around the dinner table. Maggie's sophisticated family were Spanish aristocrats who made it clear that the stuttering, stammering textile salesman in New York's garment industry whom she married was far below her station, while Frank's noisy Italian family used exuberance to cloak the terror inflicted by his angry, alcoholic, abusive father. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Blue Moon" is a sensitive, sentimental 7. It's a gem!

Title
Review for Tarzan (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
"Tarzan" is the best animated adventure since "The Lion King"!
Not only does it have family drama, laughter, love, and five new songs
by Phil Collins, but it offers young boys a viable role model for the
emotional conflicts of adolescence. The story begins as a shipwrecked
infant is orphaned in Africa when his parents are devoured by a
leopard. Despite the initial reluctance of her mate, he is adopted by
a loving female gorilla, Kala (voiced by Glenn Close), who has herself
lost a child.  As Tarzan matures into a young man (Tony Goldwyn) with
the instincts and athletic prowess of a jungle animal, his idyllic
habitat is invaded by British visitors, most notably Jane (Minnie
Driver). Quickly realizing that she's more like him than any other
animal he's ever seen, he's immediately intrigued - and far too
curious. Meanwhile, her nutty father (Nigel Hawthorne) and gun-toting,
big game hunter (Brian Blessed) pose a threat to the sanctity of the
jungle. That much is predictable from the Edgar Rice Burroughs
classic. Yet there's a lot that's new here. Tarzan no longer swings on
vines; instead, he glides through the trees like a skateboard surfer
on safari. And Cheetah's been replaced by annoyingly brash, comical
Terk (Rosie O'Donnell). But, even deeper, this Tarzan is an adolescent
in search of his own identity, wondering: Who am I? What am I? And,
most important, where do I belong? It's a coming-of-age comedy-drama,
not unlike "The Lion King," and the thoughtful, sensitive conclusion
differs from the traditional tale. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, this "Tarzan" is a timely, triumphant 10. He's a hero for our
times: a cool guy who seeks harmony and acts from the heart, utterly
devoid of machismo.

Title
Review for Girl, Interrupted (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Back in the '60s, 17 year-old Susanna Kaysen wound up in
Claymoore, an upscale psychiatric hospital in Massachusetts, for more
than a year and used that experience to write a novel which fascinated
doe-eyed actress Winona Ryder enough to option it and make it into
this movie - in which she, of course, plays the dour, dreamy title
role. It's an episodic memoir, at best, showcasing the acting acumen
of Ms. Ryder as the passive, indecisive Susanna and, even more,
Angelina Jolie as a ferociously vicious sociopath, along with Clea
DuVall as a pathological liar, Elizabeth Moss as a severely scarred
burn victim, and Brittany Murphy as a pampered, rich girl with an
eating disorder and an overly attentive father. Vanessa Redgrave is
impressive as the chief psychiatrist. Problem is, Susanna Kaysen's
confused mental state, diagnosed as Borderline Personality Disorder,
is much like that of a lot of female adolescents - confused about her
self-image, uncertain about her long-term goals, and struggling to
make sense of a rapidly changing world around her. Directed by James
Mangold (Heavy, Cop Land) from a script co-written by him, Lisa Loomer
and Anna Hamilton Phelan, the implausibly detached, humorless
narrative examines the boundaries between confinement and freedom,
friendship and betrayal, madness and sanity, evolving into a female
version of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest with no group dynamic. As a
result, there's no emotional involvement. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, Girl, Interrupted is a sappy, superficial, frustrating
5. At one point, Whoopi Goldberg, as her no-nonsense nurse, tells
whiny Susanna Kaysen, "You are a lazy, self-indulgent little girl who
is driving herself crazy." Right on, Whoopi!

Title
Review for Final Destination (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "FINAL DESTINATION" (New Line Cinema)
  There's a difference between spooky and scary. Spooky refers
to things that are ghostly, weird and/or eerie, while scary involves
fright, panic and/or terror. Precognition can be both.  The story
begins as a jittery teenager (Devon Sawa) prepares to fly to Paris
with members of his Long Island high-school French class. Suddenly,
inexplicably, before the plane takes off, he has a premonition of
doom. Screaming that there will be a crash, he freaks out and is
escorted off the aircraft, along with six of his friends.  When the
plane does take off it, there is, indeed, an explosion. Why were these
seven survivors spared?  That's a question that gnaws not only at Sawa
and his cohorts but also at FBI agents who have been alerted to the
bizarre coincidence. So there are deep philosophical questions to be
answered, like: How does one escape from Death?  Can you ever cheat
fate?  Won't it catch up with you - one way or another?  Without
doubt, the first few minutes of the film are the best - after that,
well, this heavy-handed Death-as-a-slasher tale was made for a teenage
audience by James Wong and Glen Morgan, two TV veterans who wrote for
The X-Files, The Others and Millennium, along with Jeffrey
Reddick. They know how to eliminate characters in shocking, not to
mention unusual, circumstances. So prepare yourself for graphic gore,
black humor and some of the dumbest dialogue ever spoken. Trivia note:
several characters are named for horror favorites of the past, like
Chaney, Hitchcock, Todd Browning (Dracula), and Val Lewton (I Walked
With A Zombie). On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Final
Destination is a grim, supernatural 4, packaged with a warning that
hearing John Denver sing "Rocky Mountain High" can be mysteriously
ominous.

Title
Review for Mod Squad, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of 'THE MOD SQUAD" (MGM)
       Let's face it..."The Mod Squad" wasn't that cool when it was on
ABC television 30 years ago (Sept.'68 to August '73) and it certainly
hasn't improved with age. If anything, it's deteriorated - and today's
teenagers, who are the target audience, weren't even alive when the
series aired. For those who don't remember, "The Mod Squad" were
juvenile delinquents - Peggy Lipton, Michael Cole, and Clarence
Williams 3rd - who plea-bargained their way out of custody by agreeing
to work with The Man fighting crime undercover. It was a
counter-culture thing that appealed to the late '60s, early '70s
mentality.  This time 'round Claire Danes, Giovanni Ribisi, and Omar
Epps are the teenagers who are enlisted to work as undercover police
operatives, reporting to gruff but kindly Dennis Farina.  The plot -
and I use that word loosely - revolves around a cache of drugs that
disappears from a police evidence locker. "The Mod Squad" is supposed
to find it. "I'm getting too old for this," they moan, just as they
did on the TV series, but it's a line that's far more believable when
muttered by Mel Gibson and Danny Glover in one of the many "Lethal
Weapon" sequels. Basically, the dialogue is drivel. Written by Stephen
Kay, Kate Lanier and Scott Silver, and directed by Mr. Silver, this
film has nothing, absolutely nothing to recommend it except that it's
short, so you only waste 94 minutes of your time. So, on the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Mod Squad" is a thudding 1. It's the Clod
Squad. There is no excuse for a movie being quite this lame and
stupid.

Title
Review for Small Time Crooks (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "SMALL TIME CROOKS" (DreamWorks release)
 The less you know about this romantic comedy gem, the more
you'll enjoy the continuous surprises that await you. Woody Allen, who
wrote, directed and stars in the clever caper realizes that - which is
why he keeps a veil of secrecy around all his projects. In this
Manhattan-based story, Woody plays an ex-con dishwasher with Tracey
Ullman as Frances "Frenchy" Fox, his stripper-turned-manicurist
wife. They concoct a half-baked, get-rich-quick scheme involving a
bank robbery that, as Woody puts it, leaves them rolling in
dough...but not the kind they had in mind.  Allen's theme revolves
around the old adage: Be careful what you wish for - you may just get
it. And his sly, observant script has more witty, literate dialogue
than you can hope to hear in a movie these days. There's no doubt that
Woody Allen is a comic genius, but his knack for casting just the
right actor in the right role is second to none. This film marks
Ullman's third teaming with Allen; there's a rumor that her role was
originally offered to Barbra Streisand - but Tracey's terrific.  Jon
Lovitz, Michael Rapaport and Tony Darrow provide slapstick comedy as
Allen's three stooges.  Hugh Grant lends an aura of sophistication as
an unscrupulous art dealer whose "lessons in life" aren't easily
forgotten and Elaine May almost steals the picture as an endearing
dim-witted cousin.  Production designer Santo Loquasto and costumer
Suzanne McCabe set a new standard for nouveau riche taste. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Small Time Crooks" is a delicious,
delectable 10, one of the best comedies to come our way in
years. "Small Time Crooks" is filled with uproarious, contagious
laughs - it's big time fun.

Title
Review for Drop Dead Gorgeous (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Don't be surprised if you find yourself wishing the "gorgeous"
girls would just drop dead in this heavy-handed mock-documentary. Set
in Mount Rose, Minnesota, it purports to examine a small-town beauty
pageant. Here in the hallowed American heartland, amidst cow pats and
pork sausage, there's an all-out battle being waged for the sparkling
tiara. Denise Richards plays a spoiled little rich girl whose primary
talent seems to be sucking up to the judges, mouthing banal
platitudes, and dedicating her rendition of "Can't Take My Eyes Off
You" to Jesus Christ. Kirstie Alley plays her scheming mother, a
former winner, who also serves as the pageant's coordinator. The only
real competition comes from a sweet, guileless, tap-dancing trailer
park girl, Kirsten Dunst, who worships Diane Sawyer and wants to
become a television journalist. She's egged on by her chain-smoking,
beer-swilling mom, Ellen Barkin, and wonderfully slutty neighbor,
Alison Janney. Screenwriter Lona Williams and director Michael Patrick
Jann (MTV's "The State") rely on caricatures and revisit too many
snide, crude cliches - from the "You betcha" drawl of "Fargo" to the
"Spinal Tap" hysteria to the condescending "Waiting for Guffman"
buffoonery of "God-fearin' folk." Not that beauty pageants aren't ripe
for satire, but "Smile" (1975) did it so much better - and it didn't
need to travel to the Eating Disorder wing of the local
hospital. Holly Hunter's "The Positively True Adventures of the
Alleged Texas Cheerleader-Murdering Mom" set a standard for such
things that this doesn't even come close to. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Drop Dead Gorgeous" is a tepid, trivial 5. Too bad
Hollywood couldn't have left it alone to develop on its own as a
little independent film called "Dairy Queens."

Title
Review for Man on the Moon (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MAN ON THE MOON" (Universal Pictures)
  Don't miss the beginning - it's the most imaginative and
hilarious part. Facing the camera, Jim Carrey establishes immediately
that he's completely captured the eye-bulging essence of the late
comedian Andy Kaufman. His impersonation is nothing short of
brilliant, even Oscar-worthy. That having been acknowledged, the movie
itself leaves a lot to be desired. First, it's not really a
movie. It's simply the embodiment of an objectionable character whom
people either adored or loathed. Director Milos Foreman and
screenwriters Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski, the trio who did
The People vs. Larry Flynt, don't attempt an analysis or even offer
psychological insight into the complex, enigmatic nature of this
definitely unhinged, obviously neurotic, and perhaps psychotic
performer. Instead, we simply watch his progress from comedy clubs,
like the Improv, to Saturday Night Live, to TV's Taxi along with his
relentless self-destruction, aided and abetted by his writer/sidekick
Bob Zmuda (Paul Giamatti). Danny DeVito's superb as his agent,
observing: "You're insane - but you might also be brilliant." Kaufman
meets his girlfriend (Courtney Love) in a wrestling challenge but she
too is a cipher. They have only one revelatory moment together when he
whines, "You don't know the real me." And she replies, "There isn't a
real you." And then, at age 35, cancer strikes. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, Man on the Moon is a strange, shallow 6. Who was
this Andy Kaufman - and why did he love to provoke people? That's
never answered in this uneven, two-hour compilation of comedy
shtick. Even DeVito asks, "What's the point?"

Title
Review for Belly (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "BELLY" (Artisan Entertainment)
      Hype Williams' rambling, confused gangsta rap story revolves
around lifelong pals turned drug dealers. Tommy Brown (Earl Simmons,
known as the rapper DMX) and Sincere (Nasir Jones, known as Nas) grew
up in the projects in Queens; now they're living in luxury on Long
Island. Each one decides to take a different path. Sincere's into
family life, perhaps a movie to Africa, trying to distance himself
from the chaos of illegal drug trafficking, while greedy Tommy's
getting in deeper and deeper with a superpowered heroin manufactured
in Omaha, Nebraska. Predictably, conflicts occur - and the
heavy-handed finale, set on New Year's Eve, 1999, revolves around an
interminable diatribe about ending mindless violence and saving
mankind, punctuated by a hallelujah chorus in the background. Hype
Williams' murky directing style stems from MTV, combining slow-motion,
rapid cuts, strobe effects, and a multitude of fish-eye shots and,
presumably, the actors are better at rapping than they are at
emoting. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Belly" is a stoned
2. It's hard to stomach.

Title
Review for Before Night Falls (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "BEFORE NIGHT FALLS"
  Spain's most acclaimed young actor, Javier Bardem, makes his
American debut in this cinematic parable and portrait of Reinaldo
Arenas, who was persecuted for literary and sexual transgressions in
Cuba. A writer and homosexual, Arenas was perceived as a threat to
Fidel Castro on both counts. After escaping from the haunting
Kafkaesque nightmare of the notorious El Morro prison, he tried
unsuccessfully to flee Cuba by inner tube before emigrating to the
United States in the 1980 Mariel boatlift of "undesirables." Arenas
settled in New York's Greenwich Village where, suffering from AIDS, he
committed suicide at the age of 47. Julian Schnabel ("Basquiat")
writes and directs this righteously honest, impressionistic biography
with intelligence, delicacy and craftsmanship, beginning with Arenas's
rural childhood that was marked by an idyllic communion with
nature. With cinematographers Xavier Perez Grobet and Guillermo Rosas,
Schnabel utilizes various film stocks and colorations but without the
flashiness of Steven Soderberg's "Traffic." While exploring Arenas's
obsession with indiscriminate sex (he claimed to have had 5,000 lovers
by age 25), the screenplay, however, offers little analysis or
explanation for Arenas's quirks of character. Although Schnabel
originally envisioned Benicio Del Toro as Arenas, it's Bardem's
dynamic, astonishing performance that elevates the dreariness and
depression of the fragmented tale, along with Sean Penn and Johnny
Depp's cameos. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Before Night
Falls" is a strong, poetic, imaginative 8, representing freedom of
expression in form and content. His cry, "I'm a citizen of
nowhere...the State Department declared me a citizen of nowhere, so
legally I don't exist," resonates.

Title
Review for Winslow Boy, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE WINSLOW BOY" (Sony Pictures Classics Release)
 If you're looking for an intelligently crafted, superbly
acted, immensely engrossing, adult drama, this is the film for
you. Writer/director David Mamet ("Oleanna," "The Spanish Prisoner")
has adapted Terence Rattigan's renowned 1946 melodrama, which is based
on the real-life story of a 13 year-old cadet, Ronnie Winslow (Guy
Edwards), at the Royal Naval Academy who is accused of stealing a
five-shilling postal order and sent home in disgrace.  Convinced of
their son's innocence, the Winslows (Nigel Hawthorne, Gemma Jones,
Rebecca Pidgeon) persuade one of the country's leading lawyers, Sir
Robert Morton (Jeremy Northam), a Conservative member of Parliament,
to defend the lad in court. As the case proceeds, it challenges many
long-accepted legal traditions and sets off a national outrage,
pitting aristocrats against commoners and exacting a heavy price from
the participants. A family of the utmost gentility, the Winslows,
nevertheless, are determined to maintain their honor, steadfastly
maintaining that their son is not guilty of lying, forgery, and
theft. And, using a dark visual palette, Mamet adeptly reflects a time
period when values and social structure were in flux.  Despite the
1910 setting, the question raised by the film is timeless and
universal: What is the price of justice? The story was filmed once
before by Anthony Asquith in 1948, starring Robert Donat, Cedric
Hardwicke, and Margaret Leighton, but this version is excellent
although, in essence, it still remains a melodrama, never realizing
the full tragic impact of the situation. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "The Winslow Boy" is an exquisitely etched 8. It's
surprisingly provocative, filled to the brim with suspense and
romance.

Title
Review for Without Limits (1998)
"Running is not about winning, it's about guts...To give
anything less than your best is to sacrifice the gift," said Steve
Prefontaine. In an era where heroes are hard to find, it's no wonder
that this popular track star's story has inspired so much
interest. Prefontaine had it all: talent, charm, grace, beauty,
self-confidence, and - above all - tremendous drive. He broke every
American record between 2,000 and 10,000 meters before he tragically
died at the age of 24 in 1975 in a car crash. Written by Robert Towne
and Kenny Moore (a champion runner and one of Pre's closest friends)
and directed by Towne, this biopic examines the boy behind the man,
the coach behind the athlete. A mill worker's son who grew up in a
German-speaking household in Coos Bay, Oregon, Steve Prefontaine
(Billy Crudup) learned early how to run. As a kid, he ran from kids
who taunted him. As a teenager, he ran for fun and glory. As an
athlete, he ran for himself. He was a rebel, a perpetual front-runner
who refused to win a race with a mediocre effort, saying: "When you
set the pace, you control the race." At the University of Oregon, he
met the two most pivotal people in his life: his legendary coach, Bill
Bowerman (Donald Sutherland), and his devoutly Catholic girl-friend,
Mary Marckx (Monica Potter), who both cooperated in the making of this
movie. The story doesn't idealize Prefontaine as a role model. On the
contrary, it details his blunt, cocky attitude, self-obsession, and
anti-authoritarian outbursts. Robert Towne has been this route before
with "Personal Best," his story about women runners training for the
Olympics. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Without Limits" is
an inspiring 7, examining the cool, fearless legacy of the
long-distance runner. It's a great American story.

Title
Review for Jakob the Liar (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "JAKOB THE LIAR" (Columbia Pictures)
I suspect that if "Life is Beautiful" had not won last year's
Oscar, this Holocaust film would be more appreciated. Unfortunately,
the similarities are superficially apparent - revolving around a
whimsical, imprisoned Jew who keeps hope alive and shields a small
child amidst the Nazi atrocities. In this adaptation of Jurek Becker's
1969 best-seller by French writer/director Peter Kassovitz, Robin
Williams plays Jakob, the latke (pancake) maker, who lives in a Polish
ghetto. He's a widower who gets caught, allegedly after curfew, and
sent to Gestapo headquarters where he overhears a radio bulletin
indicating that Russian forces are advancing on Warsaw. Cautiously
making his way home, he encounters a ten year-old girl (Hannah Taylor
Gordon), an Anne Frank look-alike, whose parents were taken to a
concentration camp and, sympathetically, shelters her. The next
morning, Jakob is so excited about the war news that he confides it to
one friend who tells another, who tells another, who tells
another. Soon the gritty ghetto is humming, and the assumption is that
Jakob has a forbidden radio on which he heard the broadcast. Suddenly
Jakob becomes a celebrity, a reluctant hero because of his wishful
thinking. "My crowning achievement: latkes and lies," he moans. But
it's this dark joke, a sunny day, and a hopeful rumor that helped a
few doomed Jews survive in 1944. Despite an awkward, indulgent
screenplay, Robin Williams delivers a solid, restrained
characterization, supported by Liev Schreiber, Alan Arkin, Armin
Mueller-Stahl, and Bob Balaban. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Jakob the Liar" is a serio-comic 7. Curious side-note: Kassovitz sent
the script to Robin Williams because he thought Williams was
Jewish. He isn't, but he found the concept intriguing.

Title
Review for Noriega: God's Favorite (2000) (TV)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  On Sunday night, April 2nd, at 8 p.m., Showtime premieres a
made-for-television character study of the final years of Panamanian
General Manuel "Tony" Noriega's reign. Bob Hoskins stars as the
cunning and clever, yet desperate and dangerous dictator - and the
resemblance is eerie. And Hoskins is talented enough to embody all the
contradictions of Noriega's character, a man who believed in voodoo
and claimed to be a Buddhist yet kept Hitler's picture next to a
statue of the Virgin Mary, whose heroes included Moammar Kadafi and
Mother Teresa, who tortured and killed people yet refused to eat meat
because he opposed the slaughter of animals. Born out of wedlock, he
was abandoned by his mother when he was just five, forced to fend for
himself on the streets of Panama.  Convinced that he was God's
favorite and blessed with manic energy, Noriega not only survived but
succeeded in acquiring more power than anyone else in his
country. Scarred and pock-marked, he was an ugly strongman who
suffered under the tyranny of beautiful women.  Written by journalist
Lawrence Wright and directed by Roger Spottiswoode, this is a
speculative biography, since it deals with events no outsider ever
witnessed, examining the complications under the volatile surface,
bypassing the headlines and the stereotypes. Certainly Noriega is a
despicable thug, yet he's wickedly intriguing, not unlike other
Central American dictators who consider themselves victims of
U.S. foreign policy. On the Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, Noriega is an enigmatic 8.  And the real Noriega is still in
prison outside Miami, serving a 40-year sentence for racketeering,
conspiracy, and cocaine-smuggling. But he's up for parole this year
and - with his government influence - who knows?

Title
Review for Wood, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
"The Wood" refers to Inglewood, California, where three
friends reminisce about their 13-year friendship on the day when one
is about to get married. The story opens as Omar Epps explains,
directly into the camera, that his pal, the groom, has turned up
missing.  Epps and Richard T. Jones are sent to find Taye Diggs, who
is drunk at the home of an old girl-friend, overcome with pre-nuptial
jitters. As the boyz drive around, trying to sober up Diggs so he can
take his wedding vows, they pass various locales around the 'Wood and
recall memories from their shared adolescence. That's the simple,
somewhat contrived plot and the three actors deliver solid
performances.  First-time writer-director 25 year-old Rick Famuyiwa
evokes a remarkably fresh pop '80s nostalgia, complete with a spinning
vinyl record and finger-snapping music. Until now, most
African-American films have fallen into one of four categories:
"booty" pictures, violent "hood" chronicles, female-oriented
comedy/dramas, or serious ghetto stories, aimed at an older audience.
This movie is different in that it delves into the honest camaraderie,
as well as the various comic aspects of puberty, and its appeal should
extend beyond the boundaries of the African-American community.  On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Wood" is an amusing,
appealing 5.  In a summer of coming-of-age films, comparisons are
inevitable but - while much of the narrative involves a trio of young
guys trying to get laid - "The Wood" has little of the gross, vulgar
humor of "American Pie."  Instead, it opts for good-natured charm,
poignancy and sentimentality.

Title
Review for Sugar & Spice (2001)
Cheerleaders become bank robbers...that had to be the sales
pitch for this off-beat, teen crime-caper comedy that inexplicably
tickles the funny bone. To begin with, there are these five
cheerleaders at Lincoln High School. They're best friends, bosom
buddies, golden girls. So when their perky, relentlessly optimistic
A-squad captain (Marley Shelton) gets pregnant by the simpleminded
star quarterback (James Marsden) and discovers the Beatles were wrong
- "Love isn't all you need!" - they decide to rob a bank. After all,
that's where the money is, right? At least according to Keanu Reeves
in "Point Break," the vintage surf 'n' heist film, with specifics
supplied by the rebellious daughter (Mena Suvari) of a convict (Sean
Young). While the wholesome, devout Christian (Rachel Blanchard) and
fantasy-ridden Conan O'Brien fan (Melissa George) take a bit of
convincing, the Harvard-bound brainchild (Sara Marsh) opts out. But
the human pyramid doesn't collapse, since she's quickly replaced by a
munitions dealer's daughter (Alexandra Holden). There's a slight hitch
when a jealous member of the B-squad (Marla Sokoloff) squeals to the
police but she's quickly appeased. Sure, it's shallow. It's supposed
to be. What do you expect from a fizzy, pop culture send-up, complete
with red-white-and-blue pom-poms and Madonna lyrics recited as
inspirational poetry? Director Francine McDougall, writer Mandy Nelson
and cinematographer Robert Brinkmann share the same vision: taking
"girl power" to outrageous extremes. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Sugar & Spice" is a sassy, irreverent, saucy 6. Despite
memories of the tragedy of the Columbine shootings in 1999, this
satirical dark comedy about girls and guns offers more giggles than
one might expect. "Cheerleaders kick...!"

Title
Review for Gun Shy (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "GUN SHY" (Hollywood Pictures)
        It's got Sandra Bullock and Liam Neeson but something went
terribly wrong with the incomprehensible script and lame direction of
this silly mob comedy. Neeson plays a legendary undercover DEA agent
who suffers from post-traumatic stress syndrome after a failed sting
operation. That's why he seeks psychiatric help and winds up in group
therapy and takes up with a spunky nurse, Sandra Bullock, who gives
him an enema. Meanwhile, the nasty DEA chief (Mitch Pileggi of TV's
X-Files) assigns him to complete one final covert operation wherein he
must escape the wrath of a hot-tempered, trigger-happy Mafia leader -
known as "the Jeffrey Dahmer of hitmen"- played by Oliver Platt, and
his vulgar, no-nonsense wife, Mary McCormack, who are involved with
Colombian drug dealers in a complex money-laundering scheme. Sound
like Analyze This? Sound like The Sopranos?  The producers should be
that lucky!  Just because TV writer/director Eric Blakeney worked on
Moonlighting, Wiseguy, and Max Headroom does not mean he can pull off
this kind of unconventional feature film, particularly when he
presents a colonic irrigation as a romantic encounter and relies on
feeble poop jokes for laughs. Remember Grosse Pointe Blank? It
explored much the same ironic territory - far better.  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Gun Shy misses the target with a fumbling
4. Few laughs, little suspense and several talented actors who surely
could have found a better picture.

Title
Review for Bandits (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "BANDITS" (MGM)
  Bruce Wills and Billy Bob Thornton play bickering ex-cons who become
America's Most Wanted bank robbers in this screwball caper comedy. After a
somewhat confusing, chaotic setup in which they're heisting the Alamo Savings &
Loan in L.A., a flashback reveals who they are and how they got there. They're
"The Sleepover Bandits" who take a bank manager and his family hostage the night
before a theft. Hampered by an anger-management problem, Willis is a suave if
impulsive man of action, while the more thoughtful Thornton is an
obsessive/compulsive hypochondriac. They dream of margaritas and tuxedos,
running a little hotel near Acapulco. To this end, they recruit Willis's cousin
(Troy Garity), a dim-witted stunt man, to drive the getaway car. But life gets
more complicated when they take a hostage, Cate Blanchett, an unhappy housewife
who's giddy with delight at their antics, falling in love with them both,
reasoning, "I can't choose between you because, together, you're the perfect
man." "She's mentally unbalanced to a spectacular degree," Thornton astutely
observes. And the plot is punctuated with interviews on TV's "Criminals at
Large." Working from Harley Peyton's screenplay, Barry Levinson's direction is
expertly sharp and funny, including a brief nod to the motel scene in "It
Happened One Night." While the Willis-Thornton comedic chemistry clicks, Cate
Blanchett delivers a deftly daffy, richly funny and volcanically sexy
performance, the kind that deserves Oscar attention. As does Victor Kempster's
production design and Gloria Gresham's costumes which are - to say the least -
outrageous. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bandits" is a smart, savvy,
wickedly funny 8, evoking a quirky, contemporary "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance
Kid" romp.

Title
Review for Simon Birch (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "Simon Birch" (Hollywood Pictures)
From the day he was born, Simon Birch was different. No bigger
than a baby bird, doctors predicted he would never last the night. But
he did. Then they said he would never last a week. But he
did. Eventually, Simon grew into a little boy, fortified by the
staunch belief that God had made him small for a reason, that God not
only had a special plan for him but that he was going to be a hero.
His story is related by a narrator, Simon's best friend as a child,
now grown-up. We only see him twice - at the beginning and at the end
- but it's this character, played with incredibly sensitivity by Jim
Carrey (who curiously gets no screen credit) that bookends the
narrative. Veteran screenwriter and now first-time director Mark
Steven Johnson has created a cinematic fable, suggested by John
Irving's "A Prayer for Owen Meany."  Since the story begins in a
graveyard in Gravestown, Maine, by the tombstone of "Simon Birch," we
know that the pivotal character died at the age of 12, so the only
dramatic tension revolves around when, where, and how this tragedy
occurred.  The problem with the structure of the film is that it's so
obviously melodramatic and manipulative. In the title role, Ian
Michael Smith, who is afflicted with a rare enzyme disorder, Morquio
Syndrome, compensates for his "vertical challenge" with a truly
magical display of talent. And Joseph Mazzello delivers a truly
remarkable performance as Simon's best friend (the young Jim Carrey)
whose single mother, played by Ashley Judd, refuses to reveal the name
of his father, thus providing the curious boys with an ongoing
mystery. Oliver Platt and David Straithairn provide stalwart
support. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Simon Birch" is a
charming, poignant 7.  It's a wonderful, heartwarming story.

Title
Review for Best Man, The (1999/I)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Remember Taye Diggs, the actor who played Angela Bassett's
lover in "How Stella Got Her Groove Back"?  Enough people were so
impressed with him that he's got a romantic comedy of his own. Diggs
plays a Chicago-based fledgling novelist whose upcoming book,
"Unfinished Business," about his college experiences, has his friends
buzzing, particularly regarding the steamy sections revolving around
who-slept-with-whom. It's already been endorsed by Oprah Winfrey and
an advance copy is doing the rounds prior to the upcoming marriage of
a New York Giants running back, Morris Chestnut, and his longtime
girl-friend, Monica Calhoun. It's a celebratory weekend in New York
that will reunite the successful African-American college crowd once
again as they face some of life's major dilemmas. Diggs is trying to
dodge making a marital commitment to his current girlfriend, Sanaa
Lathan, primarily because a sexy, ambitious TV producer, Nia Long, is,
as one of his buddies comments, "the best girlfriend you never had,"
while laid-back Harold Perrineau seems to be firmly attached to
domineering Melissa De Sousa, whom everyone knows is wrong for him,
and Terrence Howard continues to be a perennial bachelor as well as a
perennial student. Writer-director Malcolm D. Lee, a cousin of Spike
Lee whose company produced the film, quickly demonstrates that
film-making talent runs in the family, having genuine good fun with
the universality of intimate male/female relationships, at least from
the male perspective. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Best
Man" is an amusing, energetic 7 - and stick around for the
credits. Like "The Blair Witch Project," the hype for this date movie
began on the Internet, building anticipation for a whalloping opening
weekend.

Title
Review for Gone in Sixty Seconds (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "GONE IN 60 SECONDS" (Touchstone Pictures)
Has your car ever been stolen? Have you ever experienced that
queasy, sinking feeling when you walked to where you left it, only to
find...no car?  That may be why I had a perverse curiosity about this
new Jerry Bruckheimer action/thriller. Written by Scott Rosenberg
("Con Air") and directed by TV-commercial veteran Dominic Sena
("Kalifornia"), it stars Nicolas Cage as "Memphis" Raines, a master
car thief. Back in his heyday, there was no vehicle he couldn't heist
in 60 seconds. He's ostensibly retired until his kid brother Kip,
played by Giovanni Ribisi, is in mortal danger. That brings him back
into the grim world of crime and fear for one last, intense
high-stakes heist. He and his hastily re-assembled gang of seasoned
experts, teamed up with Kip's younger crowd, must steal 50 prized cars
- as Robert Duvall does the tally. Angelina Jolie plays a tough,
Ferrari-loving mechanic who was romantically involved with
Memphis. Delroy Lindo is the L.A. police auto-theft detective who's
determined to arrest Memphis, while Christopher Eccleston is the
vicious villain. The inventive car chases with expert stunt drivers
are amazing, particularly on the bridge linking Long Beach and San
Pedro. Car thieves give their prey girl's names so the mythical star
is "Eleanor," a pewt er 1967 Shelby Mustang GT 500 with black
stripes. In the original "Gone in 6 0 Seconds" (1974), best known for
its 40-minute chase, Eleanor was a yellow 1973 Mach 1
Mustang. (Remember the green '68 Shelby fastback Steve McQueen d rove
in "Bullitt"?) On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Gone in 60
Secon ds" accelerates to a fast-paced 4. It may push the pedal to the
metal for ca r-and-action aficionados but it left me still wondering
where my stolen car wound up.

Title
Review for Straight Story, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 This delicately wrought, true story of Alvin Straight, a man
on a mission, is a marked departure for film-maker David Lynch ("Blue
Velvet," "The Elephant Man"), and charismatic Richard Farnsworth's
poignant performance has definite Oscar potential. The story revolves
around a stubborn 73 year-old - that's Farnsworth - who travels 260
miles from Laurens, Iowa, to Mt. Zion, Wisconsin, to visit his ailing
brother and patch up a quarrel. What makes his odyssey unique is his
mode of transport: a '66 John Deere lawnmower. With his own health
failing, Alvin can't see well enough to drive and refuses to let
anyone take him, even though he must hobble with two canes. So,
despite the protests of his speech-impaired daughter (Sissy Spacek)
and his cronies who consider him crazy, Alvin rigs up a small trailer
behind his lawnmower, packs up his gear, and putts along the highway
at 5 m.p.h. for six weeks. En route, he encounters some kindly folk
and spreads his simple brand of homespun wisdom. He counsels a
pregnant teenage runaway about the strength of family ties, recalls to
yuppie bikers how "the worst part of being old is remembering when you
were young," negotiates engine repairs with quirky twin mechanics, and
commiserates with a fellow veteran about his guilt of being a sniper
during World War II.  Screenwriters John Roach & Mary Sweeney and
director David Lynch show taste, discipline, and restraint in this
heartwarming, if slow-paced, geriatric "road picture," while
cinematographer Freddie Francis hauntingly captures the dramatic
skies-and-plains vistas of America's autumnal heartland.  On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Straight Story" is an
unforgettable 9. A delight from start to bittersweet fade-out, this
subdued, lyrical, mature film is a treasure.

Title
Review for Notting Hill (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "NOTTING HILL" (Polygram/Universal Pictures release)
She's the most dazzling, famous movie star in the world and
he's the sheepish, fumbling proprietor of a tiny travel book store on
funky Notting Hill in London. Can they falls in love? Why not?  In
this joyous, contemporary fairy tale, anything's possible. Especially
with a script by Richard Curtis ("Four Weddings and a Funeral) that's
reminiscent of Audrey Hepburn's "Roman Holiday."  The set-up has Julia
Roberts, a glamorous American actress, meet Hugh Grant, a book-seller,
in his shop - after which he inadvertently spills orange juice all
over her T-shirt. She agrees to let him awkwardly clean her up in his
nearby flat and - well, nature takes its course. But their path to
romance has plenty of bumps which I won't ruin for you. Suffice it to
say, she's the impetuous aggressor, while he's wary. She's
sophisticated; he's shy. She's agile; he's clumsy. She's direct,
saying whatever she thinks; he's understated and evasive, musing,
"I've opened Pandora's box, and there's trouble inside." Director
Roger Michell has astutely assembled a superb British supporting cast,
particularly Rhys Ifans as Grant's wild, Welsh flat-mate and Emma
Chambers as his ditsy sister, with Alec Baldwin in an uncredited cameo
as Roberts' boy-friend who drops in unexpectedly. There are several
mischievous sequences involving the absolute idiocy people display in
the presence of a celebrity and a comic sparring-match with the
British tabloid press, plus a timely scandal involving obscene photos
and sly, amusing repartee involving Mel Gibson's bottom. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Notting Hill" is an amusing,
captivating, relentlessly entertaining 10 - a perfect date movie and
one of the most delightful films in years!

Title
Review for Jeepers Creepers (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "JEEPERS CREEPERS" (MGM/UA Entertainment)
  This nasty, little horror film begins as a bickering brother (Justin
Long) and sister (Gina Philips) are driving through the desolate countryside on
their way home from college and spy a man dropping wrapped-up bodies down a
drainage pipe. When Long decides to investigate, there's nothing but trouble.
"You know the part in scary movies where somebody does something really stupid
and everybody hates them for it? - Well, this is it!" Philips warns. What he
finds in the basement of an old, abandoned church  is a dying boy with a
horrifying, jagged-stitched incision from his neck to his navel, plus hundreds
of other mutilated bodies, stitched together on the walls and ceiling like a
disgusting tapestry. Long flees but now the monstrous, winged Creeper (Jonathan
Breck) is after both of them! Eileen Brennan appears briefly as the Cat Lady and
Patricia Belcher is Jezelle, a psychic who explains the evil creature's bizarre
feeding habits. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Jeepers Creepers" is a
fiendishly visceral 2 with an extraordinarily gruesome conclusion, giving new
meaning to the old song "Jeepers Creepers."
   And now - as Paul Harvey would say - for the rest of the story.
What's more scary than the cruelty of the satanic film itself is the fact that
writer/director Victor Salva is a convicted child molester who videotaped
himself having oral sex with a 12 year-old actor in California. Sentenced to
three years in prison, he served 15 months and completed parole in 1992. When
Salva made "Powder" (1995), the story of an albino boy with supernatural
abilities, Disney studio executives claimed that they did not know about his
prior conviction as a pedophile. And now, once again, in this MGM/UA film, that
fact is conspicuously absent from his press kit bio.

Title
Review for Three Kings (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
'Remember "Catch 22" and "M*A*S*H*" - those black comedies
that captured the surrealist insanity of W.W.II and the Korean War?
That's what David O. Russell attempts in this astute blend of
action/adventure, drama, humor, and scathing political
commentary. George Clooney stars as a cynical career soldier - an
American Special Forces Captain - who's ready to retire. In March of
1991, he and his cohorts (Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze) are
ready to return home from the Gulf War when they unexpectedly come
into possession of a map that indicates the location of a stash of
Kuwaiti gold bullion stolen by the Iraqi army. "Saddam stole it from
the sheiks," Clooney says, "and I have no problem stealing it from
Saddam." They take off at dawn, planning to return by noon. But it's
not that easy, particularly with a feisty war correspondent (Nora
Dunn) snooping around. There's chaos, confusion, and carnage - but
don't expect any stupendous battle scenes. Encounters with the "enemy"
are primarily skirmishes as Iraqi rebels, encouraged by George Bush's
exhortations to overthrow Saddam Hussein, courageously fight the
brutal Republican Guard, only to discover that the politically
expedient cease-fire has made the Americans unwilling to offer
humanitarian aid to the civilians caught in the turmoil. "We're
fighting Saddam and dying - and you're stealing gold," one angry rebel
astutely observes, igniting a moral dilemma for the greedy
treasure-hunters who are cornered into doing the right thing.  On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Three Kings" is a suspenseful 8,
raising serious questions about the morality of the United States
position on military intervention and putting a human face on the
atrocities of war.

Title
Review for Two Can Play That Game (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "TWO CAN PLAY THAT GAME" (Screen Gems)
  Since the success of "Waiting to Exhale," there have been several
romantic comedies about African-American professionals. This female revenge
fantasy, Vivica A. Fox plays Shante Smith, a stunning ad exec who seems to have
reached the pinnacle of success: a mansion, a sporty car and an idyllic
relationship with a hunky, hot-shot lawyer, Morris Chestnut. She's at a point in
her life when she dispenses advice to her grateful girl-friends (Mo'Nique, Wendy
Racquel Robinson, Tamala Jones). "When your man messes up, no matter how small
it is," she smugly decrees, "yuh gots to punish him." So when she catches her
hot man dancing at a bar with a smart and sexy rival, Gabrielle Union, she
devises her own version of "The Rules," a 10-day "tough love" emotionally
punishing plan to get him back. Unfortunately, writer/director Mark Brown ("How
To Be a Player") breaks the cardinal rule of romantic comedy: you have to like
the protagonist - and shrill, self-congratulatory Shante Smith is a smirking,
superficial, spiteful shrew who doesn't realize that rational rules cannot
always be applied to love. Having her talk directly into the camera gets stale
very quickly and the "Day One," "Day Two" title-card device underscores the
tedium. Comic Anthony Anderson scores as Chestnut's boisterous best-friend, and
singer Bobby Brown does a cameo as a scuzzy mechanic who's given a smooth
makeover by Ms. Robinson. But the out-takes over the closing credits contain
more humor than the film itself. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Two Can
Play That Game" is smarmy if slick 4, filled with misogynistic attitude and
blatant product placements (Coca-Cola, Miller Genuine Draft) but little else. In
this R-rated (for explicit sexual language), pseudo-hip battle of the sexes, the
audience loses.

Title
Review for Night at the Roxbury, A (1998)
        This clunky, clueless comedy is aimed directly at the
"Saturday Night Live" crowd, as producer Lorne Michaels takes a simple
skit and fashions a full-length feature, directed by John
Fortenberry. Will Ferrell and Chris Katten play two socially inept,
dumb-and-dumber losers whose heads bop in unison to the catchy
Haddaway song "What is Love?" Not that they know much about it, of
course, since most of their time is spent babe-watching. Sadly, no
"hottie" (their name for attractive members of the female gender) will
even acknowledge their stares and they certainly couldn't get in the
door of the exclusive nightclub, the Roxbury. Think Studio 54. Or
could they? On such a trivial premise, an entire film has been
constructed.  Dan Hedaya is their gruff father, who owns a
fake-flowers shop in Beverly Hills, while Loni Anderson, as their
plastic surgery-addicted mom, flashes what appear to be huge,
collagen-enhanced lips. Chazz Palmintieri plays the paranoid club
owner (wisely without billing) and Richard Grieco appears as the
Butabi brothers' favorite celebrity, not much of a stretch. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "A Night at the Roxbury" is a goofy,
tepid 3 - about two silly, senseless simpletons.

Title
Review for True Crime (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
         Clint Eastwood's an insightful director and an often
underestimated actor but he needs a more believable story to work with
than "True Crime" - along with a more appealing character to
play. He's a cynical, amoral reporter on the Oakland "Tribune" who
can't keep his pants zipped. In the first scene and in the final
scene, he's hitting on 23 year-old girls. In between, he's wallowing
in a muckraking melodrama about a noble black man (Isiah Washington)
who's bravely facing execution on Death Row in San Quentin for killing
a pregnant white convenience store clerk. The guy's obviously not
guilty and Eastwood - who was given the story as a last-minute fill-in
- is determined to prove his innocence within a 12-hour span to get a
reprieve before the warden can administer the lethal injection. It's
far-fetched but he finds exonerating evidence, plus a witness, that
the cops, lawyers, and other reporters haven't unearthed over six
years. Meanwhile, he's boffing the wife of the city editor (Dennis
Leary) and bantering with the editor-in-chief (James Woods). Actually,
the scenes in which Eastwood and Woods trade sardonic zingers are the
best in the film. Several extraneous characters are just irritating -
like a foul-mouthed panhandler and a pontificating prison
minister. There are also the Eastwood family players - remember how he
featured his daughter Alison as a singer in "Midnight in the Garden of
Good and Evil"?  This time, his former girl-friend, Frances Fisher,
plays an attorney; his current wife, Dina Ruiz, is a TV reporter
(since she is in real-life, it's not a stretch); and his love-child
with Fisher cavorts as his daughter (she's adorable).  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "True Crime" is a trite, contrived, tedious
4. It's a crime of excess, filled with people with whom you'd never
want to spend one hour, much less two.

Title
Review for Teaching Mrs. Tingle (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "TEACHING MRS. TINGLE" (Dimension/Miramax Films)
Filmed under the title "Killing Mrs. Tingle," this demented
teen comedy is about high-school students who kidnap and torture their
nasty history teacher. But, after shooting incident at Columbine High
School in Littleton, Colorado, in April, the title was quickly
changed. Kevin Williamson wrote the screenplay before "Scream" and
long before TV's "Dawson's Creek," but he couldn't sell it until he
became famous. Now he's using it to make his directing debut. The plot
revolves around a bitchy, sarcastic, sadistic schoolmarm (flamboyant
Helen Mirren) who terrifies everyone, even the principal (Michael
McKean) - whom she pointedly rebukes for his alcoholism problem.  Her
students' anger boils over when Mrs. Tingle unfairly thwarts a college
scholarship for her most ambitious, over-achieving student (Katie
Holmes) by accusing the girl of stealing a copy of the final history
exam.  The theft was actually arranged by another student (Marisa
Coughlan) and her boy-friend (Barry Watson). When the trio go to the
teacher's house in hopes of clarifying the situation, they're mocked
by terrible Mrs. Tingle (think of Margaret Hamilton as the cruel,
cackling Wicked Witch in "The Wizard of Oz") and the confrontation
gets out of hand.  Mrs. Tingle winds up tied to the headboard of her
Victorian bed as the enraged students make macabre mayhem. Will they
kill her or won't they?  Obviously not - since this is a PG-13 movie -
and clever Mrs. Tingle can outwit the dumb, childish clods with mind
games even when she's in bondage, but that's still no excuse for
plodding caricatures rather than sympathetic characters. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Teaching Mrs. Tingle" is a tedious,
tawdry 1.  There's simply nothing amusing about this mean-spirited
glorification of violent revenge.

Title
Review for Stepmom (1998)
Bring along lots of handkerchiefs because this adult drama
with that terrible title is a real weeper. It's about two women who
hate each other, two kids caught in the middle, and one man just
trying to survive.  Ed Harris's divorced wife, Susan Sarandon, and
their kids - who live in suburbia - are anything but happy when his
perky photographer girl-friend, Julia Roberts, moves into his
Manhattan apartment. Everyone hates her until a life-threatening
illness (cancer) forces Sarandon to accept her ex-husband's
fiancee. Both women are selfish - in their own way. There's the
perfect "soccer mom," who values her children's well-being over
everything else, versus the surrogate, unwanted step-parent who never
wanted children and is far more interested in her career than raising
a family. Grasping her dynamic, gritty part and running with it
magnificently, Susan Sarandon's mean, bitchy portrayal could earn her
the Best Actress Academy Award this year with fresh, hip Julia Roberts
claiming the Best Supporting Actress prize. Their scenes are so true
and so vital and cut so deep. The moving script by Gigi Levangie ("I
am a stepmom. I wrote this from personal experience.") and Ron Bass
("Rain Man," "My Best Friend's Wedding") is juicy, relevant, and
contemporary, and director Chris Columbus ("Home Alone,"
"Mrs. Doubtfire") expertly adds bite and heart to the rich texture,
making it about the humanity of people - with all the laughter and
tears of real families. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Stepmom" is a spellbinding 10. It's a "must see" to watch two
extraordinary actresses ignite the screen with bravura, Oscar-caliber
performances in a poignant celebration of family and of life.

Title
Review for Pitch Black (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
A disabled spacecraft crash-lands on a harsh desert planet at the
beginning of this tedious sci-fi disaster. Among the grungy survivors
are the female pilot (Radha Mitchell), a Muslim priest (Keith David),
a prissy antiquities dealer (Lewis Fitzgerald), a convicted killer
with huge muscles and surgically-enhanced laser vision (Vin Diesel)
and the bounty hunter (Cole Hauser) who is bringing him to justice.
Squabbling, they're all vying for leadership power - until they're
terrorized by armies of voracious, carnivorous, nocturnal creatures
who are fiendishly determined to devour them. Australian
writer/director David Twohy (The Arrival), working with writers Jim
and Ken Wheat, lifts elements from the Alien films, among others, and
treacherous, pterodactyl-like creatures from Godzilla.  The formulaic
dialogue is all their own and there's little tension in the episodic
plot which involves a solar eclipse. The only commendable originality
is in the stylish lighting, utilizing various filters, and
cinematography, drawing on several types of film stock which
complement the strange, ominous planet with its intense heat from
three different suns and bizarre desert landscape. However, on a
parched, cloudless planet supposedly devoid of all water, a sudden
downpour which drenches the hapless survivors is one of the most
obvious discordant occurrences which is never explained. And if Vin
Diesel's voice sounds familiar, you might recall that he did the title
character in The Iron Giant. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
Pitch Black is a dismal 1 - a noisy, nightmarish waste of time and
money, the producers' and yours.

Title
Review for What Lies Beneath (2000)
The greatest mystery in this psychological thriller is why the
trailer gives away so many of the carefully designed plot twists and
turns. After all, isn't a suspense story supposed to be full of
surprises? That having been said, compliments are due to director
Robert Zemeckis ("Forrest Gump") who uses technology to enhance his
craftsmanship, rather than substitute for it; to Harrison Ford who has
the courage and conviction to play a believably flawed, obsessed hero;
and to Michelle Pfeiffer who manages to be wet and wild at the same
time. They're a supposedly happily married couple - he's a respected
geneticist and she was a concert cellist - who live in a beautiful
house on a lake in bucolic Vermont next to some provocative
neighbors. She has a daughter (Katharine Towne) from a previous
marriage whom they've just packed off to college when she hears
mysterious, whispering voices and spies a wraithlike ghost in their
home. Is it a poltergeist or her repressed anxieties?  "Something is
happening in our house," she wails, oozing paranoia and
vulnerability. Indeed it is. It seems her husband had an affair with a
suicidal woman that may have come back to haunt him. But why?  And
what lies beneath? Obviously influenced by Alfred Hitchcock's penchant
for scary elements that emerge credibly, Robert Zemeckis adds
complicated camera moves and a unique ability as an illusionist, which
he uses to full advantage during the final half-hour. While Harrison
Ford conveys his usual stalwart strength which, in this case, has
creepy overtones, it's Michelle Pfeiffer who carries Clark Gregg's
somewhat predictable screenplay, adapted from his story with Sarah
Kernochan. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "What Lies Beneath"
is a menacing, ominous 6 - if you like the strange and supernatural.

Title
Review for Others, The (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "THE OTHERS" (Dimension Films/Miramax)
  "No door is to be opened before the previous one is closed and
locked," instructs Grace (Nicole Kidman), as mistress of a mysterious mansion on
the remote British island of Jersey. It's 1945 and she's waiting for her husband
(Christopher Eccleston) to return from fighting the Germans in France in W.W.II.
But the war is over and she hasn't heard from him. Plus the servants have left,
departing in the middle of the night, only to be replaced by three strangers who
appear on her doorstep looking for work. But it seems Mrs. Mills (Fionnula
Flanagan), Mr. Tuttle (Eric Sykes) and the mute Lydia (Elaine Cassidy) worked in
the mansion, years ago, for previous owners. "My children are allergic to
light," Grace continues. "The curtains and shutters must always be drawn."
Without electricity, they exist in almost total darkness and within this
macabre, claustrophobic atmosphere, bizarre things start to happen. There are
strange sounds and ghoulish apparitions, indicating intruders, which terrify
Grace and her children (Alakina Mann, James Bentley) but, oddly, not the
servants. "Sooner or later, they will find you," Mrs. Mills murmurs. "I don't
like fantasies," the stressed-out Grace snaps, relying, instead, on her devout
Catholicism. By Spanish writer/director/composer Alejandro Amenabar ("Open Your
Eyes"), this is a sinister, old-fashioned ghost story in which nothing is as it
seems. Suspense is created, not by special effects, but by the rising tension
and all-encompassing fog. Resembling a young Grace Kelly, Nicole Kidman captures
Kelly's combination of icy volatility and vulnerability which made her
irresistible to Alfred Hitchcock. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Others" is a shivery, spooky, scary 8, a suspenseful, brain-twisting
chiller-thriller, reminiscent of "The Sixth Sense."

Title
Review for American Psycho (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "AMERICAN PSYCHO" (Lions Gate Films)
  It's really hard to be objective about this picture. I
loathed it. But why? Based on Bret Easton Ellis's controversial 1991
novel, it revolves around Patrick Bateman, a vain, rich, vacuous Wall
Street stockbroker who becomes a serial killer. The profanity-laden
screenplay leaves much of the gruesome gore of the grisly
dismemberment and grotesque disembowelment of his victims to the
imagination and attempts, instead, to be a black comedy. For example,
the stylized opening sequence depicts crimson drops of what one might
assume is blood - but, in truth, they're drippings from a thick
raspberry sauce being poured over an exorbitantly over-priced poultry
entree served at a trendy Manhattan restaurant. Yes, Patrick Bateman
is a phony, obsessed with designer clothing, exercise, and pop
music. Writer/director Mary Harron and co-writer Guinevere Turner have
fashioned a sanctimonious social satire on the greedy excesses of the
'80s, and Christian Bale plays the psychopath with exuberant relish as
Reese Witherspoon, Chloe Sevigny, Willem Dafoe, and Jared Leto lend
support. Plus there's an abundance of male and female nudity with the
warm skin tones photographed in exquisite settings. But what made me
flinch was the cold, explicit glorification, the utter delight the
movie-makers took in the sleek horror of murder. To me, serial killers
simply aren't funny - no way, even if - as it's suggested
inconclusively - it's all in Bateman's warped mind. (Leonardo DiCaprio
was wise to have bailed out of this project.) On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "American Psycho" is a reprehensible 2 - and it
should have been NC-17, not R.  Trimming a sex scene involving a
threesome orgy does not make this film acceptable for a multiplex,
where young people can and do sneak in. I wish I hadn't seen it.

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "BEING JOHN MALKOVICH" (USA Films)
 If there's an award for the boldest, most unconventional and
wildly inventive movie of the year, it has to go to "Being John
Malkovich," in which screenwriter Charlie Kaufman and director Spike
Jonze blend surrealism with science-fiction and self-parody. John
Cusack stars as an out-of-work puppeteer who takes a job as a filing
clerk in a New York office building on the 7 1/2 floor, where the
rents are low because the ceilings are half the normal height. It's a
great visual gag as workers hunch over, scuttling down the hall. Stuck
in an unhappy marriage to an almost unrecognizable Cameron Diaz with
dark, frizzy hair, he becomes infatuated with a co-worker, Catherine
Keener, who couldn't be less interested. At least until he discovers a
small door behind a filing cabinet that leads to a tunnel which,
inexplicably, sucks him into the brain of actor John Malkovich. Cusack
can see through the actor's eyes and share whatever he's is feeling -
for 15 minutes - until he's dumped into a ditch on the New Jersey
Turnpike. When he shares his discovery with Keener, she immediately
sees the potential in selling entrance - $200 per person - to this
portal so that others can partake in the sensory and emotional
experiences of John Malkovich. They become partners in this commercial
venture - until, inevitably, the enigmatic Malkovich discovers how
they've opened this "metaphysical can of worms." Plus, there's a
deliriously mad subplot of gender/blender sexual seduction, absurdist
supporting gems from Orson Bean and Mary Kay Place, plus witty cameos
by Charlie Sheen, Sean Penn, and Brad Pitt. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Being John Malkovich" is a clever, outrageous 10. It's a
film of astonishing and beguiling originality.

Title
Review for Titan A.E. (2000)
  Apparently, Bill Mechanic, chairman of 20th Century Fox,
wanted an animated movie for 13-14 year-old boys, a group that hasn't
shown much interest in cartoons other than comic books. So this is the
result. Set in the year 3028, the Earth has been blown apart by a
vicious alien race made of pure energy called the Drej.  The hero,
predictably, is a cynical teenager (voiced by Matt Damon), a
rebellious drifter who works on a grungy salvage station. His life is
changed when he finds his father, a brilliant scientist who built the
Titan (a mysterious spaceship that has the power to create a planet),
has left him a genetically encoded ring with a map. With "I happen to
be humanity's last hope," he's off on an adventure on the Valkyrie
with its captain Korso (Bill Pullman), who once worked with his
father, along with fighter pilot Akima (Drew Barrymore), plus the
sarcastic First Mate Preed (Nathan Lane) and Gune (John Leguizamo),
the Peter Lorre-like navigator - with the ruthless, villainous Drej in
hot pursuit. There are plot-holes enormous enough to fly a space craft
through, perhaps because so many writers were involved - and the
formulaic concept reminded me of the old TV series "Battlestar
Galactica" with a touch of "Wing Commander" thrown in. And what's with
Stith (Janeane Garofalo), a kangaroo-like weapons expert? Animator Don
Bluth combines 3-D and 2-D which is visually disconcerting - except
for two sequences. One involves the Ice Rings of Tigrin where one
spaceship chases another through giant, reflective crystals and the
other with vibrating, brightly colored hydrogen trees. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Titan A.E." is a weird, action-packed 4 -
unless you're a teenager. Then, perhaps, it might just be a cool
sci-fi trip set to edgy, electronic rock music.

Title
Review for Double Jeopardy (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "DOUBLE JEOPARDY" (Paramount Pictures)
        In this action/revenge movie, a clever woman goes after her
conniving husband after he frames her for his supposed murder. Ashley
Judd stars as the wife and mother who is wrongly imprisoned for
killing her husband. While serving her sentence at a Washington State
Prison, she discovers that her spouse is, in fact, living with another
woman and raising their son. In addition, she's told by another inmate
that she can't be tried twice for the same crime so, when she gets
released, she figures: Why not really murder the two-timing rat?  The
vigilance of her parole officer, played by Tommy Lee Jones, is her
only obstacle. Directed by Bruce Beresford, strong and slender Ashley
Judd seems perfectly cast, yet she was not the first choice for this
plum part. Jodie Foster was supposed to do it until pregnancy forced
her to drop out. Tommy Lee Jones is stalwart, as always, doing the
relentless law enforcement officer gig which he perfected during "The
Fugitive," but Bruce Greenwood's husband part is just too slippery and
sleazy. But superficiality is the keynote of the slick, plot-heavy
screenplay by David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook. As for the legal
question about whether Judd's character truly has a legal license to
kill, the answer is "no." Under the principle of double jeopardy, a
person cannot be tried twice for the same crime. But, if the crime was
really never committed, then the concept is invalid. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Double Jeopardy" is an angry, violent 4. It's
an implausible, illogical but mildly intriguing thriller.

Title
Review for Return to Me (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Tinged with traces of "Love Story," "Ghost" and "Moonstruck,"
this romantic comedy has its moments - but, unfortunately, most of
them turn out to be sappy. David Duchovny doffs his "X-Files" Fox
Mulder persona to play a successful Chicago architectural engineer
whose wife (Joely Richardson), an ardent zoologist who works with
primates, dies in an automobile accident in one of the early scenes of
the picture. While he's still blood-stained and grief-stricken, his
wife's heart is transplanted into Minnie Driver, who's a shy, naive
waitress working in her family's Irish-Italian restaurant. Despite the
bizarre circumstances, you know that these two are eventually gonna
meet and fall in love. Predictability and foreshadowing weigh heavily
on the script written by Bonnie Hunt and Don Lake. Perhaps a more
experienced director could have quickened the pace, trimmed some
scenes, and meshed the elements better - but inexperienced Bonnie Hunt
helms her own material. In addition, she co-stars, as Driver's
confidante and wife of Jim Belushi, and she's cast at least four
relatives named Hunt in supporting parts. It's like a congenial family
movie under a big studio banner. Despite its lack of focus, it is
amusing to watch it unfold, particularly when senior pros like Robert
Loggia and Carroll O'Connor are bantering about old singers, old
songs, etc., since the title song comes from a vintage Dean Martin
ballad. David Duchovny and Minnie Driver are charming to watch; one
just wishes they had wittier, more sophisticated material to work
with. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Return to Me" is a sweet
but stumbling 5. Ah, the fickle finger of fate!

Title
Review for Glitter (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "GLITTER" (20th Century-Fox)
    There's less here than meets the eye. Or, put it this way, if you
thought Madonna was awful in "Shanghai Surprise," Mariah Carey's worse in this
reworking of "A Star is Born."  She plays Billie Frank who, despite being
abandoned by her singer/alcoholic mother (Valerie Pettiford), believes she's
destined for greatness because everyone tells her she is. "You've got this
amazing gift, and you gotta use it," her roommate says. "Your voice - it's
incredible," says another singer. "I ain't never met anyone like you," proclaims
Julian "Dice" Black (Max Beesley), the hot New York DJ who becomes her
Svengali-like producer/lover. Problem is: her signature song, "I Didn't Mean to
Turn You On" is wretched. And when she fumes out of filming her first music
video because the director wants to "exploit" her by having her wear a bikini,
the audience bursts into laughter. Exploit Mariah Carey, who chooses to wear as
little as the law will allow? Come on! Writer Kate Lanier's script is fatuous
and director Vondie Curtis-Hall doesn't have a clue how to handle the glitzy pop
diva and, as a result of their incompetence, whispery-voice'd Ms. Carey seems to
be embarrassed on-screen. She almost cringes when the camera comes in for a
close-up, pursing her lips and averting her glassy eyes. Talented British
musician Max Beesley appears equally inept, and as cinematographer Geoffrey
Simpson pans around the Manhattan skyline, there's an audible audience groan
when the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center come into view. Perhaps one of
the reasons Ms. Carey suffered her highly-publicized nervous breakdown this
summer is because she saw a preview of this clunker. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Glitter" is a pathetic 1. Right now, it's tops on my list of the
Worst of 2001.

Title
Review for Price of Glory (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Jimmy Smits has a lot riding on this picture; it's the movie for 
which he killed off his character in TV's "NYPD Blue." Written by sports 
columnist Phil Berger and directed by Carlos Avila, who developed the concept at the Sundance Institute, it's the story of a Mexican immigrant, Arturo Ortega (Smits), a pushy retired boxer who is trying to instill the prizefighting spirit in his three sons, Sonny (Jon Seda), Jimmy (Clifton Collins Jr.), and Johnny (Ernesto Hernandez). Like Don Corleone and his three sons in "The Godfather," it's a cultural heritage saga - with boxing 
being the primary way for Latinos to break out of the Arizona barrio.  The film opens with the ill-fated match that dashed Arturo's dreams of being a champion in the late '70s. Then there are glimpses of the boys growing up, being trained to be boxers, so the scene is set for the primary drama, which takes place in the present. According to Arturo's plans, two of his sons will fight; the third will go to college. Only things don't always go as planned.  Jimmy Smits captures the universality of the well-intentioned but ill-advised father-figure ("Everything I've ever done is for you boys!") with Maria Del Mar as a persuasive counter-balance as the mother. In melodramatic, cliche-ridden characterizations, Clifton Collins Jr. is cocky and rebellious, while Ernesto Hernandez is obedient and eager-to-please. But it's Golden Gloves alum Jon Seda (TV's "Homicide") who delivers the knockout performance as a man whose dreams extend far beyond the ring. In supporting roles, Ron Perlman !
is a ruthless promoter with Paul Rodriguez as a greedy insider. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Price of Glory" is a solemn, sweat-stained 6. Essentially, it's an old-fashioned, tough-love family drama set within the realm of boxing.

Title
Review for Thomas Crown Affair, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE THOMAS CROWN AFFAIR" (M.G.M.)
Pierce Brosnan doesn't even attempt to be Steve McQueen in this
re-make of Norman Jewison's "The Thomas Crown Affair" (1968).
Brosnan's bored billionaire playboy, the proverbial man who has
everything, is quite different. He's suave, cool and polished, yet
eager for a challenge, even an emotional distraction, as he tells his
psychiatrist, played by Faye Dunaway (not so coincidentally, the
co-star of the original version). The dapper Mr. Crown has just pulled
off an extraordinary theft of a $100 million Monet from New York's
Metropolitan Museum of Art. But an insurance investigator - that's
Rene Russo - knows he did it, and she's equally sleek, elegant and
provocative.  They cleverly taunt, torment, and tease each other
relentlessly - to the delight of the audience and chagrin of the
Manhattan detective (Denis Leary) assigned to the case. The issue, of
course, is trust - and neither of them does.  The intelligent, if
occasionally implausible screenplay by Leslie Dixon and Kurt Wimmer,
based on Alan R. Trustman's story, and the taut direction by John
McTiernan focuses far less on the caper aspect and concentrates,
instead, on the sexy, romantic entanglement that develops. Not that
there aren't surprises. In fact, the intriguing plot twists and turns
so much that you're bound to surprised more than once. It's too bad,
however, that more time wasn't spent on developing the edgy,
intriguing characters. They're too shallow, too glossy and
superficial. Sting performs the Oscar-winning song, "The Windmills of
Your Mind" by Michel Legrand, and Bill Conti's score is excellent. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Thomas Crown Affair" is a
sharp, stylish, slick 7. It's fanciful good fun.

Title
Review for Patch Adams (1998)
In this true comedy/drama, Robin Williams ("What Dreams May
Come," "Good Will Hunting") plays Hunter "Patch" Adams, a
manic-depressive who decides it's better to be a doctor than a
perennial patient. Problem is: Patch is also a clown, infuriating the
medical establishment by doing outrageous things.  Based on the 1993
book "Gesundheit: Good Health is a Laughing Matter" by Hunter Doherty
Adams, the film's timely theme is the therapeutic value of humor,
characterized by a personalized approach to medicine, but writer Steve
Oedekerk and director Tom Shadyac cater to Williams' talent for
improvisation. The story begins in 1969 in Fairfax Hospital's
Psychiatric Ward, where Patch voluntarily commits himself after
attempting suicide and acquires his nickname by repairing another
inmate's paper cup with a piece of adhesive.  Patch then moves on to
Virginia Medical College where, as an idealistic med student, he wants
to "treat the patient as well as the disease."  He succeeds
brilliantly with the hospitalized children, using an enema bulb to
make a red nose, and even with a surly, dying patient (Peter Coyote)
but fails dismally with his up-tight roommate (Philip Seymour Hoffman)
and the villainous Dean (Bob Gunton), who is determined to expel
him. A serious fellow student (Monica Potter) with her own demons to
exorcise provides the love interest, joining Patch to create an
unconventional clinic to "use humor to cure pain and suffering" - and
their Gesundheit! Institute still proves free care in West
Virginia. There's joy and sorrow, despair and determination, not
unlike Williams' far better "Awakenings" (1990), but the conclusion is
sheer melodrama.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Patch Adams"
is a syrupy, simplistic, sentimental 7. It's a whimsical, feel-good
film.

Title
Review for Nutty Professor II: The Klumps (2000)

Susan Granger's review of "NUTTY PROFESSOR II: THE KLUMPS" (Universal)
When audiences went wild for the "Nutty Professor"
dinner-table sequences in which Eddie Murphy played various members of
the Klump clan, the idea for a sequel was born. So, although heavy-set
Professor Sherman Klump remains the central character, his
dysfunctional family is fleshed out, literally, each member with
his/her own subplot. Last time, Sherman Klump came up with a way to
lose weight; this time, he discovers a youth serum. Annoyingly
neurotic Dean Richmond (Larry Miller) wants to sell the formula to a
drug company, while romance comes in the form of Janet Jackson as a
shy, sweet professor who's in love with Sherman.  Aggressive, skinny
Buddy Love is still in Sherman's system, bursting out unexpectedly,
until Sherman extracts him from his body.  It's like Jekyll and Hyde
separating. Buddy is no longer a sexist, mischievous alter-ego; he's
an evil ego trying to steal Sherman's "youth juice". The clash between
Buddy and Sherman as separate entities gives the plot tension because,
when Buddy's DNA goes so do Sherman's IQ points. With the help of
make-up genius Rick Baker, Eddie Murphy is chameleon-like. Mama holds
the family together; she's the most like Sherman. Papa and Ernie
Jr. are more alike. And Grandma's sexually voracious. What's amazing
is the seamless interaction of all Eddie's characters: how the eyeline
movement of one is combined with physical action of another in a
complicated digital ballet. But, despite four writers and director
Peter Segal, it's is incoherent. Clever, yes. Funny, no. The visual
gags and crude jokes are stale and predictable, and the 'space dream'
scene is downright stupid. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Nutty Professor 2: The Klumps" is a raunchy, gimmicky, forced 4.
It's tour-de-force Eddie - all over the screen!

Title
Review for Under Suspicion (2000)
  Powerhouse performances propel this tense, gripping
psychological thriller set amidst the carnivalesque festival of San
Sebastian in Puerto Rico.  Morgan Freeman plays a local police chief
who summons a prominent tax attorney - that's Gene Hackman - to his
office for an interrogation prior to a gala fund-raising party that
the attorney is hosting at a posh hotel across the street. There have
been a series of grisly murders of young girls in the precinct and,
for reasons that later become clear, Freeman suspects that Hackman is
involved in the sordid scandal. But why Hackman, who lives in a
magnificent villa with a sultry trophy-wife (Monica Bellucci) whom he
describes as "a beautiful woman who moves through life unchallenged"?
Yet, as Hackman nervously flicks his fancy cigarette lighter, there's
something suspicious about him, as a cocky young detective (Thomas
Jane) repeatedly points out. And the ultra-courteous Freeman, who
would like to be the next superintendent, cleverly reads the
desperation in Hackman's body language, maintaining that he's only
trying to clarify some details. Adapted by screenwriters Peter Iliff
and Tom Provost from Claude Miller's French cult classic, "Garde a
Vue" ("The Inquisitor"), and directed by Stephen Hopkins ("Lost in
Space," "The Ghost and the Darkness"), the character-driven
crime-mystery unfolds, revealing how both men have painful pasts
filled with secrets and lies. "You peel my onion down to the nub,"
admits Hackman. But the tedious repetition of the cross-questioning
and the too-frequent flashbacks detract from the narrative, diluting
its impact as the plot takes a dangerous, tortured twist. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Under Suspicion" is a disturbing 6,
as deceptive as the costumes of the San Sebastian street carnival.

Title
Review for Hannibal (2001)
  Terrifying, tantalizing Hannibal Lechter is ba-a-a-ck! In
this long-awaited sequel to "The Silence of the Lambs" (1991), Anthony
Hopkins reprises his Oscar-winning role of Hannibal the Cannibal. "I
have been in a state of hibernation for some time," he explains. His
portrayal is brilliant, capturing the diabolical doctor's subversive
charm and baroque wit, particularly as he's about to dissect another
victim. In this alibi-ridden world, perhaps what makes this
sociopathic serial killer so appealing is that he never makes excuses
for his evil behavior or his gruesome gourmet palate with a decided
preference for "free-range rude." Instead, he exudes a scary
integrity, augmented by director Ridley Scott's penchant for grisly,
highly stylized pieces of violence that reach operatic extremes, even
though the plot is a bit confusing.
   Julianne Moore replaces Jodie Foster as the courageous,
incorruptible FBI agent Clarice Starling with whom Hannibal is
infatuated. An unrecognizable Gary Oldman plays the hideously
deformed, malevolent pedophile, Mason Verger, whose face was devoured
by dogs. Plus, there's Ray Liotta as a slimy, corrupt Justice
Department official and Giancarlo Giannini as the avaricious Italian
detective on Lechter's trail in Florence with beautiful Francesca Neri
as his wife. Frankie R. Faison reprises Lechter's former hospital
orderly, Barney. At the request of the film-makers, I will not reveal
the conclusion to this disturbing, often sadistic, thriller except to
say that screenwriters David Mamet and Steve Zaillian contribute their
own cinematic twist which may surprise even those who have read Thomas
Harris's novel. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hannibal" is a
scary, suspenseful 7 - and this scalpel slicing is definitely not for
the squeamish.
   BACKGROUND INFORMATION: "The Silence of the Lambs" won five
Oscars, one of only three films to sweep Best Picture, Director,
Actress, Actor and Screenplay - and made more than $130 million at the
box-office. And "Hannibal" is actually Thomas Harris's third novel
featuring the fearsome Lechter, who made his first appearance in "Red
Dragon" (1981), which became the movie "Manhunter" (1986). For those
who are curious how an Orion Pictures release wound up as a
MGM/Universal release, it's because, when Orion folded, MGM bought it
s library which included "Silence." Meanwhile, Universal had made a
deal with Dino De Laurentis for the rights to "Hannibal" and, when
former Universal executive Chris McGurk took over the reins at MGM,
the two studios opted to share the financial risks - with De Laurentis
producing. Also included in this complicated deal were Universal's
theme-park rights to MGM's James Bond and Pink Panther characters.

Title
Review for Clay Pigeons (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "CLAY PIGEONS" (Gramercy Pictures)
 To call this a creepy black comedy is a serious
understatement.  This debut feature from director/producers Ridley and
Tony Scott's new Scott Free production company is about as "noir" as
film gets, this side of "Fargo." The story begins on a sweltering
summer day as two buddies, Gregory Sporleder and Joaquin Phoenix
("Return to Paradise"), are shooting at empty beer bottles in a canyon
near the sleepy town of Mercer, Montana. Suddenly, Gregory turns on
Joaquin, accusing him of having an affair with his wife (Georgina
Cates). Admitting the truth of the accusation, Joaquin tries to talk
him into lowering the gun but, instead, Gregory kills himself, making
it look as if Joaquin murdered him. That's just the beginning of this
twisted tale. Terrified, Joaquin covers up the killing and discovers
the hot-to-trot wife doesn't much care, since she soon takes up with a
swaggering cowboy, Vince Vaughn. This lusty, mysterious stranger also
befriends Joaquin. Then Janeane Garofalo shows up as an FBI agent
tracking a serial killer on the loose in the region. And more people
keep turning up dead. "I usually say, 'The more the merrier', but a
murder scene is not really crowd appropriate," she mutters
sardonically, criticizing the sheriff's penchant for allowing anyone
and everyone to mill around, inspecting evidence. Since he's sleeping
with one victim, dating another, and found a third, Joaquin becomes
the bewildered prime suspect, but writer Matt Healey and director
David Dobkin soon convince us that things are not always what they
seem. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Clay Pigeons" is a
silly, slick, surreal 6. It's more of the madness, mayhem, and murder
flooding the screens today.

Title
Review for Playing by Heart (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "PLAYING BY HEART" (Miramax Films)
Someone once said that "writing about music is like dancing
about architecture" - meaning it cannot be done - and film-maker
Willard Carroll was so taken with that sentiment that he called this
funny, poignant drama "Dancing About Architecture" until the MPAA
decreed that the title might be confused with "Dancing at Lughnasa."
"Playing by Heart" follows multiple characters from various
generations and lifestyles as they search for love in contemporary Los
Angeles during an eight day-and-night span.  Gena Rowlands and Sean
Connery head the cast as a mature couple approaching their 40th
wedding anniversary, and they're so superb together that it's a wonder
no one ever thought of teaming them before. Their story is intercut
with several others that are less interesting. Gillian Anderson is an
insecure stage director who has been so unlucky in love that she's
terrified of taking another chance.  Madeline Stowe and Anthony
Edwards are embroiled in a steamy extra-marital affair. Ellen Burstyn
coming to terms with her son, Jay Mohr, who is dying of AIDS.  Dennis
Quaid is a drunk, telling sob stories to Nastassja Kinski, Patricia
Clarkson, and even a compassionate drag queen, Alec Mapa. And sassy,
spunky Angelina Jolie of Generation X finds herself flirting with a
surly bystander, Ryan Phillippe, as she splits up with her boyfriend
by phone in a nightclub.  Reminiscent in structure of Alan Rudolph's
"Welcome to L.A." and Robert Altman's "Short Cuts," it has the benefit
of intelligent dialogue, Vilos Zsigmond's superb camerawork and John
Barry's evocative score; predictably, some storylines work better than
others. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Playing by Heart" is
an engaging ensemble 6, offering sentimental entertainment based on
the many faces of love.

Title
Review for Lost & Found (1999/I)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
       David Spade is a "Saturday Night Live" alumnus who survived
"Black Sheep" and is now on TV's "Just Shoot Me."  In this movie,
however, he's a cloying wimp who's better doing what he knows how to
do - sketch comedy - than what he doesn't. Meaning - he can do a
wickedly clever caricature of Neil Diamond but developing a
fully-fleshed character is beyond his grasp. In this lame, derivative
romantic comedy, which he co-wrote with J.B. Cook and Mark Meeks,
Spade plays a snide, smug, wise-cracking restaurant owner who attempts
to woo his dream-girl neighbor, a beautiful French cellist, Sophie
Marceau, by stealing her cairn terrier and then pretending to find the
hapless animal when she thinks he's lost. Of course, his plan is
somewhat foiled when her obnoxious ex-boyfriend (Patrick Bruel) flies
in from Paris to help with the search and Jon Lovitz is summoned as a
"dog whisperer," who senses the pooch's pain and recommends pampering.
There's a tasteless sub-plot that revolves around Spade's partner's
diamond anniversary ring that's swallowed by the dog and his frantic
determination to be there when it comes out the other end. As a
result, there are lots of poop jokes. Directed by Jeff Pollack, Sophie
Marceau shows some deft comic timing in her pink lingerie but Spade is
all attitude and grin, nothing more, which leaves a lot to be
desired. Estelle Harris ("Seinfeld's" Mrs. Costanza) does a cute
comedy bit with some lascivious elderly poker players. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Lost & Found" is a cheesy 3. It's a geeky TV
sit-com that never should have made it to the big screen.

Title
Review for Dungeons & Dragons (2000)
    What's in your imagination is usually far better than what
filmmakers can project on the screen and never was that more true than
with this tedious sword & sorcery epic that lifts liberally from "Star
Wars," "Raiders of the Lost Ark," "Hercules," "Xena: Warrior Princess"
and the old "Sinbad" movies. Based on an elaborate role-playing game
which has intrigued young minds since 1974, the plot revolves around a
young thief (Justin Whalin), his buddy (Marlon Wayans), and a pretty
magician (Zoe McLellan) who become embroiled in a battle between the
idealistic Empress of Izmer (Thora Birch), who wants equality and
prosperity for all her people, and the evil sorcerer Profion (Jeremy
Irons), who wants to depose her. Since the Empress has a scepter to
summon Golden Dragons, Profion dispatches his henchman (Bruce Payne)
to find the Rod of Savrille that summons a stronger species, the Red
Dragons. Written by Topper Lilien & Carroll Cartwright and directed by
Courtney Solomon, it's quite confusing and complicated. The acting,
however, is abominable.  Justin Whalin - dismissed by the villain as
"Pretty Boy" - smirks and struts like Han Solo, while Marlon Wayans
mugs outrageously in a JarJar Binks imitation and Thora Birch does her
Princess Leia routine.  Jeremy Irons is ludicrous with his leers, and
Bruce Payne has a perpetual sneer on his metallic blue lips. So
where's the $36 million budget? Visual effects. I did like the elves
with their Vulcan ears, but movies based on games rarely satisfy their
core audience. Remember "The Super Mario Brothers" and "Clue"?  On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dungeons & Dragons" is a cheap,
cheesy 3. At one point, Wayans wails, "This is dumb, dumb, dumb." I
agree. And Payne promises, "It was a mistake. It will not happen
again." One hopes.

Title
Review for Joy Ride (2001/I)
Susan Granger's review of "JOY RIDE" (20th Century-Fox)
    Unseen terror is always more frightening than the obvious - and
that's what makes John Dahl's newest thriller so scary.  College is over for the
summer when Lewis (Paul Walker), a Berkeley freshman, buys a beat-up '71
Chrysler Newport so that he can pick up a high-school pal, Venna (Leelee
Sobieski) at her dorm in Denver, hoping their platonic relationship will evolve
into something more as they drive home to New Jersey. En route, he makes a
detour to Salt Lake City to bail his notoriously irresponsible brother Fuller
(Steve Zahn) out of jail. When Fuller buys a used CB-radio for fun on the road,
they decide to play a prank. Using the handle "Candy Cane" - with Lewis
pretending to be an amorous woman on the prowl - they lure an amorous
trucker,"Rusty Nail," to a roadside motel at midnight. "Bring pink champagne,"
Candy Cane purrs. "It's my favorite." But when Rusty Nail turns out to be a
psycho-killer, the situation is far from humorous. Nevertheless, they pick up
Venna who cheerily chirps, "You guys ready for an adventure?" She knows nothing
about what happened - until they discover that Rusty's big black rig is
relentlessly stalking them down the highway. After "Red Rock West" and "The Last
Seduction," John Dahl proved himself a master of film noir imagery, like glaring
headlights on a deserted highway and flickering neon. Working from Clay Tarver
and J.J. Abrams clever if less-than-credible script, he utilizes them and more,
throwing in a chase through a dark Nebraska cornfield that evokes Hitchcock's
"North by Northwest" and Spielberg's "Duel" about a faceless trucker who
terrorizes a driver. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Joy Ride" is a
tense, twisting, sinister 7. It's a popcorn picture that's guaranteed to keep
you on the edge of your seat.

Title
Review for Last Castle, The (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "THE LAST CASTLE" (DreamWorks)

Oscar alert! This high-tension military prison drama is the first real contender
of the Fall season. The story begins as idolized but court-martialed three-star
Army General Irwin (Robert Redford) is delivered in handcuffs to a
maximum-security military prison run by Colonel Winter (James Gandolfini) whose
stunned reaction is: "They should be naming a base after the man, not sending
him here." A proud West Point graduate who pled guilty to disobeying a direct
order, Irwin is resigned to spending time incarcerated in the stockade, telling
fellow inmates: "I'm not fighting anyone for anything any more." But he's soon
appalled by the brutal, sadistic manipulative techniques used by the psychotic,
power-mad Colonel. "We are soldiers - and no one can take that away from us," he
finally declares, igniting guerrilla warfare against injustice within the penal
system, culminating in redemption and the triumph of the human spirit.
Screenwriters David Scarpa and Graham Yost set up a classic dramatic
confrontation over leadership since the plight of the protagonist is only as
tough as the antagonist makes it. Director Ron Lurie infuses the film with a
resonating tension, pitting Robert Redford, as the intense, charismatic hero
whose quiet, understated dignity transforms his desperate, dispirited cohorts
into defiant yet disciplined soldiers, against James Gandolfini, who carries the
warden to the brink of hardcore villainy with the will and ability to kill as
many prisoners as necessary to retain control. Mark Ruffalo scores as an
opportunistic bookie, Clifton Collins Jr. as an abused inmate, and Delroy Lindo
as Irwin's former colleague. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Last
Castle" is a powerful 10. It's compelling, crowd-pleasing escapist entertainment
with a patriotic, flag-waving finale.

Title
Review for Mighty Joe Young (1998)
Director Ron Underwood's remake of RKO's adventure about an
awesome ape is the least-likely-to-succeed of the Christmas
movies. The story begins as evil poachers kill a mountain gorilla
mother and the scientist (Linda Purl) who's been photographing
her. Watching the brutal carnage of their respective mothers, a baby
gorilla and little girl cling to one another. Skip ahead 12 years and
the gorilla's grown to 15 feet in height, due to a rare, recessive
giantism gene, and the girl's become Charlize Theron. They're
playmates, living idyllic splendor until they're discovered by a
zoologist, Bill Paxton, whose greedy cohorts realize there's profit in
capturing the beast. Paxton convinces Theron that the only safe place
for "Joe" is a wildlife refuge in Los Angeles, where he's taunted into
a frenzy by the same poachers who killed his mother. Everyone is out
to kill poor, gentle Joe except the few people who care about
him. Tracing the reasoning behind this remake leads to producer Ted
Hartley, who bought RKO's film library with his wife, actress and
Post-cereal heiress Dina Merrill, who can be glimpsed briefly in a red
gown at a fund-raising gala, screaming, "Oh, my God!" Ray Harryhausen
and Terry Moore (from the '49 film) do a cameo too. The best part of
"Mighty Joe" is Rick Baker's stunning gorilla, a big, hydraulic
creation that's even better than his "Gorillas in the Mist" work. The
worst part is the dumb, cliche-driven script.  Bill Paxton looks as if
he's still watching over-his-shoulder for a "Twister," while Charlize
Theron is terminally perky, even when she's tunelessly crooning a
lullaby. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Mighty Joe Young" is
a family-oriented 4. Another "Godzilla."

Title
Review for Dogma (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "DOGMA" (Lion's Gate Films)
A holy war has been waged over this crude, controversial Kevin
Smith satire of Catholicism. Financed and developed by Bob and Harvey
Weinstein at Miramax, a Disney subsidiary, it was sold to Lion's Gate
after William Donohue's Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights
filed protests with Disney CEO Michael Eisner. The Catholic League
previously led a boycott of Disney over Priest, a 1995 Miramax release
which depicted a gay priest. Yet, despite all the fuss, Dogma is a
surprisingly dull parable. Matt Damon and Ben Affleck play fallen
angels who have been sent to everlasting exile in Wisconsin. Using a
loophole in Catholic doctrine, they know a way to get back into heaven
but their re-entry would negate all existence - at least that's what
abortion clinic worker Linda Fiorentino is told as her help is
enlisted by an angel (Alan Rickman). She's befriended by the black
13th Apostle (Chris Rock) and a spunky stripper-muse (Salma Hayek),
while being pursued by an exiled muse (Jason Lee). She encounters a
zealous Cardinal (George Carlin), who's promoting "a buddy Christ",
and discovers God is a woman (Alanis Morissette). So what? Among the
long, boring interludes is some particularly repugnant chicanery with
an excrement monster. Affleck and Damon are genial dudes but
Fiorentino mopes, smirks or snarls, showing no emotional or vocal
range. Kevin Smith's cult fans who enjoyed Clerks and Chasing Amy may
be the only audience for this feeble comic fantasy which is too heavy
on moralizing and too light on laughter. Smith's message - that
dogmatism is bad, that no one religion is better than any other - is
delivered with a thud. The sophomoric jokes basically bomb. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Dogma is an uninspired, trifling,
muddled 2. It's a dud.

Title
Review for Slam (1998)
Marc Levin's low-budget ($1 million) chronicle of poetry
behind bars justifiably captured the 1998 Grand Jury Prize at the
Sundance Film Festival and the Camera D'Or at the Cannes Film
Festival. Shot on location in Washington, D.C., the film features a
cast of non-actors including controversial Mayor Marion Berry, who
faced a real-life conviction on drug charges, in an ironic cameo as a
criminal court judge. The story follows the spiritual and artistic
journey of a small-time marijuana dealer and rapper, played by
dreadlock'd Saul Williams, who is sentenced to prison after he's
caught fleeing the scene of a drug-related shooting in a ghetto
housing project known as Dodge City. In the grim process of
rehabilitation, he finds love with a reformed prostitute/crack addict,
Sonja Sohn, who becomes his writing teacher and salvation through
"slamming," a combination of poetry and rap. The
story-behind-the-story adds fascination to what's on the screen. Saul
Williams and Sonja Sohn were discovered at a real-life urban poetry
slam and many of the extras were actual prisoners in the D.C. criminal
justice system. One of the film's producers, Richard Stratton, as well
as Bonz Malone, who plays a prison gang leader, cites art as redeeming
him from a life of crime. Cinema verite cinematographer Marc Benjamin
uses a hand-held camera as Marc Levin superimposes a documentary style
on an innovative and topical theme; unfortunately, Levin's delight in
the emotional honesty of his subjects occasionally becomes
self-indulgent and the length of the improvisations can be
stultifying. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Slam" is a fresh,
daring, emotionally challenging 7. It's scary, strong, street-wise
stuff.

Title
Review for Meet Joe Black (1998)
The most audacious thing about this remake of "Death Takes a
Holiday" is its length. It's a romantic drama that takes its time with
each and every scene. Characters measure each syllable, often speaking
in hushed, conspiratorial tones, exchanging long, meaningful
glances. At three hours, it's more than twice as long as the
original. "Braveheart" and "Titanic" were that length but they had
sagas to tell. This is a rather simple, straightforward story - about
the inevitability of death and taxes. Bill Parrish (Anthony Hopkins),
a wealthy business tycoon, suffers a heart-attack just before his 65th
birthday. Around the same time, his gawky daughter Susan (Claire
Forlani) meets a charming lawyer (Brad Pitt) at a coffee shop near the
hospital where she works as a resident. But she's engaged so they
don't exchange names or phone numbers. Immediately afterwards, the
young man is abruptly hit by a car - and Death borrows his handsome
human form for a brief visit as a mysterious houseguest in the elegant
Parrish home. It's a fascinating premise which, despite a quartet of
screenwriters, never really goes anywhere beyond "if you haven't
loved, you haven't lived." There's no compelling tension or
drive. And, instead of going for Capra-esque charm, director Martin
Brest ("Scent of a Woman") approaches each scene in a visually
stunning yet dreary, reverential mode. Anthony Hopkins is magnificent,
making the most of his underwritten role. As enigmatic Death, Brad
Pitt wears a look of bemused, almost moronic bewilderment, savoring
peanut butter and sampling sexual ecstasy; his best scene is when he
speaks with a West Indian accent. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Meet Joe Black" is a mild-mannered, languid 5. Too little happens
in too long a length of time - and there's no magic.

Title
Review for Runaway Bride (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Ever since "Pretty Woman," Julia Roberts, Richard Gere, and
director Garry Marshall have been looking for another project, and
this screwball romantic fantasy seems to fit the bill. No, it's not a
sequel. It's an entirely different story. Roberts plays Maggie, a
small-town charmer who has left three grooms at the altar - a fact
that is exaggerated in USA TODAY by a cynical New York columnist, Ike
Graham (think Jimmy Breslin) - that's Gere - who bitterly dubs her a
"man-eater." She complains to his editor (Rita Wilson), who is also
his ex-wife, citing just cause for a defamation lawsuit. He promptly
gets fired for exploitive journalism. Determined to vindicate himself
and uncover the "real story" for GQ magazine, Ike shows up in bucolic
Hale, Maryland, just as Maggie is preparing to marry groom #4, the
high-school physical education teacher/coach.  "Shazam! It's
Mayberry," he mutters just before the barbershop quartet starts.
Ike's acerbic; Maggie's defensive. They spar and spat with incredible
finesse. But will she bolt once more?  No one knows, even her widower
father (Paul Dooley) who notes, "Maggie may not be Hale's longest
running joke, but she's certainly the fastest."  Eventually, Maggie
realizes "there's a distinct possibility that I'm profoundly,
irreversibly screwed-up." The screenplay by Josann McGibbon, Sara
Parriott, and Audrey Wells leaves little doubt in your mind about the
outcome but it's deliciously amusing getting there. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Runaway Bride" is a glowing, breezy 8. It's
not as quirky and witty as "Notting Hill," Roberts' most recent
romantic comedy, and not in the same league as "Pretty Woman." But
Gere's glossy and gorgeous, and it's flirty, feel-good fun from
beginning to end - a date movie or chick's flick.

Title
Review for Felicia's Journey (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "FELICIA'S JOURNEY" (Artisan Entertainment)
      In 1997, Canadian writer/director Atom Egoyan made an incredible
splash with his wildly unconventional The Sweet Hereafter, but this
new thriller, while superbly crafted, is neither as compelling nor
original. But that doesn't mean it's unworthy. Adapted from William
Trevor's novel, it follows the insidious story of Felicia, a
good-hearted, pregnant Irish country girl (Elaine Cassidy), who goes
to England to search for the child's father (Peter McDonald) and is
befriended by Joseph Hilditch, a seemingly gentle and smiling caterer
(Bob Hoskins) who works for a factory in industrial Birmingham. While
the laborers would obviously prefer simple British fare, the portly
Hilditch diligently concocts elaborate recipes on his antique
appliances while watching old video-taped cooking programs hosted by
his glamorous French mother (Arsinee Khanjian, Egoyan's real-life
wife). Aside from his psychotic mother complex, which rivals that of
Psycho's Norman Bates, Hilditch has courtly, Old World manners and
lives in what appears to be the family mansion - which makes one
immediately suspect that he's a dangerous serial killer with corpses
in the back yard. Not the trusting young Felicia, however. She's
grateful for the "help" he solicitously offers.  Problem is: there's
no mystery. Egoyan gives away the sinister secret so early in the
story that we're just left there, sitting in our seats watching with
dread as the tapestry unravels. And it's much more conventional than
the quirky Atom Egoyan fare in The Adjuster and Exotica. The scenes
stretch on too long and the repetitive flashbacks defuse the
tension. Nevertheless, Bob Hoskins (Mona Lisa) delivers yet another
dead-on characterization, one that he describes as "a cross between
Jack the Ripper and Winnie the Pooh." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, Felicia's Journey is a stylish if shallow 7. It's a bizarre,
macabre trip.

Title
Review for Osmosis Jones (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "OSMOSIS JONES" (Warner Bros.)
    If the Farrelly brothers taught Anatomy & Physiology in school, no
one would cut ever class. This hip, live action/animation story begins as a
monkey snatches a hard-boiled egg from Frank, a zookeeper (Bill Murray), who
grabs it back, drops it, then gobbles up the contaminated morsel, explaining,
"If it hits and ground and you pick it up within 10 seconds, you can eat it." 
    Like "Fantastic Voyage" (1966), the pseudo-science animation then
takes over when his body's immune system contacts traffic control as an ingested
virus hits the digestive system: "Be on the alert for illegal organisms!"  Eager
to right "a stomach evacuation mistake" he once made, a cocky, clever,
courageous white blood cell (Chris Rock) declares, "This is a crime scene!" and
teams up with a conscientious "Phi Beta Capsule" 12-hour cold remedy called
Drixenol (David Hyde Pierce) to chase down and destroy the deadly "Red Death"
virus (Laurence Fishburne) that's determined to take Frank down in 48 hours,
beating Ebola and E. coli to a medical record. Watch out for mucus mudslides,
chaos in Cerebellum Hall and the detritus from Booger Dam (runny nose), along
with comic turns from Molly Shannon and Chris Elliot, plus the voices of William
Shatner and Brandy Norwood.  Peter and Bobby Farrelly, along with writer Mark
Hyman and animation directors Piet Kroon and Tom Sito, have turned their
penchant for gross-out comedy, encompassing flatulence, festering sores and
"popping a pimple without a permit," into a funny, Farrelly-funny family film.
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Osmosis Jones" is a wildly imaginative,
original, explosive 7. And perhaps, as they're laughing, kids will learn where
to find their uvula, along with nuggets about nutrition and hygiene. 

Title
Review for Let's Talk About Sex (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "LET'S TALK ABOUT SEX" (Fine Line Features):
Let's not. Better to let Jerry Springer or Monica Lewinsky do
it.  At least, that way you don't have to pay at the box-office. This
sleazy excuse for a docudrama, written and directed by Troy Beyer, who
played Diahann Carroll's daughter on "Dynasty," stars Beyer as a Miami
advice columnist who wants to graduate from newspaper work to TV.  In
order to make the transition, she has to come up with a sample program
about "what makes girls tick," so she and her two roommates (Paget
Brewster, Randi Ingerman) hit the streets with their videocam to
discover women's biggest gripes about men, the insensitive
brutes. There's lots of graphic, titillating talk, which bears a
striking similarity to reading aloud the raunchy walls of a public
rest-room, as the trio come to terms with their own sexual
problems. Talk about hypocritical, cliche-drenched, psycho-babble!  On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Let's Talk About Sex" is so
cheesy and shallow that it's barely a 1. Yeah, it gets laughs - all
the wrong kind.

Title
Review for In Dreams (1999)
Susan Granger's review of "IN DREAMS" (DreamWorks)
How awful can a movie starring Annette Bening and Robert
Downey Jr., helmed by writer/director Neil Jordan be? "In Dreams"
plumbs new depths of malevolence, becoming an early candidate for the
Worst Movies of 1999 category. Annette Bening plays a New England
children's book author who is tormented by weird, terrifying
dreams. She's a psychic who can see things before they happen, and she
doesn't know what to make of images of an almost surreal underwater
town, mutilated bodies, and a mysterious man with long hair who leads
a trusting child through an apple orchard to her death. Of course, no
one believes her - not the cops, not even her often-absent airline
pilot husband, Aidan Quinn. After a couple of suicide attempts, she
winds up in a mental institution, where she occupies the same room
that Robert Downey Jr. once lived in. He's a maniacal murderer whose
abused childhood included being left chained to a bed by his mother
when their town was being flooded to make a reservoir. Stephen Rea is
Bening's psychiatrist who tries to make sense of her ramblings. Robert
Downey Jr. overacts so dreadfully that one wonders why the L.A. judge
decided to release him from his jail sentence temporarily last year to
finish this film, which is based on Bari Wood's novel "Doll's Eyes."
The singular redeeming feature is its eerie, underwater
imagery. Jordan built a small town and then flooded it in the same
Baja, California, water tanks where James Cameron shot "Titanic." On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "In Dreams" is a tedious,
ludicrous 2. Adding insult to injury, the Andrews Sisters' W.W. II
ditty, "Don't Sit Under the Apple Tree," is used on the sound track to
signal impending doom.

Title
Review for Bedazzled (2000)
 We all want to be loved and respected, but how far are we
willing to go to achieve that? Tech-support nerd Elliot Richards
(Brendan Fraser) is a sad, lonely man in search of popularity. Plus,
he's totally besotted by a co-worker (Frances O'Connor), so when he
sighs, "I'd give anything to have that girl in my life," it seems like
an open invitation to sell his immortal soul to the Devil (Elizabeth
Hurley) in exchange for seven wishes. But the Princess of Darkness has
a great sense of mischief. When he asks to be rich and powerful, he
becomes a Colombian drug lord. When he wants to be a star NBA player,
he's more Dennis Rodman than Michael Jordan. He's equally dismayed as
a Pulitzer Prize-winning author and as President of the United States
(Abraham Lincoln going to the Ford Theater). Versatile Brendan
Fraser's dexterous physical transformations into these characters are
impressive; as the various incarnations of the woman he desires,
Australian actress Frances O'Connor's dialects are on-target; and
sophisticated supermodel Elizabeth Hurley embodies a wickedly witty,
lusty Lucifer, saucily dressed as titillating male fantasies (nurse,
cheerleader, cop, French maid, etc.).  Orlando Jones, Miriam Shor,
Paul Adelstein and Toby Huss lend strong support. But, beneath the
glossy hi-jinks, the screenplay by Larry Gelbart, Harold Ramis & Peter
Tolan, based on a story by Peter Cook (which was made into a 1967
movie with Dudley Moore), is little more than an amusing series of
comedy sketches. While director Harold Ramis knows how to milk a gag
'till it's dry, this is no "Caddyshack" or "Animal House." On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bedazzled" is a sinfully silly 6 as
the pathetic hero's dreams become nightmares - and stay for the
closing credits.

Title
Review for Don't Say a Word (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "DON'T SAY A WORD" (20th Century-Fox)
  In this child-snatching suspense story, Michael Douglas plays Dr.
Nathan Conrad, a successful Manhattan psychiatrist whose eight year-old daughter
Jessie (Skye McCole Bartusiak) is kidnapped on Thanksgiving by Koster, a
European jewel thief (Sean Bean). To get her back, the doctor most promise not
to call the police. He is then given seven hours to unlock the mind of a new
patient, a deeply disturbed woman, Elisabeth Burrows (Brittany Murphy), referred
to him by a colleague (Oliver Platt), and extract a six-digit number that's the
key to locating a rare red diamond worth $10 million that Koster and her father,
his ex-partner, stole a decade ago. But Elisabeth cryptically insists, "I'll
never tell...any of you." Adapted by Anthony Peckham and Patrick Smith Kelly
("True Crime") from Andrew Klavan's novel and directed with visual flair by Gary
Fleder ("Kiss the Girls"), this is a tension-filled, if predictable, thriller,
juggling four different scenarios: a) the doctor's desperate attempts to draw
the number out of Elisabeth, b) flashbacks to the childhood trauma that has kept
her in various psychiatric institutions for years, c) the crooks' interaction
with the doctor's bedridden wife (Famke Janssen), immobilized after a skiing
accident, and d) the involvement of a tough NYPD detective (Jennifer Esposito)
in a seemingly unrelated murder that eventually leads to Jessie's captors.
Problem is: you know from the getgo how it's going to turn out - and none of the
actors are trying anything new. Douglas faced similar nightmarish predicaments
in "The Game" and "Fatal Attraction," while Brittany Murphy honed her
quirky/crazy character in  "Girl, Interrupted." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Don't Say a Word" is a disturbing, diverting 6, escapist entertainment
that really shouldn't be dissected.

Title
Review for Wonder Boys (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 The pressure's on Curtis Hanson directing his first picture
after the highly acclaimed L.A. Confidential. Adapted by Steve Kloves
from Michael Chabon's 1995 novel, the theme here revolves around a
middle-aged author who is creatively paralyzed after having published
a successful novel seven years ago. Although it is not explained in
the movie, a 'wonder boy' is someone who has experienced great success
early in life and then has to face the fear and insecurity of living
up to himself.  Michael Douglas plays the cynical, dissolute college
professor who cannot finish the manuscript for his next book - which
now numbers more than 2,500 single-spaced typewritten pages - as he
spends a picaresque "Wordfest" weekend frantically juggling his newly
pregnant mistress, a suicidal student, his visiting editor, the corpse
of a dead dog, and a fur-trimmed jacket that once belonged to Marilyn
Monroe.  Frances McDormand is his romantic interest; she's the college
chancellor who's married to the head of the English department. Tobey
Maguire is a gifted but deeply troubled writing student who catches
the eye of Robert Downey, as Douglas's flamboyant editor from New
York.  Katie Holmes is a seductive young student with a crush on
Douglas, and Rip Torn is successful, self-satisfied pop-culture
writer. Set in wintry western Pennsylvania - superbly photographed by
Dante Spinotti - it's a screwball, character-driven story whose
eclectic inhabitants are wacky, weird and whimsical. And the memorable
soundtrack includes Bob Dylan's new song, "Things Have Changed."  On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Wonder Boys is a sly, darkly
humorous 7 - aimed at an intelligent, sophisticated audience.

Title
Review for Joe Gould's Secret (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Actor/director/producer Stanley Tucci ("Big Night," "The
Impostors") specializes in gentle, cerebral, low-budget films about
male friendships and their consequences. This true story by Howard
Rodman celebrates the relationship between bohemian Joe Gould, who had
a gift of gab, and courtly Joseph Mitchell, who wrote his story in
"The New Yorker." Tucci plays the North Carolina-born Mitchell who
specialized in literary portraits of the denizens of New York City in
the 1940s, while Ian Holm is disheveled, cantankerous Joe Gould, a
homeless Harvard graduate sometimes known as Professor Seagull for his
penchant for reciting poetry in seagull cawing. Gould was also the
author of "The Oral History of the World," which he would offer up in
return for $2 contributions to "The Joe Gould Fund," since a man needs
whiskey, beer, and cigarettes if he's going to talk all
night. Mitchell made the demented panhandler, a tormented soul, into a
Greenwich Village celebrity. Mitchell was a gifted listener and his
wife, played by Hope Davis, was a noted photographer. Stanley Tucci
composes scenes in the style of the great street photographers of old
New York, but this film is not cinematic in scope, relying, instead,
on long, talky scenes as opposed to quick cuts. And the titular secret
is part of the enigmatic character study, not a mystery. Stanley Tucci
delivers a droll, deliberately understated performance, while Ian
Holm, not inappropriately, chews the scenery, drawing attention by
table-top proclamations like: "In the winter I'm a Buddhist; in the
summer, I'm a nudist." Susan Sarandon and Steve Martin do distracting
cameos. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Joe Gould's Secret" is
a rambling, poignant, bittersweet 7, aimed at sedate art house
audiences.

Title
Review for Mumford (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MUMFORD" (Touchstone Pictures)
 What does it take to be a good psychologist?  How can you get
people to confide their fantasies, dreams, and frustrations in order
to alleviate the pain of the human condition? Writer/director Lawrence
Kasdan believes that listening, really listening is the most important
skill - and that's the premise for his intelligent, amusing new
comedy. Loren Dean ("Billy Bathgate") stars as Dr. Mumford, a young
psychologist who opens a practice in a small, picturesque town,
coincidentally named Mumford, and discovers his unorthodox form of
therapy has amazing, unexpected results with an odd assortment of
quirky locals. There's a young divorcee suffering from Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome (Hope Davis), a pulp-fiction obsessed pharmacist (Pruitt
Taylor Vince), a frustrated housewife (Mary McDonnell) who's become
addicted to mail-order shopping, her workaholic husband (Ted Danson),
a fashion-preoccupied teen (Zooey Deschanel), Mumford's outspoken
landlady (Alfre Woodard) who runs the local cafe, and a lonely
billionaire (Jason Lee), the monarch of modems, who zips around on a
skateboard. While they respond to his empathy and frankness, no one
realizes that mysterious, unconventional Dr. Mumford has the biggest
secret of all - except maybe a suspicious attorney (Martin Short) and
the two other therapists in town (David Paymer, Jane Adams).  Like
"The Big Chill," "The Accidental Tourist," and "Grand Canyon," this is
an excellent ensemble effort, which is a credit to Kasden's talent for
casting. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Mumford" is a
fantastical, intriguing 8, proving that love comes in many disguises.

Title
Review for Down to You (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "DOWN TO YOU" (Miramax Films)
        More and more movies are being made for a target audience -
and this bland romantic comedy is aimed at an under-20 demographic,
particularly teenage girls. Rated PG-13, it's about a young couple
experiencing the thrill, along with the trials and tribulations, of
their first love.  Freddie Prinze Jr. (She's All That) plays Al, a
genial New York City college student aiming for a career as a
world-class chef, like his celebrated father, while Julia Stiles (10
Things I Hate About You) is Imogen, a talented art student who steals
his heart. Early in the plot, he brings her a cake. "This is sacred,"
Al says about cooking. "Cake is my world," Imogen purrs. But the path
of true love never runs smooth, particularly in this cliche-ridden,
one-dimensional soap-opera, written and directed by Kris Isacsson. A
silly sub-plot revolves around Al's kooky room-mate (Zak Orth), a
cynical, aspiring film-maker, being pursued by a seductive porn
starlet (Selma Blair) who used to study chemistry at M.I.T.  Plus
there's a guy named Jim Morrison (Ashton Kutcher) who's predictably
obsessed with this rock-star namesake. But there's no real dramatic
thrust. Henry Winkler and Lucie Arnaz do their professional best as
Al's parents who dream of the day when their son can work with his
dad, known as Chef Ray, on television; their high-concept show would
have the pair storming, like cops, into unsuspecting people's homes
and making dinner for them. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
Down to You is a cutesy, shallow, formulaic 3. Maybe it will work
better on video.

Title
Review for Road to El Dorado, The (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ROAD TO EL DORADO" (DreamWorks)
 Like the classic Bob Hope-Bing Crosby road movies, this
family comedy chronicles the misadventures of two bumbling, somewhat
inept con-artists whose enthusiastic camaraderie is as much fun as the
excitement they encounter. The story begins in 1519 in Spain, where
Tulio (Kevin Kline) and Miguel (Kenneth Branagh) win a map to El
Dorado, the legendary City of Gold, and inadvertently become stowaways
on the ship of the Spanish explorer Cortes. With the help of Ativo, a
clever war horse, they escape and stumble into idyllic El Dorado,
where they're proclaimed as gods. Only a smart, sexy schemer named
Chel (Rosie Perez) sees through their ruse. "I want in on the scam so
I can get out," she declares - and they agree. But, as the evil High
Priest (Armand Assante) plots to grab power from the Chief (Edward
James Olmos), Cortes and his army are marching on the city. That's
when Tulio and Miguel have their ingenuity and friendship truly
tested.  Road to El Dorado is the first major studio animated feature
of the new millennium - following the trail of Antz and Prince of
Egypt. The joke-filled script is character-driven with Tulio as the
cynical realist and Miguel as the romantic idealist; and the lush
visuals - combining traditional and computer techniques - are
exquisite, drawing extensively from the Mayan culture of the
Yucatan. The music is catchy and the lyrics clever in the six original
songs written by Tim Rice and Elton John, who does the vocals - except
when Kline and Branagh croon the witty, comedic "It's Tough to be a
God." And there's definitely a PG-rated moment when the bantering
rogues skinny-dip in the hot-springs. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, Road to El Dorado is a fast-paced, raucous 8 - great fun for
spirited adventurers of all ages.

Title
Review for Here on Earth (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Teenybopper alert: this picture is made just for you.  Forget about the rest of us. We've seen it before in "Love Story," but you haven't so, here goes. Leelee Sobieski is a feisty waitress from the wrong side of the tracks. Josh Hartnett is her townie boy-friend, and Chris Klein is a cocky, Princeton-bound, Boston-bred prep-school kid who takes his shiny new Mercedes out for a drive in rural Massachusetts. A dangerous car race brings their lives together when it results in the destruction of a local diner called Mabel's Table, owned by Sobieski's mom (Annette O'Toole).  In fitting punishment, Klein and Hartnett are forced to rebuild the family-run restaurant as community service during the summer. That involves snobby Klein boarding with Hartnett's working-class family and falling for Sobieski.  But that's a minor trauma compared with the tragedy that happens later - when Sobieski discovers that her old track injury to her knee has developed into cancer. After "Eyes W!
ide Shut," TV's "Joan of Arc," and "A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries," Leelee Sobieski basks in the teenage mainstream, while amiable Chris Klein goes sulky and serious after "American Pie" and "Election." They do their best with the material they're given. It's just too bad that Michael Seitzman's soap-opera script is so lame, Mark Piznarski's direction so slow-paced and prosaic, and Andrea Morricone's score so schmaltzy. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Here on Earth" is a pubescent, tear-jerking 4. The title comes from poet Robert Frost's musings about the beautiful Berkshire woods where the lovers discover "a little bit of heaven, here on earth."

Title
Review for Mulholland Drive (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "MULHOLLAND DRIVE" (Universal Focus)
    Whatever David Lynch is selling, I'm not buying.  From the
writer/director of "Blue Velvet" and "Twin Peaks" comes another dark, mysterious
thriller that opens with an automobile accident on Mulholland Drive, the
serpentine street that twists high in the Hollywood hills. Dazed, a beautiful
brunette (Laura Elena Harring) emerges and stumbles down a hill, slipping
unobserved into a '30s-style apartment as the tenant leaves for a trip. The next
morning, a dewy blonde (Naomi Watts) from Deep River, Ontario, arrives in LA
with dreams of stardom in her suitcase. Her aunt owns the apartment and the two
women meet. The brunette has amnesia so the blonde tries to help her discover
her identity along with her latent lesbian lust. Meanwhile, a hotshot director
(Justin Theroux), whose wife is in bed with the poolman, is forced to cast a
certain actress in his new film and there's an assassin (Mark Pellegrino)
roaming the city. The tortuous paths of these various characters - and others
named Cookie, Coco and Cowboy -  intersect at various points but the plot
remains elusive because, midway through the story, Lynch has the brunette and
blonde play two different women in an alternate reality, leaving a huge wad of
cash, a blue metallic key, a paralyzed mogul and a lot of questions that go
unanswered. Elena Harring and particularly Naomi Watts are gifted actresses,
effectively making the subtle switch. The same cannot be said for former M.G.M.
dancer Ann Miller who's stiff and self-conscious, speaking - like most Lynch
players - in staccato tones. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Mulholland
Drive" is a frenzied, frustrating 4. Originally designed as an episodic TV
pilot, this surreal triumph of suspenseful style over substance is packaged as a
puzzle with several of the key pieces left out.

Title
Review for Me, Myself & Irene (2000)
This scatological comedy will score at the box-office since there's
definitely an audience for the gross gags and toilet jokes but it's no "There's Something About Mary." Jim Carrey plays Charlie, a mild-mannered Rhode Island state trooper suffering from a split-personality disorder. Flashback 18 years to when his wife left him for the brainy, vertically-challenged limo driver (Tony Cox)  who fathered their African-American triplets whom Carrey has raised as a proud, loving father. The boys become rowdy, jive-talking geniuses (Jerod Mixon, Anthony Anderson, Mongo Brownlee) but, having repressed his anger and resentment too long, Charlie's suddenly got company - a foul-mouthed, aggressive alter ego named Hank. And they've both fallen for Renee Zellweger, a feisty, quirky gal who's on-the-lam from shady EPA investigators (Chris Cooper, Richard Jenkins) in a pointless plot. In the Jekyll-Hyde transformation, "Rip Van Wussy" Carrey cavorts and contorts, much to the amazement of his sympathetic supervisor (Robert Forster) and a psychotic albino (Mi!
chael Bowman) who joins the road adventure.  Directed and written by Bobby and Peter Farrelly, plus Michael Cerrone, unfortunately this romantic farce lacks the sweetness and outrageous fun of the Farrelly's earlier films. But they're still pushing the envelope of bad taste, including a redefinition of "hanky-panky" involving a rubber appliance, chicken-abuse, cow-shooting, reprising Woody Harrelson's milk-mustache from "Kingpin," and a unique marriage proposal. And the end credits are novel, citing each and every performer. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Me, Myself and Irene" is a crass, raunchy 4. Like Charlie, this movie is origami - it folds under pressure.

Title
Review for Center Stage (2000/I)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Think "Fame" meets "The Turning Point" or "The Red Shoes" and
you have the concept of this backstage story set at Lincoln Center's
prestigious and, at times, pretentious American Ballet
Theater. Directed by Nicholas Hytner ("The Madness of King George,"
"The Crucible"), it's filled with enthusiasm and good intentions,
offering a glimpse into the demanding world of ballet, complete with
bruises and bandages.  Amanda Schull stars as a beautiful, blue-eyed
blond with "bad feet" who temporarily pirouettes into the affections
of Ethan Stiefel, a principal dancer with the ABT who could be the
next Mikhail Barishnikov. They're surrounded by stereotypical "A
Chorus Line"-types - the bulimic prodigy (Susan May Pratt) with a
pushy mother (Debra Monk), the edgy rebel (Zoe Saldana) with a bad
attitude, the best-friend (Shakiem Evans), the romantic (Sascha
Radetsky), the Russian (ice-skating champion Ilia Kulik) and faculty
members (Peter Gallagher, Donna Murphy). It's all very familiar: there
are six spots in the company to be filled - who will get them? And the
screenplay by Carol Heikkinen ("The Thing Called Love," "Empire
Records") is corny, filled to the brim with cliches. It's hard not to
chuckle at: "I'm not dancing for them anymore - I'm dancing for me."
Make no mistake: this no "Dirty Dancing" or "Flashdance." Yet there's
aerobic jazz and salsa, as well as the classic tradition of
Tchiakovsky and Prokofiev. To me, the highlights were Stiefel's
performing "Stars and Stripes," choreographed by George Balanchine,
and the hip finale, set to the rock music of Michael
Jackson. Basically, this is TV fare that will probably be far more
satisfying on video. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Center
Stage" is a graceful 4. But it's the dancing that scores, not the
drama.

Title
Review for Chicken Run (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "CHICKEN RUN" (DreamWorks)
What a clever concept! Do you remember "The Great Escape" with
Steve McQueen? It's a W.W.II adventure in which Allied POW's devise a
way out of a Nazi prison camp. Now a similar idea has become an
imaginative claymation comedy, the first full-length feature from
British-based Aardman animation, the Oscar-winning team behind the
popular Wallace & Gromit shorts.
"Chicken Run" follows a group of rebellious chickens imprisoned
at Tweedy's Egg Farm who are determined to break out before they meet
"fowl" play and end up as pot pies. Trapped behind barbed wire and
yearning for freedom, the feisty hen Ginger and her cohorts are
terrorized by menacing, hard-boiled Mrs. Tweedy, who firmly believes,
"Chickens are the most stupid creatures on the planet. They don't
plot; they don't scheme; they don't organize." Until - one day - Rocky
the Rooster, a brash, American "lone free ranger," lands in the
Yorkshire chicken coop. He's on the lam from a circus and, if they
agree to hide him, he promises to teach the entire flock to fly,
despite the obvious aerodynamic deficiencies inherent in the plump
chicken anatomy. "That Yank's not to be trusted" warns the old
R.A.F. rooster named Fowler. Eventually, the scrambling hens hatch an
exciting, if desperate, alternative scheme - with a little help from
two profiteering rats. Mel Gibson, Julia Sawalha, Miranda Richardson
and Jane Horrocks head the voice cast and, instead of
computer-generated images, the visual effects are created by
stop-motion animation using clay and silicon models, set in a stylized
universe. Aardman calls it "live action in miniature." On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Chicken Run" is a bright, sunny-side up
9. Good gravy! It's a double-yolk'd chicken delight for the whole
family!

Title
Review for World Is Not Enough, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE WORLD IS NOT ENOUGH" (MGM/UA)
When you go to a James Bond film, you're looking for escapist
fantasy - and that's what you get in this 19th installment in the
long-running, most successful film franchise in cinema
history. Directed by Michael Apted, the adventure begins with a
sensational, action-packed opening sequence in Bilbao, Spain, where
Bond (Pierce Brosnan) is attacked by a sexy sniper, setting the plot
into motion. Bond's mission, this time, is to find the notorious
international terrorist (Robert Carlyle) responsible for the death of
a British oil tycoon in an explosion in M16 headquarters. This
formidable villain has a bullet lodged in his brain, rendering him
unable to feel pain. To track him down, Bond is assigned as a
bodyguard for the tycoon's beautiful daughter, Elektra (Sophie
Marceau), who is building an oil pipeline through some of the most
dangerous territory on the globe. And his only ally in remote
Azerbaijan and the Caspian Sea is a nuclear weapons expert,
Dr. Christmas Jones (Denise Richards), whose name leads to one of the
funniest last lines of a movie in years. Suave Pierce Brosnan embodies
007, delving into the emotional depth of his relationships, and Denise
Richards is amusingly absurd as a scantily clad rocket
scientist. Desmond Llewelyn returns as Q, with amazing high-tech
gadgets, including a speed-boat and BMW, and John Cleese is introduced
as R, his inept assistant. Judi Dench is back as M with Samantha Bond
as Moneypenny. "Orbis non sufficit," Latin for "The world is not
enough," is the Bond family motto (On Her Majesty's Secret Service,
1969). For James Bond fans, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The
World Is Not Enough is a spectacular, fun-filled 10, packed with all
the excitement you expect - and more.  It's a jaw-dropper, so buckle
up for a wild ride!

Title
Review for Rush Hour (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "RUSH HOUR" (New Line Cinema)
        Jackie Chan and Chris Tucker make like Mel Gibson and Danny
Glover in that they're a mis-matched, odd-couple partners in this cop
caper. Chan, as an ace Hong Kong detective, is big in the martial
arts, while Tucker's weapon-of-choice is his big, bad mouth.
Reluctantly paired with each other, they're assigned to rescue a
Chinese diplomat's 10 year-old daughter who has been kidnapped by
Asian thugs in Los Angeles. Screenwriters Jim Kouf and Ross LaManna,
along with director Brett Ratner, must have watched all the "Lethal
Weapon" pictures repeatedly because there's little that's original
here, except perhaps some Asian ethnic cracks like "I been lookin' for
your sweet-and-sour chicken ass!"  Poor Jackie Chan, a Buster
Keaton-like hero whose screen career once literally went down the
tube, gets only one significant scene in which he fights off a group
of attackers while trying to prop up a fragile, antique vase. "Fifteen
years ago, I really give up the American market," he says, recalling
playing a racecar driver in "Cannonball Run." "At that time, I don't
think the audience really accept me, this kind of fighting, this kind
of comedy, so I went back to Asia, making my Asian films. Now, I give
Hollywood another chance." Chan's big beef with studio movie-making is
their caution with dangerous stunts. "They waste two hours to check
all the things. If I get hurt, the company really scared I'm suing
it." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Rush Hour" is a
cliche-filled, copy-cat 4. The funniest bits are the blooper out-takes
at its conclusion but, when I saw it, not that many people stayed in
the theater long enough to laugh.

Title
Review for Why Do Fools Fall In Love (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "WHY DO FOOLS FALL IN LOVE" (Warner Bros.)
 What could have been a caustic, witty farce becomes a sudsy
soap opera as the life of a doo-wop singer of the '50s & '60s, Frankie
Lymon, unfolds on the screen - as seen through the eyes of his three -
count 'em - three widows. As the story begins, Frankie's dead and
they're in court vying for a stake in his royalties. Each must prove
to the judge why she is the rightful heiress. The first claimant is a
glamorous, classy rhythm 'n' blues star (Halle Berry) who was singing
with the Platters in 1955 when she became involved with Frankie
(Larenz Tate). an up-and-coming teenage sensation from Harlem with a
big hit record, "Why Do Fools Fall in Love." Their romance lasted
until she went out on an extended foreign tour and he consoled himself
with heroin. After becoming a crazed junkie, he fell in with a crass
shoplifter (Viveca A. Fox) whom he impulsively married in Mexico. His
third wife was a prissy Southern schoolteacher with admirable domestic
skills (Lela Rochon), whom he met and married while he was in the
Army. The narrative by screenwriter Tina Andrews is episodic and
uneven, offering three "Roshomon-like" interpretations yet never
delving deep enough into Frankie Lymon's real, erratic persona, and
director Gregory Nava goes for gloss rather than grit - until the last
15 minutes when the disparate wannabe heiresses begin to bond over
their mutual involvement with this bigamist - or trigamist. Utilizing
Frankie Lymon's own music, as he recorded it, there are Golden Oldie
tunes a-plenty and some amusing antics by Little Richard, who toured
with Lymon. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Why Do Fools Fall
in Love" is an indulgent 4. Why did they make it so muddled? It could
have been a black music biz's "First Wives Club."

Title
Review for Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2 (2000)
  It's marketing vs. movie-making. Last weekend, the newest
installment in this media phenomenon saturated 3000 screens in the
U.S. and about 1000 screens overseas, almost double the normal amount
for a wide-release movie. That generates a huge box-office tally but
doesn't truly tell the tale. The original used the Internet to spread
the fake-but-funky horror story about aspiring film students who
vanished in Maryland's Black Hills. This time, it's saturation
booking. Documentary film-maker Joe Berlinger begins with what's
happened to Burkittsville, where a local entrepreneur and former
mental patient (Jeffrey Donovan) guides hiking tours through the
supposedly haunted woods to the utter frustration of the Sheriff
(Lanny Flaherty), who bellows, "There is no goddamn Blair Witch!"
Nevertheless, four intrepid campers take off: a preacher's daughter
who fancies herself a white magic Wiccan (Erica Leershen), a Goth
psychic (Kim Director), a cocky writer (Stephen Turner) who is
determined to expose the Blair Witch as mass hysteria and his
troubled, pregnant girl-friend (Tristen Skyler). The body count mounts
as a competing tour crosses their path, along with sex, lies and
endless videotaping, culminating in a Civil War-era factory. To evoke
fear, Berlinger relies on standard slasher shocks, gore, nudity, and a
guitar-metal soundtrack, all quite reminiscent of the "Scream"
franchise. As a result, the characters are stock stereotypes, the
dialogue's banal and there's no tension. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2" is a thudding 2. Perhaps
there really is a Blair Witch curse to wreak havoc on the third
installment, a "prequel," being made by the co-directors Eduardo
Sanchez and Daniel Myrick from the original, Orlando-based Haxan
Films.

Title
Review for Stigmata (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "STIGMATA" (MGM)
         In a season when there have been some really scary horror
pictures ("Blair Witch Project," "Sixth Sense," "Stir of Echoes"),
this garish, overwrought hodge-podge of symbols, icons, and loud
sound-effects just doesn't measure up. Stigmata are bleeding injuries
that resemble the wounds inflicted Jesus' head, hands, feet, an back
during the crucifixion. The occurrence of stigmata is neither well
understood nor extensively documented in Christian mythology but those
afflicted are usually deeply religious, often hysterical, and regard
their condition as a gift from God. The story begins as Patricia
Arquette, as a sullen 23 year-old Pittsburgh hairdresser, an atheist,
receives an old rosary as a souvenir from her mother, who was
vacationing in Brazil. Within 24 hours after she touches the ancient
circlet of black beads, she experiences a painful, deep puncture wound
in each wrist, the first of five stigmata. The second, a
criss-crossing of her back with the lashes of an invisible whip,
occurs while she's riding on a subway - to the horror of a nearby
priest, who contacts the Vatican about the bizarre incident. A
sinister Cardinal, played by Jonathan Pryce, sends a Jesuit Father,
that's Gabriel Byrne, to investigate what turns out to be the
supernatural channeling of a malevolent spirit. At the bottom of it
all, screenwriters Tom Lazarus and Rick Ramage, along with director
Rupert Wainwright, assert that there's more corruption in the
contemporary Catholic church than anyone wants to admit.  On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Stigmata" is a gruesome, grisly
3. It's a bloody bore - and an insult to those who have faith in the
Catholic doctrine.

Title
Review for 28 Days (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "28 DAYS" (Columbia Pictures)
The girl-next-door has grown up. Sandra Bullock takes a brave
dramatic leap as a drunk stumbling on her way to sobriety in this
contemporary cautionary tale. Written by Susannah Grant ("Erin
Brockovich"), the story begins with Sandra reeling around Mahattan in
a boozy haze. She's a drinking, drugging party girl and the debauchery
never stops, even at the wedding of her sister (Elizabeth Perkins).
But when she swipes a limo and crashes it into the front porch of a
house, she gets a DUI and 28 days in court-ordered rehab. And that's a
real awakening. Defensive and heavily into denial, she first has to be
convinced that she is, indeed, an addict. Then she has to want to live
a different life, even if that means ditching her good-time boy-friend
(Dominic West) who'd like to marry her. But the core of the story
takes place in the rehab community, where she meets a motley
assortment of characters including her counselor (Steve Buscemi),
heroin-addicted roommate (Azura Skye), an irresistible gay German
(Alan Tudyk) - who has the best dialogue in the picture - and a
testosterone-laden baseball player (Viggo Mortensen). Yet the vision
of director Betty Thomas seems unfocused, skipping from slapstick
comedy to fuzzy memory flashbacks, from a silly riff on soap operas to
a romance that never develops, all within the serious substance-abuse
concept. Think of capturing the gallows humor of "Girl, Interrupted."
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "28 Days" is a scrambled 7. But
Sandra Bullock shines. She's a revelation, delivering a compelling,
surprisingly convincing performance after her recent falters in "Hope
Floats" and "Forces of Nature." Even when she's bruised and battered,
she's beautiful, bringing a haunting sadness to her portrayal.

Title
Review for Analyze This (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
When a New York Mob boss starts having panic attacks and
secretly seeks out a suburban psychiatrist what you get is one of the
most inventive, original comedies in years.  Robert De Niro is
terrific as the powerful, domineering gangster, Paul Vitti, whose
paralyzing anxiety is preventing him from assuming his role as leader
of his crime family. And Billy Crystal has never been better than as
the divorced psychotherapist, Dr. Sobel, with a young son and a
determined fiancee ("Friends" Lisa Kudrow) he's about to marry. "What
is my goal?" he asks. "To make you a happy, well-adjusted gangster?"
Despite Dr. Sobel's understandable terror of his new patient, he's
gamely determined to unravel the mystery of Vitti's childhood and make
him healthy enough to cope with an all-important Mafia meeting - in
just two weeks. Cleverly directed as a fable with Damon Runyon
overtones by Harold Ramis ("Groundhog Day") from a wickedly amusing
screenplay by Peter Tolan, Howard Ramis and Kenneth Lonergan, this
movie offers a rollicking good time, balancing drama, suspense, and
action, as Vitti's psychological troubles have the audience literally
howling with laughter. The key, of course, is that the problems (fear,
grief, rage, and guilt) are firmly grounded in reality and De Niro's
willingness to poke fun at the screen persona that he has created over
the years, along with Crystal's amusing reactions to the
conflicts. Their sense of timing is flawless, and the humor is deeply
inherent in each of their characters. Chazz Palminteri and Joseph
Viterelli ring true in supporting roles. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Analyze This" is a devilishly clever, utterly hilarious 10,
the first genuine comedy hit of 1999.

Title
Review for House on Haunted Hill (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
What's scary about this picture is how many people went to see
it last weekend, proving two things: 1) you can't beat good timing,
and 2) when you have a creepy dud on your hands, don't let people know
it's coming - that's why critics were not permitted to view this film
before it opened. Oscar winner Geoffrey Rush (Shine) plays a nasty
amusement-park tycoon who invites four supposed strangers to help
celebrate his wife's birthday in the notorious Vanacutt Psychiatric
Institute for the Criminally Insane, promising "terror, humiliation,
perhaps even murder." He obviously detest her as much as she loathes
him.  Rush is made-up to resemble Vincent Price, the star of William
Castle's campy 1958 version, including the pencil-thin mustache. His
character is even named Price, in case you missed the point. Anyway,
this eccentric host offers each of his jittery guests $1,000,000 at
daybreak - if they can survive the night. Directed by William Malone
from a screenplay by Dick Beebe, based on a story by Robb White,
there's little horror and zero originality. The villainous Vanacutt
was a demented doctor who performed hideous experimental surgery
without anesthesia until, once night, the inmates rebelled, igniting a
fire that destroyed the place - so we're told. Of course, the ghosts
still run rampant, causing death and destruction. Famke Janssen, Taye
Diggs, Ali Larter, Brigitte Wilson, Peter Gallagher, and Chris Kattan
look as though they fervently wished they were elsewhere. Heh! Heh!
Heh! So did I. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The House on
Haunted Hill is a ghoulish, wretched 1. But the only thing frightening
about it is the waste of talent. If you thought The Blair Witch
Project was ridiculous, this is far worse.

Title
Review for Music of the Heart (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MUSIC OF THE HEART" (Miramax Films)
Can Wes Craven, creator of slasher/horror movies from Nightmare
on Elm Street to Scream, score in another genre? Yes! Working with an
intelligent screenplay by Pamela Gray (A Walk on the Moon), Craven
goes for a different kind of gut emotion in this timely, true story
violin instructor Roberta Guaspari, the mother of two young boys, who
was abandoned when her Naval officer husband ran off with another
woman. Forced into asserting her independence to survive, she cleverly
badgers an East Harlem principal into hiring her as a substitute music
teacher, despite the protests of the tenured faculty and the wariness
of the inner-city parents. Fervently believing in discipline, dignity,
and commitment, Roberta Guaspari struggles to teach classical violin
to disorderly, often resistant students, building self-esteem and
changing their lives in remarkable ways. And her crusade leads all the
way to Carnegie Hall, where violinists Isaac Stern, Itzhak Perlman,
Arnold Steinhardt and Mark O'Connor join in Fiddlefest, along with the
children of Guaspari's actual East Harlem violin program. If the story
sounds familiar, it was the basis of a 1995 Oscar-nominated
documentary, Small Wonders. Meryl Streep delivers a polished, virtuoso
performance that could earn her another well-deserved Oscar
nomination, while Angela Bassett, Gloria Estefan, and Aidan Quinn
deliver strong support. Estefan performs the title song with teen
sensation 'N Sync, and the sound track talent includes Jennifer Lopez,
C Note, Macy Gray, and Julio Iglesias Jr..  On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, Music of the Heart is an exhilarating, uplifting 8. Like
Mr. Holland's Opus, it's sentimental and emotionally manipulative but
there's an audience for this kind of heart-warming film that everyone
in the family can enjoy.

Title
Review for At First Sight (1999)
 Based on a true medical case of a blind man who was able to
see again, Irwin Winkler's film revolves around Virgil Adamson, played
by Val Kilmer ("Batman"), who was totally blind from the age of three
because of a combination of retinitis pigmetosa and congenital
cataracts, despite the painful probing and pondering of "experts"
ranging from eye surgeons to faith healers. Resigned to his condition,
he becomes an incredibly skilled and gifted massage therapist at an
Adirondack Mountain resort. That's where he meets a workaholic
architect (Mira Sorvino) who falls under the spell of his magic
fingers. Convinced by his new client who marvels at his emotional
depth, and ignoring the warnings of his wary, protective older sister
(Kelly McGillis), he submits to the ministrations of a top
ophthalmologist at Manhattan Eye and Ear Hospital (Bruce Davison) who
promises miracles - and, in fact, delivers sight to Virgil. But how
Virgil interprets what he is suddenly able to "see" is another
thing. Thousands of unexplainable images assault him. He stands in the
midst of New York's fast-moving traffic, unable to believe that a
speeding car could hurt him. When he spots his image in a mirror, he
says "hello" and is curious why he gets no reply.  He is confused by
"flirting" and bewildered by "disappointment." Val Kilmer wears a
moronic smile through much of the drama, rendering his performance
wooden, and Mira Sorvino doesn't fare much better.  Only a cameo by
Nathan Lane elicits real laughter. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "At First Sight" is a philosophical 5, echoing the sentiment of
the blind jazz pianist Ray Charles, who once said he wouldn't want his
sight restored because he senses a greater authenticity in his present
condition.

Title
Review for Mansfield Park (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MANSFIELD PARK" (Miramax Films)
In this provocative, revisionist adaptation of Jane Austen's
third novel, Canadian writer-director Patricia Rozema gives her 19th
century heroine, Fanny Price, much of Austen's own confidant, creative
personality.  Incorporating material from Austen's early journals and
letters, Rozema recreates Fanny (Frances O'Connor) as a poor relation
who is sent from Portsmouth to the magnificent mansion called
Mansfield Park to live in emotional exile with her pompous uncle,
starchy aunts, and privileged cousins. Her favorite cousin is the
brooding Edmund (Jonny Lee Miller) who is destined to be a humble
clergyman, much to the chagrin of the outspoken, ambitious young woman
(Embeth Davidtz) who wants to marry him. Always made to feel inferior
within the genteel, rigidly conventional British class system, she is
considered more than a servant but less than an equal
companion. Nevertheless, meek Fanny becomes an adept and witty writer
who is courted by a charming, handsome rake (Allesandro Nivola) whom
she does not trust. Australian actress Frances O'Connor does a
splendid job as the plucky heroine and her complex performance is
matched by playwright Harold Pinter, as her autocratic uncle, and
Lindsay Duncan in dual roles - as both Fanny's desperate, impoverished
mother and wealthy, opium-addicted aunt. Admittedly, Patricia Rozema's
script tackles too many social issues, including the dark brutality of
slavery on the Caribbean island of Antigua, an exploitive endeavor
which supports this segment of England's landed gentry. And Rozema's
willfully manipulative, pro-feminist characters seem far ahead of
their time. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Mansfield Park is a
sensual, cinematic 7.  It's a period drama that should appeal,
primarily, to the art-house crowd.

Title
Review for Princess Diaries, The (2001)
Susan Granger's review of 'THE PRINCESS DIARIES" (Disney)
    The real significance of this formulaic, mildly amusing story about
an awkward teen who is horrified to discover that she's really royalty is its
success at the box-office. It opened as the second-biggest live-action G-rated
film, topped only by "101 Dalmatians" - meaning there's definitely an audience
that's hungry for family entertainment, given the right packaging. And there's
no better "packager" than Garry Marshall ("Pretty Woman") who skews the comedy
to appeal to young girls, adding a spoonful of Julie Andrews ("Mary Poppins")
for their mothers. 
    In this contemporary fairy-tale, nerdy, klutzy, frizzy-haired Mia
Thermopolis (Anne Hathaway) is about to celebrate her 16th birthday when her
free-spirited, single artist mother (Caroline Goodall) casually mentions that
her grandmother is coming to San Francisco to meet her for tea. That's odd
because Mia's never met her late father nor his mother, Queen Clarisse Renaldi
(Julie Andrews) of Genovia, a tiny, mythical principality between France and
Spain. And when shy, wide-eyed Mia's told she'll inherit the throne, she's torn
between curiosity and terror. Guided by Andrews and aide-de-camp (Hector
Elizondo), Mia's lessons in prim, proper Princess behavior generate smiles and a
few chuckles but her transformation from ugly duckling into swan comes as no
surprise. Heather Matazarro scores as Mia's social-activist pal, but it's
venerable Julie Andrews who commands attention, particularly in a sequence in
which she cleverly "knights" a policeman and the conductor of the trolley-car
into which Mia has accidentally crashed her Mustang. Despite Gina Wendkos's
lame, predictable script, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Princess
Diaries" is a refreshing if schmaltzy, silly 6 - and a sequel is already planned.

Title
Review for Nurse Betty (2000)
Irresistible Renee Zellweger stars in this darkly comedic
romantic fable as Betty Sizemore, a soap-opera obsessed Kansas
housewife caught between fantasy and reality. She's a plucky,
small-town waitress whose philandering, abusive husband is brutally
scalped and shot in their dining-room by two professional hitmen when
a shady drug deal goes sour. Cowering in an adjoining den, she's
emotionally traumatized by witnessing the violence. Her reaction is to
enter a fugue state, defined by the American Psychiatric Assoc. as "a
combination of amnesia and physical fright," impelling the individual
to flee from customary surroundings, assuming a new identity. So, in
her delusion, she becomes Nurse Betty, a character on "A Reason to
Love," who adores Dr. David Ravell whom she jilted six years
ago. Determined to right this wrong, she takes off for Los Angeles,
not knowing that the hitmen's drugs are stashed in her Buick. Inspired
by "Being There," "Purple Rose of Cairo" and "Pulp Fiction," the
clever, twist-filled script by John C. Richards & James Flamberg
should cop an Oscar nomination, and Neil LaBute's farcical direction
contrasts with the bitter bleakness of "Your Friends & Neighbors" and
"In the Company of Men." Renee Zellweger exudes enough wacky,
guileless, sweet innocence to emerge as a beguiling Oscar contender,
yet it's Morgan Freeman who
 astonishes as the elder, courtly hitman who does a dream dance sequence on the edge of the Grand Canyon at night. Chris Rock is hilarious as his acerbic, hard-headed, excitable protege with Greg Kinnear, Aaron Eckhart and Allison Janney delivering shimmering supporting gems. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Nurse Betty" is a weird, deliriously funny 8, a crazed, playful, defiantly twisted collision of alternate realities.

Title
Review for Passion of Ayn Rand, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE PASSION OF AYN RAND" (Showtime TV)
"Ayn Rand wouldn't like this movie," said director Christopher
Menaul at its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival. But, if you're
an Ayn Rand fan, I suspect you will. Novelist, philosopher, and
self-described fanatic for individualism, freedom, and creativity, Ayn
Rand wrote visionary books like "The Fountainhead" and "Atlas
Shrugged." The story begins in Hollywood as Ayn Rand (Helen Mirren)
and her actor-turned-painter husband (Peter Fonda) welcome an
intelligent UCLA philosophy student, Nathaniel Branden (Eric Stoltz)
and his girl-friend Barbara (Julie Delpy) into their home. It is a
meeting that changes the lives of these two couples forever. Nathaniel
is enthralled by Ayn's philosophy of Objectivism, while she is
besotted by his youth and sexual vigor. He is the personification of
the hero she often extols in her writings. But she still remains
committed to her husband, who fulfills her on an emotional level that
Nathaniel cannot comprehend. Ayn soon convinces everyone involved that
it's imperative that she enjoy intimacy with Nathaniel. The passive,
pitiful spouses, Frank and Barbara, allow the 15-year affair to
flourish until Nathaniel falls in love with his own protege (Sybil
Temchen). That betrayal ultimately destroys Nathaniel's relationship
with Ayn Rand. The saga is told from the viewpoint of Barbara Branden
on whose 1986 best-selling Rand biography this is based. "Ayn Rand was
a genius, a great mind, and she was a bully and terribly human,"
Barbara Branden concludes. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Passion of Ayn Rand" is a captivating 7, primarily because of Helen
Mirren's compelling performance in the title role. This edgy,
high-quality drama debuts on Sunday, May 30, at 8 P.M. on Showtime TV
with additional playdates on June 7 and June 22.

Title
Review for Family Man, The (2000)
In this romantic fantasy, Nicolas Cage plays a high-flyer on
Wall Street who has everything he wants: wealth, power, position,
disposable women and not a shred of regret. But through some
mysterious time-travel magic wielded by Don Cheadle, he wakes up on
Christmas morning in bed next to his college sweetheart, played by Tea
Leoni, and discovers they've been married for 13 years, have two
adorable children and a large dog, and live in suburban New Jersey,
where he sells tires for his father-in-law. There's abundant humor as
he fumbles finding his new identity and, gradually, comes to enjoy
this alternate universe, discovering the life he could have led if he
had made different choices. The funniest moment occurs when Cage's
daughter realizes the ruse and concludes that her real dad has been
abducted by aliens. "Welcome to Earth," she lisps. Writers David
Diamond & David Weissman and director Brett Ratner are obviously
trying for a spiritual, Capra-esque "It's A Wonderful Life" flavor -
with a hint of "Me, Myself and I," "Sliding Doors" even "Groundhog
Day" - but there are two flaws. First, Cage's character obviously
relishes his single, self-centered life with great gusto. Second, in
his new life, he still wants to go where the money is, conniving to
get not only himself but his new family back into the expensive
lifestyle of Manhattan. Plus, there are other plot loopholes, like
pivotal supporting characters disappearing, never to be seen
again. Nicolas Cage is at his best coping with crisis situations, even
dirty diapers, less comfortable with warm, cuddly moments, and Tea
Leoni is radiant and lovely, breathing life into a role that could
have been one-dimensional. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Family Man" is a sweet, sentimental 8. A better title might be "It's A
Wonderful Wife."

Title
Review for For Love of the Game (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "FOR LOVE OF THE GAME" (Universal Pictures)
It's Kevin Costner's third time at bat with a baseball movie
("Bull Durham," "Field of Dreams") and, once again, he's got a real
winner in this romantic sports drama. Costner plays Billy Chapel, a
aging Detroit Tigers pitching ace who's caught in a personal and
professional dilemma as he pitches what may be his finest - and last -
game at New York's Yankee Stadium. He's 40 years old, arm-weary and
aching, and he's just discovered that the Tigers have been sold and
the new owners plan to trade him. Plus, his long-time girl-friend,
Kelly Preston, is about to leave him, reasoning: "You don't need
me. You and the ball and the diamond - you're perfect together." As
his buddy/catcher (John C. Reilly) says, "Billy, this ain't your day."
During the game, as he pitches to different hitters, Billy replays -
in flashback - the vignettes that led up to this pivotal moment in his
19-year career. Based on Michael Shaara's novel from which the
contrived, predictable plot was lifted, Dana Stevens has written a
character-driven, well-crafted, if overly serious, screenplay, and
director Sam Raimi ("A Simple Plan") smoothly blends nostalgia with
suspenseful action. His intricate meshing of crisp sound and intense
silence is superb. Kevin Costner is heart-wrenching, imbuing Chapel
with texture and intensity, giving one of the best performances of his
career.  Unfortunately, his pairing with Preston totally lacks
chemistry - and Preston's character is frustratingly underwritten and
indecisive - but young Jena Malone, as her funky daughter, is vibrant
and impressive. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "For Love of
the Game" is a relentlessly entertaining, All-American 8. On a
personal note, I'm not a baseball fan - but I was on the edge of my
seat, ready to cheer out loud during the final inning.

Title
Review for Mighty, The (1998)
It's amazing how things come in pairs. Early this summer,
there was "Deep Impact" and "Armageddon," both about meteors headed
for earth. There's "Antz" with "A Bug's Life" to come. And now, after
"Simon Birch," there's yet another movie about a disabled youngster
and his friendship with a neighbor. Based on the novel "Freak the
Mighty" by Rodman Philbrick, the story unfolds through the eyes of
mopey Max (Elden Henson), a hulking kid who lives with his
grandparents ("Gram"Gena Rowlands & "Grim" Harry Dean Stanton). After
the trauma of his father murdering his mother, he has retreated into
his own private world. He rarely speaks, fails his seventh grade
classes repeatedly, and is bullied by tiny punks. Then, next door, a
single mother (Sharon Stone) and Kevin, her bright, inventive son
(Kieran Culkin, Macaulay's younger brother), move in. Kevin's legs are
in braces and his back is bent because he has Morquio's syndrome, a
degenerative condition that retards bone growth. "My father was a
magician," he explains. "He heard the words birth defect and he
disappeared."  Together, these two "misfits" battle local bullies and
their own inner demons by uniting to form "The Mighty," a towering,
heroic figure based on King Arthur's Knights of the Round
Table. Director Peter Chelsom ("Funny Bones") has fashioned a moving
drama with strong acting performances. My reservations about this film
revolve around its target audience. The bullies are terrifyingly
aggressive but it's the actions of an unrepentant ex-con that give the
film more dark menace than I'd recommend for the under-10 crowd,
despite the boys' symbiotic relationship. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "The Mighty" is a lively, imaginative 8. For older
children, this is an excellent family film.

Title
Review for Art of War, The (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "ART OF WAR" (Warner Bros.)
  Talk about synchronous ideas: the same week that
psychologist Richard Hatch became ultimate "Survivor," "Art of War"
celebrates the concept of manipulation and control. It's all about
using strategy to understand your opponent and defeat him. The idea of
"Art of War" is based on an ancient handbook by Sun Tsu, a powerful
Asian general who believed that wars can be won without ever having to
actually fight. Many great generals, including Napoleon, used Sun
Tsu's philosophy, and its tenets are as applicable to business,
politics and winning TV game shows as they are to war. In the
international suspense thriller, Wesley Snipes plays a covert American
agent, a "fixer," who gets involved in the emerging trade relations
between China and the Western world as a group of murdered Chinese
refugees is found in a container in the New York harbor and the
Chinese U.N. Ambassador is assassinated in the midst of delivering a
speech. Because he was in the wrong place at the right time, Snipes is
accused and the only witness who can prove his innocence is a Chinese
translator (Marie Matiko).  Meanwhile, Donald Sutherland is the
U.N. Secretary General, a Canadian, with Anne Archer as his
iron-fisted chief of security. Maury Chaykin is a senior FBI agent
with his own agenda, while Michael Biehn is Snipes' partner. And
Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa is a successful entrepreneur, an Eastern cowboy
straddling two cultures. Director Christian Duguay relishes the
gratuitous, realistic violence of Wayne Beach and Simon Davis Barry's
script, but it's Snipes' hip, cool charisma that ties the enigmatic
story together, On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Art of War" is
a slick, synchronous 7, the final summer popcorn picture. "It's the
game that makes us tick" - and Wesley Snipes is the winner here.

Title
Review for 8MM (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "8 MM" (Columbia Pictures)
The "MM" stands for millimeter, as in film, but it could also
mean murky melodrama because that's what this is. The plot, written by
Andrew Kevin Walker ("Seven") and directed by Joel Schumacher ("Batman
and Robin"), revolves around the sordid world of violent, sexual
pornography.  Nicolas Cage, who often specializes in weird, off-beat
characters ("Face/Off," "Wild at Heart," "Leaving Las Vegas"), plays a
low-key family man, a "surveillance specialist"or private detective,
from Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, who becomes involved with the estate of
a rich, recently deceased tycoon when the man's widow finds a
mysterious reel of film in her husband's safe. It appears to be an
illegal snuff film - that is, the lurid, brutal slaughter of a
teenage-girl by a man wearing a leather mask and wielding a
machete. (You only see a brief glimpse of the actual snuff footage
since the movie initially received an NC-17 rating and had to be
trimmed for a more acceptable R-rating.) Cage's job is to investigate
and a porn-store clerk - that's Joaquin Phoenix - becomes his guide to
the dark, sleazy underworld. Dark is an operative word here because
most of the film is dimly lit.  Not only is the subject matter
distasteful and depressing, but there is nothing original about the
way the film is presented. The way Cage reacts while watching the
horrifying snuff film parallels George C. Scott's reaction in
"Hardcore" (1979) and film buffs will spot subsequent resemblances to
"Taxi Driver," and "Seven."  The bizarre characters are implausible,
undeveloped, and unintentionally funny at times. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "8 MM" is a kinky, grisly 1. Unsavory and
unpleasant: violence against women is not entertainment.

Title
Review for Big Eden (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "BIG EDEN" (Jour de Fete)
     It's Utopia, this tiny town tucked away in the timberland of
northwestern Montana, where old codgers lounge on the porch of the general store
to pass the time away and the local matchmakers (Nan Martin, Louise Fletcher)
eagerly pair off the young people, regardless of sexual preference. There's nary
a homophobe or bigot around, much to the surprise of Henry Hart (Arye Gross), a
successful but lonely Manhattan artist who returns home to care for Sam (George
Coe), the ailing grandfather who raised him. And with the simultaneous
re-appearance of his best-friend from high-school and object of his unrequited
love (Tim DeKay), now divorced with two young sons, the fact of his
homosexuality must be faced. To complete the triangle, there's the tall,
taciturn Native American (Eric Schweig) who owns the general store and lovingly
yet secretly prepares gourmet meals for Henry and Sam. 
     This fable about home and family is a major debut for first-time
film-maker Thomas Bezucha (a former designer for Coach and Polo/Ralph Lauren)
who is meticulous about minding details, using ballads like "Welcome to my
World" and "Achin', Breakin' Heart" to set up the concept of our universal
longing to find a place in which we can love and be loved. In the paradise of
Big Eden, what you are doesn't matter as much as generosity of spirit, respect
and kindness. Sure, the plot's implausible but it's a good-natured fantasy so
allowances should be made. And Rob Sweeney's photography of Glacier National
Park is spectacular! On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Big Eden" is a
charming, quirky, off-beat 7. It's a heart-warming romantic comedy about a gay
man who doesn't die of AIDS or wind up alone at the end.

Title
Review for Pecker (1998)
  John Waters may be an acquired taste but his "Serial Mom"
(1994) with Kathleen Turner still ranks as one of the funniest films
I've seen.  His latest black comedy satirizes a photographer's rise to
fame and fortune, contrasting sleazy, blue-collar Baltimore with the
sleek, sophisticated Manhattan art world.  Edward Furlong stars as
Pecker, named for his childhood habit of "pecking" at his food.  He's
an unassuming 18 year-old who works in a sandwich shop when he's not
taking pictures of his loving but bizarre family. By chance, his
weird, grainy, often out-of-focus pictures are "discovered" by a New
York dealer, Lili Taylor, who declares him a genius. There's a
hilarious scene at his art opening in Chelsea, where the uninhibited
Baltimoreans - like his obnoxious, candy-chomping six year-old sister
and his grandmother who sells pit beef and totes around a Virgin Mary
statue that says, "Full of grace" - mix with the brittle New Yorkers,
including Patty Hearst as a wealthy art patron who gets drunk in a bar
and dances around with the strippers. Eventually, Pecker discovers the
cost of celebrity and instant over-exposure and must choose between
his old, familiar world and the new horizons opening to him. In the
title role, Furlong is goofy and engaging, while Christina Ricci is
bewildered as his girl-friend who takes her work at the Spin 'n' Grin
Laundromat more seriously than his photographs, perceiving, "You see
art when there's nothing there." And Martha Plimpton scores as his
older sister who works at a gay male strip bar. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pecker" is a hip, irreverent, hilarious 8. It's
gleeful, outrageous good fun!

Title
Review for Brokedown Palace (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Jonathan Kaplan's cautionary tale explores the same territory
as "Midnight Express" (1978) and "Return to Paradise" (1998), as
Americans suspected of drug smuggling wind up in a Third World
prison. Claire Danes and Kate Beckinsale stars as Ohio teens who tell
their parents they're off to Hawaii when they trek to Bangkok for an
11-day getaway to celebrate their high school graduation. After seeing
the usual sights, they sneak into a posh hotel where they pretend to
be guests enjoying the swimming pool. But when they invent a room
number to sign a bar check, their ruse is discovered. A charming young
Australian (Daniel LaPaine) comes to their rescue, paying court to
them both. When he invites them to join him in Hong Kong for the
weekend, they accept the plane tickets. But when they get to the
airport, they're arrested by armed police who find heroin in their
luggage. Thai justice moves quickly, so they're convicted and sent to
a dark, dank, filthy prison to serve 33-year sentences.  No one really
cares if the Australian may have planted the drugs in their luggage -
they're still guilty of carrying them. And the Thai penal system is
riddled with corruption. The girls' only hope is a mercenary
expatriate American lawyer, "Yankee Hank" (Bill Pullman). Writers
David Arata and Adam Fields and director Jonathan Kaplan weave a
cynical tale and elicit strong performances, particularly from Claire
Danes. But it's curiously similar to a story printed in "Marie Claire"
last year about two young women serving sentences on drug-smuggling
charges in a Peruvian prison, even to the detail of having cockroaches
crawl into the girls' ears. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Brokedown Palace" is a depressing, disturbing 4. It's a grim reminder
about the danger of gullibility.

Title
Review for Little Nicky (2000)
  Perhaps "Battlefield Earth" wasn't the worst movie of the
year! This offensive comedy raises that distinct possibility. Adam
Sandler ("Big Daddy") runs amok as the silly third son of Satan
(Harvey Keitel) who is sent to New York City in search of his two
rotten brothers (Rhys Ifans, Tommy "Tiny" Lister Jr.) who are
determined to corrupt enough souls to pull a devil of a coup. His
guide is Beefy, a talking bulldog. And a dorky design student
(Patricia Arquette) provides a whiff of romance. The gleefully
irreverent screenplay by Tim Herlihy and Sandler rides roughshod over
religion, race, politics, sexual orientation, plus drug and alcohol
abuse, offering much to offend everyone. Shortly into the film, it
becomes obvious that Popeye's Chicken has bankrolled the budget since
there's more of this fast-food product placement than I've seen in any
recent film. Except for Reese Witherspoon as a Valley-girl angel, the
cameos (Dana Carvey, Rodney Dangerfield, Jon Lovitz, Regis Philbin)
are crass and crude, particularly Quentin Tarantino's feeble attempt
at acting. When his holy man dies in a pillar of fire, it's
merciful. Sandler's so-called speech impediment, caused by a blow from
a shovel, has the annoying, irritating quality of nails scratching on
a blackboard. But director Steven Brill and lenser Theo Van De Sande's
Hieronymous Bosch-like depiction of Hell is fascinating, as is
watching Harvey Keitel tackle his first comedic role, particularly
when he disintegrates into talking lips. It takes a certain amount of
demented creativity to depict Hitler, dressed as a ballerina, being
tortured with a pineapple in a very dark, private portion of his
body. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Little Nicky" is a truly
stupid, cosmically embarrassing 1. To call it moronic is unkind to
morons.

Title
Review for Romeo Must Die (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Despite its thin veneer of Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet
tragedy, this is a martial-arts adventure featuring Jet Li (Lethal
Weapon 4) and recording star Aaliyah as reluctant members of the
Chinese and African-American mobs who are drawn to one other despite
their crime lord families' disapproval. Aimed specifically at fans of
Hong Kong action pictures, the story introduces 36 year-old Jet Li as
a disgraced ex-Hong Kong cop who escapes from jail to arrive in
Oakland, California, in time for his younger brother's funeral and, of
course, to avenge his murder. The plot that ensues is not logical yet
utterly predictable. But who cares? Audiences flock to see Jackie
Chan, Chow Yun-Fat, and now Asian superstar Jet Li for the fighting
not the fiction. And the intricate fights are impressively staged by
cinematographer-turned-director Andrzej Bartkowiak, who did the
visuals for Lethal Weapon 4.  One cool, computer-enhanced sequence
that impressed me showed precisely what happens inside the human body
when bones crack and break. But the audience seemed to respond best to
a stunt in which Jet Li polishes off five opponents while hanging
upside down, tied to a rope by one foot. Russell Wong, Henry O, Delroy
Lindo, and Isiah Washington co-star and popular R&B singer Aaliyah
makes a creditable feature-film acting debut - plus makin' music with
hip hop star DMX. Credit writers Mitchell Kapner, Eric Bernt, and John
Jarrell for trying to give their stock characters, bound by tradition,
some background and depth. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
Romeo Must Die is a violent, fast-paced 5 - but recommended for fight
fans only.

Title
Review for Dick (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Who would have thought that two naive teenage girls could make
the misadventures Richard Milhous Nixon into a political satire? But
that's just what happens when Kirsten Dunst and Michelle Williams, two
bubble-brained 15 year-olds, unknowingly cross paths with the
Watergate burglars, watching G. Gordon Liddy's plumbers squad during
their infamous break-in at Democratic National Headquarters. When
Liddy (Harry Shearer) spots the duo the next day on a White House
tour, as they accidentally stumble into a paper-shredding project,
Tricky Dick (Dan Hedaya) steps in, appointing them as Official Dog
Walkers and Youth Advisors. They wind up in the Oval Office, where
they discover a tape recorder momentarily left unguarded by
Presidential secretary Rose Mary Woods (Ana Gasteyer). What does one
of our blithe heroines do with it? What any infatuated teeny-bopper
would do: record herself singing an Olivia Newton-John ballad to the
Commander-in-Chief. The kind-hearted girls argue foreign policy with
Henry Kissinger (Saul Rubinek) and persuade the President to end the
Vietnam War by feeding him spiked cookies. Then, of course, they tip
off egomaniacal "Washington Post" reporters Bob Woodward (Will
Ferrell) and Carl Bernstein (Bruce McCulloch), divulging the CREEP
list which they find stuck to Liddy's shoe. Director Andrew Fleming,
who co-wrote the script with Sherlyn Longin, cleverly mixes fact and
fiction, evoking the giddy blonde bimbo movie tradition, setting it
amidst a Presidential scandal, and punctuating it with '70s pop
music. While it may resemble several "Saturday Night Live" skits
edited together, nevertheless, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Dick" is a sly, sweet, screwball 7. It's corny but comical romp
through revisionist history.

Title
Review for Deep End of the Ocean, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "THE DEEP END OF THE OCEAN" (Columbia Pictures)
Based on Jacquelyn Mitchard's 1996 deeply moving novel, this
family drama revolves around every parent's worst nightmare: losing a
child. Michelle Pfeiffer plays Beth Cappadora, a loving, devoted
mother who juggles the demands of caring for her family with a career
as a photographer.  With her three small children, she arrives at a
Chicago hotel for her 15th highschool reunion weekend and, when she
glances away for a moment, her three year-old son disappears in the
middle of a crowded lobby. Despite a desperate search, he vanishes
without a trace. This tragedy has a devastating effect on Beth, her
husband (Treat Williams), and family but, eventually, their lives
return to some degree of normalcy - until, nine years later, a 12
year-old boy (Ryan Merriman) knocks on their door. Could it be he?
With the help of a tenacious police detective (Whoopi Goldberg), they
unravel a tangled web leading to a reunion which, in turn, raises
another emotionally wrenching dilemma. The boy has no memory of his
biological family, having been raised by a loving, adoptive father
(John Kapelos). What should they do?
Director Ulu Gossbard handles the melodramatic story with
sensitivity and the cast is superb. I find fault with the
stereotypical Hollywood ending but any other resolution might also not
play well. Problem is: there is no credible, satisfying answer for
everyone involved, which was the problem with "Losing Isiah," a
previous film that tackled the same subject matter. Three-time Oscar
nominee Michelle Pfeiffer delivers another memorable performance, and
she spear-headed the development of this film through her company Via
Rosa. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Deep End of the
Ocean" is a powerful, thought-provoking 7, a heartbreaking story.

Title
Review for Toy Story 2 (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "TOY STORY 2" (Walt Disney Pictures)
   Among our many blessings this Thanksgiving, let us be
thankful for the astonishing, fun-filled Toy Story 2, the best
animated comedy sequel ever made. This magical, incredibly inventive
mix of action and humor continues, right where it left off, with the
gang ready to play in Andy's bedroom. Only, when Andy goes off to
Cowboy Camp, Woody gets left behind and is kidnapped by the greedy
owner of Al's Toy Barn. It seems Woody's a highly valuable collectible
from a 1950s TV show called Woody's Roundup. At Al's place, Woody
meets another family from his illustrious past - Jessie, the cowgirl;
Bullseye, the horse; and Stinky Pete, the Prospector. But, back in
Andy's house, Buzz Lightyear has recruited Mr. Potato Head, Slinky
Dog, Rex and Hamm for a rescue mission. Can his pals find Woody before
Andy comes home? And, will Woody want to come back to Andy's bedroom
now that he's discovered he's a prized museum piece?
  The original Toy Story was an international sensation, the
third highest grossing animated film of all time - behind The Lion
King and Aladdin.  Originally planned as a direct-to-video release,
this adventurous sequel reunites the same creative team, including
Pixar's John Lasseter and Andrew Stanton, along with Tom Hanks, Tim
Allen, Don Rickles, Jim Varney, Wallace Shawn, John Ratzenberger and
Annie Potts. New voices are Wayne Knight, Kelsey Grammer and Joan
Cusack, plus Little Mermaid Jodi Benson as Barbie. Composer Randy
Newman's "You've Got a Friend in Me" is reprised, along with new songs
"Woody's Roundup" and "When She Loved Me," sung by Sarah McLachlan On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Toy Story 2 is another knockout
10. Don't miss it - or, as Buzz Lightyear would say: "To infinity and
beyond!"

Title
Review for Forces of Nature (1999)
Subject: Review: Forces of Nature (1999)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Approved: graham@ee.washington.edu
X-Questions-to: movie-rev-mod@www.ee.washington.edu
X-Submissions-to: movie-reviews@www.ee.washington.edu
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Summary: r.a.m.r. #17369
Keywords: author=granger
Organization: None
Author: Ssg722@aol.com (Susan Granger)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "FORCES OF NATURE"
      Sandra Bullock shines in this frenetic road comedy/love story
about the shared adventures of two unlikely people thrown together on
a cross-country trip. She plays a goofy, mischievous, free-spirited
lady who finds herself seated on a plane next to Ben Affleck, a stolid
New York-based copy-writer. She's going from New York to Savannah,
Georgia, to sell a bagel shop and visit her 10 year-old son, while
he's nervously en route to his wedding there. But, on take-off, the
plane's engine inhales a seagull and they never get off the
ground. So, they have to find other means of transportation to their
shared destination. Think "Planes, Trains, and Automobiles" but add
buses and on foot. Patterned on the old Preston Sturges screwball
comedies, the premise works because the characters are genuine and
their emotional problems are identifiable. You empathize with their
dilemma and growing attraction to one another, even though the two
stars definitely lack chemistry together. Director Bronwen Hughes
("Harriet the Spy") captures the quirky charm of Marc Lawrence's
script, often using MTV-inspired visuals.  It's too bad that beautiful
Maura Tierney, playing Affleck's fiance, keeps losing her Southern
accent, and that the ending takes a detour that may cause some
disapproval.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Forces of
Nature" is an amusing, romantic 6. Unfortunately, however, many of the
best moments are in the coming-attractions trailer.

Title
Review for Limey, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE LIMEY" (Artisan Entertainment)
With "sex, lies & videotape,""Out of Sight" and now "The
Limey," film-maker Steven Soderberg has become the master of the
lighter, gentler film noir. Charismatic Terence Stamp (who should have
received an Oscar for "Priscilla, Queen of the Desert") stars as a
tough Englishman named Wilson who flies from London to Los Angeles to
find out who was really responsible for the death of his daughter
Jenny. With the help of Luiz Guzman, who had sent him a clipping about
the car crash "accident" which took her life, he tracks down a sleek,
sleazy pop music producer, played by Peter Fonda, who had been Jenny's
lover. He learns even more about what happened from Lesley Ann Warren,
Jenny's acting teacher, and finds himself emeshed in Fonda's
drug-running operation. Determined to savor his revenge, the
Cockney-speaking ex-con fantasizes about drawing a gun and shooting
Fonda on the spot but decides to torture the cowardly culprit a bit
before killing him. Besides, first he has to eliminate Fonda's
smirking chief of security, Barry Newman, and his hired goons. Steven
Soderberg's stylish use of recurring flashbacks and memories is
compelling. It's as if you're seeing the story unfold through Stamp's
clear blue eyes. Curiously, both Stamp and Fonda seem to be doing
parodies of their '60s screen personas, and the amazingly "youthful"
shots of Stamp were adroitly lifted from Ken Loach's "Poor Cow" (1967)
in which Stamp also played a character named Wilson. The weakness lies
with Lem Dobbs' laconic script that has loopholes you could drive a
truck through, particularly in a segment involving federal agents. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Limey" is a mysterious,
dynamic 9. It's a cool, restrained revenge thriller for the art house
crowd.

Title
Review for Snow Day (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "SNOW DAY" (Paramount Pictures/Nickelodeon)
        What kid hasn't listened to the radio for that oft-anticipated 
but rarely realized announcement: "Schools are closed. It's a snow day!"?
After a groan from the grown-ups, the fun begins. But how to spend a
lovely snow day? For the Brandstons of Syracuse, there are many
possibilities.  Dad (Chevy Chase) is a TV meteorologist, actually the
wacky weatherman who predicted that an unexpected blizzard would hit
the area. Mom (Jean Smart) is attached to her cellphone, working on a
business deal in Beijing. So 15 year-old Hal (Mark Webber) is free to
pursue the perfect girl of his dreams (Emmanuelle Chiqui), who has
never acknowledged his existence, while taking for granted the genial
companionship of his best friend (Schuyler Fisk, daughter of Sissy
Spacek). Hal's 10 year-old sister (Zena Grey) has a bigger ambition:
she's seriously determined to defeat the demonic Snowplowman (Chris
Elliott), a suburban Darth Vader in a ten-ton truck who haunts the
kids' snow days. He has a pet crow, his rig's called Clementine, and
legend has it that he makes chains for his tires from the braces of
kids he's run over. And Hal's brother (Connor Matheus), the terrible
toddler, just wants to go outside and play. Writers Will McRobb &
Chris Viscardi and director Chris Koch deliver slippery slapstick
sketches with only a few slushy moments. Yeah, there are flatulence
jokes but they get big laughs from the smallfry audience. And the
adults snicker when they recognize punker Iggy Pop as the ice rink DJ,
playing old Al Martino records. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
Snow Day is a flaky 5 - silly, wintry fun for the kids and not too bad
for their parents either.

Title
Review for Legally Blonde (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "LEGALLY BLONDE" (M.G.M.)
          It's a "Pretty in Pink"/"Clueless" coming-of-age story for the new
millennium as Elle Woods (Reese Witherspoon), a perky Southern California
sorority queen, switches from fashion to law in order to win back her yuppy
boyfriend (Matthew Davis). The girl-power story begins as this sweetheart of
Delta Nu is unceremoniously dumped by a bonehead who says: "If I'm going to be a
Senator by the time I'm 30...I need to marry a Jackie, not a Marilyn."
Determined to prove she's as smart a snobby brunette (Selma Blair) from
country-club Connecticut, Elle not only applies to Harvard Law School but gets
in, much to the amazement of family, friends and faculty. Once there, this
flaxen-haired fish-out-of-water not only survives but tenaciously thrives,
befriending a local manicurist (Jennifer Coolidge), dazzling a professor (Victor
Garber) and rescuing a defendant (Ali Larter) in a celebrated Boston murder
trial, plus finding a more worthy beau (Luke Wilson). In the tradition of
teen-comedy film-maker John Hughes and his disciple Amy Heckerling, there's wit,
cheerfulness, a fidelity of observation and a penchant for problem-solving.
First-time feature director Robert Luketic is blessed with Reese Witherspoon
who's joyously  incandescent in this utterly formulaic light comedy written by
Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith, based on a soon-to-be-published novel by
Amanda Brown. The supporting cast is terrific, particularly Raquel Welch and
Holland Taylor - and I particularly got a kick out of the gag of Elle
distributing scented resumes in pink, her signature color. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Legally Blonde" is a frivolous, funny, feel-good 8. Filled
with ditzy blonde ambition, it's a movie for high-school kids that their parents
would be happy to have them see. 

Title
Review for Croupier (1998)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "CROUPIER" (Shooting Gallery Films/Loews
Cineplex series)
     This compelling crime caper by British director Mike
Hodges is what low-budget, independent film-making is all about. Back
in the '70s, Mike Hodges did the critically acclaimed "Get Carter,"
starring Michael Caine, and this is in the same vein. It's based on a
script by Paul Mayersberg, who years ago wrote one of my all-time
favorites sci-fi films, "The Man Who Fell to Earth." Clive Owen plays
Jack Manfred, a frustrated, aspiring novelist whose father (Nicholas
Ball) gets him an interview for a job as a croupier at the Golden Lion
Casino in London.  And why not? He has the hand of a conjurer - or an
experienced card player. Reluctantly, he takes the job at "the house
of addiction," philosophizing, "You have to make a choice in life: be
a gambler or a croupier - and live with your decision." And Jack is
coldly obsessed with watching people lose since, after all, a good
customer is a consistent loser. One of the most intriguing losers is a
beautiful gambler (ER's Alex Kingston) from South Africa with whom he
has an affair, deceiving his lover (Gina McKee), a store detective who
believes Jack's high-tension job has made him into a miserable
zombie. He also becomes involved with a fellow croupier (Kate
Hardie). "I'm not an enigma," Jack explains. "I'm a contradiction."
Jack's ultimate aim is to become totally detached (i.e.: "The croupier
had reached his goal - he no longer heard the sound of the ball.").
Jack's behind-the-scenes casino adventures and the various scams are
intriguing but his hackneyed internal monologues about the book he's
writing soon become tedious. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Croupier" is a clever, stylish, cynical 7. "Gambling," we're told,
"is about not facing reality, not counting the odds." But, ah, the con
artists!

Title
Review for Saving Grace (2000)
If you loved "The Full Monty" and "Waking Ned Devine," this is the gentle summer comedy for you!  Set in the Cornish city of St. Isaacs, it's about Grace Trevethan (Brenda Blethlyn), an ostensibly comfortable, conservative middle-aged widow who discovers she's, literally, penniless. Her late husband, who died while parachuting, had mortgaged their manor house to the hilt, not to mention philandering in London with another woman who had the gall to show up at his funeral. Hounded by creditors, she has no recourse but to utilize her only talent - gardening - to grow something that will make her enough money to pay off her debts. So when her Scottish handyman (played by Craig Ferguson, who co-wrote the script with Mark Crowdy) admits he's been struggling with some sickly marijuana sprigs hidden behind the vicarage, she concludes: "No light, no buds." But once Grace gets them into her greenhouse, using some hydroponics, the plants thrive. Soon she's off to the city to find!
 a buyer - and winds up in the clutches of a shady French drug dealer (Tcheky Karyo) who has more on his mind than her bumper crop of cannabis. In the meantime, Grace's proper garden club ladies are intrigued with her new "tea plants," sampling several with hilarious results. The psychedelic story takes an unexpectedly discordant and contrived twist at the end but, nevertheless, director Nigel Cole keeps the naughty shenanigans in high gear and you find yourselves rooting for gentle Grace to pull the hip, hemp caper of a lifetime. Like "The Full Monty" and "Waking Ned Devine," it's about ordinary people who find they must compromise their values in extraordinary circumstances. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Saving Grace" is a warm, wry, whimsical 9. It's outrageously good fun!

Title
Review for Dirty Pictures (2000) (TV)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "DIRTY PICTURES" (SHOWTIME TV - premieres 5/27)
           In 1989, Dennis Barrie (James Woods), director of the
Cincinnati Contemporary Arts Center, booked an exhibit of shocking
images by controversial photographer Robert Mapplethorpe. Months
later, he learned that Washington D.C.'s Corcoran Gallery had canceled
their showing because of the controversy it evoked. But with the
support of his wife (Diana Scarwid) and Board of Directors, Barrie
forged ahead, unaware of the emotional price that he and his family
would pay when Sheriff Simon Leiss, Jr. (Craig T. Nelson) decided that
five of the photos depicting lewd acts of sado-masochism and
homosexuality, plus two nude portraits of children, were not only
offensive but obscene. "How did this happen?" Barrie wonders. "I never
wanted to be a martyr for a cause." Set in court, this Showtime
Original Movie is the story of that scandal - which was evoked last
year when New York's Mayor Rudolph Giuliani once again used the legal
system as a club when he protested the "Sensation" exhibit at the
Brooklyn Museum. Undoubtedly, this Barrie case is deeply disturbing
but perhaps writer Salman Rushdie puts it best: "If you cannot defend
what - to you - is unpalatable, then you do not believe in free
speech. You only believe in the free speech of those who agree with
you." On the Granger TV Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dirty Pictures" is a
significant 7, bravely tackling the provocative issue of freedom of
expression and dealing with what is our most treasured and troubling
Amendment. It's on Sat., May 27, and Wed., May 31, at 9 p.m. on
Showtime - but beware - the film is for mature audiences only. It
contains the seven disputed images and parental caution is mandatory.

Title
Review for You Can Count on Me (2000)
 If you enjoy literate, intimate dramas, rich in texture, this
is the film for you. In a small, rural town in upstate New York, a
petulant, irritable but good-hearted stoner/drifter (Mark Ruffalo) comes
home to borrow money from his church-going sister (Laura Linney), a
single mother with an eight year-old son (Rory Culkin).  Their parents
were killed in a car crash when she was a teenager, so she virtually
raised her younger brother. Writer Kenneth Lonergan ("Analyze This,"
"Rocky & Bullwinkle"), making his directorial debut, is less concerned
with plot than with his theme of trust and his complex characters,
particularly their dialogue. Their words are an awkward condensation
of how they feel and what they think they should feel, what they should
say. That's what subtext is all about. And Lonergan's meticulous care
includes the supporting roles: Jon Tenney as the sister's occasional
beau and Matthew Broderick as her bullying new boss at the bank, an
uptight, married man with whom she has a disastrous affair. You can
spot the perceptive Lonergan himself as the laid-back pastor who asks,
"Do you feel your life is important?" Eventually, of course, both
siblings must re-evaluate their lives and their relationships. Mark
Ruffalo and Laura Linney deliver subtle, terrific performances, as do
the rest of the cast except, perhaps, Matthew Broderick who resorts to
rigidity. Using Loretta Lynn's "The Other Woman," amidst Lesley Barber's
classical music, is a delicious touch. My only quibble is that, visually,
it's slow-moving, resembling a play that was filmed. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "You Can Count on Me" is a multi-layered,
melancholy 9,  both challenging and intriguing for mature moviegoers.

Title
Review for Woman on Top (1999)
  Spanish star Penelope Cruz is as intoxicating as Brazilian
bossa-nova rhythms in Fina Torres's wannabe "Like Water for Chocolate"
that also uses cooking as a metaphor for passionate romance. As
Isabella, she's both cursed and blessed. She's cursed with severe
motion sickness that forces her to be "in control" of her movement -
driving, dancing and being on top when she makes love. Yet she's
blessed with culinary genius, working as chef in a small seaside
restaurant owned by her mucho-macho musician husband, Toninho (Murilo
Benicio). But when she catches him in bed with another woman, she
flees Bahia, seeking solace with her childhood friend, a transvestite
(Harold Perrineau, Jr.) in San Francisco, where she's "discovered" by
a TV producer (Mark Feuerstein) and becomes the sultry star of a local
cooking show. Meanwhile, despondent Toninho is determined to win her
back. So much for story. It's charismatic Penelope Cruz that
fascinates. Curiously, she's not a traditional beauty; her thin nose
is far too long. But she's stunning, radiant and utterly compelling,
particularly when she sways to Luis Bacalov's Latino score. On the
other hand, Vera Blasi's flimsy plot goes beyond disbelief, needing
far too much voice-over narration. And Fina Torres' clumsy attempt at
magical realism cannot compare with Alfonso Arau ("Like Water For
Chocolate"), even with Thierry Arbogast's caressing
cinematography. Aside from Murilo Benicio's realization that, without
his wife, his life is barren, there is no character
development. Harold Perrineau Jr. serves as comic relief, and Mark
Feuerstein's fumbling ineptitude grows cloying quickly. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Woman on Top" is a frothy, sensuous 6, as
ephemeral and enchanting as the aromas that waft from Isabella's
cuisine.

Title
Review for America's Sweethearts (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "AMERICA'S SWEETHEARTS" (Columbia/Sony)
What a waste of a talented cast! Billy Crystal and co-writer Peter Tolan have
concocted a sly, provocative premise and, as the opening credits roll, it's
obvious that they're attempting an old-fashioned romantic comedy. The story
involves a veteran publicist (Billy Crystal) who is summoned to orchestrate a
press junket in Las Vegas when an arrogant director (Christopher Walken) holds a
megabuck movie hostage in his editing room, refusing to show it to anyone. He
figures that by giving the journalists juicy hints of a possible reconciliation
between the film's once-married-but-now-estranged stars, Gwen and Eddie
(Catherine Zeta-Jones, John Cusack), they'll be so distracted that they won't
remember they didn't see the movie or it wasn't what they expected. (And Crystal
thought of this long before a Sony exec concocted the phony critic/David Manning
quote scandal!) For help, he turns to Gwen's personal assistant/sister (Julia
Roberts).
But the laughs are few and far-between. Crystal's glib, cynical flack isn't
wickedly funny enough with a few amusing one-liners. After six months under the
care of a Depak Chopra-like guru (Alan Arkin), Cusack's character's too
emotionally fragile, lacking the necessary charisma. Zeta-Jones's vain,
narcissistic diva is undeveloped and one-dimensional. Only Hank Azaria, as
Zeta-Jones's much-macho Spanish lover, and Stanley Tucci, as a studio exec, and
Roberts manage to whip up any farcical froth. Basically, we don't like these
ego-driven, stereotypical characters, let alone root for them to unwind their
romantic entanglements, and Joe Roth's direction is predictable, formulaic and
telegraphic. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "America's Sweethearts" is a
contrived, shallow 4. As a screwball satire, it's strictly superficial.

Title
Review for Sea People (1999) (TV)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "SEA PEOPLE" (Showtime TV Family Movie)
 On Sunday night, June 20th, at 9 P.M., Showtime presents this
enchanting, original, made-for-TV movie, starring Fairfield's own Hume
Cronyn as a spry, old codger who's not what he appears to be. 14
year-old Amanda (Tegan Moss) is a bit of a loner who lives with her
family in a small coastal town in Nova Scotia. She trains as a
long-distance swimmer and dreams of swimming the English Channel, like
her heroine Gertrude Ederle. When the town's main source of
employment, the local cannery, closes, her father has to seek work in
a town a hundred miles away. Feeling abandoned and hurt, she suddenly
witnesses an elderly man (Cronyn) jumping off an inlet
bridge. Attempting to save him, she dives into the bitterly cold
water, only to be gruffly brushed off by the wiry man who calmly and
quite competently swims to shore. Introducing himself as John MacRae,
he takes the thoroughly chilled Amanda to his home to warm up and meet
his wife (Joan Gregson). After visiting with the couple, Amanda
becomes convinced that they are not human. They drink seaweed tea, eat
algae, and sleep in giant tanks filled with icy salt water. They even
refer to her and her family as "land people." Could they possibly be
related to the mermaids she's heard about in stories? She even quizzes
a school friend (Shawn Roberts) whose grandfather was supposedly
rescued by a mermaid. As their friendship deepens, the MacRaes reveal
their mysterious and magical relationship to the sea. And when John
becomes ill, Amanda embarks on a quest of desperate ingenuity to save
him. This is an unusually charming fable, a real winner that I highly
recommend for family viewing. It will be repeated on 6/29 at 7:15
P.M., 7/3 at 4:45 P.M., 7/9 at 8 A.M. & 6:15 P.M., 7/19 at 6:15
P.M. and 7/25 at 4:35 P.M.

Title
Review for Ready to Rumble (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Here's a quiz: Do you really believe that pro wrestlers fight
a legitimate bout? Do you consider them "superior athletes, superior
men"?  Do you feel that women are mindless sex objects who just love
to be punched in the face? Are you easily amused by bodily emission
humor and scatological jokes? What about leaving your partner with an
itchy crotch as a memento of a marriage?  If you answered 'yes' to any
or all of the above, you're the target audience for this lamebrained
comedy. David Arquette and Scott Caan play upwardly mobile
portable-toilet maintenance workers in Lusk, Wyoming, who worship
Jimmy (The King) King of World Championship Wrestling, citing him as
"the greatest wrestler of all time." So when the pudgy King (Oliver
Platt), clad in a studded black leather body suit, loses his crown in
a bloody double-cross by his sleazy manager, they set out on a quest
to return him to what they believe is his rightful throne. Not the
Porto-San throne, of course, but that kind of confusion is typical of
the on-screen humor penned by Steven Brill and directed with stomping,
smackdown overkill by Brian Robbins. And it doesn't much matter to
anyone that, outside the ring, King is a boozing, deadbeat dad who
stole his poor parents' motor home.  If you're into this sport, you'll
recognize Diamond Dallas Page, Bill Goldberg, Bam Bam Bigelow, Konnan,
Kidman, Sting, Juventud Guerrero, Disco Inferno Saturn, Sid
Vicious. Martin Landau, Joe Pantoliano and Rose McGowan collected
salaries as supporting players but don't bet on mention of this
"credit" on their resumes two years from now. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Ready to Rumble" is a crude, mind-numbing 3, packed
with low blows. It's about as much fun as a low kick to the groin.

Title
Review for Legally Blonde (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "LEGALLY BLONDE" (M.G.M.)
   It's a "Pretty in Pink"/"Clueless" coming-of-age story for the 
new millennium as Elle Woods (Reese Witherspoon), a perky Southern 
California sorority queen, switches from fashion to law in order to win 
back her yuppy boyfriend (Matthew Davis). The girl-power story begins as 
this sweetheart of Delta Nu is unceremoniously dumped by a bonehead who 
says: "If I'm going to be a Senator by the time I'm 30...I need to marry a 
Jackie, not a Marilyn." Determined to prove she's as smart a snobby 
brunette (Selma Blair) from country-club Connecticut, Elle not only applies 
to Harvard Law School but gets in, much to the amazement of family, friends 
and faculty. Once there, this flaxen-haired fish-out-of-water not only 
survives but tenaciously thrives, befriending a local manicurist (Jennifer 
Coolidge), dazzling a professor (Victor Garber) and rescuing a defendant 
(Ali Larter) in a celebrated Boston murder trial, plus finding a more 
worthy beau (Luke Wilson). In the tradition of teen-comedy film-maker John 
Hughes and his disciple Amy Heckerling, there's wit, cheerfulness, a 
fidelity of observation and a penchant for problem-solving. First-time 
feature director Robert Luketic is blessed with Reese Witherspoon who's 
joyously  incandescent in this utterly formulaic light comedy written by 
Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith, based on a soon-to-be-published 
novel by Amanda Brown. The supporting cast is terrific, particularly Raquel 
Welch and Holland Taylor - and I particularly got a kick out of the gag of 
Elle distributing scented resumes in pink, her signature color On the 
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Legally Blonde" is a frivolous, funny, 
feel-good 8. Filled with ditzy blonde ambition, it's a movie for 
high-school kids that their parents would be happy to have them see. 

Title
Review for Miss Congeniality (2000)
 To bury this lackluster loser in the Christmas rush is folly
but, then again, it was postponed from earlier this year.  Sandra
Bullock plays a cynical, rough-and-tumble FBI agent who, since
childhood, has been a tomboy.  So when a terrorist sends a cryptic
threat that the Miss USA Pageant in San Antonio may be the next
target, her boss (Ernie Hudson) and partner (Benjamin Bratt) rig it
with the pageant director (Candice Bergen) to insert her
behind-the-scenes by going undercover as Miss New Jersey. Problem is:
she's such a klutzy mess that her pompous beauty consultant (Michael
Caine) is aghast: "There's no way I can get this woman - dirty Harriet
- ready in two days. I haven't seen a walk like that since 'Jurassic
Park'!" Nevertheless, within 48 hours, a furious, reluctant Bullock is
"Entering Barbie-town." As for the swimsuit competition, "The last
time I was this naked in public, I was coming out of the uterus," she
wails in her pink Gottex two-piece. Despite occasional laugh lines,
the film fails because producer Bullock, director Donald Petrie and
writers Marc Lawrence, Katie Ford & Caryn Lucas can't make up their
minds whether to satire or be sympathetic to beauty pageants, going
first in one direction, then another. With their perfectly clothed and
coifed contestants, beauty pageants are tacky by nature, so how do you
do one tastefully? Cliches abound - from the ugly duckling-into-swan
routine to mocking the talent show to the eating disorders. Candice
Bergen has the good sense to look uncomfortable, as does hapless
William Shatner, cast as the local Bert Parks. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Miss Congeniality" is a pathetic, misguided
3. Sandra Bullock still has that winning smile but little
else. Someone should give this misguided star/producer some sound
career advice.

Title
Review for Star Trek: Insurrection (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "STAR TREK: INSURRECTION" (Paramount Pictures)
Love springs eternal in this ninth film of the popular "Star
Trek" franchise, as Captain Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick Stewart) is
attracted to Anij, one of the leaders of an endangered planet and
First Officer William Riker (Jonathan Frakes) resumes his romance with
Counselor Deanna Troi (Marina Sirtis). True to the spirit of the
Starship Enterprise, whose purpose is to explore strange, new worlds
and, in doing so, learn about many different species, Captain Picard
and his crew come to the rescue of the Ba'ku, a small community of
humanoid people whose serene and peaceful way of life is threatened,
along with the Fountain of Youth properties of their planet's
atmosphere. And, as it has been so often, the Star Trek plot is a
metaphor for current events with Picard challenging a Starfleet
authority that he believes to be corrupt and becoming an intrepid
freedom fighter. Doing his best to overcome the weaknesses of the
script - a blustering but relatively ineffectual alien villain
(F. Murray Abraham), a leading lady who totally lacks screen charisma
(Broadway's two-time Tony winner, Donna Murphy), and an overdose of
techno-babble - director Jonathan Frakes keeps the pace light and
lively, breaking from the standard save-the-universe, thrill-ride
formula and emerging more as a robust, fun-filled reunion episode of
"Star Trek: Next Generation." To its credit, once again, the humanity
outweighs the hardware. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Star
Trek: Insurrection" is a breezy, lightweight 7, combining idealism,
action-adventure, and the requisite special effects with some of the
gentle humor and romance that characterized the original television
series.

Title
Review for Closer You Get, The (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE CLOSER YOU GET" (Fox Searchlight)
        After producer Umberto Pasolini made The Full Monty about four
unemployed Englishmen, he turned his attention to Ireland, where five
frustrated, Guinness-guzzling bachelors feel they're sorely in need of
spicy female companionship. Every night, they meet at the pub and
bemoan the lack of eligible women around.  To that end, they place an
ad in The Miami Herald, inviting any and every adventurous "fit and
healthy" American woman to visit their remote, rustic fishing village
on the west coast. Object: matrimony.  It's an action that
precipitates much consternation among the local Irish womenfolk. Of
course, the romantic fantasy is a lot of blarney because you know
exactly what's going to happen long before it does in William Ivory's
whimsical script which is based on a story by Herbie Wave. Ian Hart,
who played John Lennon in Backbeat and the detective in The End of the
Affair, is the ring-leader, Kieran O'Donnagh, a butcher who doesn't
seem to notice that his feisty female assistant Siobhan (Cathleen
Bradley) secretly adores him. His sheep-farming brother Ian (Sean
McGinley) also doesn't seem to notice that the right woman for him is
pouring drinks just across the bar. And so it goes. Is this another
Waking Ned Devine? No - but first-time film director Aileen Ritchie
keeps it frothy, particularly when Bo Derek's 10 unspools at the
church's movie night instead of The Ten Commandments. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The Closer You Get is an engaging, amusing 7,
proving "the closer you get to something, the harder it is to see."

Title
Review for Civil Action, A (1998)

Susan Granger's review of "A CIVIL ACTION" (Touchstone/Paramount Pictures
Adapted from Jonathan Harr's 1995 non-fiction best-seller, this
is a deadly serious legal thriller - it's also a deadly bore. John
Travolta sleepwalks through the role of Jan Schlictmann, an
egotistical, high-stakes, personal-injury attorney who suddenly
becomes virtuous and loses his custom-made shirt when he sues two
corporations for dumping toxic waste which may have polluted the water
supply and, in turn, caused cancer-related deaths in eight families in
a small town outside of Boston. When we first meet Schlictmann, he's
driving a sleek black Porche and reveling in minor celebrity. Guesting
on a radio talk show, he's confronted by a client (Kathleen Quinlan)
whose letters he has ignored. She's the distraught mother of a young
boy who died of leukemia and represents seven other children in one
neighborhood who met a similar fate. But when Schlictmann discovers
that two major companies (W.R. Grace and Beatrice Foods) may be the
culprits, he gleefully proclaims, "This is a gold mine!" Greedily, he
accept the case which, eventually, drives his firm into
bankruptcy. Written and directed by Steven Zaillian, who wrote
"Schindler's List," it's issue-oriented, earnest and decent, filled
with righteous indignation about social injustice. Unfortunately, it's
not very entertaining - except for Robert Duvall's superbly nuanced
performance as a crafty corporate counsel, Sydney Pollock's turn as a
snobbish executive, and an uncredited cameo by Kathy Bates. Why does
it miss the mark? Because we have no emotional investment in
Travolta's morally ambiguous character. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "A Civil Action" is a bleak, stilted 6, proving that no good
deed goes unpunished.

Title
Review for Mononoke Hime (1997)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "PRINCESS MONONOKE" (Miramax Films)
Based on Japanese folklore, this captivating environmentalist
fable is the tale of a war between the beast gods of the forest and
the humans who are encroaching on their pristine territory. Set in the
15th century, a time of feudalism, the characters are desperately
grasping to understand and adjust to the coming industrialization and
how it will affect the balance of nature. In this English-dubbed
version, a young warrior, Ashitaka (voiced by Billy Crudup), is forced
to kill a fierce, demonic boar to protect his village. While dying,
the evil creature places a mysterious curse on him, signified by a
dark, twisting scar on his right arm. Defiant and determined to find a
cure, Ashitaka mounts his trusty red elk and travels to the boar's
homeland where he becomes involved in a dispute between Lady Eboshi
(Minnie Driver) and her feisty ironworkers and the forest creatures,
led by Moro, the Wolf Spirit (Gillian Anderson), and her adopted human
daughter, Mononoke ("spirits of things"), called San (Claire
Danes). The conclusion is a plea to humans to live harmoniously with
the world around us. Directed by Hayao Miyazaki, the Japanese version
is one of only two films to ever break $150 million at the Japanese
box-office - the other being "Titanic."  The fluid and superbly
detailed animation is technically awesome, emotionally powerful, and
unbelievably beautiful. I was particularly enchanted by the tiny,
ghost-like, head-clicking tree sprites. But - at a lengthy 135 minutes
- with scenes of graphic violence and a complex, philosophical
storyline to follow, it's definitely not meant for young
children. Heed the PG-13 rating.  Basically, it's art house fare. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Princess Mononoke" is a stunning,
spiritual 7 - but it is definitely too much of a good thing.

Title
Review for Autumn in New York (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "AUTUMN  IN  NEW YORK" (M.G.M. Pictures)
 When M.G.M. refused to screen this tear-jerking May-December
romance for critics, it was an ominous sign because studios usually
hide the star-laden stinkers, hoping to get at least one solid weekend
before reviews come out. But it's not that bad. It's also not that
good. Richard Gere plays a 48 year-old, hotshot Manhattan restaurateur
with a reputation as a notorious womanizer and whose picture is on the
cover of NEW YORK magazine. Winona Ryder is a giggly, free-spirited,
Emily Dickinson-quoting, 22 year-old millinery designer who informs
him, shortly after their affair begins, that she's suffering from an
extremely rare and probably terminal tumor which affects her heart. So
is it going to be the "Love Story" of the millennium year? Probably
not. Heavy-handed screenwriter Allison Burnett is no Erich Segal.
First of all, too much is made of the age difference. In fact,
according to her cackling grandmother (Elaine Stritch), Gere even
dated Ryder's late mother.  Plus, he has an illegitimate daughter
(Vera Farmiga) who is Ryder's age, and bartender (Anthony La Paglia)
keeps warning him. Even Ryder bluntly quips, "You've got to look on
the bright side. In a year or so, I'll be this sob story you can use
to bag more chicks." Then there's the soggy dialogue: "We have no
future. All I have to offer you is this - until it's over" and "What
should we do with this moment we're in?" On the other hand, director
Joan Chen and cinematographer Changwei Gu create such intoxicatingly
beautiful visuals that you forget they're cliche-ridden - like the
closer you come to dying, the more luminous and beautiful you
become. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Autumn in New York" is
a sentimental, predictable, melodramatic 4, but this glossy,
two-hankie weeper at least deserved to find its niche.

Title
Review for Dreaming of Joseph Lees (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "DREAMING OF JOSEPH LEES"  (Fox Searchlight Films)
This Gothic tale of romantic obsession revolves around a young woman
 named Eva, played by Samantha Morton ("Under the Skin"), who is preoccupied
 with her second cousin. Eva lives with her teenage sister (Lauren
Richardso n) and stern, elderly father (Frank Finlay) in the rural
English county of S omerset. She works as a clerk but fantasizes about
Joseph Lees - that's Rupe rt Graves - who has been the unrequited
object of her affection since childh ood. When her precocious little
sister discovers her secret, she plots to ge t the two together. The
fact that the handsome ex-soldier, now a geologist, has lost his leg
in a quarry accident in Italy only increases Eva's fervent
fascination. And she's hardly deterred by the ardent pursuit of a dull
local pig farmer, Harry Flyte (Lee Ross), with whom she moves in,
which is an inexplicably daring and rebellious move, considering it's
the late 1950s. Her explanation is that she doesn't want to "make the
same mistake" that her divorced parents did. Finally, Joseph Lees
trouble begins. There's an immediate physical at traction, pure lust,
which is soon consummated - much to Harry's distress. At this point,
Harry's suicidal depression abruptly becomes the dramatic focus,
resulting in Eva's distraught soul-searching.  Screenwriter Catherine
Linstrum and director Eric Styles concentrate on Eva's sensuality and
character development, leaving Joseph Lees as somewhat of an enigma
and ignoring large plot loopholes. In addition, Harry is such a
clumsy, unappealing rival that there's no tension. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dreaming of Joseph Lees" is a confused,
conflicted 4. It's a murky melodrama about emotional repression that
remains strange and shallow.

Title
Review for Unbreakable (2000)
 On paper, it looked great. Bruce Willis, the star, and
M. Night Shyamalan, the creator, of "The Sixth Sense" teaming up for
another supernatural thriller. On the screen, however, it's
unintelligible and undeniably underwhelming. Bruce Willis is a
Philadelphia football stadium security guard who is the sole survivor
of a train wreck that killed 131 people. Why? he wonders. That
question is shared by Elijah, a mysterious comic book entrepreneur who
suffers from a brittle bone disease, played by Samuel L. Jackson - in
an unkempt Afro - who poses not only a bizarre explanation but also
theorizes a purpose for the rest of Willis's life. "I believe comic
books are our last link to a form of history," he notes. Could,
perhaps, Willis be a modern-day superhero? Willis's wide-eyed 12
year-old son (Spencer Treat Clark, trying hard to be Haley Joel
Osment) is easily convinced but not his estranged wife (a surprisingly
haggard-looking Robin Wright Penn) who claims, "I don't want violence
in my life." As for Willis, he's just not sure of anything except that
he's sad and that his world is crumbling around him - like the slow,
stalemated story which has plot loopholes large enough to drive a city
bus through. During the dark, creepy, climactic chase, where does
Willis, the wet, caped crusader, get dumped on a dreary, damp, rainy
night? Underwater - and we've already been told that water is like his
Kryptonite. "Do you know what the scariest thing is?" Jackson
concludes during what passes for a twist ending. "To not know your
place in the world. Now we know who you are and we know who I am." On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Unbreakable" is an uncertain
3. Ostensibly about heroes and villains, basically, it's unadulterated
poppycock. Unfathomable is more like it.

Title
Review for Reindeer Games (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "REINDEER GAMES" (Dimension Films/Miramax)
 Ehren Kruger's screenplay must have read better on paper
because the film, directed by John Frankenheimer, lies like a bleak
lump of coal in a Christmas stocking. Ben Affleck plays a convicted
car thief whose cellmate (James Frain) in a cold Michigan prison has a
gorgeous penpal girlfriend, Charlize Theron, whom he met through a
lonely hearts magazine. When the cellmate dies in a food fight,
Affleck assumes his identity, getting the sexy girlfriend but also her
psychotic older brother (Gary Sinese), a small time crook who wants
his help in taking down the Tomahawk Casino on Christmas Eve.  His
bizarre scheme includes having his grungy gang dressing up like Santa
Claus with the "ho, ho, ho" becoming a heist. From the beginning,
wholesome Ben Affleck, who always seems to look like an aging frat
boy, is miscast in this cartoonish saga of betrayal, particularly as
when openly yearns for a cup of cocoa and slice of pecan
pie. Beautiful Charlize Theron has enough charisma for both of them,
along with an ability to convince men to believe anything she says,
particularly when she flashes her bare breasts. And no one can do a
buffed, tattooed, over-the-top nutcake like Gary Sinese.  But the
dim-witted plot consists of a fast-paced series of intricate
double-crosses that stretch from the barely plausible to the patently
ridiculous. And the absurd ending, literally, had people laughing in
disbelief.  Fortunately, Ehren Kruger has Arlington Road and Scream 3
under his belt and John Frankenheimer will be best remembered for
Seven Days in May and The Manchurian Candidate. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, Reindeer Games is an icy, idiotic, illogical 3. My
advice: don't play. Christmas has come and gone - just as this movie
will.

Title
Review for Iron Giant, The (1999)
The summer's best surprise is Brad Bird's fun-filled, superbly
crafted animated family film. Based on Ted Hughes' children's book,
"The Iron Man," the concept combines the sensitivity of Steven
Spielberg's "E.T." with a gleeful contemporary sensibility.  Set in
peaceful, picturesque Rockwell, Maine, in 1957 - at the time of the
Russian satellite Sputnik - the story revolves around the friendship
of a nine year-old boy, Hogarth Hughes (voiced by Eli Marienthal), and
a gigantic robot who fell into the ocean from outer space. They meet
one night when his single mother (voiced by Jennifer Aniston) is
working late and Hogarth hears a noise outside. Curious, he follows a
trail of broken fences and downed trees into the woods where he finds
a 50' tall metal monster tangled in electrical wires. Feeling sorry
for the enormous beast, he turns the power off, thus saving its
life. Knowing his mother's aversion to pets, he tries to keep the
gentle Iron Giant (voiced by Vin Diesel) hidden but the creature's
voracious hunger for metal (cars, trucks, TV antennas, railroad
tracks) arouses the suspicions of a sneaky, trigger-happy Government
Agent (voiced by Christopher McDonald). Hogarth's only ally as the
precarious situation escalates is a cool beatnik scrap-metal
dealer/artist (voiced by Harry Connick Jr.) who tells him, "You are
who you choose to be."  That's a key phrase in the heartfelt, honest,
intelligent script, which also works as a political allegory without
getting heavy-handed, teaching lessons about tolerance and
sacrifice. And Michael Kamen's musical score is subtle yet evocative.
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Iron Giant" is a charming,
whimsical, magical 10.  It's absolutely impossible not to love "The
Iron Giant" - a definite MUST SEE!

Title
Review for Rat Race (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "RAT RACE" (Paramount Pictures)
   Like Stanley Kramer's "It's a Mad Mad Mad Mad World" (1963), this
silly screwball comedy has a simple premise. Six unsuspecting people, along with
their partners, are entered a bizarre "human rat race" devised by an eccentric
Las Vegas casino owner (John Cleese) as a new kind of gambling game for his
Venetian Hotel high-stakes rollers who can make bets on the outcome. Each
contestant, chosen at random, is given a key to a locker in a train station in
Silver City, New Mexico, containing a duffel bag filled with two million
dollars. Whoever gets there first keeps the loot - and there are no rules. The
competitors include Whoopi Goldberg and Lanai Chapman, a reunited birth-mother
and ambitious daughter, who are sent over a cliff by frustrated Kathy Bates;
con-artist brothers Seth Green and Vince Vieluf, who plot to sabotage the
airport's radar system, thus forcing others to find slower transportation;
Breckin Meyer and Amy Smart, who use a helicopter since it doesn't need the
airport radar; Jon Lovitz and Kathy Najimy, who planned to see David Copperfield
but wind up stealing Hitler's Mercedes limo; Rowan Atkinson, a narcoleptic
Italian, who grabs a ride with ambulance driver Wayne Knight, who is
transporting a heart to Texas; and Cuba Gooding Jr., a disgraced NFL ref who,
stranded in the desert, hijacks a chartered bus filled with Lucille Ball
impersonators. Writer Andy Breckman ("Sgt. Bilko") and director Jerry Zucker
("Airplane!") show no restraint, throwing in every gag imaginable to get a
laugh. Unfortunately, several of them miss the mark due to bad timing, the
schtick wears thin, and the conclusion is corny and contrived. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Rat Race" is an absurd, madcap 5  but it's not, as
claimed, "the gambling experience of a lifetime.

Title
Review for Session 9 (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "SESSION 9" (USA Films)
   Sometimes you just get more than your bargained for...like when
Boston-based Hazmat Elimination, run by Scottish actor Peter Mullan and his
trusty assistant, David Caruso, assures a town engineer (Paul Guilifoyle) that
they can remove insidious asbestos fibers from a Victorian hospital facility in
a week. Erected in 1871, deserted and decomposing since 1985, the Danvers Mental
Hospital, is one of the most malevolent "locations" ever chosen for a film. The
structure is so massive - with its labyrinth of rubble-strewn corridors,
collapsing floors, stagnant pools of water, isolation cells, and ominous
surgical chambers where experimental pre-frontal lobotomies were performed -
that their task seems impossible within that time frame. And each member of
their inexperienced crew (Stephan Gevedon, Brandon Sexton III, and Josh Lucas)
is coping with his own personal demons as, one by one, their minds seem to be
affected by the grim areas in which they're working. The film's title is derived
from salvaged reel-to-reel audio-recorded sessions involving the demonic
possession of a young woman who is suffering from multiple personalities. By the
time Session 9 occurs so do dreadful disasters.
 Filmmaker Brad Anderson obviously envisioned this as a gruesome
chainsaw-massacre-type ghost story but the script lacks structure and isn't
particularly scary. The conclusion is more ludicrous than convincing. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Session 9" is a dark, gloomy 4. Silly me...at
first, I thought that the original name of the Danvers Lunatic Asylum bore some
reference to Mrs. Danvers, the creepy housekeeper played by Judith Anderson in
Alfred Hitchcock's truly terrifying "Rebecca" that also involved a cavernous
mansion called Manderley.

Title
Review for Lucky Numbers (2000)
 This is John Travolta's unlucky year. First, "Battlefield Earth." Now, this long-delayed dark comedy directed by Nora Ephron ("Sleepless in Seattle," "You've Got Mail"). Travolta is Russ Richards, an overextended Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, TV weatherman who plots with a sexy, promiscuous Lotto-ball girl, Crystal Latroy, played by Lisa Kudrow ("Friends"), to rig the state numbers game to win $6.4 million. Crystal gets her moronic cousin (documentary film-maker Michael Moore) to purchase the winning ticket, but their double-dealing caper crumbles as everyone who knows about it wants a piece of the action. In the script by Adam Resnick ("Cabin Boy"), which is loosely based on a real incident from the '80s when someone tried to fix the daily number drawing in the Pennsylvania lottery, Russ Richards is a self-centered celebrity who has his own reserved table at the local Denny's and promises his audiences unseasonably mild weather in December. Problem is: he's is a shallow,!
 unsympathetic character, as is Crystal Latroy - and neither John Travolta nor Lisa Kudrow can overcome that fatal flaw. No one cares if Richards' snowmobile business is tanking and that he may lose his beloved Jaguar convertible. In fact, all the characters - from Tim Roth as a strip club owner to Ed O'Neill as the TV station manager to Michael Rapaport as a hip-hop thug wielding a lethal World Series commemorative bat - are tacky, greedy and unethical. But Bill Pullman lends comic relief as a bumbling, inept cop who unwittingly breaks the case. When did John Travolta's voice get so whiny and irritating? And why is he eating himself out of a career as a leading man?  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Lucky Numbers" is a mocking, mean-spirited 3. Everyone emerges a loser.

Title
Review for Bicentennial Man (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
The last time director Chris Columbus teamed with Robin
Willliams they came up with Mrs. Doubtfire but, if you're expecting
this to be a slapstick kids' flick, think again. Adapted from a short
story by Isaac Asimov, it chronicles the life of a NDR-114 robot who
begins as a household appliance in 2005, created "to perform menial
tasks: cooking, cleaning, making household repairs, playing with or
supervising children."  Dubbed Andrew by the youngest of the family's
children (deep-dimpled Hallie Kate Eisenberg) who cannot pronounce
"android," he soon begins to show creativity, curiosity, and
compassion, confounding his manufacturer and launching a 200-year
quest to discover his humanity. Nicholas Kazan's thoughtful screenplay
cleverly explores the technology of artificial intelligence as it
integrates with human behavior but, since it follows a family for
several generations with only Andrew as a connective, it involves too
many characters, several with literary-allusion names like Galatea and
Portia.  Plus, there's a constant awareness that underneath the
plastic prosthesis, there's comical Robin Williams, desperately
itching to emerge. Sam Neill scores as Andrew's original owner, as
does Oliver Platt as a bio-tech designer who becomes Andrew's friend.
It's interesting that, just like Woody in Toy Story 2, Andrew makes a
choice between pristine immortality and the inexplicable vagaries of
humanity but, unlike that magical fantasy, children under 10 will
quickly be bored or depressed by the insipid depth of this 2-hour,
13-minute saga. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Bicentennial
Man powers up to a surprisingly serious, existential 7, as a poignant
parable of what it means to be human.

Title
Review for Dudley Do-Right (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
         If there was ever the right actor to bring cartoonist Jay
Ward's brave but clueless Canadian Mountie to life, it's Brendan
Fraser. Like his goofy "George of the Jungle," Fraser embodies the
dim-witted hunk superbly, relishing his obvious mastery of the
physical comedy. The plot - which is designed to appeal to youngsters,
not adults - follows Do-Right as he attempts to foil a scheme
concocted by evil Snidely Whiplash, played broadly by Alfred Molina.
Even as a child, Dudley longed to be a mounted policeman, while his
pal Snidely only wanted to be "a bad guy." Now, Snidely wants to
pollute the town of Semi-Happy Valley by making it the target of a
fake gold rush, setting up a gullible prospector (Eric Idle) who
achieves such fame and fortune that he appears on "Live with Regis and
Kathie Lee." In the meantime, Dudley's in love with Nell - that's "Sex
and the City" girl, Sarah Jessica Parker - but, unfortunately, so is
Snidely. Directed by Hugh Wilson, this cheerful comedy is aimed at
5-10 year-olds, who will thoroughly enjoy it. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dudley Do-Right" is a downright silly 6. Did you
know there's a Dudley Do-Right Emporium on Sunset Blvd. in Hollywood,
where tourists are greeted by a 15-foot statue of Ward's famous
characters Rocky and Bullwinkle, who are set for the big screen next
summer in a live-action film starring Robert DeNiro, Rene Russo, and
Jason Alexander?

Title
Review for Filth and the Fury, The (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
In this documentary, music-video pioneer Julien Temple attempts
to set the record straight about the rise and fall of The Sex Pistols,
the world's most notorious punk-pop band. And obviously it's intended
to augment Temple's earlier documentary, "The Great Rock 'n' Roll
Swindle" (1980), which told how the Pistols were marketed by their
egomaniacal manager, huckster Malcolm McLaren. Unlike their more
famous British predecessors, the Beatles and the Stones, The Sex
Pistols didn't spring from any musical tradition. In fact, they
admittedly didn't know much about music at all, preferring to slam
stuff against their guitars and drums. And it was this obvious assault
that first appealed to frustrated fans in the '70s who also had no
obvious means of expression. England at that time was in the midst of
great social upheaval, suffering from a stagnant economy,
unemployment, and race riots. Against this backdrop of social strife,
the rise of punk anarchy and the impact of the Pistols seems
understandable, even though they recorded only one album: "Never Mind
the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols" (1977).  Julien Temple reveals
the men behind the infamy, interweaving BBC news briefs, cartoons,
commercials - even an interview with Sid Vicious before he died in
1978. One of the most memorable clips shows Johnny Rotten snarling,
"There is no future in England's dreaming. Don't be told what you
want. Don't be told what you need!" And there's narration by the four
remaining band members: vocalist John Lydon (a.k.a. Johnny Rotten),
guitarist Steve Jones, drummer Paul Cook, and bassist Glen Matlock. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Filth and the Fury" is an
insightful 8. Filled with ferocious, primal power, it's one of the
best rock & roll documentaries.

Title
Review for What Planet Are You From? (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "WHAT PLANET ARE YOU FROM?" (Columbia Pictures)
 After The Graduate, Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?, Carnal
Knowledge, Heartburn, even Primary Colors, there's no question that
director Mike Nichols relishes exploring the relationship between the
sexes. Which explains why he was drawn to comedian Garry Shandling's
concept of an extraterrestrial who was sent to Earth to impregnate a
woman as a part of some sort of universal domination plan. Having this
alien come from an advanced civilization of neutered, cloned males
with little knowledge of the behavior of the female of the species is
a clever concept, ripe for scathing social satire, but its execution
misses the mark. In addition to his writing and producing efforts,
Shandling stars, utilizing his wry, dead-pan understatement to be an
awkward, almost totally passive hero. The primary gimmick revolves
around his surgically implanted penis which emits a motorized humming
sound when he becomes aroused. The gag is amusing the first time, the
second, even the third. After that, it loses its vibe. Posing as a
banker in Phoenix, his copulating mission is simple. "I have to have
sex right away," he gasps. "I'm really very horny!"  A sleazy
co-worker, played by Greg Kinnear, takes him to troll at an Alcoholics
Anonymous meeting where he meets Annette Bening, a neurotic, lovable
Earth-chick who is, indeed, easy.  "Don't laugh," she says, "but I'm
working as a real-estate agent" - a line that immediately elicits
chuckles as a reminder of her role in American Beauty.  Bening's
terrific, while John Goodman, Linda Fiorentino, Camryn Manheim,
Janeane Garofalo and Ben Kingsley add to the mix. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, What Planet Are You From? is a droll but silly,
superficial 6. I suspect Garry Shandling will have a limited
big-screen career as a leading man.

Title
Review for Simply Irresistible (1999)
Talk about misleading advertising! This clumsy comedy fails on almost all fronts, and here's why. Sarah Michelle Gellar, who plays TV's "Buffy the Vampire Killer," and Sean Patrick Flannery, who plays TV's "Young Indiana Jones," both need a truly stellar vehicle to make the crossover from the small screen to movies - and this isn't it. She plays an inexperienced chef and restaurant owner who, magically, is able to cook her sensuous passion into glorious cuisine after she meets this man of her dreams. This idea worked for Mexico's erotic, enchanting "Like Water for Chocolate," but it falls like a soggy souffle here. According to the contrived script by Judith Roberts, briskly but routinely directed by Mark Tarlov, Gellar inherits a failing 70 year-old TriBeCa restaurant, the Southern Cross, from her mother. Playwright Christopher Durang plays a cab driver Cupid as he, magically, utilizes an elusive crab to engineer a "cute" meeting between Gellar and Flannery in a Manha!
ttan Farmer's Market. Flannery's a self-absorbed retail executive in charge of opening a trendy new restaurant called Jonathan's in Fifth Avenue's tony Henri Bendel, and his temperamental French chef is giving him grief. Can you guess what happens?
Gellar's Crab Napoleon enchants him, but the standard ingredients are all measured out: no surprises, no spice, no zest, no originality. Only some stalwart supporting actors - Betty Buckley, Dylan Baker, Larry Gilliard Jr., Patricia Clarkson -  are trying the best they can. And, if you've seen "You've Got Mail," you'll find the plot similarities striking. Not that it's not pleasant. It is - but so bland that, if you go, you'll soon crave something else.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Simply Irresistible" is a quite resistible 3. Back to the kitchen for something with more gusto.

Title
Review for My Dog Skip (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MY DOG SKIP" (Warner Bros.)
Every once in awhile, you get to see a movie you don't know
anything about and, when it's over, you want to make sure everyone
else does know about it. That's the way I feel about My Dog Skip.
Narrated by Harry Connick Jr., it's a childhood memoir, going back to
the small Mississippi town of Yazoo in the '40s during World War II,
tracing the coming-of-age of young Willie (Frankie Muniz of TV's
Malcolm in the Middle), a scrawny, shy, awkward boy, eager to learn
about the world. Willie lives with his stern but well-meaning dad
(Kevin Bacon), who lost a leg during the Spanish Civil War, and
good-hearted mom (Diane Lane) and dog Skip, a Jack Russell
terrier. It's Skip who enables Willie to stand up to the neighborhood
bullies, speak with confidence to the prettiest girl in school
(Caitlin Wachs), spend a stormy night in Greenwood Cemetery on a dare,
even explore the colored section of his segregated town because dogs,
"being smarter than people," perceive no boundaries. But, above all,
Skip forges his connection with Dink (Luke Wilson), his neighbor and
the local sports hero, who goes overseas to fight Hitler and comes
back disgraced and emotionally wounded.  Part of an autobiographical
novel by the late Willie Morris, a legendary literary figure from the
'60s who edited Harper's magazine, it's been adapted for the screen by
Gail Gilchriest and directed by Jay Russell as a haunting, delicately
etched, character-driven, old-fashioned, anecdotal story that mixes
humor, menace, and pathos, evoking the timeless relationship between a
boy and his loyal, loving dog. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
My Dog Skip is a, scruffy, engaging 8.  It's a wistful, warm and wise
movie that you and your whole family will love.

Title
Review for Brotherhood of Murder (1999) (TV)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "BROTHERHOOD OF MURDER" (Showtime TV)
 Truth is far more terrifying than fiction - and never more so
than in this compelling made-for-TV movie premiering on Sunday,
Dec. 12 at 8 P.M.  on Showtime. Based on an acclaimed book by former
member Thomas Martinez and John Guinther, the title refers to the
brief but deadly rise of The Order, an insidious white supremacist
group whose violent crimes stunned the nation in the mid-'80s.
William Baldwin plays Tom Martinez, an uneducated Army dropout, who
returns home to Philadelphia in 1983. He and his wife (Kelly Lynch)
are expecting their first child and he's unable to find a good job
when he's "recruited" to join The Order, an Aryan, neo-Nazi hate
group, founded by charismatic Bob Mathews (Peter Gallagher). Poor,
white, and angry, he's ripe for their promise of "a better future" for
his family. "What do I have to do?" he asks, admitting that he hasn't
read more than six books in his entire life. "Stand up for yourself,
take an oath of allegiance, and protect your family," he's told when
he visits their isolated "compound" in the state of Washington. But he
soon learns that conformity is key, vigilante justice reigns, and
absolute obedience is expected. Adapted by Robert J. Avrech and
directed by Martin Bell, this character-driven cautionary tale about
extremist groups who preach a venomous message of racial superiority
and hate is, unfortunately, more timely and relevant than ever. But
it's hard to believe that Martinez was so stupid that he didn't know
that counterfeiting was illegal and realize earlier that his "cell
mates" were responsible for the murder of radio talk-show host Alan
Berg. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Brotherhood of Murder is
an insightful, chilling 7. If you miss it Sunday night, there are
additional playdates set for Dec. 16 at 8 and Dec. 27 at 10.

Title
Review for High Fidelity (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  In this romantic comedy, John Cusack plays a self-confessed
music junkie who owns Championship Vinyl, a dilapidated record store
in downtown Chicago. Having just been dumped by his girl-friend
(delectable Danish actress Iben Hjejle), he spends his days playing
verbal trivia games with his two moronic employees (Todd Louiso, Jack
Black), who share his encyclopedic knowledge of pop music and the
music scene, and most nights morbidly picking at the scab of his
emotional misery. In the form of an into-the-camera confessional, he
chronicles the failed relationships that repeated his first rejection
at age 14 in junior high school. "Did I listen to pop music because I
was miserable or was I miserable because I listened to pop music?" he
muses, organizing his record collection, not alphabetically or
chronologically, but autobiographically, so he has to remember the
connections.  While he considers himself unlucky in love, his ex's
include Catherine Zeta Jones, Lili Taylor, Joelle Carter and Lisa
Bonet. Joan Cusack plays his pal while Tim Robbins is hilarious as a
rival suitor. Based on a novel by Nick Hornby, it's been cleverly
adapted by D.V. DeVincentis & Steve Pink & John Cusack, who worked
together on Grosse Pointe Blank, plus Scott Rosenberg and perceptively
directed by Stephen Frears, who makes Cusack into a self-reflecting
Everyman who wonders if he'll ever find true love. With his
ingratiating charm and impeccable timing, Cusack is not only likable
but believable. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, High-Fidelity
is an honest, funny, ironic 8. Striking a timely, contemporary note,
it's a "must see" for anyone who wants to know the truth about young
men - and their obsession with music.

Title
Review for "Outer Limits, The" (1995)

Susan Granger's review of "FINAL APPEAL: THE OUTER LIMITS" (Showtime TV)
  On Sunday, Sept. 3, at 8 PM, the two-hour final episode of
"The Outer Limits" concludes the popular sci-fi series which aired 132
original, made-for-television episodes during six seasons. Written by
Sam Egan and directed by Jimmy Kaufman, "Final Appeal" is set in the
year 2076, when the U.S.  Supreme Court agrees to hear a landmark
case. Amanda Plummer plays Dr. Theresa Givens, who has been sentenced
to death for her "crimes against society." Her transgressions center
around the use of a time-travel device which violates a stringent ban
on all technology in the wake of a devastating, world-wide
technological holocaust. So it's back to the horse 'n' buggy as
transportation and communication are restricted to the lowest levels
of development. Kelly McGillis is her defense attorney, while Michael
Moriarty is the prosecutor. Charlton Heston is the Chief Justice who
is joined on the bench by Robert Loggia, Cicily Tyson, Swoozie Kurtz,
and Hal Holbrook. The trial's outcome is unexpectedly prompted by a
surprise witness, a terrorist played by Wallace Langham. The concept
of using technology as a scapegoat for all of society's ills is
intriguing, particularly with the use of film clips from previous
"Outer Limits" episodes to illustrate different points-of-view. But,
as actors, Amanda Plummer and Michael Moriarty muddle their
characters. It's one thing for a thespian to choose an unusual
line-reading, it's another to waver uncomfortably on the edge of
bizarre. Plus, the staid courtroom setting tends to grow static as the
participants are confined to specific places. So, on the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Final Episode" culminates in a 5, begging the
question: What will become of a world that has outlawed the tools it
has traditionally used to solve its problems?

Title
Review for Bachelor, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  There have been a number wedding-theme'd comedies like
"Runaway Bride" and "The Best Man" but this is the weakest of the
group. Chris O'Donnell plays a billiards heir who realizes that it's
time to give up his beloved bachelor status and make a commitment to
the photographer, Renee Zellweger ("Jerry Maguire"), whom he's been
dating for three years. But when the moment to propose occurs,
O'Donnell lamely grins at her, offering an engagement ring, saying,
"You win." Offended by his ambivalence and obvious insincerity, she
leaves him flat. Shortly thereafter, he discovers he will lose his
grandfather's (Peter Ustinov) $100 million fortune if he's not married
by the age of 30 - which is less than 24 hours away. So, following the
advice of the family attorney (Ed Asner) and stock broker (Hal
Holbrook), he desperately arranges for a priest (James Cromwell) to
wait in the limousine, ready to perform a quickie ceremony, while he
rides around San Francisco looking for a bride. Mariah Carey, Brooke
Shields, and Jennifer Esposito pop up in cameos as his former
girlfriends.  His buddy (Artie Lange) spills the dilemma to the
newspaper which results in a climactic stampede of 1,000 wannabe
brides clad in white gowns. "It's like Larry King's living room!"
Lange quips. The screenplay by Steve Cohen was adapted from Buster
Keaton's "Second Chances" (1925) with a nod to "Brewster's Millions"
(1945) in which an ordinary guy had to spend $1 million in a month in
order to receive a major inheritance. And director Gary Sinyor ("Stiff
Upper Lips") must be an ardent fan of over-acting.  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Bachelor" is a totally predictable,
pre-feminist 4 until, finally, the bland "hero" realizes the
non-materialistic merits of matrimony.

Title
Review for Rules of Engagement (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "RULES OF ENGAGEMENT" (Paramount Pictures)
 It's the sheer star power of Tommy Lee Jones and Samuel
L. Jackson that propels this picture. Based a novel by James Webb,
former Secretary of the Navy, it revolves around a highly decorated
30-year Marine veteran, Col. Terry Childers (Jackson), who is
court-martialed. The case involves an incident in which the
U.S. Embassy in Yemen was surrounded by angry, fanatic
demonstrators. Amid the violence, Childers was ordered to take in
three helicopters and evacuate the terrified Ambassador (Ben Kingsley)
and his family. In the subsequent melee, three of his Marines were
killed and, following his explicit orders, his men gunned down 83
Yemeni civilians - men, women and children - and wounded many
others. Col. Childers became a scapegoat in the diplomatic outcry that
followed . To mount his defense, Childers chooses a wartime buddy, a
cynical, just-retired Marine lawyer, Hays Hodges (Jones), whose life
he saved in Vietnam back in 1968. Together, they face off against a
malevolent National Security Adviser (Bruce Greenwood) and a young,
zealous prosecutor (Guy Pearce) - but they lack the hard evidence
necessary to present a strong defensive case. Director William
Friedkin captures the intense tension of this combat-and-courtroom
drama but he's hampered by Stephen Gaghan's hackneyed, predictable
screenplay which is marred by superficial characterizations and
cliche-ridden dialogue. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Rules
of Engagement" is a slick, suspenseful 7. And, if you enjoy this kind
of provocative, what-really-happened enigma, I recommend "Courage
Under Fire" with Meg Ryan and Denzel Washington, which delves into a
combat incident during the Gulf War.

Title
Review for Violon rouge, Le (1998)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE RED VIOLIN" (Lions Gate Films)
Francois Girard's stirring, sumptuous epic follows the
turbulent, if convoluted, journey of a legendary violin, famous for
its perfect acoustics and unusual reddish hue. Up for auction in
Canada, the stringed instrument has traveled around the globe for more
than 300 years when an American expert (Samuel L. Jackson) is summoned
to authenticate its worth. Created by a 17th century Italian, Nicolo
Bussotti (Carlo Cecchi), as a legacy of love for his unborn son, the
violin becomes an embodiment of his grief when his beloved wife Anna
(Irene Grazioli) and child die in childbirth. Mysteriously, a
Tarot-card reader has predicted a long, nomadic, adventure-packed life
for Anna, coupling her fate to the future "life" of the Red Violin. As
the intriguing story evolves, the spell of the violin seems to bewitch
the lives of its various owners. It travels to monastic Austria, where
it goes to a six year-old child prodigy. In England, it falls into the
decadent hands of a Byronic musician (Jason Flemyng) who uses it in
his flamboyant courtship of a volatile novelist (Greta Scacchi). From
there, it's brought to Shanghai, where it winds up as a treasured
artifact in the midst of the Chinese Cultural Revolution. Finally,
Chinese authorities send it to the auction hall in modern-day
Montreal, where eager bidders, descendants and friends of the people
it has touched, are obsessed with acquiring the instrument. The
mystery, of course, is who will wind up with this fabled masterpiece?
Although the pace and quality of the sprawling flashback episodes
differ greatly, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Red
Violin" is an exquisite, captivating 9. It's a sweeping, cinematic
symphony, a unique combination of classical and contemporary, both in
music and imagery.

Title
Review for Antz (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "ANTZ" (DreamWorks: SKG)
 "Antz" is only the second fully computer-animated feature
ever to be produced; "Toy Story" was the first. And the clever imagery
of "Antz" is awesome! The entire film is presented from an ant's
prospective. The story revolves around a neurotic worker ant (Woody
Allen) who as "the middle child in a family of five million" suffers
from feelings of insignificance. "But you are insignificant," his
therapist tells him. Nevertheless, he falls in love with a beautiful
princess (Sharon Stone) who asks him to dance in a bar one night when
she sneaks away from the Queen (Anne Bancroft) and flaunts the social
caste system. Eager to see her again, he enlists the help of his best
friend, a soldier ant (Sylvester Stallone), and - thanks to an amazing
twist of fate - foils her fiance, the ambitious, maniacal General
Mandible (Gene Hackman), and his military henchman (Christopher
Walken) who secretly plan to destroy the ant colony. En route to
becoming a hero, he builds a philosophical revolution and social
rebellion on the final words of a fallen comrade: "Don't follow orders
all your life!"  The intelligent screenplay by Todd Alcott, Chris
Weitz and Paul Weitz revolves around an individual asserting himself
against overwhelming conformity, a theme that will probably be too
adult for very young children in the audience. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Antz" is an amusing, inventive 8.  Like "Deep
Impact" and "Armageddon," which had the same meteor-careening
towards-earth concept, "Antz" and "A Bug's Life," due for release in a
few weeks, share the same insect-oriented story line. Which will
emerge with the bigger box-office gross? Who knows?

Title
Review for Big Momma's House (2000)
   If you're a die-hard Martin Lawrence fan, you'll appreciate
this movie. If not, forget it. Lawrence plays FBI agent Malcolm
Turner, who has built a reputation as a master of disguises. When he's
sent to a small town in Georgia to capture a bank robber who's escaped
from prison, he sets up a stakeout near the home of the con's
girl-friend's long-lost grandmother (Ella Mitchell), an old woman
known as Big Momma. Only Big Momma's not around. So Turner decides to
go deep undercover and impersonate the hefty Southern matriarch,
including cooking soul food, singing gospel, even delivering
babies. The result is an outrageous romantic farce because,
predictably, Turner experiences an emotional transformation, falls for
the girl-friend, a single mother played by lovely Nia Long ("Boiler
Room"), befriends her son and struts on the basketball court: "Grandma
knows she's got game!" Of course, when the real Big Momma surfaces, a
stunned onlooker chirps, "Are you the Doublemint twins?" The
screenplay by Darryl Quarles and Don Rhymer, based on a story by
Quarles, serves primarily as a vehicle for Martin Lawrence's riff on
Eddie Murphy's "Nutty Professor" concept of playing several different
characters. And if it looks derivative, perhaps it's because director
Raja Gosnell served as editor on "Mrs. Doubtfire," while Big Momma's
make-up and prosthetics are the work of "Mrs. Doubtfire" Oscar-winner,
Greg Cannom. Cannom's also responsible for transforming Lawrence into
an Asian man for the opening sequence in which Turner busts an illegal
dog fighting ring. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Big Momma's
House" is a sporadically funny 5 - and, yes, the fat lady sings!

Title
Review for Bless the Child (2000)
  There's a problem casting Kim Basinger. Since winning an
Oscar for "L.A. Confidential," she's attempted two protagonist roles -
"I Dreamed of Africa" and this - and neither has worked. Kim's pretty
but emotionally passive. Which just isn't appropriate for this
supernatural thriller in which a psychiatric nurse, a lapsed Catholic,
discovers that her strung-out junkie sister's child, Cody (Holliston
Coleman), whom she's cared for since birth, is "special". Not only can
the six year-old cause objects to spin and the snow inside a
paperweight form a cyclone, she revives a 'dead' bird in the school
yard. And that's just the beginning of the girl's spiritual power, at
least according to runaway informant Christina Ricci and censured
Jesuit Ian Holm, who reveal that Cody's birth coincided with the
reappearance of the Star of Bethlehem after two millennia - and the
devil is after her soul. His missionary is creepy looking Rufus
Sewell, whose unfocused eyes are as disconcerting as a leering
gargoyle. Predictably, Cody is abducted by his black-clad Satanists
and threatened continuously to renounce God for the forces of darkness
before Black Easter. "She will be ours!" vows Sewell. Only Jimmy
Smits, as a former seminarian-turned-FBI agent specializing in the
occult, is willing to help Basinger. (For this, Smits quit "NYPD
Blue"?) Reminiscent of "Stigmata," "The Exorcist," "The Omen" and "The
Sixth Sense," the stilted screenplay, credited to three writers,
strips novelist Cathy Cash Spellman's plot down to its sinister
mystery-child essentials. Chuck Russell's direction is lackluster and
the special-effects are limited to computer-generated rats and
demons. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bless the Child" is an
ominous, apocalyptic 4.  Good vs. Evil? You guess who wins.

Title
Review for Liam (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "LIAM" (Lions Gate Films)
     British director Stephen Frears, who set "High Fidelity" and "The
Hi-Ho Country" in America, goes back to the smoky pubs and cobbled streets of
Liverpool in the 1930s for this gritty story of a working-class family.
Stammering seven year-old Liam (Anthony Borrows), who attends a strict Catholic
school and is preparing for his First Communion, observes the gradual
disintegration of his family when his dad (Ian Hart) and brother (David Hart)
lose their jobs as  dockworkers. Feeling bitter, disempowered and helpless at
their poverty, they blame the Jews and the Irish and join the angry Black
Shirts, fascists who turn neighbor-against-neighbor and resort to fire-bombing
violence. In the meantime, Liam's teenage sister (Megan Burns) becomes a maid to
the wife of the shipyard's wealthy Jewish owner. While she's thrilled to be able
to bring home their discarded leftovers to feed the family, she's guilt-ridden
not only about being an accomplice to her employer's adultery but also about
denying being Catholic in order to get the job. Screenwriter Jimmy McGovern
("Priest") cleverly blends subtle comedy with his drama and, once again,
presents the Catholic clergy as not only terrorizing but hypocritical,
subversively droning on about how sin "blackens your soul with filth." And Liam
has a great big sin to worry about - since he inadvertently glimpsed his kindly,
penny-pinching mother (Claire Hackett Liam) emerging nude from the bathtub.
Andrew Dunn's photography is truly stunning and Stephen Fineran's production
design succeeds in depicting that era far more poignantly than the film version
of "Angela's Ashes." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Liam" is a serious
7, underscoring the inevitable tragedy resulting from religious intolerance.

Title
Review for Basket, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "THE BASKET" (North by Northwest Entertainment)
 The impact of regional film-making is growing and this
independent "family film" is one of the best to emerge in recent
years.  Working with three friends, film-maker Rich Cowan has created
a character-driven, intriguing tale of opera and basketball, nostalgia
and history, love and war set amid the rolling wheat fields of
Washington State. His company, North by Northwest, raised the $3
million budget for the period drama, set in the rural town of
Waterville in the midst of World War I. The story begins as a
pastor/physician welcomes two German war orphans, 12 year-old Helmut
(Robert Karl Burke) and his 17 year-old sister, Brigitta (Amber
Willenborg), into his home. At the same time, a new school teacher
named Martin Conlon (Peter Coyote) arrives from Boston, bringing with
him phonograph records of an evocative German opera called "The
Basket" about a stranger who saves a town that is threatened by
barbarians at the gates. The plot of the opera obviously parallels the
suspicion, prejudice and intolerance of Waterville's citizens, much to
the dismay of a sympathetic farmer's wife (Karen Allen) who bears her
own wartime tragedy. "Why are you teaching the children a German opera
when we are at war with them?" she asks. Conlon also introduces a
then-new sport called "basketball" with its emphasis on teamwork,
saying: "To defend a mighty wall, each one must fight for something
small." Ultimately, Waterville challenges Spokane's experienced team
for money - which will allow the farmers to buy the new thresher that
they desperately need for harvest season. Despite its slow-pacing, on
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Basket" is a warm, heartfelt,
uplifting 7. It's a gem, one of those rare, thoughtful, beautiful
movies with a feeling of "A River Runs Through It."

Title
Review for Training Day (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "TRAINING DAY" (Warner Bros.)
   It's obvious why perennial good-guy Denzel Washington was intrigued
by the malevolent role of veteran L.A.P.D. Detective Sergeant Alonzo Harris, who
heads an elite, undercover narcotics squad. He's a dedicated rogue cop who's
glib that "you gotta have a little dirt on you for anyone to trust you." His
"street justice" ethics and morality are outside the norm but he has his own
ambiguous integrity. So when Jake Hoyt, an idealistic rookie, played by Ethan
Hawke, wants to join his unit, Harris gives him 24 hours to prove himself
saying, "You've got today and today only to show me what you're made
of....You've got to decide if you're a sheep or a wolf." Their day begins with
drugs and alcohol, part of "getting to know the streets," and includes
extortion, execution, and a $4 million seizure, which quickly decreases to $3
million as the corrupt cops take their cut. "It's ugly but it's necessary,"
rationalizes Harris. "Play the game, grow wise and then you can change things."
Both Washington and Hawke deliver, supported by Scott Glenn, Tom Berenger, Snoop
Dogg, Macy Gray and Dr. Dre. But David Ayer's implausible, clich-filled
screenplay veers off in several directions with too many far-fetched
coincidences. Certainly a subplot involving the Russian Mafia is irrelevant and,
right now, after the World Trade Center, the timing seems inappropriate for
gratuitous police corruption and brutality. Director Antoine Fuqua brings a
cinematic restlessness, street smarts and a touch of slick senationalism to this
police thriller which all-too-soon becomes pedestrian, even sadistic, with an
unsatisfying conclusion. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Training Day"
is a gritty, foul-mouthed 6, questioning whether law enforcement comes at the
expense of justice and public safety.

Title
Review for Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas, The (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE FLINTSTONES IN VIVA ROCK VEGAS" (Universal)
  Hey, if George Lucas can do a "Star Wars" prequel, why not
The Flintstones?  This prehistoric, live-action prequel goes back to
the bachelor days of Fred Flintstone (Mark Addy) and Barney Rubble
(Stephen Baldwin), showing how they court and marry Wilma Slaghoople
(Kristen Johnston) and her room-mate, Betty O'Shale (Jane Krakowski),
respectively. It turns out that curvaceous Wilma's the daughter of
doddering Col. Slaghoople (Harvey Korman) and snooty, snobbish Pearl
Slaghoople (Joan Collins) who want her to marry Chip Rockefeller
(Thomas Gibson), the suave, sneaky scion of a respectable old-money
family who wants to use the Slaghoople fortune to pay off a mob
debt. But Wilma loves blue-collar Fred, who has just secured a job at
the rock quarry in Bedrock. Chip invites everyone, including Fred and
Barney, to be his guests at the opening of a new resort hotel in Rock
Vegas.  Based on the animated Hanna-Barbera TV series, the
collaborative screenplay, credited to four writers, utilizes every
known prehistoric cliche, while Brian Levant's direction desperately
underscores each sight gag and pun. Alan Cumming plays two roles: The
Great Gazoo, a tiny, wisecracking alien who was sent to Earth to
observe the mating rituals of humans, and Mick Jagged, one of Betty's
suitors, while Ann-Margret warbles on the soundtrack.  Problem is:
it's too talky for kids - they get really restless - and too tacky for
adults. At 90 minutes, it seems excruciatingly long. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas" is an
exaggerated, frantic, cornball 3.  If you really, really, really love
the Flintstones, you're gonna enjoy this movie. If not,
yabba-dabba-don't bother with this fossil.

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT" (Artisan Entertainment)
 On October 21, 1994, three young film-makers hiked into the
Black Hills Forest of Maryland to shoot a documentary about the local
legend of the Blair Witch. They were never seen or heard from
again. One year later, their footage was found. This film is their
legacy, we're told, documenting what happened in the woods. Heather
Donahue sets the stage by interviewing residents about the spooky
folktale that involves mysterious disappearances and evidence of
gruesome torture.  Her two male companions, Joshua Leonard and Michael
Williams, trudge along. Terror strikes on the second night when they
hear snapping twigs and branches that sound like people circling their
tent - and then they find a hank of hair ritualistically tied with
blood and human tooth. "I'm scared to close my eyes. I'm scared to
open them," she says, as the fear builds. While the twisted conclusion
is not as horrific as you might expect, it's ambiguous enough to keep
you talking after the show's over. The story behind this low-budget,
counterfeit chiller is: writer-director-editors Daniel Myrick and
Eduardo Sanchez hired three actors and sent them into the woods for
eight days to improvise the picture. Certain destination points and
encounters were scripted, others definitely weren't. Therefore, the
images you see on the screen are often crude and jiggly - due to the
hand-held camera. Nevertheless, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"The Blair Witch Project" is a goose-bumply, spine-tingling, scary
7. This creepy, clever, edge-of-your-seat thriller succeeds because it
plays on your imagination, your fear of the dark and the unknown and
the unseen, as opposed to showing graphic displays of violence and
brutality. What you create in your mind is far more terrifying than
anything someone can do with special effects.

Title
Review for Stiff Upper Lips (1998)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "STIFF UPPER LIPS" (Cowboy Booking International)
        This parody of stuffy, austere, Edwardian-era costume dramas is almost as formulaic as the Merchant-Ivory genre it satirizes. In 1908 England, upper class inbreeding is definitely weakening the gene pool. The story revolves around Edward (Samuel West) who takes a fellow Cambridge undergrad, Cedric (Robert Portal) home to "Ivory's End" to meet his tightly-corseted sister Emily (Georgina Cates), hoping it might be a suitable match. But Emily takes an instant dislike to Cedric who, in turn, has "strange feelings" for Edward. So Aunt Agnes (Prunella Scales) plans a diverting trip abroad, hoping that the exotic sights might inspire romance. That happens, of course, except not the way anyone plans when Emily leaps the line of class separation and falls in love with her lusty luggage-bearer (Sean Pertwee), declaring, "I want my sexual awakening, and I want it now!" Screenwriters Paul Simpkin and Gary Sinyor, augmented by Mr. Sinyor's direction, spoof the steadfast British tra!
dition of straight-backed, stoic acceptance of duty to class, school, and country - in that order. Their mocking, socially observant visual humor is amusing but not as clever as it could and should be. The primary problem lies with the fatal flaw of winking at the audience. Parody should be played absolutely straight, full out, with total conviction, rather than a smug, self-knowing smirk. Only Peter Ustinov, as a cranky, eccentric Indian tea plantation owner, and Frank Finlay, as the genteel family's aging butler, achieve their poker-faced comedy objectives. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Stiff Upper Lips" is a flimsy 4. I'd advise waiting for the video and using it as a counter-culture antidote to a Merchant-Ivory film festival.

Title
Review for Drowning Mona (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
          In this comedic whodunit, Bette Midler plays a despicable,
foul-mouthed woman whom any number of people had both a desire and a
motive to murder. So, when her yellow Yugo has a problem negotiating a
curve and ends up plunging off a cliff into a lake near her hometown
of Verplanck in New York's Hudson Valley, the chief of police (Danny
DeVito) suspects foul play. Indeed, he discovers her brake lines were
cut. But who is the culprit?  Is it her long-suffering, battered
husband (William Fichtner)? What about her belligerent, moronic,
one-handed son (Marcus Thomas) or his handsome business partner (Casey
Affleck), whom happens to be engaged to the police chief's daughter
(Neve Campbell). Or could it be the town's most promiscuous waitress
(Jamie Lee Curtis)?  Other suspects include the local auto mechanic
(Kathleen Wilhoite) who specializes in Yugos, a cop who scolded Mona
for speeding (Peter Dobson), and a snoopy neighbor (Tracey
Walter). Screenwriter Peter Steinfeld and director Nick Gomez
shamelessly pilfer Alfred Hitchcock's The Trouble With Harry and
Murder on the Orient Express, tossing in plot twists and nasty red
herrings which tend to fall flat in the midst of the tasteless mess
that should have been a wacky farce. Whodunit? Who cares? On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Drowning Mona is a floundering 4.  And
Bette Midler played this type of odious oddball once before - remember
Ruthless People?

Title
Review for I Still Know What You Did Last Summer (1998)
 After its predecessor, "I Know What You Did Last Summer," did
screamingly well at the box-office, a sequel was inevitable. Jennifer
Love Hewitt and Freddie Prinze Jr. are back but, this time, they're
spending a Fourth of July weekend on a remote Bahamian island which
seems a perfect locale for the stabbings, shootings, and stranglings
that occur in the predictable script by Trey Callaway, directed by
Danny Cannon. The premise set up in the original film is that four
teenagers are being hunted by a hook-handed fisherman, the victim of a
supposedly fatal hit-and-run automobile accident that took place in
North Carolina. Two of the original four are back, along with the
vengeful Muse Watson, joined now by the pop singer Brandy and her
boy-friend, Mekhi Phifer, along with clean-cut Matthew Settle. They
have won this trip, courtesy of a radio station contest, and check
into a seedy hotel where the desk clerk murmurs, "I see four spoiled
city kids who would not know a hurricane if it blew up their ass."
Which is somewhat relevant since a hurricane's approaching. Like its
predecessor, there are the usual false alarms and bloody butchery as
the body-count rises. What made the original somewhat interesting was
trying to figure out the identity of the killer, plus the lingering
suspicion that one of the perky, paranoid four friends was at
fault. Both those elements are missing from this cheesy,
teens-in-jeopardy chiller. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "I
Still Know What You Did Last Summer" is a slasher 3. It's just another
formulaic fright flick.

Title
Review for Solomon and Gaenor (1999)
Oscar nominated as Best Foreign Language Film, the love story
called "Solomon & Gaenor" is set in the Welsh Valleys around
1911. Solomon (Ioan Gruffudd) is a young Orthodox Jewish boy whose
parents run a pawnshop and drapery business. For added income, he
trudges through the gray mist of the muddy, wet valleys selling cotton
fabric door-to-door. That's how he meets gentle Gaenor (Nia Roberts),
whose father and elder brother are miners. They're immediately
attracted to each other but Solomon - painfully aware of the rampant
anti-Semitism of the period and rebelling against his heritage -
conceals his Jewish identity, telling her his name is Sam. After
surprising her with a pretty dress of red calico that he made himself,
they become clandestine lovers. In a deliciously awkward scene, he
meets her family. "Now I want to meet your family," Gaenor pleads. "I
want to make it right."  But Solomon, ashamed, knows his devoutly
religious family will not accept her, nor him if he chooses to stay
with her. Meanwhile, his sister becomes suspicious, Gaenor gets
pregnant and is denounced in chapel, and there's a strike at the coal
mine. The ensuing scandal spells tragedy in director/writer Paul
Morrison's confident, well-directed screenplay. And what etches
"Solomon & Gaenor" indelibly in your mind is the beautiful photography
the evokes the time, the place, and the mood. On the minus side, is
the low-key, uneven way the story unfolds slowly, utilizing a
measured, meandering pace. English subtitles translate the Welsh and
Yiddish. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Solomon & Gaenor" is
a tough, uncompromising 7. It's "Romeo and Juliet" in Wales, capturing
the exquisite pleasure and unbearable pain of first love.

Title
Review for Avengers, The (1998)
There are good pictures. There are bad pictures. And, every so
often, there's a truly wretched picture - like "Howard the Duck,"
"Ishtar," "Cutthroat Island," and "Heaven's Gate." Now, there's "The
Avengers." What went wrong with this $60+ million, big-screen
adaptation of the popular '60s British TV show? Let's start with Don
Macpherson's incoherent script, which not only lacks a plot but
strings together silly, elliptical quips that have no relation to each
other, the story, or the characters. Then, director Jeremiah Chechik
stages a fashion magazine shoot rather than a moving picture, posing
and displaying the actors like plastic department-store mannequins in
no particular context. Onto the casting...while Uma Thurman and Ralph
Fiennes are talented character actors, they lack charisma so,
inevitably, when paired, they lack chemistry. Dapper secret agent John
Steed and his sexy scientist sidekick, Emma Peel, were once terrific.
Now, they're zombie-like caricatures as they pursue a megalomaniacal
meteorologist who has invented a weather-controlling device. Sean
Connery, who can usually salvage any role, is reduced to bellowing
"Rain or shine, it's all mine!"  Some of Connery's scenes are quite
ludicrous, like when he holds a Board meeting with members disguised
as brightly colored teddy bears. As his henchman, Eddie Izzard
resembles a gum-chewing dropout from "Clockwork Orange." And Patrick
Macnee (the original John Steed) voices a bizarre cameo as an
invisible bureaucrat in the Ministry basement.  Basically, what was
supposed to be a light farce fails, the comedy collapses, the mystery
is muddled, and the dramatic impetus is non-existent since there is no
logic to the sequence of scenes. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "The Avengers" doesn't even warrant a 1. It's appallingly awful!

Title
Review for Without Limits (1998)
Susan Granger's review of 'WITHOUT LIMITS" (Warner Bros.) 
  "Running is not about winning, it's about guts...To give anything
less than your best is to sacrifice the gift," said Steve
Prefontaine. In an era where heroes are hard to find, it's no wonder
that this popular track star's story has inspired so much
interest. Prefontaine had it all:talent, charm, grace, beauty,
self-confidence, and - above all - tremendous drive. He broke every
American record between 2,000 and 10,000 metersbefore he tragically
died at the age of 24 in 1975 in a car crash. Written by Robert
Towne and Kenny Moore (a champion runner and one of Pre's closest
friends) and directed by Towne, this biopic examines the boy behind
the man, the coach behind the athlete. A mill worker's son who grew up
in a German-speaking household in Coos Bay, Oregon, Steve
Prefontaine (Billy Crudup) learned early how to run. As a kid, he
ran from kids who taunted him. As a teenager, he ran for fun and
glory. As an athlete, he ran for himself. He was a rebel, a
perpetual front-runner who refused to win a race with a mediocre
effort, saying: "When you set the pace, you control the race." At
the University of Oregon, he met the two most pivotal people in his
life: his legendary coach, Bill Bowerman (Donald Sutherland), and
his devoutly Catholic girl-friend, Mary Marckx (Monica Potter), who
both cooperated in the making of this movie. The story doesn't
idealize Prefontaine as a role model. On the contrary, it details
his blunt, cocky attitude, self-obsession, and anti-authoritarian
outbursts. Robert Towne hasbeen this route before with "Personal
Best," his story about women runners training for the Olympics. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Without Limits" is an inspiring
7, examining the cool, fearless legacy of the long-distance
runner. It's a great American story.

Title
Review for Wrongfully Accused (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "Wrongfully Accused" (Warner Bros.)
 Writer/director Pat Proft is an advocate of the "non-stop
jokes" school of comedic film-making. Problem is: they're not very
funny. Amusing, perhaps, but really funny? No. Straight-faced Leslie
Nielsen's game, though. In this parody, he's the stripped-to-the-waist
acrobat from "Lord of the Dance" and an aging wannabe Leonardo Di
Caprio from "Titanic," whose high-on-the deck love scene in the mist
and the rain culminates in a slapstick twist. The story begins like
"The Fugitive," as Ryan Harrison, a superstar classical violinist
(Nielsen) - "Lord of the Violin" - becomes romantically involved with
the sexy, socialite wife (Kelly LeBrock) of his pretentious benefactor
(Michael York). When the tycoon is fatally shot, he's found holding
the gun and wrongfully accused. But, on his way to death row, the
prison transport bus crashes into a train and Nielsen runs for his
life, spewing likes like, "My head is spinning like a dreidel in a
sandstorm." He knows he must track down the one-armed, one-legged, one
-eyed real murderer in order to clear his name. And he's doggedly
pursued by a United States Marshal, Richard Crenna, whose Tommy Lee
Jones imitation is relentlessly dead on. There are giggles - like the
"Baywatch" life guards who spring into action when he's in danger of
being water-logged, the "Braveheart" battle make-up, the "Field of
Dreams" baseball players disappearing into the mist, the "Mission
Impossible" high-wire suspension, and the "ER" public address system
bleating out messages for Drs. Ross, Green, Benton, et all to pick up
their checks, plus evocations of "North by Northwest," "Casablanca"
and other classics. But what Pat Proft really misses are his previous
"Naked Gun" collaborators, Jim Abrahams and David Zucker, who could
put some punch into his scenes and sight-gags. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Wrongfully Accused" is a silly, flimsy 4,
consisting of loosely strung-together movie allusions, cliches, and
quotes.

Title
Review for Mummy, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Forget the guy wrapped in gauze bandages emerging from a
tomb. That's the old "Mummy" with Boris Karloff (1932). This new
version combines a monster thriller with a sense of humor and a dollop
of romance in an exotic setting, plus lots and lots of special
effects.  Perhaps having learned from the disasters of "Mary Reilly"
and "Frankenstein," writer/director Stephen Sommers ("Deep Rising")
has turned a low-budget horror movie into a big-budget adventure, set
in Cairo in 1925. The Mummy's story begins when the priest Imhotep
murders the Pharaoh for his gorgeous mistress. When she then dies, he
attempts to summon the deepest, darkest evil entities to bring her
back to life. Caught in this treacherous act, he's mummified alive
with his tongue cut out so he cannot scream. 3,000 years pass before
he's resurrected and regenerated by a French Foreign Legionnaire
(Brendan Fraser), a librarian/Egyptologist (Rachel Weisz), and her
greedy, ne'er-do-well brother (John Hannah), who arrive to plunder The
City of the Dead. The wrathful Mummy (Arnold Vosloo) retaliates by
releasing the seven Biblical plagues on humanity. He's the Terminator
Mummy in this hokey story which has the tone and feel of the
'90s. While Brendan Fraser ("George of the Jungle," "Encino Man")
capitalizes on his charming, self-deprecating goofiness - muttering,
"We are in serious trouble" - he's no Indiana Jones.  In fact, the
real "star" is the CGI wizard. It's terrifying to see a scarab
burrowing under someone's skin and moving up the arm; it's amazing to
watch people turning into boil-covered zombies; and it's awesome to
witness the "wall of sand" in the desert. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "The Mummy" is a scary, spooky 6. With a PG-13 rating,
it's the first of the big summer popcorn pictures.

Title
Review for Enslavement: The True Story of Fanny Kemble (2000) (TV)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Jane Seymour, known as "the Queen of the TV mini-series,"
won't disappoint her fans with her portrayal of Fanny Kemble, a
celebrated British actress whose passionate opposition to slavery
affected the course of American history. A superstar of the19th
century, Fanny Kemble is touring America in the 1840s when she falls
in love with and marries Pierce Butler (Keith Carradine), a brash
admirer and wealthy lawyer. Retiring from the stage with no regrets,
she settles into his home outside Philadelphia. They have two children
before the publication of her journals creates more gossip and
controversy than her stubborn, strait-laced husband can bear. So,
seeking tranquility, they move to Pierce's Georgia plantation, where
Fanny gets a close-up look at the conditions which the slaves
endure. "I can't imagine a life without freedom," she says. Appalled,
she tries to improve their lives, getting to know them as individuals,
not property. She sees their souls, not their skins. Her only ally is
a sympathetic doctor (James Keach) who warns that she's treading on
dangerous ground. But Fanny's indignation leads her to teach her
slaves to read and arrange for several to escape through the
Underground Railroad. A rebel at heart, Fanny isn't intimidated by
anyone - which costs her her marriage, custody of her children and
nearly her life. Her memoir, "A Journal of a Residence on a Georgia
Plantation," which details the horrors of slavery, was published in
1963 during the Civil War. It not only became a best-seller but helped
persuade the British government to curtail financial aid to the
Confederacy, effectively ensuring the South's defeat. On the Granger
Made-for-TV Movie Gauge, "Enslavement: The True Story of Fanny Kemble"
is a socially responsible 6, an homage to the resilient human
spirit. See it on Showtime TV at 8 P.M. on Easter Sunday, April 23, or
on Wednesday, April 26 at 10:15 P.M. Parental warning: slavery is
depicted with grim, horrifying reality.

Title
Review for Fantasticks, The (1995)
  It's been more than 40 years since the two-act, fairy-tale
musical by Tom Jones with lyrics by Harvey Schmidt opened off-Broadway
at the tiny Sullivan Street Playhouse in Greenwich Village. Performed
simply no scenery and few props, it relied primarily on the audience's
imagination, much like "Our Town." In Michael Ritchie's screen
version, it's set in rural Arizona, where a traveling carnival sets up
in the vast wilderness. The plot still revolves around two fathers
(Joel Grey, Brad Sullivan) who pretend to have an on-going feud in
hopes that their respective children, Louisa and Matt (Jean Louisa
Kelly, Joseph McIntyre), will behave as teenagers have throughout the
centuries: rebel against them and fall in love. When this happens, the
fathers must find a way to resolve their imaginary feud, so they
conspire to have the carnival's handsome El Gallo (Jonathan Morris)
pretend to be a bandit and kidnap Luisa so that Matt rescue her. What
they don't figure into their plan is that Luisa might become
infatuated with her abductor and that Matt might not be up to the
task. What works is the simple story and evocative musical score -
with "Try to Remember" now used as a finale. What doesn't work is
opening up the concept to the big-screen; unlike "Oklahoma," for
instance, the wind doesn't come sweeping down the plains. As a result,
video sales will no doubt top theatrical revenues. Perhaps that's why
this film has sat on the shelf for five years. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Fantasticks" is a charming, nostalgic 7. It's
timeless, old-fashioned family-fare, filled with hopes and dreams
which bridge the generations and offer all of us a feeling of wondrous
well-being. But is there still an audience for movie musicals?

Title
Review for Talented Mr. Ripley, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "THE TALENTED MR. RIPLEY" (Paramount Pictures)
"I always thought it would be better to be a fake somebody than
a real nobody," says Matt Damon as the chameleon-like Tom Ripley in
Anthony Minghella's creepy, star-studded thriller adapted from
Patricia Highsmith's novel. Tom Ripley's a leech, an amoral outsider,
obsessed with the hedonistic la dolce vida of Dickie Greenleaf, a
charming rogue, brilliantly played by Jude Law, whom he's sent to
bring home from Italy: "You're the brother I never had. I'm the
brother you never had."  Frustrated, Ripley not only covets Dickie's
privileged lifestyle, he wants to be Dickie, so much that his brutal
killer instincts take over. Ripley's so diabolically clever, so adept
at imitation and fabrication that he fools everyone except Dickie's
girl-friend - that's Gwyneth Paltrow, a bland Grace Kelly clone, which
is quite appropriate since the story's set in the '50s, when social
distinction and class status meant everything to this detached group
of people. Also involved in this spellbinding, sexually ambiguous,
melodramatic intrigue are Philip Seymour Hoffman, as Dickie's snotty,
suspicious friend, and Cate Blanchett, as a rebellious socialite who
believes Tom's ruse. (I'm curious: what if Blanchett had exchanged
roles with Paltrow?)  After The English Patient, Anthony Minghella
does not disappoint with this visual portrait of a pathological
liar. John Seale's cinematography is stunning - from the shimmering
waters of the Mediterranean to the twisting, cobbled alleys of Italy,
particularly the eerie final shot in which a mirrored Ripley is
reflected in a subtle myriad of distorted identities. Gabriel Yared's
music, primarily period jazz, truly complements the story. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The Talented Mr. Ripley is a complex,
provocative, potent 10. It's frightening yet fascinating.

Title
Review for Hilary and Jackie (1998)
No, it's not that Hilary and it's not that Jackie - and not
about First Ladies with philandering husbands. Instead, Anand Tucker's
interesting, insightful film revolves around the Du Pre sisters, child
prodigies with remarkable musical abilities. Hilary's the quiet, older
sister, a flutist, and Jackie's, the willful, flamboyant cellist. They
grew up, inseparable, in rural England during the '50s. Their early
years revolve around musical competition, but soon Jacqueline Du Pre
becomes famous, spending her life on tour, while Hilary opts for
marriage and family, raising chickens in the country.  Their
relationship, however, doesn't grow any healthier.  Quixotic Jackie
delights in "surprising" Hilary by appearing on her doorstep, and - on
one bizarre occasion - asks to "share" her husband, played by brash
David Morissey.  Jackie's own husband, Argentine musician Daniel
Barenboim, hardly figures into the equation. Tragedy strikes when - at
the peak of her career - Jackie develops multiple sclerosis from
 which she dies at the age of 42 in 1987.  The key strengths of the film 
are the performances. As Jackie, Emily Watson ("Breaking the Waves") is vivacious to the point of maniacal, providing a stark contrast with Rachel Griffiths' stability as Hilary. The real Jackie was evidently a histrionic performer: selfish, spiteful, and sexually voracious. The key weakness is Frank Cotterell Boyce's unwieldy screenplay, based on "A Genius in the Family," Hilary Du Pre's autobiography. It's weighed down with narration and repetitive detail, like a soap opera which, annoyingly, repeats the story line often enough so that, if you missed an episode or two, you can catch up immediately. Not unexpectedly, Jacqueline Du Pre's friends are condemning the film, particularly cellist Julian Lloyd Webber, brother of Andrew, who asserts: "What they've done to her memory is scandalous!" On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hilary and Jackie" is a stylish, intense 7. This sibling rivalry is far from harmonious.

Title
Review for Slums of Beverly Hills (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "SLUMS OF BEVERLY HILLS" (Fox Searchlight)
First-time writer/director Tamara Jenkins scores with bawdy
humor and solid performances in this bizarre coming-of-age comedy.
"Happy families are all alike," reads the prologue. "Every unhappy
family has its own story." Based on her own memories of growing up on
the wrong side of the 90210 zip code, the story revolves the fractured
Abramowitz family whom Ms. Jenkins refers to as "nomads of divorce."
The movie begins in 1976, as the downwardly mobile father (Alan Arkin)
is once again moving his three children in search of a better
lifestyle. Firm in the belief that "furniture is temporary, but
education is forever," he is determined to stay within the Beverly
Hills school district, even if it's in "Casa Bella," a bleak two-story
apartment building with a fancy name and cheap rent. Natasha Lyonne is
the adolescent heroine. Confused and impressionable, she must cope
with distressingly well-developed breasts, an awkward situation only
exacerbated by her dysfunctional father and two insensitive
brothers. Complicating the situation, her wild, straight-out-of-detox
cousin (Marisa Tomei) arrives - to share her bedroom and teach her how
to use a vibrator. Then there's the boy-next-door (Kevin Corrigan)
who, in this case, is a Charles Manson-obsessed drug-dealer; the rich
uncle and aunt (Carl Reiner, Rita Moreno); and a snobbish, neurotic
socialite (Jessica Walter). Ms. Jenkins developed her script at the
Sundance Institute - hence Robert Redford's name as executive producer
- but her quirky humor is quite heavy-handed and she needs to learn
how to do some judicious editing. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Slums of Beverly Hills" is a raunchy, rowdy 5, a romp that's
probably too vulgar for mature movie-goers but should get laughs from
younger audiences.

Title
Review for Songcatcher (1999)
Susan Granger's review of "SONGCATCHER" 
In the midst of this summer's fare of dinos revisited and romantic fiascoes,
there are a few thoughtful movies - and this Appalachian period drama is one.
Oscar nominee Janet McTeer ("Tumbleweeds") stars as Dr. Lily Penleric, an
accomplished musicologist who, back in that pre-feminist era, was refused a full
professorship at her university. Determined to prove her worth, she ventures
deep into the rugged mountains of North Carolina, where her younger sister Elna
(Jane Adams) runs a school. There in Bear Creek, she discovers a treasure-trove
of traditional Scots-Irish and English folk ballads, given a unique
interpretation by the insular locals. 
Excited, she sends for recording equipment and persuades Vinie Butler (Pat
Carroll) and other self-sustaining mountain folk to share their musical heritage
on her Edison phonograph cylinders. Their music, as she puts it, is "as much a
part of life here as the air you breathe." That's the main thrust of
writer-director Maggie Greenwald's occasionally uneven culture-clash story,
which is loosely based on Olive Dame Campbell's foray through the Blue Ridge
Mountains in 1908, but there's also some melodramatic romantic spice. Ornery,
bearded, banjo-picking Aidan Quinn falls for the statuesque, passionate
"songcatcher," while Elna secretly engages in a lesbian relationship with a
colleague (E. Katherine Kerr). I'm ready to buy the soulful soundtrack with
vocalists like Emmylou Harris, Iris DeMent, Taj Mahal and young opera star Emmy
Rossum who plays a pivotal role as McTeer's wide-eyed protg. Rated PG-13,
there's an intense scene of primitive childbirth. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Songcatcher" is an intelligent, extraordinary 8, transported by the
transcendent power of song.

Title
Review for Gossip (2000/I)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Who hasn't speculated about the link between news and gossip?
At least, that's the premise for a college journalism class assignment
proposed by "professor" Eric Bogosian.  And three students - James
Marsden, Lena Headley, and Norman Reedus - decide to test his
theories. One night at a drunken, off-campus party, Marsden sees a
beautiful, wealthy, virginal freshman, played by Kate Hudson (Goldie
Hawn's real-life daughter), making out on a bed with Joshua
Jackson. Hudson calls it quits before she passes out, but Marsden
decides to start an "experimental" rumor that she's "put out" for
Jackson. It's kind of like "Cruel Intentions" goes to college. The
slanderous story spreads quickly throughout the university, soon
acquiring salacious details, including a black rubber bra. But then it
turns ugly, implicating that Jackson took advantage of Hudson after
she passed out, not before, which leads to his subsequent
arrest. Working from a taut, tension-filled screenplay by Gregory
Poirier and Theresa Rebeck, "NYPD Blue," "ER" director David
Guggenheim explores and exploits the date rape concept, bringing in
Sharon Lawrence as an angry cop and Edward James Olmos as a homicide
detective. It's an intriguing, dangerous premise but the execution
lacks believability. Why wouldn't any suspected rape victim undergo a
medical examination? What accredited college would allow Bogosian to
rant and rave in class? Which students can live in such an
extravagantly hip loft? And why would these distraught people talk and
behave in such an incomprehensible way?  On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Gossip" is nasty, tawdry, inept 3. Despite its R-rating,
it's obviously targeted at a teenage audience.

Title
Review for Hands on a Hardbody: The Documentary (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "HANDS ON A HARD BODY" (Legacy Releasing)
When Matthew McConaughey's not acting movies, he's making them through his company JK Livin. "Hands on a Hard Body" is a unique, compelling 
documentary - not a porno of some nude showgirl - about a brand new, fully-loaded $15,000 Nissan hardbody pick-up truck, the first prize in a grueling endurance contest held each spring at a Longview, Texas, auto dealership. The first part of the film sets the scene: 24 contestants are told 
to keep one hand on the truck for as long as possible. The last person standing, with at least one hand on the pick-up, gets to drive away with it. Reminiscent of "They Shoot Horses, Don't They," which revolved around marathon dance contests during the Depression, this encompasses the entire human drama of hope, devastation, triumph and defeat. As the hours and days go by, the competitors get to know each other - and we get caught up 
in their mystical quest. There's the determined young woman in her early 
30s; an ex-Marine, confident he can outlast everyone because of his military training; a farmer who had to sell his last pick-up to pay bills;  a gospel-singing Christian who's sure that God is on her side; the elderly 
man who promised his wife he'd win the truck for her; and a cocky, colorful previous winner who provides most of the commentary. By deftly intercutting pre-contest interviews with actual footage, filmmaker S.R. Bindler 
(McConaughey's best friend) captures the nervous energy, stamina, exhaustion, and determination of the various challengers, revealing their authentic quirks and humorous eccentricities. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hands on a Hard Body" is a crazy, incredible, intense 8. This is true Americana, and you gotta see it to believe it!

Title
Review for Est - Ouest (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  Oscar-nominated as best foreign film, France's "East-West"
begins in 1946, when Stalin launched a propaganda campaign aimed at
Russian emigrants living in the West, offering amnesty and a chance to
participate in the post-war reconstruction of the USSR. So an
idealistic physician (Oleg Menchikov), his French wife (Sandrine
Bonnaire), and their young son return to his homeland with high hopes
of a bright future. But as soon as they land in Odessa, they discover
they've been duped. The zealous military is convinced that 90% of the
expatriates are "imperialist spies" and, as such, are subject to
constant supervision and brutal interrogation. The doctor and his
family are assigned to a tiny apartment in a dilapidated building
which houses five other families who share a communal bathroom and
whatever black-market goods they can steal. "They can't force us to
stay," the wife reasons. But her husband knows otherwise, begging,
"Forgive me."  While he works within the system, trying to secure his
family's release, she becomes involved with a passionate, 17 year-old
competitive swimmer (Serguei Bodrov Jr.) who is just as eager to
escape as she is. Then a visiting French actress, Catherine Deneuve,
offers the victims a glimmer of hope. Writer/director Regis Wargnier
("Indochine") captures the dismal dreariness of social repression and
political enslavement but fails to create compelling,
three-dimensional characters. For example, after two years in a Soviet
labor camp, Sandrine Bonnaire emerges looking exquisite - with
perfectly manicured fingernails - and the escape "attempt" at night in
a wintry sea is so far-fetched that it strains credulity.  On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "East-West" is a bleak, flimsy 5. It's
too slick and simplistic to be truly engaging entertainment.

Title
Review for Map of the World, A (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "A MAP OF THE WORLD" (First Look Pictures)
 There's no greater tragedy than being responsible for the
death of a child, and that's just the first blow Sigourney Weaver
suffers at the beginning of this complex, dramatic portrait of a woman
in emotional agony. Then, still reeling with guilt, she's falsely
accused of child abuse, an offense which sends her to jail to await
trial. Based on the novel by Jane Hamilton and adapted by Peter Hedges
and Polly Platt, it's an implausible yet harrowing story of
victimization. Weaver plays Alice Goodwin, a devoted mother of two
daughters who works part-time as a school nurse in a rural Wisconsin
town. She and her wimpy, taciturn husband (David Strathairn), a
farmer, are a curiosity. They're relative newcomers who painted their
barn blue. But, above all, the bright, fiercely independent Alice
arouses people's ire with her cynical, sarcastic attitude towards the
complexities of life. Her only friend is a gentle neighbor (Julianne
Moore) who also has two little girls. Her nemesis is a tarty welfare
mom (Chloe Sevigny) whom outspoken Alice openly accuses of neglecting
her young son. When suspicion focuses on Alice after an accidental
drowning in a pond on her property, the town turns on her with
self-righteous fury, preferring to believe the flimsy, bogus charges
of child molestation brought against her rather than seek the
truth. Oddly, the unflappable Alice seems to relish her martyrdom,
openly enjoying her predicament. Whether it's because that's her
perverse way of coping with the bizarre situation or she's temporarily
insane is not made clear by director Scott Elliot, who makes it into a
masochistic, maudlin melodrama.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, A Map of the World is a dense, disturbing, depressing 4, made
tolerable only by Sigourney Weaver's intelligent, vivid performance.

Title
Review for Apt Pupil (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "APT PUPIL" (Tri-Star Pictures)
Most screen adaptations of Stephen King novellas fall into the
macabre slasher/horror genre, but this evolves into a diabolically
chilling and profoundly disturbing psychological thriller. Adapted by
first-time screenwriter Brandon Boyce and directed by Bryan Singer,
the bizarre story begins in 1984 with a 16 year-old high-school senior
(Brad Renfo) who becomes obsessed with the Holocaust in history class,
spending hours in the library, immersing himself in documents and
photographs. Then, one day, he spots an elderly man (Ian McKellen) on
a bus and recognizes his face from his research. After methodically
acquiring fingerprints and other evidence, he accosts the accused
former SS officer with his conclusions and, over the next few months,
blackmails the mass murderer into graphically reciting the grisly,
gruesome, gory details of his past atrocities in return for preserving
his anonymity. "Boy, be careful," the old man warns. "You play with
fire." And, true to his word, the crafty ex-Gestapo officer engages in
his own duplicity as an insidious, deadly cat-and-mouse game
evolves. As in his previous film, "The Usual Suspects," Singer never
reveals too much about his characters, so you're not sure exactly what
motivates the perverse teenager as the tension mounts. "It's about a
boy who became a very good student but not in the way his teachers and
mother envisioned," concludes the Nazi war criminal. Both Renfro and
McKellen deliver impeccable performances, but exploiting the
Holocaust-related theme may be offensive to some. And, since both
leading characters are ultimately despicable, do you really want to
spend two hours with them? On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Apt
Pupil" is a morbid, sinister 6. If you don't believe in the existence
of evil, you have a lot to learn.

Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Do you remember the fable: "The Emperor's New Clothes"? Because
this film was made by the late Stanley Kubrick, because two of
Hollywood's top stars devoted two years of their lives to its
creation, because the "hype" has been so carefully orchestrated...few
have dared to call this exquisitely photographed film what it is:
shallow soft-core pornography. Despite Kubrick's meticulous direction,
it's a wretchedly written, cliche-filled dirge about sexual obsession,
based on Arthur Schnitzler's "Traumnovelle" (1926).  The slow-paced
story begins with Tom Cruise, as a Manhattan physician, and his wife,
played by Nicole Kidman, preparing to attend a lavish Christmas party,
hosted by Sydney Pollack. That evening, as she flirts with a suave
Hungarian, he's hit on by two giggly models - until he's called
upstairs by the host to revive yet another model who has
overdosed. Later, while stoned, Kidman taunts Cruise with an erotic
tale about a naval officer in Cape Cod.  Reeling with jealousy, he
indulges in his own angst-filled fantasy, involving a kinky tryst with
a hooker and a sinister, masquerade orgy. And he flashes his doctor's
ID card more often than an FBI agent. Why Kidman and Cruise chose to
indulge in this heavy-handed, exhibitionistic carnal endeavor is best
left to their personal therapists - and the gossip columnists. Sure,
the color-drenched cinematography is stunning but, having said that,
it's like leaving a Broadway musical singing the scenery. In
evaluating Jocelyn Pook's moody score, a friend put it best
commenting: "The music sounds as if were composed by a piano tuner,
pounding on one note." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Eyes
Wide Shut" is a perverted, pretentious, numbing 3. It may be
deliberately depraved but you won't be deprived if you wait for the
video.

Title
Review for Governess, The (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "THE GOVERNESS" (Sony Pictures Classics)
 In her fictionalized tale of Britain's first female
photographer, writer/director Sandra Goldbacher fashions a romantic
drama set in Victorian England.  Minnie Driver plays the daughter of
a once-wealthy Jewishmerchant who leaves her sheltered Sephardic
community in London when herfather is murdered and the family
suffers a financial crisis. Suffering the stigma of anti-Semitism,
she poses as a Protestant in order to get a position as a governess
on the bleak, remote Scottish island of Skye. Thefamily that hires
her is bizarre: an obsessed scientist-father (Tom Wilkinson), an
invalid mother (Harriet Walter), a rebellious teenage son, anda
spoiled daughter, best described as "a rodent in petticoats."
Curiousabout his work, she offers to help with the photographic
process on which the father is working, becoming his laboratory
assistant and, eventually, not only his muse but his
partner. Together, they explore the estheticdimensions of the
then-emerging art of photography as she discovers a fixative to
prevent his camera images from fading. Eventually, of course, the
volatility of their intimate, illicit relationship explodes in a
betrayal. That and the attendant dialogue are inevitable and
predictable. After an auspicious debut in "Circle of Friends" and an
Oscar-nominated supporting role in "Good Will Hunting," Minnie
Driver delivers a standout, Oscar-caliber performance as the
seductive, spirited heroine, caught betweentwo cultures, a position
emphasized by Sandra Goldbacher's sensitive vision and Ashley Rowe's
stylish cinematography. On the Granger Movie Gaugeof 1 to 10, "The
Governess" is an exquisite, erotic 7, a sexy, sensuous feast for the
eye.

Title
Review for Life (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "Life" (Universal Pictures)
       In this comedy/drama, Eddie Murphy and Martin Lawrence play two men who are wrongly convicted of murder and sentenced to life imprisonment at Mississippi State Prison, known as Parchman Farm. Over the course of 60 years, they endure hardship and appreciate kindness, suffer cruelty and learn forgiveness and, of course, fantasize. One of the best sequences has them in a Harlem nightclub. Throughout their ordeal, they sharpen their sassy, vulgar sense of humor as their friendship deepens, and they never lose hope that one day, somehow, they will walk outside the prison walls as free men.  Apparently, the concept originated with Murphy, who got screenwriters Robert Ramsey and Matthew Stone to develop the script. Unfortunately, as often happens with Eddie Murphy movies, the writing never lives up to his abilities as a talented, edgy actor/comedian.  Directed by Ted Demme ("Beautiful Girls"), Murphy and Lawrence do deliver as an "Odd Couple." They worked together once before,!
 back in 1992, in "Boomerang."  The weakness lies in the slick, tolerant, country-club atmosphere of the penitentiary, complete with baseball, booze, and babes - and the constant, complaining banter, which serves to emphasize the episodic nature of the plot and the lack of character development. Co-starring are Obba Babatunde (who serves as the story-teller), Ned Beatty, Clarence Williams III, Miguel A. Nunez, Bokeem Woodbine, and Nick Cassavetes (as the warden). And Rick Baker's "aging" makeup is noteworthy. On the GrangerMovie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Life" is an unfocused, superficial 6 but it does offer two solid, persuasive performances.

Title
Review for Mission: Impossible II (2000)

Susan Granger's review of "MISSION IMPOSSIBLE 2" (Paramount Pictures)
PERSONAL NOTE: My son, Don Granger, is the Paramount Pictures exec who super=
vised this film so if this review sounds a bit biased - so be it.
   As a fan of the original "Mission Impossible" TV series,
I'm delighted that this sequel returns to its roots, complete with the
intriguing, unexpected disguises and inventive gadgetry updated to the
21st century. Tom Cruise plays special agent Ethan Hunt who's
recruited from a rock-climbing vacation in Utah for a new,
globe-hopping mission by his IMF contact, Anthony Hopkins. His team
consists of a computer genius, Ving Rhames, and a beautiful thief,
Thandie Newton. Their target is a terrifyingly destructive super-flu
virus. The deadly virus and its antidote were stolen from Biocyte
Pharmaceuticals in Sydney, Australia, by a bitter, formidable
IMF-agent, Dougray Scott, who threatens to ignite a worldwide
plague. To achieve his goal, Tom must not only overcome all the
physical obstacles that Scott tosses his way but also his own
emotional turmoil when he realizes that he and Scott are both in love
with the same woman.  "That could be difficult," says Tom. "This isn't
'Mission Difficult'," retorts Hopkins. "It's 'Mission Impossible.'
Difficult should be a walk in the park!" Screenwriter Robert Towne
concocted the clever, intelligent script, while filmmaker John Woo
proves why he's the most imaginative action director working today,
combining reality with surrealism. The "acrobatic insanity" of the
incredible stunts will have your adrenaline rushing - not to mention
the firepower and explosions. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Mission Impossible 2" is an exciting, action-packed 10. It's a sleek,
stylistic adventure thriller, a fun-filled popcorn picture that will
not self-destruct.

Title
Review for Skulls, The (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Having lived in New Haven for many years, I often wondered when Hollywood would capture the suspense and influence inherent in influential, century-old secret societies like Yale's Skull and Bones. Obviously, screenwriter John Pogue (a Yale dropout) and director Ron Cohen sensed the intrigue but they've failed to capture the drama in this bland, formulaic, heavy-handed dud.  Joshua Jackson (TV's "Dawson's Creek") plays a pre-law student at a prestigious Ivy League university only identified as "Y" but with tell-tale blue-and-white colors on its crew jerseys. Being from a working-class background, at first he's thrilled when he's tapped by the powerful Skulls, primarily because, as a member, he'll get pre-acceptance to law school, along with tuition, plus several other enticing amenities that money can buy - like $20,000 in his depleted bank account and a new car. But after his best buddy and room-mate (Hill Harper) is killed while delving into the Skulls' malevolent li!
ttle secrets for the college newspaper, he begins to have second-thoughts - which are aided and abetted by his intended blue-blood girl-friend (Leslie Bibb).  If you remember that President George Bush was a member of Yale's Skull and Bones, along with his son George W., you'll catch the nasty innuendoes about a father-son team hierarchy - only here, it's a prominent judge (Craig T. Nelson) who's aiming at the Supreme Court while his weasly son (Paul Walker) is up to no good on campus. And William Peterson does what looks like a President Clinton imitation. The grisly, garish initiation rites are straight out of the coffins in a Gothic horror novel. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Skulls" is a silly, brainless 1.  Numskulls is more like it - so don't even bother renting the eventual video.

Title
Review for Breakfast of Champions (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "BREAKFAST OF CHAMPIONS" (Buena Vista Pictures)
   Writer/director Alan Rudolph has attempted to make a deep,
dark comedy out of Kurt Vonnegut's satiric '70s fable - and has failed
to such an extent that it's an embarrassment for all concerned. Bruce
Willis plays a suicidal car dealer, Dwayne Hoover, a minor celebrity
in Midland City since his commercials seem to play non-stop on local
television. His pill-popping wife (Barbara Hersey) is clinically
depressed, and his gay son (Lukas Haas) is an aspiring lounge singer.
Is that why Dwayne thinks he's losing his mind? We're not really
sure. Meanwhile, his devoted secretary (Glenne Headley) doubles as his
hot-to-trot mistress and his sales manager (Nick Nolte) is a troubled
transvestite. (Nick's legs do look sensational in sheer black
stockings!)  Plus there's a pollution scandal. In the midst of this
muddled mess, the town decides to honor a mumbling, misunderstood
pulpy science-fiction writer named Kilgore Trout (Albert Finney) at
its first arts festival. "Midland City is ready for a renaissance, and
you shall be our Leonardo," gushes his sponsor. Predictably, when
Dwayne Hoover meets Kilgore Trout (Kurt Vonnegut's alter ego), he
discovers the meaning of life and achieves some kind of bewildering
redemption. Appropriately, the '50s ballad "Stranger in Paradise" is
an integral part of the soundtrack, repeatedly underscoring the
bizarre caricatures and surreal situation. Like Terry Gilliam's
adaptation of Hunter Thompson's "Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas," Alan
Rudolph's attempt to dramatize Vonnegut's zany '60s protest fantasy
seems distorted and woefully out of date. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Breakfast of Champions" is a crude, crass, incoherent 2.
Flaky, tasteless breakfasts like this could lead to indigestion!

Title
Review for Ghost World (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "GHOST WORLD" (United Artists/MGM)
    Unless you're familiar with Daniel Clowes' adult comic books, you
might think this black comedy is about the supernatural. It isn't. It's about
those plain, often-unnoticed folk who function out-of-the-mainstream. Thora
Birch ("American Beauty") stars as Enid, a recent high-school grad who's decided
to skip college, find a job and get an apartment with her best-friend, Rebecca
(Scarlett Johansson). But when she discovers she has to take a summer remedial
art course to get her diploma, Enid's plans get derailed. The chaos begins when
the girls wickedly fake a response to a personals ad and lure a lonely loser
named Seymour to a diner, thinking he's going to meet the girl of his dreams.
Since he knows he can't relate to 99% of humanity, Seymour shows no outward
indignation, sipping a vanilla milkshake, patiently waiting. Peering through
horned-rimmed glasses, utterly intrigued, Enid stalks him. "He's such a clueless
dork, he's almost cool," she muses. She discovers he's obsessed with collecting
vintage 78 rpm records and, significantly, that they have a lot in common. At
the same time, her single father decides to move his girl-friend in, her
relationship with Rebecca deteriorates, her "racist" art class project turns
into a local scandal, and she's deeply conflicted about her strange feelings for
thirtysomething Seymour. Co-written by Daniel Clowes and director Terry Zwigoff
("Crumb"), the poignant, pessimistic cynicism fairly drips off the screen as
Thora Birch glides into the kind of rebellious role that Christina Ricci has
vacated. As the hypersensitive dork, Steve Buscemi is perfect, as is Illeana
Douglas, Scarlett Johansson, Bob Balaban and Brad Renfro. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Ghost World" is a weird, satirical 8. It's an intriguing
coming-of-age story that haunts.

Title
Review for Holiday Heart (2000) (TV)
Susan Granger's review of "HOLIDAY HEART" (Showtime/MGM TV Entertainment)
 Don't let the subject matter discourage you from watching
Ving Rhames ("Mission Impossible 2") deliver an Emmy-caliber
performance in this unusual, made-for-television movie about an aging
drag queen who helps a young girl and her mother discover the true
meaning of family. The story begins as Holiday Heart (Ving Rhames), a
night club performer/choir director, mourns the death of his longtime
lover, a highly respected member of the Chicago police force. One
night, en route to a costume party, he's begged by a 12 year-old named
Nikki (Jessika Quynn Reynolds), to help Wanda, her battered,
drug-addicted mother (Alfre Woddard), and discovers two people who are
desperately in need of his love and attention. Generously, he moves
them into an empty apartment in his duplex and an unusual, but
effective, family unit develops. But their temporary tranquillity is
shattered when a flashy drug dealer (Mykelti Williamson) entices
Wanda, who sort of fantasizes herself as Mary J. Blige, into using
again. What makes this Tribeca Production (Robert DeNiro's company)
rise above its inherent melodrama is Robert Townsend's perceptive
direction of Cheryl L. West's well-written, touching, unpredictable
script, based on her play which had its New York premiere at the
Manhattan Theater Club - and Ving Rhames' amazing, poignant portrayal
of a strong, loving man who, despite overwhelming odds, is at peace
with himself. On the Granger Made-for-Television Movie Gauge, "Holiday
Heart" is a risky, intriguing 8, rising far above the usual network
fare. Rated TV-14, "Holiday Heart" premieres on Showtime TV on Sunday,
Dec. 10, at 8 PM with additional playdates on Dec. 13 at 8 PM and
Dec. 23 at 5:45 PM. It's truly worth jotting down these dates and
times on your TV calendar.

Title
Review for Zoolander (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "ZOOLANDER" (Paramount Pictures)
   If you love satire, this is for you. Claiming he based his moronic
character on a "cross between Jason Priestly and Luke Perry,"
Director/writer/actor Ben Stiller has created vacuous, good-looking Derek
Zoolander, the world's best-known male model. He's the three-time winner of the
VH1 Male Model of the Year Award but when he loses to Hansel, a Fabio-like
newcomer played by Owen Wilson, he's so depressed that he's ripe to be recruited
by the evil Mugatu (Will Ferrell) and brainwashed at a Day Spa to become a
political assassin. It seems the Prime Minister of Malaysia has become a threat
to a cabal of fashion industry tycoons because he's vowed to pay his country's
garment workers a decent wage - and it's Stiller's sinister contention that the
greatest political assassins throughout recent history have been male models.
Superbly portrayed by Stiller, Derek Zoolander is "a beautiful, self-absorbed
simpleton - an empty vessel," whose snarling signature "look" is dubbed Blue
Steel. But Owen Wilson steals scenes as the extreme-sports devotee, particularly
during the "walk-off" as the rival male mannequins duel on the runway.
Collaborating with co-writers Drake Sather and John Hamburg, Ben Stiller comes
up with a winner, casting members of his own family in pivotal roles. Stiller's
real-life father Jerry plays his agent; his real-life mother, Anne Meara, plays
a heckler; and his real-life wife, Christine Taylor ("The Brady Bunch Movie"),
plays a snoopy reporter. Jon Voight is his coal-miner father; Milla Jovovich is
a villainous vamp, and David Duchovny has a conspiracy secret - while David
Bowie, Natalie Portman, Christian Slater, Lukas Haas, Cuba Gooding Jr. and
others do cameos. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Zoolander" is a silly,
stupid 8. It's timely, hilarious, good fun.

Title
Review for Varsity Blues (1999)
Teenybopper idol James Van Der Beek of TV's "Dawson's Creek"
gets a big screen break in this football flick. Its strength is that
examines the pressures placed on high school athletes by their parents
and coaches. Its weakness is that it reduces a serious topic into all
the shamelessly predictable cliches of teenage comedy that are
liberally dished out by writer W. Peter Iliff. "Football is a way of
life," Van Der Beek explains as a second-string quarterback in rural
Texas, where devotion to high-school football attains a religious
fervor. "You never question the sanctity of the coaches," he adds. Jon
Voight plays Bud Kilmer who has coached his West Canaan, Texas, AAA
team to two state championships and 22 district championships in his
35-year tenure. There's a big bronze statue of Coach Kilmer right
outside of the stadium which is named for him. The story revolves
around Van Der Beek and his girl friend (Amy Smart) who rebel against
the football mania gripping everyone around them. They're aware of the
Coach's tenacity to force ill or injured players to continue in the
game and appalled by his racist tendency to ignore black players when
it comes to scoring touchdowns.  Understandably, the Coach doesn't
like him much but, when the star of the team wrecks his knee with five
games to go in a winning season, Van Der Beek's pushed up front and
center. His chances of an academic scholarship to Brown rest on his
performance.  The cheerleader subplot is stupefying, as is having a
sex education instructor make students chant the common names for sex
organs in unison. Not too surprising for her character, though, since
she turns out to be a stripper in her off-hours. Unevenly directed by
Brian Robbins, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Varsity Blues"
is fumbling 5. It's V for vulgar.

Title
Review for Beloved (1998)
Leave it to the resourceful Oprah Winfrey to insure that at
least three, perhaps four, fine black actors will get Academy Award
nominations this year. In this adaptation of Toni Morrison's Pulitzer
Prize-winning novel about the devastating effects of slavery on an
African-American family, directed by Jonathan Demme ("Philadelphia"),
Oprah personifies terror and truth as Sethe, a former slave raising
her teenage daughter (Kimberly Elise) in rural Ohio circa 1873. She's
haunted by the horrors of her past and the ghost of her murdered baby,
plus the way the rest of her family (husband, two sons) have abandoned
her. After drifting around since emancipation, another former slave
(Danny Glover) shows up on her doorstep. They share a common
birthplace: a plantation called Sweet Home in Kentucky - except "It
wasn't sweet and it wasn't home." Then a strange, wild young woman
(Thandie Newton) appears. Covered with slime and filth, and talking
like the devil in "The Exorcist," she says her name is "Beloved."
Gradually, through flashbacks, the tortuous, interweaving background
story of these characters evolves. Like "Amistad" and "Rosewood," it
reveals the terrible truth about black history, prejudice, and man's
inhumanity to man. Unlike "The Color Purple," however, the audience is
kept emotionally distant.  Perhaps that's because the serious,
intelligent and deeply disturbing script is an assemblage of three
writers: Akosua Busia (soon-to-be ex-wife of director John Singleton),
Richard LaGravenese ("Bridges of Madison County"), and Adam Brooks
("French Kiss"). On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Beloved" is a
stately, artistically admirable 9 - but recommended only for those who
are willing to undergo three long, stolid hours of unrelenting misery.

Title
Review for Doug's 1st Movie (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
       "Disney's Doug" leaps from ABC-TV's Saturday morning series
onto the big screen but, for the most part, I doubt if it's worth
paying - at a theater - for what you can get free - at home, unless
you're the parent of a pre-schooler who is desperate for
something-to-do. The 77-minute story revolves around 12 1/2 year-old
Doug Funnie (voiced by Thomas McHugh) and his blue-faced buddy Skeeter
(Fred Newman) and their search for the supposedly mythical monster of
Bluffington's Lucky Duck Lake. When they find the creature - a gentle
baby dinosaur mutant - and befriend him, naming him Herman Melville,
they also discover an environmental hazard, a pond of industrial
waste, covered-up by evil industrialist Bill Bluff (Doug Preis) who is
determined to keep his nasty secret. In addition, Doug's romantic
crush, Patti Mayonnaise (Constance Shulman), is being courted by Guy
Graham (Guy Hadley), the slick editor of the school newspaper, who
just happens to be the powerful Bluff's spy in the community. Will
Doug risk Patti's love and do the right thing? To put it tactfully,
Nickelodeon screenwriter Ken Scarborough was obviously inspired by the
plot of "E.T.," and the animation, while pleasant, is flat and
unimaginative except in one virtual-reality sequence in which
everything is exactly the same as in real life - except more
expensive. "Doug's" was originally conceived as a direct-to-video
project but diverted to theaters following the success of "The Rugrats
Movie." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Doug's 1st Movie" is a
flimsy 3. Wait for the video.

Title
Review for Vampires (1998)

Susan Granger's review of "John Carpenter's VAMPIRES" (Columbia Pictures)
Taking his cue from "William Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet" and
"Bram Stoker's Dracula," John Carpenter includes himself in the title,
which is an indication of how self-absorbed his first venture into
vampirism is. The scare story with campy, comedic overtones revolves
around deception and betrayal as a Catholic Cardinal (Maximilian
Schell) hires a cynical, gunslinging vampire slayer (James Woods).
Along with his grungy driver (Daniel Baldwin) and other team-mates, he
destroys a bloodsuckers' nest in an abandoned farmhouse in rural New
Mexico and then gets ambushed by the 600 year-old original vampire
"master" (Thomas Ian Griffith) who is looking for a legendary "black
cross" through which he can obtain for himself and his successors the
power to walk in daylight. What Carpenter does is transform the Gothic
castle-with-cobwebs cliche into a dusty Southwestern setting with
scenes reminiscent of Sam Peckinpah's "The Wild Bunch" and directorial
touches of Howard Hawks. His inventive manner of annihilation is
picturesque, as the slayers shoot a "stake" into the creatures and
then drag them into the sunlight, where they instantly become "crispy
critters." Unlike Robert Rodrigues's "From Dusk Till Dawn," in which
the characters morphed into bats, there are few computer-generated
special effects. Instead, Carpenter depends on lighting and make-up,
which includes lots of prosthetics and rubber appliances. Don Jakoby's
screenplay, based on "Vampire$" by John Steakley, delivers some
vicious indictments of Catholicism and a curious AIDS virus parallel,
but James Woods emerges as the biggest, bad-tempered spook. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "John Carpenter's Vampires" is a
raunchy, grotesque 4. Lots of big fangs and blood-splattering scenes.

Title
Review for Love & Basketball (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "LOVE & BASKETBALL" (New Line Cinema)
        First-time feature film-maker Gina Price-Blythewood scores
with this romantic drama told in four quarters. Sanaa Lathan and Omar
Epps play two young athletes from Baldwin Hills, an upper middle-class
black neighborhood of Los Angeles. Friendly adversaries since
childhood, they share a mutual passion for basketball. In high school
and college, Epps is set to follow in the footsteps of his famous
father (Dennis Haysbert), an NBA player, while Lathan battles her own
inner conflicts involving the rough 'n' tumble reality and inequities
of women's ball. Conformity is an anathema to her. I found this
feminist aspect of the film particularly compelling since she's
struggling to become an independent woman, as opposed to the life
chosen by her more subservient mother (Alfre Woodard) who did not have
the same opportunities available to her. Then Epps must face his own
personal disillusionment - and becomes involved another woman, making
Lathan wonder if "being all about ball" is really worth the price that
must be paid. Quite simply: this is a coming-of-age saga in which
assumptions and idealism are challenged and re-focused - on the court
and off. Unfortunately, the predictable plot is tied up too
simplistically, like a contemporary Cinderella tale. But the
performances are uniformly good, particularly Sanaa Lathan who proves
herself an actress of formidable intensity. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Love & Basketball" is an uneven but satisfying 6,
particularly as a date movie. Spike Lee, who serves as producer, has
introduced yet another exciting, new African-American film-maker in
Gina Price-Blythewood.

Title
Review for Emperor's New Groove, The (2000)
Susan Granger's review of 'THE EMPEROR'S NEW GROOVE" (Disney)
 If Walt Disney were to wander into the multiplex tonight,
he'd wonder which studio did this animated film. Unlike what's come to
be known as the Mouse House formula (or rut, depending on your point
of view), there's only one or two songs and no romantic subplot. The
story begins with a lonely, braying llama being drenched by rain in
Peru. Only he's not an ordinary llama. He's actually Kuzco (voiced by
David Spade), once the ruler of a pre-Colombian empire, who was
accidentally transformed by his scheming, malevolent advisor Yzma
(growling Eartha Kitt). Her dim-witted, muscular assistant, Kronk
(Patrick Warburton), was supposed to kill him. Instead, he escaped in
the back of a cart belonging to Pacha, a good-natured, hulking peasant
(John Goodman), his pregnant wife Chica (Wendy Malick) and five
daughters whose village Kuzco had intended to raze to build a vacation
resort. The adventure revolves around the emotional maturation of the
not-quite-18 year-old selfish, sarcastic, obnoxious Kuzco as he tries
to find an antidote for the llama spell and hoofs his way back to the
palace with Pacha to claim his rightful throne. Written by David
Reynolds from a story by Chris Williams and director Mark Dindal, it's
basically a buddy comedy and the quips are jazzy and hip, like "Your
department is being downsized" and "We're not picking up your option."
Reportedly, Sting and David Hartley composed a full musical score but
what remains is "Perfect World," sung by Tom Jones, and "My Funny
Friend and Me." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Emperor's
New Groove" is a lively, swingin' 7. Curiously, it shares the same
historical setting as "The Road to El Dorado."

Title
Review for Next Best Thing, The (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE NEXT BEST THING" (Paramount Pictures)
  Madonna's fans will be lining up to see The Material Girl
tackle this timely, thoughtful dramatic comedy, directed by John
Schlesinger. What they don't realize is that America's first openly
gay leading man, Rupert Everett, steals the show, just the way he did
in My Best Friend's Wedding.  Madonna and Everett play best
friends. They're both bright, unconventional and impulsive - with
lousy taste in choosing lovers. One evening, after a few too many
drinks, they wind up in bed together - and, soon afterwards, she
discovers she's pregnant. Eager for motherhood, she offers Everett a
choice: he can either stay uninvolved, be the baby's "uncle," or
assume the role of father. He opts for fatherhood, so they decide to
live together and raise their son (Matthew Stumpf).  Theirs may not be
the perfect family - but it's the next best thing. Everett proves to
be an ideal father, putting the child's interests first and foremost,
refusing to develop other attachments in his life. Their good-natured,
non-traditional arrangement works superbly for several years - until
Madonna meets the man of her dreams (Benjamin Bratt) and ends up in a
nasty fight for custody of the boy. That's when Thomas Ropelewski's
character-driven script gets serious. Keep in mind, this is not a
controversy about homosexuality. It's about significant human
emotions, ties that bind, and commitment. Unfortunately, Bratt's
underdeveloped role is less sympathetic, particularly since the
audience has formed a compelling attachment to Everett, making the
courtroom scenes anticlimactic. And don't miss Madonna's rendition of
Don McLean's American Pie over the final credits. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, The Next Best Thing is a thoroughly enjoyable,
enigmatic 8 - asking: What is a father? What is a family?

Title
Review for Score, The (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "THE SCORE" (Paramount Pictures)
  This high-tension crime thriller is propelled by the
three-generational star power of Robert De Niro, Marlon Brando and Ed Norton. In
the opening sequence, set during a festive party at a Boston estate, a aging
thief,  De Niro, cracks a safe, escapes with a diamond necklace and scoots
across the border to Montreal, where he's the owner of a jazz club. But Marlon
Brando, his entrepreneurial fence and partner-in-crime, needs him to do one last
heist involving an antique (1661) gem-studded scepter, a priceless French
national treasure, that's kept in the highly-guarded basement of the Montreal
Customs House. Not only does this violate De Niro's rule of never operating in
the city where you live but he'll have to coordinate with a Customs House
insider, Edward Norton, a cocky, volatile night janitor who pretends he's
simple-minded. "I run this job down to the last detail, understand?" De Niro
tells him. "It takes discipline more than talent." Not only is the relic robbery
risky but De Niro's stewardess girl-friend, Angela Bassett, has also given him
an ultimatum to quit. Working from a formulaic script by Kario Salem, Lem Dobbs,
Scott Marshall Smith and Daniel E. Taylor, director Frank Oz scrupulously
details every moment of the theft at a highly disciplined, if occasionally
excruciatingly slow, pace, particularly the final sequence. The sparking,
spontaneous chemistry of De Niro, Brando and Norton is palpable. A master
manipulator, Brando beguilingly mumbles and murmurs as De Niro embodies the
secretive pro mastermind, while Norton recklessly tries to demand their respect.
Norton's impersonation of a genial, mentally-challenged man is flawless. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Score" is suspenseful, intense 8. It's a
masterful power-play by three of our major actors.

Title
Review for All the Pretty Horses (2000)
    As muddy and meandering as the Rio Grande, this 1940's
Western is the soggy saga of two buddies, Matt Damon and Henry Thomas
(the "E.T." kid, now grown up), who ride across the border from Texas
to Mexico to be real cowboys. Faithfully adapted by Ted Tally from
Cormac McCarthy's fascinating novel, the concept is never fully
realized by director Billy Bob Thornton. Instead, the pace is
confusing and uneven, nuances that define the characters are
under-developed, even the visual style is inconsistent. As the
episodic story unfolds, Damon and Thomas are joined on the trail by a
cocky kid, Lucas Black ("Sling Blade") who is obviously riding a
stolen horse and carrying a stolen gun. They suspect he's going to be
trouble - and he is. Then there's the seduction of Damon by Penelope
Cruz, the lusty daughter of the aristocratic Mexican, Ruben Blades,
who owns the sprawling horse ranch where they've secured jobs. Despite
a nocturnal swim under the stars, director Thornton even manages to
make their love scenes dull; at one point, they're stupidly commenting
about having something up their noses. Miriam Colon scores as Cruz's
aunt who's rightfully suspicious about Damon, this gringo who winds up
in a Mexican penitentiary, albeit on false charges. Then there's what
seems like an awkwardly added epilogue with Damon telling his tale of
woe to a sympathetic West Texas judge, played by Bruce Dern. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "All the Pretty Horses" is ponderous,
pretentious 3. Basically, none of the characters - except Miriam
Colon's - exude passion or even interest. The actors seem to be going
through the motions - and the audience senses it on an conscious or
unconscious level, refusing to make an emotional commitment to the
tale.

Title
Review for Lake Placid (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Every summer needs its monster movie - think "Jaws" - and this
one has the added comedic touch of David E. Kelley, creator of TV's
"Ally McBeal," "Chicago Hope," "L.A. Law," and "The Practice."
Bridget Fonda stars as a paleontologist who is sent from museum in New
York City to a tranquil lake in Maine to verify a shard, a supposed
fossil, which turns out to be a tooth from a primitive, mysterious
predator who has killed a member of the Fish & Game department. That's
where Bill Pullman comes in. He's the perennially cool Fish & Game
Warden. Right away, there's friction because she's not only annoyingly
phobic about the wilderness but she's also arrogantly embittered about
men and love. Then there's Oliver Platt, a rich, wacky, world-renown
mythology professor, and Brendan Gleeson, the irascible sheriff. These
neurotic, off-beat, disparate characters band together to discover
what's devouring not only the wildlife but people - on land and in
Black Lake. It turns out to be a 30-foot crocodile that has migrated
to New England and been adopted as "a pet who lives in the wild" by a
local eccentric, played by Betty White. The elusive reptile is
terrifyingly realistic - thanks to the special effects creativity of
Stan Winston ("Aliens," "Jurassic Park").  Producer/writer David
E. Kelley and director Steve Miner (sequels 2 & 3 of "Friday the
13th," "Halloween: H20") supply enough absurdly inventive satire,
derived from the eclectic characters, to keep what could have been a
prosaic horror/thriller afloat. But the title is a bit misleading -
this has absolutely nothing to do with the summer tourist haven of
Lake Placid, New York. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Lake
Placid" is a gruesome but surprising 6. It's a hip, caustic
creature-feature with an unexpectedly snappy, comedic bite.

Title
Review for Next Stop Wonderland (1998)
        Independent film-maker Brad Anderson's whimsical, low-budget
romance was a big hit at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival. Hope Davis
is a 30ish Boston nurse who has just been dumped by her political
activist boy-friend, a Marxist, who, heartlessly, took the futon and
left her a farewell message on the video. This callous rejection
prompts her meddling socialite mother, played by Holland Taylor, to
place a personals ad on her behalf in a local newspaper. Meanwhile, on
the other side of town, Alan Gelfont, a second-generation plumber, is
trying to separate from his family's seedy underworld background by
becoming a marine biologist. Unfortunately, however, his work at the
Boston Aquarium revolves around fixing leaky pipes. As sulky Hope
embarks on a series of disastrous dates with strange suitors, she
keeps almost meeting Alan as they're both traveling on the Boston
Metro's Wonderland line. Finally, of course, they do meet and romance
blossoms.  Of course, then there's the 'what next?' problem or, as one
character comments: "The real mystery is what keeps two people
together after they meet." With her big brown eyes, pale skin, long
blonde hair, and tart commentary, Ms. Davis is, indeed, a contemporary
Alice, pondering her destiny as she's gazing into the looking glass
with the same quirky appeal of Lewis Carroll's adventurous heroine. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Next Stop Wonderland" is a wry,
wistful 7. Set to a Brazilian bossa nova swing called "saudade," it's
an intelligent, upbeat look at the urban singles scene, a "chick
flick."

Title
Review for Goodbye Lover (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "GOODBYE, LOVER" (Warner Bros.)
         This darkly comic, unpredictable, tantalizing thriller will
confound you. In fact, I defy you to predict what happens when a
saucy, seductive, manipulative real estate agent (Patricia Arquette),
who is married to an alcoholic public relations exec (Dermot
Mulroney), becomes the predator in an obsessive affair with his slick,
pompous, high-powered older brother (Don Johnson) who, in turn, is
adored by his mousy, insecure assistant (Mary-Louise Parker). It's
their warped penchant for vicious murder and grisly mayhem which
summon a nasty, cynical, wise-cracking detective (scene-stealing Ellen
De Generes) to the scene. In Los Angeles, self-realization and upward
mobility aren't easy tasks and, with this sociopathic quartet of
characters, nothing is what it seems to be - including the familiar
score of "The Sound of Music," which is integral to the story. Writers
Ron Peer, Joel Cohen, and Alec Sokolow have devised what Warner
Bros. describes as a "film gris," as opposed to "noir," which is apt,
since "gris" in French means "gray," and there certainly are a lot of
shady gray areas in this shrewd, superficial, twisted tale of
avarice. And, in a change of pace for his career, director Roland
Joffe ("The Killing Fields," "The Mission," "The Scarlet Letter") has
embraced and enhanced the imaginative, off-center wryness of it. He
keeps the tension taut, revealing only select pieces of the
deliciously intricate puzzle, one at a time, with credit going to the
superb lighting and camera work of Dante Spinotte
("L.A. Confidential").  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Goodbye, Lover" is a cynical yet captivating 7. It's so irreverent,
amoral, and gleefully exuberant that even the most jaded will get a
surprise or two.

Title
Review for One Tough Cop (1998)
Daniel Baldwin - not to be confused with brothers Alec and
Stephen - plays a not-too-bright Brooklyn cop, Bo Dietl, whose best
friend since childhood is a Mafioso (Michael McGlone). His partner
(Chris Penn) has never seen a doughnut that wasn't delicious, a drink
he wouldn't down, and a sporting event he wouldn't bet on so,
inevitably, you know trouble's ahead, particularly when the beefy,
streetwise duo solve a particularly savage rape/mutilation case for
which they're not given the credit they're due. Then, when Baldwin has
an affair with his Mafioso buddy's mistress, Gina Gershon, and Penn's
gambling debts mount up, you can just see the bullet-ridden
handwriting on the wall. Directed by a Brazilian, Bruno Barreto ("Four
Days in September"), this is second-rate, cliche-ridden melodrama by
Jeremy Iacone - with the only surprise engendered by the dour
appearance of Amy Irving (now Mrs. Barreto) as a tough-talking,
no-nonsense FBI agent. Never has this talented actress delivered a
more robotic performance. And, no, Stephen Baldwin is not the Baldwin
brother who was arrested on drug charges after trashing his suite at
Manhattan's Plaza Hotel - that's the admittedly self-destructive
Daniel - but Stephen looks stoned throughout this film. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "One Tough Cop" is a plodding, predictable,
unimaginative 2. In some cases, a dumb title doesn't necessarily mean
a bad movie. In this case, it does. A better title would have been
"One Dumb Cop."

Title
Review for Pledge, The (2001)
  In this dark psychological drama, Jack Nicholson delivers a
wrenching performance as a stressed-out Reno police detective facing
retirement. On his last day at work, there's a grisly homicide. An
eight year-old girl has been found slashed, raped and mutilated in the
Nevada snow. Her distraught mother (Patricia Clarkson) forces him to
promise to find the killer, intoning:"Do you swear by your soul's
salvation on this cross made by our daughter?"  Despite the
"confession" of a retarded Native American (Benicio Del Toro), coerced
by another cop (Aaron Eckhart), Nicholson is convinced that the child
molester is not only still free but will strike again. So he
ploddingly goes undercover, buying a local gas station and befriending
a battered single mom (Robin Wright Penn) with a trusting young
daughter (Pauline Roberts) he can use as bait.
  Judging by Sean Penn's first two films ("The Indian Runner,"
"The Crossing Guard") and this, his directing choices are as quirky as
his acting choices, beginning with extreme close-ups of Nicholson ice
fishing, armed with a bottle of Glenfiddich.  The sequence where
Nicholson breaks the tragic news to the parents is set in the barn of
a turkey farm; it's a long shot with no dialogue. That scene is
profoundly moving, graceful and lyrical, as are Nicholson's
conversations with the child's grandmother (Vanessa Redgrave) and a
psychologist (Helen Mirren). But the story by Frederick Durrenmatt
("The Visit"), adapted by Jerzy and Mary Olson-Kromolowski, is flat
and deliberate, almost lethargic, framed by Nicholson's bizarre
ramblings and ruminations, resulting in an emotional detachment which
is hard to overcome. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Pledge" is a haunting 8, emerging as a subtle study of pathological
obsession.

Title
Review for Whipped (1999)
Susan Granger's review of "WHIPPED" (Destination Films)
Luscious Amanda Peet deserves better than this wretched sex
comedy.  She's built up a loyal following from TV's "Jack and Jill"
and made a charming appearance in "The Whole Nine Yards," but this is
a disaster. Written, produced and directed by Peter M. Cohen, the
story revolves around three, single twentysomethings who gather each
Sunday morning for breakfast in a Manhattan diner, along with a fourth
buddy who is married, to brag and exchange graphic tales of their
erotic Saturday night conquests. They're self-proclaimed experts in
"scamming" which involves scoring a date and having sex with a
woman. Brian Van Holt plays the Wall Street guy, the slickest of the
trio; his trick is to approach women and pretend to be their friend's
brother. The friend is always named Jen because, as he reasons, "they
all have a friend name Jen." There's Zorie Barber, a shallow
pseudo-hippie, East Village screenwriter type; pathetically eager
Jonathan Abrahams, who's supposed to be sensitive; and Judah Domke,
who gets vicarious thrills and whose exploits with a juicer and an egg
beater are minor league. However, the group's womanizing camaraderie
is challenged when they meet an enigmatic, uninhibited sexpot - that'
s Peet - and she begins to date all three - at the same time. It seems
she's scamming them, waiting until the second date to have sex and
then vowing to each that he, and he alone, is the one she truly
loves. The less said the better about the grotesque scene in which
Peet's vibrator is dropped into an unflushed toilet. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Whipped" sinks to an obnoxious low with a
creepy, cynical, coarse 1.  It's a smutty, repellent sleazefest.

Title
Review for Mickey Blue Eyes (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Just imagine you're a suave, proper British auctioneer who's
madly in love with an exuberant New York schoolteacher you've known
for only three months, so in love, in fact, that you propose marriage
- only to have her burst into tears and run away. That's what happens
to Hugh Grant at the beginning of the story. Jeanne Tripplehorn
refuses to marry him because she's worried about what will happen if
he joins her dysfunctional Mafia family. Undaunted, he goes to Little
Italy to find her father - that's James Caan - at his restaurant, "The
La Trattoria," where the song "We Are Family" plays in the background
as he meets the wiseguys. Sure enough, before the bumbling Brit knows
it, his auction gallery is being used for mob money laundering and the
FBI is paying a visit. The scene where the gregarious Caan tries to
teach the refined Grant the goombah enunciation of "fuhgeddaboutit" is
a gem. One complication leads to another and soon he becomes known as
"Mickey Blue Eyes" by all the wrong people. Screenwriters Adam
Scheinman and Robert Kuh and director Kelly Makin deliver the
humorous, if cliche-ridden set-ups, but what makes the frenzied farce
work is Hugh Grant, who seems to have inherited Cary Grant's ability
to maintain an unflappable charm and graceful dignity no matter how
humiliating the circumstances. Whether he's a boyish "Notting Hill"
book seller who falls for a movie star or a proper, innocent
Englishman who behaves with aplomb when finds himself with a bloody
corpse, Grant handles his fish-out-of-water roles with witty,
sophisticated charm, adept at both verbal sparring and physical
antics.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Mickey Blue Eyes" is
a funny, funny 8.  This engaging romantic comedy is perfectly timed
for late summer laughs.

Title
Review for Beach, The (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE BEACH" (20th Century-Fox)
 It's a teeny-bopper's fantasy: Utopia with Leonardo
DiCaprio. Let's hope those teenagers who flocked to Titanic are now
old enough to get into this R-rated idyll because they're the target
audience. Leo plays an American backpacker in Thailand, eager to
escape from the touristy, pop culture, digital world of today. Travel,
he says, is the search for experience, the quest for something
different. That's just what he finds when he and a young French couple
(Guillaume Canet, Virginie Ledoyen) follow a map given to him by a
manic, crazed Brit (Robert Carlyle) who commits suicide. To get to
"the perfect beach," they swim across open sea from one island to
another, crawl through cannabis fields past armed guards, and jump
from the top of a 120' waterfall. Exhilarated, they discover a small,
international community of young travelers under the leadership of
ruthless Tilda Swinton, who has vowed to keep their unspoiled hideaway
secret, an exclusive enclave - no matter what the consequences. "In
the perfect beach resort, nothing is allowed to interrupt the pursuit
of pleasure, not even dying," Leo learns.  Filmmaker Danny Boyle
(Trainspotting, A Life Less Ordinary) and cinematographer Darius
Khondji have captured Alex Garland's parable of modern life and
distilled it into a weird, ironic glimpse of paradise, particularly
when the temporarily deranged Leo runs through the jungle as a
character in a video game. Problem is: the characters are too thinly
drawn and much comes across as pretentious poppycock, particularly the
glib, happy, very commercial ending with Leo back in a cyber-cafe,
downloading a photographic memento of his exotic misadventure. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The Beach is a cinematically sweeping
5 - the vivid saga of a Club Med gone awry.

Title
Review for Shuang long hui (1992)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
         You get two Jackie Chans for the price of one in this lame, recycled action comedy that was made as a fund-raising project for the Directors' Guild of Hong Kong, back in 1992, and, oddly enough, has been available on video in an earlier English-dubbed version. It's been edited and re-released to capitalize on Chan's success last year with "Rush Hour."  In this story - 
which is remarkably like Jean-Claude Van Damme's "Double Impact" -  Chan plays twins separated at birth by a kidnapper. Raised in the United States by his natural parents, John Ma (Jackie #1)  is a piano prodigy who becomes a renowned orchestra conductor, while Boomer (Jackie #2), who grows up in the streets of Hong Kong, becomes an auto mechanic whose idea of a good time is cruising for chicks. 27 years later, just as John Ma comes to Hong Kong for a concert, Boomer gets involved in some criminal activity and, predictably, they're mistaken for one another. Chaos and mischief reign, and there's one wane cute scene in which both Chans are in a bathtub with a woman who believes
 she's looking at a mirror reflection, not another man. Directed by Sui Hark and Ring Lam (veterans of Hong Kong cinema), there's more emphasis on slapstick farce than action - a fact which will undoubtedly disappoint hard-core martial arts fanatics who look forward to seeing the acrobatic Jackie Chan do his own, often inventive stunt work. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Twin Dragons" is an inane, boring 3, filled with senseless madness and silly mayhem.

Title
Review for Hamlet (2000/I)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
One of the elements that make Shakespeare's plays so amazing
is that they can be adapted and interpreted in so many different
ways. Filmmaker Michael Almereyda's contemporary version, set in
corporate Manhattan, stars Ethan Hawke as the morose Hamlet, a
scruffy, self-pitying Gen-X wannabe video-maker, who loathes his
passionate mother Gertrude (Diane Venora) and shallow stepfather
Claudius (Kyle McLachlan) for conspiring to murder his
father. Paranoia is the theme, augmented by depression, despondency,
and dementia - all running rampant at the Hotel Elsinore and the
Denmark Corporation. Far better than Baz Luhrmann's "Romeo and
Juliet," this visually stunning "Hamlet" is filled with intelligent,
inventive performances - not only the leads but Liev Schreiber's
furious Laertes, Julia Stiles's petulant East Village hippie Ophelia,
Sam Shepard's mysteriously remote Ghost (who evaporates into a Pepsi
machine) and, above all, Bill Murray's Polonius, advising "To thine
ownself be true...."  The soliloquies have become inner musings,
except for "To be or not to be..." which Hamlet murmurs while browsing
in the Action section of a Blockbuster video store. But there are some
problems. First, you've got to be somewhat familiar with the
Shakespeare's original version to appreciate the nuances of this
unadorned one. Second, so much of the essential narrative has been
eliminated that confusion overload occasionally occurs. And, third,
the poetic passion and fear have been diluted by the onslaught of
high-tech gadgetry. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hamlet" is
an audacious, admirable 8.  It's a clever, consumer-oriented updating
of a great tragedy.

Title
Review for Beyond the Mat (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "BEYOND THE MAT" (Lions Gate Films)
Writer/director Barry Blaustein received a Director's Guild of
America documentary nomination for his enthusiastic, behind-the-scenes
examination of professional wrestling. In publicizing his carefully
collated collection of matches and interviews, he's stated, "I wanted
the sport of wrestling to get some respect in spite of itself. I
wanted to also make a film for people who don't even care about
wrestling that would keep them emotionally involved in these guys'
lives."  Perhaps the most famous ex-pro wrestler is Jesse "The Body"
Ventura, who's now serving as the duly elected Governor of Minnesota,
but these guys include the articulate Mick "Mankind" Foley, who has a
book on the best-seller list, along with 53 year-old Terry Funk, Jake
"The Snake" Roberts, and several other lesser luminaries, including
the athlete who can vomit on cue, earning the nickname "Puke."  Make
no mistake about it: wrestling is hard work. Yeah, it's rigged but
that doesn't mean it's easy. Each round is planned, scripted,
choreographed and rehearsed. Cynical promoters pull the strings. But,
for participants, the physical exertion demands stamina and courage,
not to mention frequent trips to the hospital. And the wrestlers come
across as sympathetic, all-too-human men with their own troubles and
tragedies. Vince McMahon, who appears in the footage, and his World
Wrestling Federation has issued a cease-and-desist letter with regard
to the advertisements - which Lions Gate Films has rejected as
bullying tactics to suppress marketing of this film. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Beyond the Mat is a slammin' 6.  While it's
certainly not the "no-holds-barred expose" that's implied in the ads,
it may be more than you ever wanted to know about the subject of
professional wrestling.

Title
Review for Chicago Cab (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "CHICAGO CAB" (Castle Hill Productions and
Dream LLC)
All of us have plopped ourselves down in the back of a cab to
go somewhere but - have you ever thought of all the different
passengers thatdriver has encountered in one 24 hour period? That's
the premise of "Chicago Cab," adapted by Will Kern from his
long-running, award-winning play, "Hellcab," drawn from his own
experiences driving a cab in the Windy City. Paul Dillon recreates
his stage role as the lonely cab driver, delivering a sweetly
solitary performance as he attempts to evoke some warmth and
humanity in the midst of a cold, chaotic Christmas season. Mary Cybulski
and John Tintori, a husband-and-wife directing team, keep the pace
fast and furious as he picks up fare after fare on the day of the
winter solstice. Each encounter is a mini-episode, some more
poignant, some more repugnant than others. And there are familiar
faces: Gillian Anderson popsup as a hurt and angry Southside woman
of questionable morals, while John Cusack is simply a scary
man. Julianne Moore is distraught and devastated crime victim, whose
story is then passed on the Reggie Hayes, an architect with a
sympathetic ear. But there's also the religious zealots, the 
Pakistani who complains he's driving too slow, the pregnant woman who
barely makes it to the hospital in time, the deli-chain owner, the
stoned girl for whom he buys a do-nut, the guy who got a bad deal on
a used car, the seductive suburban mom, and the pretty receptionist
whose businessman boy-friend thinks she's a slut. The quirky humor
is angry, funny, bawdy and irreverent - all at the same time.  On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to10, "Chicago Cab" is a boldly
original, engaging 6. Hop in for a weird, wild, most unusual ride.

Title
Review for Rang-e khoda (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "THE COLOR OF PARADISE" (Sony Pictures Classics)
Majid Majidi's "Children of Heaven," about two children who
share the same well-worn pair of sneakers, received an Oscar
nomination for Best Foreign Film last year, yet it never had a
national release. However, this new entry by the Iranian film-maker is
being exhibited nationally. Mohsen Ramezani stars as Mohammed, a blind
eight year-old, who senses that his presence hinders the courtship by
his widowed father (Hossein Mahjub), a poor coal worker, of a much
younger new bride (Masoomeh Zeinti) with a bountiful dowry. Not that
the child is alone. He has a grandmother and two sisters who try to
cheer his spirits - and he spends much of the year at a special school
for the handicapped in Tehran. But the primal frustration and
emotional conflict eventually explode - on both sides. As a side note:
the child actor Mohsen Ramezani is also sightless. Which is
particularly poignant since Majid Majidi's seductively pastoral
cinematic world is splashed with vibrant color as well as the sounds
of nature. But it's what he touches and hears that makes Mohsen
recognize the message of a woodpecker, "read" the stones at the bottom
of a mountain creek, and respond to the rustle of leaves to discover
that a baby bird has fallen from its nest - right into the danger of a
cat. And you realize the lonely boy's innate courage when he carefully
climbs the tree with the chick in his pocket to place it back in its
nest. Along with "Children of Heaven," "The White Balloon," and "Taste
of Cherry," "The Color of Paradise" is a touching, memorable
contemporary Iranian film that focuses on imagery of the simple, quiet
faith and poignant innocence of children. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "The Color of Paradise" is a haunting, heart-breaking
9. It's in Farsi with English subtitles.

Title
Review for Illuminata (1998)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ILLUMINATA" (Artisan Entertainment)
         After "Shakespeare in Love," this sumptuously presented but
overly long story of behind-the-scenes actors pales in comparison. But
you have to credit it as a labor of love by John Turturro, who
co-wrote, directed, and acted in it. Set amid a flamboyant
turn-of-the-century New York repertory company, it revolves around a
failing resident playwright, John Turturro, whose claim to fame is his
marriage to the troupe's leading lady, played by Katherine Borowitz,
Turturro's real-life wife. The playwright yearns to shelve the
heavy-handed melodramas of the period as he aspires to a more
naturalistic style of theater, but no one believes in
him. "Illuminata" is both the title of a play-within-the-movie and
what he eventually calls his wife after they survive treachery,
back-biting, and intrigue - not to mention the on-stage death of the
leading man mid-performance on opening night. Susan Sarandon is
glorious as the promiscuous, aging diva who glances at a young actress
and murmurs, "That is how I shall look years from now. I'm beginning
to be able to play ingenues." But Christopher Walken steals the
picture as a smug, gay critic - think Oscar Wilde - who relishes the
cruelty he liberally dishes out, and Bill Irwin is amusing as the
wretchedly reluctant object of his affections. Their characterizations
are particularly bawdy. Beverly D'Angelo, Ben Gazzara, and the late
Donal McCann complete the supporting cast, along with Turturro's son
and cousin. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Illuminata" is an
art-house 6, exploring the durability of love with enough dramatic
lulls to catch a quick snooze.

Title
Review for Muse, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Sharon Stone is an irresistible comedienne in Albert Brooks'
slightly surreal send-up of the motion picture business. Taking a
whiny cue from Woody Allen, Brooks plays a skewed version of himself -
a neurotic middle-aged screenwriter, comparing his job with "a eunuch
at an orgy - except that the eunuch can, at least, watch, while the
screenwriter is not even allowed on the set." When he receives a
Humanitarian Award, he facetiously describes a "humanitarian" to his
daughter as "someone who has never won an Oscar." But when he's fired
by a weaselly studio exec who claims he's "lost his edge," even his
agent agrees. Desperate to save his career, he consults his successful
buddy (Jeff Bridges) who admits he owes everything to a Muse - that's
Sharon Stone. As a daughter of Zeus, she gets people in touch with
their creativity. But she's a pampered muse - demanding a suite at the
Four Seasons Hotel ($10,000 a week), limo, and dutiful attendance to
her desires. Frantically, Brooks tries to satisfy her capricious whims
- as does his wife, earnestly played by Andie MacDowell, whom the Muse
encourages to pursue her cookie dream of being the next
Mrs. Fields. And it's funny as Martin Scorese, James Cameron, Rob
Reiner, and Wolfgang Puck pay Tiffany tributes to the divine
diva. Albert Brooks ("Mother," "Defending Your Life," "Lost in
America") is an acute and adept observer of the nutty, ruthless
Hollywood scene, skewering its self-absorption and gullibility, but
his ironic concept fizzles out as he misses some screwball
opportunities with the Muse's legendary use of the magical power of
sex - and his riff on Steven Spielberg falls flat. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Muse" is a droll, satiric 7. It's wryly
amusing, pointing out that people are who you think they are.

Title
Review for I Dreamed of Africa (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Kuki Gallmann is an amazing woman whose story is a testament
to courage, determination, and tenacity.  Two years ago, I had the
privilege of meeting Kuki and spending several evenings with her on
her ranch in Kenya.  An Italian aristocrat by birth, Kuki (Kim
Basinger) begins her tale with how she met Paolo (Vincent Perez), her
second husband, who convinced her to move with her young son,
Emanuele, to Kenya in 1974, over the protests of her mother (Eva Marie
Saint).  Despite difficulty in adjusting to the tempo and pace of
life, the dangerous wildlife, greedy poachers, the ravages of nature,
and - most of all- the loneliness at Ol Ari Nyiro ranch, Kuki fell
passionately in love with Africa. Her devotion was so intense that it
withstood two devastating losses. Paolo was killed in a car accident
driving home with a cradle for their unborn daughter and, three years
later, Emanuele, an amateur herpetologist, was fatally bitten by a
puff adder. Yet, with all this inherent drama, the film skims over the
surface. Written by Paula Milne & Susan Shilliday and directed by Hugh
Hudson, it never develops an emotional connection between the
audience, nor does it communicate a challenging sense of
adventure. Instead, it unfolds with the languid pace of a magnificent
travelogue. While Kim Basinger is appealing, she doesn't capture
Kuki's zest and enthusiasm - let alone her flamboyant style and
Italian accent. In comparison with "Out of Africa," Kim's no Meryl
Streep, nor is Vincent Perez a Robert Redford.  On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "I Dreamed of Africa" is a stunning, lyrical 6. You
can stay at Kuki's Mukutan Retreat in Laikipia on the edge of the
Great Rift Valley to experience the wonders of Africa's
wilderness. But if you can't take that trip, seeing this movie is the
next-best thing.

Title
Review for Return to Me (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Tinged with traces of "Love Story," "Ghost" and "Moonstruck," this romantic comedy has its moments - but, unfortunately, most of them turn out to be sappy. David Duchovny doffs his "X-Files" Fox Mulder persona to play a successful Chicago architectural engineer whose wife (Joely Richardson), an ardent zoologist who works with primates, dies in an automobile accident in one of the early scenes of the picture. While he's still blood-stained and grief-stricken, his wife's heart is transplanted into Minnie Driver, who's a shy, naive waitress working in her family's Irish-Italian restaurant. Despite the bizarre circumstances, you know that these two are eventually gonna meet and fall in love. Predictability and foreshadowing weigh heavily on the script written by Bonnie Hunt and Don Lake. Perhaps a more experienced director could have quickened the pace, trimmed some scenes, and meshed the elements better - but inexperienced Bonnie Hunt helms her own material. In addition,!
 she co-stars, as Driver's confidante and wife of Jim Belushi, and she's cast at least four relatives named Hunt in supporting parts. It's like a congenial family movie under a big studio banner. Despite its lack of focus, it is amusing to watch it unfold, particularly when senior pros like Robert Loggia and Carroll O'Connor are bantering about old singers, old songs, etc., since the title song comes from a vintage Dean Martin ballad. David Duchovny and Minnie Driver are charming to watch; one just wishes they had wittier, more sophisticated material to work with. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Return to Me" is a sweet but stumbling 5. Ah, the fickle finger of fate!

Title
Review for Patriot, The (2000)
 Do you realize there's never been a big, blockbuster
Revolutionary War movie - until now? "The Patriot" will change all
that. In 1776 in South Carolina, Benjamin Martin (Mel Gibson), a
former hero of the French and Indian War, is now a widower and devoted
father of seven children. Rebuking those who advocate war against
England's King George III over taxation, he's become a pacifist -
until the battle literally lands in his backyard, as a cruel, arrogant
British colonel (Jason Isaacs) deliberately murders an innocent
child. Savage, bloody revenge quickly follows as Martin, wielding a
Cherokee tomahawk, organizes the civilian militia. These excellent
marksmen are guerrilla fighters, avoiding muzzle-to-muzzle
confrontations with Redcoats in an open field. But Martin's not the
real patriot - that honor goes to his idealistic son Gabriel (Heath
Ledger), whose early enlistment in the Colonial Army is motivated by
principle. Written by Robert Rodat ("Saving Private Ryan") and
directed by Roland Emmerich ("Independence Day"), it's a challenging,
exciting, character-driven story, capturing the human element that is
too often lost in history - with heart-wrenching moments like melting
a lead toy soldier into ammunition. As the tale's emotional pivot, the
conflicted father and reluctant hero, Mel Gibson delivers a touching,
tautly textured performance, ably supported by Heath Ledger, Jason
Isaacs, Chris Cooper, Tcheky Karyo, Rene Aubjonois, Lisa Brenner and
Tom Wilkinson. Caleb Deschanel's cinematography is magnificent, even
when capturing the violence of war at its most brutal, and John
Williams's score is superb. Sure, there are some cliches, but on the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Patriot" is a compelling,
powerful 10. It's a stunning, sweeping, spectacular saga.

Title
Review for Apartment Complex, The (1999) (TV)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 On Sunday, October 31, at 8 PM on Showtime TV, horror maestro
Tobe Hooper presents a quirky, psychological mystery, "The Apartment
Complex," starring Chad Lowe as a young grad student who has just
moved from the Midwest to study psychology at UCLA. Broke and living
out of his car, he's hired by Jon Polito, as the malevolent
Dr. Caligari, to manage the Wonder View Apartments in Hollywood in
exchange for rent, despite warnings from Obba Babatunde, playing a
homeless philosopher who lurks on the front curb. Inspired more by
Stephen King than Frank Lloyd Wright, there's something very strange
about the Wonder View Apartments. Certainly the tenants are an oddball
assortment of neurotics and psychotics, ideal specimens for a master
thesis on abnormal psychology. There's Faye Masterson, a
haunted-looking beauty with her hot-tempered, insanely jealous
boyfriend, Patrick Warburton; Amanda Plummer, an over-sexed psychic;
Tyra Banks and Gina Mari, stunt actresses who dabble in martial arts;
R. Lee Ermey, a paranoid, reclusive ex-government agent; creepy twins
Jimmy and David Schuelke; and Charles Martin Smith as the agoraphobic
with a dark, terrible secret. The horror starts when Lowe discovers a
dead body in the murky swimming pool. Detectives Ron Canada and Miguel
Sandoval figure he's their only suspect, tormenting and bullying him
as other strange events plague the tenants. All the psycho-babble he's
been learning in grad school comes in handy as the
wise-beyond-his-years student begins doling out free therapy as he
zeros in on the real killer. On the Granger Made-for-Television Gauge,
"The Apartment Complex" is a sinister 6.  It's Halloween hell in
exchange for free rent.

Title
Review for Snake Eyes (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "SNAKE EYES" (Paramount Pictures)
Brian DePalma's a brash master of suspense and he tackles
David Koepp's story with cinematic gusto. Set in a glitzy Atlantic
City casino called the Millennium on the night that a tropical
hurricane named Jezebelis bearing down on the New Jersey coast, the
action revolves around a live, pay-per-view heavyweight championship
boxing match. Nicolas Cage plays a manic, sleazy detective whose
motto is: "If there's anything I know, it's how to cover my ass."
He's ringside, watching the bout with his bestfriend, Gary Sinese,
the naval officer in charge of security for the visiting Secretary
of Defense. As the fight begins, in the midst of the cheering crowd,
there are two, mysterious, out-of-place people. A woman wearing a
tight, white suit and cheap blonde wig plops down next to the Secretary
and hands him an envelope, while a buxom redhead positions herself
a short distance away. Gunshots blast the government official before
the knockout and pandemonium prevails as 14,000 terrified patrons
stampede for the exits. And this all happens at the beginning of the
movie - in one, technically awesome, uninterrupted 20-minute
take. After that, unfortunately, everything else pales. Carla
Gugino, as a nearsighted, blood-spattered young woman, holds the key
to the truth. Obviously, there's a conspiracy and, inevitably,
corruption is the underlying cause. It's all quite implausible and
the mindless, contrived ending is infuriating. One interesting
sidelight, however, is the massive, computer-controlled casino
surveillance equipment that can find anyone, no matter how well
they're hidden. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Snake Eyes"
is a stylistic, exhausting 4. This wannabe mystery-thriller misses
the mark by a wide margin.

Title
Review for Summer of Sam (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  The perennial question facing film-makers has always been:
Should movies try to influence their audience - using morality
stories, fables, fantasies, etc. - or should movies simply, often
boldly, reflect the society of their time? Spike Lee chooses the
latter. There's no doubt that the anger and violence, stupidity and
intolerance that he depicts are real. But do you really want to spend
a sluggish two hours with these unpleasant, unsavory characters?  Set
in the sweltering summer of '77, when the Son of Sam psychopath, David
Berkowitz, went on his bloody killing spree in the Bronx, the story
revolves around two couples who are long-time friends. Mira Sorvino
and John Leguizamo are into disco, while Jennifer Esposito and Adrien
Brody are punk rockers. Each has his/her own sexually explicit
problems (mostly drug-connected) but, collectively, they're spooked as
they're swept into the gruesome details of Berkowitz's indiscriminate
slaughter. And Ben Gazzara scores as the local crime kingpin who is
determined to protect his neighborhood. Problem is: there's no bond
between the moronic characters and the audience. Is it the
one-dimensional roles in the episodic screenplay by Victor Colicchio,
Michael Imperioli, and Spike Lee? Perhaps. But, as a director, Lee
seems out of his element with these idiosyncratic Italian-Bronx
characters and keeps us utterly detached. And, as an actor, Lee
delivers a wretched performance as a TV newscaster overemphasizing
each line. While this film is visually stylish and vigorous with
pertinent historical imagery, it is, as Jimmy Breslin says, just one
of eight million stories of the naked city - and quite a racist one at
that. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Summer of Sam" is a
bleak, brutal, repellent 3. Don't say you weren't warned.

Title
Review for Chill Factor (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE CHILL FACTOR" (Warner Brothers)
          In this wannabe action-thriller, the mid-August tranquillity
of a tiny tropical atoll in the South Pacific is shattered when a
covert scientific military research operation, code name "Elvis," goes
terribly wrong. As a result, only the scientist who invented the
formula and a disgraced Army officer remain alive. Skip ahead ten
years to a hot summer day in the tiny town of Jerome, Montana, where
two young men - Cuba Gooding Jr. (Oscar winner for "Jerry Maguire")
and Skeet Ulrich - are in the wrong place at the wrong time. When the
guilt-stricken scientist (David Paymer) is murdered by the villainous
Major (Peter Firth), these two hapless guys must transport the toxic
and potentially combustible chemical weapon and safely deliver it to
Fort Magruder, 90 miles away. Only, they have to keep it frozen, and
the only refrigerated vehicle available is Gooding's ice-cream
truck. Of course, the Major's tactical team is in hot pursuit of
"Elvis on ice." Kind of reminds you of the concept "Speed," doesn't
it? Plus a French thriller called "Wages of Fear" with much the same
plotline. The profanity-laden screenplay by Drew Gitlin and Mike Cheda
is dumb and derivative, and novice Hugh Johnson's directing is
by-the-numbers, relying on violent hand-to-hand combat, macho gunplay,
and loud explosions. And how is it that everyone seems to know
everyone else's cell-phone number when I can't even remember my own?
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Chill Factor" is a
numbingly stupid 3. It's toxic, all right.

Title
Review for Blast from the Past (1999)
What would the world look like to you if you had grown up in a plush,
multi-room suburban bomb fallout shelter that was supposed to be a
refuge from the 1962 Cuban Missile crisis? That's the premise of this
genial comedy that begins underground.  Raised with only his paranoid
parents - dutiful yet frustrated Sissy Spacek and brilliant
scientist/inventor Christopher Walken - as role models and completely
isolated from outside information, Brendan Fraser ("George of the
Jungle") has a decidedly wholesome '60s value system. When he comes to
the surface of modern-day Los Angeles for supplies - and, perhaps, a
bride - he must keep his history a secret, which causes lots of
complications when he meets beautiful but hard-edged Alicia
Silverstone, who doesn't know what to make of this gentle, impossibly
well-mannered and archaically dressed hunk of adorable naivete.  Nor
does her platonic room-mate, David Foley, whose overt homosexuality
Fraser never quite picks up on. Directed and co-written by Hugh Wilson
with Bill Kelly, it's conceptually the opposite of "Pleasantville,"
which threw two contemporary teens into the monochromatic world of a
'50s sitcom. But, while "Pleasantville" addressed some serious issues,
this frothy fluff is heavy into sheer silliness - and far too much
time is clumsily wasted on the elaborate set-up for the actual
story. Once again, Brendan Fraser proves his adroitness as a lovable,
innocent goofball in a fish-out-of-water situation and, if you're
intrigued by this young actor, I highly recommend you see him spar
with Ian McKellen in "Gods and Monsters." On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Blast from the Past" is a sweetly satirical 7. Frothy
fun.

Title
Review for Soldier's Daughter Never Cries, A (1998)

Susan Granger's review of "A SOLDIER'S DAUGHTER NEVER CRIES" (October Films)
Kaylie Jones writes about what she knows. In this fictionalized
autobiography, the daughter of James Jones, who wrote "From Here to
Eternity y" and "The Thin Red Line," details what it was like to grow
up bilingual in the late '60s and '70s in Paris, inhabiting two
disparate cultures yet not totally comfortable in either. Her
expatriate parents were obviously conflicted about America and France,
and they passed that ambivalence on to their children. There's the
adolescent girl (Leelee Sobieski), her novelist father (Kris
Kristofferson), free-spirited mother (Barbara Hershey), and adopted
French brother (Jesse Bradford). Plus her best friend (Anthony Roth
Costanzo), an artistic, sensitive soul who sings opera in a lilting
soprano. Then, when her father's heart disease propels a move to Long
Island, there's a whole new set of emotional conflicts as she
comes-of-age in a sexually liberal, unrepressed home. Curiously, it's
the idiosyn= cratic, anecdotal story, adapted by James Ivory and Ruth
Prawer Jhabvala,not the acting performances, that distinguishes this
Merchant-Ivory film. Kaylie Jones's enduring, unbridled homage to the
memory of her father presents him as a tender, doting, understanding
paragon of loving, paternal qualities. James Jones becomes the father
every girl wishes she had. And cinematographer Jean-Marc Fabre
captures this wistful, nostalgic mood on film. The conclusion,
however, is enigmatic and problematic; given her = disturbed brother's
troubled background, it's just not credible that he would not read his
mother's diary which his sister holds for him. Nevertheless, on the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries" is
a subtle, delicately etched, poignant 7, a devoted "Daddy Dearest" for
the art house crowd.

Title
Review for Gladiator (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
"Are you not entertained?" charismatic Russell Crowe roars
scornfully to the cheering crowd in the Roman Colosseum. Certainly
there hasn't been this kind of awesome sword-and-sandals spectacle
since "Spartacus," "Ben-Hur" and "Cleopatra."  Set in 180 A.D., Crowe
plays Maximus, a Roman general who promises his aging mentor, Caesar
Marcus Aurelius (Richard Harris) that, as his appointed successor, he
will return power to the Senate, thus restoring the Republic. That
infuriates Caesar's evil, envious son, Commodus (Joaquin Phoenix), who
becomes Emperor and orders Maximus' execution. But Maximus escapes,
becomes a slave and learns from an entrepreneur (Oliver Reed) how
gladiators can fight their way to freedom and vengeance. That's when
the excitement ignites. For years, Hollywood believed that historical
epics were too expensive; now, high-tech computer wizards can
digitally revive that classic genre. Ridley Scott has cleverly
recreated a mythic form in defiantly modern terms under the raw,
realistic influence of "Braveheart" and "Saving Private Ryan," meaning
there's lots of gruesome, bloody carnage, plus surreal, dreamlike
glimpses of Elysium. What's most impressive is the gloriously detailed
world Scott creates on-screen, inhabited by characters whose emotional
motivations come from a contemporary mentality. These are real people
coping with real problems in a brutal, superheroic setting. But there
are weaknesses in David Franzoni's story - like alluding to an
unexplained affair between Maximus and Commodus's sister (Connie
Nielsen) - and the overt, almost comic villainy of Joaquin Phoenix,
whose power-hungry demeanor suggests a demented "Richard III." On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Gladiator" is a savage, sweeping,
spectacular 9. Thumbs up!

Title
Review for Fantasia/2000 (1999)
The Sorcerer's Apprentice's spell still works. The Disney
company's crown jewel sparkles again. Shown for four months at 76 IMAX
theaters in the United States, Latin America, Canada, and Asia, it's
now available on 35 mm in local theaters. When Walt Disney released
his bold, animated concert film back in 1940, he envisioned an annual
updating but, for 60 years, that hasn't happened. Now, using
traditional animation and computer-generated effects, there are seven
new segments, along with the original Mickey Mouse Sorcerer's
Apprentice, and the music is by the Chicago Symphony conducted by
James Levine. Each chapter is introduced by celebrities: Bette Midler,
Steve Martin, Itzhak Perlman, Quincy Jones, James Earl Jones, Angela
Lansbury, Penn & Teller. The first features abstract butterflies
dancing to Ludwig Van Beethoven's "Symphony No. 5." Another, set to
Ottorino Respighi's "Pines of Rome," follows a baby whale trapped
inside an iceberg, separated from its mother and the rest of the
pod. There's a 1930s New York City tribute to the caricatures of Al
Hirshfeld, complete with NINA, his daughter's name, hidden in the
drawings, set to George Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue."  Daisy and
Donald Duck march into Noah's Ark to Sir Edward Elgar's "Pomp and
Circumstance."  Hans Christian Andersen's "The Steadfast Tin Soldier"
moves to Dmitri Shostakovich's "Second Piano Concerto," as a
one-legged soldier rescues a ballerina from an evil
Jack-in-the-box. Camille Saint-Saens's "Carnival of the Animals" pairs
a rebellious pink flamingo with a yo-yo.  And the finale is a mythical
ode to the cycle of life moving to Igor Stravinsky's "Firebird Suite."
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Fantasia 2000" is a splashy,
swirling 8. It's a joyous celebration of the art of animation.

Title
Review for Astronaut's Wife, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
        Writer/director Rand Ravich came up with an intriguing premise
for this sci-fi tale: What would happen if an astronaut was, somehow,
changed after he returned from a supposedly routine space journey? Who
would know?  Good idea, right? So, Johnny Depp - newly blond with a
Southern drawl - plays a NASA shuttle pilot, one of two crew members
who are nearly killed when a satellite explodes and ground control
mysteriously loses contact with them for two minutes. His companion
(Nick Cassavetes) flips out soon after their return to Earth. But Depp
doesn't. Instead, he announces his decision to quit the space program
and impregnates his beautiful wife, played by Charlize Theron ("Mighty
Joe Young," "The Devil's Advocate"), with twins. But then strange
things begin to happen. First, Cassavetes dies from "a severe insult
to the brain" (i.e.: a stroke). Then Theron's confidante, played by
Donna Murphy, is electrocuted. Nevertheless, the now-former astronaut
and his now-fearful wife leave Florida and move to New York, where
she's befriended by the wife (Blair Brown) of her husband's new
corporate boss (Tom Noonan) in the aerospace industry. Are there any
surprises? Only when British actress Samantha Eggar turns up as an
obstetrician with a thick German accent. Otherwise you can probably
guess what happens. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Astronaut's Wife" is a fumbling, formulaic 4. Think of a sluggish
"Rosemary's Baby" with an extra-terrestrial twist.

Title
Review for Mystery, Alaska (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MYSTERY, ALASKA" (Hollywood Pictures)
Just because he just won two Emmys for "The Practice" and
"Ally McBeal" doesn't mean David E. Kelley can score every time. This
story revolves around a publicity stunt that pits the world-famous New
York Rangers in a televised exhibition game against a hometown team
from Mystery, Alaska, population 633.  The genesis for the face-off is
a "Sports Illustrated" article, written by a former native, Hank
Azaria, that explores the rural legend of a small Alaskan town where,
for generations, young men aspire to nothing more than being on the
local ice hockey team. It's a place where people are so obsessed with
the sport that they leave the streets frozen for skating. And the
comedy comes from a culture clash between the media hype and the
rugged Alaskan eccentrics. Burt Reynolds plays the stuffy town judge
and hockey coach. Russell Crowe is the sheriff and, at 34, a 13-year
veteran of the team, while Ryan Northcott is a high-school whiz who
threatens Crowe's prestigious position. Directed by Jay Roach ("Austin
Powers"), it's like "Northern Exposure" meets "The Longest Yard,"
although too much time is spent on superficial strained marriages and
father-son relationships. Colm Meaney, Mary McCormack, Michael Buie,
Michael McKean, Ron Eldard, Judith Ivey, and Lolita Davidovich embody
colorful characters who add to the predictable melodrama as Little
Richard sings "The Star-Spangled Banner" and Mike Myers broadcasts the
game. There's lots going on but little depth. If you're looking for a
really good hockey movie, rent the video of George Roy Hill's
"Slapshot," which was filmed in the mid-'70s at Yale. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Mystery, Alaska" slides in with a chilly
5. The puck stops here.

Title
Review for Ninth Gate, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
   Problem is: when Roman Polanski directs and Johnny Depp
stars, you expect more than you get in this grim, third-rate horror
mystery.  Returning to his Rosemary's Baby roots, Roman Polanski helms
this thriller, casting Johnny Depp as an unscrupulous antique book
dealer who is hired by a wealthy New York publisher, Frank Langella,
who has just acquired a rare 17th century Venetian text called The
Nine Gates of the Kingdom of the Shadows.  Langella is a demonologist
who believes that this tome, along with another two, are manuals of
satanic invocation.  Legend has it that if the engravings in the books
are assembled properly, Lucifer will be released from Hell.  Depp's
assignment is to locate the other two volumes in France and Portugal
and to ascertain their authenticity. Interesting concept. Only what
comes next makes little sense. Depp goes to Europe and develops what
he terms a "growing obsession" with his mission. Predictably, there's
a femme fatale, Lena Olin, along with Polanski's wife, Emmanuelle
Seigneur, who serves as Depp's mysterious guardian. Based on the novel
El Club Dumas by Arturo Perez-Reverte, it's been adapted for the
screen by Enrique Urbizu, John Brownjohn, and the director who make
the quest remarkably incoherent and quite lacking in
suspense. Cinematographer Darius Khondji does remarkably sinister
camera work, and production designer Dean Tavoularis creates a
convincing replica of Manhattan since Polanski, who is considered a
fugitive, could not film in the United States. Curiously, if you saw
Eyes Wide Shut, you may find the secret sect of robed society people
interested in the occult vaguely familiar. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, The Ninth Gate is a blithering baroque 4. Scary?
No. Silly? Yes.

Title
Review for Safe House (1999/I)
           Quite often, particularly this time of year, the best new
"movies" are those made-for-TV, and this character-driven
action-adventure is one of them. Patrick Stewart (Jean Luc-Picard of
"Star Trek: The Next Generation") plays Mace, a retired government
official, suffering from Alzheimer's disease, who believes a retired
Admiral, now a Presidential candidate, is trying to kill him because
he's the last remaining member of an elite, "dirty tricks, hit squad"
of the Pentagon. As a result of his suspicions, Mace has become a
paranoid recluse living in an impenetrable home in Los Angeles. To
protect himself, he's surrounded by the ultimate in state-of-the-art
weaponry and hi-tech surveillance equipment. And to keep himself
mentally and physically alert, he deliberately stages terrifying
"drills" with his poolman. Realizing that the keen mind of this
once-elegant and refined gentleman is deteriorating, his daughter
hires a perpetually perky, professional in-home caregiver (Kimberly
Williams) to look after her father and insists that he regularly visit
a psychiatrist (Hector Elizondo) who specializes in
gerontology. Initially resentful of the young woman, Mace slowly warms
to her but, when he mistakenly shoots at a neighbor's car, he realizes
that he's soon going to be "put away" in a locked-care facility. In a
race against time, Mace thinks he's prepared for what happens
next...but is he? Writer/director Eric Steven Stahl has concocted a
highly imaginative, edge-of-your-seat thriller. On the Granger
Made-for-TV Movie Gauge, "Safe House" is a suspenseful 7. Don't miss
the premiere on Sunday night, January 24, at 8 PM on Showtime TV.

Title
Review for Eyes of Tammy Faye, The (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "THE EYES OF TAMMY FAYE" (Lions Gate Films)
A hit at the Sundance Film Festival, this kitschy and
affectionate documentary by Randy Barbato and Fenton Bailey chronicles
the life and times of Tammy Faye Bakker, ex-wife of evangelist Jim
Bakker who - in a spectacular and highly publicized free-fall from
grace - lost control of the PTL (Praise the Lord) Ministries to
manipulative minister Jerry Falwell and wound up in jail. Narrated by
"RuPaul" Charles, it delves beneath the public persona of the teary
Tammy Faye and into the storybook life of the couple who had the
audacity to make Christian fellowship fun, creating a Heritage USA
water park that was the ultimate baptismal font and openly welcoming
homosexuals into their PTL Club.  Tammy Faye grew up as a humble
Christian girl who loved puppets and had such strong faith that she
claims a wart on her finger was cured during a Sunday communion. When
she was in college, she met and married Jim Bakker, whose faith
matched hers. Together, they cultivated the electronic pulpit,
building three Christian television networks and becoming arguably the
most popular Christian force in the United States. Their dreams were
expensive and their money-raising schemes extensive. Then, in the
1980s, scandal rocked Tammy Faye's life, destroying her reputation and
her marriage. Nevertheless, Tammy Faye is once again on her feet, the
indomitable survivor, back in the limelight where she feels she
belongs. Obviously, the filmmakers are sympathetic and their bias
propels the narrative. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Eyes of Tammy Faye" is an ironic, irreverent, comic 7.  I suspect that
one of the reasons this film resonates so strongly with audiences is
that we live in a very judgmental society and, just perhaps, we were
wrong about Tammy Faye.

Title
Review for Baby Geniuses (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "BABY GENIUSES" (Columbia TriStar Pictures)
If you enjoyed the "Look Who's Talking" trilogy, then this is
the kind of comedy you'll enjoy. The gimmick of having babies speak is
revisited here with a plot that revolves around the idea that all
babies are born with the wisdom of the ages and the ability to speak
with each other.  So, what adults hear as gurgling "baby talk" is
actually a sophisticated dialogue. And, through CGI technology, the
babies' lips move exactly like adults' lips, simulating conversation,
along with appropriate facial expressions. Writer/director Bob Clark
and co-writer Greg Michael have concocted a morality play, with its
conflict between good and evil, in which twins are separated at birth
by a scheming, wildly ambitious child psychiatrist, Dr. Kinder
(Kathleen Turner) who runs BABYCO, the world's largest manufacturer of
baby products. She keeps one, named Sly, to be raised with constant
discipline and training in a secret, experimental research research
lab - where he interacts with the best and brightest of other baby
geniuses - except he's always trying to escape. Meanwhile, his twin,
Whit, is raised by Dr. Kinder's niece (Kim Cattrall) who, with her
husband (Peter MacNicol), runs an old-fashioned nursery school, where
love, tenderness, and good sense reign. It's the antithesis of
BABYCO. Inevitably, the babies meet - at a shopping mall at
Christmastime - and, in a mistaken-identity switch, they find
themselves in each other's environment. What works in this film is the
inherent whimsical appeal of the babies - who are actually played by
the Fitzgerald triplets from Vancouver. What doesn't work is the
psychobabble and contrived amusement. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Baby Geniuses" is a flimsy 5. Cute but cloying - unless you're
really into watching the screen antics of two-year olds.

Title
Review for Soldier's Daughter Never Cries, A (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "A SOLDIER'S DAUGHTER NEVER CRIES" (October Films)
Kaylie Jones writes about what she knows. In this fictionalized
autobiography, the daughter of James Jones, who wrote "From Here to
Eternity" and "The Thin Red Line," details what it was like to grow up
bilingual in the late '60s and '70s in Paris, inhabiting two disparate
cultures yet not totally comfortable in either. Her expatriate parents
were obviously conflicted about America and France, and they passed
that ambivalence on to their children. There's the adolescent girl
(Leelee Sobieski), her novelist father (Kris Kristofferson),
free-spirited mother (Barbara Hershey), and adopted French brother
(Jesse Bradford). Plus her best friend (Anthony Roth Costanzo), an
artistic, sensitive soul who sings opera in a lilting soprano. Then,
when her father's heart disease propels a move to Long Island, there's
a whole new set of emotional conflicts as she comes-of-age in a
sexually liberal, unrepressed home. Curiously, it's the idiosyncratic,
anecdotal story, adapted by James Ivory and Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, not
the acting performances, that distinguishes this Merchant-Ivory
film. Kaylie Jones's enduring, unbridled homage to the memory of her
father presents him as a tender, doting, understanding paragon of
loving, paternal qualities. James Jones becomes the father every girl
wishes she had. And cinematographer Jean-Marc Fabre captures this
wistful, nostalgic mood on film. The conclusion, however, is enigmatic
and problematic; given her disturbed brother's troubled background,
it's just not credible that he would not read his mother's diary which
his sister holds for him. Nevertheless, on the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries" is a subtle, delicately
etched, poignant 7, a devoted "Daddy Dearest" for the art house crowd.

Title
Review for Magnolia (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 As a follow-up to the porn movie scene of Boogie Nights,
writer/director Paul Thomas Anderson examines the emotional effects of
physical and spiritual cancer in this manic, rambling tale of dying
fathers and their pathetic children in the rootless '90s. In what is
basically an ensemble movie, set in a single, very long day in
California's San Fernando Valley and not unlike Robert Altman's Short
Cuts, Jason Robards provides the connective tissue as an irascible
television producer with terminal cancer and a grieving,
guilt-stricken trophy wife (Julianne Moore). He begs his male nurse
(Philip Seymour Hoffman) to find his long-lost son so he can make
amends. Played with fervor by Tom Cruise, the son's now a charismatic
sex evangelist, motivational guru and host of a TV info-mercial,
teaching "Seduce and Destroy." Strutting and swaggering, he goads his
male audience into sexual exploits. In a somewhat parallel story,
Philip Baker Hall, the guilty host of a popular TV show, called "What
Do Kids Know?" and married to Melinda Dillon, is also ailing, as his
estranged, coke-snorting daughter (Melora Walters) becomes involved
with a good-natured cop (John C. Reilly). One of the current Quiz
contestants (Jeremy Blackman) is desperate for attention, while a
former Quiz Kid (William H. Macy) watches his life disintegrate in a
bar. Three hours, ten minutes is a long time to keep an audience
involved in 10 characters, connected by chance and coincidence, even
with Robert Elswit's inventive cinematography and Aimee Mann's "Wise
Up" song interwoven into the fabric of the convoluted, overly talky
narrative. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Magnolia is a
cacophonous, kinetic, audacious 7 with a bizarre, illogical, climactic
conclusion related to the Bible, Exodus 8:2.

Title
Review for 200 Cigarettes (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "200 CIGARETTES" (Paramount Pictures)
This MTV-production revolves around frantic, fateful New Year's
Eve party in 1981 in a downtown loft in the funky East Village, where
the lives of various young couples and friends intersect. Anyone who
has ever spent a dismal New Year's Eve with strangers - virtual or
otherwise - can relate to their depressing and desperate angst. Risa
Bramon Garcia, a highly respected casting director, makes her
directorial debut so, predictably, despite the modest $6.5 million
budget, there's a star-studded cast, like Christina Ricci and Gaby
Hoffman as wannabe groupies from suburban Ronkonkoma, Long Island,
lighting up with Paul Rudd and Courtney Love, two platonic friends who
agree, if all else fails, to have sex with each other. Jay Mohr, Casey
Affleck, and Brian McCardie cruise the crowd as Ben Affleck plays
bartender. Goldie Hawn's daughter, giggly Kate Hudson, makes her
feature film debut as an awkward Upper West Side princess, prone to
pratfalls, but, nevertheless, holding her own with Martha Plimpton, as
the sad-sack hostess, Dave Chappelle as a slick disco taxi-driver, and
Janeane Garofalo in a cameo. Ms. Garcia describes the filming as "a
revolving door of actors, coming in and doing their bit and leaving" -
and it looks it. Despite the fact that an appropriate early '80s song
underlines each scene, there's not much to Shana Larsen's unstructured
script and dreadful dialogue, particularly when you realize that AIDS
will bring this kind of promiscuity to an end very soon. So, as a
result, all these actors have very little substance to puff on. Or, as
Paul Rudd concludes, "We use cigarettes as a shield against relating
to each other." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "200
Cigarettes" is a vapid, clumsy 3, making you long for the morning
after to come quickly.

Title
Review for Vatel (2000)
   Based on a true story and adapted into English by Tom
Stoppard from Jeanne Labrune's French screenplay, this elegant,
elaborate 17th century costume drama is propelled by the scheme of a
nearly bankrupt French prince (Julian Glover) to save his province by
entertaining King Louis XIV (Julian Sands) and his courtiers so
lavishly that he will gain favor and patronage.  To this end, he
relies on his master steward Vatel (Gerard Depardieu), an artist with
the power to "create and astonish," to design and orchestrate an
incredibly decadent weekend-in-the-country, a bacchanal of eating,
drinking, sport and opulent theatrical spectacles. What's unexpected
is that, amidst the various sensual pleasures and treacherous sexual
liaisons, the King's new courtesan, Anne de Montausier (Uma Thurman),
will take a fancy to Vatel, seeking him out amidst his army of
peasants in the kitchen galleys, which infuriates the King's scheming
confidante (Tim Roth), whom she spurns.  Director Roland Joffe ("The
Killing Fields") concocts an indulgent feast-for-the eye but what he
sacrifices at the banquet is character development. Many relationships
and political intrigues are left unexplored and unexplained. As a
result, the audience remains emotionally uninvolved. Cinematographer
Robert Fraisse, designer Jean Rabasse and costumer Yvonne Sassinot de
Nesle create magnificent pageantry and authentically gilded excess
within the vast chateau where Vatel, literally, has a finger in every
pot, inventing whipped cream when the eggs go bad, drawing miraculous
confections out of spun sugar, and defending a scullery lad from the
unwanted advances of the Sun King's gay brother. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Vatel" is a sumptuous 7, appealing particularly to
the appetites of art-house audiences.

Title
Review for Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "FINAL FANTASY: SPIRITS WITHIN" (Sony Pictures)
  There's a far deeper question than whether the movie-makers were
faithful to the inter-active computer game which inspired this animated
fantasy/adventure. This is the first major studio release with an entire cast of
computer-generated humanoid actors - and the CGI graphics, dubbed
'hyperRealism,' are an amalgam of photography and painting. It's 2065 and Earth
has been invaded by spectral aliens. Few humans remain but there's the beautiful
heroine, Dr. Aki Ross (voiced by Ming-Na) and her mentor, Dr. Sid (voiced by
Donald Sutherland). They're working on an antidote involving various, positive
spirit waves which will disarm the enemy phantoms. Aiding Aki, who has a ghost
spore in her chest, is Capt. Gray Edwards (voiced by Alec Baldwin) and his
renegades, The Deep Eyes (voiced by Steve Buscemi, Peri Gilpin, Ving Rhames).
But a reckless, gung-ho military strategist, General Hein (voiced by James
Woods), is determined use the highly-destructive, space-mounted Zeus Cannon to
bombard Earth with a bio-etheric energy force although its ecological effect is
unknown. The "acting" is as credible as in many story-propelled sci-fi sagas and
Aki's character combines buff sexiness with spirituality. Significantly, this
could be the first Japanese animation to make the cross from cult status to mass
acceptance in the United States, a feat at which "Princess Mononoke" failed. The
"Final Fantasy" computer game has been popular since its introduction in 1987
and its creator, Hironobu Sakaguchi, worked with director/animator Motonori
Sakakibara, utilizing a clich-laden, contrived script by Al Reinert and Jeff
Vintar. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Final Fantasy: Spirits Within"
is an innovative 6 - too bad the dazzling 'eye candy' technology was wasted on
such a trivial pursuit.

Title
Review for Happy, Texas (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
In the comedy genre of "Priscilla, Queen of the Desert" and
"To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar," this whimsical
farce revolves around two convicts - Jeremy Northam ("The Winslow
Boy," "An Ideal Husband") and Steve Zahn ("Out of Sight") - who escape
from a chain-gang and steal a Winnebago, only to discover that its
rightful owners are two gay guys who travel around the country
producing children's beauty pageants. Their only hope of evading the
law is to assume these new identities, which is immediately funny
since neither crook is exactly in touch with his feminine side. When
they arrive in Happy, Texas, Zahn's job is to coach the pre-teen
contestants for the Little Miss Squeezed Pageant - to the delight of
supervisor Illeana Douglas - while Northam handles the business end.
Their plan is to pocket the contractual $1,000 fee and scram quickly -
after robbing the local bank. Only it's not that easy.  Beautiful
banker Ally Walker (TV's "Profiler") is attracted to Northam - and he
to her - but the only way he can be with her and maintain the charade
is to pretend to be her sympathetic confidante. And Northam's in for
an even bigger surprise when the tormented sheriff - that's William
H. Macy - has a hankering for him at a gay cowboy bar.  Screenwriters
Ed Stone, Phil Reeves and writer/director Mark Illsley were obviously
inspired by Billy Wilder's "Some Like It Hot" since there are many
similarities.  Curiously, in this era of Jon-Benet Ramsey's murder,
the jibes are gentle; somewhere, somehow there's irony buried in
juvenile beauty pageants that's yet to be unearthed. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Happy, Texas" is a snappy, screwball 6. And
if you like this, rent the video "Waiting for Guffman," which is even
funnier.

Title
Review for Pokmon the First Movie: Mewtwo Strikes Back (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Pokemon is more of a worldwide phenomenon than a movie. Its
name is short for "pocket monsters." These creatures are stored in
spheres carried by human trainers who free them for friendly combat
whenever they're challenged by trainers of other Pokemon. The
merchandising madness began in 1996 as a Nintendo video game in Japan
and became an animated TV cartoon. There was a quick bout with infamy
when its editing techniques were said to prompt seizures in children
but that problem has been corrected. Pokemon next appeared in card
form, the collectable, swapable baseball variety, featuring more than
150 characters. Card trading so distracted children that many schools
have banned it; as a consequences, its popularity has soared. Pokemon:
The First Movie begins with a 22-minute short called "Pikachu's
Vacation." Then comes "Mew Strikes Back." Mew is a tiny, adorable
Pokemon but then comes Mew/Two, a bio-engineered mutation, who escapes
from the lab where he was created, bitterly vowing to take revenge on
the human scientists who enslaved him. He heads a super race of
Pokemons who have declared war against the original Pokemons and their
human friends. There's non-stop fighting until, finally, the human
hero, named Ash Ketchum, sacrifices himself to save Pikachu, his
chubby yellow Pokemon, a gesture that causes Mew/Two to re-think his
assertion that humans and Pokemons cannot exist in harmony. Written by
Takeshi Shudo, based on characters by Satoshi Tajiri, and directed by
Kunihiko Yuyama, Pokemon is contradictory in that it preaches the
futility of fighting while presenting non-stop violence. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Pokemon is a frenzied 5 - but kids
love it. Don't underestimate the tsunami of Pokemon Power.

Title
Review for Simpatico (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "SIMPATICO" (Fine Line Features)
        Jeff Bridges, Nick Nolte, Sharon Stone, and Albert Finney try
valiantly but even their compelling performances can't effectively
elevate this somber, slowly paced screen adaptation of Sam Shepard's
1994 play about friendship and betrayal set against the backdrop of
high-stakes horseracing. Written by David Nicholls and Matthew
Warchus, a British theatrical director who makes his debut as a screen
director, it's deeply symbolic, filled with bitter, rambling
ruminations about corruption. Jeff Bridges plays a multi-millionaire
horse-breeder in Lexington, Kentucky, who - in the midst of selling a
champion thoroughbred stallion named Simpatico - is interrupted by a
phone call from a boozy bar-fly, an old friend, Nick Nolte, who
threatens to expose a racetrack scam they pulled when they were young,
involving Bridges' now-dissolute, unhappy wife, Sharon Stone, and
Albert Finney, as a former horse-racing commissioner whom they
slandered and vilified. Catherine Keener (Being John Malkovich)
emerges as the most likable character, playing a supermarket check-out
clerk who serves as an awkward, reluctant intermediary between the
overwrought antagonists who share this gritty, guilty secret. There
are lots of flashbacks, skillfully integrated by editor Pascquale
Buba, in which Liam Waite, Shawn Hatosy and Kimberly Williams play the
trio of principals in the '70s, their ambitious, younger years. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Simpatico is a sly, melancholy,
bittersweet 6, revolving around vindi cation and vengeance.
--part1_b6.620e9d.25b45f3f_boundary--

Title
Review for Contender, The (2000)
    Is the United States really ready for a woman to be a
heartbeat away from the Presidency? That's the challenging premise of
this timely political thriller in which a Vice-President dies and
Senator Laine Hanson (Joan Allen) is chosen by the President (Jeff
Bridges) as his successor. Her surprise selection meets with
opposition, particularly from a powerful adversary (Gary Oldman) who
heads the Congressional confirmation hearings and prefers another
Senator (William Petersen), the hero in a recent tragic
accident. Controversy erupts when an Internet site reveals a shocking
incident from Hanson's college days, along with sexually explicit
photographs. Now a happily married mother, she doesn't deny the
allegations but refuses to discuss the sex scandal, contending that
her personal past has no relevance on her public persona. It's
principles vs. politics. Joan Allen's daring and affecting performance
is not just one of the best of the year, it's one of the screen's best
examples of a woman's vulnerable, stoic courage. This remarkable
actress never hits a false note. Jeff Bridges is quite believable, as
are Gary Oldman, William Petersen, Christian Slater, Sam Elliott, Saul
Rubinek, Mariel Hemingway and Philip Baker Hall.  The multi-layered
screenplay by Rod Lurie ("Deterrence") reveals one layer of surprise
after another and his swiftly economical direction proceeds with a
feverish sense of pace and tempo that keeps the attention
riveted. Problem is: the buxom co-ed in the lurid photo bears little
resemblance to the Senator and the heavy-handed running gag about the
White House cuisine soon gets stale. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "The Contender" is an intriguing, enigmatic, compelling 8,
despite Ben Franklin's referral to the post of Vice-President as "your
superfluous excellency."

Title
Review for Dance with Me (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "DANCE WITH ME" (Columbia Pictures: Sony Releasing)

It's curious that the dethroned 1984  Miss America, Vanessa L. Williams,
has probably made a more memorable career for herself than the majority
of bland, pretty faces who have worn the Atlantic City crown. (She lost
her title after nude photos were published in "Penthouse" magazine.)
In her new movie, "Dance With Me," she does the older woman/younger
man samba with Puerto Rican pop singing sensation Chayanne. She plays
a sulky single mom who, having been dumped by her abusive professional
dancing partner (Rick Valenzuela), teaches two-step classes to Texans
at a Houston studio owned by Kris Kristofferson. Along comes sensuous
Chayanne, as an ambitious Cuban immigrant (think young Desi Arnaz),
and Vanessa's inner rhythms start beating Babaloo! Little does she
know that this sizzling handyman from Havana is really Kristofferson's
son - of course, no one else knows it either. The muddled,
cliche-ridden soap opera story, written by choreographer Daryl
Matthews and directed by Randa Haines ("Children of a Lesser God"),
revolves around losers becoming winners as the competitive beat goes
on, culminating in the predictable, show-stopping dance-contest
finale. And there's a brief homage to the late, great Gene Kelly as
Chayanne dances through lawn sprinklers a la "Singing in the Rain."
But, if you want to see this kind of film even better made, I
recommend "Strictly Ballroom" (1992), a witty, spirited, Australian
musical, directed by Baz Luhrmann ("Romeo and Juliet"). On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dance With Me" is a spicy, schmaltzy 6 with a
tangy salsa beat.

Title
Review for Thomas and the Magic Railroad (2000)
Susan Granger: "THOMAS AND THE MAGIC RAILROAD"  (Destination Films)
 For almost two decades, Britt Allcroft's imaginative Thomas
the Tank Engine has intrigued youngsters on television and video - and
now Thomas chugs off on a feature-film adventure. The plot is
ridiculously complicated but, basically, Thomas and his friends on the
magic railroad live on the Island of Sodor while humans live in a
happy village called Shining Time. Using sparkling gold-dust that he
sprinkles with his whistle, a miniature man known Mr. Conductor (Alex
Baldwin) travels between the two worlds but he's losing his gold-dust
supply. "My universe is in danger!" he wails, adding: "I think you're
going to help me and Thomas sometime in the story." This sets up an
inter-active premise with the audience that is never fulfilled as the
live-action characters function in an animated world. Instead, we meet
a somber, resourceful 12 year-old (Mara Wilson) who is going to visit
her grumpy grandpa (Peter Fonda), who spends his days tinkering with
Lady, an enchanted steam engine he's hidden in Muffle
Mountain. Mr. Conductor needs to find the long-lost Lady in order to
get more gold-dust. Meanwhile, there's a subplot involving the efforts
of nasty Diesel to relegate Thomas and his shiny cohorts to the
roundhouse, and Mara befriends a local lad (Cody McMains). Curiously,
the trains speak with British accents while the Conductor's slacker
cousin (Michael E. Rodgers) has a Scottish brogue and the other humans
are distinctly American. Alec Baldwin smiles relentlessly, looking
silly, while Peter Fonda seems befuddled. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Thomas and the Magic Railroad" is a stiffly tedious,
awkwardly fragmented 4.  Pre-schoolers - two, three, four year-olds -
may enjoy this fantasy about being "useful," but I suspect anyone
older will be squirming. Wait for the video.

Title
Review for Deep Blue Sea (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 It's "The Poseidon Adventure" meets "Jaws."  Researchers
aboard the floating laboratory Aquatica have come up with an amazing
pharmaceutical discovery. Using mako sharks, they have discovered the
key to regenerating human brain tissue - thus curing Alzheimer's and
other degenerative diseases. Only a doctor has violated ethical codes,
genetically re-engineering DNA, making the experimental specimens
smarter and faster. Suddenly a tropical storm strikes, and chaos
reigns as the scientists are being stalked by the predators. The crew
of this underwater compound, stranded on various submerged levels,
must try to get to the surface - any way they can - as, one by one,
they're chased and attacked. That's the predictable plot concocted by
writers Duncan Kennedy, Donna Powers & Wayne Powers. Director Renny
Harlin ("The Long Kiss Goodnight," "Cutthroat Island," "Cliffhanger")
focuses his attention on action and carnage. The sharks are
animatronic with some CG effects, not totally believable, but Harlin
effectively uses the elements of shock and surprise. British actress
Saffron Burrows is a dead-ringer for Harlin's ex-wife, Geena Davis,
and shark-wrangler Thomas Jane resembles Kevin Costner in
"Waterworld."  In the casting process, their looks were obviously more
important than their acting ability. Rapper LL Cool J, as Preacher,
the parrot-loving cook, is the most memorable character, along with
Stellan Skarsgard, the project director, and Samuel L. Jackson as the
financier whose company supports Aquatica. Of course, what you're
wondering is: who will survive? On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Deep Blue Sea" is a shallow yet scary 6. It's a monster movie that
will have you dreading water.

Title
Review for Where the Money Is (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
    When Paul Newman gets a roguish twinkle in his eye, you
know there's gonna be trouble - and that's just what happens when a
sexy, seductive nurse, Linda Fiorentino, discovers that her newest
catatonic patient is actually a bank robber who faked a paralytic
stroke to get out of prison. In this clever, unconventional caper,
Newman plays Henry Manning, a renowned thief who got caught in a
Denver bank vault during a massive power failure. Now he's playing
feeble in an Oregon nursing home, just waiting for the right time to
re-claim his life. "There's an element of Butch Cassidy in Henry,"
Newman says in the press notes, quoting The Sundance Kid's
oft-repeated line: "Keep thinking, Butch, that's what you're good at."
The problem occurs when the larceny-minded Fiorentino, who yearns for
adventure, tries to recruit him into masterminding a local heist. "I'm
playing brain-dead, not brain-damaged," he scoffs - but soon the plot
thickens, much to the dismay of Fiorentino's hapless husband, played
by Dermot Mulroney.  While Linda Fiorentino's ex-prom-queen-without-a
future character is intriguing, this is Newman's film - from beginning
to end. You can't take your eyes off him. There's a delicious scene in
which he explains, "Faking a stroke isn't easy - you gotta work at
it," demonstrating how he learned to control his reactions with a
G. Gordon Liddy-inspired lighted match-burning-his-hand. Written by
E. Max Frye, Topper Lilien & Carroll Cartwright and directed by Marek
Kanievska, it's a taut story, filled with tension and suspense. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Where the Money Is" is a low-key,
fun-filled, spirited 7, taking a cool cue from jailbird Willie
Sutton's answer to why he robbed banks: "Because that's where the
money is."

Title
Review for Bride of Chucky (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "BRIDE OF CHUCKY"
        If you're a horror film buff, you'll recall Chucky, the
supernatural doll with the soul of a serial killer, who came to life
in "Child's Play" (1988) and slashed his way through two subsequent
sequels. Now, he's back! But with a difference. Like "Scream" and "I
Know What You Did Last Summer," this Chucky tale, written by Don
Mancini, is an irreverent satire of the horror genre, aimed directly
at the teenage crowd. David Kirschner, the producer, states his
purpose succinctly: "We worked hard to get an R-rating because, if
you're not R-rated, you lose your 16, 17, and 18 year-old crowd. They
want to see the excitement, the chases, and the kill so, basically,
this is kind of a psychotic muppet movie."  Which isn't too surprising
since Kirschner began his career as an illustrator for Jim Henson,
creator of the Muppets. In this story, Chucky (a.k.a. Charles Lee Ray,
voiced by Brad Dourif) has a former girl-friend, Tiffany (Jennifer
Tilly) whose tarty soul has migrated into a doll too: a bridal
babe. Chucky and Tiffany do what you'd expect them to do, supervised
by Hong Kong director Ronny Yu ("The Bride with White Hair"),
considering the only way they can live happily ever after as humans is
to find compatible body donors. And the greatest horror is that, given
an offspring, there might be yet another sequel. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bride of Chucky" is a malevolent, blood splattering
1. It's just too gross!

Title
Review for Groove (2000)
A favorite of the Sundance Film Festival, first-time
writer/director Greg Harrison's "Groove" explores San Francisco's
underground rave scene. As I understand it, the difference between a
dance club and a rave is that raves are parties that spring up almost
spontaneously in different locations. Someone puts out the word on the
Internet, via e-mail, and it spreads. Others get a voice mail message
and pass it along. Participants gather, illegally, at the designated
place at the appointed time, pay an entrance fee, and the celebrated
DJs take turns, working in shifts to provide the music. This film
supposedly chronicles in pseudo-documentary tone one night at a
rave. It begins on Friday with an e-mail, announcing tomorrow's
event. By Saturday night, a crowd of 200 has assembled at an abandoned
Bay Area warehouse, many of whom are, want to be and/or will be high
on the drug Ecstasy.  There's the naive, aspiring writer David (Hamish
Linklater) from the Midwest who meets Leyla (Lola Glaudini), a worldly
New Yorker who advises him to take Ecstasy with lots of water to avoid
dehydration. And David's brother Colin (Denny Kirkwood) who surprises
his girlfriend (MacKenzie Firgens) on her birthday with something she
didn't expect. Real-life DJs with names like Digweed and Dimitri vary
the pace and mood by changing the tempo and tone of the music. Humor
is injected by the efforts of the promoter (Steve Van Wormer) to
divert the suspicions of a cop (Nick Offerman). The writing is
sketchy, relying on the art of improvisation which these unskilled
actors, and others, have yet to master. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Groove" is a throbbing, feeble 4.  I suspect there's less
than meets the eye in this manic, all-night, psychedelic celebration.

Title
Review for House Divided, A (2000) (TV)
   Based on historical events surrounding Amanda America
Dickson, a bi-racial woman who is the daughter of a wealthy plantation
owner (Sam Waterson) and his slave (Lisagay Hamilton), "A House
Divided" is an adult drama of secrets, lies, and deception. Born with
fair skin, Amanda ("Flashdance" Jennifer Beals) has been raised and
educated near Sparta in ante-bellum Georgia as if she were
white. Under the watchful eye of her grandmother (Shirley Douglas) and
convinced that her mother died during childbirth, she grows up in
privileged circumstances. But when her devoted father dies and leaves
his estate to Amanda, her uncle contests the Will, convinced that she
is not legally entitled to this inheritance. The young lawyer (Tim
Daly) who drew up the document pursues the case in court. During the
trial, through the use of flashbacks, Amanda understands her mother's
sacrifice, comes to terms with their relationship, and finds her true
identity. Directed by John Kent Harrison, Amanda's story was inspired
by the book, "Woman of Color, Daughter of Privilege," written by Kent
Anderson Leslie for a Ph.D. dissertation and adapted for the screen by
Paris Qualles. Viewed from the vantage point of the 21st century,
what's most fascinating is the bizarre psychological climate that
existed in the South between white and black families who were living
side-by-side, often in intimate circumstances, as in this case. The
production values are first-class, as viewed through the sepia-colored
prism of designer Susan Longmire and costumer Resa McConaghy. On the
Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge, "A House Divided" is a slow-paced but
hopeful 6, particularly appealing to those who have been estranged
from their parents for any reason. It's on Showtime TV, Sunday, July
30, at 8 P.M.

Title
Review for Edtv (1999)
Subject: Susan Granger's review of "ED tv"
Approved: graham@ee.washington.edu
X-Questions-to: movie-rev-mod@www.ee.washington.edu
X-Submissions-to: movie-reviews@www.ee.washington.edu
Followup-To: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Summary: r.a.m.r. #17370
Keywords: author=granger
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.reviews
Organization: None
Author: Ssg722@aol.com (Susan Granger)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ED TV" (Universal Pictures)
We're obviously a nation besotted with celebrity, fame, and
seeing ourselves on TV. If you doubt it, watch the crowds that gather
outside NBC in Rockefeller Center every morning to wave and mug for
the "Today" show cameras. "ED tv" is about a goofy, ordinary guy from
Texas - Matthew McConaughey - who is catapulted to instant success
when his photogenic face is spotted by "True TV" producer Ellen
DeGeneres, who is determined to air someone "live" on cable 24
hours-a-day.  From video store clerk to TV star in days...is that the
new American Dream?  Unlike "The Truman Show," in which Jim Carrey was
the unwitting dupe, or "Pleasantville," in which two teenagers get
stuck in a '50s sit-com, the star of "ED tv" succumbs to the
aphrodisiac of fame, volunteering to give up his dignity for the
spotlight. After discussing it with his family (Woody Harrelson,
Martin Landau, Sally Kirkland) McConaughey gamely allows cameras
installed in his apartment to record his every move (except in the
bathroom) and tries to ignore the three-man crew dogging his steps -
until he falls in love with his brother's girl-friend, Jenna Elfman
(who resembles a wannabe Renee Zellweger). Only when she resents the
constant intrusion does McConaughey realize what celebrity and the
sacrifice of privacy really mean - but, by that time, the audience has
become addicted to watching his "life" unfold. Written by Lowell Ganz
and Babaloo Mandel ("Parenthood," "City Slickers") and directed by Ron
Howard ("Ransom," "Apollo 13"), "ED tv" is a relentlessly
entertaining, cleverly comical satire of our American obsession with
the limelight. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "ED tv" is an
engaging, delightful 8, focusing on people who are considered special
just for being famous.

Title
Review for Story of Us, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "The Story of Us" (Universal Pictures)
Instead of the usual vows, perhaps the marriage ceremony should
include the question: "Do you have any idea how difficult this is
going to be?" Because that's what intrigued filmmaker Rob Reiner to
wonder: Can any couple with two kids survive together for 15 years?
Bruce Willis and Michelle Pfeiffer play a suburban dad-and-mom whose
constant quarrels have made them decide on a trial separation while
their kids are in summer camp. As they fumble through the nitty-gritty
of living apart, flashbacks reveal what abrasive episodes led up to
their edgy estrangement. Basically, she's a crossword-puzzle creator
who's a highly organized, compulsive perfectionist while he's a
laid-back, playful writer who flourishes in an unstructured
existence. (One is tempted to interpret Willis' obviously raw hurt as
a spillover from his real-life divorce from Demi Moore.) Writers Alan
Zweibel and Jessie Nelson re-visit bittersweet marital territory
that's been explored many times before, stressing that any successful
relationship is a work-in-progress. One winces for the obvious hair
pieces and/or transplants Willis feels compelled to wear, while
Pfeiffer is so breathtakingly beautiful that her efforts to be a plain
housewife are pathetic. And when Jayne Meadows, Tom Poston, Betty
White, and Red Buttons pop up as the in-laws, you're acutely aware
that these are aging stars playing cameos.  Nevertheless, Reiner's
slickly inventive direction and the sheer charm and likeability of
Willis and Pfeiffer prevail, set to the tune of Eric Clapton's guitar
strumming "I'm Sorry." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Story of Us" is a shaky, sentimental 6. It's "When Harry Met Sally" -
15 years later - with "best friend" Rita Wilson outrageously
attempting to update the orgasm-in-a-deli scene.

Title
Review for Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels (1998)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "LOCK, STOCK, AND TWO SMOKING BARRELS"
       Talk about hype! If you read the newspaper ads, this looks like
an irresistible crime caper. Don't believe it - unless you're willing
and able to decipher rhythmic Cockney slang, familiar only in London's
East End. In fact, the garbled dialogue is so unintelligible that, in
several scenes, there are even subtitles! The action-packed, Quentin
Tarantino-like plot revolves around underworld ineptitude. Nick Moran
plays a cocky card-shark who loses 500,000 pounds ($800,000) to a
gambler in a rigged card game. He's told to pay up within a week or he
and his hapless pals (Jason Flemyng, Dexter Fletcher, and Jason
Statham) will get their bodily parts chopped off in increments,
starting with the fingers. There is an alternative: he could get his
father, played by Sting, to turn over his popular bar to the
gambler. Since neither solution is appealing, Moran and his friends
decide to rip off a neighborhood marijuana factory. There's lots of
shooting, several battling gangs, Damon Runyon'ish characters (Hatchet
Harry, Barry the Baptist, Big Chris) and even a few laughs in the
midst of the crazy get-rich-quick schemes. One of the ploys involves
stealing two valuable antique muskets - the titular smoking barrels.
But, all in all, it's quite violent, repeatedly profane, and the
characters are remarkably unpleasant to watch. Obviously, first-time
writer/director Guy Ritchie has a talent for style and, given a more
coherent story, he'll do good films in the future. But the virtues of
this film lie in the rapid pace, MTV-like camera angles and quick
cuts. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Lock, Stock, and Two
Smoking Barrels" is an edgy, fumbling 4, filled with double-crosses,
chaos and corpses.

Title
Review for Central do Brasil (1998)
The Academy Award nominee from Brazil for Best Foreign
Language film and Best Actress, Fernanda Montenegro, this superb film
transcends words and culture. It's the tale of a nasty woman and a
naive, ten year-old boy who meet at Rio's train station and,
eventually, strike out on a cross-country journey to find the boy's
estranged father. It revolves around alienation and a quest for
identity: the search for a parent whom a child has never met, the
search for feelings that an older woman thought she had lost, and the
search for a country that, perhaps, has vanished forever. Fernanda
Montenegro delivers a fearless, masterful performance as the lonely,
world-weary former schoolteacher who makes her money writing letters
for illiterate people. Only she's a scam artist. She saves on postage
by never mailing anything. Instead, she rips the letters up or stuffs
them into a drawer, mocking her customers' emotional outpourings. Her
crusty, unsentimental characterization never resorts to hardened,
cynical caricature, winning her the Best Actress nod from the National
Board of Review and Los Angeles Film Critics Association. Director
Walter Salles discovered the irrepressible child, adorable Vinicius de
Oliveira, working as a shoeshine boy at the Rio airport and, indeed,
he shines in his demanding, extraordinary role. About this quietly
optimistic fable, Salles explains: "When you come from a privileged
part of Brazilian society, as I do, you have to opt either to be part
o that culture of indifference or to understand what the country
really is." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Central Station"
is a richly moving and tender 10, reminiscent of "The Bicycle Thief."
I suspect that "Central Station" and "Life is Beautiful" will be the
two major Foreign Language contenders.

Title
Review for Killing Yard, The (2001) (TV)
Susan Granger's review of "THE KILLING YARD" (Showtime TV)
On September 9, 1971, 1200 inmates of New York's Attica State Penitentiary
seized control of the prison in a violent, bloody riot, taking many hostages. On
September 13, under orders by Gov. Nelson Rockefeller, guards stormed the
facility and restored order. Their massacre, an unprecedented barrage of gunfire
lasted six minutes, and the police acknowledged having fired no less than 2200
lethal rounds. Until Waco, and with the exception of the Indian massacres in the
late 19th century, this assault was the most brutal one-day confrontation
between Americans since the Civil War. This story focuses on what happened after
the raid as the prosecutor (Larry Day) and district attorney (Christopher
Heyerdahl) pin many of the alleged murders on an inmate named Shango (Morris
Chestnut), a self-educated, if paranoid, "jailhouse lawyer." The prosecution
strategy involves intimidation, innuendo, guilt by association and character
defamation of witnesses. Shango is defended by an aging, ailing attorney (Alan
Alda) and his assistant (Rose McGowan), an Attica Defense Fund volunteer, whose
dogged determination to prove that no hostages were killed by inmates made this
a landmark legal case. It's a classic courtroom tug-of-war, an intellectual
chess match, monitored by a fair and impartial Judge (Tony Nardi). In 1976, Gov.
Hugh Carey issued a blanket pardon for everyone involved and sealed New York
records concerning Attica for 50 years and, in January, 2000, New York State
agreed to a $12 million settlement for inmates and their lawyers.` On the
Granger Made-for-TV Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Killing Yard" is a significant
7. It premieres on Sunday, Sept. 23rd at 8 p.m. but - be warned - there are
scenes of extreme brutality and bloodshed.

Title
Review for U-571 (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "U-571" (Universal Pictures)
   Brace yourself, the first popcorn picture of the season has
arrived! "U-571" has everything you could want in an
action-adventure. Set against the backdrop of World War II, when
Hitler launched a devastating U-boat assault against the Eastern
seaboard of the United States, it revolves around a daring mission to
capture an Enigma machine, a top-secret Nazi radio coding device. But
the crux of the story involves a young executive officer, played by
Matthew McConaughey, who proves his leadership ability in a crisis
situation when his submarine crew is deployed to answer the distress
call of a stranded German U-boat. Their assignment is to masquerade as
a resupply ship and, wearing German uniforms, board the damaged vessel
and seize its Enigma encrypting device. "Get the damned trophy and get
the hell outta there," orders the captain. But everything that can go
wrong does, as the cleverly constructed script poses several dilemmas
and one complication after another. Directed and co-written by
Jonathan Mostow ("Breakdown"), it's a taut, exciting tale of
historical fiction, a composite of actual events, not revisionist
history, which an important point which is made clear in the closing
credits. Matthew McConaughey shows remarkable emotional dimension,
ably supported by Harvey Keitel, Bill Paxton, David Keith, Jack
Noseworthy, Erik Palladino, Tom Guiry and Jon Bon Jovi. And
cinematographer Oliver Wood captures the claustrophobic emotional
stress of being in the path of deadly torpedoes and depth charges and,
even more terrifying, the helpless, eerie silence of expectation. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "U-571" is an action-packed,
explosive 8.  If you're into ferociously suspenseful, high-tension
thrillers: go, go, go!

Title
Review for My Favorite Martian (1999)
Susan Granger's review of "MY FAVORITE MARTIAN"
   It's hard to believe that the big-screen version of the
ingratiating CBS-TV sitcom of the early '60s could be this awful!
Christopher Lloyd seems geniunely embarrassed as a stranded space
alien who meets Earthling Jeff Daniels when his UFO crashes, and
Jeff's a mild-mannered TV news producer investigating the
phenomenon. (Bill Bixby played the role originally.) Lloyd stows away
in the trunk of Daniels' car and moves into his home, posing as his
Uncle Martin, wreaking havoc until, allegedly, his superiority complex
and wacky charm prevail. Don't believe it! This is no "Addams Family"
or "Brady Bunch." Screenwriters Sherri Stoner and Deanna Oliver
("Casper") concocted the wretched screenplay filled with banal
one-liners and an ending unabashedly lifted from "E.T." - and the mess
is ineptly directed by Donald Petrie ("Grumpy Old Men") who must have
encouraged the over-acting.  A bizarre casting note: Darryl Hannah
plays a supposedly homely camerawoman who reads "Men are from Mars"
and is secretly in love with Daniels who, predictably, pants for
Elizabeth Hurley, his airhead co-producer. Wallace Shawn is a silly,
villainous scientist who conspires with a secretive government
operative, Ray Walston (TV's original Uncle Martin), to capture the
emerald-green Martian to perform some gruesome experiments on him,
probing his retractable antennas and analyzing his ability to levitate
things by pointing his finger. And the Martian's spacesuit, named
Zoot, is an over-sexed animated character, voiced by unbilled Wayne
Knight. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "My Favorite Martian"
is a lamebrained 2. It's cheesy, creepy, and sleazy or were those
three Disney dwarfs?

Title
Review for Next Friday (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "NEXT FRIDAY" (New Line Cinema)
        Writer/rapper/actor Ice Cube's Friday was a surprise hit back
in 1995, so it should not come as a shock that there's a sequel, aimed
directly at the same young, hip, urban audience. Along with serving as
producer, Ice Cube reprises his role as Craig, a young man who was
trying to survive on the mean streets of South Central Los
Angeles. Now, he's moved from the city to the suburbs only to discover
that his troubles came right along with him. They're personified by
Debo, played by Tommy "Tiny" Lister Jr., a massive bully who wound up
in prison in the original story.  Debo's escaped from the Los Angeles
County Men's Central Jail and wants payback - which is why Craig's
father (John Witherspoon) suggests that he hang out in Rancho
Cucamonga with his Lotto-winning uncle (Don "DC" Curry) and
trophy-wife aunt (Kym E. Whitley), much to the consternation of other
friends, relatives, and Hispanic gangster neighbors. Chris Tucker's
manic character of Craig's pal Smokey has supposedly "gone into rehab"
but, obviously, Tucker's gone on to bigger and better things.  Most of
the vulgar dialogue is unprintable and the crude, chaotic humor
centers on bathroom functions. What could have been an amusing Beverly
Hillbillies riff is ineptly directed by first-timer Steve Carr, whose
background is in disjointed music videos - and it shows. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Next Friday is a coarse, cheesy,
repetitive 3. It's loud, lame slapstick silliness.

Title
Review for Pollock (2000)
     Actor/director Ed Harris's wrenching study of Jackson
Pollock, one of the greatest American painters of the 20th century,
reveals him as a complex, pathological alcoholic. In the late 1940s,
Pollock thrust "splatter" abstractionism into modern art and then
drank himself into misery, finally perishing in a car wreck. During
his rise to fame and fortune, the notoriously self-promoting, yet
inwardly self-doubting, Pollock met up with feisty, tough-talking
fellow painter Lee Krasner (Marcia Gay Harden) when he was living in
Greenwich Village and, together, they moved to rural Long
Island. Their domestic arrangement was far from tranquil and,
eventually, Pollock acquired a younger trophy, Ruth Kligman (Jennifer
Connelly), while Krasner emerges as a bitter, enabling wife.  From his
lying on the grass staring at the sky and clamming in East Hampton to
his precise methodology of drip-painting canvases and his drunken
revels at Jungle Pete's, the watering hole near his home - Pollock's
abusive, mercurial life is up there on the screen. The weakness is in
the simplistic, sequential screenplay with its cliche-ridden
exposition and dialogue, along with its lack of character insight, by
Barbara Turner and Susan J. Emshwiller. Val Kilmer lends support as
rival artist Willem de Kooning, as does Amy Madigan (the real-life
wife of Harris) as idiosyncratic heiress Peggy Guggenheim, with Bud
Cort as her art scout, and Jeffrey Tambour as art critic Clement
Greenberg. Kudos to cinematographer Liza Rinzler, production designer
Mark Friedberg and costumer David Robinson for the evocation of the
'40s-'50s era. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pollock" is a
stylish 7, distinguished by Oscar-caliber performances by Ed Harris,
Marcia Gay Harden and Amy Madigan.

Title
Review for Bowfinger (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  Are you in the mood to laugh? 'Cause you gotta be when you see this spoof of the movie industry in which Steve Martin plays Robert "Bobby" Bowfinger, a down-and-out director who's crazy about a script, "Chubby Rain," about tiny aliens who ride raindrops down to Earth. Problem is: the only way to get the movie made is to get a bankable A-list star - which he cannot afford. Illustrating his frustration, there's a hilarious scene in which Robert Downey Jr. is a prominent producer, "a player," whom he spots at a restaurant. So Bowfinger decides to stalk TinselTown's hottest actor, Kit Ramsey - that's Eddie Murphy, and surreptitiously capture him on celluloid, editing the surreptitious footage into his low-budget ($2,814) movie. The angry, already paranoid Ramsey goes nuts when he finds himself interacting with Christine Baranski and other actors from "Rain" who accost him, reciting their lines. Seeking tranquillity, Ramsey retreats to a posh haven called MindHead, run by!
 manipulative Terence Stamp. Is this a riff on certain stars' devotion to Scientology? When he was writing the screenplay, Steve Martin originally envisioned a wimpy, spiritual actor, "a Keanu Reeves type," but adapted him into a black action star with Murphy's help.  Directed by Frank Oz, Martin's elegant goofiness blends with Murphy's hip cynicism and the result is a deliriously outrageous combination. Plus, Murphy plays another role as his nerdy stunt double/errandboy. And, if you think Heather Graham's ambitious ingenue-who-runs-off-with-a-lesbian role resembles Anne Heche, you're not alone. Martin dated Heche for several years before she jilted him for Ellen DeGeneres. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bowfinger" is an amusing, inventive, entertaining 8. It's a funny, funny satire that skewers Hollywood.

Title
Review for Dog of Flanders, A (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
         Set in the early 19th century in the Dutch-speaking region of
Belgium known as Flanders, this tale revolves - not around a dog - but
a boy.  Little Nello (Jesse James/Jeremy James) is an poor orphan who
grows up in the care of his kindly grandfather (Jack Warden). Since
his mother was an artist and left him her sketchbook, Nello loves to
draw. A chance meeting with a noted local artist (Jon Voight)
introduces the great Flemish painter, Peter Paul Rubens, as a focus
for Nello's dreams. So where does the dog come in? By the side of the
road, Nello finds a large Bouvier des Flanders who was cruelly abused
by a peddler and befriends him, naming him Patrasche. Big, black,
fluffy Patrasche trots around as Nello's loyal companion, but the pet
is limited to the periphery of the action. Writer/director Kevin
Brodie, working with Robert Singer, adapting the novel by Ouida
(a.k.a. Marie Louise de la Ramee), comes up with trite dialogue
punctuating a contrived yet predictable story. Those familiar with the
book will note that the ending has been changed to one much
happier. Brought up on a diet of fast-paced television, children will
undoubtedly be bored, squirming in their seats along with their
parents. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "A Dog of Flanders" is
a slow-paced, dreary 3. "Real happiness comes not with possessions or
positions but with people" and "Never underestimate the power of love"
are worthwhile sentiments but they're presented in the dullest
framework possible.

Title
Review for Tortilla Soup (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "TORTILLA SOUP" (Samuel Goldwyn Films)
   Based on the Taiwanese film "Eat Drink Man Woman," this is a savory
romantic comedy about the power of love and food in a middle-class
Mexican-American family in Los Angeles. As Martin, the patriarch and master chef
of the Naranjo family, Hector Elizondo whips up delectable concoctions,
including freshly made guacamole, roasted red and yellow peppers, and sizzling
plantains. "We honor dinner," he instructs his daughters. "We have good manners
and good conversation." Problem is: he can't taste food since his wife's death.
And each of the girls has her own angst. The eldest, Letitia, called Letty
(Elizabeth Pena), is a repressed schoolteacher who fears God and almost
everything else - until a baseball coach (Paul Rodriguez) convinces her that
love is, indeed, possible. Feisty Carmen (Jacqueline Obradors), a businesswoman,
is quick-tempered, perhaps because her heart is really in the kitchen, even
though her nouveau recipes jar her father's already-frayed nerves. And the
youngest, Maribel (Tamara Mello), is about to leave for college when she meets a
handsome Brazilian (Nikolai Kinski, son of Klaus Kinski).  Raquel Welch overdoes
the wacky neighbor routine but Julio Oscar Mechoso is memorable as Martin's
affectionate best-friend and catering business partner. Admittedly, writers Tom
Musca, Ramon Menendez & Vera Blasi and director Maria Ripoli don't achieve the
sublime success of Ang Lee's "Eat Drink Man Woman" - nominated as Best Foreign
Language Film of 1994 -  but this, nevertheless, is a tantalizing, tasty morsel,
extolling traditional family values with the context of the contemporary world.
On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Tortilla Soup" is a zesty 7. You'll
consume this visual feast with gusto - and be ready for a Mexican meal
afterwards.

Title
Review for Walk on the Moon, A (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
This finely etched family drama is seductively reminiscent of 1969, the year of Vietnam protesters, flower power, Apollo astronauts, Woodstock, and the sexual revolution. But it was just another summer in the Catskills for the Kantrowitz family. Diane Lane plays 31 year-old Pearl Kantrowitz, a loving mother and conscientious kosher housewife, who fears that life is passing her by. She's stranded at Dr. Fogler's Bungalows, an isolated Jewish resort on the borsht belt, with her angst-ridden adolescent daughter, Anna Paquin ("The Piano"), her precocious young son, and their nagging, superstitious, tarot-card reading grandmother (Tovah Feldshuh), while her dull husband (Liev Schreiber) toils in New York as a hard-working TV repairman. The monotony is relieved only by the weekly visit by Viggo Mortensen, as the Blouse Man, a soft-spoken hippie who peddles "bargain" discount fashions from his gypsy van. On one particular weekend - while Neil Armstrong is walking on the moon -!
 Pearl enjoys a liberating, if overheated fling with this seductive, uninhibited proponent of free love and drug experimentation. But then what? Discovery, betrayal, anguish, compassion, forgiveness. Directed by actor Tony Goldwyn, inspired by some of writer Pamela Gray's childhood memories and produced by Dustin Hoffman's company, this film boasts excellent performances set within a strong sense of atmospheric authenticity. And, yes, that's unbilled Julie Kavner's raspy voice on the public address system. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "A Walk on the Moon" is an amusing, romantic, evocative 8, a sophisticated woman's picture that could appeal to men as well.

Title
Review for Universal Soldier: The Return (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
When critics are banned from a movie in advance of its
opening, you know there's a problem - in this case, more than
one. Back in 1992, "Universal Soldier" introduced hunky Jean-Claude
Van Damme as Luc Deveraux, a Unisol, the recycled corpse of a soldier
killed in Vietnam whose military motto is "Dying to Serve."  At the
story's end, Luc was just beginning to perceive human feelings and
comprehend emotions. In this sequel, he's developed into a "normal"
human being - a bit stronger with bigger muscles and certainly a
better fighter. Now, Luc's a widower with a pre-teen daughter (Karis
Paige Bryant). He serves as a technical expert on a new government
project preparing a stronger breed of soldier that is more
sophisticated, agile, and intelligent. All goes well until the
soldiers' supercomputer, in the human form of Michael Jai White,
develops a maniacal mind of its own. Then it's the Self-Evolving
Thought Helix (acronym SETH) against Luc, whose only allies are Heidi
Schanz, a tough-as-nails TV reporter, and Kiana Tom (ESPN fitness
guru) as his training buddy. So what happens when the Muscles from
Brussels faces off against an entire army of Unisols programmed to
kill, kill, kill? Guess. Pow! Bam! Jab! Zap! Some of the plot
absurdities include a pit stop at a sleazy strip club, the only place
where they can find an Internet connection to access a secret
code. Directed by Mic Rodgers, a former stunt coordinator,
Jean-Claude's acting technique has not improved noticeably, nor has
his enunciation. At one point, he cautions his cohorts not to "peas
damoff" - which translates to "piss them off," but it takes a few
moments to comprehend. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Universal Soldier: The Return" is a action-packed, homicidal 3 -
aimed at diehard kickboxing fans.

Title
Review for Kid, The (2000)
Working with Hayley Joel Osment in "The Sixth Sense" boosted
Bruce Willis's career and now he's got a new pint-sized co-star in
pudgy, eight year-old Spencer Breslin. Spencer plays Willis's
character, Russ Duritz, as a child.  He's transported from the '70s to
the present to help his arrogant, aging self - that's Willis - an
unhappy, unmarried, insensitive "image consultant" who is alienated
from his family and doesn't even own a dog - get back in touch with
the kid within. Rusty, as he was called back then, is appalled to
learn what will become of him, moaning, "I grew up to be a loser!" But
Russ eventually finds out what went wrong along the way, causing him
to give up his dreams of being a pilot and to acquire a twitch in his
left eye. Working from a script by Audrey Wells ("The Truth About Cats
and Dogs," "Guinevere") under the restrained direction of Jon
Turtletaub ("While You Were Sleeping," "Phenomenon"), Willis is
utterly charming and captivating, as he discovers that being rich,
living in an Architectural Digest house and driving a shiny black
Porsche isn't as fulfilling as loving people and having them love
you. 'Sound like "It's a Wonderful Life?" So be it - except Frank
Capra would never have tolerated Marc Shaiman's intrusive, syrupy
score. If you think Spencer Breslin looks familiar, he's the
TV-commercial kid who ordered "two all-beef patties, cheese, pickles,
lettuce, onions, special sauce on a sesame-seed bun." As for the
women, Lily Tomlin plays Russ's long-suffering assistant, Emily
Mortimer's his perky co-worker, and Jean Smart's the savvy TV
anchorwoman I wish he'd wound up with. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Disney's The Kid" is a sweet, not-overly-sentimental 7, a
heart-warming family fantasy. And you'll discover why the moon
sometimes looks orange.

Title
Review for Pane e tulipani (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "BREAD AND TULIPS" (First Look Pictures)
    In this delightfully frothy Italian romantic comedy, after
accidentally being left behind by a tour bus while on a family vacation with her
cranky husband and two cynical teenagers, Rosalba (Licia Maglietta), an unhappy
housewife from Pescara, finds herself - and love - in Venice. 
    For the first time in years, Rosalba's on her own when she's
abandoned at a highway rest area. Although her philandering husband (Antonio
Catania), a plumbing-supply dealer, orders her to stay there until she's picked
up, she impulsively accepts a ride to Venice, a bohemian paradise which she's
never visited. Rosalba finds refuge and romance with Fernando (Bruno Ganz), a
gruff Icelandic waiter who offers her a spare room in his modest apartment and
prepares breakfast for her each morning. To support herself, she gets a job
working with a florist (Antonio Catania). 
      Film-maker Silvio Soldini gently explores the blossoming of this
bored, middle-aged, middle-class woman with warmth and affection, savoring
special moments such as when Rosalba starts playing the accordion again and
abandons her maroon stretch pants, silver jacket and orange sneakers for a
simple, new red-and-white dress with platform-soled espadrilles. The superb
actors slip into their roles seamlessly, particularly luminous Licia Maglietta
and low-key Bruno Ganz, along with Marina Massironi as her nosy
massage-therapist neighbor and Giuseppe Massironi as the inept
plumber-turned-private eye who's sent to retrieve her on orders from her frantic
husband - who's discovered that his mistress has no interest in doing his
laundry or cleaning the house. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bread and
Tulips" is a beguiling, escapist 8. As the summer ends, it's a magical getaway
for mature audiences..

Title
Review for Erin Brockovich (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ERIN BROCKOVICH" (Universal Pictures)
 It's too bad Erin Brockovich wasn't released last year
because Julia Roberts would be Oscar's top contender as the smart,
struggling, twice-divorced mother of three young children who, without
law expertise, defies the odds, takes on and defeats a major public
utilities company. Funny, flippant, and feisty, she's sensational as a
Norma Rae-type of heroine. Based on true events, the story revolves
around Erin's discovery of a cover-up involving contaminated water
which is causing devastating illnesses in a small California desert
community. Infuriated by the deception, she convinces her grumpy,
avuncular boss, brilliantly played by Albert Finney, to allow her not
only to investigate but to convince the leery local citizenry to join
in litigation against Pacific Gas & Electric Co.. "It's hexavalent
chromium, highly toxic, highly carcinogenic," she explains. "Gets into
your DNA, so you pass the trouble along to your kids." With over 600
plaintiffs, they win $333 million, the largest settlement ever paid in
a direct-action suit. Brassy and bold - with the cleavage created by
her uplift brassiere always showing - mini-skirted Erin also picks up
a boy-friend (Aaron Eckhart), the biker next door, who watches her
kids while she tackles the job that earns her respect - for the first
time in her life. Written by Susannah Grant and Richard LaGravenese
and directed by Steven Soderberg, yeah, it's sexist and a bit too
lengthy - but those are minor quibbles. And if the plot sounds similar
to A Civil Action, the difference can be summed up in two words: Julia
Roberts. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Erin Brockovich is a
feel-good, nifty 9 - the first "must see" movie of the new
millennium. And let's hope voters don't forget when Academy Award
nominations come 'round in 2001.

Title
Review for Anywhere But Here (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ANYWHERE BUT HERE" (20th Century-Fox)
In this mother/daughter spin on Thelma and Louise, Susan Sarandon and Natalie Portman, as Adele and Ann August, respectively, take off from Bay City, Wisconsin, for Beverly Hills, California. They're on the road in a 1978 Mercedes, heading for what flamboyant Adele envisions as a better life. Ann's more than reluctant; she's bitterly rebellious about leaving her small-town friends and family. When they reach the promised land, their first stop is the opulent Beverly Hills Hotel where their financial reality dawns on Ann, if not Adele. In fact, reality plays a minuscule part in any of Adele's decisions - the most disastrous of which is a one-night stand with a recently-separated dentist whom she meets on the beach. Over a period of two years, mother and daughter adjust to a poverty-plagued  life in a series of tacky, sparsely furnished, one-bedroom apartments in the flats of Beverly Hills. Ann is the resourceful realist, making friends and adjusting; Adele, ever the dre!
amer, just outside Nirvana, looking in, considering an ice cream cone as the solution to every crummy problem.  Of course, in the end, Ann realizes how indebted she is to her mother not only for her creative juices but also for her spirit of adventure. Directed by Wayne Wang, Natalie Portman delivers a subtle, nuanced performance as a teenager desperate for normalcy, particularly in contrast to Susan Sarandon's persistent, over-the-top kookiness. Alvin Sargent's screen adaptation of Mona Simpson's novel amounts to little more than a series of vignettes, leaving you emotionally uninvolved. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Anywhere But Here is a touching, sentimental 6. Make no mistake - it's a woman's picture. And, if you enjoy it, why not rent last year's Slums of Beverly Hills, a similar but far edgier comedy?

Title
Review for Velvet Goldmine (1998)
Set in the sex-and-drug London music scene of the '70s, this
surreal, sensual musical romance divided critics at the Cannes Film
Festival but won film-maker Todd Haynes a special prize from the jury
for best artistic contribution. The sheer glitter and glitz of its
energetic soundtrack may lure hip movie-goers, along with its MTV
rock-video approach to film-making. Presented in an ambitious
pseudo-documentary style, lifted from Orson Welles' "Citizen Kane,"
it's the story of a fictional glam rocker, Brian Slade (Jonathan Rhys
Meyers) who, in a publicity stunt in 1974 while at the height of his
popularity, faked an assassination attempt on his life. When the hoax
was revealed, his career evaporated as his disillusioned fans
abandoned him. Ten years later, a British journalist and former fan
(Christian Bale) goes searching for Slade and interviews his former
lover, a flamboyant star (charismatic Ewan McGregor), and former wife
(Toni Collette). Problem is: Orson Welles' classic 1941 mystery
revolving about the motivations of a wealthy publishing tycoon had
intriguing characters, while Todd Haynes' androgynous pop-idol has
little to reflect upon except a short life of promiscuous bisexuality
and decadent excess. "We set out to change the world," McGregor muses,
"and ended up changing only ourselves." The message of the movie is
simply: "It doesn't matter what a man does with his life. What matters
is the legend that grows up around him." On the other hand, the visual
presentation is colorful, splashy and splendid. So, on the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Velvet Goldmine" is a frenetic 6. Caution:
its sexual content, nudity, profanity, and drug usage make it
unacceptable for most of the young teenage audience at whom it's
directly aimed.

Title
Review for Any Given Sunday (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of  "ANY GIVEN SUNDAY" (Warner Bros.)
It may be the classic story of the aging coach on a losing
streak, the meddling owner, the injured veteran quarterback, and the
rookie punk who's itching to be a stadium star - but Oliver Stone adds
a high-charged adrenaline rush and a few new twists. Al Pacino plays
Tony D'Amato, longtime coach of the Miami Sharks; he's sacrificed his
wife and kids to his job and now he realizes he's not relating to the
younger guys on the team, particularly an amazing third-string
quarterback, Jamie Foxx, who's so nervous that he barfs on the
field. "This game's about more than winning," D'Amato passionately
insists, yet he's antagonized by Cameron Diaz, as the team's ruthless
owner. Her father left her the franchise and she's determined to prove
she's tough enough to run it. While sweet-talking the league
commissioner (Charlton Heston), she even tries to blackmail Miami's
mayor (Clifton Davis) into building her a new stadium. Dennis Quaid's
the aging quarterback and LL Cool J's a wide receiver with gridiron
greats Lawrence Taylor as the top linebacker and Jim Brown as
defensive coordinator. James Woods and Matthew Modine are the team's
battling team physicians. Once again, women in Oliver Stone's movies
turn out to be boozers (Ann-Margret), bimbos (Elizabeth Berkley), or
bitches (Lauren Holly). This testosterone-laden football drama spews
visual and auditory barrages. Sometimes the split-screen holds two,
three, even four images, and there's chaotic, rapid-fire cutting
throughout. Rock and rap songs blare, almost masking the formulaic
pigskin cliches, penned by Stone and John Logan. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, Any Given Sunday is a stylish, hyperkinetic 8, a
manic, visceral cacophony of sights and sounds - and as close as
you're ever gonna get to playing pro football.

Title
Review for Topsy-Turvy (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
When the New York Film Critics voted it as Best Film of 1999,
this unconventional, music-laden biopic of Gilbert & Sullivan by Mike
Leigh took on a surprising, new status. By definition, the term
"topsy-turvy" means inverted or confused, both of which apply to the
life and times of Britain's operetta maestros William Schwenk Gilbert
and Arthur Sullivan, who worked together from 1871 to 1896, concocting
delights like H.M.S. Pinafore, The Gondoliers and The Pirates of
Penzance. The story, covering 14 months in the mid-1880s, finds the
ailing, aristocratic composer Sullivan (Allan Corduner) deeply
discontented with his collaboration with the somewhat boorish
librettist Gilbert (Jim Broadbent) after the tepid reception of their
Princess Ida. Depressed and despondent, Sullivan decides to turn his
attention from "light" to "serious" opera, much to Gilbert's dismay,
not to mention the chagrin of the manager (Ron Cook) of the Savoy
Theater. That is - until Gilbert's wife (Lesley Manville) takes him to
a Japanese exhibition in London which sparks a fanciful idea - namely
The Mikado, which became one of Gilbert & Sullivan's greatest
hits. Then the rest of the film concentrates on the meticulous
preparation of this witty, new operetta - focusing on the rehearsals,
primarily on the prickly, temperamental actors (Timothy Spall, Martin
Savage, Kevin McKidd, Shirley Henderson). Leigh's pacing,
unfortunately, is uneven. There's a middle section with tepid musical
numbers from The Sorcerer that gets quite tedious. And the including
of some risque nudity seems gratuitous, earning an R-rating when the
content should have been suitable for teenagers. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, Topsy-Turvy is a deftly performed, frothy,
delightful 8, particularly for Gilbert & Sullivan fans.

Title
Review for Innocence (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "INNOCENCE" (Fireworks Pictures/Cinemavault
Releasing)
     An adult love story is unusual - a poignant, engaging, romantically
poetic one is unique. And that describes "Innocence, " Australian
writer/director Paul Cox's tale of love rediscovered. Charles Tingwell ("The
Dish") and Julia Blake ("Travelling North") play Andreas and Claire, ill-fated
teenage lovers who were separated in post-W.W.II Belgium when his father
disapproved of their relationship. Now a retired music teacher and church
organist, a widower with a grown daughter, Andreas proposes a date for lunch in
a letter to Claire, who has endured an emotionally sterile marriage and has a
grown son. When they meet, memories come flooding back as they discover feelings
that have been dormant for 50 years. Tenderly, the elderly couple embark on a
gentle but intense affair, transcending time and place. Declaring they're too
old to lie, they don't attempt to hide. In fact, Claire recklessly tells her
puzzled husband (Terry Norris) whose incredulity soon erupts into jealousy,
followed by desperation. 
     Adeptly avoiding schmaltz and sentimentality, Paul Cox so cleverly
interweaves the tempestuous affair with flashbacks to their carefree, youthful
ardor that it's tempting to forgive his cloying aphorisms ("Too much love is as
bad as no love at all.") and inept editing. The obviously experienced and
intelligent cast is excellent, performing even the most intimate scenes of
reawakened sexuality with understated dignity and discretion. And Cox explains
the title as having the opportunity to explore your first love again. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Innocence" is a warm, compassionate, insightful
8, proving that love and passion are ageless. As Cox puts it, "This film is a
sanctuary - hopefully it will restore a bit of humanity to the cinema."

Title
Review for Chocolat (2000)
  "Once upon a time, there was a quiet little village in the
French countryside, where people believed in tranquillity. You knew
your place in the scheme of things and, if you happened to forget,
someone would remind you." That's the way Lasse Hallstrom ("The Cider
House Rules") begins this romantic magical fable about a mysterious
single mother (Juliette Binoche) opens a chocolate shop during Lent,
antagonizing the righteous, patriarchal Mayor (Alfred Molina) and
young priest (Hugh O'Conor) but tempting and transforming the stodgy,
drab townsfolk with her tasty confections - while teaching
tolerance. A Julia Roberts lookalike, Juliette Binoche embodies this
sensual, cocoa-obsessed woman, delving into life's dark bitterness and
frothy sweetness, as she mothers her troubled daughter (Victoire
Thivisol) and romances sexy Johnny Depp, a guitar-strumming
vagabond. Carrie Ann Moss is a repressed mother whose keeps her son
away from his feisty, outspoken grandmother, played by Judi
Dench. Hallstrom's real-life wife, Lena Olin engages as the abused
wife of brutish cafe-owner Peter Stormare but Leslie Caron has barely
a cameo as a Gallic matron. Combining a dollop of "Like Water for
Chocolate," a dash of "Tom Jones" and a pinch of "Woman on Top," the
story uses chocolate as a metaphor for pleasure, freedom and
rebellion. Adapting Joanne Harris' richly layered best-seller,
screenwriter Robert Nelson Jacobs has wisely changed the villainous
priest into a prissy nobleman. Roger Pratt's cinematography is
luscious so, although it's utterly predictable, this is a scrumptious
morsel that melts "ever so slowly on your tongue and tortures you with
pleasure." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Chocolat" is a
delicious 8, a decadent, delectable treat. Indulge yourself!

Title
Review for Loving Jezebel (1999)
    Hill Harper ("Beloved," "HavPlenty") oozes with charm in this diverting, amiable romantic comedy about a man who has spent a lifetime loving other men's women. Quite simply, he's attracted to Jezebels - i.e.: women who engage in amorous activities with men other than their declared mates. "Your problem is that you only want what you can't have," his buddy tells him - to which he replies, "Then why does God always put her in my path?"  Bookended by irate gun-toting husband sequences, writer-director Kwyn Bader has structured a flashback story exploring how hapless Theodorus Melville (Hill Harper) survived a domineering mother (Phyllis Rashad) and became a hopeless romantic, appealing to that elusive, risk-taking element in a woman that yearns for excitement. "I don't care whether a woman is black, brown, yellow, green or the poster child for vanilla," he maintains. The strongest part of the narrative occurs when he's 17, losing his virginity to his best friend's gir!
l-friend, noting: "It was, by far, the most impressive 30 seconds of my childhood." From there, it's on to college, where he almost gets killed for loving the wrong girls. Then his innocence is lost when he discovers that even a soul-touching love cannot last. Which eventually leads him to self-awareness and the one woman, a poet, who loves him back (Laurel Hollomon) and her jealous husband (David Moscow).  Like Spike Lee and Woody Allen, Kwyn Baker finds fun in the foibles, angst and anxiety of the amorous male, but he sticks with the bland and harmless, almost to a fault, reducing many appealingly vulnerable scenes to sit-com "dance with destiny" cliches. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Loving Jezebel" is a light-hearted, genial 5. Charismatic Hill Harper is a superstar waiting to happen.

Title
Review for Light It Up (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "LIGHT IT UP" (20th Century-Fox)
 There's this neglected high school in Queens, New York, where
a favorite teacher is suspended. In protest, six students barricade
themselves inside the school, reluctantly taking a police officer
(Forest Whitaker) hostage after he's accidentally shot. And the
simplistic, cliche-ridden story predictably evolves. But there's a
difference. After Columbine and other school shootings, this is a
surprisingly effective civics lesson about the dangers of
stereotyping. The six students are disparate personalities. There's
the sensitive graffiti artist (Robert Ri'chard) and the school's star
basketball player (R&B singer Usher Raymond), along with a
purple-haired, pregnant wise-cracker (Sara Gilbert), a sardonic
wheeler-dealer (Clifton Collins Jr.), a angry gang member (rap
musician Fredro Starr) with an itchy trigger finger and a brainy
beauty (Rosario Dawson) who tries to rationalize the impending
chaos. Written and directed by Craig Bolotin, it was supposedly
"inspired" by "The Breakfast Club," even casting Judd Nelson as the
caring, sensitive teacher. Vanessa L. Williams is the hostage
negotiator, and Glenn Turman is the school's beleaguered principal.
The "Stop Racism!" signs that pop up among the crowd of spectators,
along with the students' demands - the windows fixed, more textbooks,
and a Career Day - deliver the message of the danger of repressed
rage. However, there's little excuse for dialogue like one student's
observation: "There was a quiet riot in all of us" or another's
self-description: "a chalk-mark waiting to happen." On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Light It Up" is an irresponsible but
well-intentioned 4. It's a flawed but plausible hostage thriller,
another R-rated movie aimed at teens.

Title
Review for Sweet and Lowdown (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Vintage jazz aficionados will appreciate Woody Allen's
fanciful mock documentary about a legendary musician of the 1930s,
allegedly the second-best jazz guitarist in the world. This totally
fictional character, named Emmet Ray and embodied by Sean Penn, is a
jaunty, self-absorbed egotist who justifies his aloof, amoral behavior
by explaining that he's an "artist."  Ray lives in awe of his idol,
Django Reinhardt, the son of gypsies who lives and plays in France,
and brashly admits that loves his guitar more than any woman who ever
shared his bed. There are two memorable women with whom the itinerant
Ray becomes involved. First, he lives with the long-suffering,
worshipful Hattie (superbly played by British actress Samantha
Morton), a mute laundress whom he picks up on the Boardwalk on the
Jersey shore. Then, he impetuously marries the beautiful, bitchy
Blanche (Uma Thurman), a socialite writer searching for
inspiration. Anthony LaPaglia, Gretchen Mol, and John Waters
contribute supporting roles, and famed Chinese cinematographer Zhao
Fei (Raise the Red Lantern) makes a memorable American film debut. The
sensational soundtrack includes I'm Forever Blowing Bubbles, Limehouse
Blues, It Don't Mean a Thing, Sweet Sue, All of Me, and I'll See You
in My Dreams, tastefully arranged by pianist Dick Hyman - but,
curiously, not the title song, written by George and Ira Gershwin for
the 1925 musical Tip-Toes. There are more than a dozen guitar solos by
the real-life Django Reinhardt, lifted from his old recordings, while
musician Howard Alden supplies the notes for Sean Penn's realistic
guitar strumming.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Sweet and
Lowdown is a genial, light-hearted, rhythm-filled 8, whimsically
proving that art imitates life.

Title
Review for Sandy Bottom Orchestra, The (2000) (TV)
On Sunday night, August 27, at 8 PM, Showtime TV premieres
this sugar-coated drama about an eccentric family struggling to belong
in a small town in Northern Wisconsin. Based on the novel, "The Sandy
Bottom Orchestra," by husband-and-wife Garrison Keillor and Jenny Lind
Nilsson, it's constructed as a reminiscence, narrated by 14 year-old
Rachel (Madeline Zima), a talented violinist, who lives in Sandy
Bottom and studies at Amidore's Music School. Her mother Ingrid
(Glenne Headley) gave up a promising career as a classical pianist to
marry Norman (Tom Irwin), a local dairy farmer who dreams of
conducting an orchestra. Determined to bring culture to their
provincial, little town, Ingrid tackles community "causes," like
introducing sophisticated hymns to the recalcitrant members of the
Zion Methodist Church choir, along with its troubled minister (Richard
McMillan), and fighting to preserve a magnificent historical building
which the Mayor wants to demolish to make way for a pizza parlor. Her
closest friend is an 80 year-old widow (Jane Powell), who not only
understands Ingrid's frustration but seems to be her only ally.  Two
pivotal crises occur when Norman, playing the impresario, decides to
forgo the traditional marching and oom-pah bands to present a
classical concert at the annual Dairy Days celebration and when
Rachel's parents decide she should apply to Interlochen Music School
in Michigan - but neither is explored in enough depth to be
emotionally effective. Under the direction of Bradley Wigor, the
actors rise above the bland superficiality of Joseph Maurer's script
and the cinematography is beautiful. On the Granger
Made-for-Television Movie Gauge, "The Sandy Bottom Orchestra" is a
slow-paced, syrupy, sentimental 6, as it answers Ingrid's question: "I
wonder what it would be like to feel you were part of something
important." Additional playdates are Aug.30 at 9:35 AM, Sept. 2 at
8:15 AM, Sept. 22 at 11:15 AM, and Sept. 25 at 6:15 PM.

Title
Review for Cell, The (2000)
 Cinema is defined as "the art of motion pictures" and, for
director Tarsem Singh (best known for R.E.M.'s "Losing My Religion"
music video), the emphasis is on art.  Jennifer Lopez stars as a
pediatric psychotherapist who is involved in an experimental research
program, working with a youngster in deep coma, when she's recruited
by an FBI agent (Vince Vaughn) to delve inside the mind of a
schizophrenic serial killer (Vincent D'Onofrio) in hopes of saving his
most recent victim (Tara Subkoff). It seems the diabolical,
voyeuristic killer kidnaps young women, tortures them in an
underground tank, drowns them, and finally bleaches, slices and dices
their corpses while watching videotapes of their suffering as he's
suspended by hooks in his back, simulating weightlessness. This
gruesome, thoroughly repulsive journey inside the landscape of a
perverted patient's mind is made even more perilous since the
empathetic therapist risks losing contact with reality. The sadistic,
repetitive child abuse theme of Mark Protosevich's screenplay lacks
psychiatric plausibility. And with her seductive, whispery voice and
gallons of pink lip gloss, pop-culture diva Jennifer Lopez is hardly
credible as a virtual reality expert, serving instead as a shallow,
ultra-chic fashion model doing perfunctory posing in a chaotic
dream-world. But the daring, obsessive fantasy is amazing. Tarsem
Singh's vision combines David Cronenberg with Salvador Dali, Federico
Fellini with Heironymous Bosch - with a bit of "Hellraiser" thrown
in. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Cell" is a visually
arresting but deeply disturbing 6. If digital design and stylized
symbolism intrigue you, go to this unpleasant but meticulous
mindtrip. But be aware that it's style over substance, amounting to
less than meets the eye.

Title
Review for What Women Want (2000)
   In this appealing romantic comedy, Mel Gibson stars as the
ultimate man's man, an arrogant chauvinist ad executive who hasn't a
clue what women are about. Just ask his ex-wife (Lauren Holly) and 15
year-old daughter (Ashley Johnson). So when his boss (Alan Alda)
chooses a woman (Helen Hunt) as the agency's new Creative Director, a
job he thought he had in his hip pocket, he's chagrined, particularly
when she gives everyone a pink box full of feminine products,
assigning them to come up with ideas. That night, after a hilarious
scene in which he's waxing his legs, wriggling into pantyhose, and
trying on a Wonderbra, he's almost electrocuted - but the shock opens
up a new world. Suddenly, inexplicably, he can hear what women are
thinking - and often what they're musing is what a jerk he
is. Thoroughly rattled, he consults a therapist (Bette Midler), who
says when Freud died, he still wondered "What do women want?" "If you
know the answer, you can rule!" she tells him. Soon he does, coming up
with clever ideas, stolen from Helen Hunt's mind, astounding everyone
about how sensitive and perceptive he's become. And so it goes. Mel
Gibson is sensational: captivating when he's dancing to Sinatra's
music and charming when he's poking fun at his own manly
image. Director/producer Nancy Meyers with writers Josh Goldsmith,
Cathy Yuspa and Diane Drake have revived the battle-of-the-sexes
genre, perfected by Spencer Tracy & Katharine Hepburn - only Gibson's
more like Cary Grant. The ensemble acting is terrific and the
father/daughter relationship scores. Only the ending drags a bit. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "What Women Want" is a smart,
sassy, sexy 9. Don't miss this funny, funny mind game - it scores!

Title
Review for Stuart Little (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "STUART LITTLE" (Columbia Pictures)
It's family entertainment that's unabashedly sentimental but
it's difficult not to fall under the spell of this fanciful adaptation
of E.B. White's classic children's tale. In the book, of course, a
mouse was inexplicably born to a Manhattan family but, in the movie,
artfully written by M. Knight Shamalyan and Gregory J. Brooker,
directed by Rob Minkoff, teeny Stuart (cheerfully voiced by Michael
J. Fox) is adopted by Mr. and Mrs. Little (pensive High Laurie, perky
Geena Davis). They find him adorable, much to the consternation of
their older son, George (Jonathan Lipnicki, memorable from Jerry
Maguire), and the family feline Snowbell (hilariously voiced by Nathan
Lane), who has been warned that Stuart is now family "and we don't eat
family members." Affable and helpful, Stuart soon recruits George as a
friend but Snowbell's a different matter. After all, no one has ever
seen a chipper rodent with a fluffy cat as a pet!  Chagrined, Snowbell
consults the local alley cat (Chazz Palminteri) who enlists a couple
of malicious mice (Bruno Kirby, Jennifer Tilly) to pose as Stuart's
biological parents and claim him as their long-lost son, thus
kidnapping him and providing, for the cats, a picnic in the
park. Their comedic portrayals are eerily reminiscent of two similar
sleazy characters in the musical Annie.  Obviously, resourceful Stuart
is eventually reunited with his loved ones and the dastardly "bad
guys" get a well-deserved dunking in a cold stream. Technically, the
blend of the digital characters with humans is seamless and
superb. Stuart is minutely etched, along with his magnificently
tailored clothes and emotionally expressive whiskers. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Stuart Little is an engaging 8. This wee mouse
could roar, stealing your heart for family fare this weekend.

Title
Review for Stir of Echoes (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
        If you enjoyed "The Sixth Sense," you're gonna want to see
this supernatural thriller starring Kevin Bacon as a Chicago telephone
lineman who discovers horror lurking under his own roof after he's
hypnotized by his sister-in-law (Illeana Douglas) at a neighborhood
party. At first, Bacon's skeptical. He doesn't believe in mental
games, nor in ghosts. But when he hears his five year-old son (Zachary
David Cope) casually say, "Does it hurt to be dead?" to an unseen
apparition, he knows something's wrong. Then he "sees" a deathly pale,
terrified teenage girl who "disappeared" months earlier; she's a
vision, not real, but how did this tortured soul get on his
living-room sofa?  And who will believe him? Certainly not his
just-pregnant wife (Kathryn Erbe), who finds his bizarre behavior and
obsession with spooky, otherworldly things quite disturbing. Not even
his defensive sister-in-law, who insists she only planted an innocent
post-hypnotic suggestion into his subconscious.  Based on a 1958 novel
by Richard Matheson ("Somewhere in Time," "What Dreams May Come"),
screenwriter/director David Koepp cleverly builds the suspense slowly,
through character development not carnage, keeping the action low-key
and quite plausible. But many clues are revealed too early, and it's
quite reminiscent of Bacon's earlier film, "Flatliners," along with
"The Amityville Horror," even "The Shining." On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "A Stir of Echoes" is a creepy 7. It's an eerie,
intriguing early Fall chiller.

Title
Review for Gojira ni-sen mireniamu (1999)

Susan Granger's review of "GODZILLA 2000" (Toho Films/Tri-Star Pictures)
Good grief! Another Godzilla movie? The legendary lizard is
back in this low-tech, sci-fi fantasy from Japan's Toho studio - one
that seems better suited to the video screen than a theatrical
release. Actually, it's the 24th Godzilla picture - and much like the
rest. Directed by Takao Okawara, the story follows Godzilla as he
leaves his underwater home off Japan's coast, destroys a submarine and
seaside restaurant, and heads for a nuclear power plant. A sympathetic
scientist and his daughter, along with an eager reporter, want to
study Godzilla - forming a Godzilla Prediction Network - but the
military, as usual, has other explosive plans and Tokyo gets trampled
in the process. The twist this time comes from a shape-shifting,
radio-active, 6,000 year-old flying rock from outer space, an alien
Orga, who tries to gobble the fire-breathing Godzilla.  No effort has
been made to try to synchronize the silly Japanese dialogue with the
cheesy, dubbed-over Americanized English, and the results can only be
called ludicrous. "Ah, the damn teriyaki is cold again!" says a diner
when the big, green lizard lands near a noodle shop. "Great Caesar's
ghost!" exclaims another character. There's also little attempt to
disguise the actor who's wearing a cleated rubber suit.  Originally
conceived as a cautionary tale, "Godzilla, King of the Monsters" made
its debut in 1954 and, fittingly, the current Godzilla's size has been
scaled down from 328 feet (1991-1995 versions) to a mere 170 feet,
closer to the original concept of 168 feet, as detailed in the earlier
incarnations. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Godzilla 2000"
is a tedious 2 - for die-hard fans only - because "Maybe because
Godzilla is inside each one of us."

Title
Review for Guinevere (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "GUINEVERE' (Miramax Films)
            What do you do when you're 20 years old, the youngest in a
wealthy San Francisco family of over-achieving attorneys, and you've
just been accepted at Harvard Law School? If you're awkward, insecure
and confused like Harper Stone, played by Sarah Polley ("The Sweet
Hereafter"), you run off with a passionate photographer more than
twice your age. Especially if he's a carefree, charming, ruggedly
attractive Irish bohemian like Stephen Rea ("The Crying Game"). But
Harper's not the first naive young girl he's seduced. No, there are a
bevy of "Guineveres," as he dubs them. But this is not the usual
May-September romance in which the worldly guy boosts his sagging ego
by recapturing his youth with an inexperienced girl - despite what
Harper's urbane mother (Jean Smart) says in a scathing, devastating,
accusatory encounter. Instead, it offers a sensitive insight into what
the nubile girl gets out of such a rite-of-passage relationship -
things like self-confidence, knowledge, and experience, even if the
mentor's an alcoholic. Writer Audrey Wells ("The Truth about Cats and
Dogs") makes her directing debut with this $2.6 million independent
feature that juxtaposes the formal elegance of snobbish Pacific
Heights with the impoverished yet exuberant existence of the grungy
inner city with its scruffy intellectual and artistic community. While
it's hard to take an aspiring photographer-who-never-takes-a-picture
seriously, the conclusion, which contrives to reunite the Guineveres,
seems too fanciful and out of context. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Guinevere" is a fresh, vibrant and engaging 8, commanding
attention from start to finish.

Title
Review for Return to Paradise (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "RETURN TO PARADISE" (Polygram Pictures)
         This intensely involving drama presents a stunning moral
dilemma. The story begins with three twenty-something American men
cavorting carelessly in sun-drenched Malaysia, enjoying the rum,
girls, and cheap hash. Originally strangers who met while touring
Asia, they've spent a month in paradise, free from responsibilities
and inhibitions. When their vacation ends, two head back to
Manhattan while the third decides to remain inPenang as a "Save the
Orangutans" volunteer. Skip ahead two years - and a lawyer (Anne
Heche) tracks the New Yorkers down. One (Vince Vaughn) is working as
a limousine driver, while the other (David Conrad) is a structural
engineer, engaged to be married. She tells them that their buddy (Jo=
aquin Phoenix) has been in jail for the past two years after their
discarded and forgotten hash was discovered in a trash barrel. Under
Malaysian law, the stash was large enough to qualify him as a drug
dealer, a crime for which there is a mandatory death sentence. All
three are culpable buthe will be executed in eight days unless the
pair return to Malaysia, confess their responsibility, and volunteer
to join him in serving out a stiff prison term. Meanwhile, the media
threatens to break the story, further jeopardizing an already
precarious situation. The crisis-of-consciencetheme is superbly
developed by writers Bruce Robinson & Wesley Strick and realized by
director Joseph Ruben. Anne Heche is the hot-wire here. Her waifish
sensuality sparkles yet she never loses her downright determined
edge. She is a stunning actress. Vince Vaughn and David Conrad wrestle
with cynicism and decency, while Joaquin Phoenix delicately etches
the sensitive idealist. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Return to Paradise" is a powerful, compelling 9, provoking the
question: What would you do in similar circumstances?

Title
Review for Red Planet (2000)
 There were two competitive Mars exploration pictures planned
for 2000: the dreadful "Mission to Mars" and "Red Planet." When the
first tanked at the box-office, the second looked more
promising. Wrong! This sci-fi story begins in 2050, when the Earth has
been polluted and six astronauts are sent to repair the Mars
Terraforming Project for colonization. But when Carrie-Anne Moss, as
the mission commander, gets them into orbit, problems occur and a
crash-landing leaves her five crewmen stranded without their high-tech
equipment. "This is what they told us about it high school," one
mutters, "the moment when algebra would save our lives!"  Plus, a
malfunction in AMEE, their exploration robot, turns it into a
stalking, renegade adversary. "AMEE's gone mustang," reports Val
Kilmer, who serves as the ship's janitor. The perfunctory, contrived
script by Chuck Pfarrer and Jonathan Lemkin is filled with
techno-babble about malfunctioning equipment and why the terraforming
blue algae was scoured off the planet's surface. Director Antony
Hoffman flounders, staging stilted, superficial scenes, squandering
the talents of Moss, Kilmer, Terence Stamp, Tom Sizemore, Benjamin
Bratt and Simon Baker. A feeble attempt at humor occurs when the men
urinate and marvel, "You sure get a high arc in low gravity." So much
of this project's dramatic potential is squandered: there are no
Martians, only tiny, ravenous insects who, conveniently, keep their
distance most of the time. Carrie-Anne Moss converses primarily with a
computer named Lucille, and even her nude shower scene is a
bore. Finally, at the end, she's allowed to haul the hero out of
trouble and jump-start his heart. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Red Planet" is a pointless, fumbling 2. Is there a Mars curse?

Title
Review for Perfect Storm, The (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "THE PERFECT STORM" (Warner Bros.)
"More people die on fishing boats, per capita, than working in any other job in
the U.S.. Every journey a fishing boat makes can be an all-or-nothing risk. It
is life at its most exhilarating and its most terrifying," says director
Wolfgang Petersen ("Das Boot"). And that's just what he captures in this true
story of struggle and humanity aboard a swordfishing boat, the Andrea Gail,
sailing out of Gloucester, Massachusetts, in late October, 1991. Early in Bill
Wittliff's screenplay, based on Sebastian Junger's best-seller, we meet the crew
of six. The veteran captain (George Clooney) is frustrated because he can't find
fish on the Grand Banks, yet a rival skipper (Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio)
brings in huge hauls. His right-hand man (Mark Walhberg) needs money to build a
new life with his girl-friend (Diane Lane). There's a devoted dad (John C.
Reilly) with an estranged wife and son, a free-spirited Jamaican (Allen Payne),
a lonely guy (John Hawkes), and a last-minute replacement with a bad attitude
(William Fichtner). The skipper's convinced he can change his bad luck streak in
remote Flemish Cap, and he does. But then trouble begins. There's a rogue wave,
a man overboard and the ice machine breaks - with 60,000 lb. of fish that could
spoil. But that's minor compared with a deadly monster storm approaching which a
Boston meteorologist describes as "a disaster of epic proportions" that also
threatens the lives of a Coast Guard helicopter rescue team trying to save three
people stranded on a sailboat on the high seas. It's formulaic and there are
cliches, but the walls of water, created by fluid dynamics simulating real-life
phenomena, are awesome. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Perfect
Storm" is a terrifying, suspenseful 8. Hang on for the white-knuckle thrill ride
of the summer!

Title
Review for Angela's Ashes (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ANGELA'S ASHES" (Paramount Pictures)
Whereas a novel is written to be appreciated for its language
and literary integrity, a movie is a visual medium. Most often, the
books that make the best films are those with clear narratives and
focused stories. In Angela's Ashes, author Frank McCourt put the
entire story inside the mind of a character and focus solely on that
character's inner world - what he is thinking, feeling,
remembering. While filmmaker Alan Parker has dealt with the Irish
before in The Commitments, he now, working with writer Laura Jones,
meticulously evokes McCourt's saga of poverty, pain, ignorance, and
the death of three children. But their anecdotal screenplay fails to
capture the Irish-American writer's lilting wit and emotional
poetry. The story begins in 1935 in Brooklyn as the titular Angela
(Emily Watson) falls apart when her baby daughter dies, and the
family, consisting of her irresponsible, alcoholic wastrel of a
husband (Robert Carlyle), Frank and his brothers, goes back to
Limerick, Ireland. As McCourt noted in his opening paragraph, that was
a big mistake. Life in the miserable, wet, filthy Roden Lane slum -
painstakingly recreated by production designer Geoffrey Kirkland and
captured by cinematographer Michael Seresin - is awful, and, at
school, Frank's teachers are either religious or nationalistic
fanatics. It isn't until he's a teenager, working as a mailman, that
life begins to hold possibilities, particularly the promise of
returning, alone, to America. Three actors - Joe Breen, Ciaran Owens,
and Michael Legge - play Frank as the resilient boy-to-man who bravely
copes with his dysfunctional family and rises above his terrifying
travails. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Angela's Ashes is a
respectful but depressing, grim 7, giving one a greater appreciation
of America as the land of hope and promise.

Title
Review for Superstar (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Once again, Hollywood delves into the deep files of "Saturday Night Live" for a story idea, so no one should be very surprised when it turns out to be like an extended TV skit. Molly Shannon reprises her SNL role of gawky parochial school-girl Mary Katherine Gallagher, easily recognized by her red hairband, thick horn-rimmed glasses, too-short plaid skirt, sensible white underpants, and armpit-sniffing nervous tic. All Mary Katherine wants in life is a kiss, a real bona fide Hollywood-style kiss. She works at a video store as a "rewind girl," so she's keenly aware of the open-mouthed passion that true love can inspire. But her prospects look decidedly grim until she enters a "Let's Beat Venereal Disease Talent Contest," sponsored by Catholic Teen Magazine, lured by the grand prize of a free trip to TinselTown, where she's sure her dreams will come true. The object of her affection is SNL's Will Ferrell, who not only plays the most popular boy and best dancer at St. Mo!
nica's High School but also a jiggy Jesus. Unfortunately, in director Bruce McCullough's close-ups, thirtysomethings Molly Shannon and Will Ferrell look their age - and they've left their teenage years far behind. After playing the character for six years on SNL, Molly Shannon explains the appeal of Mary Katherine this way: "I think people identify with her adolescent struggles because she's hopeful. It's not like she's just a loser that's not going to succeed, but she has hope and she's a fighter. She gets hurt and put down but she never lets that defeat her. She just keeps going after what she wants. She's a character with a lot of heart and passion." Nevertheless, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Superstar" is an awkward, dopey 3. Mary Katherine's best suited for the small screen, so wait for the video.

Title
Review for Three to Tango (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THREE TO TANGO" (Warner Bros.)
 The producers of this mildly amusing, off-beat romantic
comedy obviously thought that if they paired popular Matthew Perry
from TV's "Friends" with Neve Campbell from TV's "Party of Five" and
"Scream," adding Dylan McDermott and Oliver Platt for substance,
they'd have a hit - wrong!  Matthew Perry plays an ambitious,
idealistic, if clumsy young architect who has just been chosen by
businessman Dylan McDermott to compete for the design of a
multi-million dollar Chicago cultural center. The slimy tycoon also
tells Perry he'll get preferential consideration if he'll spy on his
mistress, Neve Campbell, assuming that Perry is a homosexual, like his
openly gay partner, played by Oliver Platt. Predictably, Perry falls
for Campbell, who also thinks he's gay, particularly when he's honored
as Gay Professional of the Year. What will he do? Will he continue to
lie to hold on to the job opportunity of a lifetime and a warm but
frustrating friendship with the girl he loves or come out of the
closet and admit he's secretly straight? You guess. I'll give you a
hint, though. Screenwriter Rodney Vaccaro's own bizarre experience
inspired the story. While he was working as creative director of a
large advertising agency, he fell in love with his boss's mistress. A
series of what he describes as "sexual errors" led to Vaccaro
eventually marrying her and co-writing this script with Aline Brosh
McKenna. But, despite superficial similarities, this is no "The
Apartment" or even "In and Out," perhaps because of Damon
Santostefano's light-hearted direction which makes it feel like a TV
sit-com. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Three to Tango" is a
frenetic, formulaic, flimsy 4, satirizing sexual stereotypes with the
catchline: " You've made a big gay bed, and now you must slumber gayly
in it!"

Title
Review for Pleasantville (1998)
 If you can envision a surreal combination of "Alice in
Wonderland," "Wizard of Oz," and "The Stepford Wives," you've arrived
in "Pleasantville," a fictional black-and-white town where everything
is just about perfect. Like "The Truman Show." And just imagine what
would happen if two contemporary teenagers suddenly arrived. Like
"Back to the Future." In this daring modern fairy tale, "once upon a
time" involves Tobey Maguire and Reese Witherspoon - fraternal twins -
who, after their parents' divorce, are having a pretty miserable
time. Suddenly, courtesy of a mysterious TV repair man (Don Knotts),
they find themselves trapped in a 1958 sit-com where Mom (Joan Allen)
wears pearls, bouffant hair, high heels, and a pretty dress as she's
cooking a "nourishing" breakfast of blueberry pancakes, scrambled
eggs, bacon, and ham steak every morning, and Dad (William H. Macy)
arrives from work every night at the same time, hangs up his hat, and
shouts, "Honey, I'm home." The kids hang out at Mr. Johnson's (Jeff
Daniels) Soda Shoppe and the school basketball team always wins.
Tobey quickly realizes that their presence in this kinder, gentler
time could alter reality, so he tries to stick to the script but
Reese, wailing about "nerdville," just wants to have fun. Inevitably,
they introduce "dangerous" elements like sensuality, diversity, and
possibility into the staid '50s sensibility. Writer Gary Ross ("Big,"
"Dave") creates a wildly imaginative concept and, in his directing
debut, transforms his black-and-white world into multi-colored magic
as the chaotic, discordant '60s arrives, complete with its requisite
rock music. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pleasantville" is
an astonishing, intriguing, irresistible 10. This is a "must see" -
one of the best of the year!

Title
Review for Liberty Heights (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "LIBERTY HEIGHTS" (Warner Bros.)
 Filmmaker Barry Levinson says: "If I knew things would no
longer be, I would have tried to remember better." And this expertly
crafted coming-of-age tale is Levinson's fourth semi-autobiographical
film set in Baltimore - like "Diner," "Tin Men," and "Avalon."
Focusing on the changing times of the mid-1950s, it tackles the
provocative issues of race, religion and class distinction. A wry and
enormously touching remembrance, it spans exactly one year in the life
of an insular, middle-class Jewish family. With segregation coming to
an end, they struggle with the poignant dilemmas evoked by ethnic
diversity. One son finds himself attracted to a young black woman
whose family is as appalled by their friendship as is his own, while
the other son is dazzled by a luminous blue-eyed, blonde gentile who
wields a magic wand, offering him a tantalizing glimpse into a
lifestyle that's a marked contrast to everything he's ever known. Each
boy pursues his passion with a manic edge that's filled with pathos
and amusement. Plus, there's the traumatic upheaval caused by their
father's involvement in staging an illegal lottery that draws the
attention of the F.B.I..  Headed by Joe Mantegna, the superb ensemble
cast features Adrien Brody and Bebe Neuwirth, along with Justin
Chambers, Vincent Guastaferro, Orlando Jones, David Krumholz, and
Kiersten Warren. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Liberty
Heights" is an evocative, nostalgic 8. It's funny, feisty, and full of
life, as laughter and tears mix and mingle, characterizing the human
condition that Barry Levinson captures so deftly. Don't miss it - and
take your parents.

Title
Review for Lost Souls (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "LOST SOULS" (New Line Cinema)
  You gotta wonder about a Winona Ryder movie that was
supposed to be released in 1999 and doesn't make it into theaters
until Friday the 13th in October, 2000.  In this faith vs. reason
supernatural thriller, Winona plays a devout Catholic who is not only
obsessed with the concept of demonic possession but often hallucinates
about Satan. She was once exorcised by a priest (John Hurt) and is now
convinced that the Devil is about to re-appear on Earth in the body of
an atheistic, best-selling criminology writer (Ben Chaplin) who
believes "Good and Evil are only illusions" and that serial killers
are motivated by "malignant narcissism." True, he's been troubled by
weird dreams in which the letters XES appear. When his brother points
out that the letters spell SEX backwards, he's mollified - at least
until he learns that XES is also the Roman numeral "666," the sign of
the Devil, and a renegade priest tries to shoot him, muttering, "The
time of transformation is near!" Written by Pierce Gardner, this
mangled, derivative muddle of banal mumbo-jumbo is based on his story
with Betsy Stahl, and Oscar-winning cinematographer Janusz Kaminski
("Schindler's List," "Saving Private Ryan") makes an inauspicious
directorial debut. Working with lenser Mauro Fiore, Kaminski's stark,
stylized lighting and surrealistic imagery create a creepy atmosphere
of murky darkness, heightened by Jay Riddle's special effects and Jan
Kacmarek's score. It's no stretch for Winona Ryder to be a terrified,
wide-eyed waif (i.e.: "Bram Stoker's Dracula" and "Alien IV"), but
credit Ben Chaplin for not laughing at her when he says: "You really
should get some professional help." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Lost Souls" is a far-fetched 2. "Deliver us from evil..." says
the ads. Deliver us from movies like this!

Title
Review for Whole Nine Yards, The (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Bruce Willis teams up with Friends Matthew Perry in this formulaic mobster comedy. Willis plays a cool professional hitman who moves incognito into an upscale Montreal suburb, while Perry is his nerdy neighbor, a dentist, who immediately recognizes him as Jimmy "The Tulip" Tudeski, who squealed on his former employers, the Gogolak crime family of Chicago. "It's not important that I've killed 17 people," Willis tells the incredulous Perry. "What's important is how I get along with the people that are still alive."  Soon, the disparate men find they share a common bond: someone's trying to kill them both. Perry's shrewish wife, vamped with an outrageous French accent by Rosanna Arquette, complains that her husband is "the only dentist who can't make money!" She not only wants to kill him so she can collect on his life insurance but she also wants to nab the reward for nailing The Tulip.  Enormous Michael Clarke Duncan (The Green Mile) ostensibly works as an enforcer for!
 Janni Gogolak (Kevin Pollak), while Amanda Peet is sweetly sympathetic and remarkably helpful as Perry's dental assistant who has a secret yearning to be a contract killer.  Plus there's Natasha Henstridge, as Willis' cold, calculating ex-wife, who inexplicably finds the bumbling Perry sexually irresistible. Writer Mitchell Kapner repeatedly capitalizes on a running joke about the Canadian habit of putting mayo on a hamburger, and director Jonathan Lynn does his best to keep the zany, bizarre action moving quickly. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The Whole Nine Yards is a ludicrous, lame, farcical 4. Problem is: these are amiable but crude, essentially superficial caricatures, not three-dimensional characters, like Billy Crystal and Robert DeNiro in the mob comedy Analyze This.

Title
Review for Proof of Life (2000)
 Abduction of multinational executives has become big business
according to William Prochnau in a 1998 VANITY FAIR piece, "Adventures
In the Ransom Trade," the provocative article that inspired this
timely adventure story.  So, after an exciting, if bewildering,
opening sequence in which a hostage negotiator (Russell Crowe)
extracts a victim from war-torn Chechnya, the action switches to
Tecala, high in the Andes of Latin America, where an American engineer
(David Morse) is kidnapped and held for ransom. Abandoned by his
employer and insurance company, his "little hippie" wife (Meg Ryan)
and annoyingly strident sister (Pamela Reed) try to deal with the
guerrillas - until Russell Crowe, an expert in "K&R" (kidnap & ransom)
comes to their rescue, along with a fellow mercenary, David Caruso.
  Directed by Taylor Hackford from a script by Tony Gilroy,
this is a relevant, multi-layered, suspense-filled drama. Filmed in
London, Poland and Ecuador, it's no-expense-spared filmmaking, even as
it wallows in melodramatic moments. And, like "Casablanca," you're
left wondering right to the end if the leading lady will wind up in
the arms of her husband or his would-be savior. Flush from his success
in "Gladiator," Crowe offers further proof that he's a virile,
self-assured, charismatic leading man, while Meg Ryan embodies the
psychological torture inflicted on the wife. Their off-screen romantic
trysts which became tabloid fodder should fuel the box-office. David
Morse subtly shows the strain of captivity, but the Latinos,
unfortunately, are stock stereotypes, particularly the cocaine-crazed
bandidos. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Proof of Life" is a
high-tension 7. If you're looking for a thriller, this one delivers
the goods.

Title
Review for Duets (2000)
   For Oscar-winner Gwyneth Paltrow, making this dark comedy
was obviously a labor of love since it's directed by her real-life
father, Bruce Paltrow (creator of TV's "St. Elsewhere," "The White
Shadow"), who was stricken with throat cancer. Shooting began in
Vancouver only three weeks after he completed radiation therapy. The
story revolves around six unhappy characters hoping to win $5,000 in a
karaoke competition in Omaha, Nebraska. Huey Lewis plays a karaoke
hustler who meets his long-lost daughter, a third-generation Las Vegas
showgirl - that's the too-thin, too flat-chested-to-be-believable as
an innocent showgirl Gwyneth, when they're introduced by her
grandmother (Angie Dickinson in a cameo) at her mother's wake. Paul
Giamatti's a meek, mild-mannered salesman, obsessed with redeeming his
frequent flyer miles, who picks up a hitchhiking escaped convict,
Andre Braugher. And Maria Bello, as a scheming waitress/wannabe rock
star, promises sexual favors to a Cincinnati taxi driver, Scott
Speedman. They're all maudlin misfits who like to sing but, for the
most part, their renditions make you cringe. Gwyneth's not bad
warbling "Bette Davis Eyes," but she's not good either. Written by
John Byrum, this manipulative, ill-fated project has gone through
several incarnations, beginning originally as a starring vehicle for
Gwyneth Paltrow and her then-fiance Brad Pitt. After they split up, it
was revised and, in an unprecedented move, because of its violent
content, Disney shopped "Duets" around to other studios; eventually,
studio executives decided to re-cut it, editing the objectionable
scenes. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Duets" is a
disappointing, discordant 4. This rambling, raucous road trip-to-
redemption saga strikes a distinctly sour note.

Title
Review for Other Sister, The (1999)

Susan Granger's review of "The Other Sister" (Disney's Touchstone Films)
"Pretty Woman" director Garry Marshall has struck gold, once
again, with this fresh, engaging, provocative story of a mentally
challenged young woman (Juliette Lewis) who returns from ten years of
confinement in a special school determined to lead an independent
life, much to the chagrin of her guilty, indulgent father (Tom
Skerritt) and smothering, over-protective mother (Diane Keaton). When
she falls in love with a similarly impaired man (Giovanni Ribisi) and
demands her own apartment, their concern turns to absolute panic, as
the story revolves around the parental dilemma of what to do when a
child with special needs becomes an adult.  Juliette Lewis is
magnificently vibrant and totally captivating as the defiantly spunky
woman whom her doctor describes as "pushing the edge of the envelope."
And Giovanni Ribisi is endearingly vulnerable as a man besotted by
marching bands, yet haunted by taunts of "retard." Having never dated
- with only the sketchiest knowledge of sex - their romance is
innocently awkward, painfully poignant, and hilariously funny. "I
wonder who thought up sex in the first place," she muses in one
cleverly comical scene. "I think it was Madonna," he answers, quite
seriously. As co-writer with Bob Brunner, Gary Marshall's sensitivity
is apparent, allowing the audience to enjoy and empathize with these
two young people who embark on a challenging journey of
self-discovery. The only weakness of the film lies with the cliche'd
writing of the parents' roles and the so-called "normal " sisters: one
engaged, the other a lesbian. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"The Other Sister" is an exuberant, life-affirming 9. It's a charming,
delightful, bittersweet and most unusual love story.

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE MATRIX" (Warner Bros.)
Aimed specifically at a young, male audience, this challenging
sci-fi adventure is big on visuals and short on story.  Bland,
androgynous Keanu Reeves plays a 22nd-century computer hacker who is
recruited by Carrie-Anne Moss to join a band of cyber freedom fighters
led by Morpheus - that's Laurence Fishburne - in a struggle against
the scary, menacing machines that control mankind. Powerful computers
keep their oblivious human slaves passive by literally plugging them
into a virtual-reality universe that appears as the 20th-century world
we know.  Written and directed by brothers Larry and Andy Wachowski
("Bound"), the complex, pretentious script combines mythology,
mysticism, and technical mumbo-jumbo in a kinetic blender and concocts
a dazzling but illogical, incoherent head-trip in which specific
public telephone booths are the only conduit from one reality to
another. According to the Wachowskis, "We began with the premise that
every single thing we believe in today and every single physical item
is actually a total fabrication created by an electronic universe. So,
if the characters can have instantaneous information downloaded into
their heads, they should, for example, be able to be as good a kung-fu
master as Jackie Chan." Sci-fi genre aficionados will spot familiar
elements from "The Fifth Element," "Virus,"" Dark City,""Terminator,"
and "Alien," and the stunt work was supervised by Yuen Wo Ping, one
Hong Kong's top specialists in both kung-fu and wire-stunts. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Matrix" is an eye-popping,
deafening, mind-numbing 3 - unless you're a guy who's gung-ho for the
muddled mayhem and dizzying arsenal of ammunition of a weird,
big-screen video game.

Title
Review for 3 Strikes (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "3 STRIKES" (MGM release)
        Referring to California's controversial ordinance that
requires a mandatory sentence of 25 years to life for anyone convicted
of a third felony, the title tells it all - and this inept movie is
definitely out. Written and directed by D.J. Pooh, the rap-record
producer who co-wrote Friday (1995) with Ice Cube, it adds little to
the urban comedy genre. Brian Hooks plays a hapless twice-jailed loser
who has every intention of going straight when he's released from the
Los Angeles County Jail. "I'm going to do whatever it takes not to go
back," he vows. But when his pal, De'Aundre Bonds, picks him up in a
stolen car, they smoke a little weed and get involved in freeway
gunplay with the LAPD.  He's innocent but his image is caught on
videotape. Immediately, he finds he's once again on the lam - with no
one willing to help him. So where does he hide? The Ritz Carlton
Hotel, where else? Who would think to look for him there in the midst
of a citywide manhunt? On the screen, just about everything goes
wrong. The crude script is inane, the characters little more than
racial stereotypes, the rude dialogue filled with cliches, and
flatulence propels the toxic humor. Even the car chases are
boring. N'Bushe Wright doesn't stand a chance as Hooks' remarkably
tolerant girl-friend, and David Alan Grier is wasted as a
trigger-happy detective on his trail. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, 3 Strikes barely musters a 2. This is a truly dismal cinematic
experience!

Title
Review for Keeping the Faith (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "KEEPING THE FAITH" (Touchstone Pictures)
  Cleverly timed for the Passover and Easter season, this is
an amusing comedy about "The God Squad," two pious but unconventional
young men of religion, directed by actor Edward Norton, who is usually
associated with meaty dramas like "Primal Fear," "The People vs. Larry
Flynt," "American History X" and "Fight Club." Norton also plays
Father Brian Kilkenny Finn - a Roman Catholic priest. Brian's best
friend since childhood is now a Jewish rabbi named Jake Schram, played
by Ben Stiller. They're living near one another on New York's Upper
West Side when Anna Reilly, a young woman whom they grew up with
returns to the city on business. That's Jenna Elfman of "EDTV" and
"Dharma & Greg." So, instead of one of the old jokes that begins, "A
priest and a rabbi and a woman walk into a bar and....," this plot
ignites when a priest and a rabbi both care deeply for the same
woman. And this is no ordinary woman. She's a high-powered, cell
phone-addicted workaholic who firmly believes that with her help God
could have created the world in just three days, not seven. But she's
certainly not the "nice Jewish girl" whom the synagogue elders had
envisioned for their rabbi. And what about the priest's vow of
celibacy? The supporting cast is terrific: Anne Bancroft as Jake's
mother, Eli Wallach as an open-minded rabbi, and Milos Forman as a
compassionate priest. It's just too bad that first-time director
Norton didn't call "cut" more often when actor Norton's scenes went on
too long and that Stuart Blumberg's utterly predictable script gets a
bit verbose, but on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Keeping the
Faith" is a frothy, feel-good 7. In an age of cynicism, it's an
amiable, old-fashioned romantic comedy, a light-hearted date movie.

Title
Review for Shadrach (1998)
Susan Granger's review of 'SHADRACH" (Columbia Pictures)
Based on a short story by William Styron, "Shadrach" is a piece
of Americana, set in the Depression-era of 1935, as a young boy
recalls three unforgettable summer days when he was ten years old. As
the only child in a proper, middle-class Virginia family, Paul
Whitehurst (Scott Terra) often escapes to the ramshackle house of
impoverished neighbors, the earthy, volatile Dabneys (Harvey Keitel,
Andie MacDowell), who have seven mischievous children, one of whom is
his best friend. One hot afternoon while the boys are shooting
marbles, a frail, 99 year-old former slave, Shadrach (John Franklin
Sawyer), appears, having walked from Alabama to be buried on the old
Dabney grounds he fondly remembers from childhood. When the Dabneys,
who have fallen on hard times, realize his quest, attempting to
fulfill his final wish and allowing him to die in dignity has a
profound effect on everyone, as the family embarks on a heartbreaking,
hilarious expedition to the dilapidated family plantation, discovering
"Death ain't nothing to be afraid of. It's life to be feared of."
Harvey Keitel's benign bigot, who is touched by an old slave, is the
kind of character he hasn't done before, just as the beer-guzzling
mother is a change of pace for Andie MacDowell.  First-time
writer/director Susanna Styron's integrity scores with her father's
fictionalized, autobiographical, character-driven material, touching
our human chord of kindness. Curiously, both "Shadrach" and William
Styron's "Sophie's Choice" are about living survivors of the defining
tragedy of their century: slavery and the Holocaust, respectively. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Shadrach" is a poignant,
compassionate 8. It's a gem, a gentle, funny, family story that will
find a place in your heart.

Title
Review for Highlander: Endgame (2000)
 This is the fourth segment, the first in five years, and the
final episode of the series.  If you're not a die-hard fan, you need
to know some background. The Highlander is an immortal, born centuries
ago in the Scotland. He and the other immortals who walk the earth,
calling themselves "the seed of legend," can be killed only when
beheaded, which usually occurs in a sword-fight with another
immortal. The victor in such a duel gets the "quickening," absorbing
the strength and experience of the defeated amid bolts of lightning.
Morose Christopher Lambert stars, once again, as Connor MacLeod with
Adrian Paul as his protege, Duncan MacLeod, who - this time - go after
Jacob Kell (Bruce Payson), an evil, diabolical, power-hungry immortal
who has gone renegade. Kell's after Connor because, centuries ago,
Connor killed his father, which is understandable since Kell burned
Connor's mother at the stake. Make no mistake, this is a gruesome
group and the recitation of their history is often
contradictory. Plus, Duncan's got this girl-friend (Lisa
Barbuscia). Anyway, both MacLeods are determined that Kell will not be
the last immortal - "In the end, there can be only one." Problem is:
it's disjointed and tiresome. Even the choreography of the
sword-fights is clunky and choppy. Blame that on first-time director
Douglas Aarniokoski. The gimmick is that Lambert, who's starred in the
"Highlander" films, is now teamed with Paul, star of the syndicated TV
series (1992-98). The two, supposedly born 70 years apart in the 16th
century, have appeared together only in the first episode of the TV
series. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Highlander: Endgame"
is a dreadful, time-traveling, almost incomprehensible 2. As they say:
"That's one blessing of immortality - there's always tomorrow."

Title
Review for Polish Wedding (1998)

Susan Granger's review of "POLISH WEDDING" (Fox Searchlight Pictures)
       Even with a stellar cast that includes Lena Olin, Gabriel
Byrne, and Claire Danes, first-time writer/director Theresa Connelly's
ridiculouscomedy quickly becomes a Polish joke. The story revolves
around the boisterous, working-class, immigrant Pzoniak family in
Detroit who are devoted to pickles, pierogi, the polka, and the
American dream. Papa (Gabriel Byrne) is a baker; Mama (Lena Olin) and
daughter-in-law (Mili Avital) workas cleaning women; and the three
grown sons drive an 18-wheeler. To their chagrin, the only daughter
(Claire Danes) is a reckless, pouty high-school drop-out - and
carelessly pregnant, despite the fact that she's playing Mother Mary
in the local church's Festival of the Virgin procession. Like her
mother, she's a lusty wench. Mama's into long-term adultery with a
successful businessman (Rade Serbedzija) who calls her his "queen"
andtheir trysts are consummated on the tile floor of the men's
bathroom where they cavort in soapy detergent.  These professed
Roman Catholics rationalize their wanton sexual behavior with their
passionate belief in "making love and life." Credit Ms. Connelly for
writing and directing earthy characters with whom she's familiar -
she grew up in the Polish-American Detroit suburb of Hamtramck - but
all the sticky, sweet, blue-collar melodrama doesn't add up to a
movie. Whenever there's a dramatic crisis withinthe family, Connelly
goes for inappropriate slapstick farce. So, on the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Polish Wedding" is a sappy 3. It's a wannabe
"Moonstruck" that is struck down.

Title
Review for Battlefield Earth (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "BATTLEFIELD EARTH" (Warner Bros.)
THE BACKGROUND AND THE CONTROVERSY: Since 1975, John Travolta has been
an outspoken devotee of Scientology, an "applied religious philosophy"
that claims to have millions of followers. Travolta credits its
founder, L. Ron Hubbard, for all his spiritual and worldly success and
fervently believes that Hubbard's writings, particularly "Dianetics,"
contains mankind's hope for salvation. Hubbard taught that Earthlings
are the pawns of aliens. He preached that psychiatry was a timeless
evil, that, in a distant galaxy, alien "psychs" devised implants that
would ultimately wreck the spiritual progress of humans. The psychs
and their "blackened souls" are to blame for sin, violence, and
crime. In addition to his religious writing, Hubbard also wrote
science-fiction and, for 15 years, Travolta has been trying bring this
Hubbard tale to the screen. But Scientology is controversial, teaching
that a "suppressive" person deserves no mercy. He may be "tricked,
lied to, sued, deprived of property, injured or destroyed by any means
by any Scientologist."  A California appeals court called
Scientology's treatment of a member "manifestly outrageous," awarding
him $2.5 million for "serious emotional injury," a ruling that was
twice upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court, yet the litigant has never
collected. In France, last November, Scientology staff members were
convicted of fraud. And a German court ruled that Scientology used
"inhuman and totalitarian practices." Disaffected Scientologists fear
that this movie will entice believers and reinforce Hubbard's
anti-psychiatry message. Indeed, in the "New York Daily News," John
Travolta acknowledged his mission saying, "If we can't do the things
now that we want to do, what good is the power? Let's try to get the
things done that we believe in.'"
THE REVIEW: In post-apocalyptic 3000, mankind is an endangered
species. Alien Psychlos rule, enslaving the "man-animals" they capture
as they strip the planet of its mineral resources. The villainous Terl
(John Travolta) is the Psychlo Chief of Security - a huge, snarling,
dreadlock'd, fearsome creature. The hero is Jonnie Goodboy Tyler
(Barry Pepper), a human hunter who leaves his mountain hideout,
determined to discover who the demonic Psychlos really are and how to
defeat them. Remember "The Postman"? Well, that's the ambiance - only
there's no Kevin Costner. It's a mythic good guys vs. bad guys story
but Corey Mandell's screenplay, based on Hubbard's book, has so many
sappy cliches and ludicrous, far-fetched loopholes that they incite
unintentional laughter. For example, Tyler is a primitive caveman,
barely able to communicate, yet he discovers a library and is able to
assimilate all its knowledge immediately. He then dupes the Psychlos
into believing he's mining a mountain but substitutes gold bricks from
Ft. Knox which, curiously, the ore-hungry Psychlos have never
discovered. And, finally, Tyler's rebellious cohorts from the
subterranean dungeons jump into Harrier jets - which have not been
serviced in eons - find them full of fuel and fly with precision into
a final battle with the Psychlos. So much for believability. Credit
the stylish special effects involving art/set direction to first-time
feature-film director Roger Christian - that's his background. But the
heavy-handed Christian uses an unusual "center wipe" edit device
between every scene, which is distracting and annoying. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Battlefield Earth" is an awful, grim, tedious
2. "Please, I made a mistake," pleads Forest Whitaker, Travolta's
henchman. But he's shown no mercy, nor is the audience . As for the
allegation that this boring movie will recruit youth - I doubt it!

Title
Review for Boys and Girls (2000)
A romantic comedy is supposed to be fanciful and fun. This is neither. Nor is it sexy. Written by Andrew Lowery and Andrew Miller (who call themselves the Drews) and directed by Robert Iscove, as a date movie, it's so blatantly formulaic and generically predictable that it's tedium. After "She's All That" and "Down to You," Freddie Prinze Jr. could play this teenybopper idol role by rote - and he practically does. He's a sensitive stud who finds his soul-mate in Claire Forlani, who's obviously seen too many episodes of "Ally McBeal."  They first met, years ago, when they were pre-teens, on an airplane and discovered that they were both children of divorce en route to their new homes. Since then, their paths have crossed occasionally but they both, coincidentally, wound up at University of California at Berkeley.  The so-called "catch" is that they're not only commitment-phobic, very verbal best-friends but, temperamentally, opposites. He's logical and has his heart set!
 on structural engineering; she's free-spirited, emotional and a Latin major. And if much of their commiserating about their respective lackluster love lives looks familiar, think "When Harry Met Sally..." which obviously served as inspiration. Then, one night, passion overcomes resistance, and - guess what? - he's more sexually strait-laced than she is. (The giddy teenage girls in the audience were giggling hysterically at this point.) The other actors, like Jason Biggs, Amanda Detmer and Heather Donahue, simply look bored, desperately wishing they were elsewhere. And who can blame them? On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Boys and Girls" is a lame, tepid 2. Guys, you gotta wait too long for those Victoria's Secret models to beckon your glazed eyes back to the screen.

Title
Review for High Art (1998)
Writer/director Lisa Cholodenko gives far more emphasis to getting
 high than to expressing art with this pretentious, downbeat dirge
about lesbian love. Flimsily cloaked in an "All About Eve"-like
scenario, the story revolves around a lowly, but ambitious young New
York art magazine editor (Australian actress Radha Mitchell) who
"discovers" a rebellious but talented photographer living in the
apartment upstairs. A heroin-snorting, Jewish Bohemian, she "dropped
out" of the art scene several years earlier to live in
disillusioned, drug-addled decadence with her groggy German
actress/lover (Patricia Clarkson) when the pressures of "fame" got
tooheavy. In this pivotal leading role, Ally Sheedy - once an
ingenue "Breakfast Club" member of Hollywood's Brat Pack - is
ghastly thin and neurotically intense, even ferocious. Predictably,
the relationship between the self-destructive artist and the naive
opportunist sparks, ignites, and eventually fizzles but, since all
the women involved are so spaced-out, it's hard for the audience to
connect with any of them. Nevertheless, for a first-time film-maker,
Lisa Chodolenko shows promise, particularly in herhip, witty jibes
about the "business" of producing art. If she could leave the murky,
rotten drug scene behind, she'd show her story-telling skills more
admirably. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "High Art" is a
tiresome 3. Watching lethargic, unhappy women take drugs and
incoherently talk nonsense is hardly classified as entertainment.

Title
Review for Anna and the King (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ANNA AND THE KING" (20th Century-Fox)
If you've been heard to mutter, "They don't make movies like
they used to..." then this sentimental, spectacularly beautiful
historical epic is for you. In this fourth film version of Margaret
Landon's fanciful story of Anna Leonowens, the strong-willed, recently
widowed schoolteacher who travels to Siam in 1862 with her young son
(Tom Felton) to educate the King's 58 children in Western customs,
Jodie Foster delivers a magnificent performance, combining
intelligence with compassion, dignity with vulnerability. Equally
impressive is Hong Kong action star Chow Yun-Fat as imposing King
Mongkut, the proud monarch who is amazed when a stubborn, impertinent,
English schoolmarm has the temerity to consider herself his
equal. Anna has Victorian preconceptions of primitive Siam while the
King, in turn, has his own disdainful preconceptions of Western
civilization. Meanwhile, the ominous threat of an invasion by
neighboring Burma, perhaps aided by the British, hangs over their
obviously growing affection for one another in this exotic,
extravagant, romantic pastiche. Director Andy Tennant (Ever After) and
cinematographer Caleb Deschanel (The Black Stallion), shooting in
Malaysia, emphasize the lavish, breathtaking opulence and stately
splendor, conceived by production designer Luciana Arrighi, perhaps to
the extreme. That may be the result of the plodding, bland script by
Steve Meerson and Peter Krikes which dulls the sharpness of the
underlying culture clash of racial, political and sexual tensions,
relying instead on a weak, simplistic subplot involving
treason. Nevertheless, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Anna and
the King is a sumptuous 9, proving that the traditional Hollywood
formulas can still concoct gratifying entertainment.

Title
Review for Vie rve des anges, La (1998)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE DREAMLIFE OF ANGELS" (Sony Pictures Classics)
        In French with English subtitles, 42 year-old Erick Zonca's
first feature film revolves around two young working women of
contrasting temperament who meet as minimum-wage seamstresses in a
garment factory in the city of Lille, in northern France, and sustain
each other for a brief time out of necessity. Elodie Bouchez plays
Isa, a scruffy, spike-haired, happy-go-lucky gamine who travels with
her rucksack from city to city, taking odd jobs where she can find
them. Natacha Regnier plays the edgy, moodier Marie, who views the
world as bleak and perpetually clouded. Both come from broken
homes. Neither possesses marketable skills nor has a support network
of any kind. The strength of the film lies in its poignant, soulful
compassion and its stirring evocation of their raw, desperate daily
struggles, particularly with the men who use them for their own
selfish needs. While the plot is deceptively simple, the script is a
bit incoherent, and the pacing is definitely European, the charismatic
actresses are superb. Deservedly, they shared the Golden Palm for Best
Actress at last year's Cannes Film Festival. Parental Warning: this is
an adult film with nudity and intense sexual content. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "La Vie Revee des Anges" or "The Dreamlife of
Angels" is a gray, grimly realistic, yet delicate 7.  For those who
admire the art of acting, it may be worth the price of admission just
to marvel at the fully-realized, bracing performances.

Title
Review for Snatch'd (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  Kirk Douglas is still the Champion. In fact, this
affectionate story begins with photographs and clips from that 1949
film which catapulted him to stardom. In recent years, not only has
Douglas survived a helicopter crash that nearly cost him his life but
also a crippling stroke which left him with slurred speech. Now he's
back with vigor, delivering a courageous, inspirational performance as
irascible Harry Agensky, a former boxing champ known as the "Polish
Prince."  Resolutely practicing his facial and vocal exercises,
Harry's recovering from a stroke, along with the death of his beloved
wife of 45 years. But he's still feisty and ferocious, especially when
it comes to how he's going to spend the rest of his days. He's been
living uneasily with his dutiful older son (Kurt Fuller) in the
Canadian wilderness but, instead of an old-age home, he wants his own
place - with a companion to take care of him. The only way he can
swing it financially is to retrieve a cache of "magic diamonds" he
recalls hiding in the wall of a mobster's kitchen in Reno after he
threw a fight. Harry convinces his estranged younger son (Dan Aykroyd)
and teenage grandson (Corbin Allred) to take him on a life-changing
road trip that they both consider to be a fool's errand. Written by
Allan Aaron Katz and directed by John Asher, the touching but
two-dimensional story is corny, cliche-filled and contrived,
particularly when the trio make an improbable visit to a bucolic
bordello run by Lauren Bacall, who hasn't been paired with Douglas
since Young Man With a Horn (1950). On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, Diamonds is a sentimental 7 with Douglas proclaiming, "Live each
day as if it were your last - and never give up!"  It's an optimistic,
engaging comedy-adventure, particularly for the geriatric crowd.

Title
Review for Insider, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE INSIDER" (Touchstone)
Michael Mann's compelling story, adapted by Mann and Eric Roth
from Marie Brenner's 1996 Vanity Fair article, "The Man Who Knew Too
Much," examines the behind-the-scenes drama and maneuverings that led
to the media's exposure of tobacco industry fraud. Whistle-blower
Jeffrey Wigand, former head of research and development at Brown &
Williamson, was a corporate officer, the ultimate insider on the
skullduggery involved in the business of selling tobacco. His firing
comes to the attention of Mike Wallace's producer, Lowell Bergman, who
convinces the reluctant scientist to spill the beans on 60 Minutes,
only to have the interview killed by CBS's corporate lawyer who cites
a confidentiality agreement the executive signed with the tobacco
company. Three months later, after the Wall Street Journal printed
Wigand's allegations, 60 Minutes aired the segment. So much for
fiasco. It's the Oscar-caliber performances that command attention,
primarily the emotional relationship between Russell Crowe, as the
conflicted Wigand, and Al Pacino, as the tenacious Bergman. A
journalist hasn't shown this much righteous indignation since All the
President's Men. Christopher Plummer deserves a Best Supporting Actor
nod as Wallace, who with Philip Baker Hall, as producer Don Hewitt,
come across as cowards, bowing to management on ethics, leaving their
source, Wigand, hanging in the wind. The medieval and Middle Eastern
music by Lisa Gerrard and Pieter Bourke enhances Dante Spinotti's
dark, eerie imagery. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, The
Insider is a tense, trenchantly topical 10.  Subsequent to the
shocking events dramatized in the film, the tobacco industry settled
the lawsuits filed against it by Mississippi and 49 other states for
$246 billion.

Title
Review for Blue Streak (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "BLUE STREAK" (Columbia Pictures)
         Martin Lawrence reminds me of Jerry Lewis with his silly
antics in this action comedy and of Eddie Murphy with his fast-talking
glibness. Lawrence plays a jewel thief who, after spending two years
in prison, discovers that the under-construction building in whose air
duct he stashed a $20 million diamond is now the 37th L.A. Police
Precinct.  Undaunted by this ironic stroke of bad luck - and unable to
infiltrate the crime unit disguised as a buck-toothed pizza delivery
man - the ex-con concocts an outrageous plan to impersonate a cop so
that he can gain entrance, locate and retrieve the gem in a matter of
hours. But, as fate and the screenwriters would have it, he
inadvertently captures an escaping convict (Dave
Chappelle). Everything that could go wrong does go wrong, and so it
goes...
Director Les Mayfield ("Encino Man") attempts to keep the pace
fast but, despite lots of shtick, the necessary energy just isn't
there. He also relies heavily on Martin Lawrence to carry the vehicle
as an action hero which is a mistake. There's lots of action - sound
and fury - but it signifies very little. Now, if you're a real Martin
Lawrence fan, devoted to his raw, edgy stand-up comedy, and
sympathetic after his recent collapse while jogging, I don't want to
discourage you. It's just that the plot is predictable and has too
many holes in it to suspend disbelief - besides, you're in on the joke
from the beginning. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Blue
Streak" is a manic, formulaic 4. I'd advise you to go to a bargain
matinee or wait for the video.

Title
Review for Croupier (1998)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
     This compelling crime caper by British director Mike
Hodges is what low-budget, independent film-making is all about. Back
in the '70s, Mike Hodges did the critically acclaimed "Get Carter,"
starring Michael Caine, and this is in the same vein. It's based on a
script by Paul Mayersberg, who years ago wrote one of my all-time
favorites sci-fi films, "The Man Who Fell to Earth." Clive Owen plays
Jack Manfred, a frustrated, aspiring novelist whose father (Nicholas
Ball) gets him an interview for a job as a croupier at the Golden Lion
Casino in London.  And why not? He has the hand of a conjurer - or an
experienced card player. Reluctantly, he takes the job at "the house
of addiction," philosophizing, "You have to make a choice in life: be
a gambler or a croupier - and live with your decision." And Jack is
coldly obsessed with watching people lose since, after all, a good
customer is a consistent loser. One of the most intriguing losers is a
beautiful gambler (ER's Alex Kingston) from South Africa with whom he
has an affair, deceiving his lover (Gina McKee), a store detective who
believes Jack's high-tension job has made him into a miserable
zombie. He also becomes involved with a fellow croupier (Kate Hardie).
"I'm not an enigma," Jack explains. "I'm a contradiction." Jack's
ultimate aim is to become totally detached (i.e.: "The croupier had
reached his goal - he no longer heard the sound of the ball.").
Jack's behind-the-scenes casino adventures and the various scams are
intriguing but his hackneyed internal monologues about the book he's
writing soon become tedious.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Croupier" is a clever, stylish, cynical 7. "Gambling," we're told,
"is about not facing reality, not counting the odds." But, ah, the con
artists!

Title
Review for Way of the Gun, The (2000)
   Screenwriter Christopher McQuarrie, who won an Oscar for
"The Usual Suspects," makes an auspicious directorial debut with this
crime thriller about two small-time crooks who call themselves Parker
(Ryan Phillippe) and Longbaugh (Benicio Del Toro), the real surnames
of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid.  They're raising capital by
selling their sperm in L.A. when they overhear a conversation about
Robin (Juliette Lewis) who has been hired for $1 million by a wealthy
couple to be a surrogate mother. Immediately, they concoct a
kidnapping/ransom scheme. But when they unconventionally abduct the
waddling, very-pregnant Robin from her obstetrician's office, despite
the presence of her bodyguards (Taye Diggs, Nicky Katt), and hide her
in a hotel in Mexico, complications begin, and she gives birth in the
midst of a gunfight. What the inept, sociopathic thugs don't know is
that the biological father (Scott Wilson) of the newborn boy, the man
they're shaking down for $15 million, launders money for organized
crime and that he's hired a mob-connected "fixer" (James Caan) to take
care of the situation. (Curiously, the "fixer" has an assistant who in
real-life is Geoffrey Lewis, Juliette Lewis's father). One of the
menacing Caan's better lines is "I can promise you a day of reckoning
that you will not live long enough to never forget." As you might
expect from a Christopher McQuarrie script, the confusing plot twists
and turns, tricky double-cross following tricky double-cross, within
back-stabbing sub-plots, and nothing is ever exactly what you expect
it to be except, perhaps, the shoot-'em'up finale. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Way of the Gun" scores a slow-paced but
grimly stylish, snarling 4, profane and violent from start to finish -
with not one likable character.

Title
Review for Siege, The (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "THE SIEGE" (20th Century-Fox)
In this instance, the whole is less than the sum of its
parts. Denzel Washington is a superb actor, an Oscar winner for
"Glory" and nominee for "Cry Freedom" and "Malcolm X," as is Annette
Bening, an Oscar winner for "The Grifters," and Bruce Willis has
proven his ability in thrillers such as "The Fifth Element" and
"Twelve Monkeys" and faced disaster in the "Die Hard" trilogy.
Director Edward Zwick has not only helmed "Courage Under Fire" and
"Glory" but he's also the co-creator of TV's "thirtysomething" and "My
So-Called Life." With credentials like these, one expects more than a
tepid political potboiler. Based on a story by Lawrence Wright, the
convoluted plot revolves around an FBI agent (Denzel Washington), a
United States Army General (Bruce Willis), and a burnt-out,
murky-minded CIA agent (Annette Bening) who team up to find an
underground cell of Islamic terrorists who are causing chaos in New
York City, blowing up a bus in Brooklyn and threatening children. In a
panic, the President imposes martial law and suspends citizens'
Constitutional rights, allowing the Army and the National Guard to
supplant local law enforcement for the duration of the operation,
thereby creating a police state. The implications deepen when all
people of Arabian descent are considered suspicious and rounded up,
like the Japanese-Americans during World War II, posing questions
like: Does one have to become monstrous to fight a monster? How far do
you go to protect freedom? While it all reads well, it doesn't play
out on the screen. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Siege"
is a formulaic, forgettable 4. It's not dramatic enough to deserve
merit, not suspenseful enough to attract an action-oriented audience,
and so preachy as to be almost ludicrous.

Title
Review for 54 (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "54" (Miramax Films)
 This is the second movie about decadence of the late '70s era
and, like Whit Stillman's "The Last Days of Disco," it never achieves
what it sets out to accomplish. Written and directed by Mark
Christopher, it's the story of a working-class kid (Ryan Phillippe)
who escapes from the dingy reality of New Jersey by using his angelic
looks, lithe body, and ingratiating personality to infiltrate the
netherworld of Manhattan's night club scene. He's befriended by a
groggy, drug-addled homosexual, Steve Rubell (Mike Myers), one of the
owners of Studio 54, who hires him to be one of the bare-chested
busboys, joining the other narcissistic wannabees at the nightly
bacchanal. There's the coat-check girl (Salma Hayek) who wants to be a
diva; her drug-peddling husband (Breckin Meyer), who wants to be a
bartender; and the soap-opera actress (Neve Campbell) who wants to
social-climb. Everyone wants to be rich and famous. No one wants to
admit the truth. There's a sad, revealing exchange when Rubell bawls
out one of his doormen for allowing some "yids" through the velvet
rope and into the club. "But they were your family, Steve," the
unfortunate employee explains. Where the film falls short, however, is
in evoking the spectacle, the glamorous glitter, and the deafening
musical excitement that epitomized the legendary Studio 54. It was
filmed on a tiny sound stage in Toronto, and it shows. The characters,
particularly the women, are woefully underwritten, and, since Ian
Schrager, Rubell's real-life partner and a pivotal force at the club,
refused to participate in this venture, there's an obvious gap in the
quasi-historical narrative. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"54" is a sleazy, seedy 6, capturing only the deceptive energy of that
hallucinogenic, cocaine-snorting era.

Title
Review for Supernova (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "SUPERNOVA" (M.G.M release)
        The behind-the-scenes story is far more interesting than this
mundane sci-fi thriller which should disappear as quickly as it popped
into our local theaters without previous critics' screenings. It seems
Walter Hill (48 Hours, Aliens) abandoned the project more than a year
ago, using a pseudonym, Thomas Lee, as titular director. And rumor has
it that Francis Ford Coppola did the final assemblage but he is not
officially mentioned anywhere in the film credits either. The story,
written without a cohesive structure by David Campbell Wilson,
revolves around the search and rescue patrol of a medical ship and its
six-member crew in the 22nd century. When their vessel, the
Nightingale 229, answers an emergency distress signal from an
abandoned mining colony on a rogue moon in a distant galaxy, the crew
soon finds itself in danger from the mysteriously charismatic young
man, Peter Facinelli, whom they rescue, the alien artifact he smuggled
aboard, and the gravitational pull of a giant, imploding star about to
go supernova, creating the most massive explosion in the
universe. Robert Forster is the Captain of the deep-space ambulance
but he's killed off quickly, allowing James Spader, his First Officer,
to take the helm, along with Angela Bassett, as Chief Medical
Officer. Robin Tunney, Lou Diamond Phillips, and Wilson Cruz complete
the crew - along with their trusty computer named Sweetie. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Supernova is a sputtering, pointless
3. Something went terribly wrong - and not in outer space.

Title
Review for Finding Forrester (2000)
 It's tempting to call this another version of Gus Van Sant's
"Good Will Hunting," because it's about a brilliant, struggling
student, or "Scent of a Woman," since it deals with a young man and
his mentor, but I think it stands on its own. Newcomer Rob Brown plays
Jamal, a South Bronx teen who's fascinated by "the window," a
mysterious man who stares down at the guys shooting hoops in the
'hood. On a dare, Jamal sneaks into his book-cluttered apartment,
where he's discovered by its occupant. Terrified, he flees, leaving
his backpack behind. The next day, the backpack is thrown down from
"the window" and his six journals, filled with thoughts and essays,
have been critiqued in red ink. Thus, an unlikely friendship
develops. "The window" turns out to be William Forrester, a reclusive
author - think J.D. Salinger - who, 50 years ago, published one
Pulitzer Prize-winning novel. And Jamal winds up in a posh Manhattan
prep school where he's welcomed for his ability on the basketball
court but challenged about his incredible flair for creative writing
by a bitter, autocratic teacher, F. Murray Abraham, who accuses him of
plagiarism. Problem is: Mike Rich's screenplay is familiar,
predictable and not particularly believable. As the gruff, neurotic
novelist, Sean Connery is charismatic, exuding eccentricities,
defending his isolation, gulping J&B and wearing socks inside out. Rob
Brown is convincing, like rapper Busta Rhymes, as his brother, and
Anna Paquin, as his friend/love interest. Joey Buttafuco plays a
security guard and there's a "surprise" cameo near the conclusion. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Finding Forrester" is an
inspirational 7, proclaiming, "Family isn't always what you're born
with - sometimes it's the people you find, sometimes it's the people
who find you."

Title
Review for Love's Labour's Lost (2000)
 Having done "Henry V," "Hamlet" and "Much Ado About Nothing"
on film, Kenneth Branagh, who comes from working-class background,
continues his determination make Shakespeare more relevant to
contemporary audiences. This time, he punctuates the Bard with '30s
and '40s musical numbers. Set in Europe in 1939, just before the
outbreak of W.W.II, the romantic comedy begins when the King of
Navarre (Alessandro Nivola) and three companions (Kenneth Branagh,
Matthew Lillard, Adrian Lester) swear to shun all distractions and
study for three years. But no sooner have they made their monastic
vows than the Princess of France (Alicia Silverstone) and three lovely
ladies-in-waiting (Emily Mortimer, Carmen Ejogo, Natascha McElhorne)
show up, and the four flirtatious couples pair off to songs from Cole
Porter, Irving Berlin, Jerome Kern, George and Ira Gershwin. The fact
that his cast has mediocre musical ability didn't deter Branagh's
enthusiasm. "It wasn't our ambition to achieve the slickness and
impossible perfection of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers," he
explains. "What we did want was abandonment to the enterprise, joy and
commitment to the songs and dancing." Indeed, singing "Cheek to Cheek"
mid-air, they float to the rafters of a library.  Branagh wavers
uncomfortably between the various styles of American musicals,
attempting to combine the crisp, formal precision of Busby Berkeley's
choreography with the more relaxed ambiance of Gene Kelly. Also, in
his ambitious attempt to condense the narrative and combine the
ensemble numbers, Branagh loses much of the comedy, except for Nathan
Lane as the clown. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Love's
Labour's Lost" is a whimsical 7, putting a frothy, new spin on old
Will.

Title
Review for Ronin (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "RONIN" (United Artists/MGM)
Despite the pretentious opening statement which informs us:
"In feudal Japan, the warrior class of samurai were sworn to protect
their liege lords with their lives. Those samurai whose liege was
killed suffered great shame and...were no longer referred to as
samurai...such men were called Ronin," motor vehicle action is what
obsesses director John Frankenheimer who, earlier in his career,
helmed "Grand Prix" and "French Connection II."  Set not in feudal
Japan but in contemporary France, the characters are scruffy, cynical
veterans of the Cold War who, after the dissolution of the Eastern
Bloc, have become mercenaries. They're hardly "The Magnificent Seven"
or "The Dirty Dozen," but they'd like to be. There's Robert De Niro,
an ex-CIA operative; Frenchman Jean Reno; an ex-KGB electronics and
surveillance expert, Stellan Skarsgard; Sean Bean, a weapons whiz; and
Skipp Sudduth, a hotshot driver. Recruited individually by Natascha
McElhone, as a cool, close-mouth'd Irishwoman, they're assigned to
steal a mysterious suitcase so that the Irish can have its contents
before it's sold to a group of rich Russians. But what starts as a
simple ambush-and-assault turns into a series of double-crosses and
bloody betrayal, eventually leading them to an international ice show,
where Katarina Witt is stalked by a sniper in a scene reminiscent of
Frankenheimer's "The Manchurian Candidate." The complex and often
confusing screenplay is by J.D. Zeik and "Richard Weisz", a pseudonym
allegedly concocted by David Mamet because he did not want to share
screen credit. And, worst of all, the film ends without ever coming to
a satisfying conclusion. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Ronin" is a chaotic 6. It's car chases, stunts and carnage in search
of a story.

Title
Review for Message in a Bottle (1999)
  If you're an incurable romantic, this is the love story you've 
been waiting for. If you're a cynic, this one's not for you. Based on Nicholas Sparks' book, adapted by Gerald DiPego, lushly photographed by Caleb Deschanel, and directed by Luis Mandoki, the plot revolves around two lonely people. Robin Wright Penn plays a divorced single mom who works as 
a researcher for the Chicago Tribune. While on vacation alone in Cape Cod, she finds a bottle containing a beautiful, poetic love letter from a man to a woman named Catherine. The signature is simply "G" but she tracks 
down the sender. He's Garret Blake - a.k.a. Kevin Costner - a sailboat builder who lives on the Outer Banks of North Carolina. Since the death of 
his wife Catherine, he has led a sad, solitary existence - until Penn appears, literally, on his doorstep. Inexplicably, she doesn't tell him she's found his missive in a bottle. She's scared of being honest, afraid to 
trust. So she pretends she's just a tourist interested in sailing, and they begin a gentle, tender romance, complete with moonlit marshmallow fights, while the audience waits for the inevitable confrontation scene in which he discovers the truth and turns on her. Handsome, smiling Paul Newman, as Dodge, Costner's sassy, caustic, irascible father, deftly steals the picture, in one scene muttering, "If I was about 150 years younger, you'd be in trouble, young lady." Indeed, he has far more charm than Costner , who balefully underplays an underwritten role. Is it cliche-ridden, maudlin and manipulative? Without question, particularly the conclusion. Will you cry? Undoubtedly. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Message in a Bottle" is a sweet, hearts 'n' flowers 6. Spun-sugar mind-candy for Valentine's Day.

Title
Review for Arlington Road (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "ARLINGTON ROAD" (Sony Pictures/Screen Gems Release)
  This contemporary thriller stars Jeff Bridges as a college
professor whose FBI-agent wife was killed in a botched raid on an
alleged right-wing cult. The film was scheduled to open in May,
shortly after the Columbine High School massacre in Littleton,
Colorado. With its tagline, "Fear thy neighbor," its release was
understandably postponed. The theme revolves around how everyday
appearances can be deceiving. This concept is personified by a
seemingly normal, all-American couple - Tim Robbins and Joan Cusack -
who move with their three children into a suburban Washington,
D.C. neighborhood.  Gradually, Bridges, who teaches a course in
terrorism, senses something suspicious about them. Is he just paranoid
or are they part of a lethal, para-military conspiracy?  "There's no
gratuitous violence," Bridges says, "but it does deal with a violent
subject, with militia groups - and how some people express unhappiness
toward the government and their own lives. Certainly, I would hope it
doesn't lead to copycat crimes. However, it's a tough subject: whether
the arts reflect society or lead society. I don't know if we want to
put restrictions on creativity, but, at the same time, we certainly do
not want to inspire people to do violence." Writer Ehren Kruger and
director Mark Pellington are obviously manipulative as they explore
this volatile subject with a stylish scenario that leads to a grim,
uncompromising, over-the-top conclusion. Both Cusack and Robbins seem
to relish their intriguing, intimidating roles with an evil glee, and
Jeff Bridges delivers a solid performance as the tormented widower who
becomes a pawn in their plot to dismantle American society.  On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Arlington Road" is a sinister, scary
6, making you skeptical about anyone's safety. It delivers a chilling
shiver on a hot summer's night.

Title
Review for X-Men (2000)
 Based on the best-selling comic books, this live-action
allegory about persecution and tolerance revolves around an awesome
team of black leather-clad mutants who become reluctant
superheroes. For the X-uninitiated, wheelchair-bound Prof. Charles
Xavier (Patrick Stewart) is the world's greatest telepath who runs a
secret school where gifted youngsters are taught by Storm (Halle
Berry), Cyclops (James Marsden) and Jean Grey (Famke
Janssen). Wolverine (Hugh Jackman) and Rogue (Anna Paquin) are the
newcomers. The adversarial evil Brotherhood - Sabretooth (Tyler Mane),
Mystique (Rebecca Romjin-Stamos), Toad (Ray Park) - is led by the
strongest and most powerful mutant ever known, Magneto (Ian McKellen),
who captures a conservative U.S. Senator (Bruce Davison) in his
determination to get respect by whatever means necessary. Director
Bryan Singer ("The Usual Suspects," "Apt Pupil") enjoys dark character
studies, keeping the comic-book action taut. And he's obviously been
influenced by "Matrix" effects.  The Cerebro, a chamber in which
Xavier's psychic abilities are enhanced, is fascinating, as is
Magneto's Lair and the Map Room, where a six-foot diameter table made
of steel pins rises to form a 3-D topographical map of New York
City. The Rogue Effect, which drains a person's life-force, is
impressive and there's an incredible, high-energy, destructive
sequence at the Statue of Liberty. With her scaly blue skin and red
hair, Mystique is eye-candy as a shape-shifter, transforming herself,
including fingerprints and voice, into anyone with whom she comes in
contact. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "X-Men" is a cool,
mythic 7. Die-hard Marvel Comic fanatics may quibble with these movie
mutants but fans are out there and they will come.

Title
Review for Meet the Parents (2000)
 Great humor comes from simple, universal truths, and there
are few rites-of-passage as unnerving as meeting your prospective
spouse's family. That's the dreaded dilemma facing Greg Focker (Ben
Stiller) who realizes that it's important to get her father's
permission before he proposes to his girlfriend Pam (Teri Polo). A
trip from Chicago to New York for her younger sister's wedding seems
like the right occasion but things go from bad (lost luggage) to worse
when her father Jack (Robert De Niro) turns out to be an eccentric,
dogmatic, humorless ex-CIA agent, specializing in psychological
profiling, who spent 19 months in a Vietnamese prison camp. "Under my
roof, it's my way or the Long Island Expressway," dictates Jack,
regarding 21st century sexual mores. Feeling like an outsider about to
abscond with their first-born, Greg manages to do everything wrong, as
the cat disappears, septic tank overflows, sump pump explodes and
wedding altar catches fire. And his discomfort is augmented by Greg's
being a male nurse in a houseful of doctors. There's a hilarious scene
in which Greg muses about the meaning of "Puff the Magic Dragon,"
impelling Pam's mother (Blythe Danner) to placate Jack later, noting,
"Maybe he uses marijuana for medicinal purposes." Ben Stiller's
perfect as the hapless, anxiety-ridden interloper, while Robert De
Niro uses his serious, dramatic intensity to be an intimidating
adversary - much to the credit of director Jay Roach ("Austin
Powers"). Based on a story by Greg Glienna & Mary Ruth Clarke, the
wry, deftly frantic screenplay by Jim Herzfeld & John Hamburg evokes
multi-generational empathy before running out of steam. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Meet the Parents" is an uproarious,
entertaining 8. It's laugh-out-loud funny.

Title
Review for Saving Grace (2000)
If you loved "The Full Monty" and "Waking Ned Devine," this is
the gentle summer comedy for you!  Set in the Cornish city of
St. Isaacs, it's about Grace Trevethan (Brenda Blethlyn), an
ostensibly comfortable, conservative middle-aged widow who discovers
she's, literally, penniless. Her late husband, who died while
parachuting, had mortgaged their manor house to the hilt, not to
mention philandering in London with another woman who had the gall to
show up at his funeral. Hounded by creditors, she has no recourse but
to utilize her only talent - gardening - to grow something that will
make her enough money to pay off her debts. So when her Scottish
handyman (played by Craig Ferguson, who co-wrote the script with Mark
Crowdy) admits he's been struggling with some sickly marijuana sprigs
hidden behind the vicarage, she concludes: "No light, no buds." But
once Grace gets them into her greenhouse, using some hydroponics, the
plants thrive. Soon she's off to the city to find a buyer - and winds
up in the clutches of a shady French drug dealer (Tcheky Karyo) who
has more on his mind than her bumper crop of cannabis. In the
meantime, Grace's proper garden club ladies are intrigued with her new
"tea plants," sampling several with hilarious results. The psychedelic
story takes an unexpectedly discordant and contrived twist at the end
but, nevertheless, director Nigel Cole keeps the naughty shenanigans
in high gear and you find yourselves rooting for gentle Grace to pull
the hip, hemp caper of a lifetime. Like "The Full Monty" and "Waking
Ned Devine," it's about ordinary people who find they must compromise
their values in extraordinary circumstances. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Saving Grace" is a warm, wry, whimsical 9. It's
outrageously good fun!

Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "AMERICAN PIE" (Universal Pictures)
 You don't need a ouija board to predict that outrageous,
adolescent sex comedies will be big box-office. Milder versions like
"Porky's" and "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" were hot in the '80s, but
the trend, ever since "Something About Mary," is toward edgy, raw,
in-your-face vulgarity. And a slice of "American Pie" is about as
raucous, raunchy, and ribald as you can get. Surprisingly, it's a true
teen-sounding movie. The testosterone-driven plot revolves around four
insecure high school seniors who make a pact not to be virgins after
Prom Night, which is only three weeks away.  There's Jason Biggs,
who's like a young Adam Sandler, gamely agonizing through a hilarious
"date" with a Czechoslovakian exchange student that's accidentally
broadcast over the Internet. Thomas Ian Nicholas initiates the "We
will get laid!" vow, despite the fact that he's never gotten past
"third base" with his girl-friend.  Eddie Kaye Thomas relies on rumors
he's invented about his sexual prowess. And Chris Klein cultivates a
corny sensitivity to charm a sweet choir girl. First-time film-makers
Chris and Paul Weitz are heavily into gross-out humor, like the "Dumb
and Dumber" Farrelly brothers, and Adam Herz's screenplay is slick,
straight-forward funny with zero subtext. Sex itself is described as
"warm apple pie." (Sara Lee is cringing!) Despite the crude jokes
about masturbation, penis size, condoms, and various bodily functions,
the underlying theme is about losing one's innocence.  "It's not a
space shuttle launch..it's sex."  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "American Pie" is a spicy 6 if you're a teenager but a stale 4 if
you're old enough to be out of college. Odd, isn't it, that Hollywood
knows that its young target audience will somehow wangle its way into
this R-rated movie?

Title
Review for Thin Red Line, The (1998)
Writer/director Terrence Malick, known as the J.D. Salinger of
the movies, is the near-mythic Harvard graduate, Rhodes Scholar,
former journalist and philosophy professor who has exiled himself from
Hollywood's film industry for nearly two decades after making
"Badlands" and "Days of Heaven." Now he's back with this screen
adaptation of James Jones' novel about the men in an Army Rifle
company, C-for-Charlie, who suffer and change, making psychological
discoveries about themselves, as they attempt to capture a Japanese
base on an island in the South Pacific during the W.W.II battle of
Guadalcanal. The casts consists of Sean Penn (a cynical sergeant),
Nick Nolte (an ambitious officer), Elias Koteas (their
conscience-stricken leader), Woody Harrelson (a doomed sergeant), John
Cusack (a self-sacrificing captain), John Travolta (with a mustache)
George Clooney (in a cameo), with Ben Chaplin and newcomer Jim
Caviezel as the two pivotal privates. Filmed in Port Douglas, a
coastal community near Australia's Great Barrier Reef, the
cinematography is filled with sweeping imagery and the story is
punctuated with fierce bursts of energy and as Malick explores how the
various men confront fear. While his sense of irony and humanity is
evident, Malick's abstract, emotionally detached style just doesn't
seem to mesh with the structured urgency of a combat tale. The pace is
ponderous, filled with contemplative, philosophical musings about God
and nature and the insanity of war. Malick's metaphors are often
opaque in meaning and pretentious, if not condescending, as dialogue,
like "The closer you are to Caesar, the greater the fear." On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Thin Red Line" is a meditative 7,
a bizarre war movie.

Title
Review for Bossa Nova (1999)
Brazilian writer/director Bruno Barreto and his wife, actress
Amy Irving, have concocted a mid-life romance set in exotic Rio de
Janeiro. In the screenplay by Alexandre Machado and Fernanda Young,
based on Sergio Sant'Anna's novel, "Miss Simpson," Irving plays an
enigmatic widow, a retired flight attendant, whose Brazilian airline
pilot husband drowned two years earlier. While teaching English, she's
romanced by two suitors: a randy soccer player (Alexandre Borges) and
a lawyer (Antonio Fagundes) whose wife (Debora Bloch) left him for a
tai chi instructor (Kazuo Matsui). Meanwhile, the lawyer's
half-brother (Pedro Cardoso) falls for a sexy legal intern (Giovanna
Antonelli) who, in turn, develops a crush on the soccer star. One of
Irving's students (Drica Moraes) has fallen for a New Yorker (Stephen
Tobolowsky) in a chat room on the Internet. To add to the tropical
turbulence, the language school in which Irving teaches is housed in
the same building where the lawyer's father (Alberto De Mendoza) is
trying to maintain his tailor shop after his latest wife split. All of
this interconnected drama pulsates to the beat of Antonio Carlos
Jobim's bossa nova classics. While it's sumptuously photographed by
Pascal Rabaud, it should be paced like a screwball romantic farce,
complete with mistaken identities and comedic confusion, but,
unfortunately, at times it's somewhat stilted. On the other hand, I
was entranced by a fantasy in which Fagundes imagines himself as a
'40s Fred Astaire, romancing Irving's Ginger Rogers - and an elevator
scene as he surreptitiously measures her for a garment. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bossa Nova" is a bittersweet, sensuous 7. In
Portuguese with English subtitles, it's a movie that makes you want to
call your travel agent.

Title
Review for Trekkies (1997)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  I confess: I am a "Star Trek" fan. I tape "Deep Space Nine"
and "Voyager" when I can't be home. I even had a bit part in a "Star
Trek" movie. But my enjoyment of this sci-fi series is nothing
compared with the fanaticism of hard-core devotees of Gene
Roddenberry's cultural phenomenon. Before there was a "Star Wars,"
there was a "Star Trek." Over 30 million fans watch "Star Trek"
programming each week. "Trekkies" are the only fans listed by name in
the Oxford English Dictionary. "Star Trek" is seen in more than 100
countries, translated into dozens of languages.  More than 63 million
"Star Trek" books are in print and, since July, 1986, every "Star
Trek" novel has been a New York Times paperback best-seller, making it
the best-selling series in publishing history. The average Trekker
spends $400 per year on merchandise, which is why "Star Trek" products
have earned over a billion dollars in retail sales in the last five
years. And "Star Trek" conventions are held every weekend of every
year, in at least three different cities, attracting a million
fans. In this funny documentary, Denise Crosby, who played Lt. Tasha
Yar on "The Next Generation," and film-maker Roger Nygard capture the
obsessive behavior of some truly serious "Star Trek" fans - people who
live through and for "Star Trek." Like print-shop worker Barbara
Adams, who claims she's a Starfleet officer and always wears a
uniform. Like a Florida dentist who converted his practice to Startrek
Dental. Like devotees who learn the Klingon language and an elderly
man who wants to have his ears Spocked. On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, "Trekkies" is a benign, amusing 7. Don't forget, the
U.S. Space Shuttle was dubbed "Enterprise" after NASA received 400,000
requests from "Star Trek" fans.

Title
Review for Tigger Movie, The (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
    Though it's destined to have a much longer run on the
video shelf than in theaters, this fun-filled, full-length animated
feature follows in the wake of Winnie the Pooh and the Honey Tree
(1966) and The Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh (1977), adapted from
the classic A.A. Milne books. Who doesn't love Pooh, Piglet, Eeyore,
Owl, Kanga, Roo and - in this case - the ever-exuberant Tigger?
Written and directed by Jun Falkenstein, based on a story by Eddie
Guzelian, it revolves around Tigger's need to find his "gigantically,
stripedy" family tree. Voiced by Jim Cummings, Tigger hunts
boisterously throughout the Hundred Acre Wood, looking for other
Tiggers. But, as he has so often said himself, "The very most
wonderful thing about tiggers is that I'm the only one!" What Tigger
concludes, of course, is that family isn't just about sharing blood
and similar physical features. It's about giving and receiving love
from those around you - providing a good lesson for eager, open young
minds. The narration by John Hurt sounds wonderfully, authentically
British and the animation is not only inventive but amusing. Art
director Toby Bluth has chosen line drawings that hark back to the
original E.H. Shepard artwork.  The colors, the light, and the shading
all reflect the Hundred Acre Wood - a real place that one can still
visit outside of London. While nothing that will go down in the annals
of musical history, the six new songs by Robert and Richard Sherman
(Mary Poppins, Jungle Book) are pleasantly tuneful and one, at least,
is a terrific tongue-twister. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
Tigger is a toddler's 7 - it's a cuddly cartoon.

Title
Review for Hearts in Atlantis (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "HEARTS IN ATLANTIS" (Castle Rock/Warner Bros.)
  Timing is everything, and the timing just seems right for this
poignant psychological drama that combines the coming-of-age nostalgia of "Stand
By Me" with the mystical power of "The Green Mile." Based on Stephen King
stories adapted by screenwriter William Goldman and directed by Scott Hicks,
it's set in 1960 in Harwich, Connecticut, where fatherless 11 year-old Bobby
Garfield (Anton Yelchin) lives in a boarding house with his resentful,
self-centered mother (Hope Davis).  He's devoted to his neighborhood friends
(Mika Boorem, Will Rothhaar) but his pivotal relationship is with a strange, new
tenant, Ted Brautigan (Anthony Hopkins) who opens the world of literature to him
after his selfish mother refuses to buy him a birthday gift and hands him,
instead, a library card.  Knowing he's longing for a Schwinn bike, Ted offers to
pay him $1 a week to read him the local newspaper and keep his eyes peeled for
signs of the malevolent, ominous Low Men who are chasing him to exploit his
special powers. The story structure consists of one long flashback, framed by
the present, featuring the adult Bobby (David Morse), minimizing the
supernatural elements while emphasizing the human drama  Hopkins' mysterious
character is genteel, sensitive and benignly seductive. The only explanation is
that he's a psychic who is wanted by the FBI to aid in their hunt for Communists
and even that seems appropriate, given the inexplicable state of the world right
now. The production values and performances are solid, particularly Hopkins -
arguably the finest, most versatile actor of our era - and the children with
whom he forges a firm bond. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hearts in
Atlantis" is a wistful, enigmatic 8, evolving with subtle power to an
emotionally effective catharsis.

Title
Review for Bringing Out the Dead (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "BRINGING OUT THE DEAD" (Paramount Pictures)
 Martin Scorsese is one of our most respected auteurs but this
hollow melodrama is a major misfire. Marking the fourth collaboration
between Scorsese and writer Paul Schrader, it's an adaptation of Joe
Connelly's novel about the rescues and failures of a New York City
paramedic. Nicolas Cage plays a tormented EMS worker on the graveyard
shift in Hell's Kitchen who, in a week of full moons, is so
sleep-deprived that he wants nothing more than to be fired. Subsisting
on whiskey and cigarettes with an occasional pizza, he's a hyperactive
adrenaline-junkie, spiked by the surreal filth and loathing that
surround him and haunted by the face of an underage girl named Rose
whom he once failed to rescue. One night, this burnt-out wannabe hero
punches life back into the cardiac arrested chest of Mr. Burke, while
striking up a relationship with the man's estranged, ex-junkie
daughter, Patricia Arquette (Cage's real-life wife). As opposed to a
plot, the film consists of aimless, loosely connected episodes
narrated by Cage, working with a series of wacko partners. There's
John Goodman, who's resigned to holding on to his sanity amidst the
blood, pain, and despair; Tom Sizemore, who's heavily into violence
against the parasites of humanity; and Ving Rhames, who fancies
himself infused with the Holy Spirit. The camera technique is tricky,
the pace frantic, and the sound track filled with pop music with a
thumping bass. The eccentric characters say weird things which may
relate to guilt and redemption but that's not too clear. And there's a
crazy "Isn't-this-cool?" attitude when you realize that Scorsese
voices the ambulance dispatcher. But that's it. Nothing more. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bringing Out the Dead" is a chaotic,
wretched, frenzied 3. It's so cool, it's stone cold.

Title
Review for Hardball (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "HARDBALL" (Paramount Pictures)
    Think of it as a baseball version of "The Mighty Ducks" or an
updated "Bad News Bears" with a white guy who is seeking redemption coming into
a ghetto to help black kids find hope and salvation. Keanu Reeves ("Sweet
November,""The Matrix") plays Conor O'Neill, a Chicago gambler who owes $11,000
to two demanding bookies. When he tries to borrow money from a friend to pay the
debt, he must agree to coach a Little League team, the Kekambas, from the
Cabrini Green housing projects in order to get $500-a-week. The team's unruly
assortment of free-swinging, wise-cracking young players who live in fear and
squalor amidst violence, predictably, switch his perspective on life.
Particularly effective are Julian Griffith, A. Delon Ellis Jr., Michael Perkins,
and little DeWayne Warren as G-Baby. As their dedicated teacher, Diane Lane
provides an unnecessary romantic twist, while D.B. Sweeney is a rival coach.
Adapting Daniel Coyne's novel, screenwriter John Gatins ("Summer Catch") and
director Brian Robbins ("Good Burger," "Varsity Blues," "Ready to Rumble") have
discarded many of former coach Coyne's trenchant observations about the
relationships between the poor, African-American children and their white,
middle-class adult coaches in favor of the usual, simplistic clichs - like the
elitist league president, the contemptuous coach of the best team, the teacher
who insists that the kids learn, and the parents' demands from the bleachers -
and Chicago Cubs player Sammy Sosa does a cameo. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Hardball" gets a sappy, sentimental box-score of 5. And what we're
seeing is a sanitized adaptation, not the original version in which there was so
much four-letter-word profanity that it could never have received a PG-13
rating.

Title
Review for Hi-Lo Country, The (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "HI-LO COUNTRY" (Gramercy Pictures)
Leave it to an English director, Stephen Frears ("The
Grifters," "Dangerous Liaisons," "Mary Reilly'), to combine American
idealism with fading cowboy credos. Adapted by Walon Green ("The Wild
Bunch") from a 1961 novel by Max Evans, the story, set in a prairie
town called Hi-Lo in rural New Mexico, revolves around Woody Harrelson
as Big Boy Matson. He's still into hard livin' - drivin' cattle,
drinkin', fightin', and chasin' women - but - in the post W.W. II era
- he's out of place. He's like a demented Peter Pan, a boastful kid
who won't grow up. The story begins with Billy Crudup sitting in a van
with a shotgun across his lap, saying, "I once set out to kill
someone." Utilizing flashbacks, we learn the circumstances which led
up to his dilemma. Pivotal to the problem is his obsession with
flirtatious Patricia Arquette, who is unhappily married to a spineless
wimp and hot for his rough-and-ready best friend and business
partner. "A good woman is like a good horse 'n she's got bottom" is
the way Big Boy puts it.  Then there's wily Sam Elliott as a
cold-blooded, land-grabbing, wealthy rancher, an obvious
villain. "Trust is everything" is Big Boy's motto but, nevertheless,
their friendship is at stake.  All of this violent, macho turmoil is
set against Oliver Stapleton's magnificent big sky cinematography and
to the music of Carter Burdwell's evocative score.  It's no wonder
that the late Sam Peckinpah struggled for years to try to get this
picture made. Acting-wise, Harrelson and Crudup are bold and me
morable but Ms. Arquette is, at best, insipid. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Hi-Lo Country" is a simmering 7, a lusty homespun
homage to the traditional Old West of John Ford and Howard Hawks.

Title
Review for Holy Man (1998)
This is not your usual boisterous, outrageous Eddie Murphy
comedy - instead, it's a gentle contemporary fable about America's
shop-around-the-clock consumer mentality, starring Jeff Goldblum with
Murphy in a supporting role. Goldblum plays a fast-talking,
unscrupulous, self-absorbed executive at the Good Buy Network, a
Miami-based home-shopping channel whose sales are plummeting when the
venal owner (Robert Loggia) brings in an Ivy League media analyst
(Kelly Preston) to fix things. Goldblum makes a pass at Preston who is
totally unresponsive until they inadvertently encounter a smiling,
dashiki-clad pilgrim (Murphy) walking along the causeway. Preston
befriends the beatific, self-styled holy man - who calls himself "G" -
and Goldblum discovers G's got a natural aptitude for convincing
people to listen to his spiritual platitudes. Soon G's on the air as a
guru pitchman, mixing sermons with sales, hawking with Betty White,
Morgan Fairchild, Soupy Sales, Willard Scott, and Florence
Henderson. Profits soar and soon G's a hot commodity, entrancing
everyone. A rabbi claims he's talking from the Talmud, a Christian
scholar insists he's invoking the New Testament, and an imam says he's
speaking for the Muslims. The problem with "Holy Man" is that it's
being hyped as a high-octane Eddie Murphy comedy and it's not. It's
also not a cutting-edge, scathing satire. Perhaps that what the studio
wanted but that's not what writer Tom Schulman ("Dead Poets Society")
and director Stephen Herek ("Mr. Holland's Opus") delivered. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Holy Man" is an amusing if subdued 6
- but it's not the Eddie Murphy you might expect.

Title
Review for Passion of Mind (2000)
After suffering the slings and arrows of "G.I. Jane,"
"Striptease," and "The Scarlet Letter," it's understandable why Demi
Moore fled to the shelter of artsy, low-key European cinema. But this
tepid drama, the first English-language film by Belgian director Alain
Berliner ("My Vie en Rose"), is forgettable - at best. Written by Ron
Bass and David Field, it's about a woman with two lives. In one, she's
Marie, a widowed American book critic with two daughters, living
lavishly in the south of France. Marie's courted by a passionate,
older writer (Stellan Skarsgard) to whom she once gave a bad review,
although she observes, "You commit beautifully." And, as her
girl-friend notes, "He's a chance to love again."  In a less idyllic
but parallel universe, she's Marty, a high-powered, hard-working
Manhattan literary agent, courted by a shy, sensitive, erotic
accountant (William Fichtner).  In each life, she falls asleep and
awakens as the other person and, in both worlds, she visits a
psychiatrist who confirms that she's, indeed, got delusionary
problems. But at least, this time she keeps her clothes on.  Marty's
consultant (Peter Riegert) bluntly observes that she's "as mad as a
hatter," while Marie's therapist (Joss Ackland) is more tactful,
saying, "You are riding two horses, and the mind isn't built for
that." Obviously, the concept is a ludicrous, heavy-handed metaphor
about the choices facing contemporary women today, and Alain Berliner
awkwardly tries to convince us that either world could be real. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Passion of Mind" is a sumptuous but
shallow 4. With Demi Moore, more is less.

Title
Review for Orgazmo (1997)
      Before Trey Parker struck success with TV's "South Park," he
made a dreadful, scatological, NC-17 satire of parasitic, hard-core
pornography.  In this offensive opus, Parker plays a mild-mannered
Mormon missionary who agrees to appear in a porno film with Ron Jeremy
(a real-life porno star) in order to earn $20,000 so that he can be
married in the temple in Salt Lake City. Reassured that there will be
a "stunt penis" for penetration, he accepts the role of the XXX-rated
superhero Orgazmo, who crashes through cardboard walls to rescue
damsels who are being ravished by Jeremy. His secret weapon is his
Orgazmorator which stuns his enemies with multiple orgasms. Meanwhile,
his virginal fiancee (Robyn Lynne Raab) in Utah is curious about the
film, so the missionary says it's "Death of a Salesman." Intrigued,
she flies to Southern California, where she's soon kidnapped and tied
to a bed by the unscrupulous, foul-mouthed film-maker (Michael Dean
Jacobs).  The lame, shoddy, infantile excitement is confined to a huge
German shepherd humping a man's leg and a gray-haired granny swearing
like a Marine drill sergeant. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Orgazmo" is barely a 1. No yucks and a yawn - a dud.

Title
Review for Jawbreaker (1999)
Susan Granger's review of "JAWBREAKER" (Columbia/Tri Star: Sony Entertain=
ment)
  If you remember "Heathers," "Grease," or even "Carrie,"
you'll recognize elements of all three in this high-school reworked
satire. Rebecca Gayheart, Rose McGowan, Charlotte Roldan, and Julie
Benz are the four most beautiful and popular girls at Reagan High. And
they know it. As the ruling clique, they're bitches. Their
disinterested demeanor and cold stares intimidate the weak but their
sex appeal is undeniable. The plot revolves around what happens when
Rebecca, Rose, and Julie decide to pull a prank on Charlotte's 17th
birthday. Sneaking into her room in the morning, they stuff a
jawbreaker in her mouth and gag her so she can't spit it out. Then
they kidnap her and stuff her into the trunk of their car. But when
they decide to set her free to gorge on a pancake breakfast, they
discover she's dead, having choked on the jawbreaker. Terrified, they
decide to take the body back to her home and make it look like she was
strangled during some kinky sex. But there's a witness to the
crime. It's Judy Evans Greer, the class nerd who is bribed into
silence by a beauty make-over and instant social status among her
peers. Then a persistent detective, Pam Grier, arrives to investigate
the case. What "Jawbreaker" has in its favor is that it cost only $3
million and today's teen market is hot - and Rose McGowan's real-life
boy-friend, Marilyn Manson, has a cameo as her lover. The film's
weakness lies in writer-director Darren Stein's shallow, uneven
execution. He was obviously going for a Faustian tale of corruption
and redemption, even paying homage to "Carrie" in casting P.J. Soles
and William Katt as Charlotte's parents, but this black comedy is just
too derivative. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Jawbreaker" is
a stylish but sophomoric 6 - aimed at high school movie-goers.

Title
Review for Never Been Kissed (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "NEVER BEEN KISSED" (20th Century-Fox)
 How deep are your teenage emotional scars? Anyone who has
ever experienced an awkward, horrible humiliation in high school will
relate to Drew Barrymore's dilemma as she is forced to negotiate the
social and emotional land mines of adolescence - not once but
twice. As mousy, 25 year-old Josie Geller, an incurable romantic and
the youngest copy editor at the "Chicago Sun Times," she's assigned to
go undercover to report on today's teenagers.  But Josie was a brainy
nerd in high school, a gawky geek to the core, nicknamed "Josie
Grossie," and her re-visit promises to be a repeat. "All I wanted was
to be accepted, and they just tortured me," she wails to her younger
brother (David Arquette), a self-styled "loser," who decides to lend
support, catapulting her from "outcast" to "instant popularity."  And,
of course, she finds romance with an English literature teacher
(Michael Vartan) who finds himself uncomfortably attracted to one of
his "students." Drew Barrymore has a dazzling comic flair; her saucy
performance is hilarious. One of the newer trends in the motion
picture business is targeting a specific audience - in this case,
teenage girls, who are all to familiar with the cattiness, cruelty,
and clique-mentality. This romantic comedy has all the hallmarks of
vintage John Hughes - think "Pretty in Pink" and "Sixteen Candles" -
as director Raja Gosnell coaxes freshness out of Abby Kohn and Marc
Silverstein's formulaic script, which delivers the message: "Find out
who you are and try not to be afraid of it." On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Never Been Kissed" is a lively if sophomoric 7 -
but, for its target audience, it's a captivating, totally cool teenage
chick's flick.

Title
Review for Snatch. (2000)
   British writer/director Guy Ritchie repeats the hip "Lock,
Stock and Two Smoking Barrels" formula with this new, ultra-violent
crime caper - and it's less effective the second time 'round. This is
all about a diamond heist gone sour, bare knuckle boxing and a dog who
swallows a squeak toy. Benicio Del Toro ("Traffic") is Franky Four
Fingers, a diamond thief and gambler, who is passing through London en
route to New York to deliver a glittering 86-carat gem that he stole
in Antwerp to his Anglophobe boss, Dennis Farina. While distributing
some smaller sparklers to his boss's mobster cousin and other Hatton
Garden jewelers, he places a bet on an illegal boxing match. What he
doesn't know is that he's been set up for robbery - and worse. So much
for the gruesome, convoluted plot.  The gritty, working-class
characters are sadistic gangster caricatures and not at all likable,
in contrast to the four lads in "Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels."
Brad Pitt is almost unintelligible as One Punch Mickey, an Irish gypsy
boxer; he's brawny and buff but he seems to be babbling
incoherently. As for Guy Ritchie's Tarantino-like craftsmanship in
directing, it's simply "been there, done that" as the colorful, if
over-aggressive, bumblers energetically bungle their way from mishap
to mayhem. And what's with the supposedly symbolic scenes of cruelty
to animals? Surely Ritchie's torrid courtship of Madonna and Child
cannot have robbed him of all originality. However, one must credit
him for a disgustingly unique explanation of the phrase, "as greedy as
a pig." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Snatch" is a
confusing, shamelessly repetitive 4. Its continuous action and
frenetic pace don't make it either fresh or funny. I'm curious to see
what genre Ritchie tackles next.

Title
Review for Pi (1998)
Darren Aronofsky won the Director's Award at the 1998 Sundance
Film Festival for this low-budget, black-and-white cinematic calculus
which explores the meaning of life through numbers. Sean Gullette
plays a renegade math genius with a troubled genealogy that goes back
to Dr. Frankenstein. Caught between blinding flashes of brilliance and
equally blinding migraine headaches, he searches his home-built
super-computer, named Euclid, for a formula that will reveal a
numerical pattern within the chaos of the stock market. He's obsessed
with finding a unifying order in everything - from the cream spiraling
in his coffee to the infinite possibilities in his weekly board games
with his mentor, Mark Margolis. His research makes him popular with
rabid Wall Street analysts as well as with Orthodox Jewish cabalists
who believe that he has stumbled upon a 216-digit number that will
reveal God's first name. "The Torah's just a long stream of numbers,"
he's told by Ben Shenkman, a Jewish numerologist. "Some say it's a
code, sent by God."  What does the title mean? When the Greek
mathematician Archimedes couldn't calculate the answer to a difficult
problem, he gave up and retired to his bath where, in repose, the
solution - the mathematical notation used to represent the ratio of
the circumference of a circle to its diameter - suddenly came to
him. What does dense, tormented Max discover? A secret everyone is
willing to kill for. Despite its wobbly, hand-held photography and
grainy texture, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pi" is an
eccentric, cerebral 7, concluding that life doesn't fall into
predictable patterns and complete control is impossible.  It's an
imaginative, intellectually stimulating feature-film debut for this
promising writer/director.

Title
Review for What's Cooking? (2000)
  This tasty cinematic Thanksgiving celebration gently
interweaves the tension and turmoil of four different Los Angeles
families as they prepare turkey, sweet potatoes and pumpkin pie for
the traditional dinner - along with tamales, spring rolls, kugel,
macaroni & cheese.  There's also sex, politics and prejudice on the
menu, along with philandering husbands, stressed-out wives, prodigal
sons, rebellious daughters, meddling grandparents, plus estranged and
just plain strange relatives. These surprisingly interconnected
Jewish, African-American, Latino and Vietnamese families relish their
diversity while acknowledging their buoyant, bonding similarities and
generational conflicts. Under the kaleidoscopic direction of British
film-maker Gurinder Chada ("Bhaji on the Beach"), who wrote the
screenplay with Paul Mayeda Berges, the excellent and extensive
ensemble cast includes Alfre Woodard, Julianna Margulies, Kyra
Sedgwick, Joan Chen, Mercedes Ruehl, and Maury Chaykin. Unlike Jodie
Foster's "Home for the Holidays" (1995) about a dysfunctional family,
these frustrated pilgrims are simply coping with the all-too-real
problems within the contemporary American melting-pot of cultures -
even if, at times, the flavorful syrup spills over into contrived
cliches, stereotypes and sentimentality. Credit Jong Lin ("Eat, Drink,
Man, Woman") for the mouth-watering, almost surreal cinematography,
emblematic of the culinary heritage of the respective ethnic groups
and Janice Hampton for judicious editing that allows you to follow
each story clearly. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "What's
Cooking?" is a sumptuous, succulent, spicy 7, a joyous, nurturing
cornucopia, timed for gleeful holiday viewing.

Title
Review for Prince of Egypt, The (1998)
Set in ancient Egypt, this animated tale follows the Biblical
story of Exodus in which Moses grew from slave to prince and led his
people to the promised land, progressing from hedonistic unawareness
to an acceptance of faith and responsibility as God's chosen leader of
the Jewish people. It's a loose adaptation, capturing the "essence and
values" of the Bible story. Scholars may quibble with the fact that
Moses is rescued by Pharaoh's wife (Helen Mirren), not daughter but,
despite details which have been changed, the epic holds true as the
baby is set adrift on the Nile by his mother to escape the wrath of
Pharaoh (Patrick Stewart) against the Hebrews. Miraculously, he is
found and raised as a member of the Royal Family. Ignorant of his
heritage, he forms a close bond with Pharaoh's son Ramses (Ralph
Fiennes) yet, the step-brothers are torn apart by fate (think Cain and
Abel) as Moses (Val Kilmer) meets his sister (Sandra Bullock) who
reveals who he is and where he came from. The brothers' teenage
relationship is a DreamWorks invention that works dramatically since,
eventually, Moses must appeal to Ramses to let his oppressed people
go, amidst plague-and-pestilence. DreamWorks' animation is stunning,
never surrendering to "cute" touches that would make it into a
whimsical cartoon for moppets. It's a risky, PG-rated choice that may
lose the pre-school "Antz" audience but should pay off in the long
run, combining "Raiders of the Lost Ark" with "The Ten Commandments."
And the music is magnificent with a score that should dominate Oscar
night. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Prince of Egypt" is a
fanciful yet reverent 10, an instant classic that redefines the
animation genre with a new sophistication. One of the best pictures of
the year!

Title
Review for Haunting, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Eugenio Zanetti is the star of this film, no question about
it. He's the production designer who created Hill House, a spectacular
Gothic mansion that delivers one helluva performance as an ominous
haunted house that captures the imaginations of its guests. Zanetti
makes rooms collapse, even fold into themselves, and there's a demonic
bed whose canopy descends with tentacles like an octopus. Paintings,
carvings, statues, even curtains come alive. And there's the slow,
ghostly breathing emanating from deep inside.  The question is: why
would Liam Neeson, Catherine Zeta-Jones, and Lili Taylor want to play
second-fiddle to such an incredible creation that, in fact, makes them
seem wooden?  Looking terrified and screaming is really all that's
required in David Self's inane script, based on Shirley Jackson's
scare-classic, "The Haunting of Hill House." And the stylistic vision
of director Jan DeBont ("Speed," "Twister") truly revolves around the
special effects. As the story begins, Neeson, as a devious
psychologist, brings three insomniacs to Hill House, outside Boston,
for what he tells them is a sleep disorder study. In fact, he's
designed the experiment to observe the dynamics of fear, explaining:
"You don't tell the rats that they're actually in a maze."  But his
guests do know that, in the 1800s, a satanic textile manufacturer,
Hugh Crain, erected this stately "Taj Mahal" for his beloved wife and
their eight children, who are all buried nearby. What no one realizes
is that Hill House has become Crain's massive physical embodiment. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Haunting" is a spooky 4,
playing tricks with your mind as you munch your popcorn. If you're
curious, director Robert Wise made a far more subtle, restrained
version (1963), available on video.

Title
Review for Soldier (1998)
In this sci-fi thriller, Kurt Russell plays a New Millennium
mercenary, chosen shortly after his birth by nefarious, militaristic
government forces. He was psychologically programmed and brutally
trained to be a highly disciplined, emotionally dead fighting
machine. Raised with the credo - "kill or be killed" - he became a
lean, mean monster who subsequently proved himself in many galactic
battles. Then, at age 40, he suddenly becomes aware that he and his
colleagues have outlived their usefulness and are being replaced by a
new breed of test tube warriors who have been genetically engineered
to stronger and meaner. After losing a gladiatorial bout to one of
these psychopaths (Jason Scott Lee), Russell is unceremoniously dumped
like garbage on a distant planet and left for dead, but he's nursed
back to health by a pacifist space pioneers who were stranded there
years before. Predictably, when the new mercenaries, under a wretched,
villainous leader (Jason Isaacs), return and attack the settlers,
Russell defends them. The underlying theme of David Webb People's
script is not new. It's a sci-fi adaptation of the western, "Shane,"
just as the theme of "Star Wars" bore a striking similarity to "The
Searchers" and "Outland" was adapted from "High Noon." Unfortunately,
director Paul Anderson ("Event Horizon," "Mortal Kombat") is focused
on ballistic, video-game visuality rather than character
development. Kurt Russell has announced that this is his last action
movie, and his subtle characterization proves he's ready to move on to
other things. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Soldier" is a
brutal, blood 'n' guts 3. The trick is that it could have been a
treat.

Title
Review for Play It to the Bone (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 From writer/director Ron Shelton we've come to expect good
sports movies like Bull Durham (baseball), Tin Cup (golf), and White
Men Can't Jump (basketball) but this flimsy, raunchy story about
over-the-hill boxers doesn't measure up. Woody Harrelson plays a bald,
tattooed eccentric who has found Jesus - but hasn't worked in
years. Neither has his rival and best-buddy, Antonio Banderas, who
happens to be dating his ex-girl-friend, Lolita Davidovich when,
suddenly, they get the chance of a lifetime. It seems two middleweight
fighters have canceled and a sleazy promoter (Tom Sizemore) asks them
to be the opening card of a Mike Tyson bout at Vegas' Mandalay Bay
Hotel.  The job promises big money - $50,000 each - plus a bid for the
middleweight championship, but there's a catch: they have to get there
immediately. Fortunately, Davidovich has a grass-green 1972 Olds 442,
so they take off from L.A. scrambling through the sizzling
desert. Now, right away, one wonders why the hotel didn't send a jet -
or at least plane tickets - but that's part of the problem if the
underwritten script. Besides, half the film is spent on the road trip
in which we learn more than we ever wanted to know about the bickering
threesome, plus there's Lucy Liu as a free-spirited hitchhiker. By the
way, the title refers to the commitment of not quitting until you've
achieved your goal. Finally, the fighters get into the ring but, by
that time, I was ready to throw in the towel. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, Play It To The Bone is a fumbling, flat-footed,
formulaic 3, filled with foul language. In one scene, Harrelson says:
"Any guy with any gal is a mismatch - we're just not equipped to go
the distance." Neither is this movie.

Title
Review for Dinosaur (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "DINOSAUR" (Walt Disney Pictures)
 Cinematic dinosaurs have always captured our
imagination. Back in 1905, an early film called "Prehistoric Man" is
believed to have featured the first animated dinosaur.  Then animation
pioneer Winsor McCay made "Gertie the Dinosaur" and Willis O'Brian did
"The Lost World."  Others followed. Disney showed a battle between a
Tyrannosaurus Rex and a Stegosaur in the original "Fantasia" and, in
1993, "Jurassic Park" introduced the first computer-generated
dinosaurs. IMAX then did a 3-D version with "T-Rex: Back to the
Cretaceous." So this visually thrilling, technical marvel, "Dinosaur"
continues the legacy, ingeniously depicting these giant reptiles with
expressive, distinctive personalities in a wondrous "photorealistic"
world, blending digitally enhanced live-action photography, special
effects, and computer-animated characters.
  This story revolves around Alador, an orphaned Iguanodon,
who is raised from an egg by a lively clan of lemurs and, eventually,
reunited with other herbivores in the midst of a desperate
migration. Perils abound - from natural disasters, like a devastating
meteor storm, to brutal attacks by voracious carnivores.  Problem is:
there's no whimsy, no light-heartedness. "Dinosaur" is heavy-going
serious in the scripting department, utilizing many of the same
"misfit" plot points as "The Jungle Book," "Tarzan" and "The Lion
King" - extolling kindness, generosity, perseverance and hope - but
with no real villain, no emotional involvement, and no colorful,
amusing characters. Rated PG, it might scare the tiny tots so judge
accordingly. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dinosaur" is an
amazing, spectacular 7, filled with striking visual excitement. But
it's great splendor in need of some fun.

Title
Review for Scary Movie (2000)
  It's ironic that Miramax, the studio that launched the
teen-horror satire genre back in 1996 with "Scream," has now done its
own raunchy spoof of the trend. Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans, it
dives into Farrelly brothers territory, wallowing in obscenity,
profanity and splashing semen, boldly challenging the accepted NC-17
taboo of male genitalia. The shallow, sketchy plot, attributed to six
different screenwriters combining two different screenplays, involves
a serial killer who is pursuing a group of young people. In the
opening scene, lifted directly from Drew Barrymore's sequence in
"Scream," nubile starlet Carmen Electra gets a mysterious phone call,
expels gas, sheds her clothes, runs through a sprinkler and gets
stabbed in her breast implant.  But Carmen and the other hapless
actors are stereotypical caricatures of teenagers, played by 20 30
year-olds. They don't converse; they chatter. And most of the jokes
are gross and offensive, centered about the pubic region of human
anatomy - funny only to those with the most sophomoric taste. There's
already much controversy about the R-rating for "strong, crude sexual
humor."  Obviously, the 13-member, Los Angeles-based MPAA rating
committee is tougher on serious, rather than comedic, sexuality. Among
the movies parodied are the "Scream" series, the "I Know What You Did
Last Summer" series, "The Usual Suspects," "The Matrix," "American
Pie," "The Blair Witch Project," even "The Sixth Sense." On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Scary Movie" is a crude, lewd 2 - its
full 88-minutes are aimed specifically at the Gen-X and Gen-Y
audience. What's really scary is the amount of money it will probably
earn while far more worthy films pass, unnoticed, onto the video
shelf.

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  This comedy sequel continues the satirical adventures of
"The International Man of Mystery," beginning with a James Bond'ish
theme as the "Star Wars"-inspired introduction scrolls up the
screen. In a nutshell: After Austin Powers (Mike Myers) discovers that
his beloved bride, Vanessa Carrington (Elizabeth Hurley), is really a
Fem-Bot (female robot), he is informed by the Head of British
Intelligence (Michael York) that fiendish Fat Bastard (Mike Myers),
the Scottish henchman of Dr. Evil (Mike Myers), has stolen his mojo
(his essence, his life force, his sex drive), using time travel
machine to go back to 1967 when Austin was cryogenically frozen. So
Austin has to go back to the swingin', shagadelic '60s to retrieve his
manhood. That's where he meets groovy CIA babe, Felicity Shagwell
(Heather Graham): "Shagwell by name. Shag-very-well by reputation." So
much for plot. Relying primarily on sight gags and toilet humor,
director Jay Roach desperately grabs laughs wherever he can find
them. And that includes a Jerry Springer Show riff in which Dr. Evil's
son (Seth Green) confronts his father, along with Nazi and Ku Klux
Klan sons, claiming: "My Father is Evil and Wants to Take Over the
World." What's new? Dr. Evil has a tiny clone, known as
Mini-Me. Robert Wagner and Rob Lowe play the '90s/ '60s versions of
Dr. Evil's second-in-command - and Rob does the best R.J. Wagner
impression I've ever seen!  Burt Bacharach, Elvis Costello, Tim
Robbins, Willie Nelson, and Woody Harrelson pop up in cameos. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged
Me" is a goofy, sporadically funny, silly 6. Oh, behave! And stay for
the credits.

Title
Review for Celebrity (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "CELEBRITY" (Miramax Films)
Woody Allen examines the phenomenon of "celebrity" in some of
its most ridiculous incarnations in this thoroughly entertaining,
black-and-white, contemporary comedy set in New York City. Kenneth
Branagh plays his alter ego, a free-lance writer whose neurotic
ambitions lead him to divorce his high-strung wife, a school teacher
(Judy Davis), and into the wobbly orbit of superstars like prancing
movie queen Melanie Griffith, imperious model Charlize Theron, and
teen idol Leonardo DiCaprio, who was cast even before he made such a
big hit in "Titanic."  "All you writers are so sensitive," DiCaprio
whines when Branagh hedges about joining him in some drug-laden
debauchery. Famke Janssen is a svelte book editor, and Winona Ryder
does a turn as an ambitious waitress/actress. While Branagh blathers
about the current "Age of Psychiatry," where people have become so
civilized that a new barbarity has developed from their
pseudo-sophistication, his ex-wife flees to a religious retreat where
a TV-star priest signs autographs, learns about oral sex from a
prostitute (Bebe Newirth), and visits a plastic surgeon (Michael
Lerner) known as "the Michaelangelo of Manhattan."  And she delivers
Allen's signature line for the film: "You can tell a lot about a
society by who it chooses to celebrate." Obviously, Woody Allen is
satirizing Andy Warhol's "15 minutes of fame" which is now accorded to
hostages, criminals, and the unlikely oddballs who catch our fancy,
revealing a society with no firm guideposts, either moral or
traditional. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Celebrity" is an
acerbic, cynical 7, ridiculing the "discreet charm" of the auteurs and
poseurs, the so-called cultural elite.

Title
Review for Todo sobre mi madre (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "ALL ABOUT MY MOTHER" (Sony Pictures Classics)
This is the foreign language picture you'll be hearing about in
the coming awards season. It's the 13th film and best work so far from
Spanish film-maker Pedro Almodovar, who gave us unconventional fare
like The Flower of My Secret, Live Flesh, and Women on the Verge of a
Nervous Breakdown. This baroque, non-judgemental film about femaleness
- what it means to be female - tells the story of Manuela (Cecilia
Roth), whose teenage son is killed by a car. Honoring her son's wish
to learn more about the father he never knew, she goes she goes back
to her native Barcelona to locate the man she fled from nearly 20
years earlier - a man now known as Lola. Finding herself amidst drug
addicts and transvestite hookers, she befriends another former
companion, Agrado (Antonio San Juan), who introduces her to Sister
Rosa (Penelope Cruz), a nun whose own secret connection to Manuela is
cleverly interwoven into the criss-crossing fabric of coincidences and
interconnections as she comes to reconcile with ghosts from her
past. For inspiration in creating these characters, Almodovar draws on
many sources: A Streetcar Named Desire, echoing Blanche Dubois' famous
line: "I've always depended on the kindness of strangers...", All
About Eve, from which the title and character comes, and, primarily,
John Cassavetes' Opening Night, in which a Broadway actress (Gena
Rowlands) is haunted by the accidental death of an idolatrous young
woman.  But Almodovar creates a fascinating, often hilariously funny
work that stands on its own, evolving into a magnificent, if
melodramatic, meditation on female solidarity. Almodovar calls it a
"screwball drama." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, All About My
Mother is a poignant 10. It's 1999's best foreign language film.

Title
Review for Poketto monsutaa: Maboroshi no Pokemon X: Lugia bakudan (1999)
There's a sequel to last fall's "Pokemon" phenomenon revolving
around the Pokemon universe.  While the first, "Mewtwo Strikes Back,"
introduced all the participants, this has more adventure as a terrible
force threatens all life on Earth and the only one who can stop it is
a young trainer named Ash Ketchum, who proves that one person can
really make a difference. There are six new Pokemons, including Lugia,
a great hero who plays a key role in helping Ash restore balance to
the world. The plot revolves around a villainous, unscrupulous pokemon
collector who is after Lugia, who is rare and, therefore, quite
valuable to collectors. Legend has it that when three Pokemon -
Zapdos, Articuno and Moltres - are assembled, Lugia will appear. But,
as each globe is captured, the balance of nature is disrupted and
bizarre weather patterns emerge. Ash, Misty and their cohorts are
alerted to this danger when a sudden storm forces them to crash into
an island and soon setting the ecology of the planet to right becomes
everyone's quest. In Japan, where it was released last year, this film
was called "Poketto monsutaa: Maboroshi no Pokemon X: Lugia bakudan."
The rudimentary animation resembles the TV show and many familiar
characters from that series make an appearance, plus there's a music
score by Ralph Schuckett and John Loeffler. As an added bonus, there's
"Pikachu's Exploration Party," a cartoon short that precedes the
feature, much like "Pikachu's Summer Vacation." On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Pokemon the Movie 2000" is a formulaic 4 -
appealing to those children who are crazy for Pokemons and quite
boring to those who aren't. Warner Bros. Pictures is once again
collaborating with Nintendo of America, so be aware that there are
lots of new toys to accompany this film.

Title
Review for Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "ELMO IN GROUCHLAND" (Columbia Pictures)
          Anyone who's ever had toddlers knows there are certain
taboos - like separating a kid from his security blanket. In this
latest of the "Sesame Street" movie spin-offs, stemming from the
genius of the late Jim Henson, lovable Elmo, the shy, little,
red-tufted yarn puppet with an orange nose and eggshell eyes, loses
his beloved blue blanket, named Blanket. The story starts as Elmo gets
very, very upset when his best friend Zoe wants to hold Blanket. In
fact, a tug-of-war breaks out and neither of them sees Telly coming at
them on his new roller blades. An accident occurs and Blanket winds up
in Oscar's mysterious trash can - which, in turn, leads him
Grouchland, a stinky, yucky place where everyone's irritable and
smiling is forbidden. And there's a cranky villain in
Grouchland.. That's greedy Huxley, played by Mandy Patinkin. He's a
selfish bully who stamps everything "Mine" and sucks up Blanket with
his Hoxocopter and won't give it back. Moppets will not only love
watching but they're invited to yell, sing and clap along, and that's
about as interactive as cinema can be these days. And the best part -
insofar as parents are concerned - is that whenever the going gets
tough - like Blanket might rip - Bert and Ernie interrupt the story to
reassure viewers that they shouldn't worry and things will turn out
all right. With the Muppeteers, there's light-hearted humor and
good-natured fun which makes for lots of laughs - and Vanessa Williams
makes a great Queen of Trash. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Elmo in Grouchland" is a warm, fuzzy 8, teaching pre-schoolers a
gentle lesson about sharing.

Title
Review for Sunshine (1999)
 Hungarian director Istvan Szabos' epic, three-hour saga
chronicles the rise and fall of three tumultuous generations of a
troubled Hungarian Jewish family. Their name is Sonnenschein, which
means sunshine in German; the title also refers to a delicious herbal
tonic that the family brews.  Ralph Fiennes plays three roles: the
patriarch, Ignatz Sonnenschein, who marries his cousin and begins the
process of assimilation by changing the family name to Sors; his son,
Adam, who converts to Roman Catholicism, primarily to get into
Budapest's best fencing club, and becomes an Anti-Semitic snob,
slashing his way to Olympics victory; and Adam's son, cynical Ivan
Sors, who joins the Communist secret police after W.W.II.  The
sweeping story by Israel Horovitz begins in 1840 and extends through
the fall of Communism, encompassing more than 100 years - like
Bertolucci's "1900" and Visconti's "Leopard." Its theme is how all
governments - Monarchy, Fascism or Communism - are corrupt, and how
the choices we make - for better or worse - determine our future.  In
a unique casting twist, Jennifer Ehle plays Valerie, the woman whom
Ignatz loves, and, as she ages, Ms. Ehle's real-life mother, acclaimed
actress Rosemary Harris, continues the same character about whom a
grandson says, "She was the only one of us who had the gift of
breathing freely." Recently, mother and daughter were both Best
Actress Tony-Award competitors; Ms. Ehle won for "The Real Thing." On
the Granger Movie Gauge of to 10, "Sunshine" is a thoughtful,
ambitious, elegant 8 - but, because of its length, it's better suited
as a three-part TV miniseries on an adult-oriented channel that could
accommodate the graphic brutality of one torture scene in a
concentration camp, along with the sexual content and nudity.

Title
Review for Ghosts of Mars (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "GHOSTS OF MARS" (Sony Pictures Entertainment)
      Horror auteur John Carpenter ("Halloween," "Vampires") strikes out
with this sci-fi eco-fable that's so bad it boggles the mind to imagine how the
project ever got green-lit. The script by Carpenter and Larry Sulkis appears to
have been lifted directly from last year's "Pitch Black," involving a violent
prisoner who must be released from bondage so that he can help a small band of
humans protect themselves from blood-thirsty, marauding aliens. In the year
2176, there are 640,000 Earthlings on Mars, living in a matriarchal society led
by a Commander, played by Pam Grier. Grier, pill-poppin' Natasha Henstridge, and
some rookie Mars Police officers (Clea Duvall, Jason Statham) travel to the
remote mining town of Shining Canyon to fetch "Desolation" Williams - that's Ice
Cube - to bring him back to Chryse City to stand trial for murder. But when
they're besieged by demented, zombie-like, body-snatching miners, they readily
free the scowling Ice Cube since they need him for protection. It seems a red
cloud was released from a Shining Canyon cave and, soon after, most of the
miners went bonkers as long-dormant remnants of an ancient Martian civilization
took over their minds and bodies, lopping off heads as "vengeance for anything
that tries to lay claim to their planet," according to a scientist (Joanna
Cassidy). Carpenter uses so many flashbacks to tell the "Night of the Living
Dead"-like story that the idiotic plot gets incomprehensibly confusing. But you
can easily predict each of the supporting characters who will be killed, along
with the order of their elimination. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Ghosts of Mars" thuds to a laborious, bottom-of-the-barrel 1. Perhaps, indeed,
there is a curse on Mars films, if you recall two other duds: "Mission to Mars"
and "Red Planet."

Title
Review for Wizard of Oz, The (1939)
Susan Granger's commentary on "THE WIZARD OF OZ" (Warner Bros.)
Starting today, the most beloved of all American musicals,
recently named the 6th Best Motion Picture of All Time by the American
Film Institute, is available on the big screen for the first time in
more than 25 years. Made in 1939, this delightful classic now has
state-of-the-art technical improvements, including a remastered
soundtrack and a digitally restored picture. Judy Garland stars as
Dorothy Gale, a Kansas farm-girl whom a tornado blows over the rainbow
to a magical land called Oz, where she and her dog Toto take a journey
down the Yellow Brick Road to find the fabled Wizard (Frank
Morgan). Along the way, they're joined by the Scarecrow (Ray Bolger),
the Tin Woodsman (Jack Haley) and the Cowardly Lion (Bert Lahr). But
did you know that Deanna Durbin or Shirley Temple were the studio's
original casting choices for Dorothy, that Buddy Ebsen played the Tin
Woodsman until the silver make-up made him ill, that W.C. Fields
refused the role of the Wizard, and that the song "Over the Rainbow"
was almost cut from the film? Not only did L. Frank Baum write a
charming fantasy but it's also an insightful philosophical commentary
on the fears, questions, and desires with which all children
grapple. Home is the center of every child's universe - but what if
that house was transported elsewhere?  What if one's drab, everyday
existence were suddenly, inexplicably changed to something dazzling
yet quite different? The three characters Dorothy meets on her rite of
passage represent the head, the heart, and the soul, as she grasps the
concept that things are not always what they seem. The issues raised
by "The Wizard of Oz" are dilemmas that intrigue and resonate with the
child in all of us - which is why this is the quintessential family
film. It's a MUST SEE this weekend.

Title
Review for Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  Writer/director/producer Jim Jarmusch re-imagines the
gangster picture as a quirky cross-culture fusion of Eastern
philosophy, hip-hop music, urban darkness, and movie iconography. He
focuses on Ghost Dog (Forest Whitaker), an assassin who is obsessed by
the noble precepts of the 18th century warrior text, Hagakure: The
Book of the Samurai, applying them to his work as a contract
killer. In the samurai tradition, Ghost Dog has pledged his loyalty to
one master (John Tormey), a small-time New Jersey mobster who once
saved his life, with whom he now communicates only by carrier
pigeons. He's a loner whose only human contact is with a
French-speaking ice-cream vendor (Isaach DeBankole) and a curious
little girl (Camille Winbush) he meets in a park. The deliberately
slow-paced, character-driven plot involves a great deal of brutal
violence, stemming from vengeance, jealousy, and countless
double-crosses, climaxing in a blood-drenched finale. Curiously, Ghost
Dog doesn't speak a line of dialogue until 45 minutes into the
film. The blasting musical soundtrack by Wu Tang Clan's RZA
underscores both the hit-man's zen-like qualities and the lurking
menace of his allegorical environment. Jarmusch says he built his
characters from his experience living in New York's Little Italy,
where he witnessed the death of an old Mafia order. In fact, he
maintains, some of the actors came from that world: "They're gentlemen
to me, but they've also killed people." On the Granger Movie Gauge of
1 to 10, Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai is an offbeat,
thought-provoking 6. While it's not a film to enjoy, it's one
adventurous movie-goers may appreciate.

Title
Review for Dancer in the Dark (2000)
Susan Granger's review of "DANCER IN THE DARK" (Fine Line Features)
   Love it or hate it, you gotta admire its audacity!  Danish
director Lars von Trier who, back in 1995, co-authored the Dogma
manifesto, demanding that cinema be purified of tricks and illusions
and go back-to-basics, has come up with a bizarre homage to the
Hollywood musical. Making her film debut, the Icelandic pop singer
Bjork plays Selma, a Czech immigrant working at a factory in the
Pacific Northwest in the 1960s. An avid admirer of American musicals,
she fantasizes song-and-dance routines as she goes about her
depressing daily existence. It's her "emotional landscape." One
complication: because of a congenital condition, she's also going
blind, as will her 12 year-old son (Vladica Kostic) if she cannot
raise the money for surgery to save his sight. Which makes her lyrics,
"I've seen it all. There's nothing left to see," particularly
poignant. Catherine Deneuve is a supportive co-worker and Peter
Stromare is a besotted suitor but, when a treacherous neighbor (David
Morse) steals her stash of cash, Selma panics, commits a grotesque
crime and faces a bleak future. Like Emily Watson in "Breaking the
Waves," Bjork is a compelling, elfin creature playing a stubborn
child/woman trapped in an irrational paradox of reality versus
fantasy. In addition, of course, Bjork composed the music. Curiously,
von Trier contradicts his own Dogma purity principles by creating an
improbable, deliberately stylized film using not only 100 cameras in a
dance sequence but also recorded music to which Bjork lip-synchs; I've
heard there are 110 tracks in every song. Winner of the Golden Palm at
the Cannes Film Festival, on the Granger Movie Gauge, "Dancer in the
Dark" is a fascinating but, ultimately, frustrating 7. It's a musical
melodrama that's blatantly manipulative in its overt sentimentality.

Title
Review for Boiler Room (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "BOILER ROOM" (New Line Cinema)
If you've ever responded to a telephone solicitation, be
prepared for an eye-opener! This disturbing, cautionary story about a
stock scam takes you into the infamous "boiler room" where
twentysomething millionaires are made overnight.  They're Gen-Xers who
want the adrenaline rush of easy money. So when Seth, a 19 year-old
college dropout played by Giovanni Ribisi (Saving Private Ryan),
realizes that his father, a judge (Ron Rivkin), has caught onto the
illegal casino he's been running out of his Queens apartment, he's
recruited into the inner sanctum of a fly-by-night Long Island
brokerage firm named J.T. Marlin (a name chosen because it sounds like
J.P. Morgan) by Ben Affleck (Dogma). After a glimpse of his boss's 355
canary-yellow Ferrari and an eye-popping indoctrination, he becomes a
stockjock-in-training, learning how to hustle unsuspecting investors
over the phone. "Never pitch the bitch," he's instructed, meaning that
women ask too many questions. Seth's a money-hungry natural - glib and
greedy.  And he enjoys hanging out with his foul-mouthed cohorts -
"They could sell bubble-gum in the lock-jaw ward in Bellevue" - not to
mention the firm's enigmatic receptionist, Nia Long, his "chocolate
love." But soon his insatiable curiosity gets him into trouble with
the law, as he discovers exactly how his colleagues are getting richer
as their customers are getting poorer. First-time writer/director Ben
Younger was intrigued by the remarkable statistic that one out of
every 36 working Americans is a millionaire, so he created this
timely, high-wire drama about today's mega-fortune-hunters. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Boiler Room heats up to a searing,
shocking 7.  Just remember: when a stranger calls, trying to sell you
stock, hang up!

Title
Review for Random Hearts (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 How would you react to your mate's adultery? And how much
more agonizing would it be if your spouse's accidental death prevented
you from asking the agonizing question: Why? That's the premise of
Sydney Pollack's romantic drama, adapted from Warren Adler's novel by
Darryl Ponicsan with a screenplay by Kurt Luedtke. And the concept is
intriguing. Harrison Ford plays a detective in the Internal Affairs
Division of the Washington, D.C. police department and Kristin Scott
Thomas is a well-bred New Hampshire congresswoman running for
re-election. They're strangers until his wife and her husband are
killed in a plane crash and it's discovered that the deceased were
lovers, secretly traveling as "Mr. and Mrs." to a tryst in
Miami. Grief-stricken, the survivors are thrown together as they
attempt to come to terms with their mutual betrayal. He's
masochistically determined to investigate every sordid detail, while
she's deep into denial. "Sooner or later, everybody knows everything,"
he informs her. And that scandal is what terrifies her. Then abruptly,
inexplicably, they desperately start groping each other. Inevitably,
they're soon in bed, as if the answers to the emotional questions
they're struggling to understand were hidden beneath the
sheets. Looking scruffy, wearing an ear stud and sporting the world's
worst haircut, Harrison Ford is sincere, earnest and stoic, while
Kristin Scott Thomas's chilly demeanor fails to ignite this
restrained, ultimately dull, rebound romance - even though Sydney
Pollack delivers a strong performance as a media strategist. And
there's a forgettable subplot involving gunplay with two corrupt
cops. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Random Hearts" is a
well-crafted but emotionally distant 5. Let's put it this way - it's
not exactly a date movie.

Title
Review for I'll Be Home for Christmas (1998)

Susan Granger's review of "I'LL BE HOME FOR CHRISTMAS" (Walt Disney Pictures)
Curious coincidence: when Tim Allen of "Home Improvements"
made a splash on the big screen, his movie was called "The Santa
Claus," now his TV-son, Jonathan Taylor Thomas, dons the red suit to
star in "I'll Be Home for Christmas." He plays a slick college kid
whose nefarious plan to provide exam answers, using electronic pagers,
to a bunch of jocks fails, and he gets stranded in the California
desert wearing a red suit and black boots with a white beard glued to
his face. Not only is his predicament unpleasant but it has
unfortunate consequences. If he cannot make it home to Westchester by
6 P.M. on Christmas Eve, he cannot claim an expensive gift from his
father: a red Porche. He's been avoiding going home since his dad
re-married - perhaps in haste, he judges - after his mother's
death. And, if that's not enough incentive, his girl-friend, Jessica
Biel, is traveling home from college during the holiday break with his
arch-nemesis, Adam LaVorgna, who fouled up his cheating scheme. Thomas
accomplishes his cross-country journey hitching rides with various
people - and learning more about himself along the way. He joins
senior citizens en route to Las Vegas to see Tom Jones perform;
discovers a van loaded with stolen toys, which he distributes to sick
kids; wins a five-kilometer race and uses the $1,000 prize to feed the
needy; and reunites a love-troubled state cop with his estranged wife
at a roadside steak restaurant. All in all, we're supposed to believe
that he becomes a better person for his troubles. Writers Harris
Goldberg, Tom Nursall, and Michael Allin with director Arlene Sanford
pepper a basic road comedy with sophomoric humor, including a farting
dog. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "I'll Be Home for
Christmas" jingles in with a 3. Bah, humbug!

Title
Review for Idle Hands (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "IDLE HANDS" (Columbia Pictures/Sony Releasing)
        In the light of the tragic high-school massacre in Littleton,
Colorado, this ill-timed horror-comedy is so ghoulish and repulsive
that there's no excuse for it. Frankly, I think it should be
voluntarily withdrawn by the studio. But, since it's on the screen in
local theaters, here goes. Devon Sawa plays a vapid, pot-smoking 17
year-old whose hand becomes possessed by a murderous evil
spirit. "Idle hands are the devil's playpen" is the explanation he's
given. He kills his parents and many of those unlucky enough to be
around him until he cuts off the homicidal appendage with a meat
cleaver and microwaves it. First-time screenwriters Teri Hughes and
Ron Milbauer and director Rodman Flender (TV's "Dawson's Creek,"
"Chicago Hope") devise numerous grisly, blood-drenched deaths and
manage to have greenish corpses rise from the dead to become devilish,
wise-cracking zombies. Then there's Viveca A. Fox, supposedly
descended from a long line of Druid priestesses, who arrives in town
with her sacred dagger. Plus Sawa's girl-friend, Jessica Alba, and the
other freaked-out guests at a Halloween costume party who are doomed
for disaster. The most offensive scene, however, pokes fun at the
mourners at the funeral of two youngsters. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, "Idle Hands" is barely a distasteful, disgusting 1 - and
definitely not for the squeamish. If this is what teenagers want as
entertainment, as a society, we're in deeper trouble than we realize.

Title
Review for Black and White (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.

Susan Granger's review of "BLACK AND WHITE" (Palm Pictures/Sony Screen Gems)
  There are not too many films that attempt to give viewers an
insight into contemporary American society like Spike Lee's "Jungle
Fever" and "Get on the Bus" along with Warren Beatty's "Bulworth." But
now there's James Toback's "Black and White," which delves into race
relations and hip-hop music in New York City.  Toback sets the stage
in an early classroom scene in which a young black girl talks about
how all the white kids she knows romanticize the ghetto life, while
all her black friends just want to get out of it. There are several
intersecting plotlines. Brooke Shields and Robert Downey Jr. play
documentary film-makers examining privileged white teens who are
obsessed with street life. That's Elijah Wood, Gaby Hoffman, Bijou
Phillips (daughter of John Phillips of the Mamas and the Papas), Eddie
Thomas and Kim Matulova. Then there's the rap mogul/gangsta, played by
Oli "Power" Grant from Wu-Tang Clan, and Joe Pantoliano as a District
Attorney with family problems. Ben Stiller is a crooked cop who bribes
a college basketball star, played by Allan Houston of the Knicks, plus
Mike Tyson as - who else? - Mike Tyson. Claudia Schiffer surfaces as a
grad student. Even Donald Trump's former wife, Marla Maples, shows
up. James Toback obviously improvised much of the fragmentary action
as he went along with no sense of cohesion or purpose, so this is not
a smooth, evenly edited picture, but perhaps it isn't supposed to
be. And the most authentic buzz about deceit and treachery comes from
the recruited performers, not the professional actors. On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Black and White" is a complex, sexually
energetic, fast-paced 4.  It's a risky, interesting concept but not a
very good movie.

Title
Review for Bride of the Wind (2001)
Susan Granger's review of "BRIDE OF THE WIND" (Paramount Classics)
        Remember Sharon Stone's character in Albert Brooks' 1999 comedy "The
Muse"? She inspired writers and other cinematic creators in Hollywood.  In this
film, Alma Schindler assumes that role in the cultural community of early
20th-century Vienna. As played by petulant model-turned-actress Sarah Wynter
("The Sixth Day"), she's the free-spirited young wife of composer Gustav Mahler
(Jonathan Pryce) whose sexual escapades were legendary. Her major lovers
included painter Gustav Klimt (August Schmolzer), architect Walter Gropius
(Simon Verhoeven) of the Bauhaus movement, painter Oskar Kokoschka (Vincent
Perez), and novelist Franz Werfel (Gregor Seberg), whom she married after Mahler
died - but she also toyed with her musical tutor Alexander Zemlinsky, singer
Enrico Caruso, composer Arnold Schoenberg, and writer Gerhart Hauptmann.
Australian director Bruce Beresford relies on Peter James's cinematography and
Herbert Pinter's production design, including artistic costumes and elegant
sets, in a valiant attempt to overcome Marilyn Levy's exposition-weighted script
and soggy, repetitive dialogue in a cacophony of accents. Although her story has
great dramatic potential, Alma Schindler's capricious motivations are unclear
and, at best, petty and shallow. Has her own creativity been stifled because
Mahler forbade her to pursue a career in composing? Is she a neurotic
pre-feminist, rebelling against Gropius's desire to keep women in their place at
home? Or is she simply a promiscuous adventurer, as satirized in Tom Lehrer's
song "Alma," concluding "The body that reached her embalma was one that had
known how to live"? On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bride of the Wind"
is a glossy but floundering 5 - far better suited to a TV mini-series. 

Title
Review for Shanghai Noon (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
The classic Western gets a kick in the pants when East meets
West and Jackie Chan tosses the tumbleweed.  He plays a Chinese
Imperial Guard who tags along when the Emperor sends three of his
cohorts to America, circa. 1890, to ransom and rescue Princess Pei Pei
(Lucy Liu) who has been kidnapped from the Forbidden City.  So there
he is - Hong Kong's contemporary Buster Keaton knocking around all the
cowboys & Indians & Asians cliches as he crosses Nevada.  He's named
Chon Wang, pronounced "John Wayne," and there are obvious allusions to
"High Noon." About half-way through the story, the buddy theme kicks
in, as Chan befriends a bumbling wannabe outlaw, played strictly for
laughs by Owen Wilson. Director Tom Dey, whose previous experience is
in TV commercials, blatantly telegraphs what's gonna happen in advance
so there aren't too many surprises - like when Chan and the Native
Americans pass the peace pipe. Writers Alfred Gough & Miles Millar
heap on the racial and ethnic stereotypes but, in general, they let
Jackie Chan do a lot of what he does best: acrobatic fighting. There
are clever touches - like an amusing trick horse, an inebriated bubble
bath in a bordello, and making unlikely use of antlers and
horseshoes. Unlike other grim martial artists, Chan radiates warmth
and humor which makes him irresistibly appealing between the action
sequences. So how does "Shanghai Noon" compare with "Rush Hour"?
"Rush Hour" is set in a contemporary urban environment which may be
easier for much of Chan's audience to relate to than the gunslingers
of the Wild West. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Shanghai
Noon" is a light-hearted, silly, irreverent 7.  And don't leave before
the final "out-take" credits - they're the best of all.

Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
Susan Granger's review of "OCTOBER SKY" (Universal Pictures)
"Until I began to build and launch rockets, I didn't know my home town was at war with itself over its children, and that my parents were locked in a kind of bloodless combat over how my brother and I would live our lives"....is what Homer Hickam, a high school boy in Coalwood, West 
Virginia, wrote in "Rocket Boys," a memoir which forms the basis for this
 wonderful, new coming-of-age film. When on October 4, 1957, the
Russians launched Sputnik, heralding the dawn of the Space Age, it
inspired Hickam (Jake Gyllenhaal) to look to the stars rather than
into a bleak future in the coal mines. Working with three high school
friends, and inspired by rocket pioneer Dr. Werner Von Braun, Hickam
begins to design and launch a series of rockets at his own "Cape
Coalwood," a slag heap - much to the disgust and dismay of his father
(Chris Cooper), the mine superintendent. Only his teacher (Laura Dern)
supports him, supplying a book on rocketry and encouraging him to
learn trigonometry to gauge the range of the shots. Everywhere, Homer
Hickam looks there are seemingly insurmountable obstacles blocking him
from his goals of becoming a rocket scientist, yet earning his
father's acceptance and approval. Nevertheless, he doggedly pursues
his soaring dream which, eventually, becomes a fulfillment of the
hopes of the close-knit, rural town. Adapted for the screen by Lewis
Collick and directed by Joe Johnston ("Jumanji"), this is a remarkably
rich, s ensitive, heart-warming family drama. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "October Sky" is a triumphant 10, the first "must
see" movie of 1999.  And there's a post-script. In Feb., 1998, the
real Homer Hickam took an early retirement from NASA, where he worked
as a space engineer, training astronauts on the space shuttle.

Title
Review for Cookie's Fortune (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "COOKIE'S FORTUNE" (October Films)
Robert Altman, one of the screen's most intriguing
story-tellers, is back again with writer Anne Rapp's sweetly satirical
tale about the genteel citizens of a small Southern town. Holly
Springs, Mississippi, is a place where very little happens which is
why - when an eccentric, old lady is found shot in the head in her bed
- everyone becomes involved. Patricia Neal plays the indomitable
matriarch, Jewel Mae "Cookie" Orcutt, who lives with her kindly black
handyman Willis (Charles S. Dutton), much to the consternation of her
pretentious, hypocritical niece Camille (Glenn Close) who, in turn,
dominates her sweet, simple-minded sister Cora (Julianne Moore). While
Camille's directing a production of Oscar Wilde's "Salome," which she
has adapted for the local Presbyterian Church, Cookie decides to join
her late husband in heaven and commits suicide, using a "peacemaker"
from his gun collection which Willis has just cleaned and
polished. When Camille finds her aunt's bloody body, she is determined
to avoid the "disgrace." "Only crazy people commit suicide," she
mutters. So she messes up the house and makes it look like a
murder. And, of course, Willis becomes the prime suspect. Poor Willis!
All he wants in life is some Wild Turkey bourbon, catfish enchiladas,
and hanging out with his friends at a Theo's Bar, a blues club.
Fortunately, the sheriff (Ned Beatty) is Willis's fishing buddy, as is
the town's only lawyer (Donald Moffat) who comes to his
defense. Meanwhile, there's a muddled subplot involving Cora's
rebellious daughter Emily (Liv Tyler) and a naive young deputy (Chris
O'Donnell).  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Cookie's Fortune"
is a rambling but whimsical, fascinating 7, a deliciously nutty black
comedy of manners.

Title
Review for Outside Providence (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
        Don't expect another "There's Something About Mary," just
because this contemporary comedy is made by Peter and Bobby
Farrelly. Instead of gross silliness, there's gloppy sentiment, as
Shawn Hatosy portrays a pot-smoking slacker teen, circa 1974, in the
blue-collar town of Pawtucket, Rhode Island.  After a fender-bender
with a parked police car, he's packed off to a fancy Connecticut prep
school, Cornwall Academy, where he's outnumbered, outclassed, and
definitely out of place. But he gets little sympathy from his
beer-guzzling, loud-mouthed, deadbeat dad (Alec Baldwin) whose idea of
affection is to nickname the boy "Dildo." "It ain't easy being Ozzie
when you ain't got a Harriet," dad explains. Predictably - and
somewhat unimaginatively - Hatosy not only ends up with the prettiest
girl around (Amy Smart), protects his wheelchair-bound younger brother
(Tommy Bone), and takes revenge on a repressive dean. Directed and
co-written by Michael Corrente ("American Buffalo"), there are quirky
touches like a three-legged dog and some crude slapstick antics, but
there's nothing to make your hair stand on end about this prosaic
coming-of-age story set. Not surprising since the script was recycled
from long before the Farrelly brothers had hits like "Dumb and
Dumber." And the edgy comedy "Rushmore," released early this year,
covered the same territory far better. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "Outside Providence" is a flimsy 5. It's bittersweet nostalgia
- wait for the video.

Title
Review for Cast Away (2000)
  Along with a sure-fire Oscar nomination, Tom Hanks gets my
vote for this year's REAL "Survivor." In this contemporary Robinson
Crusoe tale, Hanks plays a busy FedEx executive who waves good-bye to
his girl-friend , Helen Hunt, saying "I'll be right back."  They've
just exchanged Christmas gifts. She gave him her grandfather's pocket
watch with her photo inside and he gave her a little, square jeweler's
box, presumably an engagement ring. Then there's the harrowing agony
of a terrifying plane crash, and Hanks washes ashore on a tiny,
deserted speck of an island in the Pacific Ocean. How will he find
water, food and shelter with nothing but the clothes he's wearing, a
scavenged flashlight and the contents of FedEx boxes strewn on the
beach? Using ingenuity, he turns ice-skate blades into knives,
videotape into rope, dress material into a fishing net and
triumphantly builds a fire. With his own blood, he paints a face on a
volleyball and it becomes his companion named Wilson. But even more
important than his grueling physical and mental endurance is his
metaphysical meditation in the solitary silence and his eventual
transformation from a selfish, time-obsessed workaholic into a
thoughtful, mature man, fully capable, four years later, of coping
with a challenging crossroad of choices. Actor/producer Tom Hanks and
director Robert Zemeckis, who collaborated on another Everyman journey
called "Forrest Gump," superbly craft this risky, often humorous film
and, along with writer William Broyles Jr., they are as distinguished
for the paths not chosen, the pitfalls avoided. On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Cast Away" is an intense, ironic, insightful 10 -
one of the 10 Best Pictures of the Year. It's not just a movie - it's
an experience.

Title
Review for Omega Code, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE OMEGA CODE" (Providence Entertainment)
Onward, Christian filmmakers! Heavily promoted by the Trinity
Broadcasting Network, the largest Christian TV organization in the
country, this religious thriller is an end-of-the-world suspense story
based on the book of Revelation. Written by Stephan Blinn and Hollis
Barton, it manages to be a non-violent story about Armageddon,
crediting to Hal Lindsey (The Late Great Planet Earth) as "prophecy
consultant." The muddled plot revolves around Casper Van Dien as a
Tony Robbins-like motivational speaker who, along with European Union
Chairman, played by Michael York, seems to be trying to secure a world
peace agreement. Only, a secret Biblical code falls into the wrong
hands, putting the world's future at stake. Not surprisingly, Van Dien
will have to accept Jesus Christ as his Lord and Savior in order to
save civilization as we know it. Produced by Matthew Crouch, son of
TBN's president, Paul Crouch, the film is designed to alert Hollywood
that there's an audience for clunky spiritual entertainment. They may
be right from a religious perspective but film-making is an art that
these zealots have yet to master. Casper Van Dien (Starship Troopers)
is handsome but unconvincing, as is Catherine Oxenberg as a talk show
host. Michael York's such an obviously sleazy megalomaniac that it's
not credible that he's a trusted diplomat. Only Michael Ironside
emerges with dignity intact. Rob Marcarelli's direction is flat and
unimaginative, the computer graphics are juvenile, and the delusional
absurdity includes having Van Dien discover his house is bugged and
then verbally discuss his "secret" plans. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, The Omega Code is a timely but ploddingly dull 3. I'd
advise you not to pay for this preachy, blatant brain-washing;
instead, tune in - free - to TBN.

Title
Review for Hanging Up (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
No doubt, Columbia Pictures and the producers wanted this to
be a baby-boomers' version of The First Wives Club; i.e.: a wise,
witty chick's flick about three blonde, beautiful sisters coping with
their sibling rivalry while dealing with their philandering old father
who's suffered a minor stroke. But something went wrong from the
script to the screen. What's left is an overdose of cheery cute. Meg
Ryan's perky as ever as the sensible middle sister, a party planner
whose motto is "No surprises."  Which puts her in direct conflict with
Walter Matthau, her charming, curmudgeonly dad who not only drinks too
much but loves to surprise women by pinching their posteriors.  Diane
Keaton's the hip, super-successful, self-involved older sister, while
Lisa Kudrow's the youngest, a ditsy, semi-successful TV actress on one
of those daytime hospital dramas. Adapted by Delia Ephron from her
1995 novel, co-scripted by sister Nora Ephron, and directed by Diane
Keaton, its title comes from the family's addiction to cell phones
which are annoying enough in real life but become unbearable on the
screen. Delia Ephron reveals, "I live half my life in the real world
and half on the telephone" - and that cliche-filled, whiny jabbering
is the premise of the story. There's also some metaphysical connection
between hanging up the phone and disconnecting yourself from your
problems. But the movie is uneven in pace and tone. Sometimes it's
goofy, concentrating on quirky, if banal, verbal sibling encounters;
at other times, it goes for pathos - what with dad's
dying. Predictably, ultimately, there's reconciliation and
redemption. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Hanging Up is a
flimsy, floundering 4. Be thankful you don't share the phone gene in
this family's DNA - nor their frenzied phoniness.

Title
Review for Legend of Bagger Vance, The (2000)
  From the opening shot of (uncredited) Jack Lemmon reaching for a club, muttering, "Why do I play a game that's destined to kill me?," you know you're in for a magical, mystical golf metaphor. Through flashbacks and Lemmon's narration, the story of his childhood idol, Rannulph Junuh, unfolds. Junuh was the greatest golfer in Savannah, Georgia, until he went off to W.W. I and returned home, disillusioned and depressed. The golden boy had lost his "authentic swing." After that, it took a high-stakes exhibition tournament with Bobby Jones and Walter Hagen, the two greatest pros of the Depression-era, and a dose of reality from a philosophical caddie, Bagger Vance, to help him find redemption and get back in the groove, not to mention back in the arms of his spunky fiance. As the guardian angel Bagger, Will Smith steals the picture, ruminating wisely on overcoming adversity. Originally, director Robert Redford was to play Junuh, opposite Morgan Freeman. Too bad he didn't.!
 Damon's a charming if bland, young Redford clone, and an original is always preferable to an imitator. On the other hand, Charlize Theron is beguiling, as is young J. Michael Moncrief. The problem: Jeremy Leven's screenplay, based on Steven Pressfield's novel, has too little backstory to evoke an emotional investment in the characters. But the production values are admirable: credit cinematographer Michael Ballhaus, designer Stuart Craig, costumer Judianna Makovsky, visual effects supervisor Richard Chuang and editor Hank Corwin. Too bad composer Rachel Portman's music goes over-the-top, as when a religious choir heralds a hole-in-one in the 3rd round. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The Legend of Bagger Vance" is a spiritual 7. Like life, golf  "is a game that can't be won, only played."

Title
Review for Almost Famous (2000)
   Cameron Crowe's first film since "Jerry Maguire" is so
engaging, entertaining and authentic that it's destined to become a
rock-era classic.  Set in 1973, this slightly fictionalized,
semi-autobiographical, coming-of-age story revolves around a
baby-faced 15 year-old (Patrick Fugit) prodigy whose intelligence and
enthusiasm land him an assignment from "Rolling Stone" magazine to
interview Stillwater, an up-and-coming band. With the help of Penny
Lane (Kate Hudson), a bewitching "Band-Aid," he meets the charismatic
lead guitarist (Billy Crudup) who invites him to join the tour, much
to the dismay of his mother (Frances McDormand) who relentlessly
repeats, "Don't do drugs!"  Soon he's part of the inner circle of the
band he idolizes, disregarding the caution of his rock critic mentor
(Philip Seymour Hoffman): "Friendship is the booze they feed you to
make you feel cool." Eventually, of course, the rookie reporter
becomes disillusioned, honest and unmerciful. What's so compelling is
Crowe's infallible casting which doesn't have a single discordant
note. Patrick Fugit embodies innocent bewilderment, revealing one
layer of surprise after another. Billy Crudup is dynamite, a superstar
waiting to happen. Kate Hudson (Goldie Hawn's real-life daughter)
gives a captivating, flamboyant yet hauntingly poignant performance.
Frances McDormand is bracingly funny, playing with perfect
pitch. Philip Seymour Hoffman is mesmerizing, exploding like a land
mine. Finally, Crowe, cinematographer John Toll, art directors Clay
A. Griffith & Clayton Hartley, and costume designer Betsy Heimann
cleverly capture the sense of time and place.  On the Granger Movie
Gauge of 1 to 10, "Almost Famous" is a soaring, spirited 10. I loved
it! I haven't had such a good time at the movies in ages.

Title
Review for My Son the Fanatic (1998)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "MY SON THE FANATIC" (Miramax Films)
 This is an unconventional love story about a Pakistani
immigrant who strays from his wife and the stability of his home when
he falls in love with a British prostitute. But what makes it even
more compelling is that screenwriter Hanif Kureishi ("My Beautiful
Laundrette") satirically reverses the conservative, middle-aged
father/freedom-loving son rebellion axiom, giving it an unexpected
twist. Acclaimed Indian actor Om Puri ("Gandhi," "City of Joy") is
superb and utterly convincing as a Scotch-drinking, cricket-loving,
jazz enthusiast who has spent 25 years driving a taxi in industrial
Bradford, England. He is worried about his beloved son (Akbar Kurtha)
who has broken his engagement to the Caucasian daughter of a British
police detective and is selling off his "capitalist pig" possessions
as part of a religious conversion to militant, fundamentalist Islam,
with all of its anti-semitic overtones, in order to find personal
identity after many years of being made to feel like an
outsider. Directed by Udayan Prasad with a cast that includes Rachel
Griffiths (Oscar-nominated for "Hilary and Jackie") and Skellan
Skarsgard ("Good Will Hunting"), the film probes universal conflicts,
using disparate lives to examine the broad moral themes of love versus
duty and happiness versus personal sacrifice - in addition to the
racial and cultural problems inherent in assimilation. It gets a bit
melodramatic towards the conclusion but, on the whole, it's quite
engaging, pursing the point that "After a certain age, there's no
point in saying 'No' to everything."  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "My Son the Fanatic" is a bittersweet, compassionate 7. It's
engaging, off-beat art house fare but, for those with auditory
problems, it's often difficult to decipher the North London burr and
the Pakistani accent.

Title
Review for Remember the Titans (2000)

Susan Granger's review of "REMEMBER THE TITANS" (Walt Disney Pictures)
  Back in 1971, when high school football was everything to
the residents of Alexandria, Virginia, local officials were forced to
integrate the schools and hire a black man, Herman Boone, as head
coach of the T.C. Williams Titans. First, he and the older, beloved
white coach with more seniority, Bill Yoast, had to learn to work
together. Then they were faced with molding a group of rebellious
teenage boys into a winning team while teaching them valuable lessons
about becoming men. Their respect, friendship and determination healed
a town torn by fear, ignorance and prejudice. Based on a true story,
scripted by Gregory Allen Howard, first-time director Boaz Yakin
propels the gradual process of discovery and bonding among the
participants. A highlight is the pre-dawn cross-country run,
culminating at the Gettysburg Battlefield, where Boone notes: "50,000
men died on this same field fighting the same battle we are still
fighting today...If we don't come together on this hallowed ground, we
too will be destroyed." Denzel Washington radiates intensity as the
tough-yet-fair taskmaster Boone, who divides his enraged players into
color-blind squads, offense and defense, at training camp, saying,
"football is about controlling that anger, harnessing that aggression
to achieve perfection," reminding them how, in mythology, the titans
were greater than the gods. Bill Patton strikes a different note as
the gentle, quiet, taciturn Yoast with his precocious, outspoken,
football-obsessed daughter (Hayden Panettiere) who provides comic
relief. What distinguishes this film is its honesty, a credit to the
young ensemble actor/players. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Remember the Titans" is an inspirational 8, an emotionally-uplifting
testament to the power of the human spirit.

Title
Review for Shaft (2000)
 When Samuel L. Jackson learned that director John Singleton
was doing "Shaft," his first reaction was, "Why do we need a remake?"
- which was mine, too. Gordon Parks's 1971 original, based on Ernest
Tidyman's novel, starring Richard Roundtree, was emblematic of the
vitality of the blaxploitation genre, plus Isaac Hayes' thematic
music. But Roundtree is back as the original Shaft, 29 years older -
and so's the theme. Jackson plays his nephew, NYPD detective John
Shaft, a different hero for a different time, fighting against hate
crimes and drugs. His character's more volatile, ruthless and
violent. And he views violence in a different way. When things get
dangerous, Jackson's Shaft kind of smiles, indicating, "I can handle
this." The plot revolves around a racially motivated homicide. Walter,
a spoiled young college kid ("American Psycho's" Christian Bale),
kills a young black student, skips bail, and flees the country for two
years - after hiring a tattooed thug (Jeffrey Wright) to kill the only
witness (Toni Collette) to the murder. When Walter sneaks back home,
Shaft finds him - but his father, once again, posts bail, so Walter's
back on the streets only, this time, he's after Shaft - along with two
corrupt cops (Dan Hedaya, Ruben Santiago-Hudson) and a Dominican drug
lord (Jeffrey Wright). Shaft's only allies are a colleague (Vanessa
Williams) and a streetwise buddy (Busta Rhymes). Director John
Singleton and writer Richard Price delve into the usual urban crime
scene, predictably punctuated by street-smart profanity, and come up
with a disappointing conclusion. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Shaft" is a stylish, slick 6. It's hip and cool - if you dig that
"It's my duty to satisfy the booty" action. And a sequel's already in
the works.

Title
Review for Tumbleweeds (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "TUMBLEWEEDS" (Fine Line Films)
Why see Tumbleweeds? One very compelling reason: Janet McTeer,
who's been dubbed "the next Meryl Streep."  The plot, involving a
flighty, narcissistic mother and profane, outspoken adolescent
daughter who hop in a car and head for a new life in California,
sounds like Anywhere But Here, but this affable, low-budget comedy is
far more focused, character-driven, and less artificial than the Susan
Sarandon/Natalie Portman star vehicle in which the supporting players
seemed like cardboard cut-outs. Besides, there's Janet McTeer, a
remarkable, highly respected British actress who won Broadway's Tony
several years ago as Nora in a revival of Ibsen's A Doll's House. The
Amazonian McTeer plays a working class woman from North Carolina who
drags her smart-aleck teenage daughter (Kimberly J. Brown) through her
many abusive, failed relationships, finally trying to settle down in
Starlight Beach, a quiet seaside town near San Diego, and find
happiness with a long-haul trucker (Gavin O'Connor) who's
contemptuously referred to as "the future ex-husband." There have been
four previous ex-husbands. Directed and co-written by Gavin O'Connor,
the story is loosely based on the relationship between screenwriter
Angela Shelton (O'Connor's ex-wife) and her own strong-willed,
free-spirited mother. And the tone of the film is curiously
reminiscent of Martin Scorsese's Alice Doesn't Live Here
Anymore. Twitchy supporting actor Michael J. Pollard makes a brief but
memorable appearance, looking not much older than he did in Bonnie and
Clyde, back in 1967. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
Tumbleweeds is a rueful but significant 7, because of Janet McTeer's
complex, funny, multi-faceted performance which includes an impeccable
Southern accent.

Title
Review for Jesus' Son (1999)
Susan Granger's review of "JESUS' SON" (Lions Gate/Alliance Atlantis)
Adapted from a collection of short stories by Denis Johnson,
this episodic, un-rated film was heralded at the Venice and Toronto
Film Festivals and at the New Directors/New Film Festival in
Manhattan. It chronicles the adventures of a slacker who disdains
convention and is known only by a nickname that cannot be
printed. Let's call him F-H for propriety's sake, acknowledging his
uncanny ability to screw things up. As played by Billy Crudup ("Waking
the Dead"), F-H is a heroin-using hedonist, a passive loser, who is
out for thrills and excitement as he makes his way from Iowa to
Phoenix during the counterculture movement of the early 1970s.  The
title comes from Lou Reed's lyrics to the Velvet Underground song
"Heroin," and F-H spends much of his time hallucinating, often within
a religious iconography. On his travels, he encounters some pathetic,
oddball characters like the derelicts in a farmhouse where he hangs
out and gets stoned and a psychopathic emergency-room orderly (Jack
Black) with whom F-H pops uppers and downers simultaneously. F-H falls
in love with a free-spirited fellow addict (Samantha Morton of "Sweet
and Lowdown") until tragedy inevitably occurs. There are
subplots/cameos with Holly Hunter, Denis Leary, Will Patton, Greg
Germann and Dennis Hopper. Certainly screenwriter Oren Moverman,
producer-screenwriters Elizabeth Cuthrell & David Urrutia, and
director Alison Maclean ("Crush") aren't afraid to take risks
exploring the quietly desperate, black humor in themes of boredom,
alienation, death and salvation - all within a $2.5 million budget. On
the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Jesus' Son" is an edgy, detached,
fragmented 5, but recommended only if you can tolerate graphic drug
use and rambling junkie humor.

Title
Review for Me Myself I (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Remember the "Sliding Doors" parallel lives concept in which
Gwyneth Paltrow imagined what might have happened if she had not
missed the subway one day? Remember Rachel Griffiths who co-starred
with Emily Watson in "Hilary and Jackie"?  Put them together and you
have this fantasy in which Rachel Griffiths plays Pamela Drury, a
celebrated, award-winning journalist who lives in a lonely, box-filled
apartment in Sydney, Australia, and worries that life may somehow have
passed her by because she didn't marry Mr. Right. She wonders "what
if"....until, suddenly, one day, in an alternate universe, she
magically switches places with her alter ego, Pamela Dickson, who
married her old sweetheart, has three demanding children and lives in
suburbia.  While Pamela Dickson gladly slips out of station-wagon
bondage, Pamela Drury copes with the strenuous, nitty-gritty routine
of the neglected wife and soccer mother she would have become if her
heart had ruled her head.  Australian film-maker Pip Karmel's premise
is reminiscent of the old adage, "Be careful what you wish for because
you may just get it." But it gets a bit clumsy during the transitions
between the two Pamelas, particularly since we never learn enough
about the newly liberated Pamela Dickson. And are we really to believe
that a serious woman with a penchant for investigative journalism
would be totally content writing hackneyed romantic how-to articles
for a women's magazine?  In the final analysis, it's the charismatic
dual performance by Rachel Griffiths that makes this road-not-taken
film memorable. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Me, Myself,
and I" is a poignant, daydreaming 6. It's summed up best by
Ms. Karmel's line, "Regret is futile."

Title
Review for Shakespeare in Love (1998)
Susan Granger's review of "SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE" (Miramax Films)
At last, a juicy, funny, romantic comedy - aimed at adults!
Cleverly written by Marc Norman & Tom Stoppard and brilliantly
directed by John Madden, this charming story, set in 1594, introduces
Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes) as a young English playwright
struggling with plots, characters, deadlines - and writer's bloc. And
he's in competition with Christopher Marlowe, who writes for a rival
theater. And his producer (Geoffrey Rush) is deeply in debt to the
local moneylender (Tom Wilkinson) whose methods of collection are
insidious. Just as the future of their Rose Theater looks dire, a
wealthy merchant's daughter, Viola De Lesseps (Gwyneth Paltrow), who
swoons over Will's sonnets, decides to masquerade as a boy (since
girls were not allowed to perform on the stage at that time) and
audition for "Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate King's Daughter," one of
Will's works-in-progress. She's hired immediately, as Will is
enchanted with the recitations of his new "Romeo" until, of course, he
discovers he is a she - at which point the bawdy Bard slips between
the radiant maiden's sheets - but, by then, Queen Elizabeth I (Judi
Dench) has promised her in marriage to Lord Wessex, a cold, arrogant
Virginia tobacco farmer (Colin Firth).  All's well that ends well and,
if their escapades resemble "Twelfth Night," that's no coincidence. In
true Shakespearean form, there are mistaken identities, sight gags,
ghosts, sword-fights, betrayal, lies - and a dog. You don't have to
know Shakespeare to enjoy this incandescent film but the more you
know, the more you will appreciate its hilarious wit.  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Shakespeare in Love" is an enchanting, richly
comic 10. Not only one of my 10 Best Pictures of the Year but one of
the major Oscar contenders.

Title
Review for Tea with Mussolini (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "TEA WITH MUSSOLINI" (G2, an MGM Company release)
Based on Franco Zeffirelli's own childhood in Florence, this
comedy-drama tells the story of the five extraordinary women who care
for Luca, a boy born out of wedlock, while resisting the madness of
war that sweeps across Europe during the '30s and '40s. Known as the
Scorpioni, for their biting wit, these feisty British and American
expatriate females adore Italy and refuse to leave. Instead, they
arrogantly defy the mercurial officials, trusting in the autocratic
widow of the British Ambassador to Italy, Maggie Smith, who once had
tea with the Fascist leader who assured her that no harm would ever
come to her and her friends. As Luca's father's secretary/translator,
Joan Plowright is entrusted with the boy's care as a surrogate
mother. She works hard to make him "a proper English gentleman,"
teaching him about Shakespeare, while Judi Dench gives him an
appreciation of drawing and art. The Americans are an openly lesbian
archeologist, Lily Tomlin, and a wealthy, free-spirited art collector,
Cher, who was a friend of Luca's late mother. As England and America
enter W.W.II, the women become "enemy aliens" in their adopted
homeland. Scripted by John Mortimer, their story is colorfully
dramatized in lush settings and exquisitely photographed by
cinematographer David Watkin (Oscar winner for "Out of Africa"). The
only discordant note is Zeffirelli's overly sentimental depiction of
the Italian and German soldiers. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to
10, "Tea With Mussolini" is an irresistibly joyous, opulent 9,
featuring insightful performances from some of the greatest actresses
on the screen today. The film is a delightful treasure.

Title
Review for Crew, The (2000)
 First "Space Cowboys," now another quartet of cranky, old
geezers gear up for a final mission. No, they're not saving the
planet; they're saving their sanity. It's been too many years since
Bats (Burt Reynolds), Brick (Dan Hedaya), Mouth (Seymour Cassel) and
Bobby (Richard Dreyfuss) had anything to do but sip slurpees and ogle
bikinis from the verandah of the Raj Mahal, a ratty retirement hotel
in South Beach, Florida.  Once they had it all - money, power, women
and respect - but now they're facing eviction from the semi-squalor of
their suddenly trendy, ocean-view apartments when Bats comes up with a
plan. They steal an unclaimed corpse from the mortuary where Brick
works and shoot the dead guy in the lobby of their hotel. Predictably,
their anti-gentrification scheme works. Squeamish yuppies flee the
crime scene and their landlord relents, offering a rent reduction and
hefty bonus for signing long-term leases. They're into heavy-duty
celebration until they discover the corpse was the senile father of a
paranoid South American drug lord (Miguel Sandoval) - and that Mouth
spilled the story to a stripper/hooker (Jennifer Tilly) who threatens
to blab unless the wiseguys bump off her wealthy, widowed step-mother
(Lainie Kazan). Chaos reigns when this crime caper goes sour, much to
the consternation and confusion of a police detective (Carrie-Ann
Moss) who has more than a passing interest in Bobby. While I didn't
find the gang-whiz along the side of the road particularly funny,
Barry Fanaro's screenplay, directed by Michael Dinner, contrives to
elicit chuckles if not belly-laughs. And why not? Fanaro used to write
and produce TV's "The Golden Girls." On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1
to 10, "The Crew" is a satirical 5, a genial geriatric Goodfellas.

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
First rule of Fight Club: You do not talk about Fight
Club. So, right away, I'm in trouble with this bleak, profoundly
disturbing, testosterone-laden contemporary study of emasculation and
insanity. Edward Norton is the nameless narrator. He's a bored,
bitter, yuppie insomniac with no family or close friends. For company,
he joins cancer and other disease-support groups, while Brad Pitt is
Tyler Durden, a devious, charismatic anarchist who challenges him,
taunting "How much can you know about yourself if you've never been in
a fight?" He introduces Norton to the raw, animalistic instinct for
survival. When their bare-fist brawls outside a bar attract cheering
crowds, they create an underground network of secret, private clubs
where self-destructive, disillusioned professionals can seek solace
from despair by pummeling each other to smithereens. "This is your
life," Durden says, "and it's ending one day at a time."  Soon Durden
becomes a subversive cult hero, a grungy messiah for the
sado-masochists of an emotionally-dead generation suffering from the
onslaught of consumerism and technology. And Helena Bonham Carter is
the funny, foul-mouthed, chain-smoking, self-help junkie who comes
between the two men.  Adapted for the screen by Jim Uhls from Chuck
Palahniuk's gritty best-seller and directed by David Fincher
("Seven"), it's a fast-paced, stylized man's movie, exploring the
psychology of violence, complete with a sub-plot involving bath soap
made from human body fat from a liposuction clinic. Both Norton and
Pitt deliver knockout performances, relishing the wry, cruel nihilist
humor. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Fight Club" is an
insidious, cynical, savage 8.  But it's socially irresponsible and
repellent in its graphic depictions of extreme violence and brutality.

Title
Review for Screwed (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
            "Screwed" sneaked into our local theaters without advance
screenings for critics - and screwed is how you'll feel if you
inadvertently pay at the ticket counter. Stand-up comic Norm Macdonald
plays Willard Fillmore, a mild-mannered servant who works for nasty
Virginia Crock, a wealthy Pittsburgh bakery owner played by Elaine
Stritch. Understandably bitter - since he has to scrub her dentures
along with her toilets and cars - and egged on by his best buddy, Dave
Chappelle, he decides to kidnap her beloved, yappy, mean-tempered lap
dog for $1 million ransom and flee to the Caribbean. But, of course,
their contrived, chaotic plan backfires.  None of this is funny -
particularly Danny DeVito as a creepy, degenerate coroner. And Norm
Macdonald is amazingly inept; he cannot act - period.  Written by
Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski before "Ed Wood," "The People
vs. Larry Flynt," and "Man on the Moon," it serves as their
directorial debut. Perhaps that's understandable since they also
collaborated on the sloppy scripting of "Problem Child." On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Screwed" is a wretched, idiotic
1. Hard to believe, but it's worse than "Battlefield Earth."

Title
Review for East Is East (1999)
Based by Ayub Khan-Din on his semi-autobiographical play, "East
is East" revolves around a large Anglo-Pakistani family living in the
working-class town of Salford, near Manchester, in a small suburban
house which also contains their fish 'n' chips shop. Set in the 1971,
it draws on several societal themes: the inherent cross-cultural
conflict, the sexual revolution of the '60s and, above all, the
patriarch's determination to cling to traditional Pakistani
values. The celebrated Indian actor Om Puri plays George Khan, the
tyrannical, expatriate father who has forced his six sons and one
daughter to learn Urdu and attend the mosque - earning himself the
nickname "Genghis" - with Linda Bassett as his long-suffering
wife. But the kids are rebellious, preferring soccer, discos, pop
culture, and sexual experimentation. The boys certainly don't want to
marry good Muslim girls - in fact, one of them is gay. And, one by
one, the prospective brides are rejected. The only confusing aspect is
why George Khan, given his prejudices, would have married a Catholic
Englishwoman in the first place - and then why he would so try to
hamper their children's assimilation. A first-feature by Irish
director Damien O'Donnell, it's a hilarious, moving comedy,
sidestepping all the usual cliches about mixed-race, mixed-religious
families, culminating in a surprisingly satisfying conclusion. And, if
you enjoy Om Puri, rent the video of "My Son the Fanatic," in which he
plays a married cab-driver with another set of family problems. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "East is East" is a subtle,
multi-layered 8. It was a huge hit in Europe, winning many awards
including Best British Film of the Year from the London Film Critics.

Title
Review for Detroit Rock City (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
  It's 1978, and four Cleveland teens are trying to crash a
KISS concert in Detroit to see their idols after their tickets are
burned by a religious fanatic parent who swears that the group's name
is an acronym for "Knights in Satan's Service" and is a member of
M.A.T.M.O.K. (Mothers Against the Music of KISS). Edward Furlong,
Giuseppe Andrews, Sam Huntington, and newcomer James De Bello are
die-hard KISS fanatics and they're determined to attend the concert -
whether it involves winning front-row center seats in a radio contest,
spiking a teacher's pizza with hallucinogenic mushrooms, stealing a
car, selling their bodies, robbing a convenience store, or sneaking by
security. Between these escapades, they smoke dope and stop to beat up
a car full of disco fans in some half-witted defense of rock 'n'
roll. While the KISS members are prominently listed as part of the
cast and Gene Simmons is a producer, they only appear for a couple of
minutes on-stage amid pyrotechnics. But Mrs. Gene Simmons - better
known as Playboy bunny Shannon Tweed - does drop in as a romantic
interest, along with Natasha Lyonne and Melanie Lynskey.  (The latter
two are named 'Christine' and 'Beth,' which are names of KISS songs.)
Carl V. Dupre's screenplay seems to be lifted piecemeal from a myriad
of coming-of-age movies and has so many hateful caricatures of
Catholicism as to be quite offensive. Vulgar mockery of any religion
is not funny. Director Adam Rifkin relishes the tasteless sexism of
picturing a cheerleader on a toilet and visiting a male strip club
filled with obnoxious women. And do you really want to watch Edward
Furlong vomiting? On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Detroit Rock
City" is a lame, loud 1 - one of the most feeble pictures of the year
so far.

Title
Review for Go (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
 Obviously inspired by the Coen Brothers, along with Quentin
Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction," Doug Liman's "Go" is a dark, reckless
comedy/drama about some impulsive Los Angeles slackers whose lives
collide after a botched drug deal. The action takes place during a
period of 24 hours in the lives of three groups of people, and
first-time screenwriter John August's plot involves everything from a
bizarre Christmas Eve dinner to a trip to Las Vegas, with scenes of
drug deals, lap dancing, mate swapping, and tantric sex. And the story
is told from three points of view.  The ensemble cast includes Sarah
Polley ("The Sweet Hereafter") as a cool yet feisty, over-worked
supermarket clerk facing eviction; Katie Holmes (TV's "Dawson's
Creek"), who is trying to score some rent money; Jay Mohr ("Jerry
Maguire") and Scott Wolf (TV's "Party of Five"), playing soap opera
actors who get caught up in the middle of a sting operation. There are
many different characters and, somehow, during the three half-hour
segments, their wobbly paths dovetail, an obvious homage to the
strange coincidences of life.  Best known for his cult hit "Swingers"
(1996), Doug Liman also directed a low-budget comedy, "Getting In"
(1993), starring Calista Flockhart and Matthew Perry before they
landed TV roles; Jennifer Aniston was also supposed to be in that film
but the studio insisted on Kristy Swanson, who had just starred in
"Buffy the Vampire Slayer." With "Go," Limon again demonstrates his
cinematic eye for casting, as he also doubles as cinematographer,
keeping up a fast momentum. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Go" is a nasty, vulgar, crude, off-beat 6, obviously targeted at an
18-35 year-old audience who will also appreciate the loud, ultra-hip
soundtrack. It's been dubbed "a teen 'Pulp Fiction.'"

Title
Review for Office Space (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Just imagine Scott Adams' comic strip "Dilbert" on the big
screen and you've got the concept of this caustic comedy. Which is not
surprising since it's written and directed by Mike Judge, the creator
of "Beavis and Butthead" and "King of the Hill." Ron Livingston plays
a young computer programmer who hates everything about his geeky,
anonymous job at Initech Corp. - the mind-numbing routine, the
clock-punching, the procedure-obsessed supervisors, the "paper jams"
and the pettiness. Above all, however, he hates the humiliation of
being fired as the result of downsizing. To ease his frustration, his
yuppie girl-friend arranges for him to see "an occupational
hypnotherapist" who suffers a fatal heart attack in the midst of his
therapy session, leaving Livingston relaxed and free of all his
anxieties about unemployment. Unencumbered, he begins to enjoy life,
much to the consternation of his despicable, condescending boss (Gary
Cole) who is prone to tell his employees on Friday afternoon that
they're expected to report for work on Saturday and Sunday. "I don't
like my job," Livingston says nonchalantly, "and I'm not going to go."
Then, when he's interviewed by a couple of consultants, his candid,
carefree sarcasm about his uselessness is interpreted as a
qualification for an upper-management position. Meanwhile, he's
concocted an embezzlement scheme with two cyberwise cubicle nerds and
launched a personal pursuit of a pretty young waitress (Jennifer
Aniston). As a film, what you're seeing is a series of comedy sketches
created by Mike Judge over the last decade - but, given the right
frame of mind, it works. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Office Space" is a sharply satirical 6, a wickedly funny take on the
deskbound worker.

Title
Review for 102 Dalmatians (2000)
      In this highly anticipated sequel to "101 Dalmatians"
(Thanksgiving, 1997), the spiky-haired villainess Cruella De Vil
(Glenn Close) is released from prison after promising that she will
give up her dream of wearing the ultimate Dalmatian fur coat. To prove
her good intentions, she wears a coat made of garbage bags, trimmed
with bubble wrap. But, being the vicious, fur-lusting liar that she
is, she is soon plotting another "fur-ocious" scheme to terrorize the
spotted canines. Now she's pursuing them through the streets of
Paris. And there's a fantastic Parisian-bakery scene in which Cruella
chases some puppies into a cake-making machine and the dogs flip the
"on" switch. It's quite a sight to see the sadistic Cruella sliding on
a baking pan, which looks like a bobsled, into a massive bowl of cake
batter. If this isn't an upcoming Disney theme park ride, I'll crumble
my dog biscuits! The canine characters include Dipstick, the son of
101's Pongo and Perdy, and Dottie with their pups: Domino, Little
Dipper and Oddball, who has all-white fur, no spots. Actually,
computer wizardry removed Oddball's spots; once Dalmatians hit a
certain age, they are no longer spot-free. Preying on her
black-and-white spotted-fur fetish, Cruella's lured back into
puppy-napping by a French furrier, Jean Pierre La Pelt (Gerard
Depardieu), while Alice Evans and Ioan Gruffudd try to protect the
Dalmatians while falling into puppy love themselves. Directed by Kevin
Lima, the production is even more elaborate and outrageous this time
'round as the devilish De Vil romps around doing her dirty deeds. And
the 102nd pelt is necessary because, this time, Cruella wants her
Dalmatian coat to have a hood. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"102 Dalmatians" is a G-rated, entertaining 8. Puppies, puppies,
puppies!

Title
Review for S.L.C. Punk! (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
          If you're interested in this satirical film about teenage
defiance, you'd better plan to see it quick because, when I went to
the theater, there were exactly three people in the audience!
Writer/director James Merendino chronicles the early '80s
transformation of Stevo - played by Matthew Lillard ("Wing Commander")
- from a Dungeons and Dragons geek and academic genius to a hard-core,
blue-haired punk, whose ambition in college is to get "a 4.0 in
damage," rather than to follow his former hippie father's example and
go to Harvard Law School. Set in suburban, Mormon-colonized Salt Lake
City, Utah, the chaotic - obviously loosely autobiographical - story
is hard to follow at times but that seems to be the object of
Merendino's hyperactive style. After all, as Stevo explains at length,
the anarchic spirit is the essence of the punk movement. There's much
more talk than action. In fact, there's more talk than even the most
dedicated movie-goer can sit through comfortably. Long, tiresome, and
repetitious talk. As colorful co-starring characters, Michael
A. Goorjean plays Heroin Bob, who boasts an anti-drug attitude and an
aversion to needles; Til Schweiger is the quick-tempered braggart of
the group who has converted his home into an electronics warehouse,
courtesy of a generous settlement from his parents' plane crash; and
Annabeth Gish is the head shop owner whose hair color changes with
each scene.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "SLC Punk" is a
floundering 4 - unless you're really into an aimlessly twisted parody
on the punk side.

Title
Review for Dr. T & the Women (2000)

Susan Granger's review of "DR. T AND THE WOMEN" (Artisan Entertainment)
Dr. Sullivan Travis (Richard Gere) is an outrageously
successful Dallas gynecologist who genuinely cares for his patients
and dotes on his wife and daughters. His problem: he worships women,
referring to them as "saints. " He's a genuinely nice man, surrounded
by a kaleidoscope of neurotic, mostly unpleasant females. After she's
arrested for cavorting nude in a public fountain, it's obvious that
his wife (Farrah Fawcett) has regressed into a childlike state before
the extravagant society wedding of their cheerleader daughter (Kate
Hudson) who, according to their other daughter (Tara Reid), is having
an affair with her enigmatic maid-of-honor (Liv Tyler). His boozy
sister-in-law (Laura Dern), in the midst of a divorce, has moved in
with her three little girls. And controlling the chaos of his
overbooked practice falls on his adoring office-manager (Shelley
Long).  It's no wonder that he flees to the country club, where he
finds solace with the level-headed, briskly independent, new assistant
golf pro (Helen Hunt). Written by Ann Rapp and directed by Robert
Altman, who collaborated on "Cookie's Fortune," this stinging
character study and satiric social commentary with its curiously
twisted ending has a distinctly misogynistic undertone. Certainly, the
vulnerability of a woman with her legs in stirrups during a
gynecological exam is ripe for humor - "That man knows how to handle a
speculum!" - but Richard Gere plays the charming doctor like an
amiable sap who's constantly victimized by the privileged, pampered
shrews who surround him with their shrill cacophony of whining,
demanding voices. Lyle Lovett's honky-tonk score provides welcome
distraction. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Dr. T and the
Women" is a flimsy 4. It's an irreverent, estrogen-enhanced farce that
just isn't very funny.

Title
Review for O Brother, Where Art Thou? (2000)

Susan Granger's review of "O BROTHER, WHERE ART THOU?" (Disney/Universal)
  Joel and Ethan Coen have built a reputation on their quirky,
intelligent, unorthodox films ("Fargo," "The Big Lebowski," "Raising
Arizona," "The Hudsucker Proxy," "Blood Simple," "Barton Fink") and
this is no exception. Who else would approach Homer's classic
"Odyssey" with a Preston Sturges touch? Yet there is is, up on the
screen, a road movie beginning with a blind prophet. Set in the 1930s,
the story begins as three shackled convicts escape from a Mississippi
chain gang: charming, articulate Everett Ulysses McGill (George
Clooney), a schemer who's obsessed with his Dapper Dan hair pomade and
getting back to ex-wife Penny (Holly Hunter); dumb Delmar (Tim Blake
Nelson) and moody Pete (John Turturro). Relentlessly pursued by state
troopers on their way to find $1.2 million in buried loot, they
encounter the Cyclops, embodied in a one-eyed Bible-thumper (John
Goodman), and the Sirens, three seductive maidens washing laundry in
the river - along with a notorious bank robber, Babyface Nelson
(Michael Badalucco), a campaigning Governor (Charles Durning) and the
Ku Klux Klan. The title comes from the oft-mentioned film in Preston
Sturges' "Sullivan's Travels." To spice up the episodic structure and
stolid pacing, there's T-Bone Burnett's tuneful bluegrass music, as
the trio joins up with a black guitarist (Chris Thomas King), who sold
his soul to the Devil, to cut a hit record as "The Soggy Bottom Boys."
While Roger Deakins' photography is visually stylish, there's a
fundamental problem: a complete lack of humor. It's a comedy with no
laughs. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "O Brother, Where Art
Thou?" is a goofy, bizarre 5, appealing primarily to devoted Coen fans
who will accept their colorful, absurdist style over substance.

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "STAR WARS: EPISODE I, THE PHANTOM MENACE"
(20th Century-Fox)
  The Force is definitely with George Lucas in this first of
three "Star Wars" prequels which attempt to awaken a mythic, sci-fi
kind of spirituality as they chronicle the life and times of young
Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd) who eventually becomes Darth Vader. For
those of you to whom this cultural icon is unfamiliar, rent videos of
the original "Star Wars," followed by "The Empire Strikes Back" and
"Return of the Jedi." It also wouldn't hurt to read Joseph Campbell's
musings on heroes and "The Uses of Enchantment" by Bruno Bettleheim,
which analyzes how myths affect young people. "The Phantom Menace"
tells how two stolid Jedi knights, Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) and
Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor), meet nine year-old Anakin and join the
Gungan, a scrappy race of amphibioid creatures, to save Naboo, the
planet ruled by gutsy Queen Amidala (Natalie Portman). She is destined
to marry Anakin and give birth to Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia,
but that comes later in Episode II in 2002 and III in 2005. Right now,
the excitement lies in the action, particularly a heart-thumping "pod
race," reminiscent of the chariot race in "Ben-Hur." Sure, there are
flaws: die-hard fans may chafe at the recycled Good vs. Evil plotline
and the chatter of one creature, Jar-Jar Binks, is almost
unintelligible. Nevertheless, on the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Episode I, The Phantom Menace" comes at you with a thrilling,
meteoric 10.  Not only is it a fanciful phenomenon but it's also the
most eye-popping spectacular special-effects picture ever made as
George Lucas integrates the fantasy of computer imagery with
reality. The only question is: Will it beat the all-time box-office
champ "Titanic"?

Title
Review for Bait (2000)
  Motor-mouthed comedian Jamie Foxx's thriller-comedy may be
called "Bait" but never it grabs the hook. Foxx plays a good-natured,
small-time thief on parole who, as the story begins, is caught
stealing prawns from a Brooklyn restaurant with his brother (Mike
Epps).  What the hapless brothers don't realize is that, across town,
two professional criminals are lifting $42 million in gold bars from
the Federal Reserve. But Foxx finds himself sharing a jail cell on
Rikers Island with one of the pros (Robert Pastorelli), who has buried
the loot in a secret location and then suddenly dies of a heart
attack. Thinking he can use Foxx as "bait" to track down the other pro
(Doug Hutchinson), a computer wizard who masterminded the "heist of
the decade," a ruthless treasury investigator (David Morse) has a
tiny, satellite-controlled radio device that continually broadcasts
his location secretly implanted in Foxx's jaw.  Knowing that the
high-tech hacker can get into their computers, the agent sends
internal Treasury e-mails implying that Foxx is actually an undercover
agent who has discovered the whereabouts of the stolen gold. The ploy
succeeds but soon the petty criminal finds he, his girl-friend
(Kimberley Elise) and their baby son are in danger. Three writers -
Tony Gilroy, Andrew and Adam Scheinman - and director Antoine Fuqua
("The Replacement Killers") make the fragmented plot almost
incomprehensible. The only thing that's made abundantly clear is the
difference between shrimp and prawns, and that Hutchinson is trying to
imitate John Malkovich. Plus, the galloping finale at the racetrack is
simply ludicrous. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Bait" is a
dismal 3. The hip-hop soundtrack rocks, but Jamie Foxx needs far
better material if he wants to be a major movie star.

Title
Review for Frequency (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "FREQUENCY" (New Line Cinema)
   Once you see this movie, you can't stop thinking about
it. "Frequency" poses the question: What if you could travel back in
time and change your past?  That's the dilemma that faces NYPD
Detective John Sullivan (John Caviezel) who discovers that, while
using an old ham radio just when a natural phenomenon, an aurora
borealis, is lighting up the night sky, he is actually talking with a
man who died 30 years earlier - his ownfather.  Back in 1969, his dad,
Frank Sullivan (Dennis Quaid), was killed fighting a warehouse
fire. But what if John could warn his father and, thereby, save his
life? It's worth a try, isn't it? But, then, if it works, the past is
inexorably changed, so what happens to the present? That'sall I'm
going to tell you about the plot. Like "The Sixth Sense," this is not
a movie you want to know too much about.  Toby Emmerich has writtena
stunning, multi-layered thriller that's part murder mystery,
involvinga serial killer, part family drama, revolving around the
loving relationship of father and son. Science-fiction time-travel
fantasy goes back to Jules Verne and H.G. Wells, and Emmerich's
imaginative contribution is cutting-edge. Credibility is maintained
and continuity matches, despite thecomplicated plot twists and
mind-bending paradoxes involving temporal intersections with parallel
universes. Director Gregory Hoblit ("Primal Fear") keeps the action
fast-paced and the tension taut, shooting the ham radio scenes like a
live, multi-camera TV show. What's on the screen is totally
entertaining, emotionally gripping, and so thought-provoking that you
may want to see it twice. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Frequency" is an exciting, surprising 10.  If you're into
edge-of-the-seat suspense pulling the cosmic strings of time travel,
"Frequency" will light your fuse.

Title
Review for Out-of-Towners, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE-OUT-OF-TOWNERS" (Paramount Pictures)
Back in 1970, Jack Lemmon and the late Sandy Dennis made this
movie about what went wrong for two midwestern visitors on a business
trip to New York City. Written by Neil Simon and directed by Arthur
Hiller, the misadventure worked because the comedy was firmly rooted
in everyday reality.  This new version, far from being a re-make, is a
glossy, flashy star-vehicle for Goldie Hawn and Steve Martin, two
clever sophisticates not even remotely believable as Nancy and Henry
Clark from Ohio. Both Sam Weisman's direction and Marc Lawrence's
script are forced beyond redemption. Looking impossibly young, trim
and beautiful, albeit in soft-focus, Goldie plays Nancy, a middle-aged
woman going through "empty-nest" blues after the departure of her
youngest child (played by Oliver Hudson, her real-life son), while
Steve's Henry is advertising executive who has just been fired. Faced
with an uncertain future in suburbia, they're both edgy, which is why
she decides to tag along when he goes to Manhattan for a job
interview. Immediately, things go wrong. Their plane is diverted to
Boston; their luggage gets lost; they miss the last New York-bound
train; they wreck their rental car in the Fulton Fish Market; they
fall for a street scam and get robbed by a con-man who claims to be
Andrew Lloyd Webber. And that's just the beginning. Reunited for the
first time since "HouseSitter" (1992), bubbly Goldie and resourceful
Steve demonstrate their undeniable talent for physical comedy - and
John Cleese hams it up as a supercilious hotel manager - but no one
can save this painfully strained film from being a great
disappointment. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Out-of-Towners" is genial but tiresome 4. It's a feeble downer.

Title
Review for Best in Show (2000)
    There's something about dog shows that's terribly
amusing. I know those who show off their purebreds take them very,
very seriously, but for onlookers, like Christopher Guest, the
possibilities for comedy are endless. In fact, sanity goes to the dogs
where Best of Breed trophies are concerned. This wacky mockumentary, a
worthy successor to "Waiting for Guffman," centers on Philadelphia's
annual Mayflower Dog Show, similar to New York's Westminster Dog Show.
Diverse contenders include, from Illinois, a bickering, neurotic
yuppie couple (Parker Posey, Michael Hitchcock) with Beatrice, their
depressed Weimaraner; from Florida, a milquetoast menswear salesman
(Eugene Levy) with, literally, two left feet and bubbly, his
promiscuous wife (Catherine O'Hara), showing Winky, their Norwich
Terrier; from North Carolina, a fly-fishing shop owner (Christopher
Guest) with his beloved Bloodhound Hubert; from New York, a
flamboyantly gay couple (John Michael Higgins, Michael McKean) with
Miss Agnes, one of their Shih Tzus; and from the Main Line, a trashy
trophy wife (Jennifer Coolidge) and her hired handler (Jane Lynch)
with their two-time champion Standard Poodle, Rhapsody in White. Plus
there's the show's President (Bob Balaban), chairman (Don Lake), and
mis-matched commentators (Jim Piddock, Fred Willard), along with a
long-suffering hotel manager (Ed Begley Jr.)  Guest and his
co-scripter Eugene Levy obviously encouraged their ensemble cast into
improvisational riffs that are executed with somewhat predictable but
barkingly loony, fast-paced finesse, particularly the one-liners and
non-sequiturs. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "Best in Show"
is a dementedly funny 9. It's a hilarious howl - a walloping woof!

Title
Review for Scream 3 (2000)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
         Back in 1996, Wes Craven's Scream single-handedly revived the
teen slasher genre, launched the career of screenwriter Kevin
Williamson and spotlighted young TV actors like Neve Campbell, Liev
Schreiber, Rose McGowan, Skeet Ulrich, Sarah Michelle Geller and
Rebecca Gayheart. As it evolved into two sequels, it even spawned an
off-screen romance - Courteney Cox met David Arquette while making
Scream, got engaged after Scream 2, and they are now married for
Scream 3.  This final version of the trilogy, written by Ehren Kruger
(Arlington Road), finds tortured Sidney (Neve Campbell) hiding out in
the California hills, even as intrepid TV reporter Gail Weathers
(Courteney Cox Arquette) tries to track her down. Meanwhile, there's a
movie-within-a-movie, as the real-life survivors of the Woodsboro
massacre become technical advisors on Stab 3, a low-budget
horror-movie-in-the-making. That's how dorky ex-cop Dewey Riley (David
Arquette) finds himself dating Jennifer Jolie (Parker Posey), the
actress who is playing Gail. Sound confusing? Just wait. There's an
obsessive detective (Patrick Dempsey), a flaky director (Scott Foley),
and a producer-with-a-past (Lance Hendrickson) - all of whom become
suspects in multiple murders. It's deja vu all over again. Problem is:
it's difficult to sustain the excitement over three years so, by now,
the concept feels a bit flat, formulaic, even stale. And the scariest
part is glimpsing Star Wars' Carrie Fisher, whom age has not been kind
to since playing Princess Leia. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
Scream 3 is a silly, shrieking 6. And get ready for a parody. Miramax
will slay you with Scary Movie on March 31.

Title
Review for Galaxy Quest (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "GALAXY QUEST" (DreamWorks)
Glory, Hallelujah - this is the Christmas action comedy you've
been waiting for! Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony
Shalhoub, and Daryl Mitchell play five actors who - 20 years ago -
starred on a popular television series that was canceled. For four
seasons, from 1979 to 1982, they played the crew of the NSEA Protector
- now they earn their living appearing in costume at sci-fi
conventions and chain-store openings. However, far in deep, outer
space, the Thermians, a race of aliens from the Klatu Nebula, have
intercepted Earth's TV transmissions and, having no knowledge of
fiction or drama, they have mistaken the sci-fi shows for valid
historical documents. So when they're faced with a deadly adversary,
the ruthless Roth'h'ar Sarris of Fatu-Krey (Robin Sachs), the
Thermians abduct the characters - Comdr. Peter Quincy Taggert,
Lt. Tawny Madison, Dr. Lazarus, et al - not realizing they're really
out-of-work actors. With no script, no director, and no clue about
real space travel, the actors must turn in the performances of their
lives to become the intergalactic heroes they've convinced everyone
they are, as they encounter cannibalistic Blue Demon children, a giant
Rock Monster, and a Pig Lizard. As the vain, self-serving commander,
Tim Allen has never been better. Sigourney Weaver is a sexy, shameless
babe, and Alan Rickman is outrageous as a Shakespearean-trained Brit
who has been reduced to playing a half-human/half reptile. On the
Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, Galaxy Quest is an exuberant,
enormously funny 8. Aptly directed by Dean Parisot from a cleverly
ironic screenplay by David Howard and Robert Gordon, it's a bright,
shiny holiday package of pure enjoyment, destined to blast into one of
the big hits of the season.

Title
Review for Gift, The (2000)
  Written by Billy Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson, this gothic
Southern mystery revolves around a single, widowed mom (Cate
Blanchett) in Brixton, Georgia, who "reads" cards, using her
genetically-inherited psychic insight to help her emotionally needy
friends and neighbors. Primary among these is a severely disturbed
garage mechanic (Giovanni Ribisi) who is tormented by childhood
memories of sexual abuse by his father and a desperate, battered wife
(Hilary Swank) whose face and body bear the marks of her husband's
unbridled temper. "You've got to get legal help," Cate counsels
her. But when Hilary's philandering husband (Keanu Reeves) calls Cate
a "Satan worshipper" and begins to terrorize her family, it's her
teenage son (Lynnsee Provence) whose emotional scars over the death of
his father burst open, causing behavior problems at school. That's
where Cate meets the principal (Greg Kinnear) and his sexy, socialite
fiance (Katie Holmes) who is curious about Cate's psychic gift. "I'm
not a fortune-teller," Cate protests. But when the spiteful,
duplicitous Katie mysteriously disappears, it's Cate's telepathic
"visions" that help the skeptical police track down the
culprit. Intuitive director Sam Raimi ("The Evil Dead," "Darkman"), a
master of spine-tingling, supernatural horror, uses surreal imagery
and disconcerting camerawork to augment the psychological terror. Cate
Blanchett delivers a subtle, nuanced performance, where guilt about
not being able to "forecast" her own husband's death lurks below the
surface. Keanu Reeves takes a real chance as a cruel, redneck type and
pulls it off creditably. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The
Gift" is a chilling, haunting 7.  "I see things and I sense things,"
says Cate. Problem is: I sensed whodunit far too soon.

Title
Review for Titus (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Julie Taymor, who received both critical and popular acclaim
for her Broadway version of Disney's The Lion King, makes her film
debut with a curious adaptation of Shakespeare's Titus Andronicus, one
of the Bard's least successful plays. It's a graphic, grisly, gruesome
orgy of vengeance, revolving around Titus, a proud but aging Roman
general, played by Anthony Hopkins, who returns home in triumph
circa. 400 A.D. after conquering the Goths to crown the new Emperor
Saturninus (Alan Cumming). His prized gift to the new ruler is Tamora
(Jessica Lange), Queen of the Goths, whom the depraved Saturninus
impetuously marries - after being scorned by Titus's only daughter
(Laura Fraser). Along with her secret lover, a villainous Moor (Harry
Lennix), and her two punkster sons (Jonathan Rhys Meyers, Matthew
Rhys), the furious Tamara then schemes to wreak a crafty revenge on
Titus and his family for the ritual death of her oldest son at Titus'
hands. Cinematically, Taymor idiosyncratically links this historical
epic of political intrigue with the 20th century by incorporating a
contemporary lad (Osheen Jones) playing with toy soldiers. Working
with production designer Dante Ferretti, costumer Milena Canonero and
cinematographer Luciano Tovoli, the inventive Taymor sets out a
defiant, dizzying visual feast, crowned by a repulsive, cannibalistic
banquet that could have been created by Hannibal Lechter - and it's
impressively scored by Elliot Goldenthal. On the Granger Movie Gauge
of 1 to 10, Titus is a perversely stylistic, surreal 6. It's a bold,
bizarre bloodbath, giving us only fleeting glimpses of the tragic
characters who - in later Shakespearean plays - evolve into King Lear,
Lady Macbeth, and Iago.

Title
Review for Midsummer Night's Dream, A (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S 'A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S
DREAM'" (Fox Searchlight Pictures)
  Without doubt, Shakespeare is the most sought-after
screenwriter in Hollywood. And why not? The game-playing of his
characters and their efforts to grapple with reason and love seem
quite contemporary, and Shakespeare neither contests re-writes nor
demands royalties. Writer/director Michael Hoffman's clever adaptation
of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" is set in Tuscany around 1900,
coinciding with the advent of the bicycle. The plot deals with love in
all of its comical and fantastical forms, complicated by fairy
jealousy, love potions, and misbegotten romances. The wondrous evening
begins with Duke Theseus' involvement in a dispute involving Hermia
who loves Lysander but is being forced to marry Demetrius, who is
adored by Helena. In the forest, there are five amateur thespians
rehearsing "Pyramus and Thisbe," plus the love game between Oberon and
Titania, the King and Queen of the Fairies, complicated by the
trickster sprite Puck. There have been at least six film versions of
this 400 year-old play, including one with 11 year-old Mickey Rooney
as Puck, but this vibrant, all-star cast dazzles, particularly Kevin
Kline, Rupert Everett, Michelle Pfeifferand Stanley Tucci. Curiously,
Calista Flockhart transforms the obsessed Helena into another version
of her whining but spunky Ally McBeal character; her mud-wrestling
scene with Anna Friel, complete with clinging, wet clothes could only
be called bizarre. "What fools these mortals be!"  On the Granger
Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "William Shakespeare's 'A Midsummer Night's
Dream'" is a mischievous, whimsical 9. It's a charming, frothy frolic
that captures the enchantment and delight of Shakespeare's most
magical comedy.

Title
Review for Mystery Men (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
This feeble spoof tells the saga of seven aspiring
superheroes, each possessing a unique - and bizarre - superpower, who
band together to save Champion City. The ragtag group consists of Ben
Stiller as Mr. Furious, a leather-clad neurotic with a foul temper
("I'm a ticking time bomb of fury!"); Janeane Garofalo as the bitchy
Bowler, whose weapon is a clear bowling ball with her father's visible
skull inside; Paul Reubens (a.k.a. Pee-wee Herman) as the Spleen, who
farts noxious gas; Hank Azaria as the effete Blue Raja whose specialty
is throwing silverware ("May the forks be with you!"); Kel Mitchell as
Invisible Boy, who can't disappear when people are watching; Wes Studi
as the Sphinx, who spews sage-like homilies; and William H. Macy as
the Shoveler, whose superweapon is, you guessed it, a spade. The
villain is the psychotic Cassanova Frankenstein, played by Geoffrey
Rush, who has invented the deadly "Frakulator" beam which fragments
and warps everything - from people to buildings - into a weird state
that reflects what's going on within Cassanova's maniacal head - like
Picasso's cubist renderings. His conspirator is Greg Kinnear,
a.k.a. Captain Amazing, Champion City's bona fide arrogant superhero,
who is afraid he'll lose his product endorsements if there isn't a
villain on the loose. The preposterous derring-do in Neil Cuthbert's
deliberately formulaic screenplay, based on the Dark Horse comic book
series created by Bob Burden, must have looked better on
paper. Utilizing every camera trick, director Kinka Usher exaggerates
the obvious, which is not surprising since his background is in
television commercials.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Mystery Men" is a muddled 3. It's a superhero sendup that snickers
and deflates quickly.
