Authors
Kenneth E. Mohnkern
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Addams Family, The (1991)
     Here's another recommendation for THE ADDAMS FAMILY.  It's not the
greatest movie of all time, but it's worth the matinee price.  I
couldn't imagine ahead of time what sort of plot they might give us, but
it really wasn't too bad.  There *is* a plot, but it's not the important
thing here.  Don't see this movie for the plot.  Sit back and enjoy the
good performances.
     Raul Julia is terrific as Gomez, energetic, swashbuckling, romantic
(swooning over Morticia at her every French word).  Angelica Huston
(Morticia) is also quite good, but I thought Christina Ricci stole the
show as Wednesday.  Straightfaced, intense, but she's a little kid all
the way - mischievous and playful.  She's got a future in film.  (She
was also in MERMAIDS.)  The reason I had looked forward to seeing this
was Huston and Julia.  If they had cast Cher (the original choice for
Morticia) and Mel Gibson (or whoever) to star, it wouldn't be nearly as
good.
     Others - the woman who played the nasty mother; Dan Hedeya, the
sleazy family lawyer; and even Christopher Lloyd as Fester - seemed to
be pretty flat and stereotypical here.  That may be why the film started
to drag a bit for me in the middle, as we saw the evil plan unfolding.
We saw less of the great characters and more of the 2-D bad guys.
     Director Barry Sonnenfeld (cinematographer for MILLER'S CROSSING
and RAISING ARIZONA) does a pretty good job in his first directorship.
The camera has as much playful energy and vitality as the Addamses.
There are plenty of "point-of-view" shots, several with Thing (the best
performance by a hand I've seen).  The trip to the vaults is well done
-- spinning, falling, floating through mist.  And you've got to stay
aware -- there's always a choice tidbit going on the in the background.
(Granny: "Here, Kitty.")
     I have to agree that the highlight of the film is the school talent
show with all the parents in the audience and children onstage singing
"Getting to Know You," followed by Wednesday and Pugsly showing their
swordfighting abilities, Wednesday delivering a poetry-laden death
scene.
     There were plenty of kids in the theater.  It's a film you can take
them to, without having your intelligence insulted.
     Obligatory "favorite scenes" follow:
     There are plenty of great lines, and as many great visuals, but
here are a couple:
     The driveway gate has closed on Tulley's coat.  He's struggling to
get free.  Morticia (looking out the window, noting who's come to
visit): "It's Tulley, playing with Gate."
     The opening shot, carolers in front of the house.  Camera travels
up the face of the house, revealing The Addams Family, practicing a
holiday tradition.
     The next shot, a closeup of the Addams' cuckoo clock with little
animated members of the family all over it.  Meet, bend, smooch.

Title
Review for Shadows and Fog (1992)
     SHADOWS AND FOG is Woody Allen's new movie.  I think I need to say
that since I had no idea what I was in for until I was in the back seat
of the car on my way to the theater.  Even then my friends were kind
enough to say nothing more than "SHADOWS AND FOG is Woody Allen's new
movie."  There's something right about going into a theater with no
expectations, knowing nothing about the plot, letting it all unfold for
you as the filmmakers intended.
     I've always mildly enjoyed Woody's movies, but don't list them as
favorites.  His dramas are pretty well out of my experience, and his
comedies are goofy, but get chuckles from me -- not laughs.  I always
figured you had to be a New Yorker to appreciate his stuff.  
     [If you want to go into the theater without a clue, stop reading
now.  I won't include any real spoilers, though.  I won't get into the
plot.]
     But, geez -- I really liked SHADOWS AND FOG.  It was beautifully
shot in black and white, really showing off his talent for the visual.
The film takes place one dark, foggy night in an unnamed city at an
unnamed time in history, presumably in the late-19th century.  There's a
murderer roaming the streets, as are a vigilante group, prostitutes, and
circus performers.  It's a great bunch of characters.  
     And what a cast!  Kathy Bates, John Malkovich (as a clown worried
about his "art"), Madonna (ha!), Woody Allen, Mia Farrow, Lily Tomlin,
Jodie Foster, John Cusack (another great role for him), Wallace Shawn,
Fred Gwynn, Donald Pleasence, Julie Kavner (in a great role!)
     We see briefly what a good physical actor Woody is.  The scene
where he steals a glass from a table is priceless.  Anxious, seeing his
only chance to do it, fumbling around, trying not to draw attention to
himself -- classic!  And another where he's got a huge wooden hammer
overhead, ready to swing it ... hysterical.  They're basically
silent-era scenes.  Sure, he's no Buster Keaton or Charlie Chaplin, but
these days there aren't any Keatons or Chaplins.  Only Steve Martin and
Woody Allen, I guess.
     I have a feeling there were analogies to society and life as we
know it, but can't quite put the pieces together.  Was there
significance to the circus?  The killer in the night?  The politics
going on in the vigilante group?  Woody's ignorance of his part of the
plan?  It's the sort of movie that you're still thinking about the next
morning.  And there aren't many of those.  
