Authors
Clark Parkhurst
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Akira (1988)
[Followup directed to rec.arts.movies.  -Moderator]
     AKIRA may be the best and most well told example of Japanese
animation ever.  AKIRA, based on the graphic novel and comic book
series by Katsuhiro Otomo has all the elements of great story and is at
or should be at the top of its film genre.
     Tetsuo is a young man whom is just trying to be one of the
guys.  But, thirty years in the future, after a global nuclear war is
what the earth has suffered.  And as a result:  Tokyo blown to
smithereens by a powerful psychic force known as Akira.  Now, Tokyo has
been rebuilt and renamed Neo-Tokyo.  Two rival biker gangs control the
city and Tetsuo just happens to be on the winning team until he runs
into a child on his motorcycle and he turns into a Tetsuo-on-a-stick.
     Suddenly, Tetsuo and his buddies are surrounded by lights,
sirens, and the military.  The strange boy, along with Tetsuo, are
taken away to a special hospital where they are trying to find the
secrets to this Akira force.
     Meanwhile, Tetsuo's fellow gang members have been arrested and
are being interrogated by the police and military who have joined
forces to battle against the rebellion of the citizens of Neo-Tokyo.
     Back at the hospital, it seems that Tetsuo is showing the same
patterns as the Akira patterns, and that could spell the destruction of
Neo-Tokyo if these 'patterns' are not kept under control.  Tetsuo soon
escapes from the hospital and steals his friend's, Kanada, bike, only
to be met up with the rival gang, The Clowns.
     Tetsuo's girlfriend is raped and beaten while Tetsuo is about
to watch Kanada's bike go up in flames, which ironically compares
Tetsuo's friend's bike to his girlfriend.  The outcome: a Tim the Tool
Man Taylor 'machines are better then women' quote that leads to Kanada
and the rest of the gang coming to the rescue.  The scene soon fades to
a violent beating of one of the clowns by Tetsuo and then the Akira
patterns kicking in with Tetsuo having delusions.  Soon, the military
comes and frisks Tetsuo away to the hospital for a second time.
     Well, a lot of side tracking goes on and on ... and on, but mark
my words: "Every cel of animation in this film is important."  It *is*
the most detailed and thought out script of Japanese animation ever
made.  It joins the ranks of such greats as RANMA 1/2, DOMINION, the
"Bubblegum" series and the American HEAVY METAL animated feature film.
     Now, back to the story.  Tetsuo soon finds himself with amazing
powers.  He also finds that he is not the only one that possesses these
extraterrestrial powers.  It seems that the boy he hit with his
motorcycle is part of the family that he is joining quickly.  Tetsuo
must make a decision.  One that is imperative to the survival of
Neo-Tokyo: Will he join the family and tame his powers or will he be a
cocky half-assed twit and defiantly destroy Neo-Tokyo?  I think that
Tetsuo has death, Destruction, and not to mention revenge on his mind.
     Everyone in Neo-Tokyo is in either panic or glorification.  Some
know of Tetsuo's powers and abilities.  Others think that Tetsuo is
"the Great" Akira.  One question lingers in his head: What is this
Akira?  The other psychics are pushing him to the edge, pounding his
brain with challenges the Akira still has more power.  And, as a power
hungry bastard, Tetsuo goes to find the one that is more powerful.
Tetsuo loses it, and all is surrounded by a blinding white light.  You
know the rest.
     Not very often does a motion picture, animated or not touch you
in a way that you gape at every movement, or word that comes from
this.  AKIRA grips you, and takes you, literally, thirty years in the
future and shows you that like the medieval stories of wizards and
warriors, dragons and knights still is there.  Its LAWNMOWER MAN times
10.
     One of the best things about this that other movies in the comic
genre failed to do was have the person who knows the story, characters,
and other tid bits behind the cameras.  BATMAN and THE CROW (not that
THE CROW was bad) could have been more fluent with their present and
complete storylines if the creator and illustrator of the comic books
and graphic novels were behind it.  Think what it would be like if Bob
Kane, directed the BATMAN motion picture?  Sleep on it.
