Authors
Myra VanInwegen
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Schreckliche Mädchen, Das (1990)
     This is one of the best movies I've seen - as good as (just to name
a few of my semi-recent picks) CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS or Imamura's
BLACK RAIN.  It is the only movie I have ever seen that has a heroine
whom I would very much like to be, or to try to imitate.
     Basic plot (no spoilers, unless you think any plot description is a
spoiler):
     This movie tells the story of Sonya, a girl whose intelligence and
willfulness make her hard to control.  However, despite the title of the
movie, she is a very nice girl, a good girl, who excels in her classes
and is the pride of the town.  That is, as long as the town's definition
of "good" matches her own.
     This movie is really two films in one.  The first part is
wonderfully light and funny, recounting the mishaps of a girl growing up
in a Catholic family in a small town in Bavaria.  The other part begins
as she starts doing research for an essay on "My Hometown During the
Third Reich."  The film rapidly grows serious, and the humor of the
first half is replaced by frustration, hatred, and even danger as the
film progresses.
     Technical notes (you might want to skip this if you want to be
surprised by the structure of the film):
     The film is told as sort of a flashback, with the present-day Sonya
narrating.  Color, or the lack of it, is used to show time periods here.
Black-and-white is used for Sonya's childhood, color for the present,
and, in one brief sequence, sepia for "way back when."  If I remember
right, the film turns from b&w (the past) to color (the present) about
when the Third Reich essay is announced, that is, when the film changes
mood from funny to serious.  This marks the transition from childhood to
adulthood for Sonya.
     The sets used when Sonya is dealing with the "establishment" - the
locals who continually try to thwart her - use a minimum of furniture (a
desk, a chair) with a painting or slide behind to suggest the rest of
room in which the action takes place.  Perhaps this suggests the
illusions on which these people have based their power.

Title
Review for Life Is Sweet (1990)
     What do you expect of a movie named LIFE IS SWEET?  Well, if you're
like me, you expect something like a warm look at a happy time in
someone's life.  Well, that's definitely not what this movie is.  A
friend remarked, as we walked out of the theater, "Maybe they were
thinking of calling it LIFE IS A BITCH."  Well, I don't think that would
have been an appropriate title either, but we did have a little bit of
discussion as to whether it was depressing or not.  I'll give my views
on this question later.
     This is a British movie, starring no one I've heard of before.  It
covers roughly four days in the life of a working class family
consisting of mother, father, and two fraternal twin daughters who are
as different at can be.  Other players include a man who's always trying
to sell the father something, a fellow who's about to open a new
restaurant, and one of the daughter's boyfriends.  I found the accents
of these people a bit hard to understand at times and missed a bit of
dialog, but not enough to affect my enjoyment of the movie.
     There is no single focus of this movie, no single problem that they
all must face.  Rather it tells a little story about each character, and
we learn about the trials and hopes of each.  But it also deals with the
family as a whole and how they react with each other and the support or
lack thereof that each character receives from the family.
     Now, is this a depressing movie?  Lots of unpleasant things happen
to the family, but we get the feeling that they don't really consider
these things depressing.  They seem to accept that bad things will come
along with the good, and when something bad happens, they just get on
with their lives, learning how to cope with it.  One feels that this
family (at least most of it members) have hope.
     The thing I liked most about it is the end of the movie.  It didn't
really end, it just stopped, and the credits started to roll.  At first
I was a bit annoyed -- I wanted the movie to go on, I wanted to find out
more of what happened to them.  But then I realized that that's the way
real life is.  Problems are really not solved in a day, or even four
days, so it is unrealistic to expect to have all the answers by the end
of the movie.  Instead, one is lead to wonder what happens after the
movie ends, and whether each person works for and achieves his or her
goals.
     Another thing I liked was the look of the film.  It had nice rich
color and scenes were carefully framed, though the camera work was
nothing special.
     I liked this movie a great deal, and recommend it even at full
price (I, who always see the matinee shows, spent full price for it and
was very satisfied).

Title
Review for Double vie de Véronique, La (1991)
     I saw THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERIONIQUE about a week and a half ago and
figured that while I was writing reviews I might as well write about
this one too.
     The basic idea is this: there are two women, Veronika in Poland and
Veronique in France, whose lives are somehow connected.  In addition to
looking a lot alike and having similar lives and talents, each feels that
she has a counterpart somewhere in the world although they have never
met (they did come close enough to see each other once).  Also I found
it amusing that Veronika's aunt looks a lot like Veronique's Dad.  But
anyway...
     I felt that the idea of the movie was interesting, but there wasn't
enough in the actual film to hold my attention.  There was some
interesting photography, but it was insufficient to save the movie by
itself.  It moved very slowly, and though things happened I was left
with the strange impression that nothing very important occurred.  Now I
have no complaint about slow-moving films as long as I find something to
hold my interest, but I couldn't find it in this movie.  It was a bit
confusing and seemed mysterious for no apparent reason.
     Suffice to say that I didn't like it much.  But, to present an
opposing view, the friend that I went with liked it, enough that he
would like to see it again to understand it better.  Evidently it gave
him plenty enough food for thought, though it left me still hungry.

Title
Review for Eating (1990)
     Today I saw, in a matinee, STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY (directed by
?, sorry, I forgot to write it down; it's a woman, and the film is
sponsored by the National Film Board of Canada) [reviewed in a separate
article].  This time last week I saw EATING, directed by Henry Jaglom.
EATING is about a bunch of mostly beautiful, rich, well-dressed,
successful women gathered for a triple birthday party.  STRANGERS IN
GOOD COMPANY is about seven very ordinary women, six of whom are senior
citizens, who have gotten stranded by a broken-down bus.  Neither film
has any male characters in it (except for a very brief glimpse of a male
at the very end of STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY), and neither film is
missing anything by not having them.
     EATING is a fast-moving film where emotions run high and the words
run fast, and all the scenes are filled with people.  STRANGERS is a
much slower, quiet film, where the Canadian countryside is as much a
part of the film as the characters are, and emotions are much more
subdued, as if the many years of living have put these women's feeling
deeper into them.  EATING is billed as a comedy, but I thought is was
much more serious than funny, and the end result is that I felt very
depressed about being a woman.  STRANGERS is actually very funny, in a
quiet way, and I left the theater feeling uplifted.
     EATING is about women and food.  And boyfriends and husbands and
careers and friendship and loyalty and trust and childbearing and
daughters and mothers and smoking and drugs and cosmetic surgery.  But
more about food and the way we view our bodies than anything else.  The
overwhelming feeling I have about this movie, a week after seeing it, is
that it is about beautiful women complaining about how ugly and fat they
are.  Now, not all the women in the film have the shapes of Vogue models
(although some did), but most of them had perfectly normal shapes.  And
all these women were talking about their fights with food: how they
would binge, then starve themselves or force themselves to throw up, and
how each of them felt inferior in the company of all the other women.
     This made me think pretty seriously about myself.  I am right now
about the lightest I have been since growing to full size, but yet I
still feel fat.  I'm not thin, but neither am I fat, and I'm actually in
quite good physical shape (I'm exercising lots nowadays).  Now, I could
lose about 10 pounds, and it wouldn't be physically damaging to me, but
on the other hand, it wouldn't make me any healthier either.  Yes, I
would look better *by society's standards*, but is that a sufficient
reason to lose weight?  A man with a build similar to mine would simply
be considered stocky, and no one would suggest that he go on a diet or
ask him if he had gained weight recently.  But as women, we are
subjected to that sort of treatment.
     After seeing this movie, and seeing the extremes this can be taken
to, I say: to Hell with it.  We are beautiful *as we are*; we don't need
to be dangerously thin to look good.  In the past week, since seeing the
film, I have found myself challenging traditional notions of beauty when
expressed by my friends.  I hope this stays with me.

Title
Review for Strangers in Good Company (1991)
     Today I saw, in a matinee, STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY (directed by
?, sorry, I forgot to write it down; it's a woman, and the film is
sponsored by the National Film Board of Canada).  This time last week I
saw EATING, directed by Henry Jaglom [reviewed in a separate article].
EATING is about a bunch of mostly beautiful, rich, well-dressed,
successful women gathered for a triple birthday party.  STRANGERS IN
GOOD COMPANY is about seven very ordinary women, six of whom are senior
citizens, who have gotten stranded by a broken-down bus.  Neither film
has any male characters in it (except for a very brief glimpse of a male
at the very end of STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY), and neither film is
missing anything by not having them.
     STRANGERS IN GOOD COMPANY is about a group of women getting to know
each other and learning to take care of themselves.  All the women
(except one, the bus driver) are old, about half of them are fat, only
one uses makeup, and they wear ordinary clothing.  They talk about their
lives, and as the movie progresses we get to know their strengths: what
keeps them going and optimistic in the face of their troubles.  These
are very resourceful women.  They try various techniques of getting
food, attracting attention, and getting themselves out.  Some methods
succeed, some don't, but these women (except for one) never give up
hope.
     These women, unlike their counterparts in EATING, are slow and
natural, like the countryside in which they are trapped.  Yet, despite
their fear and desires to get back to civilization, they never resent
their surroundings nor each other, and they are sorry to go when they
are finally rescued.  And despite their lack of physical beauty, we grow
to love and respect them.  It is very reassuring to see ordinary people
in a movie, where usually all the lead actors look like they've stepped
out of GLAMOUR or GQ.
     I recommend this movie to people who don't define the goodness of a
movie by the number of dead left in the gutters and the number of car
chases.
