Authors
kala ladenheim
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Holy Smoke (1999)
There's this game that I sometimes play when a movie or TV show is
particularly mind boggling:  "Whatever were they thinking?"  I try to
envision the moment when the story was pitched or the plot was hatched. 
I think I've got it for this one.
OK, this is what I think happened.  Harvey Keitel--consistently one of
the most interesting actors out there and one who has a playful/serious
"actor's workshop" approach to his craft, is hanging out, maybe
inhaling, maybe slugging back the scotch with his good buddy Jane
Campion and her sister Anna.  "Hit me with your best shot.  Give me the
most ridiculous scenario you can come up with.  I'll convince 'em."
They put their heads together and come up with a vision of him crawling
around the Australian outback in a red minidress and a single cowboy
boot--one of these strokes of brilliance the muse occasionally drops on
you (especially, as mentioned before, when the smoke is wholly...) 
"Great!  How did I got there?"  "Had to be a woman."  AND they were
off.  The writers had to back into the story, and when they did they
realized things got kind of draggy when it was just the dialogue in the
desert--a little too heady.  Needed some livening up.  So whenever the
action slowed down they'd roll the dice and add in a feature from a
collection of odds and ends they'd written on slips of paper and put in
a fishbowl to draw from--sheep as tray tables, reindeer antlers on the
car-- a game of dares.
For supporting evidence that this piece was an extended workshop
exercise, look to Keitel's 1995 "Smoke" and "Blue in the face" (as in
Krishna, blue-faced God?) for the title and spiritual allusion.
Anyway, fun for Keitel and Winslet, some interesting stuff, some too
silly stuff.  Probably not worth paying for but fun for free.
BTW, this is the second film preview I've attended at Pentagon City, and
I don't think I'll go to a movie there again.  At the first--Any Given
Sunday--the sound track kept breaking up.  At this screening they
cropped about the top 15% of the image (except for the period in which
the film slipped out of registration so we saw the top part but lost the
next 15%).
