Authors
D. Agnew
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Virtuosity (1995)
     Okay, this review is a little late for those who want to hear
about movies the weekend they came out.  Sorry about that.  On to the
review.
     Actually, that about says it all, but since this would be
rather short if it was just left at that....
     In a summer of grade-B action flicks, VIRTUOSITY stands out as a
bad movie.  MAD MAX WAAAAAY BEYOND THUNDERDOME (or WATERWORLD, as the
studio decided to call it) was the kind of movie we would expect to see
from Stallone, Ahnuld, etc.  BATMAN FOREVER was pretty bad, but not a
disaster.  The list goes on.  VIRTUOSITY, however, reaches new lows
even in such a crowd.
     Denzel Washington stars as an ex-cop, now con, who is a human
guinea pig in a virtual-reality experiment.  The "bad guy" is a
computer program amalgamation of 100+ mass murderers, although there
seems to be some confusion between mass murderers and serial
murderers.  In this movie, however, if they even managed to get all
murderers that is quite an accomplishment.  This evil computer program
manages to get a body built--don't ask how, it is one of the sillier
ideas in a movie rife with them--and predictably goes on a rampage.
Equally predicatably, our hero is the only person who can stop the
critter.  There is the mandatory damsel to get into distress, complete
with girl-who-can't-act playing her daughter (do they hold auditions
for bad child actors for these movies?), together with just about every
other B-movie plot device you have ever seen.
     The special effects are well done, and fit the story well.  That's
about the only good thing to say about the movie.  Even for this type
of flick, the holes are awful.  There are few obvious plot holes as
such, so this is not principally a script problem.  Rather, there are
any number of visual problems: things that just do not make sense;
things that obviously cannot work as shown; things that appear done in
a very peculiar way for no reason (except presumably to look
interesting on screen).  To the "You know you're in a bad movie
when..." list, add "when the bandage on the hero jumps location between
two shots of him going through a door."
     What, exactly, does a producer do?  If not the producer, is there
not someone who is in a position to say to the director, "Bob (

     One final note--what the hell was Denzel Washington doing in this
film?  I realize that every actor makes a mistake or two in choosing
roles, but it must have been clear pretty early what a piece of garbage
this was.  At the very least, he should have been told not to work so
hard: "Denzel, stop that emoting stuff.  This is a two-dimensional
character you're playing here, so stop that acting nonsense and let's
just shoot the scene and go for a beer."  God knows it looks like that
was the director's philosophy.
     All in all, I can't really say I enjoyed the movie.  Don't see
this turkey in the theatre.  If you happen someday to win a bunch of
free rentals at the local video store, and you use up most of them
renting every movie in the world in which you have any interest at all,
and still have some left over, and spot this one on the shelf--don't
rent it.
