Authors
Mos Eisley
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Army of Darkness (1993)
     General Comment: If you have a life (i.e., you're not making a
fortune by sticking coal up your butt), you'll enjoy this movie.
     Sam Raimi has an intense visual style which I would characterize
as the Coen brothers locked in puberty.  And I don't mean that in a bad
way (by the way, the two directors are acquaintances and have a film--I
forget the name--in which all three were involved.  Sam Raimi also
appears in Coen Brothers' MILLER'S CROSSING, briefly.) One of Raimi's
proclaimed influences are the Three Stooges.  Curiously enough, it is
specifically that influence which pops up in ARMY OF DARKNESS as often
as the number of times undead pop out of the ground.
     It's a tough task that Raimi tackles in making a sequel to the
tightly crafted EVIL DEAD II: DEAD BY DAWN (essentially a remake of
EVIL DEAD, or as Raimi claims, a remake of EVIL DEAD as a *tribute to
the Three Stooges*.  Go figure.)  It's one thing to have mundane
machoman Ash (Bruce Campbell) surviving in an isolated house in the
woods chopping evil dead limbs, spouting one-liners to the already dead
like "You're going down" but it's a much more monumental challenge to
propel Ash into a movie of epic form, epic in the tradition of KING
ARTHUR AND THE ROUND TABLE and D&D-like fantasy novels.
     We have seen plenty of fantasy movies from Hollywood, and to be
quite frank, they all sucked (THE DARK CRYSTAL being a remarkable
exception, sci-fi not being included in the genre I call fantasy, and
THE PRINCESS BRIDE not really fantasy).  The pretense of making a
"real" fantasy just becomes too inflated on the big screen.  All the
costumes and makeup don't come even close to the images we've already
formed in our heads.  No one's been able to touch that dreamworld who's
foundation lies in the logos of reading books and playing D&D games.
And wisely enough, considering the character of Ash, Raimi avoids even
trying.
     Instead, Raimi sticks to his guns.  Army of Darkness is slapstick
and parody (a parody of King Arthur and other mythological legends)
backed up by solid effects and amazing camerawork.
     Just as a note, there are some scenes in which Raimi's cameraman
had epileptic seizures, and though they were intentional, it was a bit
distracting (I kept thinking through the fast camera work, "Don't tell
the story in pans ... tell the story in cuts, Sam.  No, Sam, schizoid,
fast blurry pans are not an exception to the rule.").  And as if he
heard me, Raimi's next scene involves a hilarious rapid-fire sequence
of cuts in which Ash dresses in knight gear.  Bravo!
     The comedy potential for situating Ash into a mythological role as
The Prophesized One is realized by Raimi, but only halfway.  There are
great scenes.  As Ash begins to gain respect from the medieval people,
he yells with authority, waving his gun in the air, "This ... is my
BOOM STICK."  The scene in which Ash finds the NECRONOMICON is also
unforgettable (and elicited the most noise from the audience as Ash
mutters "I know it starts with an 'n'...") However, it seems to me that
Raimi didn't study his fantasy films, because in the end he resorts to
Three Stooges (Ouch ouch!  Take this!  Oof!  Stop it, stop it!
Nyuknyuk!--you know the kind) type humor to keep his movie going.
While that base level of humor had its moments, overdoing it seemed to
drain the menace out of the Army of Darkness and hence the climax never
got off to a jump start.  There's the cliche technology vs. brute force
theme and that's about it.
     It is my opinion that Raimi should have limited his humor to the
interplay between Ash (90s man) and the medieval myth-seeking folk and
the machoesque manner in which Ash disposes of The Dead (great scene in
which Ash flexes after shooting a witch from behind his back).
However, he focused that Three Stooginizations upon The Dead also, a
mistake he didn't make in EVIL DEAD II.  The leader of The Army of
Darkness appeared stupid, harmless and for a while I thought he was a
metaphor for Curly.  Who knows.
     But there's something to be said for the almost Ren & Stimpy-esque
manner in which Raimi has his characters trying to prove their
manliness and survive at the same time.  There's something to be said
for the times in which indignity stares both Ash and the viewer right
in the face whether it be in the form of skeletal fingers or just
forgetfulness.  And I would never dismiss Raimi's talent as
prepubescent or wasted.  After all, I enjoyed the movie.

Title
Review for Trust (1990)
Directed by Hal Hartley
Starring Adrienne Shelley, Martin Donovan, Merrit Nelson, Jim MacKay
COMMENTS: I'm reviewing this because it's an easy rental to pass over.
I was extremely skeptical when I picked it up, but it's one of my
favorite movies now.
A very unique, surprisingly touching "dark-comedy."  By the way, this
won my award for Best Video Sleeper (ooooh's, aaahhh's from the Usenet
audiences).  The critic style here might seem a little stiff.  That's
probably because this was originally written for publication in my
school newspaper.  YEeeeeOW!
     Trust is hard to come by these days, and in Hal Hartley's quirky
movie, TRUST, it's even harder.  In an all too familiar world, people
zone out and watch television, talk about everything except what they
actually want, and bicker about nothing.  But you'll be hard-pressed not
to enjoy this slickly directed, bam-out-of-a-low-budget movie.
     TRUST begins rather strangely, if not difficultly, for the
conservative viewer.  In the opening scene, Maria Coughlin, a high
school dropout played to perfection by a now personal fave actress,
Adrienne Shelley, is arguing with her father over her recently
announced pregnancy.  After he calls her a slut, she slaps him and says,
"So there!" and leaves.  He then drops to the floor dead from a heart
attack.
     Even more noticeable is the dead-pan dialogue which the characters
constantly engage in--a feature which seems to be a signature of
Hartley's films (his other, THE UNBELIEVABLE TRUTH).  Throughout the
movie, conversations carry the weight of obligation and lack ornation.
When the conversation becomes intense, it is out of a very genuine
sense of anger or frustration.  But it's effective: we get the
impression that no one is connecting; each is their own island, and
lost on it.  Hartley also makes great use of silence.
     Alienated in a world of utterly useless parents and television,
Maria and Matthew Slaughter (Martin Donovan) independently cope with
the angst of teenage life.  Maria, heavy on makeup and big hair but
light in the head, would like just one thing: to get married to her
jock boyfriend.
     Matthew, a hot-headed high school graduate, can't stabilize a
career despite his talent as an electronics mechanic because he's too
principled about manufacturing quality, of all things.  He has other
principles, in fact.  He refuses to watch TV.  His reason: "It causes
cancer."  His frank response to those who don't believe it: "Find
out for yourself."
     Much time is spent by Hartley to establish Maria's poor fortunes.
After Maria's boyfriend chickens out and abandons her and her mother
Jean (Merrit Nelson) bans her from the house, Maria suddenly finds
herself alone and contemplating abortion.
     The establishment of Maria's simplicity and eventual banishment
from her family and her boyfriend seem too requisite, too contrived.
Hartley does develop this when he explores the changes that occur to
both Maria and Matthew after they meet, but the early Maria scenes are
too pity-mongering, too much method to the weirdness in the off-kilter
world Hartley creates.  It is the only blaring weak spot in the film.
     The movie starts to kick when Matthew finds Maria drunk in an
abandoned home.  She asks "What do you want?" and he responds, "I
don't want anything."  "Why not?" she inquires, and he says "Cause I
don't think anything will help," pointing to the empty six-pack by
her.  Yes, the dialogue is sometimes a little too spontaneously deep
for plausible conversation but you allow for it because it is
consistently wry and funny.
     The strength of the movie is the manner in which Matthew and Maria
interact and learn to trust each other.  Much of the charm of the movie
also lies in the ways in which they cope with their wacked parents.
     Matthew's father, wonderfully acted by Jim MacKay, slaps his son,
rants about how worthless his son is (while all he does is watch
television).  His anal attitude towards the order and cleanliness of his
house creates some hilarious film sequences in which Maria accidentally
creates chaos in the kitchen.  Never before has spilled milk and soup,
burnt toast and ashes in a coffee cup taken on the magic of wicked
delight.
     Maria's mother is callous and cold, bordering on psychopathic.  She
is warned by Matthew, "A family is like a gun.  You point it in the
wrong direction; you might kill somebody."  To which she snaps
"Exactly."  She's the most unorthodox of mothers.  When Matthew and she
argue over who Maria gets to live with, Matthew challenges her to a
thumb wrestling match.  She suggests, "Let's drink for it.  Whoever's
left standing wins."  Yet despite all her bizarre idiosyncrasies, she
seems genuine.  Genuinely mad, maybe, but genuine.
     Maria and Matthew begin to change in their relationship.  Maria
gets a job and becomes a bookworm while Matthew, willing to sacrifice
his manufacturing quality principles, decides to look for a long term
job.  He even starts to watch TV, muttering, "Television allows us to
make these daily sacrifices.  It deadens the inner core of our being."
Maria fears these changes and sacrifices and suggests that they leave
town.  "It's no use.  Television is everywhere," Matthew says.
     In echoes of THE GRADUATE, we are engrossed in the efforts of
Maria and Matthew to somehow be beyond the muted world through marriage
and each other.  The ending of TRUST lacks the dramatic intensity of
the wedding scene in THE GRADUATE but Hartley finds a more human and
less fantastical conclusion to the lives of these two lost lovebirds.
     The musical soundtrack is excellent (though poorly recorded) as
well as the cinematographic style of Michael Spiller.  The general
theme and closing theme for the movie is a rather repetitious but
harmonious keyboard ditty which seems to evoke a nobility in the
futility of Maria's and Matthew's efforts.  I have no idea what that
means, but it was basically pretty moving.  Things may or may not work
out for these two trusting friends, but the fact that we like to tune
in to their world makes their success or failure seem irrelevant.
