Authors
Jim Griffith
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991)
     Well, I went to a sneak preview last night, and I naturally have to
say a few words about this movie.
     Drop whatever you're doing, sell your children if necessary, and go
and see this movie.
     Siskel and Ebert apparently called it "the best action movie since
DIE HARD 2" in their review.  I don't think they're doing it justice.
I would call it "the best action movie since RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK".
     I gotta start by commenting on the plot (without spoiling -- yet).
The plot was very well done, making it the best *sequel* I've ever seen.
The story makes sense, there aren't any gaping logic flaws (if you
ignore some of the technological explanations they make), and it fits
very well with the original, without being even slightly contrived or
generally predictable.  While there aren't any violent twists, there
weren't a lot of places where they went with what I considered to be the
obvious route.
     The special effects are superb, and well worth the serious amount
of money they spent to make them.  Admittedly, I'm sort of biased, since
my graphics professor worked on them (Mark Dippe', HI MARK!).  Those of
you who saw THE ABYSS will recognize the technology involved, and you'll
see how far they've taken their techniques.  The ABYSS effects were
fairly obviously computer generated, although at the time, they were
quite impressive.  I sat through the movie knowing full well how the
advanced Terminator effects were done, and I never consciously thought
of them as effects -- they looked real and I took them for reality.  In
my opinion, that's the ultimate sign of special effects success.  The
movie is worth seeing for the advanced Terminator effects alone.  More
than anything, I think this movie really showcases what computer
graphics are capable of, and I think this is the first time I've ever
seen a computer graphics effect that truly doesn't look like a computer
graphics effect.  If I seem to be raving here, there's a reason.  As far
as I'm concerned, this film is as much a pioneer special effects film as
either 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY or STAR WARS were.
     The characterizations leave something to be desired, I think.  At
times, Arnold is too much Arnold and not enough Terminator.  And the
advanced Terminator (Robert Patrick) was far less ... abrupt than Arnold
was as the first original Terminator.  I think that most of the blame
for this lies in the writing -- if Patrick was told "say this line", he
had to say that line, regardless of what it did to the character.  In
terms of the acting, I have no complaints with Patrick.  He looked
appropriately nasty at the right times, and he was convincing as a
killing machine.  I think he portrayed the character as it was written.
I just think it was written a bit off-base.
     As for the character of John Connor, I think he was portrayed well.
I would have preferred the character to have been written such that the
audience gets a glimpse of the character growing towards the successful
rebel that he is as an adult.  We really don't see any of that, and I
think it's too bad.  But as a ten-year-old, he's quite believable.
     The interesting character is Linda Hamilton as Sarah Connor.  In
the original, she was a strongly sympathetic, somewhat helpless heroine.
In this one, she's essentially a psycho.  This takes a little getting
used to, but it makes for some interesting scenes.  A lot of Sarah's
character and actions are rather cliche -- I think Linda's watched ALIENS
a few too many times.  But her character is essential for the movie.
     These are really minor nits.  The characters are believable in the
situations they get into, and that's all that's really required.  This
movie is no TERMS OF ENDEARMENT, and it doesn't need to try to be.
     I think the advanced Terminator really didn't use his full
abilities until the fight sequences with Arnold at the end.  There was a
lot that the thing was capable of that it should have done that it
didn't.  For instance, it almost always attacked in a humanoid form.
There were a number of cases where a tentacular form (or even a simple
fifth limb) could have accomplished quite a bit, but it wasn't done.
Essentially, the advanced Terminator is so nasty that if it can get
within three feet of its target, its target is dead.  As such, the
Terminator's efforts should always have been to get in as close a
proximity to its target as it could.  When it was in the nitrogen truck
chasing Arnie in the truck, it should have oozed into Arnie's truck and
attacked directly, rather than trying to run them down.  It didn't
seemed as focused on its mission -- killing John Connor -- as Arnold's
Terminator was in the original.
     The advanced Terminator generally wasn't single-minded enough.
Arnie as the original Terminator was single-minded.  He went straight
after whatever he needed to do the job, whether that meant shoving his
hand through a guy's chest, blowing away a police station full of 17
cops, or whatever.  The advanced Terminator went through a lot of effort
to remain within human society, and that seemed strange.  It paused far
too often for dramatic effect, rather than finishing off its target.  I
think I counted three instances where the Terminator could have
accomplished its mission if it hadn't stopped for a dramatic pause.
That kind of ruined it for me -- I knew because of the pauses and who
was involved which characters would survive at the end of the film.
     Arnie was also too gregarious a Terminator.  Admittedly, he was a
"learning" Terminator.  But he still went in for chit-chat far too
often.  I think the writers wanted to portray the older Terminator as a
sympathetic character, and I'm not sure it worked for the film.
     I also had a hard time accepting the nature of the advanced
Terminator in general as being realistic, but I'm willing to file that
under "willing suspension of disbelief".
     Enough said.  My complaints are minor and generally technical.  As
a piece of entertainment, this is the best I've seen in a long time.
I've never been to a movie that had me as thoroughly engrossed.  Go see
it.

Title
Review for Air America (1990)
     The first comment I have to make about this movie is that the
trailers for it and the television advertisements are grossly misleading.
The most visible example is the fact that many of the trailer's scenes
are not even in the movie.  For instance, the trailer shows Gibson and
Downey walking together, having the following conversation:
     In the movie, all that happens is Gibson says "Anything anywhere
any time.  That's our motto."  Another example is that the trailers and
ads show Gibson calmly chomping on a sandwich while his plane goes up in
a ball of fire.  This "scene" is actually a collection of clips from two
separate scenes, taken completely out of context.
     Granted, this is a nit.  But in general, the trailers and ads make
this movie out to be a fun-loving comedy.  It is not.  The movie has
some pretty dark tones to it, and parts of it will depress the hell out
of you.  Don't go to this movie if you are simply looking for fun -- you
will be largely disappointed.  I was really offended by the extent to
which the ads portrayed this movie as something it isn't.
     Don't get me wrong.  Parts of this movie are very funny.  But the
movie's subject deals with a rather embarrassing aspect of American
history -- the fact that the CIA was maintaining a covert distribution
system of virtually any imaginable commodity (including body parts,
according to Gibson on "Arsenio Hall"), and that this system ran a fair
amount of drugs, all in the name of national security.  And it would not
have done the subject justice if they had played it as a comedy.
     The movie starts with a young California chopper pilot losing his
license essentially due to stunt flying a radio station's traffic
chopper.  He is promptly recruited by the CIA to fly for "Air America,"
the CIA's distribution network in Laos.  Once in Laos, he finds himself
in the midst of a number of pilots who are bordering on insanity.  He
even remarks on how strange it is for him to find himself as the most
normal person in the room.  The movie goes on to describe various
incidents involving different deliveries and what happens on the way.
Incidental to the plot is a US senator on a fact-finding mission, and
the attempts to placate him while keeping him in the dark.
     The problem that I had with the movie was that it was unwilling to
commit to any particular plot twist.  There are a number of
opportunities for the story to take on a potentially challenging
approach, but it consistently heads in one direction, only to veer off
right away.  A potential romance is set up between Downey's character
and an idealistic USAID worker, but nothing ever comes of it.  A
dramatic confrontation between one of the "heavies" and Downey's
character is in the making, but again, nothing happens.  The movie has
no climax per se.  Rather, it sets up a number of minor climactic
moments, with no real surprise endings to any of them.  Essentially,
other than to say, "Hey, look what the US government was up to!" this
movie doesn't say or do anything remarkable.  The only other plot aspect
that interested or surprised me was the senator's final stand.
     What is most interesting about the movie is the characterization of
the pilots involved.  Downey is a rather idealistic rebel who is trapped
in a situation where he must deal with unpleasantness in order to do
what he loves to do.  Gibson is a man who sees any moralizing about his
situation to be a futile exercise.  He is solely interested in becoming
independent enough to do his own thing.  The pilots in general are aware
of the roles that they are playing, and they are fatalistic in their
view of their roles.  They spend their time alternately dealing with a
bureaucracy which is looking for scapegoats and unfriendlies who are
looking to kill Americans, and they walk the line between sanity and
insanity in an effort to cope with it.  All that has value to them is
each other, and they are fiercely protective of each other.
     My gut reaction to this movie is "So what?"  It has no message, it
doesn't know how to take itself, which means that the audience doesn't
either.  Gibson gets to put more into a character than he's been able to
do in the past.  Downey is playing a familiar role, but one which is
still sympathetic.  If you're going to go see this movie, go for the
characters, not the plot, and certainly not for the humor.
