Authors
Peter W. Ely
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Night Falls on Manhattan (1997)
Screenplay and Direction by Sidney Lumet.
Starring Andy Garcia, Richard Dreyfus, and Lena Olin
Capitol Square and Brittania 6 [14 adult entertainement].
This film, by the great Sidney Lumet is almost certain to disappoint.  It
is a confused collage of cliches 
and improbable scenes, implausable story line, and simply bad casting
that results in a movie that is not worth viewing unless you are ready to
laugh your way through the last 90 minutes of the film.  
Do you believe that a lawyer fresh out of law school could within one
year, successlly prosecute a kingpin drug lord being represented by a
brilliant defense attorney (Dreyfuss), and subsequently be asked by the
mayor to run for the office of chief district attorney, win, and then
undertake a massive shake up of corrupt police services, all the while
establishing a relationship with another lawyer who seemingly only wants
to cook eggs for him and to have sex with him?  How about a judge who
tongue in cheek is party to the falsification of evidence?
Funnier than the implausible script is the myopic development of badly
casted characters from the hypomanic buffon (Andy Garcia) who 
stands on tables, desks, or bars to rant vitriole whenever more than six
people are present in a room to jailed drug lords who present to trial in
snappy blue suits rather than in standard prison issued clothing.  You may
also be amused by the other characters in this flop; for example, the
character played by Andy Garcia's father, who would make a more convincing
septogenerian rather than a late fifties cop near retirment.
Sidney Lumet has made some brilliant movies in his time, but this
character study is not vintage Lumet.  Rather, is seems to be from the Mr.
Magoo school of character development.
I was looking at the reviews in the newspaper today.  Rex Reed of the New
York Observer reportedly described it as "One of those rare movies with
impact and insight."
Bruce Williamson of Playboy reportedly wrote:  "Night Falls' has grit and
intelligence."
Mike Cidoni of ABC-TV reportedly wrote:  "Powerful! Truly Triumphant."
Larry Ratliff of FOX-TV reportedly wrote:  "Sidney Lumet scorches the screen."
Tonight, I discovered that even though I have not written a movie review
since my undergraduate years in University, the aforementioned "movie
critics" have nothing to teach the masses.
Save your money.  I predict that this dud will experience a core meltdown
before the end of May 1997.
