Authors
Steve Kramer
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Die Hard (1988)
     Well...looks like DIE HARD made it out before A FISH CALLED WANDA...I have
no doubt in my mind these will be two of the most remembered movies shown in
national movie theatre chains this summer (ROGER RABBIT being the third,
probably...but who can tell?)....  Thumbs up from me and my friends, although I
must say it's probably going to be far more impressive if you see it in 70mm so
you get the "bigger-than-life" feel...and the big sound, of course.  It was
impressive.  Still, this one should hold its own in normal movie theatres as
well.
     Bruce Willis.  The man "is an enigma"?  No.  He is a jerk.  Or, used to
be.  He started off really hot in MOONLIGHTING and kind of sputtered out.  We
won't even mention debacles like THE RETURN OF BRUNO and so forth.  However, in
DIE HARD the director probably said "Don't be doing Seagram's Wine Cooler
acting in here, or you're outta this flick."  Must've been a convincing
director.
     In my mind (and I'll bet the rest of you will feel the same as well),
Willis does a damned convincing job.  The character in which he is cast feels
pain, and goes through it for the people depending on him, and coincidentally
for the audience.  You can even feel for him.  In certain places, the acting
seems a bit contrived (as in when he seems to be going crazy going "what'll I
do?"), a bit pushed.  Other places (few as they were) were annoying with the
wonderful one-liner "Yippee-ki-ay, m*therf*cker!"  However, as a whole, he does
a damned convincing job in his role.
     Which is this: John McClain is a NYPD cop, either accidentally invited to
an office Xmas bash in LA, or he has gone out there to visit his separated wife
and kids...or both.  I'm still unclear on this; it'll come to me.  As he enters
the office tower where the party is going on (cutting out the first 15-minute
hullaballoo), an ingenious subplot is unfolding: a crafty, incredibly
knowledgeable team of experts want to get their hands on a lot of valuable
goodies locked inside a very tricky "safe" inside this building.  I won't relay
more detail because many of you probably have not seen this movie yet.  In
short, the team seals off the building from the inside, effecting a hostage
situation.  It's McLain's/Willis' job to get the people out in one piece, among
other things.  I've said too much already...go see it.  It's a another must
this summer.  It seems to be a little *too* high on action...seems to be
something happening every minute after the first 20...which is probably why the
few people who *were* somehow bored with this movie didn't leave (I'd guess 3,
out of a theatre of 1,000 or so).  The slow-motion cliffhanger sequence (sky-
scraper-hanger? ;^)) near the end was extremely well done in my opinion....
(Shhh!  Ok, ok...)  The amount of enforcer help summoned near the end seems a
bit ludicrous to me, as do the FBI agents attitudes....
     It has a fairly talented cast...not too many faces I recognized, but the
main baddie has a face from somewhere I am sure, and is *very* cold and *very*
calculating...a perfect villain, especially considering what he was supposed to
be portraying.  And one of his cronies, is that guy with the wonderfully...
*stormy* (good word!) face that was also the conductor in MONEY PIT (an
amusing, but strange comedy to see at 4AM)...I forget his name.  I am almost
100% positive he is Germanic.  But he is wonderful.  The end bit was a
*little* (cough...HA!) hard to believe, but...;^).  I remember now.  Alexander
Godunov.  He also co-starred in WITNESS (tri-starred?  4-starred?)

Title
Review for Batman (1989)
     It's hard to know where to start on a supposed blockbuster film such as
this.  It's been hyped up so much on rec.arts.movies it's ridiculous, and
there's been lots of controversy about whether or not Keaton would be able to
fulfill the role of the Dark Knight respectfully enough that it wouldn't be a
laughable thing.  In my opinion, at least, Keaton did a very good job,
bordering on excellent.  However, in all honesty, I would have to say this is
*definitely* Nicholson's movie.  Both actors did an excellent job of
captivating the attention, but Jack exuded an irresistible magnetism during his
parts that didn't allow my attention to waver at all.
     The beginning of the movie starts us off in Gotham City, which looks
busier than New York City during rush hour.  A family walks down a street
together, heads through a seamy alley, and gets mugged by a gang of hoodlums.
The hoodlums go to a nearby rooftop to count out their loot, and one begins to
express his fear about the mysterious creature that's been haunting the night
lately: the "Bat."  Apparently many of the 2-bit hoodlums in the city have been
plagued by the same vision, leaving the ambulance attendants who pick up the
nervous wrecks, as well as the policemen, in an utter state of confusion.  The
Batman has of course noticed this mugging and proceeds to stealthily "glide"
down upon them, a spooky sight if there ever was one for a criminal.  They
shoot him, and "Bat" falls down ... only to rise again in a few seconds,
sending the thieves into an utter state of terror.  After Batman dispatches one
of them, he dangles the other over the edge of a rooftop while the blubbering
thief pleads for his life.  The "Bat" says that he will not kill the man, but
that he wishes him to give a message to his friends that He is out there.  The
thief asks in a tremulous voice who he is, and the 2 simple words "I'm Batman."
send the theatre into spontaneous cheering and clapping.
     From then on we cover the newspaper angle a bit and discover Ms Vicki
Vale, a la Kim Basinger.  She is the staff photographer for a major magazine
and has come to Gotham to find out more about this mysterious Bat.  Ms
Basinger does an excellent job as Ms Vale, displaying her professionalism and
street-smartness as well as her personal side.
     Michael Keaton, as Bruce Wayne, does a very believable job of how Bruce
Wayne could actually be after the trauma of his parents being killed.  He is
first seen during a charity bash he is hosting, and his mansion looks as big as
a fabled English castle.  Wealthy beyond belief, he seems initially quite
cheerful and lighthearted, but as the movie progresses, we see more of the real
Wayne: serious, concentrated, and locked inside a world of his vow: to stop
crime.  Ms Vale's initial opinion of Mr.  Wayne before having met him is a
vain, egocentrical playboy; after having met him, however, is another matter....
     And of course, Jack Nicholson.  Jack begins as Jack Napier, a very
powerful criminal apparently, pulling capers in the city, paying police
kickbacks to keep them off his case, and seems to be an underling of a crime
boss, Grissom, who is played by Jack Palance.  Grissom apparently decides Jack
has outlived his usefulness and cleverness to him, and asks him to personally
supervise the robbery of a chemical plant.  After Jack and company leave to
plan said robbery, Grissom telephones the police and tips them off to it.  In
the ensuing police shootout, the criminals almost escape, except who should
show on the scene but Batman (what a surprise).  Batman corrals the majority of
criminals quickly and almost nabs Jack, except for the fact that as he nabs
Jack, Jack's right-hand man nabs Commissioner Gordon, along for the sting, and
threatens to blow his brains out.  After Batman lets him go, Jack kills a
police lieutenant (the one who he had paid the money kickback to), and the
Batman comes back to apprehend him.  Jack fires a bullet, it bounces off
Batman's body armor and shatters a nearby gauge, which send shrapnels of glass
into Jack's face, at which point Jack falls over a railing and Batman catches
him.  Unfortunately, Jack happens be over a chemical tank loaded with
chemicals, apparently part of which is a nerve gas the government had banned
from use some years back.  Whether it was Batman's conscious decision, or
whether he could not hold on, we cannot say; but Jack falls into the chemical
tank ... and later arises.  He goes to a back-alley surgeon who tries to doctor
him up as best he can, but he cannot undo the nerve damage Jack has suffered
to his face: it has fixed his face in an unalterable grin.  Going a little
nutso at this point, the Joker is born.  
     The movie is fraught with battle, murder and spectacular special effects;
interspersed with the secondary storyline, which is the developing relationship
with Bruce and Vicki, and as it turns out later, the Joker.  Apparently the
Joker has developed the hots for Ms Vale as well and means to make her his
own.  The interaction between the 3 is very well done; especially with the
Joker's twisted insanity.  One of the funniest parts of the movie is when the
Joker is in an art gallery with his goons, on the way to Ms Vale.  One of
them is carrying a boom box (with, of course, the Batman soundtrack inside!
:^), and watching the Joker and his goons caper and dance about is worth the
price of admission itself.  The battle scenes are quite well done, with martial
artists, climatic fist-fights, and the wonderful array of gadgets the Batman
has, including the Batcave (complete with real live bats, the only question is,
who did he get to construct it?), the Batplane (a marvelous collection of
gadgets inside a sleek stealthy plane in the shape of (what else?) a bat), and
of course, the fabled Batmobile.   Some of the effects with the Batmobile were
done with computer graphics, I'm convinced, like the Batmobile's shields to
protect it from harm.  It's quite a stunning piece, as are the rest of Batman's
gadgets.  However, it is the acting (which it should be in all good movies)
which gets the movie it's excellent rating.  The final battle between the Joker
and the Batman is quite impressive, and proves Batman to be a mere mortal after
all; in fact, in some places, Batman gets out of his inevitable death by sheer
luck.  And as we find that Batman "created" the Joker (SPOILER!),
we discover the Joker has also, in effect, "created" the Batman.  In the
interests of leaving this movie a bit of a mystery, I'll leave it for you all
to watch.
     Give this one 4 to 4.5 out of 5 stars.  Excellent movie, and possibly the
best "blockbuster" movie of the summer.  Go see it.  Today.  Now.
[ Steve Kramer-Always go out with a :^)| "Those toys. Where does he get those ]
[ kramer@tramp.colorado.edu            | wonderful toys?" Nicholson, "Batman" ]
[..!(ncar.nbires)!boulder!tramp!kramer | internet: kramer@tramp.colorado.edu  ]
