Authors
Kevin Leung
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Dung che sai duk (1994)
There are no films like ASHES OF TIME, or perhaps its influences are
just too many.  It is Faulkner's THE SOUND AND THE FURY, maddeningly
oblique, overlapping vignettes told in diverging styles and points of
view.  It is Salvatore Dali's "The Persistence of Memory," perception
of space and time all bent out of shape, droopy, melancholic.  It is
Claude Monet, its scenes composed in bold broad strokes, pushing at
sensations directly experienced, the blur of consciousness.  It has the
mystery and discreet charm of LAST YEAR AT MARIENBRED and the fin de
siecle rage of THE WILD BUNCH.  Wong Kar-Wai's 1994 masterpiece has
all these elements and much more.  Half a dozen storylines intersect,
drift apart, are illuminated by literary allusions, linked by ironic
intimations of destiny and fate.  Time runs in circles, dilate, becomes
sublimal, or frozen in pastiches.  Characters spontaneously age ten years,
transform into their male/female alter egos, or the object of someone
else's romantic obsession; they scale the heights of triumph and plumb
the depths of despair, they are at the mercy of the elements, their
fortunes blowing in the wind.  There are enough materials and ideas
to furnish half a dozen films, and these are held together, barely and
brilliantly, by the sheer force of Wong's artistic vision and the heroics
of his editing crew.  The project is staggeringly ambitious, but its
roots goes back to the origins of cinema -- 24 frames of still pictures
a second, too fast for the human eye to separate, give the illusion of
continuity.  And so, by the raw speed of images sent in collision, ASHES
OF TIME creates the appearance of unity and meaning where none exists.
Terse black on white credits.  Golden breakers crashing down on words as
old as the sea.  A quote from the Buddhist Canon, and then, in voice-over,
the famous first words in ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF SOLITUDE.  Two duellists
stand at face-off, their half smiles full screen, long hair in the wind,
the very picture of the exuberance of youth.  There is the clean hard ring
of metal unsheathed, and they are high in the air, swinging away; they
strike with such majestic, world-nihilating power, where their blades cross
mountains shudder and the earth moves.  And it would be the last time the
two friends draw their swords in combat in the film (Cantonese title,
literally: "Evil East and Malicious West") named after them.
Many years later they would become the elder statesman and arch villain in
Jin Yong's martial art romances.  As the literary prequel, ASHES OF TIME
portrays these archetypal swordsmen as not so young men, their future
darkened and their wings clipped.  Melodramatic, larger than life, Jin's
most popular titles chronicle the apprenticeship, romance, tribulations,
and ultimate triumph of his young heroes.  His books idealize loyalty and
chivalry, family honor and national pride -- Chinese traditions perhaps
long forgotten in the island of merchants that is Hong Kong.  At the same
time, he champions radical individualism and sentimentality -- the perfect
escapist cure for the colony's suffocating corporate culture.  No one
works for a living in his novels, true love lasts a life time, martial
artists can defeat thousands and leap over trees, but are always hopeless
when it comes to matters of the heart.  The heady mixture makes Jin's
books enormously popular across age groups and gender divides.  The genre
is probably the most treasured literary form in the former British colony,
notwithstanding the fact that most of its authors are from Taiwan.  The
film is darker, more visionary.  Nothing lasts in ASHES OF TIME.  Everyone
lives for himself, there is little honor or loyalty, and (this being Wong
Kar Wai's allegory about the island of political orphans saddled with
uncertain future and ambiguous past) there is not a hint of family life or
jingoistic drum-beating.  From a grand simplicity of human motivations
-- distilled to love and death -- Wong elevates the city state's alienation
into myth.  ASHES OF TIME is ultimately as quintessentially Hong Kong as
the sword-fighting genre it debunks, but it also draws heavily from the
traditions of European art cinema, American Westerns, and Japanese samurai
epics.  The inspired amalgam of Eastern and Western influences is part and
parcel of what makes this, in my opinion, easily the greatest film ever
created in Hong Kong.
The story takes place in the desert, a land of mirage, a testing ground,
where travellers confront their fate and the anti-Christ lives out his
apprenticeship.  East (Tony Leung, THE LOVER), a one-time womanizer,
is reduced to a passive, melancholic observer, while West (Leslie Cheung,
DAYS OF BEING WILD) has become a pimp for killers.  He is not yet the
devil incarnate in Jin Yong's novel, in his frown you can still see
concern for his contract hitmen, although he would never lift a finger
to help.  He is a fascinating figure, nihilistic, superstitious, the
chief narrator of the film and commentator on the follies of his clients
-- only much later is it revealed how much of his cynicism stems from
personal wounds.  When the film begins, East has his memories erased by a
"magic wine" and stumbles zombie-like to his home-town, where he runs into
his former best friend, a swordsman now approaching blindness, and the
swordsman's wife he has seduced during her honeymoon.  The dead-pan,
darkly comic memory-loss episodes seem to be more sly references to
ONE HUNDRED YEARS OF SOLITUDE.  Gabriel Garcia Marquez's magnum opus
has long been adopted as a fable of the colony's political fortunes --
an entire series of minimalist plays, loosely based on the novel, were
staged in the 80's -- but more to the point, its inexorable fatalism
and its enigmatic, self-defeating characters are the perfect frames of
reference for ASHES OF TIME.  The casting in this film are quintessential
Wong Kar-Wai: Tony Leung (CHUNGKING EXPRESS), in the traditional Andy
Lau role, plays the stalwart blind hero who is cursed from birth and can
never find fulfillment; Karina Lau, as his wife, reprises her love-starved
character in DAYS OF BEING WILD; Jackie Cheung is once again the Kid
with the hair-trigger temper and the fast draw; Brigitte Lin, a relative
new-comer to Wong but has many gender-ambiguous characters on her resume,
plays Yin, the vain-glorious crown princess of a fringe nation who can't
quite come to terms with her heritage.  Maggie Cheung has a small,
uncredited late appearance, but in many ways her character is the emotional
core of the film.  In the best traditions of myth, these fallen angels and
wayward knights have their personalities engraved on their coats-of-arms.
Yin is as self-limiting as her birdcage, the Kid is as straight-forward as
his camel, while Karina Lau's long suffering character is always knee-deep
in water, so that she seems to be wallowing in a river of her own tears.
There is also Charlie Young, vulnerable and stubbornly bent on revenge,
armed with *both* a basket of eggs and a mule, who plays a Kieslowskisque
foil to the protagonists' mindsets.  West cruelly suggests she prostitute
herself to raise money and hire a killer; the blind swordsman, buried in
his own sorrows, ignores her; while the Kid, naive and chivalrious, would
eventually put life and limbs at her service.
But these sharply drawn individuals gradually lose their definition.  What
draws them together are their rootlessness, their lack of history and
concrete heritage; their company gives each other a temporary sense of
belonging even as it makes them interchangeable, sadly blended together.
They are always referred to as "this man, that woman," even in the rare
cases that they actually have names.  Their ill-fated romances are always
linked with peach blossom, the women all have water signs and are awash
in tears, while the men all have the sign of the windmill, are bent on
exploring the land beyond the next mountain, until the day their beloved
leave them, whereupon they are stuck in the desert with nowhere left to
go.  They are all men, all women, all suffering from the same disease,
forever searching for emotional anchors.  "Perhaps they don't have better
things to do," West observes dryly.  The Kid is more optimistic: "there
is always someone waiting for you back home."  Yes, but this being Wong's
film, it will always be the wrong person doing the waiting.  In a recurring
dream sequence, West desperately, violently grasps on to Maggie Cheung on
her wedding night; in her drunken stupor, Yin mistakes West for East and
slips her hand inside his tunic, while he pretends the hand to be someone
else's; the blind swordsman forces a kiss on the girl with the eggs on
the eve of his last battle; far away, his estranged wife takes out her
displaced passion on a black stallion, her bare legs arched back, caressed
by the shimmering light on the walls of the cavern reflecting off the water
underneath.  Cinematographer Christopher Doyle has such fine hands.
The first vignette of the film is shot in seemingly random flashbacks,
as if seen from Yin's overheated imagination; it is as out of kilter as
she is schizophrenic.  Jilted by East, Yin's superego (her "brother," i.e.,
she herself in male disguise) puts a price on East's head, while her id,
clinging on to the notion she is East's "most beloved" -- her only claim
to identity -- asks to be rid of the the brother instead.  The two halves
of her splintered psyche petition West daily in an increasingly bizarre
game of one-upsmanship while he bemusedly looks on.  Wong evidently has
great sympathy for the poor mad girl -- Faye Wong's waif in CHUNGKING
EXPRESS would be a benign version of the same character -- and this
segment boasts some of the most lyrical images in the entire film.  One
night, insolently drunk, Yin drains her saucer and tosses up a huge china
moon staring down impartially on shattered plates and a broken soul struck
dumb by wonder.  Terrence Malick would not have shot that scene better.
The wine may as well be the memory-erasing wine, for it washes away the
last shreds of her sanity.  With exquisite classical restraint the
haughty princess slowly caresses the length of West's body laying there
feigning sleep, and she has the hands of a harpist.  When morning comes
the birdcage lies broken and the spirit flown, and henceforth she is always
found slashing at her reflections in the water, forever trying to scratch
out her other half that fills her with such loathing.  They say that water
cures you of your madness, but it is too perfect a mirror, and in its
depths the seeds of dissolution fester.
For its sheer technical virtuosity, and its innovative, subjective depiction
of space and time, the blind swordsman's story is a modern classic that
should be enshrined in textbooks.  As a parable of man working against fate,
about human dignity in the face of certain defeat, it has all the nobility
of JEAN DE FLORETTE condensed into twenty minutes.  Wong's desert battle
evokes a dozen American and Japanese masters, but it has a lyricism all his
own -- in his films, the specter of windswept curtains invariably announces
the coming of tragic deaths.  Time grates so heavily on the skin as the
samurai holds vigil each night in a ruined cottage, waiting by a candlelight
for the enemies he can no longer see.  Penniless, his eyes failing, he has
agreed to ambush some highwaymen, hoping to get home in time to watch one
more peach blossom.  (West's commentary: "flowers bloom with the seasons,
but no one knows when the bandits will arrive"; somehow it comes as a shock
that so corrupt a mind is capable of so pure a thought.)  When he finally
rides out for the mercenary war, accompanying him are only the drying
tears of a woman who is not his woman, and the urging of the elegiac battle
hymn.  The attack comes in broad daylight.  The bandits ride huge and
mythical out of a slow rise, an entire army of them.  At first the samurai
can use his mobility and the wide open space to neutralize the bandits'
numbers, and the editing, the flow of the scene are athletic.  Then the
sky darkens, his eyesight falters, and the sword fight collapses to
impossible close quarters, the flailing bodies and agonized grunts shot
in excruciating slow motion.  When the first attackers are dispatched,
there is a lull, the clouds open, and he sees his fate.  In the middle
distance the dismounted dragoons have formed up in a ragged battle line
that blurs and multiplies and coaleases until it turns into an entire
human forest.  It stretches all the way to the far side of the cottage,
surrounding him on all sides.  His smile could be one of recognition or
merely fierce pride, and soon enough it gives way to a grimace.  He charges,
right at the center of the advancing second wave.  The denouement, a
Brechtian note of resignation and wonder, could be the perfect epitaph for
all of Wong's existential heroes who die young.
The Kid has a name -- it marks him the seventh son of a rural family --
but he comes from nowhere and does not wear shoes.  West recruits him to
complete the Task set forth by his Predecessor, but he never trusts the
new hitman, for an astrologist has warned that his death would be linked to
the unlucky number.  This vignette serves as a fascinating study of the
notion of chivalry that drives young people like Seven to martial arts.
In a precious shot, lasting perhaps two seconds, Wong reveals what may
lie beneath the nameless, faceless masks of banditry Jin Yong's heroes
slaughter by the thousands to rescue their damsels in distress, thereby
thoroughly debunking the fame and glory that only comes with high body
count.  Meantime Seven drives away his country wife who has followed him
to the desert, while the local pretty girl with the eggs beseeches him
to avenge her brother's death at the hands of the Colonel's bodyguards.
Aided by West's tactical advice, Seven blows out of a sandstorm and
annihilates the entire regiment of bandits.  Soon wind blown gravels
cover up the bodies, and the killings, like the machine-gunning at Garcia
Marquez's mythical train station, may well have never happened.
He is upon the bodyguards while they sit sipping wine, an angry god on
a rampage, out to meter justice on the Chinese almanac's Day of Atonement.
The fight is the same senseless revenge-by-proxy Andy Lau would enact a
millenium later in AS TEARS GO BY, and even the seedy watering hole
looks exactly the same.  The perspective has evolved, becoming more
objective, affording multiple interpretations -- the sure sign of a
mature artist's work.  Like the previous fight, this desperate melee is
shot entirely in impressionistic montages, as if by their sheer savagery
these suicidal furies have broken through some speed barrier to a
netherworld where leaping assassins are blurred shadows, spurting blood
are frozen paint drops, and shattered straw hats and wind swept sand dust
are angry brush strokes stopped dead in their tracks.  Or perhaps all this
is merely a cinematic realization of the Buddhist saying immortalized in
the film's prologue, which in retrospect seems so utterly appropriate:
The fight costs him dearly; he will not use his sword again.  But
(despite his resemblence to other Jackie Cheung incarnations) Seven
is also a new paradigm, never before seen in Wong's films.  He is not
afflicted with the Curse, and would live to laugh about his losses.
"The difference between you and me," he tells West, "is that you will
never risk anything for an egg."  In one stroke he has repudiated both
West and Yin.  Values do not derive from monetary worth, any more than
identity derives from external sources.  His apprenticeship is over.
>From then on he is his own person, a modern day Orestes, the doer of
the deed.  One can only speculate how much the director identifies with
the character the film loves.  Wong is himself the "unsophisticated"
China immigrant turned enfant terrible of Hong Kong cinema, the star
of an industry that honors him but will never completely embrace
his talents, the world class artist and intellect of a city state that
never has much use for either.  ASHES OF TIME was two years in the
making, shot on locations all over China, its rare huge budget a largesse
of DAYS OF BEING WILD's success; Wong shot it like he had a score to
settle, like he wielded his sword in the proverbial wind.  He went for
it all, and there was never any question any one scene would be less than
shoot-the-lights-out brilliant.  This is truly one of the great films of
our time.  I sincerely hope it gets a proper stateside release.  Given
his preference for small films, it is unlikely the reigning Cannes film
festival best director will try something on this scale any time soon.
But there is the story of one more person to unravel before director,
characters, and cast can move on.  She is the excuse for East's melancholy,
the origin of Yin's murderous rage, the reason for West's self-imposed
exile.  In five minutes' screen time her presence threads together all
segments of the film and then releases the knot, allowing the protagonists
to go their own way.  The role can only be entrusted to Maggie Cheung,
Wong's special actress since his first film.  In the full glory of her
bridal red she is an angel, far removed from the struggles of the other
earth-colored mortals.  She is the same woman she has played in Wong's
previous films, the woman born in backwater towns (Lantau Island in AS
TEARS GO BY, Macau in DAYS OF BEING WILD), the embodiment of pastoral
beauty, the closest thing his disaffected heroes have to the idea of
Home.  There is no doubt she might once have found adventure with Wong's
leading men, and I always imagine her looking longingly at the far end
of the horizon, where presumably the water ends and the clouds begin.
She is much older now, her face looks too red and unwell; the longing
is replaced by a wistfulness, born of the realization that her chance
for happiness has passed by.  Looking across the water she muses about
what might have been, while East supplies his own succinct observations
in voiceover.  The two sing-song voices blend and alternate with perfect
harmony, and they finally seem to make order out of the rampant self-
deceptions and bitter pride that has ruined so many lives in the film.
But the epiphany is a false one; it does not belong to the characters,
only the audience.  For something like five straight minutes the camera
peers mercilessly into her eyes while she does her soul-searching, and
Ms. Cheung's performance here is one for the ages, one that I will never
forget.  Her brief appearance is in effect a summation of Wong's first
phase of filmmaking.  Since then she has not returned to his films, and
his later works have yet to find a comparable center of gravity.
Her departure from the film is shattering, and not just emotionally.
At last it is revealed that she is the one who has sent the magic wine
at her deathbed.  Therefore the film's hidden center has been deceased
the whole time, all pretense to a chronological narrative is wiped out,
and all the bloodshed, the exiles, the madness, they have all been in vain.
Thereafter revelations rush by in a blur, the images become more allusive,
the scenes increasingly elliptical.  It takes this native Cantonese
speaker half a dozen viewings to sort through the disjointed narrative,
but then again, no one ever needed to count the petals to appreciate Monet's
waterlilies.  Figures appear in the distance, squating, riding on horse
back, split between land and water, their inverted reflections towering
in the high desert heat.  These seem like characters we already know, or
maybe they are merely mirages in the sand.  Another recurring image has the
desert mariner at his wind-filled flagstaff, watching the ravishes of
time disguised as dancing lights unfolding like a sea change.  At last
West drinks the magic wine, and goes on delivering his sales pitches as
before.  It is the same pitch that opens the film, and yet subtly
different; maybe the end of the film is also its beginning, or perhaps
it is merely part of the eternal recurrance.  When he learns of the
passing of his beloved, he tells us, in the same chilling matter-of-fact
voice, about his two-days vigil.  We watch with him the miracle at sundown,
the heavens on fire on the far rims of the horizon, the sky darkening,
dissolving into montages of a burnt out grey dawn.  And then the flames
started again.  All this time we never get to see his eyes.
When Christopher Doyle photographs fire or the roaring sea he shoots full
screen, in primary colors, for extra duration and exposure, as if it needs
be emphasised the forces of nature possess a vivacity, a permanence, a
fullness of being Wong's tormented characters can never dream of attaining.
Another year, another spring; West burns down his dilapidated cottage
[the almanac that day -- Courier rides, Mars ("Fire," the red planet)
chases Venus ("Gold"), Auspicious westward], heads back to his home town,
and becomes the terror of western China.  With no more ties to desert,
East has long departed; he would cement his reputation as the premier
swordsman along the eastern seaboard, then retire to an island, and father
the bright-eyed heroine of Jin Yong's novel.  As for Seven, I suppose
nothing ever ties him down, and he too has long gone, camel and wife in
tow (i.e. he has to terms with his heritage, such is the economy of Wong's
sleight of hand), eventually to become the eccentric Great Northern Beggar,
the righteous leader of thousands, and mentor to Jin's young hero.  The
day he and West part company, "Pole star presides, the wind blows south,"
boiling stratus embellishes a time-lapsed dream; Seven deliberately heads
into the north wind as West looks on, and that long look cements the
covenant, foretold by astrologers and flashed in subtitles across the
screen, and which martial arts genre afictionidoes already know all along
-- that thirty years hence West and his one-time protege would duel to
mutual destruction at the climax of Jin's epic chronicles.  It is an
intimiation of destiny fulfilled, mankind vindicated.  Perhaps some day
Wong's characters will find peace and destiny that are theirs, not
imposed by "fate"; perhaps his angry, violent, alienated heroes, never
afraid of death, will at last find something worth dying for.  This is
more than good enough for now.  In ASHES OF TIME Wong has finally given
my birthplace something it never had: a cinematic Great Novel, an epic
poem for the dispossessed; a requiem for the dead, and anthem for the
living.  The epilogue is as purely cinematic and brilliant as anything
else in the film, and the absences are just as significant as what appears
on screen.  We find East, years later, facing down an army of assailants;
Seven, brandishing in his ruined hands the light club that would bring
him fame; Yin, steep in her madness now, waltzing with the corpse of a
dead swan; and West, his long hair flying, sword drawn, last seen
slaughtering his enemies in a vicious Dragon Inn melee, his still youthful
smile registering genuine pleasure, even surprise, at his own personal
well-being.  Their exploits are legend, written in the Books; their
personalities become archetypal, celebrated forevermore.  As for the blind
swordsman fighting for a last chance to see his hometown, his estranged
wife, and the woman with a face the color of a defiant, dying peach
blossom -- they do not get their second chance on earth, and they are not
seen or heard from, but their stories live on in Wong's silver-etched
memories.

Title
Review for Trois couleurs: Rouge (1994)
     Perhaps the opening sequence could have been more subtle.  That is
the only criticism I have of Kieslowski's last film, a glorious
celebration of the art of cinema and the vagaries of life, and a
tantalizing meditation on intersection between the two.  Elegiac,
self-referential, and full of world-weary wisdom and irony, RED is
widely considered an update of THE TEMPEST, with Kieslowski as
stage-manager/magician conjuring up sea-wraths, weaving intricate webs
of fate that link unsuspecting strangers and reconcile present to
past.  But the director, ever respectful of human freedom, would be
loathe to stuff alien words into his characters' mouths; instead, the
magic is mostly in the shades of light, the camera angles, the oblique
story-telling--the stuff of pure cinema.  Irene Jacob's character
(Valentine) comes upon dark suspicions, and shadows obscure her face;
Jean-Louis Trintigant's retired judge sets to unveal his secrets, and
the afternoon sun breaks through into his mauloseum-mansion.
Thunderbolts interrupt the "conversation in the theater," thus evoking
the Judge's tumultuous past and prefiguring an impending catastrophy in
one stroke, illuminating one brief moment in time against all
eternity.  The all-reflecting panes of glass that frame the characters'
isolation have never been more pristine, more revealing; every
coincidence, every glance out the window is a destiny missed, and every
turn into a side street is an adventure bursting with significance--as
if revelation is just around the corner.  Kieslowski does not invent
the conventions; the originality in RED lies in the exceptional power
of the symbols and imagery, and the propriety with which they fit into
the narrative, anticipating/recalling each other, until they seem to
sustain and animate the film all by themselves.  Indeed the color red,
in the guise of a Landrover, is used prominently as the vector of
narrative.  Nominally about "fratenity," in the master's hand it also
becomes the color of betrayal, of breathless expectations, a warning;
very early in the film (following the first fashion show), the
oppressive array of red objects and road-map of cautionary signs and
flashing lights (paced by Zbigniew Preisner's breath-taking score)
combine to establish a mood almost oracular in intensity that will
never go away.  The crafty director is not above throwing in red
herrings either: the red jacket is on the *other* fashion model as the
surprised camera pulls away; it tracks down Valentine as she glides
down the runway and then--with characteristic Kieslowskian
modesty--almost trips and falls on her high spiked heels.  In fact the
entire film has this disposition of a precisely choreographed fashion
show graced with humanizing glitches; it is a cosmic fairy tale told
with the power and certainty (as Dave Kehr suggested in "Film Comment")
of planetary alignment, yet it is also one that finally repudiates
design in favor of freedom and the chaos of life.  Kieslowski has set
out to create a masterpiece, and who can deny he has created the
cinematic landmark of the 1990's.  All in all, it seems like an
appropriate note on which to end his brilliant career.
     It is springtime in Geneva, but Joseph Kern's garden is full of
fallen leaves.  Tormented by guilt and sunk in irony and indifference,
he is really more Camus' judge-penitent than Kafka's Joseph K.
Trintigant gives a supremely controlled portrait of this black-hole of
accumulated cynicism, a deeply withdrawn man incapable of giving
anything away; only his still clear eyes reveal the madness that must
have burnt away so much of his life.  Having given up his worldly
titles, the Judge holds the world in contempt and spends his days
eavesdropping on his neighbors' phone-calls.  He is an impressive
wizard of technology, and his command of weather conditions, planetary
motion, and daylight also seems downright supernatural; but mostly he
is a haggard, bitter old man whose lightbulbs are running out.
Valentine is his opposite: she is open and radiant, the poster-girl of
red-blooded youthfulness that gives so much life and inspiration to the
film.  She meets Kern through an accident, when she runs over his
German shepherd while she is distracted by interference on her car
radio.  Initially Kern sends woman and dog away, prompting her to call
on him to "stop breathing." Later he sets her up to "discover" his
voyeurism; the display of self-flagellation is evidently meant as
revenge for his loss of idealism, to be wrecked upon the guileless of
the world.  His scheming fails, for Jacob/Valentine's face is finally
too sympathetic, and her compassion for him is too genuine.  The
subtle, poignant, and finely-nuanced portrayal of their emerging
friendship is reminiscent of the story-telling technique of the best
parts of BLUE.  Valentines tells Kern about her troubled brother, her
fears and admonitions; he gradually reveals his tribulations and guilt,
and tells her the story of his unfaithful lover who died in a
car-wreck.  He says he dreams of her (Valentine), and sets out to free
her from the cold comfort of her displaced, destructive love affair.
Round the corner from her apartment lives the earnest Auguste, a sort
of young, unspoiled "double" for Kern, whom Kern learns about while
spying on phone calls.  Not only is Auguste also involved in a ruinous
relationship, but it is clear that he shares Kern's dubious taste for
self-pity and futility.  (Kieslowski's concise characterization of
Auguste--using just scraps of dialog and a few short scenes--has the
clarity of self-knowledge.) Only the fairy-tale maiden Valentine can
save him from a fate like Kern's, but they stubbornly keep missing each
other in the streets, as though they were ciphers in an Altman tale.
It is finally up to the Judge to take drastic measures, to give them a
much needed hand on their way to their manifest destiny.
     RED is a fable about the mysterious, intangible links between
human beings, and as in THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE, these connections
are for the most part one-sided or blocked, if not missed completely
until too late.  There are the missed opportunities between Valentine
and Auguste, always a few heartbeats apart, and the miscommunications
between them and their respective ex-lovers.  Among the incidental
figures, Valentine's estranged brother Mark is always preying on her
mind.  Through the intercepted phone calls, we also learn about the
chasm between the closet-homosexual and his wife, as well as the
pathetic story of the attention-pandering elderly mother; these little
everyday tragedies seem to be growing in the air, flourishing behind
every closed door.  Kern, acknowledging his limited powers, tells
Valentine she can't live for others, but must just "be" (herself);
meanwhile he is secretly cultivating a redeeming love in the ruins with
the last summons of his powers.  It is amusing that Kieslowski chooses
the telephone as metaphor for both isolation and connectedness,
considering the days of wire-taps and crossed-up telephone lines he
must have endured in old communist Poland, where phone calls were
anything but private and insular.  Valentine, the crown jewel of a
Western culture that values individual freedom above all else, pleads
that "everyone deserves their privacy"; but when she calls at the gay
husband's home to blow the Judge's cover, she is shocked to find the
man's young daughter eavesdropping on the phone too, and seems none the
worse for having learned the terrible secret.  Perhaps people are more
complex and resilient, more understanding of others' weaknesses, than
the romantics and cynics would like to believe after all.  RED, the
most flamboyant and visually beautiful work among Kieslowski's films,
also has the most voyeurism, the most decrepit old women running around
with recycled bottles, as well as numerous other obscenities.  Death,
the greatest obscenity of them all, is present in particular
abundance.  It is as if beauty and its antithesis must exist side by
side, if not exactly in harmony, then at least with respectful
wariness, and a peculiar kind of grace.  During the second fashion
show, Valentine receives Kieslowski's coronation of light and is
showered with every tricks of flattery the camera can muster, and yet
she is completely distracted, scarcely thinking of herself at all, but
is looking all over for the disreputable dirty old man she has invited
to the show.  It is a remarkable scene, one that rivals in conception
and care the miraculous spinning shot from inside the tourist bus in
THE DOUBLE LIFE OF VERONIQUE.  It makes one wonder what divine grace
has given the young Jacob the centerpiece to two such memorable scenes
in a row.
     The conclusion to RED is more daring than the ending in BLUE, more
revelatory than that of WHITE, and far more subtle and mysterious than
both of them combined.  Valentine, Auguste, as well as Julie and her
assistant in BLUE and Dominique and Karol of WHITE are all assembled on
board the same ferry.  The thunderstorm, gathering force all this time
on (Auguste's unfaithful lover) Karin's computer screen, unleashes its
fury, killing all one thousand people aboard--only the principle
characters of the trilogy and an unknown English barman survive.  Also
perishing in the tragedy are Karin and her new beau yachting nearby,
but Kieslowski would only let us sympathize with Auguste's drowned pet
dog.  The Judge impassively follows the rescue on television; just
moments earlier he has been cradling his shepherd's new born puppies.
Safely landed, Auguste at last meets Valentine, whom he already knows
from her larger-than-life poster hoisted over Geneva.  The likeness of
that poster--Valentine's mystery-haunted profile caught in a blaze of
red--momentarily regenerates before him in freeze-frame.  The Judge
looks out the window, a shade more weary now, having passed one more
sentence too many; he allows himself a hint of softness in the eyes,
betraying the fondness expressed in his farewell and his gift of life.
He will not see her again.  With that, Kieslowski's long procession of
magicians and demigods--the camera buff transforming people and objects
into celluloid, the puppeteer Alexander honing his telepathy--have
worked their capricious deeds for the last time.  It is probably moot
to ask whether the Judge has condemned the many or spared the few.
Some die, others live on, and life regenerates itself--these are the
rules that the director's characters have always lived by.  On these
very terms, the dead Weronica sends warning to Veronique, her double,
and Ulla (NO END) is saved by her husband's ghost; Julie consents to
destroying the baby mice in her apartment in BLUE, and in return grants
legitimacy to the unborn child of her late husband's mistress.  Ignored
by them all, the decrepit old woman follows her relentless recycling to
all corners of the world.  Kieslowski's mythicism, dismissed as "new
age" by some frivolous critics, is ultimately as old as the Book of
Ecclesiastes, just as the conclusion to the trilogy is as harsh and
arbitary as the story of Eve.  Still, it is a tremendously moving and
fitting ending, the likes of which I doubt I'll ever see again.  Like
BLUE and WHITE before it, RED brilliantly subverts the ideal that the
color represents, turning the abstraction of universal comradeship into
the mutual congratulations of the lucky surviving few.  But if life in
our times is truly the uninterrupted aftermath of car accidents and
shipwrecks that Kieslowski's vision seems to suggest, then I suppose we
can all be doing a lot worse.

Title
Review for Homo Faber (1991)
     The first few minutes of THE VOYAGER is revealing of everything
that is to come.  It opens black-and-white, outside a generic 50-ish
airport populated by generic 50-ish people and automobiles.  The
voyager shows up, hugs this handsome woman farewell, sits down in the
utterly familiar waiting room, and buries his head in his hands in a
sea of felt hats and cigarette smoke, thinking of a certain woman who no
longer exists.  He does not want to be there or anywhere.  Then color
filters back on screen as the camera takes him two months back in time,
to another waiting room straight out of faded photographs, poised to
miss another plane.  Over and over again the film would echo this
strong sense of spatial dislocation, address the circular nature of
time, narrate the story as some sort of a chronicle of a death foretold
and of human endeavors foredoomed, and enhance it with flashbacks and
voice-overs by someone precisely situated in a certain period in history
and thus make the events twice removed from us, and do all of these with
plenty of sardonic humor and self-irony.  It is a good, solid beginning
for (in my opinion of course) an much overlooked, excellent film.
     Sam Shepard plays the voyager, Walter Faber, a globe-trotting
American engineer who sets his bearings by his faith in technology and
treats metaphysics as an exercise in the laws of probability.  He
carries with him a bored, presumptuous air which of course makes him
irresistible to women.  We watch him snatched and shepherded aboard a
gorgeous propeller plane, turn into an entry in plane-crash statistics
(things definitely *happen* to him), survive the landing, and become
witness to a suicide in a strange land -- all appropriately meaningless
and absurd, except that they call to him memories of a woman he once
knew before the war, Hanna, whom he sees in crisp flashbacks.  He
returns to civilization, haunted by memories.
     The "train of coincidence" runs on; he hops on a boat to France to
escape a female acquaintance and to resume his anonymous, moment-to-
moment existence atop the bell-shaped curve.  Instead, he runs into a
young woman (Julie Delpy, of EUROPA, EUROPA) he names "Sabeth" whom
reminds him of his lost love.  He sees more flashbacks (the film would
gracefully unfold simultaneously on parallel tracks twenty years apart
in time and unerringly converge to an ending we can easily guess but
will find spellbinding all the same).  She is something of an paradox,
this Sabeth, terribly young and vulnerable, a lover of ancient art and
its timeless mysteries, and at the same time devoted to Camus and
Sartre, those unabashedly contemporary writers who write of freedom and
transparency and of experiences created ex-nihilo, unencumbered by a
troublesome past.  He sees her a lot, and there are some delicate scenes
of glances exchanged in crowded ballrooms and slow-dancing on the
moonlit deck.  (The soundtrack is moody but very pretty.)  Stranded on
an oceanliner in the middle of the Atlantic, the voyager who shuns
entanglements finds himself locked on to this young woman, a beckon that
arose from the depths of his past and destined to guide him to complete
an act of destruction he set into motion some twenty years ago.
     They land in Paris where Faber delivers speeches on the Future of
Mankind and stalks Sabeth in art museums.  They encounter the
inevitable scuffles in Parisian cafes and graffiti protesting the
Algerian war.  The heart of the film consists of the couple's journey
across the continent, from metropolitan Paris, through blazing
wheat-fields in the south of France, to nameless historic Roman ruins
in Florence and Rome, finally to arrive at the ancient villages of
Greece.  Along the way are scattered sequences of great tenderness and
discipline graced with extremely evocative camera work (this film is no
small-time affair, by the way, it is loaded with "production values"
and is very beautiful physically; unfortunately it falls into that
category somewhere between mainstream Americans and flashy, exotic
European hits like EUROPA, EUROPA or TOTO THE HERO and simply won't
attract crowds, which is a damned shame).  In Athens they are touched by
tragedy and reunite with Hanna; swiftly unfolding events bridge the
twenty years that separates them, and simultaneously the memories that
has been tormenting Faber passes into the present.  The acting is
particularly impressive in this more somber half of the film: e.g,.
Delpy's Sabeth sitting dry-eyed and crushed in the cafe where Faber
left her; Shepard and Barbara Sukowa's Hanna maneuvering to wait each
other out over dinner; it is all quite extraordinarily restrained and
dignified.
     There is something about the adaptation (or maybe it is the
cinematography) that makes the tale's symbolic dimension leap off the
screen and highlights the cyclic quality of this improbable tale of
strong-willed, self-centered people forging their fate only to get
ensnared by it.  Yet the characters never come across as mere
mechanical parts reenacting an ancient drama, nor do Faber's relations
with Sabeth or Hanna seem at any time less than genuine:
(The opening monologue, from memory.  It's quite different from the
passage in the book.  My guess is that Shepard, a decent playwright
himself, shortened it.)
     There is always this sense of the immediacy of *seeing*, of sights
and experiences so perishable they have to be captured with 8 mm's or
constantly rehashed in memory, of the moment-by-moment nihilating power
of Time, that absolutely transcends the premise of the story.  Yet Time
also has great viscosity, as Faber the technologist-modern man finds
out while getting caught in its backflow.  This tremendous tension (as
well as the memorable acting and effortless direction) makes watching
THE VOYAGER the most rewarding film experience I have in months.  I
recommend it without reservation, but don't ask me for refunds.
