Authors
Jonathan F Richards
Number of Reviews
16

Title
Review for Dogma (1999)
     When you're already laughing before the picture starts, it's a good
omen.  Kevin Smith, whose tilt at church dogma has already riled Catholic
legions and caused Disney to bail, has prefaced his movie with a disclaimer
suggesting that passing judgment is God's province and the rest of us
(critics included) should cut him some slack.  
    Most critics have, and I want in.  This is a hilarious movie, delicious
enough in its best moments to forgive occasional lapses in concentration
and (dare I say it) taste.  One cringes at even typing the word taste in a
review of a Smith movie ("Clerks", "Chasing Amy"); still, even amid this
riotous avalanche of obscenity and raunchy, merciless barbs at organized
religion, there are some tediously sophomoric gags -- the most obvious of
these a drawn-out poop monster scene that should have been flushed.  But
it's a small price to pay for the deceptive depth and originality of
"Dogma".
     Cardinal Glick (George Carlin) is reconsecrating his Red Bank, NJ
church as part of an effort to revitalize the image of Catholicism.  He's
replacing the depressing crucifix with a winking, grinning, thumbs-up
"Buddy Christ".  On the day of the rededication, everyone passing through
the Plenary Arch will, according to dogma, receive absolution and get
automatic entry to Heaven.  Two fallen angels (Ben Affleck and Matt Damon),
banished by God for all eternity to Wisconsin, spot a loophole: pass
through that arch and He will have to take them back.
     The downside?  This will prove God fallible, and the universe will be
obliterated.  
     Space and good sense prevent any further plot synopsis.  The actors
have fun: Affleck and Damon, Carlin, Linda Fiorentino as a disillusioned
Catholic who tithes her income from an abortion clinic to the Church, Chris
Rock as a Black apostle left out of scripture by a White conspiracy, Jason
Lee as a devil, Salma Hayek as a stripper/muse who inspired the 20 all-time
top-grossing movies except "Home Alone", Alan Rickman as God's mouthpiece
and Alanis Morissette as God Herself, plus Smith regulars Jay and Silent
Bob (Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith).
     At two hours plus, the pace doesn't always sustain, and it's certainly
not for everybody. But "Dogma" is far from anti-religion.  It's very
devout, and if anything has a weakness for preachiness, but its heart is in
the right place. "I have issues with anyone who makes faith a burden," says
Rock. 

Title
Review for Best Man, The (1999/I)
     "The Best Man" is a potboiler told with inoffensive slickness and
dependable moral values, and peopled with an attractive ensemble cast.  Its
paperback plot involves Harper (Taye Diggs), whose first novel is about to
be published as he heads for New York to be best man at his best friend's
wedding.  Advance copies are already circulating among the old college pals
who are the core of the wedding party.  Skeletons come tumbling out of
closets as his friends recognize themselves and the things they did in
college thinly disguised in Harper's autobiographical fiction.  Since one
of the things he did was sleep with the bride (Monica Calhoun), and since
the groom (Morris Chestnut) is Lance, a monster running back for the New
York Giants, this ill-timed early sampling of his roman-a-clef is
particularly awkward for Harper, although the alert viewer will be
wondering what the hell he thought the effect of his revelations would be
on his pals if they'd surfaced after the wedding.
First time writer/director Malcolm D. Lee has a terrible weakness for
exposition in the early scenes (which is where exposition traditionally
rears its ugly head.)  "Oprah wants my new unpublished novel *Unfinished
Business*" Harper sings out to his girlfriend Robin (Sanaa Lathan) as he
comes in the door.  When Lance is introduced, Lee gives us a long closeup
of the cross hanging around his neck, to establish his credentials as a
Christian running back, which we will find out anyway soon enough.
But once you get by the exposition, the talented and beautiful cast of
young African-American actors takes over and delivers a story of passions
and friendships and self-discovery that, while far from original, still
makes itself agreeable and satisfying.  Taye Diggs, the hunk from "How
Stella Got Her Groove Back" whose career is justifiably in meteoric rise,
smiles his jaw-to-jaw perfect smile and takes his shirt off and throws in
some good acting to boot.  There's no letdown with the other actors, with
the exception of Melissa DeSousa's gratingly bitchy Shelby, and
particularly good are Harold Perrineau as the sweetly unassertive Murch and
Terrence Howard as the sly, troublemaking Quentin.  There are no white
characters, which seems a little contrived in a group so pointedly
mainstream.  

Title
Review for Bounce (2000)
One of the most enduring sub-genres of the romantic movie is the one 
where the relationship is entered into by one of the parties under false 
pretenses, and a secret hangs over the proceedings like a dark cloud 
which is going to have to flash some lightning and rumble some thunder 
and get everybody wet before the skies clear and the lovers kiss and 
make up. Often it's a bet the guy's made that he can woo and win (or 
these days, bed) the girl. Sometimes it's something darker and more 
personal, as in this year's "Return to Me", where Minnie Driver keeps 
putting off telling David Duchovny that she's wearing his late wife's 
heart.20
Writer/director Don Roos, the indie auteur of the quirky "The Opposite 
of Sex", has chosen to fly these friendly skies in his second outing, a 
formulaic weeper that waffles between clever charm and awkward writing 
and is largely rescued by its two stars, Gwyneth Paltrow and Ben 
Affleck. Their job is made more difficult by some contrived situations, 
a few tin-eared speeches, and an end game with the subtlety of a rubber 
boat full of explosives. But these two have the talent, appeal, and 
chemistry (reinforced by real-life tabloid gossip) to almost pull it 
off.
It is a rule of movies that if somebody gives you his seat on a plane, 
that plane will surely go down, a rule Tony Goldwyn would have done well 
to brush up on. He doesn't, the plane does, and the result is a grieving 
widow in L.A., and a guilt-ridden ad exec, the guy who gave up the seat, 
watching the news in the Chicago airport hotel with a shapely stranded 
fellow traveler.
The air disaster sends Buddy Amaral (Affleck) into a downward spiral of 
alcoholism. He's part owner of "the hottest little ad agency on the 
coast," for whom he's just closed a contract with Infinity Airlines 
before their plane crashes. (Roos shows a weakness for meaningful names 
- Amaral is amoral, and infinity is just where the passengers go.) Heavy 
drinking leads Buddy into some inappropriate behavior vis-vis the 
client, and his partner/boss (Joe Morton) steers him into a rehab 
clinic.
When he gets out, it's been a year since the crash, and in running over 
his 12-step AA manual he is struck by #9, which enjoins him to make 
amends wherever possible. So he looks up the widow Abby (Paltrow) to see 
if there isn't something he can do for her, and it turns out there is. 
They meet cute, if you can find cuteness in the jaws of an attack 
Rottweiler, and he manages to throw some real estate business her way. 
(The dog's name is also Buddy, which raises complications, but none as 
great as those inherent in the name itself: a line like "What is it you 
want, Buddy?" hits the ear differently than it would if his name were, 
say, Howard.)
The movie takes pains to show the pains he takes not to get involved 
with her after his 9th step intervention, but the centrifugal force of 
true love is too strong. And soon we're in a Situation. Roos handles it 
well, with a slick romanticism reminiscent of the golden days of 
Hollywood when romantic clichE9s had a good name, when stars like Grant =
and Stanwyck and Stewart and Davis stamped their indelible personae on 
contrived smiling-through-the-tears material. Affleck and Paltrow are up 
to that standard. He makes a credible transition from glib, shallow jerk 
to sensitive male, and she handles her role with remarkable subtlety, 
rejecting easy sympathy while managing to show an irresistible 
vulnerability. It's a beautiful performance that confirms her 
Oscar-winning talents.
Movies are easier to begin than to end, but there's no excuse for the 
depths to which this one sinks in its plot-resolving scene, which 
involves courtroom testimony and Court TV. There have been problem 
moments before in the story, but after this clunker, even the winning 
grace of the actors can't keep it aloft, and the worn places begin to 
show like threadbare patches of carpet when the furniture is moved. 
There is also a sense of things inserted as plot devices, and of parts 
of characters and situations that may have been jettisoned to keep the 
bounces a little more buoyant.20
Still, for most of its modest length "Bounce" lopes along with the 
smooth, easy ride of a polished genre picture. On the whole Roos is 
better at the high points - when he goes for the tear ducts he falls a 
little short. The movie benefits from a solid supporting cast. Caroline 
Aaron is all knowing sympathy as Abby's best friend, the usually 
villainous Tony Goldwyn has a chance here to show his nice side, and the 
always-welcome Joe Morton is gruff but caring. Johnny Galecki as Buddy's 
brash recovering alcoholic gay assistant almost steals the show, except 
that his alcoholism and gayness, inserted as if meaningful, are never 
revisited.20
When the shoe falls, as it must, just before Buddy summons the courage 
to confess his secret, it falls with the kind of timing God leaves to 
screenwriters. But after all, it is a movie; and for all its failings, 
it's one that almost rises above pleasant to achieve the level of good.20

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
     Most of "Being John Malkovich" is such twisted,
through-the-looking-glass originality that you should have plenty of
tolerance to cushion a creative fall-away in the film's declining scenes. 
The premise itself is irresistible: Craig Schwartz (John Cusack) is an
out-of-work puppeteer who takes a job at a filing company located on the 7
1/2th floor of an office building, where he and fellow employees must stoop
as they negotiate the 5-foot-high corridors and offices.  There he
discovers a door hidden behind some filing cabinets, and this door leads
into the head of actor John Malkovich, where he can remain for 15 minutes
before being spit out on the side of the New Jersey Turnpike.  
Catherine Keener ("Living In Oblivion") is Maxine, the sexy and
contemptuous co-worker after whom Craig lusts, and with whom he sets up a
business to exploit this phenomenon.  Cameron Diaz, transformed into a
mousy brunette, is his pet-obsessed wife, who also lusts after Maxine after
she sees her through Malkovich's eyes from inside his head.  Orson Bean is
the owner of the filing company, a well-spoken man who is convinced by his
loopy receptionist (Mary Kay Place) that he has an impenetrable speech
impediment.  And Malkovich is Malkovich, and even he finds his way into the
secret portal and into his own head, resulting in a hall-of-mirrors scene
of mind-blowing self-reference.  
Music video vet Spike Jonze directs his first feature brilliantly from
Charlie Kaufman's hilarious screenplay.  The acting suits the warped world
perfectly; Cusack's unkempt obsessive puppeteer, Keener's cold tease of a
vamp (her legs are never together in the movie), Diaz's neurotic,
sexually-ambivalent frump, and Bean's cheerfully eccentric employer are all
inspired creations.  And John Malkovich's blandly compliant version of
himself may be the most weirdly original characterization of the bunch.
The less you know about the plot going in the more fun you'll have. 
Inspiration flags a bit at the end, but it's nothing serious.  The movie
raises a dizzying array of questions about identity, gender, morality, and
mortality; it makes you think while it makes you laugh.

Title
Review for Bringing Out the Dead (1999)
     The title of Martin Scorsese's new movie (adapted by Paul Schrader
from the bestseller by former paramedic Joe Connelly) reflects the grisly
cry of corpse-collectors in plague-stricken 18th century London: "Bring out
your dead!"  The New York City Scorsese shows us at the end of the 20th
century is gripped by no less deadly a plague; it is a nightmare world
crushed under an epidemic of drugs, violence, and indifference.
Scorsese is perhaps the most revered living American director, admired
by peers and critics for his mastery of the language of film.  And yet he
is a director with a deep and abiding propensity to disappoint.  In
"Bringing Out the Dead" he disappoints again, with a movie that lacks
narrative drive and coherence, but that still manages to pack plenty of
virtuoso filmmaking into its two hours.
At the center of things is Frank Pierce, a paramedic at the end of his
skein, played by Nicolas Cage in a stunned, anguished trance.  Pale of skin
and dark of eye, he looks as if he's been made up for a Tim Burton movie. 
Frank drives an ambulance through the streets of New York accompanied by a
series of partners, listening to emergency radio dispatches broadcast as
Altmanesque asides ("A woman has gone into cardiac arrest because a roach
has crawled in her ear and she can't get it out") and sometimes responding
to them.  
The action (you couldn't call it story) covers three nights in Frank's
disintegrating life.  On the first, he's called to try to revive a man
who's had a heart attack, and manages to get a heartbeat again after the
man's been dead for 20 minutes.  He's ambivalent about this ("I've come to
believe in spirits leaving the body and not wanting to come back"), but
he's been on a losing streak, hasn't saved a life in months, and then
there's the man's daughter (Patricia Arquette), who seems to light some
extinguished fire deep in Frank's spiritual wasteland.  
Arquette is bland, and Cage's mumbling, stumbling performance
(occasionally leavened by bursts of manic energy) is drawn from the actor's
increasingly familiar and finite bag of tricks.  The performances that give
this film life come from his three partners, John Goodman, Tom Sizemore,
and especially Ving Rhames.  There's also a wonderfully sinister velvet
turn from New Zealander Cliff Curtis ("Three Kings") as an upscale drug
dealer, and Mary Beth Hurt is memorable as a tough-talking ER nurse ("I
don't see why we should help you -- did we shove the heroin up your nose?")
Scorsese dazzles with some breathtaking visuals and powerful scenes,
but the movie has an unfocused, rambling feel that reaches several climaxes
of ennui before it plays itself out.

Title
Review for Return to Me (2000)
     This is Bonnie Hunt's "Citizen Kane".  The talented second banana
comedienne wrote the story and the screenplay, starred, and directed.
In case you think the Welles connection slipped by Bonnie, the first
line uttered by her heroine is "Rosebud."
I've seen "Citizen Kane", Ms. Hunt, and "Return to Me" is no
"Citizen Kane".  On the other hand, it's a lot funnier and a lot more
romantic than "Citizen Kane".
A good bit of the action takes place at O'Reilly's Italian
Restaurant in Chicago, where Grace (Minnie Driver) works when she has
the heart for it.  She gets the heart for it when a zoologist (Joely
Richardson) dies in a car crash and her ticker is transplanted into
the expiring Grace.
The grieving widower (David Duchovny) shows up at O'Reilly's one
night a year or so later, and it's love at first sight.  Theirs is a
sweet, totally PG romance - he's the jacket-sharing, hand-holding
type, she's a winsome virgin whose dating career has been curtailed by
her bad heart.  She knows she should tell him about her heart
transplant, but can't seem to work up the nerve.  Then she discovers
whose heart it is she has.
The premise is a tad unlikely, but Hunt and her company play it
with such sweetness and good humor that it hardly matters.  There's
even a lovable dog and gorilla in case things aren't cute enough
already.  Duchovny files away Fox Muldur and learns to enjoy life.  He
and and Driver are appealing lovebirds, and when things threaten to
falter Hunt steps in with her unfailing charm, and brings along James
Belushi for some likable vulgarity.  And if that's not enough, there's
the gang in the back of O' Reilly's, an over-the-hill Irish-Italian
Rat Pack led by Robert Loggia and the wonderful Carroll O'Connor as
Grace's doting grandfather.  This isn't an Oscar-breeding kind of
movie, but worse performances than O'Connor's have grabbed the gold.
Hunt keeps the hankies popping out of the pocket pack with her
hearts-and-flowers story, but she never lets herself wallow too long
in sentiment before nudging things back onto the laugh track.  She
directs with the same pure timing she shows as an actress, and it
makes for a lovely movie.

Title
Review for Insider, The (1999)
     The opening of Michael Mann's gripping expose' "The Insider" has "60
Minutes" producer Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino) driven blindfolded through
Tehran to a meeting with a Hezbollah chief.  When the interview is abruptly
terminated, Bergman finds himself alone in the room, and he sweeps back the
curtains to discover a view of the city from an office window high above
it.  A similar perspective will be repeated from the corporate offices of
tobacco giant Brown & Williamson, and broadcast giant CBS.  The implication
is evident:  it's all about money, folks, and the view from high floors is
pretty much the same everywhere.
     The movie recounts a low moment in the image of CBS News.  In 1995,
"60 Minutes" yanked a Mike Wallace interview with tobacco industry
whistleblower Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe), who had confirmed that
tobacco CEOs perjured themselves before Congress in denying that nicotine
was addictive, and that their companies knowingly spike the nicotine in
cigarettes to boost the fix.  The CBS brass pressured the news magazine
show, fearful that Brown & Williamson would sue for billions claiming
"tertious interference" (inducing Wigand to break his confidentiality
agreement).  The truth is irrelevant, says a network lawyer (Gina Gershon).
 "The truer the information, the greater the danger."  And "60 Minutes"
caved.
      Christopher Plummer captures Mike Wallace so unerringly with
gestures, facial expressions and temperament that although the two men are
hardly lookalikes, there are moments when Plummer morphs completely into
the veteran newsman.  Al Pacino stays in control and still sears the screen
as producer Bergman, who established a bond with Wigand and drew him out
for the story.  And Russell Crowe, the Australian actor best known here for
"L.A. Confidential", is superb as Wigand, the muffled powder keg whose slow
fuse of temper and conscience is unerringly lit by the bullying tactics of
his former employers.  
     There's a fascinating correlation between the disparate characters of
Bergman and Wigand.  Wigand left a background in health companies for a
high-salaried job with tobacco; Bergman departed the leftist magazine
"Ramparts" for a career with ultra-establishment CBS.  In Mann's treatment,
both finish the movie with their lives in disarray but their values
restored.  Big Tobacco is the villain, but the unsettling moral cavity at
the center is the buck-driven relativity of truth in the corporate news
business.
    "The Insider" doesn't pretend to be a documentary.  It's a movie in the
great tradition of tear-the-lid-off-the-whole-stinking-mess cinema, with
artful cinematography and a lush enhancing score.  It's drawn from life,
but events are shuffled, compressed, invented.   Still much of it,
according to insiders, is just the way it happened, and on screen the story
carries the whiff of truth; if some of it has been knowingly spiked to
increase its impact, that's only the delivery system, and it's effective as
hell. 

Title
Review for Messenger: The Story of Joan of Arc, The (1999)
     With "The Messenger", Luc Besson fulfills the promise he showed in
"The Fifth Element".  That one was confused and pretty bad.  This one is
truly awful.
     Begin with little 8-year-old Joan (Jan Valentine), after her umpteenth
confession of the day, dancing through fields of flowers like a miniature
Julie Andrews on the road to Oz, flinging her arms wide and chortling "It's
wonderful!"  Throw in "Koyaanisqatsi"-esque churning clouds and weird
"Paul-is-dead"-ish backwards music on the soundtrack to show that the day
is taking an ominous turn, and then home to find the town pillaged by the
villainous English, and her sister raped and murdered (not in that order)
before her eyes.
     Then things really get bad.
     Enter Milla Jovovich (the "big bada-boom" girl from husband Besson's
"Fifth Element") as 19-year-old Joan.  She's learned to ride a horse and
wield a sword, and heard enough voices and made enough waves in her part of
France to convince the sniveling Dauphin (John Malkovich) to grant her an
audience, although we have no idea why except that his mother-in-law (Faye
Dunaway, so refreshed with her puffy lips and taut skin that she looks like
she's standing in a wind tunnel) puts him up to it.  Half of France,
including the part he needs for his coronation, is in the hands of the
barbarian English, and he'll try anything once.  
     If the Dauphin seems a bit genetically flawed, Joan is a full-bore nut
case.  She's so wild-eyed and hysterical you're afraid she'll have a stroke
before the English can burn her.   She finds the Dauphin in a cute game of
hide-and-seek and he gives her an army.  The generals take to her with
surprisingly little resistance, and soon they're all hacking and hewing
away at the English, and for most of the rest of the movie her face is
drenched in blood.  She's impervious to pain -- "How are you, Joan?" one of
her officers asks during a battle.  "Me?  I'm fine.  Why do you ask?" 
"There's an arrow in your leg."  "Oh."
     If only we were so impervious to pain.  By the time she's been
betrayed by the Dauphin and captured by the English, visited in her cell by
her Conscience in the form of a spectral Dustin Hoffman (sounding like his
previous assignment was in the Bronx), been through a few trials and more
betrayals, the two-hour mark is a distant memory, and you're feeling as
though you're at Zozobra*, waiting with diminishing patience for the main
event.
*Zozobra is an annual end-of-summer event at Fiesta in Santa Fe, NM, which
involves, after endless preliminary carryings-on, the burning of a giant
effigy of Old Man Gloom.

Title
Review for Mickey Blue Eyes (1999)
MOVIES     Jonathan Richards, Santa Fe Reporter
     Nobody does Hugh Grant like Hugh Grant.  The urbane, slightly
sheepish, self-deprecating poise, the adorable, floppy-haired,
twinkling-eyed good looks, the Englishness worn simultaneously as an
apologetic scarlet "E" and a badge of honor -- it all adds up to an
original and satisfying screen persona.
     In "Mickey Blue Eyes", the gag is to juxtapose that character against
a very different ethnicity and style: the Mob.  It's a good gag, and Grant
uses his considerable skills to keep it light and funny for a nice stretch
as the movie gets underway.  He's Michael Felgate, director of a posh
Manhattan art auction house whose biggest problem is surly truckers who
make late and incomplete deliveries.  When he gets engaged to Gina Vitale
(Jeanne Tripplehorn), daughter of a mobster (James Caan), that problem
miraculously disappears.  But his real problems are just starting.
     At first Gina refuses him because she doesn't want him mixed up in the
family business.  He thinks he can handle it.  Boy, is he naive.  Soon he's
up to his French cuffs in money laundering, and his and the movie's
problems multipy when the stakes are raised with a murder.  Director Makin
doesn't seem up to that change of gears.  Laughs continue intermittently,
and there are some good ones, but the sureness is gone.  The movie offers
situations that want to be hilarious, as with a confusion of signals
involving an old lady at an auction, but neither the setup nor the payoff
rise to the occasion, which cries for Monty Pythonesque abandon.
     There's not much olive oil in the veins of Tripplehorn's Mafia
princess, and not much chemistry between her and Grant (there's more
between Grant and Caan.)  The Italian-American actors who make their living
as celluloid mafiosi are comfortable in their familiar roles.  
     "Mickey Blue Eyes" coasts after a funny start, and can't find its
rhythm when the plot takes a darker turn.  But it gets out of the gate
fast, and with Hugh Grant in the saddle it provides plenty of laughs along
the way.
                              ***********************************
(Jon Richards's weekly editorial cartoon can be seen at
http://cmty.prodigy.net/news/)

Title
Review for Wonder Boys (2000)
Movies     Jonathan Richards, Santa Fe (NM) Reporter
    Like the insatiable plant in "Little Shop of Horrors," Grady Tripp's
second novel sits by his old IBM Selectric typewriter demanding to be fed.
And feed it he does.  He's well into his third thousand manuscript pages
(single spaced), and the end is no closer at hand than it ever was.  Grady
(Michael Douglas) has the opposite of writer's block.  He can write.  He
just can't stop.
     Curtis Hanson's laconically-paced screwball comedy of letters (adapted
from Michael Chabon's novel) covers a pivotal weekend in Grady's life at the
western Pennsylvania university where he is a tenured professor of English.
His young wife has just left him.  His mistress (Frances McDormand),
university chancellor and wife of his department chairman (Richard Thomas)
has just told him she's pregnant. One of his students (Katie Holmes) rents a
room in his house, but would like to get closer to the master bedroom.  His
editor (Robert Downey Jr) is in town, ostensibly for Wordfest, the college's
annual book business symposium, but really to get his hands on the
manuscript, which is now seven years overdue.  His best creative writing
student, James (Tobey Maguire), is a pathological liar and possibly suicidal
depressive who carries a loaded pistol.  It is not the best of times for
Grady.
     This the first movie for Hanson since his hugely successful L.A.
Confidential, and it shows his versatility (Hanson gets around
stylistically; he also made The River Wild and The Hand That Rocks the
Cradle).  It's not entirely without violence - there's a bloody ankle, and
more of the lethal indignities to dogs popularized by There's Something
About Mary - but Hanson, working from a witty screenplay by Steve Kloves
(writer/director of The Fabulous Baker Boys), shows an assurance with comedy
that builds from character.
     The cast is terrific.  Douglas gives Grady the wry, worn intelligence
of a well-thumbed paperback on self-knowledge.  Maguire, a seriously
underestimated actor, shoots beams of sly wit through James's moody
darkness.  McDormand serves a crisp tossed salad of clear-eyed judgement and
sympathetic patience.  Rip Torn is memorable as a pompous author who turns
out a book a year, and begins his keynote address to Wordfest intoning
"I...am a writer."  And Downey, as always, is brilliant.
     There's sex, drugs, and even a little rock 'n roll with a new Bob Dylan
song, "Things Have Changed", on the soundtrack.  There are plenty of laughs,
and only a few aimless patches before the movie rounds into its home
stretch.  Then it lumbers through a series of endings that feel too
calculated, trite, improbable, and self-consciously finishy - you can almost
feel the blank sheet being rolled into the typewriter and the writer
muttering "last page.."  It's too bad, but it's not a deal-breaker.  Wonder
Boys is a lot better than a February move has any right to be.

Title
Review for House on Haunted Hill (1999)
     Where was Wes Craven when we really needed him?  "House on Haunted
Hill", a gloss-and-guts remake of William Castle's 1958 horror flick, is
left in the journeyman hands of William Malone ("Creature").  It starts
with some nice campy fun, but it's designed as a thrill ride, and a 95
minute thrill ride gets long.
     Geoffrey Rush ("Shine", "Shakespeare in Love") reprises Vincent
Price's role as a billionaire amusement park tycoon who rents a haunted
house to throw a birthday party for his wife (Famke Janssen) and invites
four guests to whom he puts this proposal: stay the whole night, stay
alive, and leave in the morning with a cashier's check for a million bucks
(oh, inflation; Price only offered $10,000).  
     The joint is the former Vanacutt Institution for the Criminally
Insane, a towering structure closed and haunted since a grisly inmate
rebellion in the '31 left everyone within its walls horribly slaughtered. 
Now it's overseen by the nervous Pritchett (Chris Kattan), a descendant of
the evil Dr. Vanacutt.  But as soon as the four guests -- Eddie (Taye
Diggs), a baseball player, Sara (Ali Larter), a pretty blonde executive,
Melissa (Bridgette Wilson), a pretty blonde game show hostess, and Dr.
Blackburn (Peter Gallagher) -- are assembled, along with their host and
hostess, the house locks itself up tight as a drum, and there's no escape. 
     That's all you need to know about the characters.  The movie
concentrates on scaring them, not developing them.  Mostly it lures them
into the basement, a dank place packed with ghosts and grisly displays.  It
hacks them up, twists some back to life only to devour them again, crawls
with creepy effects, and throws in a few random naked women when things
threaten to get unbearably tedious.
     When Castle unveiled the original in '58 he had skeletons dropping
from the ceiling and ambulances stationed outside. At the showing I saw at
the UA South, the lights and the FM between-the-shows broadcast kept coming
on during the movie.  I don't know if that was a device or not.  It was a
little weird.

Title
Review for Tian yu (1998)
MOVIES     Jonathan Richards, Santa Fe Reporter
     In 1975, during that Chinese orgy of ideological puritanism known as
the Cultural Revolution, young people from the cities were sent to the
sticks to purge themselves of the stench of urban sophistication and learn
good peasant values.  The teenage Joan Chen escaped ruralization by being
accepted at the state acting school, and went on to a distinguished
international career ("The Last Emperor", "Twin Peaks", etc.)
     In her directorial debut, Chen revisists those days with the powerful
there-but-for-the-grace-of-God tale of Xiu Xiu (Lu Lu), a teenager from
Chengdu who is farmed out for a six-month apprenticeship to a horse herder,
on some vague and woolly-headed plan that has something to do with the
starting of a women's cavalry.  Her assigned mentor, a rugged older man
named Lao Jin (Lopsang), lives alone in a hide tent in the middle of a vast
empty range near the Tibetan border.  
     Though they share close quarters, Lao Jin is no sexual threat.  He was
castrated while the captive of enemy tribesmen.  In any case, his
temperament is gentle and protective.  He does all the work, while Xiu Xiu
sulks and puts on airs.  She doesn't seem to learn a thing, but when her
time should be up she becomes concerned when nobody comes to fetch her
home.  Eventually a peddlar shows up who tells her that the youth program's
over, and everyone's scrambling for a permit to go home.  For a roll in the
hay, he might be able to pull a few strings....
     The performances by the two principals are compelling.  Lu Lu builds a
character whose attitude is not always appealing, but whose helpless,
battered naiveté touches your heart.  Xiu Xiu's loss of innocence, which
accelerates through a series of callers with cynical promises of help as
word spreads of an easy lay in the wilderness, is made the more poignant by
her continued cluelessness.  Lao Jin's impotence extends to his inability
to interfere; he can only withdraw in disapproving sadness as the stream of
visitors passes through, and be ready to tenderly pick up the pieces. 
Lopsang makes him a figure of crippled dignity and wounded depth.     
     There is a rugged, almost nightmarish beauty to Chen's vision of this
forgotten outpost, where the eye sweeps from horizon to horizon unrelieved
by anything but the encroaching menace of storm clouds.  Chen shot most of
her footage on location without a permit from the Chinese authorities, who
would not have granted one and will not allow the film to be shown in
China.  Though it suffers at times from the monotony of its situation and
the adolescent petulance of its heroine, "Xiu Xiu" is a trenchant
indictment of a system in which ideology goes to bed with bureaucracy and
the progeny are abandoned to indifference.

Title
Review for Rules of Engagement (2000)
     Back in the '70s, when Vietnam was raging and the Young Turks
were blazing a rebellious trail through Hollywood, a tyro auteur like
William Friedkin, with the mantle of European artistic sensibility
draped stylishly across his shoulders, would have cast a cold eye on a
job of work like "Rules of Engagement".  That was then, this is now.
     Still, a lot of this movie is pretty engaging, if you close your
eyes to a smattering of logic-stretchers and wince-makers.  Two Marine
colonels, Hayes Hodges (Tommy Lee Jones) and Terry Childers (Samuel
L. Jackson), have been buddies since Vietnam, when Childers saved
Hodges's life.  Hodges sustained the leg wound that put him behind a
lawyer's desk for the rest of his Marine career while Childers went on
distinguishing himself in combat in the world's trouble zones.
     Then comes Yemen.  A protest outside the American embassy turns
ugly (we never quite know what it's about.)  Childers evacuates the
American ambassador (Ben Kingsley) and then, under withering attack
and with marines dropping like flies, orders his men to fire on the
crowd.  83 are killed, including a lot of women and children.  No
weapons are found among the dead, and a surveillance tape goes
missing.  Childers finds himself facing a court-martial.  Of course he
turns to his old buddy, who of course is retiring, and doesn't want
the responsibility ("I'm a good enough lawyer to know you need a
better lawyer than me.")
     What "Rules" would like to be about, and sometimes rises to, is a
moral ambiguity in which the boundaries between duty and excess,
defensible reaction and overkill, Guadalcanal and My Lai, good and
evil, are blurred.  The courtroom stuff is good, although the promised
mismatch between the self-described plodder Hodges and the brilliant
prosecutor (Guy Pearce) never materializes - Hodges holds his own
nicely.  But the story is generously ventillated with holes, and
characters do things that simply make no sense, and Friedkin grabs at
cliches like a contestant asking Regis for a lifeline.  It is revealed
that politicians are slimy and unprincipled, that men at arms forge
special bonds (even if they're on opposing sides), and that, as Pearce
points out, that "whether a man is charged with murder or hailed as a
hero is sometimes a very thin line.."
     The acting is of the high quality you'd expect from a cast that
includes Jones and Jackson and Kingsley and Anne Archer.  Pearce tries
on a Bronx accent, and wears it well.  Bruce Greenwood's villainy is
overdone, but the fault is with the filmmaker.  Whether a man is
hailed as a great director or pilloried as a hack is sometimes a very
thin line.  And sometimes not so thin.

Title
Review for East Is East (1999)
When English mother Ella Khan (Linda Bassett) calls her offspring, it's 
Meena, Saleem, Maneer, Nazir, Tariq, Sajid, and Abdul. When she calls 
her husband, it's George. This is not the least of the ironies in which 
this sometimes probing, sometimes pratfalling social comedy of the 
English melting pot is steeped.
George Khan (Om Puri of My Son the Fanatic) is a Pakistani who by the 
early '70s when the movie begins has been living in Manchester for many 
years, but who hangs onto his roots like an ironwood on a muddy 
riverbank. He's taken himself out of the old country, but he'll be 
damned if he'll let the old country out of his English-born kids, who 
don't know from Pakistan and could care less. His wife is an English 
lass, but his sons will marry Pakistanis, and he'll do the arranging, 
just like back home. As the story opens, George is preparing to marry 
off his oldest son Nazir (Ian Aspinall) to a Pakistani bride he has 
never met. When Nazir bolts from the altar, George writes him out of the 
family, and clamps down on the rest of his brood.
George is something of a monster, but only when he's crossed, which 
isn't a bad definition of a monster. He's lovable when things are going 
smoothly, and there's a genuine sweetness to the affection between him 
and Ella. But when anyone in his family resists his orders, he becomes 
mean, and worse, violent. He's a terrible hypocrite, his English wife 
and his fish-and-chips shop at odds with his super-Paki prejudice, but 
we're not sure why. If you asked him - as his kids do - he'd clout you.
Yet most of this movie of cultural preservation vs. assimilation in 
prejudice-ridden working-class England is very funny. It's got a knowing 
script, adapted by Ayub Khan-Din from his successful play and mounted by 
first-timer Damien O'Donnell. The ensemble cast defines each of the 
characters distinctly but keeps it a completely credible family, from 
the older kids down to little Sajid (Jordan Routledge), who's so 
confused about his identity that he's always hidden inside the hood of 
his parka like the kid in South Park. And both Puri and Bassett are 
simply wonderful, expert at showing the humanity that is at the root of 
their many contradictions.
O'Donnell does a good job, and gives us a splendid movie, but you can't 
help thinking that with a bit more experience he might have found a way 
to integrate the different moods more seamlessly, and blend the comic 
styles, which range from genuine moments to Richard Lesterian flights of 
madcappery. They make us laugh, but we're not always in the same 
universe.

Title
Review for Music of the Heart (1999)
     To repeat that Meryl Streep is the most gifted movie actress of her
generation is to be the bearer of no startling news.  One of Streep's most
remarkable qualities as an actress is that she finds her personality and
mannerisms in her characters, whereas most actors, even very good ones,
bring their own personae to the character.  In "Music of the Heart", a
movie based on a true story previously told in the documentary "Small
Wonders", she plays Roberta Guaspari, a determined woman who teaches violin
to kids at an East Harlem elementary school.  Streep spent two months
intensively learning the instrument, and she hardens her jaw and thickens
her speech into the patterns of a small-town girl and Navy wife whose
horizons are defined by her marriage and her music.  
When the marriage falls apart, she's helplessly adrift until a chance
meeting with an old friend (Aidan Quinn) leads to her traveling to New York
to land a job.  Streep's face as she rides a taxi through Harlem, clutching
her pocket book to her breast, tells you everything you need to know about
this woman.
Sadly, there is more to the movie than Streep's acting.  There is also
a screenplay, stitched together by Pamela Gray like a quilt of the most
familiar material she can find.  Gray has gathered her patches from every
movie ever made about teachers in inner city schools, without ever
stumbling across any with dramatic value.  The result is a series of
monotonous, colorless, repetitive and boring scenes about a life that would
not appear to be worth the telling if it were not for a lively and stirring
grand finale at the movie's end.  When Guaspari's school program is
threatened with a budget redline, she pulls together a benefit "Fiddlefest"
that winds up in Carnegie Hall with guest artists like Itzhak Perlman and
Isaac Stern sharing the stage with Roberta and her students.  Only at this
late point does the Kleenex come out, and the two hour ordeal rises at last
to a satisfying conclusion.  The presence of these virtuosi and the
legendary venue brings some magic, but it is magic that is borrowed, not
earned.  
The role of Roberta Guaspari was originally Madonna's, but she took a
powder a couple of weeks before shooting started.  Too bad.  Madonna's
acting talent would have been less at odds with the level of the material. 
The shocker is that this drab and uneventful exercise is directed by that
master slasher, Wes Craven ("Nightmare on Elm Street", "Scream").   In his
effort to mend his ways, Craven has crawled into the soft shell of the
reformed drinker who used to be life of the party, but now bores everyone
to tears.  

Title
Review for Big Momma's House (2000)
Screenplay by Darryl Quarles and Don Rhymer
Probably the scene that lost me was the early one where the fat lady 
rushes into the bathroom, hikes up her dress, sinks with a sigh onto the 
toilet, and lets go with loud, flatulent diarrhea, while Martin 
Lawrence, hiding in the shower, makes "Oh boy does it stink!" faces. 
Now, there are people who think that's hilarious, I imagine, or they 
wouldn't have put it in a comedy. There must have been chuckles at the 
pitch, chortles at the script conferences, and guffaws on the set. There 
weren't any in the theater where I saw it.
In fact, this entire 97-minute exercise in movie comedy was pretty much 
laugh-free. Take a little Tootsie (a great comedy), run it through a few 
reels of Mrs. Doubtfire (a pretty funny picture), dredge it in some 
Nutty Professor (now we're showing signs of strain), and by the time it 
comes out here, we're talking about a severely depleted comic gene pool. 
Martin Lawrence is an appealing guy, but he doesn't seem to have a sure 
fix on what's funny. Here he's an FBI man who's a master of disguise, 
and when Sherry (Nia Long), the ex-girlfriend of an escaped convict 
(Terrence Howard), goes to hide out at her granny's, and granny gets 
called out of town, it's an opportunity made in comedy hell. As quick as 
you can say Little Red Ridinghood, Lawrence has disguised himself with 
enough latex to keep a Nevada whorehouse in condoms for a decade, and 
he's greeting Sherry on the front walk with a big hug saying "Big Momma 
could never forget that ass.ma."
Nia Long, who showed well in The Best Man, is a lovely actress who will 
certainly live this down. Terrence Howard, the cynic from that same 
movie, is reasonably menacing as the villain, but he's on so little you 
hardly notice. The director, Raja Gosnell, has directed a couple of 
pictures (Never Been Kissed, Home Alone 3), but he must have caught this 
bug while editing Mrs. Doubtfire. But that had Robin Williams, and a 
script. This one made it to the screen without an ounce of wit or 
originality.
This is the picture that famously landed Lawrence in the hospital with 
heat stroke as he was jogging in heavy clothes to lose weight. Martin, 
baby, it wasn't worth it.
