Authors
Matthew DeMizio
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
http://us.imdb.com/Title?Truman+Show,+The+(1998)
This has been the finest movie that I have seen in a while.  I walked
into the theater with the praise for the movie ringing in my ears. "4
Stars!"  "Excellent...Drama becomes Carrey!" "Brilliant!"...
The movie follows Truman Burbank (Carrey) on his very own television
show - The Truman Show.  However, Truman doesn't know that it's a show
- he lives it unaware, as an audience of millions watches.  Truman
lives beneath a great dome - the largest soundstage ever constructed
(complete with 5000+ cameras) The entire operation is controlled by
Christof (Ed Harris), the director, from the "moon" - or what looks
like the moon to Truman.
The entire purpose of the setup is so that Truman can lead a "normal
life" - the life that Christof has planned for him.  Sure, bad things
happen to Truman, but he always bounces back.  Christof always assures
that.
Truman begins to question his world when things malfunction on the
inside.  He begins to ask questions about the nature of life and what
is real.  The movie follows his quest to find the answers.
The closest feeling that I can associate to this movie is the one I
felt after seeing Forrest Gump for the first time (actually, after
every time I see Gump.)  Harris is strangely father-like in his role.
He genuinely seems to love Truman as a son, yet he has to punish him
to get the ratings.  Some of the most powerful scenes are those where
Christof has to work against Truman.  Harris comes across genuine and
very human.
Carrey is beautiful in his role.  It almost seems as if it were meant
for him and only him.  You quickly forget his slapstick roles in "Ace
Ventura: Pet Detective" and "Dumb and Dumber."  He reminded me of Tom
Hanks to a certain extent - they both have the same sincerity around
them.  Carrey lays off the slapstick in the film almost entirely, and
if you don't expect it, you will miss it. (A gratification to some
people.)  Carrey also tugs at the viewer's heartstrings.  Remember
Robin Williams in "Dead Poet's Society"?  Carrey has the same effect
on the viewer.
Overall this film was the most excellent one I have seen this year.
As said earlier, it brings memories of "Forrest Gump" - the story of a
simple man trying to get the most out of life.

Title
Review for Deep Impact (1998)
Deep Impact (1998)
IMDB: http://us.imdb.com/Title?Deep+Impact+(1998)
This film had me worked up for weeks in preparation.  "Morgan Freeman
as President - brilliant casting decision!"  "Ooh...those effects look
great!"  "I haven't seen this plot before!"
Meanwhile the forces that be were dictating that this would be yet
another formula thriller trying desperately to reach at the viewers'
heart until the moment of great letdown.  For that's what this was:
Another formula action picture that couldn't decide whether it wanted
to be a deep sympathetic drama or a spectacular, Independence Day,
effects blast.  In the end, it grazed both sides, but never made it to
either.
The winding plot begins by showing a young astronomer (Elijah Wood)
discovering a new comet in his high-school astronomy club.
Fast-forward 10 years and we find a reporter for MSNBC (Téa Leoni)
trying to break through into the broadcast chair.  She stumbles onto
word of a vague, conspiracy-type story, and wants to break it to the
world.  We learn that the government has known about the comet for
some time.  They also know that the comet will crash into the earth
within a few years.  Of course, they've been planning for the impact
for some time.  They've dug huge caves that can withstand the impact
and house survivors for 2 years, in which time the earth will recover.
Only there's only enough room in the caves for 2 million people.  The
rest of the movie is spent watching the impact of the comet and the
implications it holds for all the characters.
I know that I'm missing something here, but there's no way I could
tell it all without giving away the entire movie.  There are some
astronauts (one brilliantly played by Robert Duvall) and a love story
and some childhood wrongs finally righted...
There lies one of the major problems of the movie: It knows that it
has to do everything, and it tries.  Only it can't do it in its 2-hour
time span.  Questions about many of the characters remain - "Why?
How?  Huh?" 
There are a few bright spots - Robert Duvall gives a pretty good
performance as the captain of a space mission to try and deflect the
comet.  He comes across as a genuine guy - The Great Santini flying
high in space.  Morgan Freeman also gives a spectacular, but brief
performance as the President.  If only he had more to do!  His
character portrayed the kind of politician I'd like in the office of
President.
The graphics are pretty good in this film too.  The shots of the comet
hitting, and the shots in space are well done.  The most memorable one
is from the end - a shot of the newly destroyed Capitol building.  It
was haunting.
Overall, this film was a good thriller for a Saturday night, but I
expected more from the commercials.  It has its moments, but overall,
"Deep Impact" was disappointing to me.  Do yourself a favor - save
your money from the tickets and rent this film when it comes out on
video.  You'll be a lot happier.
