Authors
Liz Rizzo
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Object of My Affection, The (1998)
Starring Jennifer Aniston, Paul Rudd, Alan Alda, Allison Janney, Timothy
Daly, John Pankow, Steve Zahn, Nigel Hawthorne and Amo Gulinello
Written by Stephen McCauley (novel) and Wendy Wasserstein
Directed by Nicholas Hytner
Produced by 20th Century Fox [US] and distributed by 20th Century Fox
Film Corp. [US]
A chain is only as strong as its weakest link.  And if "The Object of My
Affection" was a chain, it would be a strong one.  Of all the things I
like about this film, and there are a lot, the large and outstanding
supporting cast is by far the most notable.  Our main characters, Nina
Borowski and George Hanson, are played wonderfully and realistically by
Jennifer Aniston in her best role yet and Paul Rudd, who I personally
enjoyed in "Clueless."  Alan Alda is full of funny lines as Nina's book
agent brother-in-law, Sidney Miller, and Allison Janney is hilarious as
his wife and Nina's half-sister, Constance Miller, a woman with firm
ideas about how things should be.  Of all the supporting roles, she was
my absolute favorite.  Timothy Daly is effective as Dr. Robert Joley,
George's initial, self-centered love interest.  And John Pankow turns in
an excellent performance as Nina's boyfriend, Vince McBride, who
develops into much more as the film progresses.  He successfully meets
the challenge of creating a guy who isn't simply the bad guy, but rather
is just not Nina's idea of a perfect match.  Real people break up
because they don't get along with each other, not because one is an
obvious loser.  It is a credit to the script that Vince is a real
person, not just the jerk boyfriend.  Other excellent performances are
given by Amo Gulinello, Kevin Carroll, Marilyn Dobrin, Steve Zahn and
Nigel Hawthorne, who is excellent as an aging gay man and Nina's voice
of reason.  This film is stuffed full of interesting people, and the
script manages them effortlessly.
Another thing I enjoyed is that these characters have jobs, and they
actually work!  OK, they all have incredibly happy, politically-correct
jobs - even Vince is a public defender - but we get to see them working
nonetheless.  Since the average person works over 40 hours a week, it's
nice to feel that what we do with the majority of our lives is worthy of
film.  I like to see characters working just like real people.  Well,
almost like real people.
In fact, when we first meet George he is directing a performance at the
elementary school where he teaches.  The Miller's daughter is a student
there and a performer in the show, which leads to George and Dr. Joley
going to dinner at the Miller's that night.  Nina and George meet and
bond, and when it becomes apparent that George will be needing a new
place to live, Nina jumps at the chance to get a roommate to live in her
spare bedroom, and one who is a respected teacher and friend of the
family, no less.  This leads to a beautiful friendship, the basis of the
whole film.
The conflict arises when Nina becomes pregnant and asks her best friend,
George, to stay with her permanently and act as a father figure. 
Needless to say, this norm-defying decision sends waves through Nina's
circle of friends and relatives.  Most upset is Vince, the father of the
child, who upon being told that Nina would rather be with George than
him, immediately assumes he is being pushed completely out of the
picture and storms off.  And of course, Constance, not one to be into
alternative living arrangements, is completely against the setup.  The
truth she sees though, is that Nina is falling in love with George, and
we all know that can only lead to trouble.
The beauty of `The Object of My Affection,' is that it sets up complex
personal issues, and it doesn't back away for a minute; it lets them
play out.  For example, there is a scene where Nina and George come
close to physical intimacy.  And we think, what are they doing?  Is
George leading Nina on?  Yes, although I'm sure he's not thinking
straight at the moment.  Is Nina fooling herself?  Obviously.  Could
this happen in real life?  Yes, I'm sure it does. I find that films are
often criticized when characters are written realistically and allowed
to do the crazy things we do but don't like to admit.  Julia Roberts and
Cameron Diaz found this out in `My Best Friend's Wedding.'  People
complained about the girl who would quit college to get married and the
strong, single woman who still would drop everything to pursue a man,
yet I could introduce you to plenty of women just like Julianne and
Kimmy.  It can be inspiring when characters are role models, but it's OK
(and at times refreshing) for characters to represent real people, too. 
And while `The Object of My Affection' may not be `As Good as it Gets,'
it does set up surprisingly delightful scenes and then let the audience
sit back and enjoy them, much as that excellent film did.  It also
benefits from excellent editing (I loved how Nina and George's
friendship was developed through dance) and scene segues, not to mention
it's FUNNY.  At one point I missed two lines because the audience was
laughing so loud.  Four words:  Mothers of Latino Lesbians.
Not content to be simply funny and heartwarming, however, `The Object of
My Affection' has a thesis, and it is this: You should find one person
in life to love as a partner and try to make it work with them.  I, and
probably some cultures who practice polygamy, don't blindly accept this
simple assertion as necessarily true, but I'm sure it appeals to the
majority.  Personally, I found myself wondering why George's new
boyfriend, Paul James played by Amo Gulinello, didn't simply move in
with them.  Although they would have needed a bigger place!  And Nina
did need to release and grow past her romantic love for George, who
despite his dalliance with Nina, is gay.  I do like how `The Object of
My Affection' embraces the time-tested notion of monogamy while
incorporating all of the idiosyncrasies of life today:   homosexuality,
divorce, interracial relationships, etc.  Although that last one is
thrown in a bit gratuitously.
If there is a major flaw in this film, it is that the ending is too easy
and too perfect.  In the end, everyone has someone and happiness is
delivered wrapped up nicely with a pretty bow.  That being said, I have
to admit I loved it.  Children singing `Gotta Be.'  Nina's daughter
Molly, played by Sarah Hyland, saying that she had more people come see
her in the school show than anyone because of the extended family Nina
has built around herself.  A perfect picture of how we can create a
village of friends and family through acceptance and open-mindedness. 
This is Nina's world, and it is a pretty perfect place by the end of the
film.  So what.  I wouldn't mind living there myself.  It sometimes
seems that people would rather see films where unrealistic characters
exist in realistic settings.  As though to ask, what would a perfect
person do in my world?  Straight realism aside, I would rather see
realistic people existing in a more perfect world.  As if to say, if we
all tried a little harder, how could it be?  I hope we get there some
day.

Title
Review for Midsummer Night's Dream, A (1999)
Starring Christian Bale, Rupert Everett, Calista Flockhart, Anna Friel,
Kevin Kline, Michael Pfeiffer, Stanley Tucci, and Dominic West.
Directed by Michael Hoffman.  Written by Michael Hoffman, play by
William Shakespeare.
`Over hill, over dale, Thorough bush, thorough brier, Over park, over
pale, Thorough flood, thorough fire...'
When A Midsummer Night's Dream is done well, it should take us on a
journey to a magical place and time, ignite our imaginations and stir
our hearts.  When Shakespeare is done well, the language and emotion
must flow out of every actor, making us understand even if we don't
quite follow every turn of phrase.  Michael Hoffman's film does all this
and more.  It is beautifully done and, for the most part, wonderfully
acted.  This is what theater brought to the screen should be.
Clearly an Oscar contender for costume and set design, this version has
been placed convincingly in the 1900s (and out of ancient Greece), a
trick which only jars occasionally and allows our heroes and heroines to
amusingly rush through the woods on bicycles.  The fairy kingdom is
enchanting, and the whole production shines with the time and care that
was obviously put into it.
There are several notable performances, including Kevin Kline in a
standout portrayal of Bottom, the acting enthusiast who wants to take on
every part in the play within the play, and Rupert Everett as a dark and
sexy Oberion, the fairy king, while the ever vivacious Stanley Tucci
seems to be having the time of his life playing his faithful servant
Puck.  As for the women, the best performance is clearly held by Calista
Flockhart in the frequently less-than-desirable role of Helena, who
spends the entire play throwing herself at the reluctant Demetrius,
played by Christian Bale.  Flockhart brings humor and sympathy to her
Helena.  For in typical Shakespearian comedy style, Demetrius is love
with Hermia (Anna Friel), who is turn in love with Lysander (Dominic
West), who is thankfully in love with her (Hermia).  At least most of
the time.
My least favorite performance was surprisingly that of Michelle
Pfeiffer, who is absolutely radiant and gives a good performance, but
somehow comes off as rather unbelievable as the fairy queen to Everett's
Oberion.  Other less than perfect moments include a glimpse of the child
she's adopted, who for some reason is very blue.  OK, he's from India,
but he's `mortal born,' and it struck me as odd.  He's very blue.  Also,
there's a mud wrestling scene that I could have done without.  I found
myself overly distracted from the dialogue.  Luckily, our heroes and
heroines lose the mud very quickly.  Must be that fairy magic.
What is most outstanding is the wonderful interpretation of
Shakespeare's work.  Many of the things one familiar with the play would
expect and hope to be there, are.  However, there are also many
surprises and interesting interpretations of lines and situations.  For
when all is said and done, this is Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's
Dream, a play in which it is sometimes hard to keep up the pace as it
shifts back and forth between the multiple story lines.
And yet, fascination and love of this play persists, and people love to
perform and watch it over and over again.  It's hard to imagine someone
doing another film version after this one, but someone will.  As Puck
might say, `Lord, what fools these mortals be!'  Ah but Puck... perhaps
not.  We can all use a little fairy magic now and again.

Title
Review for Naked Lunch (1991)
Starring Peter Weller, Judy Davis, Julian Sands and Roy Scheider.
Written by William S. Burroughs (novel) and David Cronenberg.  Directed
by David Cronenberg.
There are some films that do more than tell us a story.  They create a
world so vivid, so lovingly created, that we feel transported.  We feel
that we have entered an incredible moving painting: a true motion
picture.  Two films that come to mind:  The Fifth Element and Midnight
in the Garden of Good and Evil.  In each of these very different films,
including Naked Lunch, there is a story.  But it is secondary to the
visual world created and the experience of being in it.
Naked Lunch is loosely the tale of William Lee, or should we say author
William S. Burroughs, and is loosely based on his novel of the same
name.  Our ill-fated protagonist is played to dry perfection by Peter
Weller and is joined by a superior cast of drug addicts, writers,
mysterious strangers and bugs.  Yes, homoerotic bugs play a large part
in this film, and if you can't handle it, you'd better get out now while
you can.
As I watched this film, I couldn't help but think about `normal' authors
- those who have loving families and regular writing schedules.  Those
for whom writing is a joy, to whatever extent that is possible.  But
then, who wants to watch a film about them when tormented, drugged-up,
hallucinating writers give invitations like this?  For as William Lee
falls deeper into his bug powder drug habit, he enters a dark world
called Interzone, and the trippy fun really begins.
This is not a film for everyone.  Much more palatable fare has been
rejected by the average audience for whom watching this film would
probably qualify as cruel and unusual punishment.  But surely every
writer can find a little corner in Interzone, a land where typewriters
become large, roach-like bugs that literally talk out of their ass and
`reports' are always due.  Surely every filmmaker can find something to
admire in this visual triumph.  And if erotic symbolism is your thing,
consider this your trick-or-treat bag after a long night of knocking on
doors.
An invitation to Interzone is an invitation to one author's private hell
and haven.  It is a strange and often uncomfortable place that draws you
in even as it repels you.  For as William Lee tells us, `the Zone takes
care of it's own.'   Care to visit?

Title
Review for City of Angels (1998)
Starring Meg Ryan, Nicolas Cage, Andre Braugher and Dennis Franz
Written by Dana Stevens and Wim Wenders
Directed by Brad Silberling
Produced by Atlas Entertainment and distributed by Warner Bros. [US]
`She didn't believe in angels until she fell in love with one.'
I really wanted to like this film.  And for the first few scenes, I was
there, ready to be swept away.  Unfortunately, `City of Angels' doesn't
quite come together and really gets weak toward the end.
First we meet Seth, who we know is an angel because it's Nicolas Cage
and we saw the previews.  He seems to be trying a little too hard to
appear angelic.  Then we meet other angels who seem quite vampiric as
the movie progresses (I have to admit I loved this).  There are shades
of Anne Rice novels all over this film - unfortunately the mythology
created is incomplete, at times weak and left me wanting more.  However,
what was presented was interesting and, for the most part, effective. 
Now for the obvious comparison:  Cage's Seth is the complete antithesis
of Travolta's Michael, and after the first few scenes his performance
becomes so flat (and this is purposeful) that I found myself wondering
who could have played this role better.  I almost wished they had gone
with Denzel Washington!  Almost.
Next, we meet heart surgeon Maggie Rice (coincidence on the Rice?), and
Meg Ryan is excellent, as usual, as is Dennis Franz when he emerges as
one of her patients, Nathan Messinger.  For those who missed the famous
NYPD Blue shower scene, `City of Angels' provides you yet another chance
to view Dennis Franz's famous back side.  Somebody just loves this man's
butt!  The character of Nathan is fun, and Franz appears to enjoy
playing him.  Andre Braugher gives a good performance as Seth's friend
in the angel world.  Sadly, this only makes Cage's performance appear
flatter.
To the film's credit, we do care about Maggie, we believe and enjoy the
development of her relationship with Seth, and we are fascinated by the
angels and the world which is created.  But towards the end, which is so
often the case, the film falls apart.  For all the careful pacing and
build up, the last third goes too quickly, we lose our belief in the
story line, and we simply are not allowed to feel long enough.  Just as
`The Lost World' did not capture the wonder of `Jurassic Park,' `City of
Angels' simply does not attain the emotional, mystical power of say,
`Ghost' (another obvious comparison).
And most annoyingly, and I hope I'm not giving anything away here,
someone's probably patting themselves on the back for (skip to the next
paragraph if you're afraid I'll ruin it for you) not going with the
Hollywood ending, when this is exactly the film that should have gone
there.  The end of this film is actually trite, although there is a
flash (albeit brief) of brilliance in the final development of Seth's
character.  Thankfully, and it's actually a relief, Cage is allowed to
act during the final scenes, and he does it well.
Another kudo:  `City of Angels' stays away from excessive use of special
effects, which would have seemed tired.  But in the final analysis, I
was left feeling like this was a film based on a book that must be
better (another Jurassic Park/Lost World reference would fit here).  I
wish it existed so I could read it.  There's a lot of interesting stuff
here.  What I am going to do is rent `Wings of Desire,' the 1987 German
film that `City of Angels' is a remake of.  And if that doesn't satisfy
me, maybe I'll just reread the Anne Rice vampire series.  

Title
Review for My Giant (1998)
Starring Billy Crystal, Zane Carney, Walt G. Ludwig, Gheorghe Muresan,
Kathleen Quinlan and Steven Seagal (as himself)
Written by David Seltzer
Directed by Michael Lehmann
Produced by Castle Rock Entertainment/Columbia Pictures Corporation [US]
and distributed by Columbia Pictures[US]/Sony Pictures Entertainment
[US]
My Giant begins with a monologue that's more funny than not and a
distinctive `Princess Bride,' medieval fairy-tale-in-the-90s feel.  I
was pleasantly surprised how sharp the comedy was, with very funny
scenes occurring on a movie set in Romania where talent agent Sammy
(Billy Crystal) is visiting a client and in the monastery where Sammy
ends up after being mysteriously saved when he accidentally plunges his
car into a stream.  And when Sammy meets Max, his giant, mysterious
savior played by Gheorghe Muresan, there is magic in the air; albeit it
a bit goofy, I loved every minute of it.  The film, of course, plays on
the size difference between the two, and at times you would almost swear
it must be special effects.  I particularly enjoyed a shot of Sammy
dangling his legs from a Max-sized chair as the two face each over an
enormous table and eat from oversized bowls and spoons.  I also liked
Jere Burns' (from TV's `Something So Right') performance as the director
of the film in Romania.
At this point, the primary flaw in the film is that Gheorghe Muresan is
incredibly hard to understand, particularly during his fast-paced first
scene.  It is unfortunate that the script required him to speak quickly
right out of the gate, as I did understand him more as the film
continued and I became accustomed to his speech.  However, about the
time Muresan becomes coherent, the characters head to New York and the
film takes a dive.  Off the high board.
Suddenly, we are expected to believe Sammy is a do-whatever-it-takes
slime ball.  Up until this point he was pursuing his own interests to be
sure, but he didn't come off as a desperate jerk.  If he had, the first
scenes could never have been so lighthearted and magical.  But now, in
New York, we are further introduced to his neglected wife and son, and
his character is desperate enough to involve Max in a disturbing giant
vs. midgets wrestling match, which I found quite unpleasant and jarring
within the framework of the film.  Indeed, many scenes stuck out of this
film like incorrectly placed puzzle pieces.  
This includes the scenes featuring Steven Seagal, when Sammy gets Max a
role in a big, Hollywood movie filming in Las Vegas.  While I enjoyed
seeing Seagal poke fun at himself, the scenes appeared to exist solely
because of his participation, rather than because the film demanded it. 
And the audience is required to take a huge leap to believe that Max
would win the role based on his quotations of Shakespeare.  At this
point I found myself thinking, `We're supposed to believe that someone
would cast this guy in a film?'  Then I realized he was, and I was
watching it.
In the final third, the film undergoes another transformation, this time
to unbridled sentimentality.  Note:  Major plot points are revealed in
this and the final paragraph. Max went to America because Sammy promised
to reunited him with his childhood love, Lillianna, who hasn't seen him
since he was a normal-sized kid.  Her refusal to see Max (unbeknownst to
him) leads us to an awkward `ends justify the means' scene as Sammy's
wife Serena, played nicely by Kathleen Quinlan, poses as Lillianna.  I
found this scene offensive.  Not only did it rely on deception to induce
warm, fuzzy feelings from the audience, it reduced Max to someone we
should pity and coddle, which I thought was quite undeserved.  I think
Max could have handled the truth, gratuitous illness and all.  Late in
the film we learn Max, and in fact all giants, have a heart condition
which shortens their lives considerably.  This could be an enlightening
revelation, but the film seemingly presents it only to justify Sammy's
transformation into a caring, sensitive guy -- and hey, a great dad and
husband, too!
`My Giant' suffers from a poorly constructed story line and undeveloped
characters whose actions are determined by plot points rather than their
own internal persuasions.  A stronger story with more room for character
growth might have been possible if the focus was on Max's struggle to be
accepted and cast in movies instead of Sammy's struggles to get money
and become a better person.  In this scenario, Max's illness could have
been a integral part of the film not a story motivator.  Sentiment and
emotion would have followed naturally.  Instead, we're apparently not
supposed to like Sammy until the end, but we're not allowed to focus on
Max.  Crystal and Muresan give adequate and at times enjoyable
performances, but in the end, `My Giant' left me feeling like I'd been
fed gruel from a giant spoon.
