Authors
Mike Gobbi
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Darkman (1990)
NOTICE:  A non-computer-using friend saw this movie and is using my
account to review it.  After (if) I see the movie I may (or may not)
issue a contradictory review.  Or maybe even one that compounds his
criticisms.
     The first thing I'd like to say is that Gene Siskel, Roger Ebert,
and Rex Reed are all wrong.  This film sucks.
     The premise, that a man can change his face merely by changing the
skin on top of it, with no regard to any difference in the shape of his
skull, is hopeless.  If you feel like accepting this, it  would help if
the scientist responsible for inventing this skin came across as
intelligent rather than as a retard who grunts  through the film without
uttering a single piece of intelligible dialogue.  (DISCLAIMER:  I have
nothing against retards.  I just don't think they make believable
scientists).  Add to this the fact that all of his skin reconstruction
work is performed with materials salvaged from a completely annihilated
laboratory, reconstructed in a disused factory with no explanation as to
who is paying the power bill.
     If you feel like accepting all of this, you must deal with a head
villain capable of wiping out forty-odd of a competitor's muscle-men,
using only one gun and lacking any cover.  You must deal with the idea
(we cannot call it a fact) that the fake skin alone is enough to fool
numerous "bad guys" into believing that our "hero" is who he pretends to
be, faulty mannerisms (and lack of knowledge) notwithstanding.  (I mean
let's face it:  it's easy to fool us, as we're willing to suspend our
disbelief, and every time he has assumed a new personality they merely
used the actor who portrayed the role that he is assuming, but when you
are dealing with a person  close up, and you haven't suspended your
disbelief, you're going to note nervousness and fake skin.  And come on:
criminals are a suspicious lot anyway).
     If you want to accept all of this, I should tell you that the plot
is essentially the same as that of ROBOCOP, with the big corporate bad
guy with his right-hand-man who destroy the hero only to have him come
back to life and hunt them down.  I'm not comparing this film to
robocop, as it lacks all the satire and intense pacing and genuine
suspense of that film.  If you need to see this story again, rent
Robocop from a video store.
     If you *still* want to see this film, I can't help you.  But
please, go alone.  This is without a doubt the worst film I've ever
seen, and I've seen a lot of films.
