Authors
M.Srikanth
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Bandit Queen (1994)
     BANDIT QUEEN is the real life story of India's Phoolan Devi, a
low-caste woman who rose to become one of the most feared dacoits of
her time.  In a sense, it is also a chapter from the real life story of
India today.  In another sense, it is also a chapter from the real life
story of world's women.
     Here is no stylised narration of truth; this is real life viewed
under the glaring arc-lights of brutal honesty.  The director was
walking a very thin line--one false step and this would turn into a
sleazy, irreverent portrayal and would betray all good intentions.  The
viewer is taken through an emotional roller-coaster ride--I felt
hatred, extreme anger, embarrassing helplessness, enormous pity and
at last, a sense of guilt-ridden relief when it was all over.  If such a
movie can only be judged by the effect it has on its viewers, BANDIT
QUEEN is a huge success.
     This movie, completed a year ago, has been embroiled in
controversy from multiple fronts.  Initially, Phoolan Devi strongly
opposed the screening of the movie saying that it was a warped account
of her life.  However, as Shekar Kapur (the director of the movie who
was present during the screening) explained, she had not even seen the
movie then and was going entirely by hearsay.  Recently, however, she
has been shown the movie in private screenings (the movie is still
banned in India) and she has both "approved it for worldwide release"
and withdrawn her case from court.  After watching the movie, the only
comment she had was "My life was much harder."
     >From another front, Shekar has also been fighting to get the
censor board of India to clear the movie.  This is unlike any Indian
movie ever made--graphic violence, explicit language and even a scene
with full frontal nudity.  But again, this is reality and if people can
see it in the streets, why can't they see it on the screen?  Shekar has
vowed to fight the censors "tooth and nail" and is confident that the
movie "will be screened without any cuts in the near future."
     Is Shekar commercialising India's current moral depravity? Given
the thoroughly deglamourised, non-dramatic portrayal of potentially
cinematic contexts, the answer would have to be a no. "Are you saying
this is India?" asked a viewer after the movie.  "No," Shekar said
emphatically, "I don't think I ever did."  How did he feel as an Indian
filming this shameful side of his country?  "I feel ashamed about how
things are ... I think we (Indians) all need to.  But I think any other
director from any other part of the world--be it from Yugoslavia or
Russia or South America would do the same thing as I did.  We are
mature enough to face reality.  Aren't we?"
     From the outside, it seems an improbable task--Shekar Kapur is a
high-caste, city-bred man trying to portray the life of Phoolan Devi, a
low caste woman from a village.  However, the fact that, at the end,
this positioning vis-a-vis the artist and his subject only serves to
accentuate the merits of the films's artistic achievement, is a
statement on the sincerity and involvement of the artist in his
endeavour.
     The film opens in the year 1968 when as a 11 year old girl,
Phoolan is sold away by her father as a bride to a heartless man whose
sole concern is that he "needs his wife since his mother is getting too
old to do the house work."  We are introduced to a girl who freely uses
foulest of languages and who has a game confidence that she can take on
any of these "sister *******."  In her new environment, she is
confronted with the caste discriminations of the local high caste
Thakurs whom she would live to hate for the rest of her life.  Here is
also the first of the countless times she would be violated.  This
first act of violation was a powerful piece of work, with the camera
initially showing both the husband and the scared girl, then slowly
moving to close-in on the girl's tormented face, while in the
background one can hear the screamings grow shriller and shriller till
the moment when it mixes with a voice that is singing a high-pitched
lament.  Genuinely gut-wrenching.
     The initial fifteen minutes of the movie, in which all this happens,
sets the tone and the pattern for the remaining 105 minutes.  We see
the turbulent, often traumatic life of Phoolan Devi with little left to
imagination.  She runs away from her husband after the incident, is
driven out of her native village for having "enticed" a higher caste
youth, lives with her cousin for a while till the time that Vikram, a
low caste bandit, falls in love with her and rescues her from his
high-caste fellow bandit.  There is a brief relief for Phoolan (and the
audience) as she adjusts herself to the new life as a bandit, her new
image and the prominence.  However, things get rough again with the
release of the high caste ex-leader of the gang from prison.  How this
changes her life irrevocably and how she rises again from the ashes to
become the bandit queen is the rest of the movie.
     There are several sequences in the movie where the art of
portrayal of reality has been taken to new heights.  I will not go into
all the details and let you experience it first hand, but it would
suffice to say that much of the movie is not for the faint-hearted.
     While handling a story such as this, the role of  the director of
a movie changes dramatically.  He is more of an interpreter; constantly
making choices of what to show and what to leave out, there is an
abundance of material, and constantly "coalescing" truth into
understandable unifications and using them as vehicles to convey a
sense of the reality.  An overwhelming priority is also his role as a
watchdog to protect the film from veering into the dimension of
celluloid entertainment, while all the time maintaining an eye on both
the sincerity of his own intentions and the authenticity of his
interpretations.  Thankfully, Shekar has scored well in all departments
relieving us from having to digress into pedantic details.
     Seema Biswas is Phoolan Devi.  It is difficult to believe that
this is her first movie.  The hatred and anger in the eyes are real,
the confidence in her manner in the latter part of the movie is real
and on the whole a near faultless performance.  Only during the scenes
when she tries to portray the feminine side of Phoolan can one sense a
measure of discomfort as if she is not wholly sure of what to do.
However, on second thought, there might be some truth in saying that
Phoolan herself, after all the trauma she has gone through, had lost
touch with her feminine side and as such the hesitation on Seema's part
was deliberate.  Also, one has to admire and appreciate the courage of
an Indian artist to come forward to be cast in such a portrayal.
     The screenplay is mostly tight.  The first half of the movie moves
very fast and so do the final segments.  The middle portion, showing
the life of Vikram and Phoolan as bandits seems a little sagging,
though.  Towards the end, the attempts by the government to get Phoolan
to surrender are shown in a hurried detail.  Also, we get no real
understanding of how Phoolan was perceived by the general public
outside the valleys of Chambal.  What we get is a tight close-up on
Phoolan the person and her social position as a bandit queen is almost
considered an irrelevance (Shekar did mention after the movie that he
had to make many difficult choices and that he was contractually
obligated to make a two hour movie).
     The music by Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan and the photography by Ashok
Mehta lend able support.
     From a totally different view point, this is a positive film about
resurgence.  The fact that a physically traumatised, mentally
tormented, low-caste woman from a depraved Indian village chose not to
give up but stand up and fight her own battle is amazing.  This movie
stands as fair testimony to this life of resurgence.
Needless to say, I highly recommend the movie.
