Authors
Amin Meghani
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Sazaye Maut (1981)
     What starts out as a promising engineering job opportunity soon
turns into a horrible nightmare for Omkaar (Naseer); in the space of a
few terrible minutes, he is sucked into a vortex of events that
culminate in his being accused of murder and sentenced to death.  And
this is where our story begins. (Have I caught your interest now?) On
death row, Omkaar finally seems resigned to this cruel twist of fate
when a high-priced attorney mysteriously appears to appeal his case.
Omkaar is proved insane and the court orders him locked up in an
asylum.  There, he is offered a bargain to regain his freedom.  Realizing
by now that he is merely a pawn intentionally trapped in the web of a
sinister conspiracy, Omkaar acquiesces to the deal.
     Vidhu Chopra's debut movie is as a multi-carat gem on a revolving
display in a fancy, well-lighted jewelry store: no matter how you look
at it, it dazzles you with its sparkling brilliance, not occasionally
but continuously, leaving you slightly dazed at the end, but wanting
more.  From the opening frame (which by its very ordinariness, aided by
some nifty background sets, is made extraordinary) to the closing
credits; from the menacing steel and concrete jungle of Bombay to the
breathtaking beauty of the countryside to the deceptive serenity of
Goa, Chopra holds, make that commands, our attention.  The script is
intelligent and well-crafted:  VVC and team have ensured the conspiracy
is no hokey 'saazish' that often gives indigestion to yours truly, but
a genuine, no-way-out jaal that begs for recognition independent of the
movie's human stars as it attempts to swallow our hero.
     Talking about our hero, m'man Naseer is fully up to the task and
in top form (as he always is).  His Omkaar is well-scripted for sure,
but Naseer truly brings him to life, imbuing him with an evolving
ability to adapt to his rapidly changing circumstances born out of a
desperate struggle for survival.  This low-key metamorphosis is a
marvel to watch and we have only Naseer to thank for this all-too-rare
acting treat.
     This is a riveting movie; as the end credits roll, and we slowly
come out of the trance Chopra has put us under for two hours, we know
we have seen a master craftsman make an impressive debut.  Is this just
a flash in the pan, or will he indeed climb to new heights with his
subsequent projects? Will he go far is the question.  Having the
benefit of hindsight, we smile a secret little smile and whisper,
"Khamosh, Parinda, 1942.  Does that answer your question?"  You bet.

Title
Review for Neel Kamal (1947)
     When Ganga (Madhubala), a (supposedly) low-caste untouchable,
first sets eyes on Madhusudhan (RK), a handsome sculptor, she knows
he's the only man in the world for her.  It takes quite a bit of
convincing, however, to bring Madhusudhan to see things her way.
Societal mores in those days forbade inter-caste marriages (sound
familiar?), and Madhusudhan is painfully aware of cruel future
rebuttals were he to succumb to Ganga's love.  Instead, he allows
himself to be swayed by Rani Saheba's (Ara) attentions.  By the time
the principals discover that Ganga is of noble birth, it is too late.
Or is it? Ganga has claimed Madhusudhan for her own and emerges
triumphant in her seeming defeat.
     I have not seen Madhubala in too many films, but I have noted on
occasion her remarkable resemblance to Marilyn Monroe.  In NEEL KAMAL,
though, she is barely on the verge of adulthood and the transformation
to the riveting beauty of later years is not yet evident.  It is
impossible not to be affected by her childish enthusiasm, her pure and
simple beauty, and her unswaying, unadulterated love for Madhusudhan
that triumphs in the end against all odds.  I have not been moved by so
poignant a performance (in recent memory).  RK's suavity and magnetic
screen presence speak volumes of the dazzling star he was (destined) to
become.
     Kidar Sharma, one of the fathers of modern (post WWII) Indian
cinema, displays his thorough command of the medium.  As the merest
trifling example of his genius: there are a couple of (early) powerful
scenes involving bloodshed; however, these do not glorify violence, but
rather are designed to effectively convey a genuine sense of grief and
bereavement for those innocents killed needlessly.  To this end, these
scenes are superbly filmed and succeed admirably in their objective.
     Stars of the 40s and 50s have often recalled fondly the stern,
no-nonsense nature of the great Kidar Sharma.  I can't help but wish he
were alive today, so that he could roll up his sleeves and teach
today's so-called directors what it takes to make a real film.  And if
they refuse to learn, why he could easily take them across his knee and
administer 10 to 12 of the juiciest...Singapori ishtyle!!
     I will always remember NEEL KAMAL as the movie in which I fell in
love (and I suspect I'm neither the first nor the last in this
endeavor) with that rarest of lotuses: a beautiful girl called
Madhubala.
