Authors
Elisabeth Riba
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Dick Tracy (1990)
     DICK TRACY has had more hype than any other film this summer.
Unfortunately, it doesn't live up to it.  When out of a stellar cast,
Madonna has the strongest character, you know there's something wrong.
     I'd say the plot suffers from comic-book simplicity, but that
insults comic books.  Big Boy Caprice has organized all the mobsters
under his leadership.  This coalition faces trouble from Dick Tracy on
the side of the law, and the mysterious Blank from the criminal front.
That's the whole plot.
     Dick Tracy's toughest decision is choosing between Tess Trueheart
and Breathless Mahoney (Madonna).  He waffles through the entire movie
and only chooses by default.  The other main subplot features the
now-obligatory smart-aleck kid.  Tracy continually muddles into hopeless
situations which the Kid (that's his name, honest!) gets him out of.
Short Round in TEMPLE OF DOOM did it far better.
     DICK TRACY easily lends itself to comparison with BATMAN.  Yes,
both come from comics, but the parallels go much farther.  Danny Elfman
scored both, and he used similar music.  Some scenes directly
correspond.  When he leaps through the skylight, jacket flapping, you
cannot think of anything else.
     One possible reason DICK TRACY felt so much weaker than Batman is
the difference in their original medium.  Comic books can offer much more
characterization than daily strips.  That should give the cast much more
room to develop.  Instead, it constrains them.
     Warren Beatty both directed and starred.  Perhaps he should have
left one of the jobs to someone else.  I could not care about Tracy.
Watching his woman problems, I thought Beatty was playing himself.  For
all the hype of the Madonna/Warren Beatty romance, it never showed on
screen.  He had no chemistry with either woman.  Tracy wasn't even a
good cop.  Anyone who needs a child to pull his fat out of the fire more
than once obviously has problems.  He also admitted using unethical
tactics in his investigations.
     While Beatty stumbled along, Madonna oozed sensuality.  When she
walked on in a transparent top, I couldn't believe I was watching
Disney.  She had the best lines, as well.  Her songs were fun, although
I would have liked to hear them straight through.  But despite the
strong character, Madonna also just played herself.
     Tess Trueheart barely competes.  She whined her way through the
entire movie.  What brains she had, she loses midway through the film.
Although she accepted his desire to work the streets and knew he loved
her, she walks out on him with no reason.  Of course, with a name like
Trueheart, you know she'll return.
     What about the other big name stars?  I see no sense in hiring
great actors and then covering them in makeup until they're
unrecognizable.  Al Pacino does the best Mel Brooks imitation I have
ever heard.  In fact, with all that makeup, I thought Brooks did play
the role.  Dustin Hoffman's "Mumbles" does just that.  Some considered
it self-parody--I just found it annoying.  Mandy Patinkin held a lot of
promise.  His duet with Madonna left me wanting more.  But 88 Keys is a
far cry from Inigo Montoya.
     Yes, the cinematography was nice.  I liked the color scheme and
comic bookishness.  Beatty did a good job of recreating the forties feel
especially in the montages during the music.  But the effects were
sloppy and seriously detracted.  I could actually see the cut between
Tess's house and the model.  And again, I found fault with the blue
screen.
     A few other notes of interest.  Stephen Sondheim wrote all
Madonna's music.  When will we get another musical from him?  The Batman
tradition continues.  Disney will release three albums from the film:
Madonna's, featuring both Sondheim's songs and her own, Danny Elfman's
score, and the incidental music.  In the continuing Star Trek actor
watch, keep an eye peeled for Colm Meaney (Lt. O'Brien) as a police
officer.
     As an added treat, the movie opens with a new Roger Rabbit cartoon.
I hope other studios follow Disney's lead.  Unfortunately,
"Rollercoaster Rabbit" shared the same plot as every other Maroon short.
Roger watches over Baby Herman, this time at an amusement park, and gets
killed many times over protecting him.  Although some scenes
(particularly with the bull) are funny, I don't find constant injury
amusing.  Surely Disney can do better than this.

Title
Review for Total Recall (1990)
     You really need a break, but you haven't the time or the money for
an extended holiday.  That's where Rekall can help.  For a fraction of
the cost and an evening's time, they will provide you with memories of
vacation--guaranteed indistinguishable from reality.  To make your
enjoyment complete, you can even assume another persona, from idle
playboy to secret agent.
     But when memories can be altered for pleasure, what can people do
with malicious intent do?  And if memories can be implanted, what then
is reality?  Those questions form the premise of TOTAL RECALL, Arnold
Schwarzenegger's latest movie.  Schwarzenegger plays Doug Quaid, a
construction worker of the future.  He is constantly plagued by dreams
of Mars, and of a beautiful brunette.  He goes to Rekall, to relive (or
relieve) these dreams.  True to form, all hell breaks loose.  To say
more would be unfair.
     Originally based upon a story by Philip K. Dick, TOTAL RECALL
quickly devolves into another Schwarzenegger action slugfest.  Directed
by ROBOCOP's Paul Verhoeven, it paints a very convincing picture of the
future.  And it is a fun one.
     How was the acting?  Well, Arnold was ... Arnold.  He seemed
incongruous as the happy husband of the beginning.  It almost felt like
he was waiting with the rest of us for the action to start.  But once he
got moving, he appears to have as much fun as the viewers.
     His female co-stars were not up to his standard, though.  Sharon
Stone, recently featured in PLAYBOY, plays his wife.  She could handle
the feminine roles, but when she tried to get physical, forget it.
Whirling around in fake Oriental moves only looks ridiculous.  Rachel
Ticotin managed the action scenes, but her character lacked motivation.
Her feelings toward Schwarzenegger heat and chill more frequently than
Boston weather.
     The rest of the cast featured a who's who of recent SF.  Verhoeven
recast ROBOCOP villain Ronny Cox as the big corporate bad guy.  He plays
basically the same character, although wielding much more power this
time around.  Michael Ironside from V works for him.  He holds a
personal grudge against Quaid, but it all felt tired.  I also spotted
two guest-stars from STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION, one of them utterly
delightful as a triple-breasted whore.
     But when you watch the film, none of that matters.  Verhoeven's
direction pulls you along for the ride.  He manages to closely focus the
attention through both fast and slow-paced scenes.  The tension level
remains high throughout.
     The script also deserves credit.  Philip K. Dick's work usually
provokes thought and this is no different.  For those unfamiliar with
his work, his novel DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?  inspired
BLADERUNNER.  TOTAL RECALL comes from his short story "We Can Remember
It For You Wholesale."  Although the adaptation certainly takes
liberties, it still raises powerful questions like those mentioned at
the start.
     The future we get seems quite plausible.  No one presents us with
utopia or dystopia on a platter.  We feel at home with the Quaids.  I
wish the year had been pinpointed more clearly--some details seem
anachronistic.  (Mining machines exist, yet they still use jackhammers?)
It also includes a lot of product placement, but that didn't get in the
way of the story (keep your eyes peeled for the copy of Mars Today).
     Generally, the effects are strong.  With a few exceptions, the
alien makeup is convincing.  My main complaint regards something I've
noticed in many recent films.  It appears that someone has lost the
secret to good blue-screen.
     Like Robocop, TOTAL RECALL is incredibly violent.  However, about
halfway through the film, the gore stops amusing.  You can't cheer the
bad guys' deaths because there are too many of them.  The cliff-hanging,
eye-popping finale runs a little too long.
     Also, their research seemed quite sloppy.  Too often they
sacrificed believability for the sake of drama.  Again, the ending
really disappoints.  Verhoeven has a Ph.D. in Physics; one might think
he'd study Mars a little more.  People in glass airlocks shouldn't throw
stones.  One moment's thought can puncture more holes than their
automatic weapons did.
     But the pace doesn't allow you that much time to think.  All these
nitpicks come to mind long after seeing the film.  When watching the
movie, I loved it.  And, yes, I'd probably go see it again.
     So, if you like your fun mindless and don't mind a bit of gore and
violence, by all means see TOTAL RECALL.  For those who want something a
little more intelligent, read the short story and wait for it to come on
cable.

Title
Review for Cadillac Man (1990)
     CADILLAC MAN opens with shots of a cemetery.  An unlikely place to
begin a movie about cars ... until we focus on the procession stalled
by a broken hearse.  Not only does Robin Williams, the consummate
salesman, pitch the undertaker, he also hits on the widow.
     Despite this sell-at-all-costs attitude (or perhaps because of it)
Williams doesn't move the cars as fast as he once did.  His problems
pile on quickly.  He can't resist the ladies, juggling three of them as
the film starts.  To help meet his expenses, he owes massive debts to
some not-so-savory sources.  And then he receives an ultimatum.
Williams will lose his job unless he can sell twelve cars in two days.
     That sets up a tidy plot--Robin Williams does DEATH OF A SALESMAN.
But just as you think you've got the movie straightened out, it throws
you a curve.  Tim Robbins (BULL DURHAM) takes the dealership hostage.
You see, his wife is having an affair with someone in the office, and he
wants to know who.  Only Williams' practiced patter can free them.
     I found this movie the funniest I've seen all year.  It doesn't
reflect as sharp a vision as other black comedies, but it also isn't as
cruel.
     Generally, the minor characters portrayed broad stereotypes.
However, strong acting took them past the familiar territory.  Both of
Williams' girlfriends had strong personalities, although his ex-wife
seemed rather bland.  Likewise, the other salesmen seemed to blend
together, although the customers all sharply define themselves.
     Tim Robbins basically reprises his role of befuddled innocent from
BULL DURHAM.  All he wants to know was "Who did Donna?"  As his plot
falls apart, his frustration is evident.  He honestly never expected
police to show up.  When they request his demands, he only wants them to
go away.  Despite the situation, you soon sympathize with him.
     Robin Williams is quite credible as the sleazy salesman.  He knows
the reputation and lives up to it.  Williams narrates the bridges and
slower scenes, the camera an invisible passenger in his car.  I found
this technique distracting at times, although his points were often
valid.
     Robin Williams has definitely graduated from the pack of Seventies'
comics.  While much of the SNL/SCTV crowd has stagnated, he takes us
from laughs to near tears in seconds.  If future movies continue in the
vein of CADILLAC MAN and DEAD POETS' SOCIETY, I can see Robin Williams
winning an Oscar within the next decade.
     The language seemed unnecessarily strong, but didn't detract too
much from the story.  Otherwise, it was a marvelous film.  The
soundtrack consisted of older tunes.  In some ways, this added to the
image of Robin Williams as a dying breed.
     Although I enjoy most movies, I'm offering unequivocal praise here.
See this film and do so soon.  I'm afraid that the summer blockbusters
will roll CADILLAC MAN right out of the theaters.  But that's a shame,
because this definitely deserves a test drive.
