Authors
John Eung Soo Kim
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Mimic (1997)
Director: Guillermo Del Toro
Star Players: Mira Sorvino, Jeremy Northam, Charles Dutton
Something about this movie really bugs me (pun intended).  New York has
been infected by a new disease which kills children.  The carriers of
this disease have been identified as the always misunderstood
cockaroach.  Etomologist Susan Tyler (Sorvino) was brought in to kill
ALL the NYC roaches using a genetically engineered bug which secretes
enzymes that kills the roaches after they injest it.  BTW the bugs known
as the Judas Breed have also been engineered to die after a few months. 
Sound familiar?  How about this, "Life will find a way!"
Three years have passed since the roach genocide and strange murders
have been turning up in the streets.  Coincidence?  Not likely.  The
bugs have found a way to reproduce and grow to amazing size.  They have
evolved and mutated into a functional hive complete with soldiers,
workers, queen and king.  It only took three years for this macro
evolution due to the life span of the creatures and their relatively
short generational gap.  Now it's up to two scientists (scientists never
seem to know when they're in way over their heads), a NYC transit cop, a
shoe shiner and his autistic boy to save the world.  Any questions?
The story and premise was a good idea.  The sub-plots, however, just
dragged the whole movie and added extraneous characters.  Even the
autistic child, Chuy proved to be a nuiscance and tried the patience of
the audience.  One event that truely bothered me was the unnaturally
strong emotions Sorvino's character had with the child.  There were
indications that she loved children and longed to have one but to be so
attached to someone who she hardly had any contact with seemed contrived
and pushed the audiences ability to believe the authenticity of her
feelings.  The bugs were well done.  The creature effects were superb
along with the special effects.  The acting was also surprising. 
Sorvino played her character well as did (unsurprisingly) Dutton. 
However,  a good idea, good special effects and good acting doesn't
necessarily make a good movie.  Mimic lacked a good script and although
it had well developed secondary characters, they didn't prove to be very
useful or very likeable.  The editing was as good as it could have been
but I was just one "Funny shoes" away from walking out.  Less is more
and in Mimic's case, they should have taken out shoe shine man and shoe
shine boy.  They weren't necessary at all for the progression on the
story and just added 20 minutes and unbelievability to an otherwise good
idea.

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
If you love being scared out of your pants, this is the movie you've
been waiting for.  In the year 2040, the space ship Event Horizon was
lost near Neptune.  Publically, it was stated that Event Horizon had
exploded.  Privately, it was a special experimental ship that allowed
faster than light space travel by folding space.  It is now 2047, seven
years after what was called the biggest space disaster ever recorded and
a beacon has been discovered near the orbit of Neptune.  Dr. Weis (Sam
Neil of Jurassic Park) is sent with the rescue ship Lewis&Clark which is
captained by Lawrence Fishburne to attempt to salvage the crew and ship.
There were only two plot points that disturbed me but they proved to be
minor.  The first was the scientific explanations for the experimental
space folding process but  remember Star Trek?  During its initial
television season 90% of its audience was unable to understand one full
episode due to its heavy usage of up to date scientific theories and
hypotheses.  We figure this point can be forgiven since an explanation
had to have been made and it's very much appreciated that they don't
come back to any more science and concentrate on the story.  The next
point is slightly more critical.  The survivors.  They weren't the ones
that we rooted for.  In fact, they had the least amount of screen time
and the least amount of contact, save one, with the entity within Event
Horizon.
Aside from these slight hitches, the movie was brilliantly done.  The
special effects were amazing, except for some of the floating space
debris which was clearly computer generated, the editing was tight and
moved the story quite nicely, the sound and score was perfect, never
overpowering and perfectly underscoring the visuals and the story! 
Whew!  The most amazing aspect of the film was that it had a fierce
story with tension starting at the first five minutes and never
relenting afterwards.  The plot was well developed and the sub-plots
added to the eerieness of the whole project.  One bit of warning, Event
Horizon is not for the squeemish.  There is enough gore to make you spew
so don't buy the extra large popcorn!  Be especially wary of the hell
scenes, which by the way screams with Clive Barker influences.

Title
Review for Deep Impact (1998)
Unlike most disaster movies, "Deep Impact" focuses on the psychological
aspect of impending doom.  Dir. Mimi Leder tries to bring us into the
minds of the characters and explore the drama for each sub-plot but it
just doesn't seem to work.  "Deep Impact" is Leder's second feature
film.  She directed DreamWorks' first feature "The Peacemaker" with
George Clooney and Nicole Kidman.
The story and script was very well written.  The situation and measures
taken seem very feasible.  The only problem?  The people didn't seem
real and sorry to say, the directing wasn't all that good as well.  It's
very difficult to have a director (whose strength is in drama) to direct
a story with nothing but heros for a cast.  Everyone sacrificed.  Some
gave up their lifes, others allowed their child to go off and save the
girl he loves, etc, etc.
Academy Award winner Robert Duvall seemed out of place and unconvincing
(I never thought I would ever say that),  3 time Academy Award nominee
Morgan Freeman was one-dimentional, Tea Leoni was always either scared
or angry.  And sadly to say, these were just a few of the problems. 
Leder does try, however.  There's a great scene where we're glued to the
edge of out seats when we are brought into the helmets of the
astronauts.  The slow repetition of dissolves as Mrs. Lerner prepares to
die is reminiscent of Scorcese's "Age of Innocence".  Unfortunately, the
attempt to bring us in to the minds of the people in the smaller stories
only suceeds in making the film seem smaller.  As if the budget wasn't
large enough to support the special effects, great cast AND the large
amount of extras needed to make it a legitimate disaster film.  There
just wasn't enough scenes with a mass of people.  In fact, there were
more people in the theater than in most of the crowd scenes.
Overall, due to poor directing, art direction, and character
development, I gave the film *1/2 of *****.
