Authors
Michael Har-even
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Lola Montčs (1955)
Director: Max Ophuls
Cast: Martine Carol, Peter Ustinov, Oskar Werner, Anton Walbrook
Released on 1955, 140 minutes.
     LOLA MONTES tells the story of a woman who had many lovers all
around Europe and ended up in an American circus selling her memories
and kisses to the masses.  The film is a mixture of the circus act
presenting her life and of flashbacks from the past.
     This film is very demanding for the spectator.  The mixture of the
present and the past, the unique style of Max Ophuls and the usage of
cinemascope demand our full attention.  I shall try to clarify some
aspects of this film without revealing important details.  In fact, the
film has no ordinary plot.  The film consists of several events from the
life of LOLA MONTES.  Who is Lola Montes?
     She is the woman who had more than 42 lovers, the woman who was
admired by every man in Europe and had love affairs with Wagner and
Liszt.  She was the perfect "femme fatal," the woman who symbolized
love, the woman who had caused scandals all over Europe and ended up in
the circus.  When Lola was asked about herself, she said that all the
things told about her are not true, she was just a woman who did
whatever she wanted to do.  Why are men attracted to Lola?
     she is not very beautiful, she is a mediocre dancer and she has no
unique qualities but Lola can do whatever she desires to do.  She
chooses whom will fall in love with her and when the affair should be
terminated.  In fact, one might suspect that Lola had many lovers in
searching for true love.  Her search is more important than all the
conventions and all the rules in the world and as a result no obstacle
seems to bother her.
     When Lola finds a new lover, we admire her individuality.  When
Lola is making a scandal, we admire her for doing what we are afraid to
do.  When Lola realizes love, we admire her for fulfilling our dreams.
When Lola joins the circus, we are not just feeling sorry for her but
rather pity ourselves for failing to fulfill our own desires.  Why did
Lola stop her search?  Why did she join the circus?
     Lola is a true romantic hero, in the best tradition of the great
romantic literature.  When I am using the term "romantic," I am not
referring to the misleading and abused connotation given to this word
in this century.  I think that a romantic hero is a person who doesn't
believe in fate and tries to fulfill all his desires in any cost.  The
problem is that the fight is tedious and actually life itself is
tedious.  In the end, Lola became tidy and joined the circus.  She was
defeated by the naturalistic world, by the conventions and by the mass
of people.  Her final tragedy is that she is literally like in prison.
She doesn't have enough strength to make her attempt to be free
successful.  The irony, of course, is that her prisoner is her last
lover.
     The naturalistic end of the film should raise many questions.  Is
LOLA MONTES a romantic film or a naturalistic film?  Did Lola stop to be
the perfect romantic hero?  Does true love exist?  Is romanticism as a
life style possible?
     The great qualities of LOLA MONTES are not just the ideas stated
so far.  The aesthetic style of Ophuls is very unique.  His originality
could be easily compared to that of Renoir, Welles or Bunuel.  I could
describe in great details his detached way of cinematography, the
significance of the decor and his focusing on the exterior of the event
and not on the interior.  The best thing to do, however, is to go and
see the film for yourself.  LOLA MONTES is one of those rare gems which
could be distincted from most of the films you have ever seen.  To see
LOLA MONTES is to realize that cinema can be the greatest form of art.

Title
Review for Jurassic Park (1993)
     I wanted to forget my integrity and to write this review without
going to the film. Then, I have decided against seeing the film and
against writing this review. Finally, I saw the film and got 100
million reasons in favor of writing this review. Most of the following
ideas were raised before seeing the film. Those ideas should reflect
trends in the American cinema today. Watching Jurassic PARK reassured
me that I was right.
     Preston Sturges wrote many years ago the golden rules for making a
successful comedy. I would like to list those rules along with my rules
for making a successful commercial film. Naturally, the rules of
Sturges are much better. Here are the rules (my rules are inside
brackets):
     Technology has no correlation to quality. Most of the great
masterpieces of cinema are either silent films or B&W films. The medium
of cinema is realistic by its nature. There should be no essential
difference between a silent film, B&W film or a colored film. The
availability of sound and color opened new ways of expression,
nevertheless, the aesthetic nature of cinema has not been changed since
the beginning.
     One might presume that technology could help to increase the
realistic effect. The truth is that realism cannot be achieved by mere
imitation or by restoration. Realism can be only achieved if the
director and the actors are totally sincere. Spielberg invested 100
million dollars in order to create realistic dinosaurs. The irony is
that his film is totally unrealistic. His film is like the Jurassic
park, amazing at first sight but totally phony. Whether 100 million
dollars or billion dollars are spent virtual reality cannot replace
reality.
     JURASSIC PARK is like a new candy. It seems to be tasty but very
soon you want a sweeter candy. You can enjoy a candy, but how can you
take a candy seriously?

Title
Review for Reservoir Dogs (1992)
     Even though RESERVOIR DOGS is the first film of director-writer
Tarantino, I would like to evaluate his work.  The most striking thing
in the film is the mixture of events from the present and the past.
The pre-crime and crime sequences are not flashbacks, their main
purpose is not to explain but rather to increase the dramatic tension.
Those events are assembled by the author of this film as another mean
of expression.  We might even say that this process is super-editing or
even super-montage of a whole film.
     Another quality of this film is the lack of psychology.  All the
characters are flat and the only important matter is the action and not
the reason.  This is one of the reasons why the last scene is already a
myth.  In fact, we know almost nothing about each character.  The only
exception is the police agent and I am not sure that it is justified.
The difficult violence is mingled with humor.  This mixture is not only
original but it is also being used to increase the total realistic
effect.
     Tarantino is an excellent writer and a talented director.  The
main problem is his inability to control the medium totally.  Most of
the scenes on the film are theatrical yet the decor is monotone.  The
lighting could be improved and there is no order (or purposeful
disorder) in the cinematography.  For example, the dazzling movements
of the camera on the dialogue scenes remind an experiment of a cinema
student.  Naturally, Tarantino has no experience so we have to forgive
him.
     His next film will be the true test of an artist.  If he continues
to be obsessed with violence at the expense of form, in the best case
he will be just another good American director like Scorsese or
Coppola.  In the worst case, he will be merely an imitator.  By
forgetting all his idols and by challenging the limits of cinema, his
true self might be exposed.  After all, I hope he wants to become more
than just a fucking professional!

Title
Review for Sunrise (1927)
Director: F.W.Murnau
Cast: George O'Brien, Janet Gaynor, Bodil Rosing, Margaret Livingstone.
Released in 1927, 110 minutes.
     SUNRISE tells the story of a peasant who is encouraged by his
mistress, a city vamp, to get rid of his beloved wife.  The actual tale
is well known but the unique way that Murnau has managed to treat the
subject turns a cliche to one of the great masterpieces of cinema.
     It is impossible to relate this film to a precise style or genre.
Basically, it is a realistic film (but not naturalistic) mingled with
surrealistic and expressionistic scenes.  It is not a drama more than
it is a comedy.  It is a silent film yet every spectator can imagine
the colors and hear the sounds of each scene.
     The main subject is the relationship between men and women in the
modern society.  Men and women are different creatures.  Men like sport
while women like to dance.  Men are active while women are passive.
Men are direct while women are more sensitive.  In the modern world
(the city), the distinctions between the sexes are not that strict any
more.  Men must learn to be sensitive while women should pay for their
lunch.  How can that change take place?
     The only possible way is through love.  Love unites men and women
and gives them the strength to cope with troubles.  In SUNRISE, the man
and woman are peasants who enjoy the modern world but in the same time
have difficulty in adjusting to it.  As a result, there are several
very funny scenes that Keaton and Chaplin would have been proud of.
For example, after dropping a reproduction of Venus of Mile, the two
peasants cannot find the missing parts of the body on the floor.
     SUNRISE describes the rebirth of love.  The magnificent thing is
that the way the story is told is as delightful as the story itself.
Only on rare occasions, the audience becomes so close to the main
characters.  The actors are wonderful and Murnau succeeded to transform
their feelings and thoughts to the spectators.
     The expressions of the actors are so revealing that the spectators
are forced to unite with the main characters.  As a result, all the
events and the situations are very realistic.  Murnau exploits the
exterior for the same purpose.  When the hero is happy, a street full
of cars turns into a magical forest.  When he is full of lust for his
mistress, images of her are dissolving around him.  Even the titles are
formed in different shapes to express sarcasm.  A set of panning shots
are used to retain the realistic atmosphere after the expressionistic
and the surrealistic scenes.
     The result is one of the most sensible love stories ever told.  It
seems that SUNRISE is more interesting, more enjoyable, more original
and more authentic than any film of our decade.  How come?
     Like a true modern artist Murnau had an aesthetic theory on the
background of his films.  He tried to avoid the conventional so he
explored his ideas by creating films.  On the foreground, he loved his
actors, he loved his actresses, he loved the camera--he was in love
with cinema.  The greatest quality of SUNRISE is that some of this love
is passed to us.

Title
Review for Schindler's List (1993)
     How can you pass a judgement when the matter is so important?  Is
SCHINDLER'S LIST a great film?  If it is not, is not the fact that it
raised the awareness of the Holocaust sufficient by itself?  How can we
speak about a piece of art when so many feelings are involved?
     All those questions are difficult to answer but we must try to
find answers because the subject is very important.  First, it is
necessary to put all our feelings behind.  Not that those feelings are
not important, their direct connection to the subject might become an
obstacle.  After all, I would like to believe that the Holocaust is
shocking and horrible for every human being.  On the other hand, it is
impossible to treat the film from a purely artistic point of view.  The
ethical side of the film must not be neglected.
     The fundamental issue is whether the theme of the film is
Schindler or the Holocaust.  If it is Schindler, the film has no
historical importance and it must be treated as any other film.  If it
is the Holocaust, we must find out if the film is a good representation
of the subject.  What do I mean by using the word "good"?
     The nature of art is to select, to point out what is important.
The film describes some local events that should reflect the Holocaust
in general.  It is necessary to find out if this reflection is
credible, typical and most important: if all the difficult questions
are tackled.  What are those questions?
     It is very difficult to perceive the Holocaust as a real event.
How could it happen?  How could German intellectuals become vicious
murders?  Why did so many people hate the Jews?  Why, only on rare
occasions, did somebody oppose?
     The film tells the story of 1100 Jews saved by Schindler, a member
of the Nazi party.  Naturally, this story is untypical to the Holocaust
because most of the Jews were exterminated and on every person who
saved Jews (and most of them were not Germans) there were thousands of
people who deliberately turned Jews to the Nazis.  The main characters
of the film are Schindler, Goeth, Stern and several Jewish survivors.
The main problem of the film is disproportion.  On every Schindler
there were not one Goeth but several hundreds.  Even worse, on every
Schindler there were thousands of ignorants who did not care.  Those
ignorants were the majority and their silent approval made the final
solution possible.
     After seeing the film, one might presume that the Holocaust was
caused by the S.S.  The S.S. is not the only source of evil.  It is the
child of hundreds years of Christian hatred.  It is the representative
of the German people, who thought that they were superior.  If fact,
the film is very successful in Germany because every German can believe
now that there were also good Germans, that that were many good
Germans, that the Nazis were only the minority.  Nothing can be further
from the historical truth.
     The only explanation for the Nazis' behavior is given by
Schindler.  He says that Goeth is really a good guy.  It is the war
that made him evil.  The spectators cannot except this opinion because
it is evident that Goeth is very cruel in his nature.  What about
everybody else?
     The film does not describe other persons.  It is only possible to
observe that they follow orders and that they consider Jews as
animals.  Why? What was the source of those opinions?
     It seems that the film fails to treat all those important issues.
Nevertheless, it has an important role in adding credibility to the
Holocaust.  It is  particularly important because many people claim
that the Holocaust never happened.  The source of this credibility is
mainly due to the fact that all the events in the film were real.  In
my opinion, the most sensitive scene in the film is the last scene
where the story turns into reality.  After seeing the film, the
spectator, who was unfamiliar with the Holocaust, will have some sense
of Holocaust.  He will not understand the nature of the Holocaust and
he will not know that the historical details suggest that the Holocaust
was much worst.  For example, Jewish children were shot and the Germans
called it "rat hunting."  German doctors checked how long it takes to
starve an infant to death.  Jews were massacred by people of other
nations.  Jewish doctors were forced to kill babies.
     After all those subjects, it seems that it is impossible to
evaluate the film artistically.  Nevertheless, I shall handle this
matter briefly.  The fundamental artistic tool used in the film is
shooting it in black and white.  It seems that Spielberg used it to
bring a gloomy atmosphere and to reach some kind of detachment.  The
only colored scenes in the film are naturally symbolic and impressive.
Nevertheless, Spielberg has not used all the means of expression at his
disposal.  He failed to use lighting in any reasonable and consistent
way.  It seems that he lacks the understanding of the black-and-white
medium.  As a result, his film is in black and white but is not a
black-and-white film.  The wonderful actors make the situation more
balanced.
     After expressing my opinions, I feel like injuring myself.  Seeing
hundreds of Jewish spectators all being very silent after the film, I
hope that I have not hurt the feelings of any of them.  I hope that
many people all over the world will go to see the film and become
familiar with the Holocaust.  I also fear that most of them will get
the wrong impression.  The Holocaust is not the story of the survivors,
nor is it the story of charity or brutality, it is the misfortune of
the victims exterminated just because they were Jews.
     I believed once that Spielberg is insincere.  I was wrong, he is
simply blind.  I hope that the audience is not blind.  I urged everyone
to find out all the facts, to ask the difficult questions, to remember
and never to forget.  Only then, another Holocaust could be prevented.

Title
Review for Deux anglaises et le continent, Les (1971)
     LES DEUX ANGLAISES ET LES CONTINENT also known as TWO ENGLISH
GIRLS is one of the most beautiful films of the director Francois
Truffaut.  The script is based on a novel by Henri-Pierre Roche, who
also wrote JULES ET JIM.  The film was released in France on 1971 and
was a big failure.
     The film is the story of the love between a young Frenchman called
Claud (Jean-Pierre Leaud) and two English sisters, Anne (Kika Markham)
and Muriel (Stacy Tendeter).  The story takes place in England and
France before WWI.  The characters of Claud, Anne and Muriel are
presented by Claud and by the "author."
     The complicated love story is surrounded by two different
atmospheres.  On one hand, there is puritan and peaceful England in the
end of the Victorian decade.  On the other hand, there is imaginative
French with its freedom and impressionism on the horizon of a new
decade.  The two opposite environments are portrayed with soft colors,
authentic lighting and realistic decor by the "mise en scene" of
Truffaut and the camera of Nestor Almandros.  The result is a magical
restoration of that period.  It is easy to notice throughout the film
paintings of Cezane and Renoir transformed into their cinematographic
equivalence.
     The main theme, however, is about love.  Many films about love were
made, but only few of them handle this subject well.  We may recall LES
ENFANTS DU PARADIS (tragic love), L'ATALANTE (sensual love), LOVE ME
TONIGHT (romantic love), CITY LIGHT (pure love), LETTER FROM AN UNKNOWN
WOMAN (absolute love), THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO (impossible love) and
other films.
     Early in the film, Claud said that true love must be physical.
Truffaut also told that he wanted to create a film about physical love
but he did more.  The feelings between Claud and Anne and Muriel and
Claud reflect tragic, sensual, romantic, pure, absolute, impossible,
physical and other forms of love.  The plot consists of a climax
followed by another climax and so on.  As the events become more tense,
the true love between Claud and one of the sisters grows.  After the
last climax, Truffaut could have ended the film but Truffaut was
honest.
     The last scene is truly impressionistic.  It gives the film its
final perspective.  In the end, we are sad for all the pain, we are
excited by the beautiful story but the most outstanding thing, in my
opinion, is the sensitivity and sincerity which dominate the whole
film, the sensitivity and sincerity of a great director.
