Authors
Nicholas Parrott
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for 06 (1994)
(Theo van Gogh, Holland, 1995)
Welsh International Film Festival, Theatre Y Werin Aberystwyth, 16/11/95
     In Holland 06 is the code for special services, including sex
lines.  Here complete strangers can meet and share their personal
fantasies.  Thomas replies to Sara's advert and soon they are involved
in exploring their erotic fantasies over the phone.  Thursday nights
become their regular "date."  But Sara has control as Thomas doesn't
have her number.  And only towards the end of the film does Thomas
start to influence the direction of the relationship.
     06 is a slow-moving, minimalist movie which explores the anonymity
and absurdity of telephone sex without sending it up.  Here is a world
that exists only in fantasy, where lovers can adopt whatever physical
characteristics, dress or sexuality that they chose, and where lies are
rarely found out.  This is a bittersweet if sometimes laboured account
of two peoples attempts to balance the erotic attraction of talking
dirty to a complete stranger and their denial that this is part of the
lives.  Thomas's reaction when Sara describes, in detail, a recent
sexual exploit to him is intriguing, raising questions whether theirs
is a real relationship or not.  This movie will probably get no further
than the arts clubs, but is fascinating viewing for those interested in
the politics of sex.

Title
Review for Limits of Thermal Travelling, The (1995)
(Mark Bender, USA 1995)
Welsh International Film Festival, Commodore Cinema Aberystwyth, 16/11/95
     Director Mark Bender was in town to introduce his new film, which
in his words "catalogues the weird sex lives of Americans."  Judging
from this movie it is not only their sex lives which are weird....
     The seriously moody Josh Mackintosh (David Jacob Ryder ) hits the
road believing he killed his wife in a domestic fight.  He ends up on
the Space Coast of Florida where he promptly meets and beds slapper
Angela Hayes.  Things turn weird when he starts receiving phone calls
from her deranged and estranged husband, Dennis (****). They then
become distinctly unpleasant when his wife, alive and kicking, and new
lover arrive in town seeking revenge.  There are twists a plenty in the
plot, not all of which can be revealed as this was a unique cut for the
festival, with the film about to be recut for general release.
     THE LIMITS OF THERMAL TRAVELLING is one weird movie over which the
influence of David Lynch (Director of Twin Peaks) hangs heavily.
Cleverly crafted camera work creates a mood of disorientation, and this
is set against a fast moving and sometimes difficult to follow plot.
Thankfully the film never gets as dark as much of Lynch's work and
maintains an ability both to surprise the audience and make them
laugh.  Star of the show has to be Dennis, Angela's spurned husband who
throughout the film maintains the fine balance between lucidity and
over the top craziness.

Title
Review for Comfortably Numb (1995)
Welsh International Film Festival 1995
     Idealistic young lawyer William Best leaves the security of his
prestigious family practice to go to work public prosecutors office in
Manhattan.  Out on the town with one night with a colleague he meets
and is bedded by the seductive Meadow Adare, little knowing that she is
an escort girl and that the treat was paid for by his friend.  Their
relationship blossoms as she introduces him to a world of parties and
hard drugs.  But the heroin takes its toll and he is unable to live up
to his high flying job.
     Despite fine acting by the two leads this movie plumbs the depths
of cinematic clichi.  The idealistic ivy leaguer falling prey to the
corrupting influence of the underworld; the hooker who starts dating
one of her clients and; the power of drugs to wreck peoples lives.
>From the moment she introduces him to heroin he hits a downward slope
and never once looks like pulling himself off of it.  The message, that
smack kills, has been told before (although perhaps it needs telling
time and time again) but in this instance the storyline is predictably
told and halfway into the film there is little doubt what the outcome
will be.

Title
Review for Siempre Xonxa (1989)
(Chano Pineiro, Galicia, 1990)
Welsh International Film Festival, Arad Goch, Aberystwyth, 17/11/95
     SEMPRE XONXA is the first feature film to come from Galicia (the
north westerly Atlantic province of Spain).  Set in the beautiful
scenery of that area it tells the story of a relationship between one
woman, Xonxa (Uxia Blanco) and two men, Pancho and Biratus (Miguel
Insua and Xavier R Lourido).  It is a story of love, honour and
betrayal: a very familiar latin theme.
     Yet it is not only a love story.  It also explores ideas of
cultural change and the conflict between the traditional and the
modern.  The village may be isolated from the rest of the world, but
not immune from its influence.  When Biratus returns from the Americas
a self made millionaire he is easily able to accept the established
order of things.  But will his influence last?
     Stealing the show is village ironsmith, **** (******) whose
madcap inventions and visions animate village life as well as the
movie, bringing a touch of magical realism to the film which will be
familiar to fans of Gabriel Marquez.   Although long (at almost two
hours), it is an altogether enjoyable move, which presents a very
different facet of Spanish film to the more familiar, and wholly
urban, works of Pedro Almovadar.  One of the highlights of the
festival.

Title
Review for Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid (1995)
Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid
The K Foundation at Ceredigion Museum Sat 11/11/95
     I must confess that Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty were once heroes
of mine.  In 1992 they set the charts alight, were the top selling
singles band in the UK, recorded one of the best albums ever (The White
Room) and scooped top band from the Brits Awards.  They did it with
detachment, breaking all the rules along the way.  Rumours of their
personal indulgences, lawsuits over unauthorised sampling of Abba's
music, a collection of wacky vehicles (including a US cop car, ice
cream van and military combat vehicle) and wild publicity stunts all
went to fuel the legend of pop's wildboys.  Then they retired, claiming
that they would never make another record, and set up the K
Foundation.
     Two years on they withdrew all the K Foundation's assets from the
bank, headed up to Jura and burned the lot in a fireplace in an empty
croft.  This is the only record of that event.  A one-hour home movie
of two guys burning a million pounds.  Entertainment it is not.  The K
Foundation smile and chat as they flick one fifty pound note after
another onto a burning fire.  Visually it is as exciting as watching
paper burn, but there is a morbid fascination involved.  The audience
fidgets nervously, wondering if this is 'art' or a personal form of
therapy, asking themselves what on earth possessed these two guys to do
such a thing.  Were these guys for real or is it just another of their
notorious publicity stunts?
     If there was point to the exercise it maybe it was just that,
to get people talking.  After all, money is the most important symbol
in our society (witness the hysteria unleashed by the Lottery) and to
wilfully destroy it is akin to an act of heresy.  Here's the K
Foundation burning a million smackers.  Is it art?  Is it a social
statement?  Or is it just sad ?  Not surprisingly it made a lot of
people angry and many questioned the collective sanity of the K
Foundation.  But it did get people talking, all the way to the bar and
out the other side again.
     Having burned a million quid, made the home movie, and made a
documentary about it (screened on Omnibus two weeks ago), the K
Foundation are now keeping silent.  They've done the interviews about
why they did it and are now refusing to answer all questions on the
subject, feeling that they've exhausted its potential.  Permission for
the planned showing of the movie in a prison in Glasgow was withdrawn
at the last minute.  The K Foundation has disbanded itself, being
financially (and creatively) bankrupt.  The question on many people's
lips was what will they do next?  Unless they make another record who
really cares ?

Title
Review for Kicking and Screaming (1995)
     KICKING AND SCREAMING is one of the many new movies being shown at
this years film festival.  It played to a surprisingly packed house at
the Commodore. But then it does deal with a theme that many at
Aberystwyth will find familiar.
     A bunch of guys decide to stay around college after
graduating.  They hang out in bars and chase freshers, but these are
the occasional highlights of an otherwise boring existence.  Shortly
they find their friendships starting to fracture as frustration and
personal jealousies set in.  Wannabe writer Grover (Josh Hamilton) is
plagued by memories of his girlfriend (Olivia D'abo) who left for
Prague straight after graduation.  His flashbacks of that romance are a
recurrent theme of good times lost.  His inability to reply to her
messages on his answerphone symbolic of his lack of direction.  Skippy
(Jason Wiles) re-enrolls in classes and tries to keep his relationship
with the flighty Miami (Parker Posey) alive.  While Otis (Carlos
Jascott), the lovable buffoon, tries hard to adjust to his new role,
applying to Graduate School but ending up working in a video store.
Role model to them all is the philosophising Chet (Eric Stolz), bar
steward and eternal student, now in his tenth year at college.
     KICKING AND SCREAMING is an enjoyable movie, but it does lack
some punch.  The end is inconclusive as the characters start to drift
away.  Otis eventually flies back home.  His departure inspires Grover
to fly to Prague to see Jane, but he gets grounded because he doesn't
have a passport.  As in real life the characters just start to drift
apart, not necessarily in pursuit of something new but because they
know they have climb out of the hole they have dug for themselves.
Despite a limp ending the film is an impressive debut for writer and
director Noam Baumbach and an wonderful vehicle for a clutch of gifted
young actors.
