Authors
Paulo Sargaco
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Rock, The (1996)
   This movie achieves a doubtfull feat, beeing at the same time 
predictable and a good thriller. The pregnancy annoucement is 
predictable, the change in the missil launch coordinates as well the 
general's (Ed Harris) attitude towards the whole mission are 
predictable, the major's final move is predictable and finally the 
'Mason's dead' scene is quite predictable indeed. But even though all 
these predictabilities exist Michael Bay manages to build a fairly 
interesting thriller ambiance while the movie's heroes, Goodspeed (Sean 
Connery) and Mason (Nicolas Cage), crawl under Alcatraz' tunnels. The 
characters are pretty well constructed and Michael Bay doesn't give in 
to the temptation of making Mason an 
even-though-he's-quite-old-he's-still-a-superman kind of guy and it's my 
opinion making Goodspeed a somewhat goofy and not that combat-fit FBI 
agent was a good bet. 
   Another proof of Bay's good sense is the not excessive amount of 
explosions used in the film, in fact, I would almost dare to say he used 
the exact amount. There were some not that credible scenes though but I 
suppose in movie of this kind it must be almost impossible not to have 
them. As examples we have the scene in wich Mason throws Cormak, FBI 
director (or whatever), out the terrace, holding him only whith the 
thinnest thread. The result would be that FBI would have to get a new 
director and the city would have a hell of a time scraping him from the 
pavement. The other scene is the one in which Cage's character is 
projected into the water by the explosion of the bombs thrown by the 
F-18s. If these bombs were intended to melt the VX stuff I gess poor 
Goodspeed would have turned into a very small amount of ashes scattered 
in the four winds. But I guess leavind dear pregnant Carla without a 
husband to help her raise the unborn child would be a very cruel option 
even though stuff like that happens all the time. But then, this is a 
movie.
   Another scene I would like to mention is the one in wich all the 
SEALs get killed. It is, in my opinion, very well achieved and leaves 
you with a cry of powerlessness stuck in your throat. It hurts even 
though you didn't really had the time to bond with the SEAL's charaters.
   Finally a small word for this movie's motivation. It seems north 
americans are starting to go sweet on these "The Internal Enemy" (or 
"They", if your prefer short terms) stories. It's only healthy to be a 
little paranoid about the next door neighbour.
