Authors
Billy Green
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Long Riders, The (1980)
     Another western (and I don't generally like westerns).  Like GREASER'S
PALACE, though, I don't really consider this one to be so much of a western.
The focus of this film is the characters, not their guns.
     This is the western with the best gimmick of the decade--the James
brothers are played by James and Stacy Keach; the Younger brothers are played
by David, Keith and Robert Carradine; the Miller brothers are played by Dennis
and Randy Quaid; and Bob and Charlie Ford are played by Nicholas and
Christopher Guest--four sets of brothers played by four sets of brothers.  But,
unlike most gimmicks, this gimmick doesn't detract from your enjoyment of the
movie.
     The story is primarily that of the James-Younger gang.  This version seems
to be based more on fact than on speculation, though.  On this level, the movie
succeeds very well.
     Underneath the historical facts we get a glimpse of the bandits as people
(this is where the speculation comes in).  To this end, the film resembles
BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE SUNDANCE KID, except that the characters aren't so
loveable.  The major resemblance between the two films is that the bandits are
tripped up by time and progress--both of which have quietly passed them by.
There is a wonderful scene (although brief) in THE LONG RIDERS where the James
and Younger brothers (plus Clell Miller and two hired men) are riding into a
town to rob the bank.  As they ride their horses down the street, a strange
noise grows louder and louder.  A steam-engined vehicle (a steamroller, I
think) comes rumbling up the street.  The bandits stop dead in their tracks as
this strange machine forces its way past them.  Shortly after this, their
attempt at robbing a bank is foiled by a new time lock on a safe.
     THE LONG RIDERS features good acting, a nice script, and great music by Ry
Cooder.

Title
Review for Lily Tomlin (1986)
     First of all, I wish to separate myself from "Enquiring Minds Want To
Know" critics who went to this film hoping to see rumors come to life on the
screen.  I refuse to say things like, "What this film is *really* about is what
the film will not show us, and about what Lily didn't want the filmmakers to
reveal."  Instead, I will focus on what the film shows us, and I will leave the
gossip-mongering to the tabloids.
     The name of the film is LILY TOMLIN.  It is a twenty-month voyage of
exploration and experimentation.  Very little of the film was staged for
filming, and that part was done beside Lily's pool.  Lily sits in her Edith-
Ann-sized chair and fidgets at being interviewed.  The impression these scenes
left me with is that she is a private person who doesn't like to be asked to
perform.  When Lily performs onstage, it is because she wants to be there.
However, when someone puts her in a chair and says, "What would Ernestine say
about this?" (i.e., "Do that voice for us."), she understandably feels
pressured.  Mercifully, these scenes are few and brief.
     When they go backstage, the filmmakers ask questions at inappropriate
times (like between acts of a performance) and wind up distracting Lily from
her work.  Inadvertently, they wind up showing us just how seriously Lily takes
her work.
     The filmmakers do their best work by just shutting up and letting the
cameras record events.  A considerable portion of the film shows Lily onstage
during the "work in progress" shows and during the actual Broadway opening
night.  This shows us Lily at her best.  Like a dancer, she makes her work look
effortless.
     However, the film shows us that her work is a long labor, especially when
the film shows us the development of the character of Agnus Angst.  Prior to
this work, Lily and Jane had only ever used this character once.  Through the
developmental shows and Lily's sessions with a drama coach, we see this
character evolve from ideas and words into a genuine, living personality.
     In this film, we see Jane Wagner finally get the credit she deserves.  It
is very obvious that Jane does the bulk of the writing of Lily's material, and
that control of the script lies in Jane's hands.  The magic of these two women
as a team definitely shines through in this film.  They are a perfectly matched
set, and they have the ideal creative situation--the writer who writes for her
intended performer, and the performer who performs up to the expectations of
her script.
     The filmmakers were smart enough to show what their intended audience came
to see--Lily Tomlin in action.  There are several TV clips (including Lily's
first TV appearance), and there are many wonderful segments from "Signs Of
Intelligent Life".
     However, the film's title should have reflected that the film is chiefly a
"making-of-the-show" film.  To name the film after Lily discredits the efforts
of Jane Wagner and Cheryl Swannack (company manager--a very visible woman in
the film) and everyone else involved in creating "Signs Of Intelligent Life."
To name the film after Lily Tomlin is to suggest that the film is going to
examine either the star herself or the generalized concept of a show-biz star.
What the film actually examines is a process, not just the one person.
     Don't expect to see this one nominated for Best Documentary next year.  It
is, however, the most entertaining documentary I have seen in a long time.
     On the -4 to +4 scale:  +2
"I worry whoever thought up the term "quality control" thought if we
didn't control it, it would get out of hand."
        --from "The Search For Signs Of Intelligent Life In the Universe"

Title
Review for Sid and Nancy (1986)
     When I heard that a film was being made about Sid Vicious and Nancy
Spungen, I figured, "Well, I guess it was inevitable that someone would wind up
doing a Sex Pistols retrospective.  Let's go see how badly they messed it up."
     I was amazed that Alex Cox managed to make a movie that was both true to
the characters *and* comercially viable.  SID AND NANCY is a very slick movie
about a very dirty, grimy subject.  The slickness of the photography and the
choreography of the scenes manages to balance out the coarseness of the subject
matter.
     Gary Oldman plays Sid.  More to the point, Gary Oldman *is* Sid Vicious
(or the closest we can hope to see since Sid's death).  He even looks like Sid.
It's almost scary.  Give the man a cookie.  He's earned it.
     Chloe Webb is made to look a whole lot like Nancy.  The most uncannily
accurate aspect of her portrayal is the voice--she sounds 99% like Nancy.  The
only real failure I saw was that Chloe didn't affect a British accent every
thirtieth word (Nancy Spungen lived a long time in London, and her heavy Bronx
accent would give way to an altered British pronunciation  every once in a
while).
     The characters of Sid and Nancy are so faithfully portrayed that it's
almost scary.  However, some of the lesser characters are not quite to
faithfully portrayed.  John Lydon's character seems to have been cast for the
singing voice alone.  The actor (whose name escapes me) doesn't quite manage to
capture Johnny Rotten (except for the singing voice).  His mannerisms are not
right, his composure is far off base--but the overall impression is right on
target.  The same holds true for the characterization of Malcolm McLaren--the
character in the movie is an exaggeration of Malcolm, not a realistic
portrayal.  In both characters, we do not see a realistic portrayal.  Neither
actor looks or acts like the person he portrays.  Instead, we are given an
impressionistic view--both characters represent the *effects* that the people
had on Sid and Nancy, not the actual people they are based on.  (And, don't
forget, this is SID AND NANCY, not SID AND NANCY AND JOHN AND MALCOLM.  :-))
     Apart from these portrayals, Mr. Cox has gone to some pains to set his
scenes in a world controlled subtly by the characters.  For example, the first
view we have of Sid and John is of them as they demolish a Rolls Royce.  A bit
later, we see Sid and friends walking along the street.  On the surface, you
hear a fairly mundane conversation.  However, if you pay attention to the
background, you will see a bunch of school kids (in uniform) running up the
street and making a ruckus.  They are beating cars with their lacrosse sticks.
Shades of Sid and John's influence on the kids?  Maybe.  Pay closer attention.
The kids are beating only on the old, beat-up cars.  They don't touch the Rolls
Royces or BMW's.  This is actually a much better image of how the mainstream
kids of England took the Sex Pistols and their anarchy.
     As a whole, I give extreme kudos to Alex Cox for making SID AND NANCY.  In
this movie, he has given much more information about Sid Vicious, the Sex
Pistols, Nancy Spungen and the whole musical/social revolution in the UK than
anyone else has dared to try before.  The movie is far more impressionistic
(and, at times, surrealistic) than anyone tends to give it credit for.
     I also would like to suggest D.O.A. as a companion piece for SID AND
NANCY.  D.O.A. chronicles the Sex Pistols' American tour (during which they
disbanded--pardon the pun).  D.O.A. is a documentary (including interviews
with Sid and Nancy).  SID AND NANCY is a grand piece of impressionistic
fictionalization.  Watch them both.  Turn the sound up REALLY LOUD.  Bang your
head.  Slam dance with whoever is closest to you, even if you've never slammed
before.  Spit at the TV.  Find the punk that you didn't think resided in you.
     (The last time that D.O.A. played at UNC, the audience did several
hundred dollars worth of damage to the Student Union.  No real point--I'd just
thought I'd say that.  :-) )
[Moderator's note: Do not confuse the D.O.A. that Green describes with the 1949
Edmond O'Brien film that shows up all the time on television because it's in
the public domain, not the remake with Dennis Quaid soon to be released.
They're interesting in their own way, of course, but if you're expecting the
Sex Pistols and get Edmond O'Brien instead, you'll probably be disappointed.
:-) ]


Title
Review for Greaser's Palace (1972)
     So you say that you thought HAIL MARY was controversial?  This one makes
HAIL MARY look like HOW THE GRINCH STOLE CHRISTMAS.
Imagine, if you will, this scene.  It is the old west.  In a small town
built around a saloon (called, "Greaser's Palace"), all the locals are gathered
for the show.  A young woman sings about lost innocence and a beautiful young
woman's lust.  Everyone is quite pleased with the song.  A figure, shrouded in
white, enters unnoticed.  He walks up to one particularly slimy-looking
character and puts a cigar out on his chest.  The slimy-looking man screams in
agony and disrupts the show.  He is carried out of the bar, and Seaweedhead
Greaser (owner of the saloon and the town) follows close behind.  He's had
enough out of this character, so he tells him to head for the border.  The
slimy-looking man pleads, "But, Paw .  .  ."
Greaser repeats his warning, and his slimy-looking son starts to run.
Greaser calls to him, smiles and beckons for him to return.  Lamy Homo (for
that is his son's name) turns around and heads back.  Greaser pulls out two
pistols and shoots him.
This is the opening scene of GREASER'S PALACE.
This has to be one of the most truly bizarre movies that I have seen in
many a moon.  A savior (Allan Arbus) parachutes down into a nearby field.  He
is a vaudeville entertainer in a zoot suit.  Every time Greaser kills his son,
the savior brings him back to life.  He performs miracles (like dancing on
water and bringing Lamy Homo Greaser back to life), and he performs
song-and-dance numbers at the saloon ("He's got the boogie in his fingers and
the hubba-hubba in his soul").
Seaweedhead Greaser (Albert Henderson) is the corrupt owner of Greaser's
Palace.  He locks his mother in a cage with a mariachi band.  He suffers from
such a severe case of constipation that the entire town gathers around whenever
he goes to the outhouse.  He surrounds himself with seedy characters who
explain to him (graphically, I might add) their sexual exploits.
GREASER'S PALACE is one of the strangest, yet most engrossing films I have
seen.  Although I found it hard to believe the events as they unfolded, I also
found it impossible to look away from my TV (I now own it on videotape).
I'm not even going to try to rate this one on any scale.
(For the record, I found HAIL MARY to be one of the most boring films of
the decade.  GREASER'S PALACE beats it by a country mile as a potentially
controversial version of the gospel.)
