Authors
bdglchst@ac.dal.ca
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Misery (1990)
On the negative side:
     William Goldman's script is rather dull and uninspired.  
     Stephen King should have written the screenplay.
     The editing is only adequate.
     Some rather cheapo scenes were used.
     The movie definitely wasn't dark and evil enough.
     Sometimes the humour is not in the right place.
     The movie has an overall rushed appearance.
     This does not appear as a Rob Reiner film.
     If you didn't know you certainly wouldn't equate it with his
          previous works.
     It AAAAAAARRRRRRGGGGGGGGGGGHHHHHHHH isn't true to the book.  There
is a lot of rewriting of the interactions between Paul and Annie (no
good).  There is a lot of rewriting in of new characters (quite well
done).  Annie just doesn't get to do as much of what she did (i.e.,
gross things) in the book.  They changed the ending.
     The one thing that I was really looking forward to was a good
movie.  Which it is.  I heartily recommend this to fans.  I was also
looking for an unadulterated transference of the book.  Which it is not.
Why can't they leave good enough alone?  Personally I saw no reason to
change what they did (although I liked all of the new characters) but
they didn't allow Annie to let go enough.
     I have to admit I was going with really high expectations.  Well, I
figured it's SK's best book and Rob Reiner directing.  What could be better?
It came up to all standards for a good movie, which it was.  But it didn't make
it to a great movie.  There are some great scenes (especially the hobbling
WOW!) and some good shots (esp. Annie driving) but overall there wasn't enuff
to bump it over to the really good or classic level.  I wouldn't mind
seeing someone else try to work this.  Here goes... Kathy Bates - Annie
(she is by far the best thing about the movie.  I wouldn't be surprised
by an Oscar nomination--yes, she's really that good!).  Malcom McDowell
- Paul Sheldon, Director - The Coen Brothers.  Don't take this too
seriously.
     So overall, good, worth seeing, but not the best you're gonna see.
If you're wondering how I saw this early, I got special passes to a
preview showing.
