Authors
Waldron-Mantgani
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Tumbleweeds (1999)
Rated on a 4-star scale
Screening venue: Home (Screener tape courtesy of Fine Line Features USA)
Released in the UK by Entertainment Film Distributors on March 3, 2000; 
certificate 15; 102 minutes; country of origin USA; aspect ratio 1.85:1
Directed by Gavin O'Connor; produced by Gregory O'Connor.
Written by Gavin O'Connor, Angela Shelton; from a story by Angela Shelton.
Photographed by Daniel Stoloff; edited by John Gilroy.
There is an early scene in this movie which shows the main character, Mary Jo 
Walker, throwing all her clothes out of a car window and letting them fly off 
down the highway. She's trying to make a point to her daughter about how they 
should leave their old lives behind and look forward to the future. Never 
mind that she has no money to buy new garments -- she's being carefree, 
everybody!
Moments like this don't exist in the real world, and for all its dirty 
locations and documentary-style hand-held camera movement, hardly a second of 
"Tumbleweeds" does. It resides in that particularly farfetched cranny of 
Hollywood where audiences are expected to root for obnoxious trailer trash 
sluts like Mary Jo simply because she keeps saying "I'm gonna get me a new 
life, yessir!"
The woman is played by British actress Janet McTeer as someone who cannot 
settle down even after childbirth, four marriages and numerous attempts at 
relocation. She's leaving one of her husbands as the movie opens, and young 
Ava (Kimberly J. Brown) seems to know the drill, getting from the house to 
the car so fast it's as if she'd expected the break-up sooner, and had been 
getting impatient.
The plot goes through the same motions as all other mother-and-child road 
movies, which range from "Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore", released in 1974, 
right up to last year's "Anywhere But Here". We know certain obligatory 
things must happen: The mother's recitals of lines about how things can only 
get better. The child's groaning, complaining and rebelling. Comic relief in 
the car. Sentimentality in motel rooms. Pigging out after mom gets her first 
new job. Romance, separation. More romance, another separation. Reunion. 
Happy ending. (Yippee.)
There are some good things about the film, including McTeer's Oscar-nominated 
performance. She never makes Mary Jo likeable -- that would be an impossible 
task -- but her American 'Southern belle' accent is faultless, and she 
follows a set of mannerisms so subtly distinctive that it's hard to deny she 
has inhabited the character. Even greater kudos to Brown, who is just as 
convincing in a more emotionally complex role, wanting to love and support 
her mother, but often feeling neglected and unguided by her.
Several good passages of dialogue can also be found in the picture -- one 
involving "coffee enemas" will not soon leave my memory. But little moments 
such as these don't quite conquer our animosity toward Mary Jo, who is an 
insecure tramp, ill-equipped with parenting skills and lacking in self-worth. 
Enjoyment of "Tumbleweeds" requires us to abandon logic and values from the 
real world, so we can blindly cheer on the characters. We're supposed to feel 
happy, for example, when Mary Jo walks out on her typing job at an alarm 
company, destroying lots of files on the way out. But would you really be 
happy if YOUR security details were destroyed? Methinks not.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit, and encourage others to visit, the UK Critic's website, which 
is located at http://members.aol.com/ukcritic
