Authors
Paul Easter
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Judge Dredd (1995)
     Yes, I know this isn't the first review of the movie.  Yes, I know
most people who want to have seen it.  Despite this, I feel it my duty
to save as many people as possible from the boredom that is JUDGE
DREDD.  I'm not going to beat about the bush: this movie sucks.  With a
licence as potentially rewarding as the Judge Dredd one, any studio
worth its salt ought to have taken care to not mess things up.  But no--
what did they do?  They took the most standard-fare action movie script
I've ever seen, stuffed in a few second-rate SFX and slapped Sylvester
Stallone's name on the top.  Urgh.
     The existing fan-base for Dredd should've been enough to convince
them that this was not supposed to be the average actioner.  It shocks
me that this movie has paid so little attention to the comic fans--for
a start, these people know what Dredd should be! I'm by no means a
comic book Judge Dredd fan, however.  I know people who are, but more
important: I know enough to not assume anything about Dredd.  The
filmmakers in this instance have made wild assumptions about Dredd; they
turn him into yet another muscle-bound bad ass with a good heart.  This
movie makes me sick.
     Okay, enough about my problems with the story.  To be honest, if
you go to see Dredd with no preconceptions you might just enjoy it.
There's nothing really wrong with it, if you like action films.  But
that said, there's nothing right about it either; no innovation on the
part of the script or plot.  This movie looks like it's been produced
by a machine, not by a talented bunch of human beings.  The plot is so
flaky it's unbelievable--full of holes, with no real aim or point to
make.
     Those of you who like big explosions and computer SFX will
be ... will be ... thoroughly disappointed, also! There is *one* very
impressive scene, right at the beginning reminiscent of a similar scene
in Blade Runner.  But that's where it ends: some effects are obviously
fake (the bike chase one) whilst others just look downright silly.
     To those of you who go and enjoy this movie--well done.  You must
be either very charitable when it comes to handing over money to cinema
owners, or else you're also a fan of mental torture.  I fail to see any
way this film could be anything more than average in anyone's books.
