Authors
Ed Powell
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Mortal Kombat (1995)
     I'll be honest ... I was truly surprised with this movie.  I
thought that it was going to be a film filled with fighting and special
effects ...  and no plot.  There was plenty of fighting and special
effects, but there *was* a story behind all of it.  MORTAL KOMBAT is
one of the better action films I have seen this summer.
     The story is basically a "good versus evil" structure, where
the best fighters of Earth compete in a tournament that takes place
once a generation.  If the forces of evil win this tournament ten times
in a row, they will take over the Earth.  And they're one win away from
winning.
     The movie was written well, considering that all the writers had
to go on was a video game (or three).  There were some bits that could
have used some refining, and the character of Sonja was poorly
developed.  However, drama and comedy (yes, there were great comedic
moments in the movie), while seeming prefabricated, were well worked
into the story.
     I suppose the martial artistry counts towards acting, so I'll say
that the acting in the film was above average.  All the moves looked
realistic and quite painful on screen.  But if you take out the martial
arts, most of the actors could take a refresher course in acting.
Christopher Lambert, however, did play the part of Rayden (Lord of
Lightning, the "Obi-Wan Kenobi" of this film) quite well.
     The sets and props of the film were excellent.  As of this moment,
I am not sure if the Temple of Light (in China, according to the movie)
was real or computer-generated.  If it was real, it is a magnificent
work of architecture and design.  If it was computer-generated, it was
well rendered and integrated with real scenery.
     Speaking of computer-generation, the visual effects were above
average.  There were a couple of fakey shots (namely, the first time
Scorpion shows the snake-like thing that comes out of his hand ... if
you look close, you'll see that the effect doesn't keep aligned with
his hand), and when the action shifts to Outworld (no ... not
Waterworld), there are a few shots that are painfully obvious that they
are computer-generated.  Still, the effects are close to the
sophistication of BATMAN FOREVER (take that for what it's worth.
).
     Dave Anderson knows how to direct an action film, and MORTAL
KOMBAT proves it.  Pans, zooms, and other fancy camera moves were used
to good effect, and simple shots were used when it was all that was
needed.
     Is MORTAL KOMBAT something that you can take your Nintendo/Sega
"Mortal Kombat"-playing seven year old to?  My opinion: no.  While the
gratuitous blood-and-gore was kept down to a minimum, there are several
disturbing shots and ideas that go with the film.  The PG-13 rating
should be taken seriously.
     I really can't do a review of the music ... there wasn't very
much.  What music there was, was your generic dance track with the
words "MORTAL KOMBAT!!!" screamed in every once in a while.  And to
think that some people actually like that kind of music....   
     Overall, this is a great fight film.  If you are willing to see
around the few noticeable flaws, that is.  If you have a desire to see
people get hit, smacked, punched in the groin, and otherwise hurt, this
is the film for you.
Produced by Lawrence Kasanoff, directed by Paul Anderson.
A New Line Cinema release.

Title
Review for Copycat (1995)
     COPYCAT is a suspense/thriller, where Sigourney Weaver plays a
criminal psychologist, that is attacked by a serial killer.
Fortunately for her, she isn't killed, and the killer is sent to
prison.  The attack has, however, left her mentally scarred, and she
now suffered from agrophobia (sp?).  Thirteen months later, still
scarred, she is asked by a police detective (Holly Hunter) to help
solve a series of murders.  It turns out that there is a serial killer
at work, and as you may have guessed, he is copying the methods of
other serial killers.  And ... to top it all off ... he is in league
with the serial killer that attacked Sigourney's character.
     The pace of this film seemed slow at times, but it wasn't boring.
It was suspenseful, but it wasn't edge-of-your-seat nail-biting
thrilling.  The story itself seemed real enough to have come from
today's headlines.  The script was well researched and was thoroughly
engrossing.
     The acting in this film was top-notch.  Sigourney played her part
of a criminal psychologist who drinks and takes a wide assortment of
medication in order to be able to get through the day without having a
mental breakdown quite well.  Holly, while not as believeable in the
role of a police detective, nevertheless was quite convincing in the
role.  A good deal of the male roles in the film seemed to get killed
off, but their roles were well played.
     Direction of this film was well above top notch.  I may not agree
with the director's (Jon Amiel) decision in using a few shots that made
me want to reach for a barf bag, he made the film a true visual
delight.
     COPYCAT is tamer than some suspense films I have seen, but it is a
great extra-dramatic experience.  If you have some or any interest in
what goes on in the minds of serial killers, this is great
entertainment.  Go see this film.
Produced by Arnon Milchary and Mark Tarlov.  Directed by Jon Amiel.
A Regency Enterprises/Warner Brothers release.

Title
Review for Judge Dredd (1995)
     During the Third Millennium (2000-2999 A.D.), the world has
undergone some bad times, and is now a desert wasteland.  In order to
survive, the American people have gathered into four or five gigantic
cities, or megacities.  To keep order in the megacities, the government
is now a police state, and the police are judge, jury, and
executioner.  They are ... the Judges.
     (In other words, a generic action/sci-fi movie.)
     Judge Joseph Dredd, a genetically-engineered man that is the
perfect Judge.  He gets wrongly accused of murdering a TV journalist,
and somehow manages to find and kill the person who actually did it,
causing death and destruction in his wake that no one really seems to
mind.
     (In other words, a generic action/sci-fi movie.)
     Sylvester Stallone plays Judge Dredd.
     (In other words, a generic action/sci-fi movie.)
* Story and plot
        Have a mentioned that this is a generic action/sci-fi movie?
     Actually, there was a plot, and it wasn't too bad.  The story was
above average too.  Not Oscar material, but not too bad.  Whatever it
was, it was better than BATMAN FOREVER.
     The script seems as if it was directly converted from the comic
book format.  The dialogue was stilted at times, but was overall above
average.
     I thought the best actor in the film was Rob Schnider.  In this
film, he had a bigger role than he had in DEMOLITION MAN (which,
oddly enough, also starred Sly Stallone), and he made the film
hilarious when people weren't being shot, blown-up, or insulted.
     Sly conveys the emotionless Judge Dredd well enough (although I
have not read any of the comic books).   The rest of the acting was
average.
     The film employed an incredible amount of matte shots and models,
which were of high quality, and conveyed the sense of a dark future
well.  The building models I can best describe as a futuristic,
multi-layer "Batman" style.
     The weaponry, vehicles (especially the taxis), and other props
were quite stylish, and worked well with the film.
     Really nothing special.  Some good computer animation.  A few neat
visual effects.  Buildings blew up real good.  Average.
     Again, average ... nothing special.  Won't win any major (or minor)
awards, but it was adequate.
     *This* is the film's shortcoming.  This is definitely *not* family
material, definitely not for kids.  Rare is the scene where someone
isn't being shot, blown-up, or insulted.  As much as I hate to say it,
take your kids to see POCAHONTAS or something.  And as always, thank
you for not poking my hontas.  :-)
     If you like fast-paced, blood and gore sci-fi/action flicks, go
for it.  I was entertained for its 105 minute run-time.  This is the
average action flick--entertaining, funny, but not Oscar material.
Produced by Edward R. Pressman, directed by Danny Cannon.
A Hollywood Pictures release.
(This can't be right, it scored less than BATMAN FOREVER....)

Title
Review for Showgirls (1995)
     For the 6 dollars I shelled out for this flick, I could have
stayed home and bought a night of the "Spice" channel ... and gotten as
much plot and more vivid images of female bodies and sex.  This film is
proof that it is hype, not plot and story, that really sells a film.
(Sad, isn't it?)
     The film revolves around a sexy young woman named Nomi (Elizabeth
Berkley) who hitchhikes to Las Vegas, to seek a career as a dancer.  I
cannot really describe the plot, because there really isn't much of
one.  The film wandered aimlessly around for two hours, trying to
interweave several weak story lines into one central plot.  It starts
nowhere ... ends nowhere ... and fills the in-between with plenty of
jiggling breasts.
     While all involved played their parts adequately ... there was
something that didn't let me believe their parts.  This may be in part
to the writing of the film:  I cannot believe that Las Vegas, or
anywhere in the world, for that matter, is *that* sleazy.  Then again,
I live in a safe little suburb on the East coast....
     Since most of the film is apparently shot in Las Vegas, the
design of the film was filled with plenty of neon and tasteful glitz
(?).  In fact, the stage shows were incredibly well done ... I wouldn't
be all surprised if they were actual shows being shown in Las Vegas
right now.
     The director should be given another chance at directing a
feature film.  The film wasn't too fancy with the shot setups, but some
of them were obviously ill-planned.  If you go to see this film, be
prepared for some badly framed shots (but you'll never have to yell
"Focus!").
     If you are looking for an evening of sitting in a movie house
watching various parts of the female anatomy wobbling, this is for
you.  Otherwise, just stay home and rent the "Spice" channel.  This is
not a film where you will find higher forms of entertainment.
* Note:  I cannot judge this film on effects or family value.
There were no noticeable effects, and scoring on family value just
wouldn't be fair ... it is an NC-17 film, after all.

Title
Review for First Knight (1995)
     First, go to your local library and check out LE MORTE D'ARTHUR.
It's a long, boring read, but live with it.
     This film is an interesting twist on the Arthurian legends, and
well worth the time to go see it.  The story centers around two
themes: first and foremost, the cat and mouse game that Launcelot
(Richard Gere) and Guinevere (Julia Ormond) play.  The second, to a
lesser degree but serves its purpose of making the film exciting, is
the desire of Prince Maligent (Ben Cross) to take over the kingdom of
Camelot, ruled by (g'won ... have a guess) King Arthur (Sean Connery).
     While the story is not completely true to the legends (at least
the legends I have read), it is gripping and wonderful.
     The dialogue and overall writing of the film was above average.
The writers spared us the overload of sappy poetic speech:  Shakespeare
it ain't.  From the dialogue, the audience gets a feel of how life
really was back in those times.  It did have its poetic lines, but it
does not mar the film.
     Acting wise, Sean Connery was excellent ... as ever.  I cannot,
however, figure out how or why the King of *England* had a SCOTTISH
ACCENT!!!  FROM PLAYING 15th CENTURY SPANIARDS TO RUSSIAN SUBMARINE
COMMANDERS HE STILL HAS THE SAME ACCENT!!!
     Where was I?  Oh, yes.  The rest of the cast played their roles
with superior believability.  The battle sequences were well thought
out, and the warriors fought with realism.
     The design of the film worked well.  All the props, costumes, and
architectural design were what was expected of that time period.
     There were very few visual effects in this film.  There were a few
matte shots for the exterior of Camelot, and while they were stunning,
you could tell that they were matte shots.
     And we come to the direction of the film, which I can sum up in
one word: EXCELLENT!!!  Jerry Zucker made the battle sequences
edge-of-your-seat thrilling, the end of the film emotional (I managed
to blink back the tears ... no, I'm not a fem), and made me forget that I
was in a cramped multiplex for two hours.
     Should you bring your family to this film?  This reviewer says:
perhaps.  This is not a picture for young children, but your teenagers
might like it.  No obscenities, but there are quite a few shots of
villages being burnt and people being slain.
     Overall, this film is one of the best I've seen this year.  It
well deserves being nominated for Best Picture this year.  Go see this
movie by yourself, or go see it with a date.  But by any means ... GO SEE
THIS FILM!!!
Produced by Jerry Zucker and Bill Nicholson, directed by Jerry Zucker.  
A Columbia Pictures release.

Title
Review for Apollo 13 (1995)
     The story of APOLLO 13 isn't fiction ... it is a dramatic
recreation of the actual situation that happened during the Apollo 13
mission to the moon.  During the flight to the moon, one of the oxygen
tanks on the command module exploded, causing massive system failures.
It was on luck and ingenuity alone that the crew of the Apollo 13
mission made it back to Earth alive.
     I cannot comment on the story and plot of this film.  It was so
incredible, that it could not have come from anywhere but real life.
The writing also falls under this description, except that there were
some moments that seemed a bit false ... a little artificial.  The film,
though, was filled with drama, emotion, and moments of comedy.  An
excellent script.
     There cannot be enough praise for the actors.  Although I
cannot really name names at the moment (my local paper doesn't have an
ad for the film in it), all were quite convincing in their roles.
     Design of the film was consistent with the time period, that
being the late 60s/early 70s.  A couple of items, however, seemed to be
a bit too modern for the time period.  The computer text on the screen
at Mission Control looked like they came off of an off-the-shelf IBM
PS/2, and a few of the controls on the space vehicles looked like they
came from the modern-day Space Shuttle.  Then again, I am not an expert
on space vehicles ... all of this could have been 100% accurate.
     There were quite a few visual effects in the film, all of which
looked very realistic.  Tom Hank's character's daydream of walking on
the moon looked as if they actually went to the moon and filmed the
scene.  All the zero-gee effects were realistic ... because they were
actually in zero gravity!  They filmed those scenes inside of the
training airplane lovingly known as the "Vomit Comet," where the plane
goes up to about 35,000 feet and then dives, giving up to 30 seconds of
near zero gravity conditions inside the plane.  Very well thought out,
very well executed.
     Ron Howard did a splendid job of directing this film.  My only
complaint is that there were just a few too many fancy camera moves
...  I felt at times I was going to be sick with all the tilts, pans,
and zooms the camera was doing.
     The music for the film was absolutely PERFECT!  From opening
credits to the end of the film, the music evoked the right emotions and
the right times.  Even I, ol' Joey "Stoneheart" Lemur, was brought to
tears at times (all quickly blinked back, of course.)
     This film contained strong language at times, and was quite
emotional.  You might want to think twice before bringing children
under thirteen to see this film.  Teens and older will thoroughly enjoy
this film, though.
     I cannot recommend this film enough.  This will probably win Best
Picture at this year's Oscars.  It is a stunning film, filled with
nail-biting tension and peppered with lighter moments.  Go.  See it.
You'll be glad you did!  :-)
Produced by Brian Grazer, directed by Ron Howard.
A Universal Pictures release.

Title
Review for Get Shorty (1995)
     Take one Miami loansharker (John Travolta), send him to collect
$300,000 from someone who was gone to L.A., and mix him with a horror
movie director (Gene Hackman), an actress from his movies (Rene Russo),
and a bigtime actor (Danny DeVito).  Add several twisty plotlines, and
let insanity ensue.
     GET SHORTY is a tounge-in-cheek look into the world of film making
and organized crime.  While is was a very entertaining and engrossing
film, I couldn't help but be confused with the way that the many
plotlines were intertwined.  It seems as if the writer was trying to
get too creative.  Not that there is anything wrong with creativity,
it's just that the writer could have directed it towards clarifying
fewer plotlines.  Overall, however, I give high marks to the writer and
director for overall story execution.
     Four big names in a film ... I usually take that as a sign that
those names are trying to cover up for a weak story.  The story wasn't
weak, though, and the acting was excellent.  John Travolta is made for
playing a loansharker, Gene Hackman is good in anything, and Rene Russo
and Danny DeVito are excellent actors playing actors.
     The settings were well thought out, the music was well suited for
the action, and the director made fine use of several fancy camera
moves, even if there were a few too many.
     GET SHORTY is a wonderful film, and I wouldn't be surprised if it
gets an Oscar or two.  It seemed a little short, and it ends rather
suddenly, but it is well worth paying to see.
Produced by Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, and Stacey Sher.
Directed by Barry Sonnenfeld.  An MGM release.

Title
Review for Net, The (1995)
     Going into this movie, I thought it was just going to be another
film that's trying to cash in on the "Information Superhighway" buzz,
and overglorifies computers and the Internet.
     When I left disgusted 45 minutes later, that view hadn't really
changed.
     The story of the film is about a professional computer program
beta-tester, virus-healer, web-surfer, and all-around computer hacker
(played by Sandra Bullock), who gets hold of a computer program that
gets the user into restricted areas of the Internet.  Some group
somehow finds out about this program, and nearly gets the disk from the
character played by Sandra when she vacations in Cancun.  She manages
to keep the disk, but the group starts to make her life unlivable, by
changing around her police record, DMV records, selling her house (?),
etc., etc., etc., ... all by using computers, of course.
     It seems to me that the writers forgot that life is not an episode
of "Max Headroom."  The writers also seem to have forgot that what
personal information that IS stored on computer (police records, IRS
whatnot, DMV, just to name the few that are on the top of my head), YOU
CANNOT READ, NEVER MIND CHANGE, THAT DATA BY USING THE INTERNET!!!  And
even if you could, THERE WOULDN'T BE FANCY-SCHMANCY GRAPHIC INTERFACES
FOR DOING IT!!!
     You see, most government agencies do something smart (for a
change).  They make damn sure that any vital computer data is protected
by the most hacker-proof method around: no network or modem connections
to the computer, period.
     To make a long section short, the plot, story, and writing suffer
from two incurable problems: unbelievability and stupidity.
     As for acting, fairly average all around.  Sandra Bullock
portrayed a sterotypical hacker with little social skills
well ... although I do not think that this role was well suited for her.
     I can't say much about design.  It looked as if this movie was
shot completely on location, with little set building whatsoever.
     I can't say much about special effects either ... other than Sandra
Bullock in a bikini .  I suppose that you could group the computer
screens into the effects group, and they suited the movie well ... but
that isn't a compliment.
     Irwin Winkler (any relation to Henry?  Inquiring minds want to
now), who directed this cinematic trainwreck, looks like he was
trying to overdramatize the film.  Many shots were not well suited for
the action.  Perhaps he should take a refresher course in basic
directing.
     Overall, this movie sucked.  At least the first 45 minutes of it
did.  As a MSTie*, I have watched many a bad movie, and I think I could
recommend this one to be added to the stack of material to be made fun
of.  Don't waste your money on this.  I think I'd rather see 'Batman
Forever'.
Produced by Irwin Winkler and Rob Cowan, directed by Irwin Winkler.  A
Columbia Pictures release.
* A MSTie is a fan of the brilliant TV show 'Mystery Science Theater 3000'
(shown on Comedy Central).  In a nutshell, MST3K takes bad movies, and has a
guy and two 'robots' sitting in an orbiting movie theater, talking back to
the film and generally making fun of it.  It's a great show ... you should
watch it.

Title
Review for Birdcage, The (1996)
Starring:  Robin Williams, Nathan Lane, and Gene Hackman.
Directed by Mike Nichols, a United Artists release.
This is a terrific movie for the 1990s.  "The Birdcage" is a tale about a
young man (whose parents are a gay couple (played by Robin Williams and
Nathan Lane) and he has never met his biological mother), who meets a
young woman (whose father is an ultra-conservative Republican senator
(played by Gene Hackman) and mother looks and sounds like she came
straight out of the world of "Leave it to Beaver") and they decide to get
married.
The problem is that the woman's parents want to meet the man's parents. In
order to keep the woman's parents from flat-out going insane at the
concept of the inlaws being a gay couple (as a stereotypical conservative
Republican is want to do), they try (with very limited success) to make
everything seem like a normal, "moral ideal American" family.
Robin Williams proves once again that he is a great dramatic actor as well
as a foot-stompingly funny comedian, Nathan Lane played his role as a man
acting as a woman so well, it scared me, and Gene Hackman is, as always,
good in anything.
Although I have never seen "La Cage Aux Follies", on which this film was
based, I imagine that an extensive rewrite was required to make this film
a
fable for the 1990s.  We could all learn a little something about
tolerance
and accepting lifestyles that are unlike our own from this film.  Bravo to
the writers, bravo to director Mike Nichols, and bravo to the actors and
actresses who made this film an entertaining work of art.
