Authors
Michael Max Stoaks
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for I Know What I Want (????)
     I saw this movie years ago but remember it still because of the
disturbingly strange psychology of it.  It is perhaps the most alien
movie I have ever seen in English.  It's like seeing a foreign film
which somehow emerged from the western movie industry.  For one thing,
the character at the core of the movie does not think, act or look like
any other female character I've seen before or since.  Unlike the
romantically yearning female characters I'm used to seeing,  she is a
startlingly a-sexual and hard-headed person.  Not that she's ugly, a
lesbian or a gold-digger!  She's just determined to be logical about
men and to remain impervious to the tug of passion.  Perhaps that is
why the movie rubbed me the wrong way.  I'm accustoming to sharing the
emotions of an open, genuine person at the heart of a film.  I'm not
accustomed to making the stretch to sympathize with a detached,
inauthentic individual as the main character.  I found the heroine hard
to like and hard to relate to--but not evil.  She is simply someone
who doesn't know what she wants.  This movie's  title is sarcastic and
tongue in cheek, for this woman is out of touch with herself.  She is
not merely fighting to suppress her feelings, like the Cher character
in Moonstruck, she has succeeded in defeating her feelings entirely, to
the point where she is totally unconscious of them.
     It is important to avoid a sexual double standard in being overly
critical of the female lead in I Know What I Want.   Plenty of male
characters lose touch with their feelings.  A HEART IN WINTER (UN COUER
EN HIVER) or WIDE SARGASSO SEA are recent films on that theme.  Would
the star of I Know What I Want seem so strange and wrong if she were a
man?   Fact is, in real life, many people of both sexes try to keep
passion *in it's place*, somewhere under the thumb of practical logic.
This movie just takes an unusual, ironic look at that effort.
     I KNOW WHAT I WANT* is strange because of it's attitude--a salty
Scottish bite,  not overly sympathetic to any of the characters--dry
and ironic.  There are casualties who suffer from the heroine's
inability to feel, but the movie is about her and not about the people
around her who suffer because of her.  In the end, as she discovers her
true self, the writers expect us to  rejoice in her rescue from an
empty, soul-less life.  This is a stretch for a modern audience.  But
if you can accept that there are a few women in the world who try to
get the upper hand over their feelings, then this classic movie is an
interesting experience.
