Authors
Alex Lopez-Ortiz
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
Think of a movie that is entertaining, yet deep; intelligent but not 
uncomprehensible; a movie about events of normal daily life, but with 
a truly original plot. Make it funny, but not a comedy. Serious, but
not preachy. 
Sounds impossible? The Truman Show proves that it can be done. 
One of the best movies produced by Hollywood in recent memory, The Truman 
Show succeeds in such a scale that, to quote movie critic Don Irvine,
"at times it contends for 'best film of the decade'." 
Now when was the last time you heard a critic say such things about 
a movie starring Jim Carrey?
This film is not without its risks. It presuposes the general public 
dislikes art films because of their snobery and slow pace, but if only 
one made the whole experience entertaining and non-elitist, the public 
would enjoy intelligent material as much as they do watching action 
film or romantic comedies.
To judge from this week's box office receipts it is so.

Title
Review for Remains of the Day, The (1993)
Starring:  Anthony Hopkins, Emma Thompson, James Fox, Christopher Reeve
Screenplay:  Ruth Prawer Jhabvala based on the novel by Kazuo Ishiguro
Director:  James Ivory
     THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is a movie about rhythm. The plot, the
performances, the photography, the characters are all about rhythm.
     Do you remember all those action flicks that keep you at the edge
of your seat, with your heart pounding in your chest, hoping that the
hero triumphs over the karate-expert heavily-armed villain?
     Those movies are based in their fast paced action or as I call it,
on their fast rhythm. The plot is minimal, they have mostly no
character development--beyond the fact that the hero is good and the
villains are bad, that is--and almost no message, again, excluding the
traditional "good always wins."
     Well-paced, soft, musical, Anthony Hopkins sets, with his
presence, the cadences in this film.
     Miss Kenton, Lord Darlington, and Mr Lewis are all musical
instruments, playing to the tempo set by the director of the Orchestra,
Mr Stevens.  The musicality of the movie is magnificent and thoroughly
enjoyable.
     As with action movies, the plot is tangential, even superficial.
Anybody who thinks of Great Britain's version of Plato's educated elite
as a bunch of amateurs, needs to review its junior high history
lessons.
     The rest of THE REMAINS OF THE DAY's "insights" on English society
are not much deeper than this. Even the central premise of the movie is
vacuous.  Englishmen would be a race long extinct if their
stiff-upper-lipness were an impediment for establishing relationships.
The criticisms of Mr Stevens' extreme devotion to his work cannot be
anything but self-criticisms of Japanese's own devotion to work.
(Recall that the author of the novel, upon which the movie is based,
was written by Kazuo Ishiguro from Japan).
     Nevertheless, the absence of a plot did not stop me from
recommending TERMINATOR 2, and it certainly won't either with THE
REMAINS OF THE DAY.
     All to the contrary, THE REMAINS OF THE DAY is an excellent movie,
and Anthony Hopkins performance is superb. Casting choices were most
appropriate.  Little can be criticized in this movie. THE REMAINS OF
THE DAY is definitely in my short list for best movie of the year.

Title
Review for Searching for Bobby Fischer (1993)
Starring:  Joe Mantegna, Ben Kingsley, Max Pomeranc, Laurence Fishburne.
Director/Screenwriter:  Steven Zaillian.
     SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER is a top contender for the best movie
of the summer.
     It is hard to imagine a more difficult topic for a movie than
chess. It is not a popular game/sport, and as countless flicks have
proven, sports movies are seldom a success. It seems that the battles
of the field in a sports match are already cartoonish enough so as to
tolerate another layer of dramatization in the big screen.
     And even among the few sport movies that excel there is a common
complain: the sports footage is completely unrealistic, thus making the
movie insurmountable for sport aficionados.
     Director Steven Zaillian took the challenge and passed with flying
colours. SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER is a movie that appeals to a large
audience and to chess experts alike. Technical assistance by the noted
chess player Bruce Pandolfini paid handsomely.
     On a first approach, SEARCHING is a movie about the true story of
chess prodigy Josh Waitzkin, and how he and his family adjust to having
a wunderkind at home. Even if this is all what you get from the movie,
it is worth your time and money to see it.
     But there is more to SFBF than what meets the eye. Think about
chess as a 8x8 mock up of life ordeals; suddenly it is not just a
game.  In fact, there is nothing more offending for a professional
sportsmen than telling him/her that their sport in question is "just a
game". You live and breath through playing.
     From this perspective, SEARCHING is also about the extremes
of chess (and life) so skillfully represented by Pandolfini, Vinnie,
Josh's dad, mom, the chess parents, and Josh's opponent and his
trainer.
     The last facet of this movie, which has been seldom mentioned in
the reviews, is the search for the real Bobby Fischer, portrayed
through some skillfully interspersed footage of Fischer during the
1960-1970's.
     SEARCHING FOR BOBBY FISCHER is, in black and white, a search for
the past.
     America was strong. It had just beaten Russia in their national
pasttime. Those were happier times: "we were young and we were
strong".  But all this is gone. It just disappeared.
     SEARCHING is also about this search, we want back the innocence of
our young years, we want back the security of the streets, we want back
the comfort of a well paid job. We want our champion past back.  Is
Josh (this generation) the Prometheus of a new future? Pandolfini hopes
it is so....
Rating: **** (out of five)   (8.5 out of 10).

Title
Review for Exotica (1994)
NOTICE: This is a review and analysis of EXOTICA.  The first part
of this piece is the review, the second part contains some analysis of
the movie which might be construed as spoilers.  If you have not seen
the movie and after reading the first part you intend to do so, 
then save the second part for the discussion afterwards.
Starring: Bruce Greenwood, Mia Kirshner, Elias Kosteas, Don McKellar,   
          Arsinee Khanijian, Sarah Polley
Director: Atom Egoyan
Screenplay: Atom Egoyan
     EXOTICA keeps the viewer guessing about the relationship between
the various characters in the film.  All of the people know each other,
but apart from that, there seems to be no other reason why to select
such set and follow them in this fictional account.
     The director hints for possible solutions, using a multi-line plot,
so popular with critics in MYSTERY TRAIN, and used to good advantage by
Quentin Tarantino in PULP FICTION.  EXOTICA reaches a whole new
dimension using this technique.  At the end it is surprising to see how
well the pieces of the puzzle fit together, in spite their apparent
unconnectedness and even misleading features.
     The out-of-chronological-order technique has become ever so
popular, perhaps even de rigueur, for biographical films.  Similarly,
we can now expect to see more movies in the future which will use, to
varying extent, converging multiplots.
     On a first glance, once the multi-plot puzzle in EXOTICA is solved,
there seems to be little left to look at.  But perceptive minds which
take the time to dig further will be rewarded with interesting views on
life or rather, commentaries on views OF life.
     EXOTICA is very much worth seeing.  It opened to critic's praise
worldwide (I first saw it in Mexico City, last December).  In Canada,
it broke records for a movie of its kind, which prompted the American
distributor to go for a wide release.  Apart from a strong plot, acting
is very convincing, and the soundtrack seems as if made for the movie.
     The spoon-fed-entertainment crowd may not appreciate this movie,
and thus it might last little on screen.  But if you want to try a
movie a cut above the crowd, with an originality that is ever so rare,
by all means see EXOTICA.
     First, a common theme of the quest for gratification by monetary
means.  The lone tax-auditor, the repressed homosexual pet shop owner,
the pregnant woman which runs the nightclub, the rich man which has the
club remodeled, the audience at the movie theatre, all use personal
wealth to buy palliative relief for the penuries of the soul....  Then
we have the quest for gratification through visual means by most of the
same people, including those who sit watching EXOTICA....
     In that regard EXOTICA stands for onlookers at a nightclub, for
the rich man looking through silver mirrors, and poor-rich people
looking at other's people lives through a silver screen.  EXOTICA also
stands for unwanted society attention into the lives of other people,
such as the tax auditor and the pet shop owner.
     EXOTICA is the customer agent looking at the pet shop owner, which
in turn is looking at the core of the problems between the strip dancer
and the tax auditor through the detached eye of a gay person (no
attraction to the strip dancer), and only interested on avoiding jail
(no personal relationship with the tax auditor).
     Second, EXOTICA is about isolated people holding back their
feelings; about people which by voluntary or involuntary means transfer
their view of reality to other characters.  The strip dancer becomes
the proverbial daughter, the DJ becomes the proverbial killer by means
of breaking the relationship between the father and the proverbial
daughter.  The niece becomes the baby sitter, the baby sitter becomes
the dancer, and the dancer becomes the proverbial daughter.  The pet
shop owner becomes the proverbial DJ, by finding the proverbial
daughter.
     A chain made of real and imagined links coming around full circle,
just as everything comes around to a fitting whole at the end of the
movie.

Title
Review for Forrest Gump (1994)
     FORREST GUMP is a sleeper par excellence.  In Canada, it opened
without any announcements, and on its first day in town, all of ten
people attended the first show.  A week later, it is the number two
film, and fourteen days later it has a larger lineup than BLOWN AWAY.
     What makes this movie so successful?  I would say it's originality
together with a masterful directorial work by Zemeckis.
     FORREST GUMP is original in its theme.  It is not about crimes, or
violence, or spies, or a silly comedy.  It is about people, and in that
respect it reminds me of Fried Green Tomatoes.
     FORREST GUMP is original in its execution.  The movie is narrated
from a bench in a bus stop, and actual dialogue is sparse.  In most
cases such format would get tiresome pretty quickly.  But somehow the
audience never grows tired from 140 minutes of slow southern-accented
speech go about unnoticed.
     FORREST GUMP is original in its dialogue.  This is a movie about a
retarded person.  I was expecting the movie, at one point or another,
to turn into a speech about impaired people, but it remained subtler
than that.  The director let Forrest speak for himself, literally and
figuratively speaking and the message comes across as all the more
genuine.
     FORREST GUMP is original in its plot.  Rather, it does not have a
typical plot.  It has no introduction, problem or solution.  Forrest
flows seamlessly through life, and the movie just keeps that pace.  No
need for dramatic scenes.  Even, some dramatic scenes are surprisingly,
but intelligently left out: we never get to see Forrest's momma die or be
buried.
     FORREST GUMP may be a period piece.  Remarkable only in as much as
it differs from the current school of cinematic production.  But even
if it is only that, it is still a refreshing intermission in the
avalanche of gun-them-down productions of late.

Title
Review for Shadowlands (1993)
Starring: Anthony Hopkins, Debra Winger, Edward Hardwicke, John Wood,
          Michael Denison, Joseph Mazzello
Screenplay: William Nicholson
Director: Richard Attenborough
     Some people might construe SHADOWLANDS to be a movie about
C. S. Lewis, the Christian writer. Nothing further from the truth.
SHADOWLANDS is the portrayal of an intense romance between a troubled
man (C. S. Lewis, British writer and philosopher) and a caring woman
(Joy Davidman Gresham, American poet).
     Why then, the reader may ask, use historical names and places if
the film is not to dwell on the historic figures?
     Because C. S. Lewis, being the powerful writer that he was, left a
written trail of his feelings and tribulations during the seven year
period for which he knew Joy.
     In other words, the movie is a real story and it feels very much
so.  That is the strength of the film. One feels moved by both the joy
and the pain endured by Jack (as C. S. Lewis was known to his family and
friends) and Joy. There is genuine tragedy and happiness in this film.
     The script, superbly recreates and quotes C.S. Lewis, and it is
through beautiful dialogue and prose that we learn of the feelings
between the two of them. Brief references to Lewis's work and credo let
the viewer share on C.S. Lewis's perspective on the events at hand.
     Debra Winger and Anthony Hopkins perform flawlessly, and the rest
of the cast, with their sober performances let "Jack" and "Joy" shine
in the screen as they should.
     Photography, while unobtrusive, is no less refined than the rest
of the movie. Attenborough (and his director of photography) brings
about a sequence of gray/yellowish tones that accurately portray the
landscape and moods of Old Blighty and especially the post-war period.
     SHADOWLANDS is, in a nutshell, an experience not to be forgotten.
     I could say more, but I would only be repeating commendations
already made in this newsgroup by Berardinelli (SHADOWLANDS.2331) and
Renshaw (SHADOWLANDS.2332).
