Authors
James D. Oliver III
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Mo' Better Blues (1990)
     Impressions from last week's sneak preview of Spike Lee's newest,
MO' BETTER BLUES.  The following may contain some minor spoilers for
those who like absolutely no prior information.
     It stars Denzel Washington, Spike Lee, Wesley Snipes, the Spike Lee
Regulars (Joie Lee, Bill Nunn, Giancarlo Esposito, John Turturro) and
newcomer Cynda Williams.
     It's the story of Bleek Gilliam, jazz trumpeter and band leader,
for whom composing and playing--and having absolute control of his
music--is the takes precedence over all other facets of his life,
including the juggling relationships with two women, and creative and
business conflicts within the band.  Bleek refuses to make a commitment
to either woman or to allow other members of the band to make
contributions.  At times it occurred to me that it was a cross between
PURPLE RAIN and SHE'S GOTTA HAVE IT.
     Technically, Spike has never been better.  Sometimes you're *too*
aware of the camerawork, but when he's on, as he is much more frequently
than not, it's an unmatchable combination of artistry and entertainment.
The cinematography is the best I've seen in a long, long time.  Three
outstanding sequences come to mind: First, a scat/rap number by Bleek
about the sameness of Top 40 love songs is outstanding (especially after
you breathe a sigh of relief at knowing that Denzel isn't going to try
to actually *sing*).  If someone has any kind of sense, they'll try to
market it as a single.  Second, a hilarious scene when Bleek does the
absolute worse thing a man involved with two women can do.  And last, in
a summer of escalating cartoon violence, Spike Lee reminds us in
excruciating detail how devastating real violence is.
     The storyline itself is rather uneven: many strong scenes
interspersed with some weak ones.  It seems Spike had specific points he
wanted to get to, even if he didn't always know how to get there.  And
the last ten minutes of the film is a miscalculation: a forced "happy"
ending.  Even then it's clear that Spike was reaching for a specific
point; it just doesn't work.  However, his failure comes from aiming a
lot higher than probably anyone else would.  (Actually, an informal
consensus on the ending was that Denzel got away with what he did only
because he was Denzel: guys, don't try this at home!)
     Denzel Washington is absolutely magnificent in his first truly
three-dimensional role.  The rest of the cast, particularly Wesley
Snipes as Shadow, Bleek's saxophonist and rival, and Cynda Williams as
Clarke, one of Bleek's girlfriends who wants to become a singer.  Rueben
Blades and the late Robin Harris show up in bit parts.
     Oh, yeah.  If you're one of those who consider a movie unrealistic
if black people aren't taking drugs, you won't like this one either.
