Authors
Fred M. Hung
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Replacement Killers, The (1998)
Though born and raised stateside, I was fortunate enough to watch Hong
Kong action movies growing up.  And though my definition of the ultimate
hero is more Jack Ryan than Jackie Chan, I can still appreciate the
slickness of Chow Yun Fat.  Naturally, I was excited when I heard of his
debut in the American mainstream market in The Replacement Killers. 
The plot is rather wafer thin.  Fat is an assassin who refuses to kill
his mark, a detective's son, and in doing so condemns himself to the ire
of his underworld employer.  To aid in his escape, fat solicits the aid
of forger Mira Sorvino.  
The atmosphere, however, is very Michael Mann-esque slick.  In addition
to Chow Yun Fat's smooth demeanor and solemn expressions, The
Replacement Killers is a cinematic exercise in mood setting.  Peter
Collister has filled every frame with midnight blues and metallic grays
enhanced by a neon-lit background.  The firefight sequences are
choreographed to a dance, with every draw and trigger pull an extension
of the characters themselves.  What Fat does not speak, he more than
expresses with the use of twin 9mm Berettas.  
Yet although the plot is thin, the not all the characters are not
completely uni-dimensional, close but not quite.  Fat's, John Lee, is
one of few words.  His dour face suggests a tortured soul beyond the
cool veneer.  His movement and form is so graceful, he becomes almost
mythological.  Fat certainly has presence, and while that is sufficient
to carry him through this film, his future projects could make better
use of his incredible acting range as yet not witnessed by Hollywood.  
Sorvino, though incredibly arresting and alluring, is wasted here.  Her
Meg Coburn attempts to be both Lee's grounding in sanity and firepower
assistance amidst the chaos.  Though Sorvino gives more than a valiant
attempt to breathe life into Meg, the plot does not give her room to
maneuver.  
The supporting actors, Jurgen Prochnow, Michael Rooker and Danny Trejo,
are all underutilized.  Prochnow impressed everyone as the stolid and
lonely captain in Das Boat.  Rooker was much more animate in
Cliffhanger, Sea of Love, and Days of Thunder, as was Danny Trejo in
Heat.  Being relegated to supporting roles notwithstanding, their
characters should have been more significant.  
The Replacement Killers, like Ridley Scott's Black Rain, is definitely
competent entertainment and not as mind-numbing as it easily could have
been.   Antoine Fuqua attempts to make no social commentary and only a
token address to morality, and thus the audience will find no dose of
profundity.  What the audience does find is Fat and Sorvino, radiating
ambiance behind a glossy backdrop of Los Angeles.

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
In an era bereft of such mythical heroes as Sir Arthur's Knights of the
Round Table, Hollywood attempts to fill the void with tales of ordinary
men thrust into extraordinary circumstances. The pragmatic 90s have all
but eliminated the magic of kings and queens.  Thus instead of Lancelot
and Knights, we have … Harry Stamper and oil drillers?  
Armageddon is the latest product from Jerry Bruckheimer who brought us
The Rock, Crimson Tide, Con Air, and Top Gun to name a few.  This time
he is again teamed with Michael Bay, director of The Rock, to bring the
story of a fierce "Global-killer" asteroid on a direct trajectory with
Earth.  Since comparisons to this season's earlier film about asteroids
is inevitable, the simplest way to describe this one would be Deep
Impact on steroids.  
Much of the Bruckheimer trademarks are present, helicopters in
formation, FBI agents in their dark suits, dark jackets, and dark
suburbans, crisp military salutes, motorcades of government vehicles
from the horizon, and stalwart men marching in unison into their finest
hour.  Themes of honor and duty are well represented.  All protagonists
unequivocally volunteer for missions of no return.  American garrison
flags can be seen on rustic homes from small town Kansas to large
hangars in NASA.  Optimists will call Armageddon patriotic, detractors
will call it propaganda.  Whatever the case, none can deny that the film
visually spectacular.  Bay, a former rock video director, is a genius at
creating incredibly slick imagery.  From shepherds in Scotland, to
Muslims in India, parts of Armageddon will rival AT&T and American
Express commercials.  Combine all these elements with an adrenaline
pulsating soundtrack by Aerosmith and others, Bruckheimer has again
brought us the testosterone flick of the year.
Despite the sheen and marketing blitz, Armageddon can not compensate for
its overriding weakness, unidimensional characters.  Bruckheimer and Bay
entertainingly introduce us to men who are mankind's saviors, but never
bother to tell us who they really are.  Bruce Willis, the leader of the
motley crew, never transcends the terse and grimacing tough guy.  Ben
Affleck and Liv Tyler are the star-crossed lovers.  Billy Bob Thorton is
a Sen. Fred Thompson clone.  Will Patton is the loyal sidekick.  Steve
Buscemi again reprises his stereotype as the Shakespearean clown but
this time in space.  Although Armageddon proceeds at a breakneck pace,
the script accords so little for character development.  Consequently,
it is difficult to sympathize, or empathize for that matter, with the
characters' fates.  
No unwritten law exists that states testosterone action and character
development are mutually exclusive.  In fact it was also Bruckheimer and
Bay who gave us Ed Harris' complex and tortured anti-villain in the
Rock.  It is Armageddon's ambitious scope, so many characters, so many
events, that prevented such exposition.  Moments of emotion are too
easily eclipsed by explosions.  
That being said, the film is by no means a failure.  While certainly
transparent and mindless, Armageddon had me saluting cab drivers as I
exited the film.  Personal bias – I live for images of flags waving in
the wind, salutes, self-sacrificing men, and  F-16s flying missing man
formations.  Bruckheimer and Bay are no Chaucer and Homer, nor do they
pretend to be.  Armageddon is simply meant to rally an audience, for 2.5
hours, to surrender belief and cheer for 8 men who are willing to
sacrifice themselves for a greater good.  This isn't poetry, but it's
still a lot of fun.

Title
Review for U.S. Marshals (1998)
I should have known what to expect when I saw the director, Stuart
Baird, whose last work was Executive Decision, a mildly entertaining but
mostly formulaic and uneven Die Hard in air.  In US Marshals, Sam Gerard
is again on the hunt for Sheridan, a former Marine, Special Forces. 
Robert Downey, Jr., DSS Special Agent John Royce, is a new addition to
the team.  
The first Fugitive was a remake of the old TV series, and no one had
more doubts than I about its effectiveness.  Yet the sheer unrelenting
pace and amazingly strong characters made the film so much more than the
sum of its parts.  Tommy Lee Jones was riveting, full of energy resolve,
and professionalism.  Many will complain that US Marshals suffers
because it lacks Harrison Ford, but Ford's performance, though solid,
was not particularly out of his narrow range.  In fact, you can supplant
Ford's President from Air Force One with Dr. Richard Kimble and one
could scarcely tell the difference.  What made Fugitive truly great was
the combination of Tommy Lee Jones' Sam Gerard, a noble Wyatt Earp who,
though chasing our hero Harrison Ford, is difficult to dismiss, and
impossible to hate.  
US Marshals is disappointing, but not in the material, in the editing. 
In a film class I took back in college, we were taught that editing
creates continuity, and thus makes the story of the film.  The blame,
therefore, must fall on Baird.  In fact, all the elements of a good film
are present in US Marshals, action, plots and subplots, bad guys, and
noble good guys.  Unfortunately, nothing successfully gels these
components.  Even Jerry Goldsmith, whose musical scores are usually
quite engrossing, produces a nondescript and absolutely nonemotive
effort.  At times I even wondered whether they had forgotten to add a
score.  
Like Executive Decision, US Marshals suffers from moments of intensity,
to great lulls in rhythm.  The plane crash where Snipe's Sheridan
escapes is preceded by a very tepid formal where Gerard's superior
orders him to take vacation.   In addition, The supporting cast blends
too easily in the background to be noticeable.  The chemistry between
Sam Gerard and his men in the Fugitive created levity in the moments
when they interacted.  In the US Marshals Baird attempts to mimic these
moments, but they too seem forced. 
While certainly disappointing, US Marshals is not a horrible film, but
audience expectation is so much greater.  I can think about a dozen
directors, namely Michael Bay, Tony Scott, John McTiernan, and certainly
Andrew Davis (although Chain Reaction was pretty lackluster) that could
have made more of this solid cast.  What a waste of talent.

Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
When the Bruckheimer/Simpson team brought Crimson Tide to the screen
back in 1995, I was incredibly surprised.  I had previously associated
the duo with such popcorn successes as Top Gun and Days of Thunder. 
Never did I expect a clever and taught thriller that challenged the
audience with theoretical dilemmas as well as entertained with gripping
drama.  When The Rock emerged in 1996, again, I was impressed by the
charismatic chemistry between Connery and Cage, in addtion to the
awesome performance of the misled anti-villain like Ed Harris' Gen.
Hummel.
After the death of Simpson, Bruckheimer ventures alone (you can tell by
the slightly modified lightning intro that marks each of their films)
with his entry into the summer season, CON AIR, with Nicolas Cage, John
Malkovich, and John Cusack.  Cage is a US Army Ranger wrongfully
imprisoned.  Unluckily, on day of his parole he finds himself on a
hijacked plane filled with the Justice Department's most wanted.
Simply put, to the extent that a film's purpose is to entertain, Con Air
accomplishes just that -- and no more.  Many of the current
Bruckheimer/Simpson patents are present, including the news footage of
military action to start, the very Hans Zimmer-ish score by Mark
Mancina, and a script that again seems edited by Tarantino.  Since the
script does not offer much range within the protagonists, Cage comes off
competent, as does Cusack.  Cage's character, Sgt. Cameron Poe, is
almost caricature -- terse, deadly, but at heart a family man.  Cusack's
Deputy Marshal Larkin, however, is basically Cusack with gun.  
Malkovich, however, is underused.  While certainly capable of so much
more (refer to In the Line of Fire, Dangerous Liasons, and the Killing
Fields), Malkovich is just having fun in his maniacal portrayal of Cyrus
"the Virus."  To his credit, the image of Malkovich holding Cage's bunny
hostage will should go down in the annals of film history as one of the
funniest hostage moments ever.  Unfortunately, much of these clever
moments are eclipsed by pyrotechnics.  
Buscemi steals the show in his limited moments.  It is difficult to
describe accurately his role, a sort of Shakespearean narrative clown
crossed with Hannibal Lecter.  His presense in the film is nonetheless
ambitious as the screenwriters remind us that all is in good fun.  
The action is solid.  Bruckheimer and company are geniuses when
combining testosterone soundtracks, TNT, and intense close ups.  In a
way, expectation may be Con Air's greatest enemy.  The audience is
already expecting high explosions, chases, and mounting body counts. 
Although Con Air delivers adequately all these, in the end one might
leave somewhat anti-climatic.  After all, how thrilling is it to put on
a familiar pair of old shoes?

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
I was sitting in a conference room during a late night in December. 
Tired, and not really focused, I asked a colleague what exciting
Christmas movie he was waiting to see.  He answered, "Titanic."  I
immediately smirked.  I likened Titanic-hype to another Ishtar,
Waterworld, and all their runaway budget sisters.  My friend said he
wanted to see what a $200 million movie would look like, especially the
cutting edge effects by Industrial Light and Magic.  Still, I was
hesitant.  Effects alone are not the hallmarks of a superior film.  I
have always been cynical of Hollywood producing superficial,
eye-catching films that are pleasing to look at but lack a real story.
Well, several months later, and a billion dollars later, on a very
boring Sunday night last weekend, I decided to give in examine the
Titanic hysteria for myself.  Everyone and their cousins had seen the
film by then.  Critics were giving kudos to director James Cameron and
female cast Kate Winslet and Gloria Stuart.  Moreover, as people in my
office will tell you, I was driven insane by the radio play of Celine
Dion's "My Heart will Go On."  Still, I was very biased against it. 
After all, I thought, it's still about a giant boat sinking to the
bottom of the ocean, right?
Aside from the enormous budget, the very uncomplicated story line
(nomadic working-class boy meets sophisticated spoiled socialite girl)
is not that original, which probably explains why Titanic was never
nominated for best screenplay.  And like Apollo 13, the audience is
aware of the fate of the ship, and some 1500 of her complement.  Titanic
could have easily been a titanic failure.
The fact that Titanic has been such an amazing success for James Cameron
and his producers should be a resounding vindication for her earlier
detractors.  In addition to breathtaking special effects, the critical
success factors to Titanic can be broken down to a simple but endearing
story, solid performances from both lead and supporting actors, and an
unforgettable soundtrack.  
An ABC critic said it best, "We know that at least one lives to tell the
story, and for the next 3 hours, we're hoping that both survive."  The
romance between DiCaprio and Winslet is doomed from the start. 
Cameron's then has the difficult task of telling a fated tale where the
audience still has to remain optimistic despite all evidence to the
contrary.  Perhaps that is Titanic's greatest achievement.   
DiCaprio, despite a very youthful appearance, manages to deliver a solid
performance but much of Titanic's success must be attributed to Kate
Winslet.  Kate is absolutely stunning, giving a near flawless
performance as an anachronistic turn of the century feminist, refusing
comport to the customs or prejudices of the privileged.  Kate delicately
balances her character with strength and vulnerability.  
DiCaprio and Winslet are supported finely by Kathy Bates, a Southern
commoner whose husband struck riches through oil, and Frances Fisher,
Winslet's elitist mother who wants to secure her place in aristocracy
through Winslet's marriage. 
Last, but certainly not least, Titanic has an amazing score by James
Horner.  Horner has traditionally been inconsistent, composing tepid
tracks in the Star Trek series, to rousing themes in Clear and Present
Danger and Glory.  Here he has mapped the emotions of  Titanic to music,
from a triumphant march in her launch to mournful requiem in her death. 
Batman's Danny Elfman, who is nominated twice in the same category this
year, has already graciously conceded defeat.
There are some lines in Titanic that could be reworked, namely the
horrible "I was like tumbleweed in the wind" and "Don't ever let go!" 
It is difficult to determine whether Titanic is good enough to warrant
the attention she's receiving, but it is good.  The mass appeal of the
film is a direct result of  its ability to evoke the universal themes
love, humanity, and at times courage.  Look for a superbly intellectual
film like Primary Colors to be crushed this weekend by the Titanic
juggernaut.  Also look for Best Picture, Director, Actress, Original
Score, and Song to all go to Titanic, effortlessly.  Cameron has created
a film of epic splendor, if not story.  For his audacity and faith, he
should be commended.
