Authors
Z_RIDGEJE@CCSVAX.SFASU.EDU
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for True Romance (1993)
     The road picture is just about the ultimate medium for action
movies.  I mean, where else do you get the chance to visit so many
different places and meet so many different kinds of people?  Of
course, along for the ride should be at least two interesting people
with whom we, the audience, can do all that and leave the theater in
one piece--and perhaps be entertained in the process.  Such is the
case with TRUE ROMANCE.
     The film opens in a bar, where we first meet Clarence.  He is near
drunk, talking to no one in particular about his idol (yeah, you guessed
it ... Elvis).  He goes to a movie theater to watch some kung fu flick,
and it is then that we meet the other protagonist of the
piece--Alabama.
     It's love at first sight.  They talk in a diner, visit his
workplace, and then--before you can say the S word--they're at his
apartment doing the nasty under a light blue hue.  Afterwards, Alabama
tells him that she's been a prostitute for three days.  "I'm completely
monogamous.  When I'm with a man, I'm with *him* and nobody else," she
tells a confused Clarence.  Obviously, her job didn't work out.  And to
make things worse, she's in love with Clarence now.  Guess what
happens.
     Clarence and Alabama get hitched.  After that, Clarence feels it
his duty to retrieve his wife's suitcase of clothing.  So, he goes to
the residence of Alabama's pimp, Drexel (played by Gary Oldman).  He
ends up killing the pimp, grabs the suitcase and runs.  He and Alabama
later open the case, and find it filled with cocaine.  "Those aren't my
clothes," Alabama laughs.  But Clarence doesn't find the situation so
funny.  What are they gonna do?  They do what any two normal kids on
the run from the mob and the police and drug dealers would do--they
attempt to sell the stuff.  Things don't turn out so great.
     Like I said before, I like road movies.  And this *is* a road
movie if nothing more.  But there's a lot more.  As far as
characterization and plot go, this film has it's head in the right
direction.  Too bad it fails t make Clarence or Alabama interesting
people.  Sure, we care about both of them.  But they're really just one
note harped and harped and harped til we get a headache.  The
characters that *are* worth your time are the supporting players:  Gary
Oldman goes way over the top in his role; Christopher Walken has the
best cameo; Dennis Hopper does his usual thing as Clarence's dad, who
is reluctant to help his son; and Brad Pitt is quite funny as a totally
stoned beach bum who couldn't care less about the world.  The
soundtrack is kickin', the direction and production values as slick as
they come, and the writing by RESERVOIR DOGS dude Quentin Tarantino
combines just about every action film cliche in the book.
     There is testosterone pumping at all times throughout the film,
and there is also a message.  Violence is wrong, but it happens and we
just have to deal with it.  There also exists a theme of what would two
immature kids do in a situation like the one that Clarence and Alabama
are in.  I'm not sure if TRUE ROMANCE gets all its messages across
clearly, but they *are* there--just dig deep.  Take your time with
this movie, and have a wild ride too.  Enjoy.
CRITICAL RATING:  ***(1/2)
RATED R, for Violence and Profanity like you wouldn't believe
