Authors
Jonathan Hauer
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Very Bad Things (1998)
Y'ever see a car wreck?  How about one in slow-motion? How about in super
slo-mo?  How about one hundred one minutes of slo-mo car wreck up-close and
personal in all its teeth gnashing, nail scraping, shriek-inducing glory?
Well, if this is what's lacking in your life, please see "Very Bad Things."
The movie details Kyle Fisher's (Jon Favreau) ill-fated bachelor party.  You
see, his wife-to-be is demanding, the planning is a chore, and his only
relief is a night in Vegas with his mean-spirited, low-life, self-righteous
childhood pals.  After quickly tiring of the obligatory gambling and
pro-wrestling pay-per-view, the boys move on to cocaine and a woman of the
night, which one of the man accidentally kills.  This premise is not a bad
one, in my book.  This is not to say that I am condoning either hooker
slaughter or drug abuse, but the fact is that these are dark and titillating
subjects (see car wreck, above) which can propel a movie in the right
direction for an adult audience.
But, alas, these are cheap, contrived situations and Peter Berg leads us
through one hundred one of the most tedious and depressing moments of our
lives, second only to our own true tragedies.  On the positive side, the
acting is pretty good.  I was convinced (with the exception of the
developments involving Christian Slater's character) that these fellas were
being run through hell and back.  I truly felt Kyle was trapped, I felt Adam
(Daniel Stern) was grossand pathetic and I felt like Michael (Jeremy Piven)
was an irresponsible, hot-headed jerk.  However, gross manipulation does not
a movie make.  In this respect, I was reminded of last year's "Return to
Paradise,"  another long, slow car wreck of a movie, which showed us the
most pathetic and heart-rending of stories, but that's all it showed.
The tone of "Very Bad Things" felt awfully inappropriate at times.  At the
beginning I was impressed that the film decided to defy its previews and
take the much more serious tone of a darker film rather than a dark comedy.
But, then, as if to confuse, each act was concluded with an entirely
contradictory happy, jazzy tune...way to kill the mood, guys.  It's like
they were trying to say, "hey, we were just kidding about all that horrible
stuff," but without the actual humor to back it up.  Add to that a very bad
sense of timing -- how many days took place between the bachelor's party and
the wedding? -- and you've got yourself a stinker of a movie.
I found myself wondering why I had enjoyed other dark movies (Fargo, A
Simple Plan) to a great degree, but not this one.  What was the difference?
The difference for "Very Bad Things" was an uneven tone, a lack of any human
sympathy for anyone in the film, and a story that was entirely too
predictable.  It could've been better, the audience can see the potential,
Peter Berg's direction was very interesting at times, but that just made it
all the more frustrating.

Title
Review for Runaway Bride (1999)
Directed by Garry Marshall.
Cast: Richard Gere, Julia Roberts, Joan Cusack, Paul Dooley, Rita Wilson,
Hector Elizondo, Christopher Meloni, Jean Schertler, Laurie Metcalf
Maybe I was in a bad mood or maybe I have a thing against theaters with
rocking seats banging into my knees, but this contrived, by-the-numbers,
empty-calorie movie left me angry.  Oh, sure, I laughed a little, but after
the fifteenth strategic placement of a cute puppy or a set of adorable
twins, I began to feel something akin to hatred for this movie.
"The Runaway Bride" is the movie equivalent of a political campaign, trying
to make up for its lack of believable characters and ridiculous plot by
throwing in tried and true shots of cute things to keep the audience warm
and fuzzy.  It's as if Garry Marshall would shout, "THE AUDIENCE IS CATCHING
ON TO THE FACT THAT THIS IS CRAP!  THROW THEM A KITTY-CAT!" and the
audience, almost seeing behind the moldy green curtain within which the
studio wizards operate, is unable to react other than favorably to the
cotton-candy being lobbed at them.
Please understand that I like romantic fluff movies...I actually liked
"Pretty Woman," "Notting Hill" and "My Best Friend's Wedding," all fairly
successful attempts at ultra-lite romantic comedy.  "Pretty Woman," of
course, was directed by Garry Marshall, and had a nice, new touch to it.
Richard Gere and Julia Roberts are both decent actors, and can carry a
movie.  Joan Cusack is always good to have on hand to add some funny,
touching buoyancy to a dramatic moment.  Larry Miller is a funny comedian.
Laurie Metcalf was good on "Roseanne."
Was "The Runaway Bride" destined to be terrible?  I don't think so.  But,
for god sakes, Garry, after "Dear God," I would have thought you'd learned a
lesson about adding some complexity and mature interest to a film.  Like the
flagging comedy of "In & Out," this film tries to approach actual emotion
while using characters as synthetic as the stock on which the film was shot.
It used stylized, stereotyped situations and then tried to throw
Oscar-nominating speeches on top ("You humiliate me every time you take a
drink!").  "Bride" couldn't figure out its own tone and as a result never
approached the deep-felt humor of a good romantic-comedy.
Alas, it really doesn't matter what I think of this movie.  The producers
threw in something for everyone, and it'll make a lot of money.  I know that
much.

Title
Review for Shall We Dansu? (1996)
SHALL WE DANSU?, a.k.a. SHALL WE DANCE? (1996)
Invoking the spirit of Yul Brenner, Masayuki Suo's "Shall We Dansu?" invites
us to take a long look at a tradition which is as foreign to most of us as
it is to the Japanese: ballroom dancing.  The film begins by telling us that
dancing is almost unheard of in Japan, and that a man embracing a woman in
public is considered  lecherous and perverse.
The film then jumps to the workaday life of Shohei Sugiyama (excellently
portrayed by Koji Yakusho, managing to remind me of both Jackie Chan and
Harrison Ford, go figure).  Mr. Sugiyama is an accountant who has committed
his life to his wife, his child, his work and his new house.  However,
Sugiyama's soul is in limbo, and as he rides the train home every evening he
longs for a lonely soul he sees peering out of a dance studio window.
Natch, we find him entering the studio and taking classes without his wive's
foreknowledge.  Funny, heartwarming capers ensue.
Sometimes, while I'm watching a foreign film, I begin to wonder whether it
is the film I'm enjoying or the fact that I understand what's happening on
screen. Upon reflection, "Shall We Dance?" did at times succumb to sitcom
cliche characterization, and plot devices that might have irritated me in an
English language film.  However, this film is so lacking in the ever-present
self-consciousness of North American filmmaking, and so gleeful in its
spirit that I found myself forgiving the simplicity of sub-plots and simply
enjoying the film for what it was.  There was a more complex message about
the stoicism of Japanese society hiding within this film, but this state of
mind seemed to leave many of the main characters pretty easily.
I recommend this movie.  It's not pretentious, it's a little manipulative
and it's a lot of fun.  Your significant other will thank you for renting
this one, too.
Strictly Ballroom (Baz Luhrman, 1992) http://uk.imdb.com/Title?0105488
The King and I (Walter Lang, 1956) http://uk.imdb.com/Title?0049408

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
The movie: 3 and a half dried twigs (out of 4)
The movie, plus the website, plus the featurette: 4 dried twigs (out of 4)
Directed by: Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez (II)
Written by: Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez (II)
Cast: Heather Donahue, Michael C. Williams and Joshua Leonard
But, you've got to hand it to them, the folks behind "The Blair Witch
Project" were.  With no money or name actors, writer-directors Daniel Myrick
and Eduardo Sanchez (II) got clever, and created an event bigger than the
actuality of their film.
The story of the film is best encapsulated by the words that appear before
the footage begins: "In October of 1994, three student filmmakers
dissapeared in the woods near Burkittesville, Maryland, while shooting a
documentary. One year later, their footage was found."  Now that is a good
premise for a horror story.  The ensuing tension and revelations are worth
the price of admission.
Debuting their film at midnight during the Sundance film festival, Myrick
and Sanchez scared the bejeezus out of an indy-film crowd with an
unexpectedly well made, scary film project.  The Sundance buzz was ignited,
but the duo did not stop there.  They went on to create a wonderful web-site
that tells much of the history of the film's story and paired up with the
Sci-Fi channel to create a "Blair Witch Project" documentary, "The Mythology
of Blair Witch."  By the time the actualy film was released (to only one
theater in the D.C. area!) my desire to know the story and learn the secrets
that film contained were greater than ever.  I was as anxious to see the
footage as I was to see *GASP* "Episode One."
This is a very well made, very clever film. The real question is, "Is it
scary?"  Yes, it is scary.  "Is it the scariest movie you've ever seen?"  It
was pretty intense.  I think, though, that "Schindler's List" ranks up there
on the actual fear meter.  On the other hand, this movie is not meant to
preach, it is meant to scare.  It may be a post-haunted house "I'm no
coward" mentality that leads me to say that it wasn't too terribly scary.
However, I can say that my mind was haunted on the drive home; to the extent
of turning off the radio and picturing the film's final images again and
again to try to discern exactly what it was that occurred.
In reality, the movie is really little more than a documentary style ghost
story told with a lot of screaming, a teensy bit of fake blood and a couple
of shaky cameras.  The media hoopla has described the style of the film as a
necessity because of the project's low budget, but I don't believe that this
film would have been as effective any other way.  The casting of unknown
actors -- Heather Donahue, Michael C. Williams and Joshua Leonard (playing
themselves) -- closed the gap between reality and fantasy.  The camera's
blurred images and distant sound (sometimes the sound you hear was captured
by the video camera, and sometimes by DAT) make you believe that this is
actually happening as documented by the machinery.  And, perhaps most
effective of all, is the lack of a clear picture of whatever it is that's
happening.  In an age when filmmakers are being encouraged to dream their
most fantastic digital dreams for their audience, these two filmmakers were
forced to look into the negative space of our psyches and remember that what
we don't know is the source of true magic and terror.
Thank you to Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez, along with your cast and
crew, for creating excitement about an innovative vision and a film that
mostly achieves its own hype.

Title
Review for Summer of Sam (1999)
Directed by: Spike Lee
Written by: Victor Colicchio and Michael Imperioli
Cast: John Leguizamo, Adrien Brody, Mira Sorvino, Jennifer Esposito, Michael
Badalucco
It is the summer of 1977, and not only is it hotter than the summer of
"Do the Right Thing" but the Son of Sam has struck again, and the
neighborhood brown-outs are driving New Yorkers to new heights of deviance.
Brooklyn is being looted, the mob is turning vigilante, and anyone who is
outside of the neighborhood's realm of understanding is prey.
Spike Lee's new film once again uses a sensational catalyst to tell a
story about the human condition. In "Do The Right Thing" it was a heat wave,
in "He Got Game" it was the lure of celebrity and money, and in "Summer of
Sam" it is the infamous serial killer (for whom the term was coined), David
Berkowitz.   The "Son of Sam" becomes our excuse to abuse, accuse and harm
one another.
John Leguizamo turns in his best performance to date as the slimy, yet
sympathetic, Vinny, a man torn between holding together his neighborhood and
maintaining the integrity of his friendship with Richie (played by Adrian
Brody).  Brody is the real stand-out in a cast large enough to include both
Ben Gazzara and Bebe Neuwirth.  Richie has returned from travels, and has
been greatly influenced by the English punk movement.  When Richie returns
to his old friends, he is sporting spiked hair, multiple piercings and a
fake cockney accent.  This impresses some, but quickly intimidates others
that find safety and comfort in the routine of the neighborhood.
Mira Sorvino plays Vinny's wife, Dionna, and is effective and believable
as a woman who just wants to make her husband happy until pushed over the
edge.  Michael Badalucco plays the Son of Sam himself.  While his crimes, as
we are shown at various intervals throughout the movie, are incredibly
shocking and scary, the murderer seems more pathetic and comic than scary.
One of his
key scenes involving the dog that commanded him to murder comes off as more
comic than harrowing.
This film is one of double standards.  Vinny is willing to cheat on his
wife, but if another man should insult her, he becomes vicious.  The local
gang harrasses and mistreats the token neighborhood homosexual, but the
minute someone from outside the neighborhood should do the same they use it
as an excuse to attack.  When the horror and hysteria of Son of Sam's crimes
reach their dizzying and climactic heights, the neighborhood uses it as an
excuse to commit their own horrible acts towards those that intimidate them
through individuality.
Spike Lee and writers Victor Colicchio and Michael Imperioli (of HBO's
"Sopranos" watch for his cameo as Midnight) show us that the big apple is
divided into neighborhoods that are every bit as gossipy as the small towns
of America, and just as isolationist.  At once it seems that the film is
telling the story of the New York City in the summer of '77, but it becomes
clear that this is truly a lesson in humanity in all of its horror and
glory.
