Authors
Andy Phillips
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Man with the Golden Gun, The (1974)
Let me begin by saying that this is easily the worst movie in the entire
official (and even unofficial) James Bond series. It is so full of
self-parody and silly characters that you would almost believe you were
watching a spoof.
An omen of what is to come is provided by the pre-credits sequence, a dull
affair featuring a confrontation between a man (it's difficult to give a
better description since no mention of him is made elsewhere in the movie)
and the assassin of the title. A song with woefully terrible lyrics
follows, and the rest of the movie is even worse.
The plot might have been a pleasant change from the usual rule-the-world
so often found in the James Bond movies of the 70s, but here we get a
confused mismash about a fabled assassin, Francisco Scaramanga
(Christopher Lee, putting in a performance which is one of the rare saving
graces of this movie) who someone has apparently payed one million dollars
to in order to remove Roger Moore's 007. There is also a flimsy connection
with the energy crisis and a missing solar cell with 95% efficiency. It's
as much of a mess as it sounds.
Bond is "helped" in his task by Mary Goodnight (Ekland), whose character
couldn't possibly be any closer to the stereotypical bimbo. During the
course of the movie she gets locked in both a closet and a car trunk,
blunders around a control room accidentally setting off a laser and serves
no purpose in enhancing the plot whatsoever. Maud Adams (later to star in
Octopussy) is a much more stronger and useful character, but she hardly
features in the movie. Scaramanga's lackey is a dwarf called Nik-Nak,
who rather fittingly is also possibly the silliest henchman in the series,
serving up annoyance and weak dialogue in equal measures.
Worse still is an almost total lack of action throughout the whole movie.
There is but one fight sequence about fifteen minutes in (not counting a
ludicrous scene where two teenage girls beat up several dozen trained
martial artists -- another misguided attempt at humour). The solitary
car chase might have been a highlight, but the "action" is interrupted
on a frequent basis by a redneck sheriff (J.W. Pepper, played by Clifton 
James of Live and Let Die "fame") yelling stupid comments out of the
passenger window. He is easily the most irritating character in a James
Bond movie. Even his presence could have been made bearable by one of
the most impressive car stunts in cinematic history, a 360 degree
twisting loop jump over a broken bridge -- could have been, except
somebody got the idea to dub a mocking whistle tone over the final
print. On top of that debacle, the whole end of the film is an
anticlimatic sequence in Scaramanga's "funhouse".
The only good thing that came out of this movie was that the producers had
to make the next film in the series (the infinitely superior "The Spy who
loved Me") a great film in order for the Bond franchise to survive.

Title
Review for Snake Eyes (1998)
Starring: Nicolas Cage, Gary Sinise, Carla Gugino
Directed by: Brian DePalma
MPAA Cert: R  (UK equivalent: 15)
Review by Andy Phillips (aphillips@ma.man.ac.uk)
        SNAKE EYES, the latest thriller from director Brian DePalma,
centres around a high-profile heavyweight boxing match. Corrupt cop Nick
Santoro (Cage) has been invited by best mate Commander Kevin Dunne
(Sinise), who also happens to be in charge of security. With a hurricane
raging around the hotel where the fight is being staged, things turn nasty
when the US secretary of defence attending the fight is assassinated.
Santoro is placed in charge of investigating the shooting, and uncovers
all the usual conspiracy-type dodgy goings on in the process.
        There are many moments in the movie where the relatively good
direction can do little to hide the deficiencies in the screenplay,
notably one sequence showing birds eye views of the rooms in the hotel.
With a better script, this could easily have set up a suspenseful scene,
but here it seems to have little purpose other than to fill up a few more
seconds. 
        Even the terrifically done opening, a twenty minute continuous
steadicam shot, is lost amidst near unintelligable dialogue. Nick
Santoro's seeming inability to anything other than to go around yelling
quickly becomes irritating. One scene in particular, where he
confronts one of the boxers (Stan Shaw) over match rigging, degenerates
into nothing more than a contest to see who can shout the loudest.
        Occasionally, there are flashes of inspiration that do just about
enough to keep the viewer interested. The eyewitnesses' different
views of events leading up to the shooting, told in flashback, are more
than competently handled and work well. 
        Another fault that keeps the excellent premise from becoming the
bookend to an equally good thriller is the premature unveiling of the
villain. Although the enormous lack of potential suspects make the
revelation more than a little obvious, the suspense completely evaporates
afterwards, leaving us with inferior cat-and-mouse antics supported by an
unimmersive soundtrack. The ending is a seriously silly anticlimax,
strongly supporting theories that it was very different from what DePalma
had in mind.
        The movie, like so many thrillers, is also riddled with plot holes
obvious even to viewers of average intelligence -- spectators returning
to a normal life moments after witnessing a cold-blooded act of supposed
terrorism, nobody seeming to notice one of the witnesses' blood covered
clothing -- to name but a few. 
        Despite its shortfalls, SNAKE EYES isn't the worst film of its
type you'll ever see, and may entertain some people, though it might be
best to wait for the video.
