Authors
Philippe de Saussure
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
- "Can you imagine ? 200 millions !"
- "What a beautiful romance !"
- "...class consciousness..." (said a european critic on
http://www.webdo.ch/cineweb/titanic.html)
And though... Cameron tried hard : he shot his little "Metropolis" in the
engine room (including the ambiguity of the social connotation), he evoked
the working class in the lower stories (no rudeness, don't be afraid), he
shot the powerful scene of the life-boat slowly moving past the frozen
corpses... Several moments get close to good movie-making in his "Titanic".
And now, your opinion ! You meet a director who introduces a movie in which
:
1) he uses for the 100'00th time a romance between the rich girl and the
poor boy (ok, so far !), without any intention to renew it;
2) the deceived fiancé is evil (who would dare betray a gentle person !),
and plays the complete evil repertoire (conceited, then miserly, then
indifferent, then violent, then cruel, then cowardly, etc. - no hitches);
3) implausible details abound (why not !), only to make the narrative frame
more readable (example : all the lights remain on even when the ship is
half-sunk, making it so much easier to shoot the lovers swimming 30 minutes
in ice-cold water);
4) the evil characters all have a british accent, whereas the "good ones",
like the handsome proletarian (but clean, and artist !) or the
down-to-earth, friendly milionnaire have an all-american speaking...
- "Why, this is Hollywood filmmaking, but... so beautiful !"
- "A great movie may lack of taste now and then, the greatness is not
altered..."
The lovers are locked in a tender embrace, on the tip of the bow, across
the wind, in front of the setting sun... the scene is PERFECT. But... maybe
the audience will be frustrated if no more is disclosed ? So : the girl
then offers her nudity to the eyes and the pencil of her lover (remember
this french movie with Emmanuelle Beart ?). But... will the audience really
understand ? Thus we will not get away without the final, clear-cut scene
of lovemaking in a car ! Fortunately Cameron remembered to use a nice and
shiny old-timer instead of the usual Chevy !
Why should we forgive the taste flaws ? Did Kubrick or Orson Welles indulge
in any ? While he was shooting "Titanic", Cameron probably sensed the
presence of a masterpiece, snooping around outside the studio. But
masterpieces are so elusive, particularly when you must make absolutely
sure that you will pay back the celebrated 200 millions, and that you
CANNOT afford to be disliked !
Clumsily translated from the french - obviously reflects a european
opinion. Thank you for sending you comments. 

Title
Review for Boogie Nights (1997)
"Les années 70 en Amérique, encore elles ?" Il fallait des idées pour
reprendre le sujet : Paul Anderson en a eu, et beaucoup ! Dans cette longue
saga californienne vous verrez un jeune mec sorti trop tôt du lycée (Mark
Wahlberg, "Dirk Diggler"), qui entre dans l'univers du film porno, sous
l'aile d'un pčre adoptif-réalisateur de cul (Burt Reynolds). Ses débuts,
ses amours, son ascension, sa chute...
Les personnages ont de l'appétit; le réalisateur, de la gourmandise ! Il
nous emmčne dans une West-Coast de 1977 qui fait revivre tout naturellement
les maillots de bain, les chemises, les hanches, les démarches... et le
cheap omniprésent des temps du disco. Comme son double Burt Reynolds,
Anderson (derričre la caméra) semble garder d'un bout ŕ l'autre un petit
sourire au coin des lčvres. Il nous dit "Tiens, regarde !" et hop ! nous
place ŕ l'oeilleton de sa 32mm, ou carrément dans la salle (vous
apprécierez la texture de l'image lorsqu'on est "au cinéma dans le film").
Boogie Nights est l'histoire bouffonne de plusieurs regards, et aussi un
petit témoignage sur l'effet des transitions techniques (ici, le
remplacement du film celluloďd par la vidéo, au début des années 80).
Pourquoi le porno ? Parceque c'est un sous-cinéma, c'est ŕ dire un univers
miniature. Grâce ŕ sa super-queue, Dick devient une vraie sous-star,
obtient des succčs de sous-critique, gagne des sous-Oscars, croit en son
super-talent... Et on le comprend tellement bien ! Le message du film est
lŕ. Tout sérieux momentanément oublié, ne sommes-nous pas tous des
"sous-quelque chose" ? Attention, pas d'erreur, Boogie Nights n'est pas un
film porno ! Le fameux zizi, Anderson vous le montrera une fois, mais il
choisira son moment ! 
Aprčs la gloire, le succčs de Dirk fléchit. Les films doivent ętre plus
racoleurs, deviennent violents. Brouillé avec son mentor, le héros sombre
lentement (dčche, délinquance). Malgré des moments inspirés, la prise de
vue et le scénario de Boogie Nights se relâchent. Alors que l'histoire
roule de plus en plus vite vers une fin lugubre, Anderson reprend toutes
les ficelles des personnages qui divergeaient, les noue en un paquet-cadeau
inattendu, et concocte une sorte de happy end provisoire et un peu
décevant. Sincčre volonté d'éviter une conclusion pessimiste ? Ou exigence
des producteurs ? Malgré ces défauts, l'ensemble garde une exceptionnelle
densité  humaine et esthétique.
Je vous ai mis l'eau ŕ la bouche ? Ma recommandation : allez-y. Votre
voisin vous prendra pour un cochon. Sortie prévue en France le 18 mars
1998.
Philippe de Saussure - Boston - Merci de m'envoyer vos impressions !
