Authors
Ivana Redwine
Number of Reviews
12

Title
Review for Persona (1966)
There are some films that never let you go. For me, Ingmar Bergman's
"Persona" (1966) is such a film. Because it has great depth and resonance,
new facets of meaning emerge with each viewing. Yet it defies being
completely understood, but that is part of its beauty and power.
When I first saw "Persona," I didn't quite know what to make of it. I
thought it was a haunting, enigmatic cinepoem, but my mind was unable to
grasp it all at once. Much as a wonderfully complex novel demands careful,
multiple readings, I knew I would have to see the film several times to
start to gauge its depth, even though it's only 81 minutes long.
Every time I watch this film, my mind still reels a little, but that's not
surprising. There's a kind of psychological vertigo operating in "Persona"
that complements its theme of slippery, shifting, ambiguous personal
identity. And Bergman takes great pains to make the people in his audience
sharply conscious of the fact that they are watching a movie. Thus, the film
is also about the vampiric voyeurism that is inherently part of cinema and
the corresponding loss of self it produces.
In "Persona," much of the viewer's time is spent looking at the faces of a
pair of women who are very similar in appearance, and as the story
progresses there are moments when the two women seem to become one. In a
striking sequence near the beginning of the film, an adolescent boy reaches
for an image of a huge face apparently projected on a screen that he can
almost--but not quite--touch. The face shown in this sequence alternates
between the visages of Liv Ullmann and Bibi Andersson, the actresses who
portray the main characters in the film. And much later in the movie, in one
of the most stunning images in all of cinema, a composite face is formed,
half Ullmann's face and the other half Andersson's. There is, in fact, much
loving, lingering camera work devoted to faces throughout the film, and it
struck me as reminiscent of the incredibly emotive things they used to do
with faces in silent films.
The story in "Persona" is deceptively simple. It revolves around Alma
(Andersson), a 25-year-old nurse put in charge of Elisabet Vogler (Ullmann),
a well-known stage and screen actress who has suddenly, inexplicably stopped
speaking. Elisabet steadfastly maintains her silence, evidently through the
sheer strength of her will. Early on, Alma expresses feelings of inadequacy
to the psychiatrist in charge of the case, fearing that this patient might
require a more experienced nurse.
Nothing seems to be really wrong with Elisabet, except for her stubborn
refusal to speak. When there seems no good reason for the actress to remain
at the hospital any longer, the attending psychiatrist suggests that she
stay at a rustic seaside cottage for a while under Alma's supervision. There
the nurse does all the talking for both of them. A little in awe of the
actress, the nurse is caught up in her glamour and magnetism. Slowly, Alma
becomes taken over by Elisabet's persona and temporarily loses part of her
own identity in the process.
One evening at the cottage while the two women are relaxing and sipping
wine, Alma confesses to Elisabet an incident where, even though she was
engaged to be married, she had sex with strangers without her fiance's
knowledge. But the nurse goes on to tell of the incident's painful
consequences and how she still feels tormented by it. In some ways, the
telling of this story makes for a highly erotically charged scene, yet I
found that at the same time Alma's feelings of desperation and despair all
but cancel out the eroticism.
Not long after sharing this confidence, Alma reads a letter which Elisabet
has given her to mail and makes the discovery that the actress regards her
as an interesting study, perhaps something she can use in her acting
someday. Alma's feelings of disappointment and betrayal as she reads the
letter make for a heartbreaking moment of shattered illusions, superbly
realized by Bibi Andersson.
In reprisal for her perceived betrayal, the nurse lashes out in an attempt
to emotionally wound her patient, and this causes Elisabet to retaliate in
kind. The conflict between the two women heightens until we are eventually
drawn into a lengthy dream where Alma's identity temporarily merges with
Elisabet's, and this dream sequence adds to the film's enormous emotional
impact.
It is during this dream sequence that a stunning repeated monologue occurs.
It unfolds twice, and each time it is seen from a different point of view.
What Bergman does here is completely unexpected, and I was at first taken
aback by it, although after seeing it many times, I see it as a stroke of
genius.  Although I doubt that I ever will completely understand it, I am
always affected by its haunting resonance.
Twice Alma speaks the same rather lengthy monologue, in which she accuses
Elisabet of being unable to bond with her own son, and each time the words
and delivery are almost exactly the same. At this point, the two women's
personas are so difficult to differentiate that the scene has the eerie,
evocative effect of something seen from each side of a mirror. The first
time Alma's monologue is delivered the camera focuses on Elisabet's face,
the second time on Alma's.
At the end of Alma's repeated monologue, the fusion of the two identities is
indicated by the famous image of the composite face which is half Elisabet's
and half Alma's. But before the dream ends, Alma somehow manages to reassert
her separate identity. To my mind, this extended dream sequence is a tour de
force--managing to be simultaneously both surreal and super-real.
When Alma awakens from her dream, she finds Elisabet packing a suitcase, and
both women seem to have come to some strange sort of closure that allows
them to keep their respective demons at bay, at least for a while. The women
prepare to leave the beach cottage, apparently ready to return to their
normal lives and their separate identities.
"Persona" is hardly a film that uses strictly linear storytelling, and I
would be remiss if I failed to point out that there are some short, visually
jarring sequences at the beginning, roughly at the middle, and near the end
of the film. These sequences show such things as film projector components,
film winding over spools, a segment from an animated cartoon, a fragment
from a silent farce involving a skeleton, a spider, the slaughter of a lamb,
a human hand pierced by a spike, and views of hospital grounds and a morgue.
These sequences are not directly part of the narrative as described above,
but are about filmmaking itself, and I like to think of them as a kind of
matrix that surrounds and defines the story of Alma and Elisabet.
Bergman's films are so dear to me that I find it impossible to single out
just one as my favorite, and while I love "Wild Strawberries" (1957) and
"The Seventh Seal" (1956), "Persona" is definitely one of my favorites as
well. It has an uncanny ability to reach down into the depths of the
subconscious with its dream-like quality, and on this basis alone, I believe
this Swedish film must be considered a masterpiece of world cinema. It also
features a point-perfect visual sense, superb cinematography by Sven
Nykvist, and extraordinary performances by Andersson and Ullmann, both of
whom have extremely difficult roles. Andersson carries the weight of
delivering almost all the dialogue in the film, while Ullmann must rely on
her facial expressions, body language, and magnetic presence to take her
where words cannot. And Ullmann does so with such mesmerizing force that she
makes it credible that the nurse could come close to losing herself for a
while under the actress' spell.
Although "Persona" is one of my favorites, I realize it's not a film for
everyone. The critic John Simon wrote that it was probably "the most
difficult film ever made." Although I don't completely agree with him, I can
certainly understand his point. "Persona" initially baffled me, yet each
time I see it, I comprehend just a bit more. "Persona" is a difficult film,
but if you're up for a challenge, it's an intellectually rewarding and
emotionally rich experience.

Title
Review for Hamlet (1996)
Kenneth Branagh, Derek Jacobi, Julie Christie, Richard Briers, Nicholas
Farrell, Michael Maloney, Brian Blessed, Rufus Sewell, Billy Crystal,
Jack Lemmon, Charlton Heston, Gerard Depardieu, Rosemary Harris,
Timothy Spall, Reece Dinsdale, Robin Williams. Directed by Kenneth
Branagh. Screenplay Kenneth Branagh, based on William Shakespeare's
play. MPAA Rating: PG-13 (violence, sexual situations). Running Time:
238 Minutes.
WARNING: This review contains spoilers.
Until I saw Kenneth Branagh's 238-minute, full-text version of HAMLET, 
I thought nothing could rival Laurence Olivier's classic 1948 film 
version. I've always loved Olivier's subtle, sensitive, and poetic 
performance as Hamlet, in addition to the way that his film wrapped 
everything in a moody black and white chiaroscuro. But Branagh has 
created a powerful masterpiece that is psychologically complex and 
lushly cinematic. Never have all the nuances of Shakespeare's story 
been more vibrantly examined on screen. I predict that Branagh's 
HAMLET will eventually become the definitive film version of 
Shakespeare's play; yet, I make this prediction with some degree of 
sadness because Olivier's version has always been one of my favorite 
movies.
Of course, Branagh had advantages that Olivier could only dream of in 
1948, including a studio willing to finance and release a version that 
is nearly four hours long. With an hour and 20 minutes less to tell 
the story, Olivier's version is less dramatically coherent and omits 
some rather important minor characters, notably Rosencrantz and 
Guildenstern. Also, Branagh had at his disposal the magician's bag of 
technical tricks available to today's filmmaker, including digital 
special effects. I only hope that people who are excited by Branagh's 
HAMLET might be inspired to take a look at Olivier's film in order to 
compare different takes on Shakespeare's classic story.
Both Olivier and Branagh have managed to breathe the kind of life into 
the title role that makes for a classic film. Branagh's interpretation 
of Hamlet differs greatly from Olivier's, but then there is no correct 
way to play the role. Olivier's Hamlet is focused on the character's 
melancholia and indecisiveness, while Branagh encompasses a greater 
emotional range, running through a spectrum from an almost serene 
state of intellectual contemplation to an intense anger that 
threatens to tear his sanity apart. Thus, there are more nuances in 
Branagh's portrayal than in Olivier's.
Branagh's film is a veritable feast for the eyes with dazzling 
cinematography that is all the more vivid because of the crystalline 
clarity and trompe l'oeil depth of the 70 mm format. And Branagh makes 
excellent use of color in his film, made credible in part by changing 
the setting of the story to the latter half of the nineteenth century. 
This change also justifies impressive location shooting at Blenheim 
Palace, which plays the role of Shakespeare's Elsinore Castle. 
However, as richly visual as this film is, its dynamic visual aspects 
never detract from the substance of the story or the beauty of 
Shakespeare's words.
At the core of the artistry in Branagh's movie is that all the 
elements of film making come together in a seamlessly integrated work. 
Where Branagh's film outshines Olivier's is in its intricacy and in 
its ability to bring image, word, performance, and music into a 
gestalt of pure genius. 
The story of HAMLET has to be one of the most famous in the English 
language, but I'll refresh your memory with a broad synopsis. The 
film's focal character is the Danish prince Hamlet, who is deeply 
disturbed over his mother Gertrude's (Julie Christie) quick marriage  
to Claudius (Derek Jacobi), the brother of Hamlet's dead father. Soon, 
Hamlet has an encounter with what appears to be his father's ghost, 
who informs him that Claudius murdered him and that it is now Hamlet's 
duty to take revenge for this murder by killing Claudius. The tragedy 
then grows out of Hamlet's delay in carrying out this revenge.
Branagh's film illuminates an often overlooked aspect of the story, 
namely that it is not merely a personal tragedy for Hamlet, but it is 
also a tragedy for Denmark and its people. Because of Hamlet's 
indecisiveness, the Danes must endure the consequences of a political 
power vacuum and corrupt leadership. Then, near the film's end, there 
are scenes of Hamlet fighting a duel in Elsinore Castle interspersed 
with scenes of Fortinbras, Prince of Norway, and his army closing in 
on the Castle. At the end of the duel, the Danish Prince, King, and 
Queen all lie dead and the fate of Denmark and its people has fallen 
into the hands of Fortinbras.
Branagh's HAMLET makes good use of the classic Shakespearean motif of 
illusion and reality. In a scene that filled me with terror, Hamlet 
meets the ghost of his father (played menacingly by Brian Blessed). 
Special effects along with excellent acting and direction make the 
ambiguity between specter and hallucination come alive on the screen. 
There is a supernaturally sharp focus to this scene, and Blessed's 
eyes are a deathly shade of blue and strangely distorted. At times 
his face and eyes fill the screen. The ghost's highly processed voice 
(it reminded me at times of Darth Vader's voice in STAR WARS) rumbles 
across the surrounding area, cracking open the ground under Hamlet's 
feet. When the ghost instructs Hamlet to "Remember me!", there is 
little doubt that Hamlet could ever forget.
The difficulty in distinguishing between illusion and reality is 
clearly a factor in Hamlet's delay in killing the King. Before 
carrying out this act of revenge, Hamlet must determine the veracity 
of what he believes he saw and heard. Was it a hallucination, an 
apparition, or even the devil in disguise? Or was it the actual ghost 
of his father's spirit? Dramatic tension is maintained throughout the 
film; and until the dueling scene near the movie's end, it is neither 
clear nor simple when or whether Hamlet should take action on the 
ghost's mandated revenge. 
Another strong scene that also echoes the motif of appearance and 
reality is when Hamlet "tests the conscience of the king" by altering 
a play put on by a traveling group of players to mirror the ghost's 
description of the murder. Hamlet hopes that Claudius's reaction will 
determine if the ghost was telling the truth. Hamlet feigns an "antic 
disposition" to camouflage his actions and protect himself from 
Claudius, who poses a real threat to him if he knows that Hamlet 
suspects him of regicide. Branagh's performance is what makes this 
scene so dynamic. While waiting to see how Claudius reacts to the 
play, Hamlet struggles within himself trying to contain an anger that 
is tearing his sanity apart. As the scene progresses, it is not 
entirely clear whether the madness he is putting on is an act anymore.
Every aspect of Branagh's production, even set design, enhances 
meaning and emotional impact. The main gallery of Elsinore Castle 
contains a hall of mirrors that cast a dizzying myriad of reflections 
and conceal doors leading to secret rooms--a breathtaking visual 
metaphor that again echoes the motif of illusion and reality. It is to 
one of these mirrors that Branagh delivers the famous "To be, or not 
to be" soliloquy. As the soliloquy progresses, the camera comes in 
tighter and tighter on the reflection until it appears to be Hamlet 
himself who is speaking and not his reflected image.
Another strength of this film is how it uses visually stunning images  
to intensify dramatic impact. For example, in one scene Hamlet slowly 
inserts a blade aimed at the head of Claudius who is alone at prayer. 
On the surface, it appears to be the perfect time to act out the 
revenge. As Hamlet debates the merits of killing the repentant 
Claudius, the blade inches closer to the head of Claudius who is 
oblivious to the threat that is just a hair's-breadth away. Hamlet 
decides that killing Claudius would be an unsatisfactory form of 
revenge since Claudius's soul would go to heaven since he is at 
prayer, and the blade is then slowly withdrawn. The knife being 
inserted through the screen adds power and dramatic tension, making 
an already thrilling scene burn white-hot with emotion.
Branagh's performance is magnetic; his performance acts as a center of 
gravity. Yet, the other performances are strong enough not to be 
overwhelmed. Branagh assembled an international cast of the highest 
caliber, and most of the performances are exemplary. I'll comment on a 
few that impressed me most. Derek Jacobi's Claudius has a regal and 
controlled surface demeanor that occasionally cracks to reveal the 
dangerous monster lurking just underneath his public facade. Claudius 
here is a cold-blooded, pragmatic man, and Jacobi makes him as 
bone-chilling as the snow-covered landscape just outside the castle 
walls. The character of Gertrude has so often been portrayed as 
weak-willed and passive, but Julie Christie plays this role with a 
hedonistic charisma that speaks to Claudius's motivation--as evil as 
his actions are, they are not beyond the pale of credibility given the 
attractiveness of Christie's Gertrude. Kate Winslet is well cast as 
Ophelia, bringing an air of vulnerability to the role, which, when 
combined with  flashbacks showing a sexual relationship between Hamlet 
and Ophelia, makes the character's eventual emotional breakdown more 
believable to contemporary audiences.
Added to the mix of Shakespearian actors, there are quite a few 
recognizable faces from Hollywood--Charlton Heston, Billy Crystal, 
Robin Williams, Jack Lemmon. With the exception of Jack Lemmon, who is 
badly miscast as Marcellus, their performances hold up well against 
the competition. Heston is a wonderful choice for the role of the 
Player King; his rich voice and clear delivery are perfect for 
Shakespeare. And Crystal's considerable comedic gifts make the 
conversation between the two grave diggers sparkle with wit and humor. 
The four-hour version of HAMLET was released on Christmas Day in New 
York, Toronto, and Los Angeles, in the 70 mm format, and a shorter, 35 
mm version will also be released nationwide at the end of January, 
1997. Given the positive response to the longer version, I hope that 
it will also remain in release, at least in larger cities and 
university towns. With its visual vividness, emotional depth, and 
complexity, the longer version is the one I recommend. Don't let the 
length scare you; the longer version is a highly entertaining film. 
Plus, a film like this produces an event atmosphere where you can 
catch a theater-like spark of excitement in the air during 
intermission. For Shakespeare lovers this is a dream come true; if 
you are not a Shakespeare lover, this might just turn you into one. 
Don't miss one of the film experiences of a lifetime--HAMLET has 
never before been realized with such power, passion, and pathos.   

Title
Review for Lola rennt (1998)
I went into "Run Lola Run" expecting to be dazzled, yet I thought
I would probably hate it anyway since my taste leans toward
films with strong stories and fully developed characters. But I
was pleasantly surprised to find this little German movie to be
emotionally engaging as well as highly entertaining. Although
"Run Lola Run" hasn't redefined my taste, I learned something
about movies and myself after seeing it. There are ways to
create an unforgettable character and a film that sparks with
emotion, even if the story is paper-thin.
"Run Lola Run" is visually stunning and has an energy seemingly
fueled by pure adrenaline. The film is basically a breathlessly
paced thriller with a bit of a love story thrown in. Its inventive
narrative structure also creates a frame for a meditation on the
mutable nature of destiny. Although "Run Lola Run" is stronger on
style than substance and story, it is not without some emotional
resonance and philosophical depth, and it isn't surprising that
it has attracted considerable attention at film festivals. It won
Best Film at the 1999 Seattle International Film Festival and the
Audience Award in the World Cinema category at the 1999 Sundance
Film Festival.
A preamble sets up the film, suggesting that in a world of
infinite possibilities there is only one certainty--the amount of
time something takes. Then Lola (Franka Potente) receives a phone
call from her boyfriend Manni (Moritz Bleibtreu), and he tells
her he is in big trouble. While working for a crime boss, Manni
lost a bag containing 100,000 marks, and he must replace the money
by high noon or he will be killed. Running through the streets of
Berlin, Lola has only 20 minutes to somehow obtain the cash and
get it to her boyfriend in time to save his life.
The film's innovative structure is tiered into three parts, all
starting at the point when Lola gets the call. From there, each
segment branches off, suggesting dramatically different destinies
for Lola, Manni, and others. Even the lives of some of the
passersby are changed forever, and this provides much of the
movie's humor.
Writer/director/co-composer Tom Tykwer's film has an audacious
style. I thought the film's visual aspects and its edgy score
were perfectly matched to the emotional high stakes of the
action. Energetic camera work and the pulse-like beat of techno
music intensify the frantic mood of the film. The editing is
impressive, too, as the movie switches back and forth between
film and videotape, in addition to mixing still photography and
animation with live action.
Even though the story in "Run Lola Run" is a little flimsy, its
characters managed to eventually pull me in, making me care
about their plight, and much of the credit for this must surely
belong to the actors. This is especially true of Franka Potente
as Lola. She has an intense, charismatic screen presence, and
some of the tight shots of her expressive face are particularly
dramatic. I was also impressed by the film's way of showing
different possible fates, as if drawn at random from a multi-
layered time/space continuum of infinite possibilities. "Run
Lola Run" not only entertained me, it made me think and
feel. Not bad for an afternoon at the movies.

Title
Review for Everyone Says I Love You (1996)
Starring: Woody Allen, Natasha Lyonne, Julia Roberts, Goldie Hawn, 
Alan Alda, Edward Norton, Drew Barrymore, Tim Roth, Lukas Haas, 
Natalie Portman, Gabby Hoffman 
Written and directed by Woody Allen 
Cinematography: Carlo Di Palma 
Music: Dick Hyman 
MPAA Rating: R (for one use of strong language) 
Running Time: 101 Minutes
Imagine the enchantment of the MGM musicals of the 1930s and 1940s 
filtered through the mind of Woody Allen and what you have is EVERYONE 
SAYS I LOVE YOU. Although the musical numbers are old standards, the 
story is set in the 1990s; yet the vintage music does not seem 
incongruous with the contemporary setting. In a strange alchemy, Allen 
combines his own personal brand of angst and intellectualism with the 
lighter-than-air quality of the old musicals, and the result is a 
wonderfully romantic movie that is one of his funniest ever. 
People tend to either love or hate Woody Allen movies, and the 
reaction to EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is likely to be similar. I'm a 
Woody Allen fan, so it's not surprising that I loved this film and was 
swept away by its charm. It's not a perfect film, but more important 
than perfection is the feeling that stayed with me for days after 
seeing it--an almost weightless feeling of the beauty of love and the 
shortness of life. 
All the principal actors are given at least one song, and except for 
Drew Barrymore, they do their own singing rather than have the voice 
of a professional singer dubbed in. Some of the actors, notably Goldie 
Hawn and Edward Norton, are very good singers indeed. On the other 
hand, some, particularly Woody Allen and Julia Roberts, are barely 
adequate as singers, but their songs work anyway--the movie is not 
about getting every note just right, it's about the giddy joy of 
falling in love and the bittersweet heartbreak of falling out of it. 
Music and an ensemble performance drive the intertwined love stories, 
which revolve around the members of an extended blended family. The 
story structure is almost a dance of life that continuously circles 
around in a cycle of love found, lost, and then found again. The 
disparate story elements are unified by the use of the narrator DJ 
(newcomer Natasha Lyonne), who is the college-age daughter of Steffi 
(Goldie Hawn) by a previous marriage to Joe (Woody Allen). Like almost 
everyone else in the film, DJ is a romantic at heart who seems to be 
always falling in and out of love. In addition to narrating, she acts 
as cupid in helping Joe meet Von (Julia Roberts), a woman he has 
fallen in love with at first sight. 
Woody Allen's Joe is not unlike characters Allen has played in the 
past, an ordinary-looking man who is angst-ridden, neurotic, and 
intellectual. When Joe breaks up with his girlfriend, he takes a trip 
to Venice with his daughter DJ to try to escape his heartache. In a 
beautiful and wistful scene, Allen half sings, half speaks "I'm 
Through With Love" while he forlornly looks out at the Grand Canal. Of 
course, he isn't through with love for long. He soon sees Von and is 
instantly smitten.
As luck would have it, DJ knows all about Von because DJ and her 
mischievous friends have eavesdropped on Von's therapy sessions. (The 
idea of kids eavesdropping on therapy sessions is as horrific as it is 
funny, but this is the edgy kind of humor that Allen pulls off 
beautifully.) DJ feeds her inside information to her father, and for a 
while Joe is able to transform himself into the man of Von's dreams. 
Then, in an ironic and almost karmic twist, Joe is dumped by Von. 
After having been with him, she feels that she has fulfilled her 
romantic fantasy and wants to return to her old life.
Another major thread in the film is the relationship between DJ's 
sister Skylar (Drew Barrymore) and her fiance Holden (Edward Norton). 
Holden seems to be just perfect for Skylar, although things don't 
always go smoothly. For example, in an attempt to be romantic when he 
proposes to her, Holden hides the engagement ring in a dessert 
parfait, only to have Skylar swallow it. Later in the film, Skylar's 
mom, who is active in supporting liberal causes, throws a party 
celebrating the release from prison of Charles Ferry (Tim Roth). 
Skylar is so attracted to Charles that she breaks her plans for the 
marriage to Holden. But don't worry, Holden won't be through with love 
for long. When Charles returns to his old criminal ways, Holden and 
Skylar reconcile.
Another important thread in the movie concerns the remaining 
tenderness and attraction between Joe and his ex-wife Steffi. I really 
liked this thread's bittersweet quality and gentleness. Allen and Hawn 
have a great chemistry together, especially as they dance and sing 
while taking a late night stroll in Paris along the Seine. This scene 
simply took my breath away. Wildly romantic, it is the one scene in 
the film that is most reminiscent of the grace and screen magic of the 
old musicals. The effervescence of its music and Steffi's 
gravity-defying dance make it rank with some of the best scenes of 
this genre; I'd recommend seeing this film, even if it is just to see 
this one scene alone. 
EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU explores love as it affects the heart through 
a wide variety of ages, including even a kid's first crush. There is 
an amusing minor thread about two girls, Lane (Gaby Hoffman) and 
Laura (Natalie Portman), who both have a crush on the same boy. 
Eventually they do get to know him after following him around for 
awhile; yet, heartbreak lurks on the horizon. He asks only one of them 
out.
Even though EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is funny and romantic, it is not 
all fluff. The film is at its most powerful when it acts as an almost 
cinematic equivalent of a vanitas painting, juxtaposing the beauty of 
love with the idea of mortality and the frailty of the flesh. For 
example, there is an effervescently joyous song and dance number set 
in a hospital, but the number contains harsh undercurrents. In the 
scene, doctors, nurses, patients--some of whom are bandaged or in 
wheelchairs--dance and cavort while singing "Makin' Whoopee." Another 
outstanding scene in the same vein is almost a "danse macabre" set in 
a funeral parlor where ghosts rise out of their coffins, singing and 
dancing to the tune "Enjoy Yourself (It's Later Than You Think)." 
Allen has created some quirky and delightful characters. In addition, 
he has cast them well, which is important because the success of an 
ensemble performance depends largely on the strength of its actors. 
Part of what works in this film is that there are couples of a variety 
of ages, and for the most part these couples have the kind of 
chemistry that gives screen romance its luminescence.
Julia Roberts is convincing as the art historian Von, a beautiful and 
intelligent woman who becomes the focus of Joe's infatuation. She is 
perfectly cast as the kind of irresistible Goddess-like creature that 
could possibly make an ordinary guy like Joe do something as crazy and 
desperate as to try to transform himself into someone he is not. The 
relationship between Von and Joe is basically an extended one-liner, 
and Roberts has the kind of physical attractiveness and intelligence 
that makes the joke work. 
Woody Allen as Joe is good, although this is the kind of role that he 
has done so many times that it has become almost an alter-ego for him. 
Where Allen really shines is in the scenes he shares with Goldie Hawn. 
Steffi is a wonderful, funny, and subtly dizzy character. In addition, 
Goldie Hawn is probably the best singer and dancer of the ensemble.
Alan Alda plays Steffi's current husband Bob, who is a slightly 
steadier and less neurotic man than ex-husband Joe. Casting is key 
here since Alda seems not to act so much as to play out facets of his 
charismatic and very funny self, and he turns out to be a rather good 
singer as well. 
Edward Norton is wonderful as Skylar's betrothed. He obviously has 
great versatility as an actor; this is a much different role from the 
icily manipulative murder suspect that he played recently in PRIMAL 
FEAR. He truly steals the show when he sings "Just You, Just Me" to 
Skylar as they walk around New York's upper East Side during the 
film's opening sequence.
Tim Roth is Charles Ferry, the prisoner whose cause is championed by 
Steffi. When he comes to dinner there are some hilarious moments, 
thanks to Roth's comic gifts.
Natasha Lyonne sparkles both as the narrator and as Joe's biological 
daughter. She is perfectly believable in a role which in the hands of 
a lesser actress could have easily turned into little more than a 
device to unify the story. But Lyonne handles it beautifully, 
breathing life and credibility into a fanciful part.
Although it features flat-out gorgeous location shooting in such 
glamorous, yet real, places as New York, Paris, and Venice, this film 
and its characters belong wholly to the world of make-believe. This is 
a world where you are best friends with your ex-spouse, where the kids 
never seem to suffer any ill effects from the divorce, and where money 
is never a problem. Even the singing panhandler in the first sequence 
shot on the streets of New York is strangely non-threatening and 
better groomed than any panhandler I've seen lately. But let's face 
it, escape is the reason that many people, including me, sometimes go 
to the movies. However, Allen's trademark edginess and anxious 
intellectualism give the escapism of this film a much different flavor 
from that of the musicals produced during the Great Depression and 
World War II.
Although EVERYONE SAYS I LOVE YOU is not one of Allen's deepest films, 
it is one of his most entertaining. It is a light film whose surface 
sweetness is tempered by echoes of love's potential for heartbreak and 
the impermanence of life. It is a film for Woody Allen fans and anyone 
who likes to laugh, who has been in love, or who has had a day when 
they couldn't get an old song out of their head.

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
After being a little bit seduced by the advance buzz for the
low-budget Sundance indie "The Blair Witch Project," I entered the
theater expecting to see one of the scariest movies ever made.
And I did experience moments of sheer terror--especially toward
the film's end--but overall it isn't all that scary, although
it is extremely unsettling. To my mind, this movie doesn't fit
neatly into the horror genre category--it's more of a
psychological thriller. What affected me even more intensely
than the undercurrent of horror in the film was the tension that
continued to build slowly throughout, culminating when the
pressures of being hopelessly lost in the woods (and possibly
hunted) cause the sanity of the characters to slowly start to
snap. In some ways, I found "The Blair Witch Project" reminiscent
of the 1972 adventure/thriller "Deliverance," although that film
is stylistically quite different.
Employing a cinema verite style, "The Blair Witch Project" tells
the tale of a three-person student film crew that went out to
the woods near Burkittsville (formerly Blair), Maryland, in
1994 to make a documentary about the legend of a local witch.
The film opens with stark letters on a black background,
stating that their footage was found a year after their
disappearance and comprises what we are about to see.
At the beginning, the students laugh and joke in an easy,
relaxed manner. But as things go fatally wrong during the
creation of their documentary, their mental and physical
condition progressively erodes, causing them to become brittle
and start to turn on each other. The gradual deterioration of
the film crew's state of mind is heartbreaking. Particularly
devastating is the degeneration of the documentary's plucky
director. Finally realizing that they will probably not get
out alive, she films an apology to her own parents and those
of the crew in the movie's most memorable scene.
Adding to the realistic nature of "The Blair Witch Project,"
Eduardo Sanchez and Daniel Myrick, who co-wrote and co-
directed the film, make extensive use of improvisation in
collaboration with their actors, resulting in scenes that
seem natural and uncontrived. The first names of the
characters are the same as those of the actors who portray
them. Heather (Heather Donahue) is the documentary's director;
Michael (Michael Williams) the sound man, and Joshua (Joshua
Leonard) the cameraman. The acting is so convincing that at
times I had to remind myself that this was fiction rather
than fact and that these were actors rather than the
characters they portrayed. I found this reminiscent of the
films of John Cassavetes--one of the pioneers of independent
filmmaking--who also made extensive use of improvisation.
>From its uncomplicated premise to its stark visual style, much
of the film's impact stems from its simplicity, and this is
particularly true of the film's stunning cinematography. While
emulating the look and feel of a student documentary
production, it also manages to slyly conceal a slow-release
emotional wallop cleverly hidden in its seemingly naive
delivery. The vertiginous, jerky hand-held camera work, along
with the constant intermixing of film stock--much of it grainy
and often shot from disorienting, oblique angles--create a
dizzying visual edge. This cleverly complements the mood of
uncertainty, bewilderment, dread, and ever-encroaching doom
that permeates the movie.
In "The Blair Witch Project," imagination is the ultimate
special effect. One of the most daring aspects of the camera
work is that it sometimes drops down to velvet black; there
is nothing to be seen, except for what exists in the
audience's imagination. These moments of absolute darkness are
extremely disturbing because your mind wraps itself around the
ambiguity, conjuring the rest out of whatever happens to lurk
in your subconscious.
I think "The Blair Witch Project" is well worth seeing, although
it probably won't meet most people's expectations of what a
horror film should be. Despite a meager budget, Sanchez and
Myrick have created a remarkably original, vividly realistic
movie that reaches down deep into the personal and
psychological aspects of fear. It's a film that shows what
can happen when talented independent filmmakers follow their
creative vision without compromise.

Title
Review for Contact (1997)
Produced by: Warner Bros. Directed by Robert Zemeckis, Effects by: Sony
Pictures Imageworks, Cinematography by Don Burgess. Starring: Jodie Foster,
Matthew McConaughey, James Woods, Angela Bassett, John Hurt, Rob Lowe, Tom
Skerritt, William Fichtner, David Morse, Jena Malone. 
In director Robert Zemeckis' screen version of the late Carl Sagan's
bestselling 1985 novel CONTACT, there is a moment of pure movie magic:
After the public learns that a broadcast has been received from intelligent
extraterrestrial life, we see a car moving slowly through the circus-like
atmosphere of a huge crowd that has camped out around a scientific facility
in the New Mexico desert. The crowd, which contains everything from an
evangelist to an Elvis impersonator, is a motley crew of various and sundry
people, most of whom are in the throes of something between a party mood
and a blissed-out state. Inside the car, Dr. Ellie Arroway (Jodie Foster),
the brilliant radio astronomer responsible for detecting the broadcast and
recognizing its meaning, stares through the window in disbelief, dismay,
and horror. Her idealism, honesty, and determination have served her well
in the arena of science, but she is ill-prepared to deal with society's
reaction to her discovery.
Foster's performance is what takes CONTACT far beyond the pale of  the kind
of vacuous entertainment that most moviegoers have to settle for during the
summer, and the actress is again a strong candidate for an Academy Award
nomination. (Foster has previously won Oscars for her acting in THE SILENCE
OF THE LAMBS and THE ACCUSED.) In addition to featuring a great star turn,
CONTACT is a film with intelligence, heart, and some of the most
aesthetically beautiful, dazzling, and well-integrated special effects
sequences I have seen since Kubrick's 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY.
The film's visually breathtaking opening sequence revolves around radio and
television signals as they speed away from earth into the depths of space,
and through the wizardry of special effects, we follow them on the way out.
Eventually all this manages to dovetail back into the eye of a young girl,
and we are introduced to the film's heroine as a child. Young Ellie (well
played by actress Jena Malone) is a short-wave radio and astronomy buff
whose hobby is trying to contact faraway places via short- wave radio,
marking each success with a thumbtack on a map. Soon her child's
imagination becomes fascinated with the possibility of life on other
planets. Her father, who helps to nurture her interest in astronomy, makes
the point that if intelligent life didn't exist somewhere other than on
earth, it would be "an awful waste of space."
There is a telling scene early in the film that reveals young Ellie's
character and foreshadows the kind of woman she will become. The girl's
beloved father, who suffers from a heart condition, has an attack one day,
and while Ellie runs upstairs to get his medicine, he dies. A priest
attempts to comfort the grief-stricken girl, but Ellie can find no
consolation in the priest's appeal to spirituality and mysticism. Instead,
she channels her energy into a cool, rational analysis of what happened and
reaches the conclusion that she should have kept some of her father's
medicine downstairs so she could have reached it more quickly in an
emergency.
Years later, Ellie Arroway is an adult with an earned Ph.D. who is
conducting research at an observatory in Puerto Rico. There she meets
Palmer Joss (Matthew McConaughey), a writer/theologian who is studying the
effect of technology on the local population. Joss's faith in God is as
strong as Arroway's scientific skepticism, and the contrast between their
belief systems is one of the film's main themes. It is fitting that Joss
turns out to be a former priest who loved the theological aspects of the
priesthood, but whose raging hormones had made him realize he would not be
able to fully honor his vows. One of the functions of the Joss character is
to provide a love interest for Arroway, and the film makes it clear that,
in spite of their dedication to their respective careers, they do not
observe celibacy. Later, he goes on to write a bestselling book that is a
mix of religion and philosophy; due to the book's success, he becomes a
sort of new-age spiritual guru. Although the character as written is little
more than a cardboard cutout, McConaughey is convincing as Palmer Joss: his
kind face and obvious sex appeal give the role more dimension and
credibility than actually seems to be in the script itself.
Ellie is able to enjoy her research at the Puerto Rico observatory for only
a little while before the funding for the project is suddenly cut by her
superior, David Drumlin (Tom Skerritt). Drumlin is a
scientist-administrator with an icily pragmatic approach, which serves as a
counterpoint to Ellie's  passion and idealism. To Drumlin, science seems to
be more of a vehicle for self-aggrandizement than anything else. I liked
what Skerritt did with Drumlin's character--adding just the right touches
of slippery suaveness, ruthless ambition, and shameless opportunism to his
portrayal.
When Drumlin pulls the government appropriations from the Puerto Rico
project, Ellie seeks private funding for her research. After many setbacks,
she finds a strange ally in S.R. Hadden (in a strong performance by John
Hurt, who imparts an eerie spectralness to the character). Hadden is a
brilliant engineer turned entrepreneur, and his wealth allows him to
indulge in an eccentric lifestyle. His idiosyncrasies include the avoidance
of being earthbound: he lives on a plane that rarely lands, and later in
the film takes up residence on a space station. He offers to fund her
project, and she moves her research to New Mexico, where she can use the
Very Large Array of radio telescopes to listen to the skies.
Ellie's intensity and dogged devotion to her work finally pay off, and she
intercepts a broadcast from an extraterrestrial intelligence, but her
narrow focus makes her a little naive about how the media, public, and
political interests are going to react to the news. When a press conference
is held to announce her discovery, Dr. Arroway is busy going over flash
cards in preparation for speaking to the journalists. But before she can
say anything, her old boss David Drumlin takes over the podium and tries to
take credit for her discovery. It is outrageous behavior, especially since
he was the man who cut the funds for her Puerto Rico project, telling her
she was throwing away her career if she stayed in such an unpromising line
of research.
Naturally, the media goes into a feeding frenzy once the news of the alien
broadcast is out. As was done in Zemeckis' FORREST GUMP, CONTACT employs
digitally manipulated images from old newscasts, including footage that
features Bill Clinton in the cameo role of--you guessed it--the President
of the United States. Zemeckis had originally intended that the role of the
President be played by Sidney Poitier, but eventually decided against it.
The inclusion of the modified news footage was done without Clinton's
permission, and according to reports in the press, the President was not
pleased.
An exciting thread in the film concerns plans transmitted by the aliens for
a device that could possibly transport humans deep enough into space to
enable contact with the extraterrestrial intelligence, and an international
consortium joins forces to build this machine. I was really impressed by
the superb production design and deft special effects that went into the
completed device. Its visual aspects have strong Jungian resonance, drawing
on mental models of the untouchably small and the untouchably large. The
machine reminded me of both electrons revolving around a nucleus and
planets revolving around a star, while also resembling a sort of
three-dimensional mandala. Luckily I saw CONTACT at  a theater that has an
excellent sound system, and the crystalline clarity of the vibration-like
noise the device gives off while being powered up gave me goose bumps. It
was a sound that was strangely primal, while at the same time eerily
mechanical and otherworldly.
Another memorable sequence in the film takes place when Ellie is
transported into deep space through a series of wormholes, and the special
effects made it so believable that I felt I was along for the ride. As a
result of her journey through the wormhole, Ellie goes through an
experience that changes her life and subtly alters her perspective on
things. However, the way the film treated what happened at the end of her
journey seemed to me to be a bit of a letdown. Then, however, the movie
recovers much of its earlier momentum, and in an ironic twist, Dr. Arroway
has to try to convince a government panel of something for which the only
evidence appears to be her own incredible eyewitness account. The coolly
rational scientist must ask others to do what she herself had been
previously incapable of doing--take something on faith.
Thanks to the cinematography of Don Burgess and special effects by Sony
Pictures Imageworks, CONTACT is a richly cinematic film. The special
effects are elegant and effective, and although they are often dazzling,
they never overwhelm the story and often enhance the movie's emotional
impact.
I was particularly impressed by the cinematography depicting New Mexico and
the area near the Very Large Array, especially the shots that emphasized
the vastness of the surrounding landscape. To me this functioned as an
earthbound frame of reference that echoed the expanses and aching
loneliness of space. In a similar vein, the shots of handfuls of sand and
dirt, twinkling away like stars, reinforces the same kind of feeling. While
watching this, I could hear in my imagination Carl Sagan's voice saying
"billions and billions"
Although it has many vibrant moments, CONTACT is a little uneven and at
times it is heavy-handed, resembling a TV movie in its unwillingness to
trust the audience to think for itself and to be able to follow the story
without intrusive guideposts and heavy explication. However, viewers like
me who admire the film will be disposed to overlook these flaws. In any
case, I admire Zemeckis' willingness to take chances in films like FORREST
GUMP and CONTACT. These are the kinds of movies that elicit strong
reactions, ranging from ire to admiration. Because CONTACT contrasts the
realms of spirituality and faith against the realms of reason and logic,
some people will never get past their knee-jerk reactions and won't be able
to enjoy the film for what it is--an entertaining mix of science fiction
and a sprinkling of science fact. But the movie doesn't play it completely
safe, and this gives the film quite a bit of power, even though it
eventually loses its nerve and goes for a warm, fuzzy, all-encompassing,
new-age kind of resolution. However, even though Zemeckis pulls his punches
on loaded issues, at least he is willing to address them, which was
something I didn't except to see in a big-budget summer Hollywood
blockbuster.
In my opinion CONTACT is a very good film that unfortunately sometimes
misses its mark because of minor flaws. As good as the movie is, I couldn't
help but think that it had the potential to be even better. During the
first part of the movie, CONTACT dangles tantalizing glimmers of becoming
truly provocative, but in the end it is geared more toward entertainment
than deep critical thought. Nevertheless, it is an emotionally engaging
film that features an outstanding performance by a great actress, Jodie
Foster, and that is enough to give it passages of incandescent power.

Title
Review for Persona (1966)
There are some films that never let you go. For me, Ingmar Bergman's
"Persona" (1966) is such a film. Because it has great depth and resonance,
new facets of meaning emerge with each viewing. Yet it defies being
completely understood, but that is part of its beauty and power.
When I first saw "Persona," I didn't quite know what to make of it. I
thought it was a haunting, enigmatic cinepoem, but my mind was unable to
grasp it all at once. Much as a wonderfully complex novel demands careful,
multiple readings, I knew I would have to see the film several times to
start to gauge its depth, even though it's only 81 minutes long.
Every time I watch this film, my mind still reels a little, but that's not
surprising. There's a kind of psychological vertigo operating in "Persona"
that complements its theme of slippery, shifting, ambiguous personal
identity. And Bergman takes great pains to make the people in his audience
sharply conscious of the fact that they are watching a movie. Thus, the film
is also about the vampiric voyeurism that is inherently part of cinema and
the corresponding loss of self it produces.
In "Persona," much of the viewer's time is spent looking at the faces of a
pair of women who are very similar in appearance, and as the story
progresses there are moments when the two women seem to become one. In a
striking sequence near the beginning of the film, an adolescent boy reaches
for an image of a huge face apparently projected on a screen that he can
almost--but not quite--touch. The face shown in this sequence alternates
between the visages of Liv Ullmann and Bibi Andersson, the actresses who
portray the main characters in the film. And much later in the movie, in one
of the most stunning images in all of cinema, a composite face is formed,
half Ullmann's face and the other half Andersson's. There is, in fact, much
loving, lingering camera work devoted to faces throughout the film, and it
struck me as reminiscent of the incredibly emotive things they used to do
with faces in silent films.
The story in "Persona" is deceptively simple. It revolves around Alma
(Andersson), a 25-year-old nurse put in charge of Elisabet Vogler (Ullmann),
a well-known stage and screen actress who has suddenly, inexplicably stopped
speaking. Elisabet steadfastly maintains her silence, evidently through the
sheer strength of her will. Early on, Alma expresses feelings of inadequacy
to the psychiatrist in charge of the case, fearing that this patient might
require a more experienced nurse.
Nothing seems to be really wrong with Elisabet, except for her stubborn
refusal to speak. When there seems no good reason for the actress to remain
at the hospital any longer, the attending psychiatrist suggests that she
stay at a rustic seaside cottage for a while under Alma's supervision. There
the nurse does all the talking for both of them. A little in awe of the
actress, the nurse is caught up in her glamour and magnetism. Slowly, Alma
becomes taken over by Elisabet's persona and temporarily loses part of her
own identity in the process.
One evening at the cottage while the two women are relaxing and sipping
wine, Alma confesses to Elisabet an incident where, even though she was
engaged to be married, she had sex with strangers without her fiance's
knowledge. But the nurse goes on to tell of the incident's painful
consequences and how she still feels tormented by it. In some ways, the
telling of this story makes for a highly erotically charged scene, yet I
found that at the same time Alma's feelings of desperation and despair all
but cancel out the eroticism.
Not long after sharing this confidence, Alma reads a letter which Elisabet
has given her to mail and makes the discovery that the actress regards her
as an interesting study, perhaps something she can use in her acting
someday. Alma's feelings of disappointment and betrayal as she reads the
letter make for a heartbreaking moment of shattered illusions, superbly
realized by Bibi Andersson.
In reprisal for her perceived betrayal, the nurse lashes out in an attempt
to emotionally wound her patient, and this causes Elisabet to retaliate in
kind. The conflict between the two women heightens until we are eventually
drawn into a lengthy dream where Alma's identity temporarily merges with
Elisabet's, and this dream sequence adds to the film's enormous emotional
impact.
It is during this dream sequence that a stunning repeated monologue occurs.
It unfolds twice, and each time it is seen from a different point of view.
What Bergman does here is completely unexpected, and I was at first taken
aback by it, although after seeing it many times, I see it as a stroke of
genius.  Although I doubt that I ever will completely understand it, I am
always affected by its haunting resonance.
Twice Alma speaks the same rather lengthy monologue, in which she accuses
Elisabet of being unable to bond with her own son, and each time the words
and delivery are almost exactly the same. At this point, the two women's
personas are so difficult to differentiate that the scene has the eerie,
evocative effect of something seen from each side of a mirror. The first
time Alma's monologue is delivered the camera focuses on Elisabet's face,
the second time on Alma's.
At the end of Alma's repeated monologue, the fusion of the two identities is
indicated by the famous image of the composite face which is half Elisabet's
and half Alma's. But before the dream ends, Alma somehow manages to reassert
her separate identity. To my mind, this extended dream sequence is a tour de
force--managing to be simultaneously both surreal and super-real.
When Alma awakens from her dream, she finds Elisabet packing a suitcase, and
both women seem to have come to some strange sort of closure that allows
them to keep their respective demons at bay, at least for a while. The women
prepare to leave the beach cottage, apparently ready to return to their
normal lives and their separate identities.
"Persona" is hardly a film that uses strictly linear storytelling, and I
would be remiss if I failed to point out that there are some short, visually
jarring sequences at the beginning, roughly at the middle, and near the end
of the film. These sequences show such things as film projector components,
film winding over spools, a segment from an animated cartoon, a fragment
from a silent farce involving a skeleton, a spider, the slaughter of a lamb,
a human hand pierced by a spike, and views of hospital grounds and a morgue.
These sequences are not directly part of the narrative as described above,
but are about filmmaking itself, and I like to think of them as a kind of
matrix that surrounds and defines the story of Alma and Elisabet.
Bergman's films are so dear to me that I find it impossible to single out
just one as my favorite, and while I love "Wild Strawberries" (1957) and
"The Seventh Seal" (1956), "Persona" is definitely one of my favorites as
well. It has an uncanny ability to reach down into the depths of the
subconscious with its dream-like quality, and on this basis alone, I believe
this Swedish film must be considered a masterpiece of world cinema. It also
features a point-perfect visual sense, superb cinematography by Sven
Nykvist, and extraordinary performances by Andersson and Ullmann, both of
whom have extremely difficult roles. Andersson carries the weight of
delivering almost all the dialogue in the film, while Ullmann must rely on
her facial expressions, body language, and magnetic presence to take her
where words cannot. And Ullmann does so with such mesmerizing force that she
makes it credible that the nurse could come close to losing herself for a
while under the actress' spell.
Although "Persona" is one of my favorites, I realize it's not a film for
everyone. The critic John Simon wrote that it was probably "the most
difficult film ever made." Although I don't completely agree with him, I can
certainly understand his point. "Persona" initially baffled me, yet each
time I see it, I comprehend just a bit more. "Persona" is a difficult film,
but if you're up for a challenge, it's an intellectually rewarding and
emotionally rich experience.

Title
Review for Romeo + Juliet (1996)
Starring: Leonardo DiCaprio, Claire Danes, Brian Dennehy, John 
Leguizamo, Pete Postlethwaite, Paul Sorvino, Diane Venora. Directed by 
Baz Luhrmann. Screenplay: Craig Pearce and Baz Luhrmann. Producers: 
Gabriella Martinelli, Baz Luhrmann. MPAA Rating PG-13 (Adult Themes, 
Violence). Running Time 121 Minutes.
Visually dense with a well-integrated musical score that runs the 
gamut from rock to classical, Baz Luhrmann's film WILLIAM 
SHAKESPEARE'S ROMEO AND JULIET took me for a thrilling ride on an 
operatic tidal wave of emotion. I was almost overwhelmed by the sheer 
force of this powerful film, which I found to be a brilliantly 
innovative work of sheer cinematic artistry. It is a film that 
demands a lot from its audience and elicits a strong reaction of 
love or hate or a combination of the two.
Although Luhrmann has generally preserved Shakespeare's language, it 
is bold imagery and music that drive the film more than the words 
spoken by the actors. Also, the setting is changed from 14th-century 
Verona, Italy, to a fictional composite 20th-century city named 
Verona Beach, a creation that is a surreal nightmare wrought wholly 
from Luhrmann's imagination. To my mind, this film is as much 
Luhrmann's creation as it is the Bard's. I realize that Shakespeare's 
works are revered texts and to play fast and loose with them is risky 
business. Shakespeare purists may disagree, but what matters is that 
Luhrmann pulls his interpretation off brilliantly. However, Luhrmann 
has changed enough here that I would not blame anyone for seeing this 
film as a work separate from Shakespeare, yet closely related to it. 
While the film has been released with the title WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S 
 ROMEO AND JULIET, presumably for purposes of name recognition, titles 
like VERONA BEACH or BAZ LUHRMANN'S ROMEO AND JULIET would be more 
fitting.
Framed by the matrix of this film's unique vision, the essential plot 
elements of Shakespeare's tale remain basically intact. Two of the 
leading families of Verona Beach, the Montagues and the Capulets, are 
bitter enemies. Romeo (Leonardo DiCaprio), a Montague, crashes a 
costume party at the Capulet mansion where he falls in love with 
Juliet (Claire Danes), unaware that she is the host's daughter. Soon 
after Romeo and Juliet are secretly married, Romeo's friend Mercutio 
(Harold Perrineau) is killed by Juliet's cousin. Enraged by the death 
of his friend, Romeo kills Tybalt (John Leguizamo). As a result, 
Romeo is banished from Verona Beach. Juliet's parents have not been 
told that she has married Romeo, and they put her under tremendous 
pressure to marry Paris. (In the film Paris is cleverly introduced via 
a magazine cover as bachelor of the year.) Desperately trying to avoid 
this union, Juliet takes a potion that mimics death with a deep sleep, 
and Friar Lawrence (Pete Postlethwaite) sends Romeo a message about 
Juliet's ruse. (The film wittily has the message sent by a courier 
service named "Post Haste.") Leaving exile without receiving the Post 
Haste dispatch, Romeo goes to the church where the unconscious Juliet 
lies in a casket. Then mistakenly thinking her dead, he takes poison 
in despair. Juliet awakens just as the poison starts to take effect 
on Romeo. She takes Romeo's gun (not a dagger as in the original 
Shakespeare) and commits suicide. Luhrmann's change of weapon makes 
it a bloodier and more viscerally violent end. The image of the 
blood-spattered bodies of the lovers nestled together as the film 
nears its end is a particularly gruesome sight.
Baz Luhrmann is a daring filmmaker with an eclectic style, which makes 
for some vividly creative and memorable scenes. Verona Beach is a 
place so fantastic that it could exist only in a parallel universe; 
yet it is beset with many of the same problems that plague modern 
life, including urban violence and a media that blitzes the senses 
with a barrage of information. Our first hint of this parallel world 
comes when the film begins with a television screen that frames a 
newscaster who delivers the prologue in the same calm tone in which we 
are accustomed to hearing the news of the tragedies of modern life.
There is a witty scene set in a gas station where insults are traded 
between the "Montague boys" and some of the younger members of the 
Capulet clan; here there are echoes of WEST SIDE STORY along with the 
film language of contemporary action movies. In my opinion, this scene 
would be merely derivative in the hands of a less competent director; 
instead, it turns into a scintillating synthesis. 
The intensity and virtuosity of the costume ball sequence set at the 
Capulet mansion is a tour de force. Romeo enters the party while under 
the influence of a pill given to him earlier by Mercutio, and the 
kaleidoscopic array of vivid imagery and daring camera work reflects 
Romeo's altered state of consciousness. Soon he is overwhelmed by both 
the party and the effects of the drug and makes an exit to the men's 
room. Trying to sober himself up, he places his face in a basin of 
water. He comes up for air, starts examining fish in an aquarium, and 
sees Juliet through the aquarium's glass. Romeo and Juliet seem to 
fall in love while watching the fish and each other, and this moment 
in the film struck me as both lyrically beautiful and hauntingly 
strange. The sequence is reminiscent of Federico Fellini and Ken 
Russell, while remaining something that is distinctively Luhrmann's 
own.
The film's treatment of the famous balcony scene departs radically 
from the traditional by having the young lovers fall into an adjacent 
swimming pool and deliver much of their dialog while treading water. 
This is daring, but I am not sure it entirely worked; I missed some 
of the power of the more traditional interpretations of the scene. 
Still, I thought it was a fresh and engaging scene with a charm all 
its own. 
Three main motifs run through the film like a series of interrelated 
fugues--water, guns, and religious iconography--creating a complicated 
visual tapestry. These motifs can be interpreted on any number of 
levels: Jungian, Freudian, personal. While there seems no simple way 
to interpret them, I thought that the motifs added a touch to the 
film that was both surreal and at the same time intensely real; they 
seemed to belong to the world between wakefulness and sleep. However, 
I concede that this often had the effect of making the film harder 
to follow. In addition, sometimes these motifs were deliberately 
provocative, making the film more unsettling. In particular, I found 
that guns--sleekly designed and seductively photographed--seemed 
almost omnipresent, but they also fit the artistic vision of the film 
and were integral to the nightmarish violence that permeated Verona  
Beach. In addition, some viewers might find Luhrmann's freewheeling 
approach to religious imagery irreverent. However, in general I 
thought the use of these three motifs made the film more dynamic, so 
I gave the film artistic license on the parts that disturbed me.
There was one thing that Luhrmann did that seemed to me to be a touch 
of sheer genius. When the "star-crossed" lovers are alone on the 
screen, the bombardment of music and surreal imagery seems to fade 
away: it is as if the truth of their young love gives them a temporary 
refuge from the horror of Verona Beach.
The performances in the film are surprisingly good, although they are 
not the kind of great performances given in film adaptations of 
Shakespeare featuring actors such as Ian McKellen, Kenneth Branagh, or 
Laurence Olivier. There is less emphasis on Shakespeare's language in 
this film, so if the performances cannot match the perfection of 
trained Shakespearean actors, it is not as much of a distraction as 
one might think. Claire Danes and Leonardo DiCaprio still manage to 
shine; the innocence and exuberance of their actual youth makes them 
magic on the screen. 
Two of the supporting performances are particularly good. Harold 
Perrineau's Mercutio is charismatic throughout the film, and at times 
he is superb. Perrineau manages to steal the show as a dazzling drag 
diva in the costume ball scene. John Leguizamo gives a powerful 
performance as Tybalt; he projects some of the malignant malevolence 
of pure hate into the role.
The intensity level of this film is overwhelming at times, and that is 
what struck me as both the film's strength and its weakness. This is a 
highly stylized film, and I found that style sometimes interfered with 
substance. There were times in the film when I yearned for greater 
focus on the poetic power of the Bard's words. This is not a perfect 
film, but it is a brave and often brilliant one. A deliberately daring 
and disturbing interpretation of Shakespeare's work, I must admit that 
it is not for everyone. But I think it is easily one of the best and 
most important films of this year. This is a film that will be 
watched, studied, and its merits debated for years to come. 

Title
Review for English Patient, The (1996)
Starring: Ralph Fiennes, Juliette Binoche, Willem Dafoe, Kristin Scott 
Thomas, Naveen Andrews, Colin Firth, Julian Wadham, Juergen Prochnow, 
Kevin Whately, Clive Merrison, Nino Castelnuovo, Hichem Rostom. 
Directed by Anthony Minghella. Screenplay: Anthony Minghella, based on 
a novel by Michael Ondaatje. MPAA Rating: R (Sexuality, Violence, 
Language). Running Time:162 Minutes.
WARNING: This review contains spoilers.
A brilliant, if rather loose, adaptation of Michael Ondaatje's popular 
prizewinning novel, THE ENGLISH PATIENT is an intellectually intense 
and psychologically complex film that conveys the haunting power of 
memory. A great screen romance in the tradition of CASABLANCA and DR. 
ZHIVAGO, the film is also a tragedy and a fascinating mystery. 
Moreover, THE ENGLISH PATIENT takes on such subjects as the horror of  
war and the power of love.
The film is set in the late 1930s and early 1940s against the backdrop 
of World War II. Most of the earlier events take place in the North 
African desert, while the later part of the story is set in an 
abandoned ruined monastery a few miles from Florence, Italy. However, 
a nonlinear narrative structure is employed throughout, giving the 
film a dreamlike, enigmatic quality. 
The film begins and ends with a sequence of images of a man and a 
woman  in a two-seat biplane flying over sand dunes. A little later, 
the plane is shot down and explodes into flames. Everything about the 
plane and its occupants is a mystery that the film unravels slowly. 
The mystery is maintained throughout the film; what happened to the 
plane and its occupants is not completely revealed until the end. 
The title THE ENGLISH PATIENT refers to the man in the plane who,  
after being rescued in the North African desert by a nomadic tribe, 
ends up in the caravan of a field hospital. Since he has been burned 
beyond recognition and he claims to be unable to remember anything, 
his identity cannot be established any further than a guess at his 
nationality based upon the sounds of his speech. 
During the waning days of the war, a young Canadian nurse named Hana 
(Juliette Binoche) takes pity on the man and leaves her unit so she 
can stay with him at an isolated bombed-out monastery in Tuscany where 
he can die in peace. It is at the monastery that the film begins its 
extensive use of flashbacks. The patient is given morphine by Hana for 
the intense pain from his burns, and he drifts in and out of 
consciousness. It emerges that the patient is actually a Hungarian 
count named Laszlo Almasy (Ralph Fiennes), who begins to reminisce 
about a torrid, adulterous affair in prewar North Africa with an  
Englishwoman named Katherine Clifton (Kristin Scott Thomas). With his 
body broken and its pain numbed by morphine, his memory of Katherine 
is the only thing that still has vibrant life for him. These 
flashbacks are presented in a manner that is both emotionally and 
cinematically extremely vivid to emphasize the indelible nature of 
this love. 
We eventually learn that Almasy's affair with Katherine unleashed a 
tragic chain of events that rippled through his own life and the lives 
of others. A man named Caravaggio (Willem Dafoe), whose thumbs were 
cut off by the Nazis, comes to the monastery to kill Almasy because he 
believes Almasy partially responsible for the mutilation of his 
hands. But after hearing Almasy's story, Caravaggio cannot bring 
himself to kill him. Thus the film is not only about the price that 
Almasy pays for passion, it is also about forgiveness.
Hana, Almasy, and Caravaggio are joined at the monastery by Kip 
(Naveen Andrews), a young Sikh from India who is an expert at 
deactivating mines and bombs. A sweet love develops between Kip and 
the nurse, serving as a counterpoint to the shady affair between 
Almasy and Katherine.
There are many good performances in this film, but I thought that the 
strongest belonged to Ralph Fiennes and Kristin Scott Thomas. Not only 
was their acting superb, but they had the chemistry of a great screen 
couple.
Ralph Fiennes gives an extraordinary performance as Count Laszlo 
Almasy. He portrays a man whose intellectual veneer cannot completely 
mask his heart's capacity for passion. What was remarkable to me was 
how Fiennes was able to convey such a wide spectrum of emotion using 
his eyes and voice when he was wearing a mask of scars.
Kristin Scott Thomas as Katherine Clifton is a self-confident femme 
fatale. Her intelligence and spirit are as much a part of her sex 
appeal as the way she looks. She is brave enough to take on the 
dangers of the desert, but she also betrays her husband with 
sang-froid. 
Juliette Binoche's wonderfully expressive face is her greatest asset 
in this role, bringing to life the angelic compassion, child-like joy, 
and the spectrum of other emotions--including despair--that Hana 
experiences. 
Naveen Andrews does a good job of portraying Kip. Like Almasy, he is a 
man whose cool surface covers his inner capacity for emotion. By day 
he defuses bombs with cool deliberation; by night he is Hana's ardent 
lover. 
Dafoe's Carvaggio is a dangerous and mysterious man who masks his 
anger with a strange charm. Yet, Caravaggio is not an entirely 
convincing character in the movie. I think this is because he is 
reduced to little more than a sketch in the screenplay, rather than 
because of Dafoe's acting. 
Colin Firth is quite good as Katherine's husband, Geoffrey Clifton. 
He is an affable fellow; yet when he realizes that he has become a 
cuckold, his face reflects a quiet fury.
Those who have read Ondaatje's novel should be forewarned that the 
story told in the movie differs in many ways, both large and small. 
The biggest difference is that the film expands the love story between 
the Count and Katherine, while drastically curtailing the roles of the 
other characters. In particular, the role of Kip is much smaller in 
the film than in the novel.
Although the movie is not faithful to the book from a literary point 
of view, it does find a cinematic equivalent to the poetic qualities 
of the novel: The story makes a breathtaking transition to the more 
visually assertive medium of film. I loved the way the wonderfully 
cinematic imagery worked in concert with the evocative story. From the 
opening sequence, this film is visually stunning. The plane flies over 
gracefully undulating sand dunes that resemble the curves of the human 
body; this visually sets the scene and foreshadows the story in a way 
that words alone never could. The flight over the desert sequence that 
begins and ends the film is dazzling; it is one of the most 
emotionally powerful sequences I've ever seen. And the equivalent of 
the novel's complexity is found in the film's visual density, with 
images echoing other images. For example, when Hana's lover Kip 
designs a device with pulleys that lift Hana up to view the frescos of 
the monastery by the light of flares, the opening sequence of lovers 
in flight is echoed.
Also, this film, like the novel, often juxtaposes both horror and 
lyrical beauty. One sequence where this worked particularly well was 
when Almasy and Katherine were caught in the sandstorm. Katherine 
watches the sandstorm on the horizon hovering like a shroud of fog--an 
image that is both gorgeous and ominous. She is oblivious to the 
danger until Almasy warns her and rushes her into the vehicle where 
they wait out the storm. While they are in the vehicle, the imminent 
danger brings down their emotional armor and they bond.
This is a superbly crafted and hard-hitting film that is 
intellectually and emotionally demanding, but I think that it is well 
worth the effort. Every aspect of this film is exemplary. The 
writer-director Anthony Minghella has created a masterpiece. This film 
is not light entertainment, but if you are up for a serious film, 
movies just don't get much better than this. 

Title
Review for Basquiat (1996)
(Miramax 1996)
Starring: Jeffrey Wright, Michael Wincott, Benicio Del Toro, 
    Claire Forlani, David Bowie, Dennis Hopper, Gary Oldman. 
Written and directed by Julian Schnabel. 
Running time: 1 hour, 46 minutes. MPAA rating: R.
WARNING: This review contains spoilers!
        I find that the best movies touch me on an emotional level, 
and "Basquiat" moved me deeply. The film, a character study of 
artist Jean-Michel Basquiat, is a heart-felt masterpiece of 
innovative film-making.
        Jean-Michel Basquiat was a young black artist living a 
hand-to-mouth existence in New York when he was discovered 
by critic Rene Ricard and became a darling of the New York art 
world, skyrocketing to a Warholesque fifteen minutes of fame. 
Basquiat died of a drug overdose just a few years later. Unlike 
many artists who suffer because of the indifference of the 
public to their work, Basquiat's plight was one of too-early 
fame mixed with the exploitation of his talent by the art world 
of the 1980's. 
        Writer-director Julian Schnabel, who was also a 
successful artist and darling of the 1980's art world, brought 
something to this film that few others could--first-hand 
knowledge of the milieu in which Basquiat moved. In my 
opinion, no other film made about an artist has the 
verisimilitude of "Basquiat." Most film portrayals of the life of 
an artist present stick-figure characters that seldom go 
beyond the mythic archetype of the artist as troubled genius. 
The title character in "Basquiat" is a much more complex, fully 
developed character than the Van Gogh in old Hollywood's 
"Lust for Life."
        Schnabel's skills as an artist make this a visually vivid 
film, using powerful images to tell the story of Basquiat's life. A 
particularly memorable example is the scene where Basquiat 
as a child is standing with his mother in front of Picasso's 
"Guernica." The painting moves his mother to tears as a shiny 
crown suddenly appears on the child's head. I interpreted this 
as a metaphor for the ability of a great painting to touch the 
deepest human emotions and transform lives. When the 
crown appeared on Basquiat's head, I felt that the artist was 
born within him.
         I thought that the film's greatest strength is Jeffrey 
Wright's superb performance as Jean-Michel Basquiat. Wright 
slips so easily into the role of Basquiat that there were times 
when I felt there was some Boswell-like videographer following 
the real Basquiat around. Yet, Schnabel's artistry is such that 
the film never feels like a documentary or even a docudrama. 
        Basquiat had no contact with his father, and his mother 
was in a mental institution. He sometimes seemed to distance 
himself from the world by alienating people who were close to 
him. One of the first people he alienated was Gina Cardinale 
(played luminously by Claire Forlani). Gina was an early 
girlfriend who took him in when he was homeless and loved 
him with selfless devotion before he found fame and fortune. 
She saved his life once when she found him in their apartment
nearly dead from a drug overdose. But Basquiat committed an 
infidelity with an art-world groupie (played by Courtney Love) 
and lost Gina soon after she found out. After losing Gina, he 
lives an increasingly solitary existence, and here the actor 
Wright is particularly effective in his use of body language and 
facial expression to portray Basquiat's slow withdrawal into 
himself.
        In spite of his isolation, Basquiat did have a rather 
strange friendship with Andy Warhol, and their friendship 
struck me as one of the more fascinating aspects of this film. 
Warhol became something of a surrogate father to Basquiat. 
Warhol was the only person who seemed to care enough about 
Basquiat to warn him about the perils of drug addiction.
        I thought that one of the best scenes in the movie was 
when Warhol and Basquiat worked collaboratively on a series 
of paintings. There was a sadness and a loneliness common to 
both men in this scene. They seemed to be two lost souls who 
found solace in each other's friendship for a while.
        I enjoyed David Bowie's low-key performance as Andy 
Warhol. Bowie's Warhol was soft spoken and introverted; it 
was Warhol as the private man, not Warhol's better known 
flamboyant persona as a diva of pop culture. 
        Racism is another thread in the movie. All of Basquiat's 
genius and all of his art world success could not shield him 
from the racism that he confronted in his daily life. In one 
scene in an elegant restaurant, a table of white businessmen 
stare rudely at Basquiat. Basquiat does not openly confront 
them with his anger; instead he tells the waiter that he will 
anonymously pay their check. In another similar scene, 
Basquiat is in an upscale deli with Andy Warhol when a clerk 
treats him rudely because of his race. Basquiat responds to 
this by buying a thousand dollars worth of caviar from the 
clerk. In yet another scene, Basquiat reacts with open hostility 
when a long-time white friend says something about Basquiat 
becoming "uppity" since his success. Basquiat becomes 
quarrelsome, and to get away from him, the friend angrily gets 
out of the taxi they are sharing. 
        However, Basquiat's race and his background as a graffiti 
artist made him chic with the hip New York art crowd of the 
1980's. This is reflected in the scene where he is working on 
some paintings in his studio and is visited by a gallery owner, 
an art collector, and the collector's bimboesque wife. The gallery 
owner announces to the couple, "This is the voice of the street." 
Tatum O'Neal is hilarious as the art collector's wife, who 
indicates to Basquiat that she might buy one of the paintings 
if he will paint over a large area of institutional-looking green 
with a more pleasant color. 
        There are many fine performances in the film, including 
Parker Posey as gallery owner Mary Boone, Gary Oldman as 
artist Albert Milo (Schnabel's fictional surrogate), Dennis 
Hopper as art dealer Bruno Bischofberger, and an 
exceptionally strong effort by Michael Wincott as the art critic 
Rene Ricard. 
        "Basquiat" is a rare treat. Few films have performances of 
the caliber that Jeffrey Wright gives in playing Jean-Michel 
Basquiat. And even fewer films have the kind of original vision 
shown in this one by Julian Schnabel. A film like this comes 
around only once in a long while: it would be a shame to miss it.

Title
Review for Wings of the Dove, The (1997)
Starring: Helena Bonham Carter, Linus Roache, Alison Elliott, Elizabeth
McGovern, Charlotte Rampling. Directed by Iain Softley. Written by Henry
James (novel), Hossein Amini (screenplay). Cinematography by Eduardo Serra
(II). Music by Ed Shearmur. Production Design by John Beard. Costume Design
by Sandy Powell (II).  Film Editing by Tariq Anwar. MPAA Rating R. Running
Time 101 Minutes.
THE WINGS OF THE DOVE is a tragic romance and a powerful film about the
painful personal prices that are sometimes paid for passion. I highly
recommend this movie as one of the most entertaining and emotionally
satisfying films of the year. A lavish costume drama with exquisite
production values, this moving story of friendship, love, and betrayal is
set in the early 20th century in the glamorous and cinematically lush world
of London drawing rooms and Venetian palazzos. The story centers around a
complex young woman named Kate Croy (Helena Bonham Carter) and her doomed
love for Merton Densher (Linus Roache). The acting in the film is superb in
general, and in particular, Bonham Carter's performance is extraordinary
and seems likely to win her an Oscar nomination.
The film is loosely based on Henry James' novel, but admirers of that great
writer should be warned that the sensibilities of the movie are not
entirely faithful to those of the book--for example, the film shows that
Kate and Densher have a steamy extramarital sexual relationship. And in
many other ways the characters in the movie seem strikingly modern compared
with those in the novel. Such liberties are partially justified by setting
the film around 1910, which is about ten years later than the time frame of
the book. Also, the film adaptation streamlines James' story to fit the
confines of the leaner form of the screenplay, making the movie less
cerebral and complex than the novel, while shifting the story's focus to
its emotional aspects. But the screen adaptation succeeds brilliantly in
finding those elements of the book that translate well to the visually
aggressive and emotionally immediate medium of film. The result is a
compelling and accessible movie that is not just for Henry James fans or
for the costume drama crowd--it's a movie for anyone who enjoys getting
caught up in the sweep of a passionate drama.
Bonham Carter imbues the story's main character Kate Croy with a spectrum
of emotions that makes her almost impossible to completely figure out. At
times Kate is almost as coolly cynical and selfishly scheming as a
film-noir heroine. But although Kate makes cynical decisions, it is not
clear whether she is a selfish monster or a victim who has been corrupted
by the cynicism of the society that surrounds her. She is a character who
at first inspires sympathy which later becomes mixed with disdain. I think
this adds resonance to her character, and as is often the case with
fictional characters who have substantial psychological depth, much of the
fascination lies in the fact that she is neither completely bad nor
completely good.
When the story opens, Kate's mother has died recently and her
opium-addicted father is living in poverty. Kate has been taken in by her
wealthy socialite aunt who is intent on matching her with a suitable
husband of appropriate wealth and social standing. The aunt forbids Kate to
see her father, fearing his negative influence on her will hurt her chances
for a good marriage. To complicate matters further, Kate is passionately in
love with Merton Densher, a young journalist who can barely support
himself. Kate's aunt also forbids her to see Densher, forcing her to meet
him secretly in such unlikely places as an elevator in the London
Underground. Kate is in the nearly impossible situation of being torn
between her love for Densher and her fear of being cut off financially by
her aunt. To make matters worse, her father is also being supported by her
aunt in return for his staying away from Kate. Thus, it is more than
destitution that Kate fears--she is afraid her aunt's wrath will hurt her
father. 
Kate's dream of being able to openly be with the man she loves seems all
but impossible. But things change when Millie Theale (Alison Elliott), a
wealthy American heiress, enters the glittering social scene. Kate soon
learns that Millie harbors a tragic secret: The heiress suffers from a
fatal disease and is not expected to live much longer. Based on this
information, Kate devises a desperate scheme that she hopes will allow her
to end her financial dependence on her aunt and marry Densher. Since I
don't want to spoil the story for those not familiar with it, I'll say no
more about how all this plays out, but I will say that things come out
quite a bit differently from what I think most people will expect. 
In my opinion, Bonham Carter's performance steals the show, but there are
also other strong performances. As Kate's aunt, Charlotte Rampling has just
the right touch of icily patrician villainy. Linus Roache takes on a
difficult role with Merton Densher--he plays a man weak enough to be putty
in the hands of a manipulative woman, yet he manages to project enough
masculine appeal to make it credible that women like Kate and Millie would
be in love with him. And although Alison Elliot does not have the kind of
patrician looks that would make her perfect for the part of Millie Theale,
she brings to the role the kind of luminosity and innocence that makes her
portrayal come to life.
The gorgeous cinematography--which includes stunning location shooting in
Venice, Italy--heightens the film's impact while adding additional layers
of subtle meaning. I interpreted the seductive appeal of the visual
opulence of some of the imagery as a metaphor paralleling the hedonistic
influences that helped to shape the actions of Kate, Densher, and Millie. I
thought that the cinematography's lushness was the perfect way to
illustrate luxury's sensual lure. Especially effective was the scene in
which Millie and Kate walk through an exhibition hall where the works of
the Viennese artist Gustav Klimt are being exhibited. Klimt's paintings
brilliantly foreshadow the sensual richness and passionate sexuality of
much of what is about to unfold in the film. I was also particularly
impressed by the lyrical, innovative, and silkily smooth visual transitions
between the scenes; they reminded me of the facile, poetic complexity of
Henry James' prose style.
One thing the film did that struck me as incredibly powerful was to show
just how much Kate has to lose by contrasting the world of wealth and
privilege with the world that she is likely to descend to if she does not
obey her aunt's wishes. In one stunning scene, Kate sneaks out to slip her
father an expensive piece of jewelry her aunt had presented her as a gift.
Kate gives the necklace to a woman standing at the door of an opium den
that her father patronizes. The camera then provides a glimpse of the den's
dark and ominous interior, which is tinged with a nightmare's horror. Much
later, near the end of the film, comes another powerful scene, similar in
its feeling of heartbreak, when Kate makes love with Densher in his small,
stark London apartment. The treatment of this scene is anything but
romantic; it is a scene of desperation and tragedy. Both Bonham Carter and
Roache are unforgettable here as two people whose love for each other has
been poisoned by what they have done and the kind of people they have
become.
The psychological and intellectual depth of Henry James' stories have
proven irresistible to filmmakers during the past couple of years, and THE
WINGS OF THE DOVE is the third recent major movie to have been adapted from
the great writer's novels, the other two being THE PORTRAIT OF A LADY and
WASHINGTON SQUARE. While all three are films of high quality, it seems
probable that general contemporary audiences will like THE WINGS OF THE
DOVE better than the other two, although some Henry James devotees will
never be able to get past the fact that great liberties were taken in
adapting this classic work to the screen. 

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
THE TRUMAN SHOW (1998)
A film review by Ivana Redwine
Copyright 1998 by Ivana Redwine
Starring: Jim Carrey as Truman Burbank, Laura Linney as Meryl, Noah
Emmerich as Marlon, Natascha McElhone as Lauren/Sylvia, Ed Harris as
Christof. Directed by Peter Weir. Screenplay by Andrew Niccol.
Cinematography by Peter Biziou.
There is a stunning scene in THE TRUMAN SHOW where Truman Burbank (Jim
Carrey, in a breakthrough dramatic role) attempts to have a serious
conversation with his wife Meryl (Laura Linney, who gives the role just the
right touch of icy hypocrisy). He tries desperately to communicate, but his
words do not dent the armor of her soul-numbing insincerity. As Truman
tries to tear down her seemingly impenetrable facade, she reacts in a
subtly horrifying, surreal manner--she suggests that Truman might like to
try a new product called Mococoa and launches into a sales pitch for it.
During her spiel, she holds up the product's package as if to an unseen
camera. Like the rest of the film, this scene is slick, smart, and superbly
realized, but Carrey's performance is what gives it its emotional core. His
face reflects just the right mix of dismay, anger, and disbelief, as he
slowly begins to understand that something is terribly wrong.
A rather similar scene a little later in the film also strikes a
particularly moving emotional chord. Truman and his best friend Marlon
(Noah Emmerich) spend an evening together, nursing a couple of beers while
sitting on the end of an unfinished bridge. Although it sounds like pure
paranoia, Truman tells Marlon, "Everybody seems to be in on it." But Marlon
looks Truman straight in the eye and says convincingly, "I'm not in on it,
Truman, because the last thing I would ever do is lie to you." However, it
turns out that in spite of Marlon's seeming sincerity, he is getting his
lines from an ear piece. At this moment, Truman does not yet know that
Marlon is an actor. Everything Marlon has ever said or done around Truman
all their lives has been a well-performed lie. I found this to be a
powerful, memorable scene, and it struck me as yet another hard-hitting
example of the tragic emotional toll on Truman as he slowly learns about
the artificial world surrounding him. No matter what he tries, Truman
cannot communicate with or get close to his family or friends because they
are not what they seem. In this scene, the sadness in Truman's eyes is only
a shadow of the devastation he will eventually feel when he realizes the
extent to which he has been cruelly deceived by those he loves and trusts.
For almost 30 years, Truman Burbank has been unaware that he is the star of
an uninterrupted, live television broadcast. It is the ultimate in reality
programming. In addition to being the longest running show in history, it
is also the most popular, with a devoted, world-wide audience. In fact,
some of his more ardent fans get a feeling of reassurance from keeping the
show on while Truman sleeps; but if his audience ever gave any thought to
Truman's exploitation, they would need more than a television night light
to keep their terror safe.
Without ever having committed a crime, Truman has been held captive his
entire life in a man-made world that is enclosed within a huge dome, a
structure so large that it can be seen from space. Within the dome is
Seahaven Island, which is actually a huge stage set. Except for Truman, all
Seahaven's citizens are actors. It is a created world with the
verisimilitude of reality, and seven days a week, twenty-four hours a day,
ingeniously concealed cameras broadcast every aspect of Truman's life to a
global village of vacuous voyeurs. In concept it is a cross between "Candid
Camera" and the omnipresent, all-seeing eye of Big Brother in George
Orwell's novel "1984."
I was particularly impressed with the satiric imagination that went into
the design of Seahaven; it is a safe and sanitized utopian dream, a
community seemingly conjured out of the plastic world of 1950s television
comedies. The feel of Seahaven is similar to walking into the world that
exists only within the frame of a Norman Rockwell illustration--a
heartwarming place where the smiles seldom waver. Yet, on closer
inspection, there is something unsettlingly saccharine and hollow about the
conspicuous absence of the gritty, untidy realities of life.
A chilling aspect of the story is that Truman was adopted before his birth,
not by surrogate parents, but by a corporation. Instead of being nurtured
by parental love, Truman has been treated his whole life as if he were a
commodity. Everything that surrounds him forms a matrix for product
promotion, and he is kept in a place that is little more than a picturesque
prison, while his free will is callously manipulated.
The puppet master pulling the strings of Truman's life is the television
show's creator and director Christof (well played by Ed Harris)--a man so
enraptured with his own creative vision that his arrogance and egotism make
him blind to the moral implications of Truman's plight. I found Christof to
be a brilliantly conceived and absolutely frightening character. The
control that Christof holds over Truman's life and world is almost
God-like--at one point he directs his crew to "Cue the sun!"-- but Cristof
is a faux-deity whose vanity makes his blood run very cold. He is even
cynical enough to go as far as to contrive events to instill fears in
Truman that will keep him from leaving Seahaven Island. For example, Truman
believes that when he was a small boy, he witnessed his father's drowning;
but in actuality what appeared to be the drowning was merely a staged
event, designed to make Truman fear the water.
At one point in the film, Christof makes a provocative statement: "We
accept the reality with which we're presented." Few people have the kind of
courage it takes to question the veracity of the world they are presented
with, but when there are too many disturbing incidents for Truman to
ignore, his faith in everything he has believed all his life begins to
unravel. His first clue that something is rotten in Seahaven is when a
stage light falls from the sky, nearly landing on top of him. Another time,
something goes awry with his car radio, and he hears actors getting their
instructions instead of the radio program that was on the air. On another
occasion Truman finds a homeless man wandering around town who claims to be
his father--the man Truman watched drown years ago and believed to be dead.
Later in the film, a close inspection of Truman's wedding photo reveals his
bride's fingers were crossed when the picture was taken. 
But what finally makes Truman take action--spurring him on a quest for the
truth--is the memory of his true love (played by Natascha McElhone), a
woman who went by two names, Lauren and Sylvia (indicative of the slippery
nature of her identity). On a brief romantic moonlit walk on the beach, she
courageously told him, "Everyone is pretending, Truman." Soon after she
said this, she was whisked away by her father, who dismissed her words as
the ramblings of a madwoman. Yet Truman is haunted by her last words to
him: "Get out of here! Come and find me." She vanishes from his life, but
what has actually happened is that she was tossed off the show for straying
from the script. Truman's refusal to accept her disappearance is the
impetus for unraveling the web of lies that has been the matrix of his
reality for so long. He is determined to go to Fiji, where he believes he
will find her. But suspiciously, every time he tries to leave, strange
events prevent him from doing so. 
Truman's attempts to escape Seahaven brought a haunting question to my
mind: What would freedom mean to Truman? Through television many millions
of fans around the world are more familiar with his face than they are with
those of people they see frequently in real life. But Truman is a person
who has never had the luxury of a private self. I imagined that if he ever
made it to the outside world, he would have even less privacy--his fans
would hound his every move. Yet, if he remained in the artificial
environment of Seahaven, he would be little more than a pawn trapped in an
illusory world. Either way, his life would be a kind of living hell. 
Although this film is not without its comic touches, the dramatic aspects
of Jim Carrey's performance are what really surprised me. Working different
ground than the kind of manic, exaggerated, over-the-top comedy that made
him famous, Carrey brings off some subtler tricks here. He manages to do as
much dramatically with slight changes in his facial expression and body
language as he has shown in other films that he could do comically with his
trademark brand of humor. Truman Burbank is a fascinating archetypical
hero, an innocent everyman who has the courage to search for the truth and
not to accept the lies he has been told all his life. But Truman is a
character who is more mythic/iconic than realistic and thus is by design
not a fully faceted character. Yet Carrey puts so much into the role that
he almost makes Truman more than that, and it is difficult to imagine the
movie without him. Carrey's performance gives the film its heart and
humanity, and I believe that if he had not been in it, THE TRUMAN SHOW
could have easily been little more than a fascinating intellectual
exercise. 
This is an extremely well crafted movie. I felt that the superb production
design and cinematography intentionally imbued the film with a slick,
soulless artificiality. This made the scenes appear wholesomely picturesque
and sweetly beautiful, yet at the same time somehow so cold and sterile
that there was an eerie deadliness to them. To my mind, the visual aspects
of the movie were meant to echo and intensify the subtle undercurrent of
horror that runs throughout the film. It is rare that style and substance
work together so seamlessly in a movie. THE TRUMAN SHOW is a multifaceted
and resonant film of ideas that has aspects of myth, allegory, and fable.
It even delves into complex philosophical issues such as illusion and
reality. A far cry from the usual summer movie fare, this is a thoughtful,
nuanced film that also manages to be highly entertaining.
