Authors
FilmFan16@aol.com
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for Roseaux sauvages, Les (1994)
Directed by Andre Techine.
Cast: Gael Morel, Elodie Bouchez, Stephane Rideau, Frederic Gorney, 
Michele Moretti, Jacques Nolot, Eric Kreikenmayer.
1995 - 110 minutes - French - Subtitled.
Unrated; equivalent of an R (for sexual situations, profanity, and 
nudity). 
Reviewed September 1998.
"Wild Reeds" directed by Andre Techine, was the best film of 1995, and 
one of, if not my favorite, foreign-language film I have seen.
This beautifully made French film is set in 1962, and revolves around 
four teenagers. At the center of the story is Francois (Gael Morel), a 
rather shy, introverted young man who is staying at a boarding school. 
When a new student, Serge (Stephane Rideau), who is a much more 
rebellious person, comes to stay at the school, they become friends, and 
to Francois' shock, finds Serge in his bed late one night. After this 
encounter, Serge strays farther away from him, and it is apparent that 
he is not interested in a relationship, but he leaves Francois utterly 
confused about his own sexuality. Also a large part of the story is 
Maite (Elodie Bouchez), Francois' long-time female best friend, who 
obviously has deep feeling for him, and the oldest student at the 
boarding school, Henri (Frederic Gorny), who is about to turn 21, and 
has purposefully failed each year because he is afraid to face the "real 
world." 
Something I have noticed lately is that the characters in American films 
almost always act like immature children, and in most foreign films, the 
characters are infinitely more intelligent and interesting people. "Wild 
Reeds" proves this point to a T, even though these characters are still 
in high school. This motion picture is full of such truth and honesty, 
that it is in another league with most films that are made nowadays. 
Regardless of what the film is about, it is not a "gay" film, and the 
film is far too complex for it to be labeled such a thing. Instead, it 
is about the uncertainties and insecurities of growing up, and the 
picture understands and cares about the characters so much that the 
audience can't help but do the same thing. Also, all of the characters 
are written to be fully-developed, living-and breathing human beings, 
and they are helped even more by the amazingly mature performances from 
its cast, particularly Morel and Bouchez, who have a large future in 
films. Incidentally, Bouchez was awarded the Best Actress prize at this 
year's Cannes Film Festival for a yet-to-be-released French film. There 
are moments within the film that involves these characters that are full 
of such unblinking reality and intelligence that there is no way it 
could be a "mainstream" American picture.
Another highlight of "Wild Reeds" is its music, which is filled with 
several 60's hits, such as "Barbara Anne" and "Runaway." Although this 
may, at first, sound a bit strange, since this film is in subtitles, it 
only adds to the realism since in France in the 1960's American pop 
songs were no doubt popular, and they fit perfectly into the story.
The conclusion of "Wild Reeds" is splendid, as it brings together all of 
these characters and story threads, and all of the predicaments are 
dealt with. And yet...very little is solved, except that, I sense, the 
characters have grown quite a bit as people and have learned about 
themselves. In this sense, it is just like real life, because not 
everything is always resolved and wrapped up within two hours. Instead, 
"Wild Reeds" leaves you thinking and pondering about what lies ahead for 
these four people, even after the end credits. Judging from the film 
itself, their lives will not be a bed of roses, but they will make it 
through everything quite alright, I'm sure. 
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Title
Review for Quiet Room, The (1996)
"The Quiet Room," is an exceptional, if not perfect, Australian drama 
that gets farther into the inner workings of a child's mind than any 
other film I've ever seen. It is an ideal picture for parents (who just 
might learn something about their children), teenagers (who will nod in 
recognition at its accuracy), and high school and college classes 
studying children.
The film is told exclusively, and never sways, from the central 
character's point-of-view, a seven-year-old girl (Chloe Ferguson) who, 
by choice, has completely stopped vocally talking with her parents, who 
are clearly having marital troubles. Since she does not talk, and yet 
she is the main character, we hear all of her thoughts and feelings at 
any given time. And, we sense, if her parents understood her a little 
better, they would realize that she doesn't need to talk to express 
herself.
"The Quiet Room," with the constant voice-over by the little girl, 
expressing the thoughts in her mind, are constantly so right-on-target, 
that director Rolf de Heer should be applauded for the obvious knowledge 
and maturity that he brings to this emotional story. Admittedly, the 
narration sometimes overstays its welcome in certain scenes, but when 
you think about it, this is completely acceptable. All people, not just 
children, have endless thoughts always floating around in their head, 
and to stop the little girl from expressing herself would be like 
telling her she can't use her mind anymore.
Not enough praise could possibly be given to Chloe Ferguson, as the 
young girl, who, second to three-year-old Victoire Thivisol (1997's, 
"Ponette"), gives the best motion picture performance I can remember 
from someone under ten years of age. You can never catch Ferguson acting 
because she is so very good, and by the film's end, I really was 
beginning to acknowledge her character as a actual person.
If, "The Quiet Room," ever steps wrong, it is in the conclusion, in 
which everything is somewhat solved. It is not that it is necessarily a 
disappointing ending, but I think I probably would have changed the 
penultimate moments to make them feel as accurate as everything that had 
come before.
Nonetheless, "The Quiet Room," is, for once, a serious film on the 
subject of a young child. We do not get many films of this nature, and 
when we do, they more often than not get many of the little details 
wrong. The character of the young girl in this film, on the other hand, 
is so truthful that she really does, in the viewer's mind, at least, 
become a real human being, as if it was a documentary we were watching. 
"The Quiet Room," may be a fictional film, but what it says is not 
"fictional" at all. Children go through the exact same things that this 
young girl goes through, and the points that this film has to make 
speaks volumes about them.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Title
Review for True Crime (1999)
Directed by Clint Eastwood.
Cast: Clint Eastwood, Isaiah Washington, Lisa Gay Hamilton, Denis Leary, 
James Woods, Diane Venora, Francesca Fisher-Eastwood, Michael Jeter, 
Mary McCormack, Frances Fisher, Lucy Alexis Liu.
1999 - 127 minutes
Rated R (for profanity and violence).
Reviewed March 21, 1999.
As with 1995's "The Bridges of Madison County" and 1997's "Midnight in 
the Garden of Good and Evil," actor-director Clint Eastwood has 
successfully adapted a well-recieved novel to the screen, this time it 
being Andrew Klavan's "True Crime." Although unread by me, this film 
version is a taut, if somewhat overstuffed, suspense-drama, that is 
worlds better than a similar Eastwood picture that was also adapted from 
a novel, 1997's "Absolute Power."
Eastwood stars as crackerjack newspaper reporter Steve Everett, a man 
pushing his late-60's who nonetheless is always getting involved with 
much younger women, and cheating on his wife, Barbara (Diane Venora). 
When a well-liked young colleague of his (Mary McCormack) is in a car 
accident after drinking-and-driving and is killed, Everett finds himself 
getting her original job of interviewing Frank Beachum (Isaiah 
Washington), a black man on death row for a crime he claims he didn't 
commit, only hours before his planned execution that night. Looking 
through the case records, Everett finds that there were two witnesses 
during the fateful day when Frank allegedly went into a convenience 
store and shot and killed the female worker there, who happened to be 
six months pregnant. One of the witnesses only saw Frank run out of the 
store, while the other walked in to only see him holding the gun, but 
neither heard the shot. While investigating the store, Everett discovers 
that the witness' story of seeing Frank with a gun was impossible since 
there was a large stand of potato chips blocking his view. Convinced 
Frank really is innocent, Everett only has a small number of hours to 
find out what actually did happen, so that Frank will be saved from his 
impending death.
As with the superior "Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil," one of 
the delights in "True Crime" is Eastwood's, as well as screenwriters' 
Larry Gross, Paul Brickman, and Stephen Schiff, effortless handling of 
the wide array of character, from those already mentioned, to Beachum's 
grieving wife (Lisa Gay Hamilton), Everett's precocious, neglected 
daughter (Eastwood's real-life daughter, Francesca Fisher-Eastwood), and 
Everett's fast-talking editor (James Woods) and edgy co-worker (Denis 
Leary). The treasure of watching these characters is in the writing, 
which might only give some of the people a handful of scenes, but is 
able to develop each one enough so that we feel we know them. On the one 
hand, the many characters and stories swarming around occasionally 
become slightly unbelievable since the movie takes place within a 
24-hour period, but on the other hand, they are very well-done. One of 
the unexpected subplots that snuck up on me and acquired a heartbreaking 
pay-off involved Everett's rocky relationship with his wife, played by 
Venora in an assured, precise turn. All performances, in fact, are 
memorable, but the others that stand out include Washington, who doesn't 
make one false note in portraying a man terrified of dying, and yet 
knows he must be strong for his wife and daughter; Hamilton, who was 
also wonderful in last year's "Beloved"; and Michael Jeter, as one of 
the witnesses who firmly believes Beachum was holding a gun...or does 
he?
At the center of everything is Eastwood in his first screen appearance 
in two years, and he really is very good here, although I did have some 
problems with the way his sex life was portrayed. Portrayed as 
irresisitible to all women, even those still in their teenage years, 
Eastwood has significantly aged recently, looking even slightly older 
than his actual age of 68. Unlike Robert Redford, who is now in his 70's 
and still could pass for a good-looking fiftysomething, Eastwood holds 
no such scrutiny in a plot contrivance that I could have done without.
Another irksome matter, though one that might have stood out even more 
in the hands of a less-professional filmmaker, is the story itself. So 
many similar movies have been made recently about the exact same subject 
(1995's "Dead Man Walking," 1996's "Last Dance," 1996's "The Chamber") 
that there could virtually be a new film genre invented. Even if 
intelligent and effective, Eastwood might have been better off choosing 
a more original premise for a movie he was going to spend at least a 
year of his life on.
Despite its commonplace storyline and a few small qualms, "True Crime" 
is a respectable film, particularly in its unequivocal details involving 
the characters and genuinely unpredictable outcome (even though the very 
last scene didn't quite sit well with me). Clint Eastwood is a true 
craftsman, as he usually proves with each of his directing jobs, and it 
is due largely to his expertise in character and dialogue that "True 
Crime" rises above its tried-and-true plot outline.

Title
Review for Spy Kids (2001)
Directed by Robert Rodriguez.
Cast: Alexa Vega, Daryl Sabara, Carla Gugino, Antonio Banderas, Alan Cumming, 
Teri Hatcher, Cheech Marin, Robert Patrick, Tony Shalhoub, Danny Trejo.
2001 - 86 minutes
Rated PG (for mild violence).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, April 4, 2001.
For someone who has directed a blood-drenched $5,000 indie about a mariachi 
with a gun disguised as a guitar holder (1993's "El Mariachi"), a ghastly, 
foul-mouthed vampire epic (1996's "From Dusk Till Dawn"), and a high 
school-set horror movie about alien teachers (1998's "The Faculty"), it would 
seem like an odd choice for director Robert Rodriguez to next choose a family 
film, but that is what he has done. Then again, as he has proven thus far in 
his career, Rodriguez is completely disinterested in following a conventional 
filmmaking pattern, instead making any given movie in any genre that he feels 
like.
"Spy Kids" is a fun-filled, if slight, children's variation on James Bond, 
with two child protagonists, lots of action, spiffy special effects, and an 
overabundance of neat gadgets. There are no life-threateniong weapons to be 
found here, nor is there any graphic violence, proving that it is possible to 
make a quality action movie that the entire family will be able to enjoy 
equally.
Carmen (Alexa Vega) and Juni (Daryl Sabara) are siblings who live in peace 
and happiness with their parents, Gregorio (Antonio Banderas) and Ingrid 
Cortez (Carla Gugino). As Ingrid spins fascinating bedtime stories night 
after night about star-crossed lovers who originally were international spies 
on opposing sides, until they married and settled down, Carmen and Juni have 
no idea that the tales are actually about their own mother and father. 
Gregorio and Ingrid love their children, but after years of downtime, they 
thirst for their old jobs as spies, and quickly go off on an assignment. Not 
being as quick-witted as they once were, they are quickly captured by Fegan 
Floop (Alan Cumming), a dastardly children's show host who is planning to 
take over the world by creating robotic replicas of every child in existence. 
When Fegan's evil henchmen, including two played by Teri Hatcher (1996's "2 
Days in the Valley") and Robert Patrick ("The Faculty"), come looking for the 
Cortez offsprings, it is up to Juni and Carmen to go on the run, all the 
while setting off to rescue their parents.
While far from perfect, "Spy Kids" is an intermittently dynamite 
entertainment that, sure enough, manages to be exciting, with hair-raising 
stunts and plenty of non-violent fight scenes that have no danger of 
offending anyone. The visual effects are creative and mostly believable, 
particularly for the picture's relatively low $30-million budget, as they 
include underwater and aerial chases, a place called the Virtual Room that 
puts the characters into different settings that only appear to be there, and 
floors that drop out like jigsaw puzzles.
In transporting a James Bond thriller into a family movie, the screenplay, 
also by Robert Rodriguez, is imaginative and light-hearted, as he also throws 
in a few odes to his previous movies, including a very funny slow-motion shot 
of Carmen and Juni coolly walking down the aisle of a department store, 
equipped with sunglasses and long, draping clothing. I could have most 
definitely done without, however, some of the throwaway puns and jokey 
dialogue that are supposed to be clever and humorous, but come off as overly 
juvenile, even for a film targeted at the kiddies. These moments of corniness 
are thankfully brief and not abundant in number, so it is easy to ignore them 
and move your mind towards the next scene.
Directing children has to be a challenge for any director, especially if they 
are aiming for realism, and Alexa Vega (1999's "The Deep End of the Ocean") 
and newcomer Daryl Sabara are up to the challenge. Both succeed at dodging 
the ever-dreaded unctuous-factor, and interact like true siblings--ones who 
love each other, help each other out when things get rough, but are also apt 
to argue and feud. Pure performance-wise, Vega is a step above Sabara, as she 
is a really talented find, while Sabara still has a large amount to learn 
regarding subtlety. 
The adults play second banana throughout to the kids, with Carla Gugino 
(1998's "Snake Eyes") and Antonio Banderas (1999's "Play It to the Bone") 
underused, but effective, as the kidnapped parents, and Alan Cumming (2000's 
"Get Carter") a standout as the allegedly villainous Fegan Floop, who may or 
may not be slowly growing a conscious heart. Added amusement comes from a 
surprise cameo in the final scene featuring a big, "A"-list actor who has 
worked with Rodriguez in the past.
At a blink-and-you'll-miss-it 86 minutes, "Spy Kids" is needlessly brief, and 
could have benefitted from a little more development and a stronger third 
act, which comes off as anticlimactic. The fact that the movie is so 
fast-paced, no doubt, also contributes to the feeling that it is about twenty 
minutes too short. Flawed or not, "Spy Kids" is one of those rare breeds--a 
live-action family film that relies on intelligence and adventure to tell its 
story, rather than flatulence and doggy-do-do jokes.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Title
Review for Final Destination (2000)
Directed by James Wong.
Cast: Devon Sawa, Ali Larter, Kerr Smith, Seann William Scott, Kristen Cloke, 
Amanda Detmer, Chad E. Donella, Daniel Roebuck, Roger Guenveur Smith, Brendan 
Fehr. 
2000 - 95 minutes
Rated R (for violence, gore, and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, March 18, 2000.
Have you ever wondered if death is something that simply happens naturally, 
at any given moment, in life? Or if it is an occurrence that is predetermined 
by some much larger force within the world, or outside of it? These 
thought-provoking questions are the subject of "Final Destination," which is 
the most riveting horror-drama since 1999's "The Sixth Sense." Stylishly 
filmed and tautly directed by "X-Files" alum James Wong, the film deals with 
several fairly heavy topics that are discussed truthfully by teenage 
characters (in accurately written "teen-speak," rather than overwrought, 
highly intellectualized dialogue that even Harvard scholars wouldn't use), 
all the while developing into a darkly foreboding, severely eerie thriller 
that successfully leaves you uneasy from the horrifyingly real opening twenty 
minutes to the less-successful, but still suspenseful epilogue.
At the start of the film, 17-year-old high school senior Alex Browning (Devon 
Sawa) is about to leave with his 40-student French class for a field trip to 
Paris. Progressively getting a case of preflight jitters, he spots several 
mysterious "coincidences," including the departure time being 9:25, the same 
as his September 25 birthday, as well as hearing the John Denver song "Rocky 
Mountain High" over the sound system in the airport bathroom. "John Denver 
died in a plane crash," Alex grudgingly mutters to himself. Once seated, Alex 
suddenly gets a horrific premonition about the plane exploding upon takeoff, 
and after causing a ruckus onboard, he, as well as six other students and a 
teacher, are thrown off. Arguing in the airport lobby, Alex's suspicion comes 
true when the plane really does explode in flight, killing all 300+ 
passengers, including the rest of their classmates.
As two investigators interrogate Alex about how he knew the plane was going 
to explode, the fellow survivors, whom he has saved, treat him in varying 
manners. Carter (Kerr Smith), the hotshot jock, holds him in contempt because 
he believes that it is only he himself who can decide his fate. Alex's best 
friend, Tod (Chad E. Donella), wants to stand by him but can't because of his 
fearful parents. The teacher, Mrs. Lewton (Kristen Cloke), is frightened by 
him, believing that it was he who somehow caused the disaster, as well as in 
a state of guilt for giving up her seat on the plane to a fellow coworker. 
Only outsider Clear Rivers (Ali Larter), who unboarded the plane due to a 
sudden connection to Alex's premonition even though she had never even spoken 
to him before, is sympathetic and thankful to him for saving her life.
That is only the setup of "Final Destination," and the less said about what 
follows, the better. Suffice to say, the film does, indeed, turn into a 
slasher film, albeit one that is more thoughtful than most, and replaces a 
knife-wielding maniac for the never-seen granddaddy killer of them all, the 
Grim Reaper itself.
The setpieces in any horror movie are the death scenes, and "Final 
Destination" surely boosts some of the most inventive ones to grace the 
silver screen in years. Graphic and brilliantly orchestrated in a Rube 
Goldbergesque manner, they manage to occasionally be so intense you don't 
know whether to shrink down in your seat, tap your feet in nervousness, or 
turn away. 
Devon Sawa, a rising star who put his physical comedy skills to good use in 
1999's underseen slasher-comedy, "Idle Hands," is even more of a charismatic 
presence here. The conflicting emotions he feels for his survival, which he 
comes to believe he wasn't meant to do, as well as the loss of the other 
passengers, is superbly and subtly acted on his part. One scene, in which he 
is watching a news report on the crash and slowly begins to break down is 
especially realistic and powerful. 
Ali Larter (1999's "Varsity Blues"), in the other central role, is also 
effective, as a girl whose life was going well until her father died in a 
convenience store shooting years before, leaving her stuck with an 
increasingly uncaring mother who married a loutish man--the exact opposite of 
her now-deceased father.
The other roles are not as fully written, and most remain rather 
one-dimensional. The movie is mainly Sawa's, however, and the rest of the 
actors equip themselves well in limited roles. Tony Todd (1992's "Candyman"), 
as an arcane morgue attendant, pops up for a five-minute cameo, but his 
appearance is rather supererogatory. And the aforementioned dialogue 
occasionally hits the bullseye, while at other times it hovers over being 
just a little too stilted and campy.
Ultimately, what is so good about "Final Destination" is that, within the 
confines of the slasher genre, writer-director Wong and screenwriters Glen 
Morgan and Jeffrey Reddick have created a premise that has never been seen 
before in this manner, and a film that has the ability to both surprise and 
frighten--two things that are rarely found in today's horror films. If 
anything, it's safe to say you will never ever look at flying in airplanes 
the same way again.

Title
Review for Nurse Betty (2000)
Directed by Neil LaBute.
Cast: Renee Zellweger, Morgan Freeman, Chris Rock, Greg Kinnear, Crispin 
Glover, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Allison Janey, Aaron Eckhart, Kathleen Wilhoite.
2000 - 112 minutes
Rated R (for violence and profanity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, September 9, 2000.
For director Neil LaBute's first two pictures, 1997's "In the Company of the 
Men" and 1998's "Your Friends & Neighbors," he showed an affinity for 
ruthless, acid-minded characters who primarily are only out for the 
well-being of themselves, and no one else. His views of the human condition 
were at once startling, yet grim--bravura looks into the darker corners of 
the world. For LaBute's third effort, "Nurse Betty," he has adapted the 
highly original screenplay by John C. Richards and James Flamberg into a 
motion picture that is as sweet as could possibly be, with the title 
character being one of the most lovable heroines in many a moon. While not 
without a few shocking moments of bloodshed and murder, "Nurse Betty" is a 
profoundly earnest and charming film, not to mention LaBute's strongest, to 
date.
As Betty Sizemore, the lovely Renee Zellweger has found a wonderfully layered 
role that she was undoubtedly born to play. A coffeehouse waitress in Kansas 
who is stuck in a dead-end marriage with her no-good, philandering husband 
Del (Aaron Eckhart), Betty is enamored with the soap opera, "A Reason to 
Love," as well as the strikingly handsome Dr. David Ravell, played by actor 
George McCord (Greg Kinnear), and dreams of going to nursing school. She has 
always wanted to help people, you see, and it wasn't until she got married 
that she found her future grow cloudy and uncertain.
One night, as Betty quietly watches a recording of the day's episode of "A 
Reason to Love," she hears noises out in the living room and eavesdrops on 
Del being threatened by two men, Charlie (Morgan Freeman) and Wesley (Chris 
Rock), hired killers who subsequently scalp and shoot him to death. The 
post-traumatic shock of seeing him getting murdered in cold blood sends Betty 
into a dissociative fugue in which she believes that the characters on "A 
Reason to Love" are real people. So she sets off for the fictional Luna Vista 
Hospital in Los Angeles to find Dr. David Ravell, the man she just knows she 
was meant to be with, in a borrowed 1997 LeSabre that is, unbeknownst to 
Betty, carrying drugs in the trunk. 
After a summer overflowing with special effects-laden disaster pics and 
tiresome big-budget retreads, you can always tell when the Fall movie season 
has arrived with the release of the first great film. "Nurse Betty" is a true 
American original, high-spirited and giddily entertaining, with a potentially 
overblown fantasy of a storyline that, through the assured filmmaking touch 
of LaBute, never strays far from the bounds of realism. The premise may 
appear to be in danger of growing preposterous at any minute, but it never 
does, and you follow the film closely and care about what happens so much 
because of one major factor: the seminally written and performed character of 
Betty.
Mere written praise cannot, and does not, possibly do justice to how very 
good Renee Zellweger is as Betty, but to give you an idea, she was able to 
generate such likability right away that she does something within the first 
five minutes that was so genuinely touching and heartfelt, it nearly caused 
me to tear up. With 2000's "Me, Myself & Irene" and, most prominently, here, 
Zellweger has also proven herself to be quite a funny actress, able to 
generate huge guffaw laughs simply from an expression or the delivery of a 
single line of dialogue. Sorely passed up for an Academy Award nomination for 
her impressive turn in 1996's "Jerry Maguire," Zellweger's time to shine in 
Oscar's glory may finally, and deservedly, have arrived with her brilliantly 
nuanced work in "Nurse Betty."
Also a standout is Morgan Freeman, who hasn't been given such an opportune 
chance to really show his talent as an actor in quite some time. As the 
worn-out romantic Charlie, who is getting ready to retire from the profession 
of being a hired killer and who forms an indirect close bond with Betty, 
Freeman puts his many years of being a performer into his role, successfully 
conveying wisdom and honesty. 
In supporting roles, Chris Rock is surprisingly restrained as Charlie's 
apprentice, Wesley; Aaron Eckhart appears briefly and effectively as the 
loser Del; Crispin Glover and Pruitt Taylor Vince are humorous and 
sweet-natured as two of Betty's friends from Kansas who set out to find her 
themselves; and Greg Kinnear is excellent as the charming Dr. David Ravell 
and the vain, self-important George McCord.
"Nurse Betty" is a masterful human comedy and a sincere drama, as imaginative 
as it is unpredictable. Without giving anything away, the film does not sell 
out and go for the obvious, too-neat conclusion, but stays true to the main 
character and ends the only possible truthful way that it could. "Nurse 
Betty" is a pure heartwarmer from the first frame to the last, an uncynical 
motion picture that proves, yes, dreams surely do come true.

Title
Review for 24 Hour Woman, The (1999)
Directed by Nancy Savoca.
Cast: Rosie Perez, Marianne Jean-Baptiste, Diego Serrano, Wendell Pierce, 
Patti LuPone, Karen Duffy, Aida Turturro.
1999 - 92 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity and brief violence).
Capsule Review, July 27, 1999.
The exquisite characters , tightly-wound stories, and memorable writing that 
usually accompanies films directed by talented indie filmmaker Nancy Savoca 
(1989's "True Love," 1991's "Dogfight") are all but absent in her latest 
comedy-drama, "The 24 Hour Woman." Rosie Perez heads the hit-and-miss film as 
Grace, a rising television talk show producer whose life drastically changes 
when she gets pregnant with her actor husband (Diego Serrano), and ultimately 
becomes overloaded when the baby comes, questioning whether her career or job 
as a parent is more important. Rosie Perez, in one of her more quietly 
restrained and effective roles, is left stranded in a tiresome comedy-drama 
that is not very funny and is often too overwrought to be poignant. If 
anything, the film successfully shows how difficult a job parenting is; 
perhaps too successfully, since watching the non-stop chaos of children 
became overly stressful to me, even as merely a viewer.
    - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
      Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Title
Review for Porky's (1981)
Directed by Bob Clark.
Cast: Dan Monahan, Mark Herrier, Wyatt Knight, Roger Wilson, Kim 
Cattrall, Scott Colomby, Kaki Hunter, Nancy Parsons, Alex Karras, Susan 
Clark.
1981 - 99 minutes.
Rated R (for profanity, nudity, and sex).
Reviewed December 8, 1998.
Well, here's a distasteful, thoroughly amateurish item that, 
surprisingly, was actually a box-office hit at the time of its release. 
After just viewing the film for the first time, my primary question is 
how did anyone with an IQ north of 35 enjoy this movie? It is cheap, 
idiotic, unfunny, and not nearly as raunchy as I had heard it was. At 
least some smut would have livened things up a bit.
"Porky's," tells the story (if you can call it that) of four clueless 
high school buddies, Pee Wee (Dan Monahan), Billy (Mark Herrier), Tommy 
(Wyatt Knight), and Mickey (Roger Wilson), whom desperately want to get 
laid. Women, for the most part, are a mystery to them (and in this 
movie, they are to the audience, as well, since all of them are written 
and acted as if they are aliens from a different planet). Their plan is 
sidetracked, however, when they venture out to a smarmy strip bar named 
Porky's, which they are able to get into using fake ID's. After they pay 
the manager one-hundred bucks for three hookers, they are played a trick 
on and find themselves being dumped into the swamp below the building. 
For these four teenage guys, this means war on Porky's.
"Porky's," ultimately manages to fail on almost every possible level. As 
a teenage sex-romp, it is not wild or amusing enough. As a comedy, all 
of the jokes are predictable and fall flat. As a look back at the 
1950's, it is something, I suspect, most people from that era would want 
to bury deep in a grave. And as a revenge movie, it is a crushing bore.
One of the most offensive things about, "Porky's," is how jaw-droppingly 
inaccurate the film is about teenagers. The four main characters are not 
even attempted to be developed as characters, and we learn very little 
about them, except that they are horny and would probably feel more 
comfortable in a preschool. That sure is revealing information.
The female characters fare even worse under the inaudacious screenplay 
and direction by Bob Clark. The women are all treated as objects or 
comedy props, rather than real people. For example, the two gym 
teachers, Mrs. Balbricker (Nancy Parsons) and Honeywell (Kim Cattrall), 
only have one purpose, and that is to be made fun of. Mrs. Balbricker is 
a gruff, no-holds-barred, overwight woman who will not stand for any 
foolishness, and, in one particularly embarrassing scene for all 
involved, Honeywell has sex with a coach and barks like a dog. There is 
no way to tell if Parsons or Cattrall are servicable actresses (even 
though I have the suspicion they are not), but one thing is for sure: 
they are asked to do things in this film that are not at all funny, only 
humiliating.
To prove how out-of-touch this so-called comedy is, compare it to other 
more serious 80's films about teenagers, and it looks even worse in 
comaprison. Any of the John Hughes pictures, such as 1984's "Sixteen 
Candles," or, 1985's "The Breakfast Club," put, "Porky's," at an even 
greater shame. Those films actually dealt with serious teen matters, but 
remained a great deal funnier, thanks to their bright and truthful 
writing. And heck, if, "Porky's," wanted to be a teenage sex movie, I'd 
take 1982's "Fast Times at Ridgemont High," or 1982's "The Last American 
Virgin," over this any day of the week.
Director Bob Clark is not a bad director. Two years after he made, 
"Porky's," he directed the nostalgic holiday classic, "A Christmas 
Story." I would forgive him for this misfire, in fact, if it wasn't for 
the fact that he also wrote the screenplay. Just the thought that 
someone would actually sit down to write such a piece of garbage, and 
think that it was actually a film worth releasing unto the unsuspecting 
world, is actually a whole lot funnier than anything in, "Porky's."
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Title
Review for Gift, The (2000)
Directed by Sam Raimi.
Cast: Cate Blanchett, Greg Kinnear, Giovanni Ribisi, Katie Holmes, Hilary 
Swank, Keanu Reeves, Kim Dickens, Gary Cole, Michael Jeter, J.K. Simmons, 
Rosemary Harris, Chelcie Ross, John Beasley, Danny Elfman.
2000 - 111 minutes
Rated R (for violence, profanity, sexual situations, and nudity).
Reviewed by Dustin Putman, January 20, 2001.
Gothic murder-mystery yarns are not a new conceit. In fact, they've been 
around in books and on film for many, many years. Without the proper 
handling, they come off as old-fashioned, bland, and outdated. "The Gift," 
directed by Sam Raimi, is a tried-and-true effort that surprises very little, 
and includes everything from a wide array of suspects and red herrings, to 
mansions in the deep south with moss trees out front, to the eventual 
discovery of a waterlogged corpse found in a nearby pond. It's fairly obvious 
who the killer is; in fact, I predicted who it would be before the movie 
began and was correct in my preliminary suspicions. The film ultimately 
shouldn't work, but it does, thanks to a sparkling cast that fills each 
character with so many memorable nuances, the most fun to be had is in simply 
watching the people interact with each other. 
Annie Wilson (Cate Blanchett) is a recently widowed mother of three sons who 
makes her living giving psychic readings to the residents of her backwater 
southern hometown. Some of her mainstay clients include Valerie Barksdale 
(Hilary Swank), who is severely abused by her husband Donnie (Keanu Reeves), 
and Buddy Cole (Giovanni Ribisi), an unstable mechanic who is confused by the 
nightmares he's been having about a mysterious blue diamond that is somehow 
linked to his father. For Annie, she does not give the readings merely for 
money, but uses it as a way of seeking solace in finding the good in 
everyone's future. Her late grandmother (Rosemary Harris) told her as a child 
that it was a gift she was given, and she should always remember that.
When Annie's eldest son is involved in a fight at school, she meets the 
nice-guy school principal, Wayne Collins (Greg Kinnear), whom she finds 
herself attracted to. But Wayne is engaged to the wealthy Jessica King (Katie 
Holmes), whom Annie immediately gets a negative vibe about. At a party with 
her best friend Linda (Kim Dickens), Annie stumbles upon Jessica in a 
compromising position with lawyer David Duncan (Gary Cole). Soon after, 
Jessica has disappeared, leaving everyone in a frenzy over what could have 
possibly happened to her, and Annie starts to have nightmares and apparitions 
linking Jessica with the vicious redneck Donnie Barksdale, and the pond 
behind his home.
"The Gift" may be cliched on a sheer storytelling level, but the performances 
and tight direction from Raimi (who has redeemed himself for his embarrassing 
last film, 1999's "For Love of the Game") lift the picture up several 
notches. Slowly enveloping the viewer into the many intriguing characters and 
their individual plights, the disappearance of Jessica at the 30-minute mark 
divulges the movie's true intentions and transforms the proceedings into a 
taut, at times frightening, horror-mystery.
At the center of the film is the exceptional Cate Blanchett (1999's "The 
Talented Mr. Ripley"), who turns Annie Wilson from what could have been 
little more than a run-of-the-mill protagonist into a very exact, 
down-to-earth, realistic person with valid troubles and a caring attitude 
towards those around her. Blanchett takes the unextraordinary material and 
runs with it, giving the entire film a truly classy aura that it otherwise 
might not have had. We follow her at every turn because she is so 
mesmerizing, both as a character and an actress.
Blanchett isn't the only bright performer, as she is ably supported by one of 
the best casts of the year. In her first role following her Oscar win for 
1999's "Boys Don't Cry," Hilary Swank is excellent as the confused Valerie, 
who seeks guidance from Annie, but is too scared to take her biggest advice 
of all: to leave the grossly abusive Donnie. As Donnie, Keanu Reeves (2000's 
"The Watcher") makes an utterly convincing backwoods meanie, so much so that 
it is difficult to believe he is an actor at all. For the often-criticized 
Reeves, whose acting abilities have never been the best, this is the biggest 
compliment he could possibly get, and it is also one of the better 
performances he has given. Giovanni Ribisi (2000's "The Boiler Room") is 
heartbreaking as a mentally slow young man who sees Annie as his only friend, 
and wants her to do nothing but help him understand why he is being plagued 
by bad dreams about his dad. In the small, but pivotal role of the sleazy 
Jessica King, Katie Holmes (2000's "Wonder Boys") has turned in yet another 
stunning supporting turn. Her promiscuous role of Jessica is one she has 
never played before, and she is radiant in her few scenes. Finally, Kim 
Dickens (2000's "Hollow Man") makes her usual strong impression as Annie's 
spicy best friend, Linda.
The other notable aspect of "The Gift" is its moody atmosphere that lays such 
a thickly foreboding air over every scene it's almost suffocating. Thanks to 
cleverly construed editing by Arthur Coburn and Bob Murawski, and the 
successful use of different eerie sounds effects and a very good music score 
by Christopher Young, the movie not only achieves a scary undercurrent, but 
one that is filled with dread. Helped along by a strong screenplay by Billy 
Bob Thornton and Tom Epperson, which makes the most of its setting and 
delightful cast, "The Gift" is that rarest of thrillers that actually 
thrills, and offers up a fair share of chills, too. It may not be 
groundbreakingly original, but it sure is an entertaining ride for the 
duration of its running time.
   - Copyright 2001 by Dustin Putman
     http://us.imdb.com/ReviewsBy?Dustin+Putman
http://www.atnzone.com

Title
Review for Leila (1996)
Directed by Dariush Mehrjui.
Cast: Leila Hatami, Ali Mosaffa, Jamileh Sheikhi, Amir Pievar, Turan 
Mehrzad, Mohammad Reza Sharifinia, Shaqayeq Farahani.
1999 - 125 minutes 
Opens May 16 at New York's Cinema Village; May 21 in LA).
Iranian; in Farsi with English subtitles.
Not Rated (equivalent of a PG-13 for adult themes).
Reviewed April 19, 1999.
The thought-provoking question of tradition over morals is the subject 
directly at the core of "Leila," a powerfully articulated and subtle 
drama from famous Iranian director Dariush Mehrjui, that is his first 
motion picture in a prosperous thirty-year career to gain U.S. 
distribution, thanks to First Run Features. Although unfamiliar with 
Mehrjui's previous directing efforts, perhaps the reason for this is 
that, while the predicament at hand is no doubt exclusive to its own 
country, the heartbreaking and solely truthful emotions of the 
characters can easily be understood by all viewers.
Set in modern-day Iran, "Leila" begins on the birthday of the title 
character (Leila Hatami), after a brief prologue in which we are shown 
the first encounter between Leila and her future husband, Reza (Ali 
Mosaffa). As Leila and Reza set off to visit his parents, and then hers, 
where a birthday celebration has been planned, things seem rosy for the 
couple on the outside, but for Leila, life isn't quite as sweet. 
Earlier, on that very same day, Leila had gone to see her physician, and 
has ultimately discovered that she holds very little chance of ever 
conceiving a child. When all of the conditions are ruled out, and Leila 
passes up the possibility of adoption, Reza firmly and lovingly tells 
her that he married her, and doesn't care at all about having children. 
Nonetheless, Leila is ashamed that she will never be able to give him a 
baby, which is the societal norm, and her self-esteem is not helped at 
all by her domineering mother-in-law (Jamileh Sheikhi), whose hopes to 
carry on the sacred family name vanishes once hearing the news (Reza is 
her only son). Bluntly explaining to Leila that Reza has always wished 
for children and, in a country where polygamy is an accepted tradition, 
she suggests that he take a second wife to bear a child with. Leila 
hesitantly agrees, and while she and Reza are able to shallowly laugh 
afterwards about the hopeful womens' inadequacies, Reza finally does 
meet a woman whom he claims to like, even though he refuses to go 
through with the marriage if Leila doesn't give her full blessing. 
There are no easy answers to be found within "Leila," a film that 
thoughtfully examines the central character's unfortunate plight, as 
well as the inner workings of Leila herself, told through matter-of-fact 
narration. Almost completely taken over by her own shame, she has no 
option but to agree to her forceful mother-in-law's requests, even 
though she is unsure of how she will react if Reza really does end up 
marrying another woman. Maybe because "Leila" is from Iran, the film 
will unquestionably be shocking for American audiences, since the 
concept of polygamy is looked upon by the characters as a more or less 
everyday occurrence. Leila, however, is unable to come to terms with the 
idea quite as easily, but feels it is her duty to make her husband 
happy, no matter what the circumstances.
One of the strongest aspects of the film is in its portrayal of the 
relationship between Leila and Reza, who married only three months after 
their first meeting, but obviously love each other very deeply. It is 
this relationship that is the key ingredient to making what follows the 
opening scenes all the more powerful, and director Mehrjui has succeeded 
just about as well as possible. Although seemingly unimportant at first 
glance, an early sequence where Leila and Reza are eating dinner and 
both are laughing, nearly uncontrollably, actually is one of the most 
vital moments in the first half, as it unmistakably sets the boundary 
for their unrequisite love for one another. Ditto for another scene in 
which Reza gives Leila a large stuffed animal for her birthday, and then 
reveals a beautiful necklace he has also gotten her. These "small" 
moments are the perfect contrast for the solemn, outraging sequences in 
the latter half, in which Reza drops Leila off at the side of a busy 
road, and then zooms off to go on a date with another woman. Left there 
to ponder her quickly diminishing marriage, foolishly unbeknownst to 
Reza, Leila prays each time that the date will not go well, so she will 
be able to keep her husband to herself for a little while longer. 
Refusing to stay over at her parent's house, the film inevitably leads 
up to the second wedding night between Reza and another woman, and in a 
sequence of extraordinary sorrow and potency, Leila finds her whole 
being emotionally torn apart, as she is closed up in an upstairs bedroom 
as the marriage proceedings are going on down below. Despite her initial 
agreement to such a thing, Leila realizes how much she has been betrayed 
by Reza, whom she believed cared for her as much as she did of him. 
Sure, the whole second marriage was his mother's idea, but if he really 
did believe what he initially had told her about not wanting any 
children, then he could have still easily backed out, couldn't he?
In the pivotal role of Leila, who appears in every scene, Leila Hatami 
is nothing short of remarkable, injecting her character with an equal 
measure of startling strength, unavoidable vulnerability, and utter 
despair. Unlike most American films, in which everything always has to 
be spelled out for audiences, Hatami says much more with just an elusive 
expression on her face than could possibly have been conveyed by words. 
Every bit a perfect match for Hatami is Ali Mosaffa, as Reza, a man who, 
I believe, does hold an unbreakable bond with his wife, but is too naive 
to realize what he will be doing to Leila if he marries someone else.
For all of its strong aspects, "Leila" isn't a perfect film. On a 
technical level, I found many blatant punctiation and spelling mistakes 
within the subtitles that need to be fixed. And concerning the plot 
developments, the final five minutes ring false when compared with 
everything that has come before. Mehrjui's decision to use an extremely 
stylized approach to the ending was the wrong choice, particularly in 
his almost comedic way of wrapping up the character of the spiteful 
mother-in-law, played memorably by Jamileh Sheikhi.
Despite these minor missteps, "Leila" is an important motion picture 
that should definately be sought out upon its limited May 16 release at 
New York's Cinema Village, and then on May 21 in LA. The 
thought-provoking questions that the film deals with is balanced evenly 
with its uneasy morales, and when the climax arrives, Leila's self-worth 
is startlingly stripped away to reveal a victim led into complete 
devastation, to which there is no return. It's difficult to not consider 
how Leila's culminating interior demise could have been so simply 
avoided, had the other characters taken a second out of their own 
selfish lives to consider what Leila, the major pawn in the unforgivable 
scheme, was going through.
     - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
       Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html

Title
Review for Party Camp (1986)
"Party Camp," is one of the most mindnumbingly brainless comedies I've 
seen in awhile.
A late rip-off of the "Meatballs" series, the film follows a group of 
young camp counselors at Camp Chipmunk. That's really about all that can 
be said about the "plot" because nothing much happens, except that the 
main character, wise-cracking Jerry (Andrew Ross), has the hots for a 
cute blonde (Kerry Brennan), and there is a big contest in the climax. 
How fun!
Since, "Party Camp," has practically no screenplay and there is no 
talent at all involved, the least the makers could have done was make it 
raunchy and exploitative. It's not that I think exploitation is 
necessarily a good quality, but when you are talking about a dull turkey 
like this, the least that could have been done would be to fill it with 
a lot of mindless sex. Even a psychopathic slasher at the camp would 
have done the trick. At least, then, it wouldn't have been such a chore 
to sit through.
Never before have I seen so many jokes fall astoundingly flat. The 
comedy was easy to spot, but it wasn't the least bit funny. It was 
groan-inducing. Constantly throghout, I was asking myself if director 
Gary Graver actually thought this movie was worth anything.
So what saves, "Party Camp," from the dreaded zero star rating? Well, 
that's simple: Jewel Shepard, as a flighty bimbo, was admittedly fun to 
watch. Although nothing could have saved this film from the lowest 
depths of motion picture trash, at least if the film had centered on 
Shepard, she might have been able to add a little spice to an otherwise 
rancid, low-budget teen comedy. 
      - Copyright 1999 by Dustin Putman
        Http://hometown.aol.com/FilmFan16/index.html
