Authors
Michael K. Ellis
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Far and Away (1992)
     This is a mini-review.  If you are looking for a short capsule
summary, you should look in some of the other reviews of FAR AND AWAY
posted here.  My review is meant as a contrast to the favorable reviews
posted here so far.  My advice is to avoid this movie like the plague.
     I don't understand why FAR AND AWAY has received so many good
reviews.  It's possible I didn't see the same film that everyone else
saw, since I can't really understand why anyone would *like* this film,
much less recommend it to anyone else.  The problem is, Ron Howard has
made a romantic film very much in the tradition of the romantic films of
the 1930s and 1940s.  It has a very broad, sweeping theme anchored (and
I do mean anchored, as in sinking quickly) by a love story.  The best
example of this is probably GONE WITH THE WIND.  The major problem with
FAR AND AWAY is that all the elements you would have found spread out
over several of those movies in the 30's and 40's are contained in the
movie.  It's so busy going from cliche to cliche that it misses out on
some very interesting subplots, all of which are far more engrossing
than the romance between Cruise and Kidman.
     I suspected something was very, *very* wrong with this movie when
it started out with the father being brought home dead by his good
friend, the town drunk.  That's right, the first thing this movie does
is play right into the old 'Irish sot' stereotype.  Now, stereotypes can
either be funny (like much of WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP) or they can be
pathetic.  This was, to my mind, pathetic, and it didn't really get any
better from there.  Cruise, in his attempt to kill his landlord, falls
head in love with the landlord's daughter (Kidman), and we're off on the
road of cliches, including the dastardly love interest, the unlikely
romantic relationship between Cruise and Kidman, the voyage to the new
world, the long process of getting to know each other, the injury, the
return, the separation, and the whole rest of the mess.  There was
nothing new about this movie, there wasn't even a fresh reworking of the
story.  About the only thing missing was Kidman's character being tied
to the train tracks (or a log in a sawmill) by the dastardly love
interest.  And let's examine the dialogue.  "Now we can go out and get
the land of your dreams, and we can finally be married, Shannon."  I
forget what company has been making commercials with the "widows and
orphans" scenes straight out of old line movies, but those weren't any
more cornball than this.  As for the ending, it was without a doubt the
*worst* final scene I have ever had the displeasure of viewing in any
movie I've ever seen.
     So, did the movie have any redeeming values?  Yes.  The scenery was
gorgeous, and both the social situation of the Irish in Boston and the
great land rush rang dead on true to me (although both were a little on
the romantic side).  The bare-knuckle boxing scenes were, in their own
way, more graphic and powerful than the boxing in any of the ROCKY
movies after the first one.  I have no idea how they filmed that without
someone getting badly injured.  The same goes for the land race, which
was, after the buffalo hunt in DANCES WITH WOLVES, the most incredible
bit of re-creation I've seen.  If the movie had stayed with *these*
types of scenes and subplots, rather than the inane and cliched
Cruise-Kidman relationship, I would have considered my admission price
(matinee, mind you) well spent.
     I should say one other thing about this movie.  There is nothing
unobjectionable about this movie, in a "moral" sense.  It has (minimal)
swearing, no sex, and no "unwholesome" scenes.  I've seen Disney
cartoons that were more controversial than this film.  For that reason
alone I expect it will end up cleaning up at the box office.  If there
was ever a movie made for the "moral middle-class" of America, assuming
such a thing ever existed, this was it.  Dan Quayle recently made a
comment about "elite" society and "the rest of us."  Well, I don't know
how many "rest of us" there are for Quayle to hang with, but I'd bet
they all love this movie, and take their kids to see it.  I'd rather sit
through something with more intellectual content than a soap bubble,
thanks.
     On the -4 to +4 scale, I rate this a -2.  I'll give it some credit for
the subplots, but the movie itself is a mess.  Go see it if someone
gives you a pass for it free, and concentrate on the pretty scenery.
Don't bother waiting for video, either.  The only reason to see this
movie at all is so you can be blown away by that scenery, and it will be
much diminished when it moves to video, robbing this film of whatever
character it has now.
