Authors
Bert Gene
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
Tagline: "Witness the Resurrection (of another bad Alien sequel)"
Not learning much from the lesson of letting a Frenchman make a sci-fi film
after $80 million disaster THE FIFTH ELEMENT, Twentieth Century Fox once
again hires Luc Besson to destroy yet what could've been another science
fiction classic, the $70 million ALIEN RESURRECTION.  At least they saved
about $10 million this time around.   In order to payback its hefty budget,
the fourth installment of the formerly popular series attempts to resurrect
not only Sigourney but also the elements of the first two films that made
the franchise a critical and financial success. Granted, the heavy-duty
action of ALIENS and the claustrophobic terror of the original ALIEN are
present in RESURRECTION.  They even throw in an obligatory butt
scene--reminiscent of that of Sigourney's near the end ALIEN--with Kim
Flowers plump backside bulging out of a pair of g-string undies as Michael
Dudikoff massages her feet.  However, despite all of these appealing
familiarities,  it's ultimately the French element sprinkled in by Besson
that spoils the ingredient for this sequel for its American audience.  
Sigourney Weaver (most noted in GORILLA IN THE CLOUDS, THE ICE PIRATES)
once again returns to her role as Probation Officer Ellen Ripley, but this
time she's a whacked out, smartass cloned version of her former self who,
20 years previously, heroically leaped to her death in ALIEN 3.  Joining
her along for the adventure is humanitarian android named Call, played by
Winona Judd (BEETLEJUICE, HEATHERS).  Also, in minor supporting roles are
Ron Perlman as the big gorilla-type bully Johner, Dominic Pinon as the
horizontally challenged Vriess, Stephen Dorff as the mad geneticist Dr.
Guinan, Dan Hyhena as the goofball General Perez, J.E. Freeman as
untrustworthy Dr. Wren, Michael Dudikoff as toad-caught-in-this-throat
Elgyn, John Leguizamo as serious officer DiStephano, and Kim Flowers as the
"other" tough female ball buster Hillary.  This is pretty much the extent
with which the supporting characters are developed before becoming dinner
for the aliens.
As for the story, Ripley and Call soon find themselves along with rest of
the space pirates bunched up against a crowed of loose, DNA enhanced aliens
that wreck havoc onboard ship called the Algeria.  Because Ripley herself
is half-alien and missing a few human brain cells, the
pirates--particularly Call--are reluctant to form an alliance with this
alien ball buster.  Once they figure out that they have no chance to win
the "cat and mouse" game with the aliens, they all get behind Ripley as she
rips the shit out of the slimy acid beings and leads them back to their
ship that's docked inside the Algeria before they crash on Earth.
Although the concept may sound interesting, the story seems to get lost in
its confusion on exactly what type of film it's suppose to be.  Here comes
the problem of Besson who seems to want to try to impose his Frenchie artsy
style on his latest interpretation of the American series.  (Did we see
Cameron impose this Australian culture and values in the classic ALIENS?) 
Self-indulgent  Besson casts two of his stock French actors Ron Perlman and
Dominic Pinon from CHILDREN OF THE LOST CITY as two contrived weirdo
characters who are more fitting in some bizarre independent art film than a
sci-fi action flick.  Who wants to see some big asinine ogre and a crippled
midget with a speech impediment trying to resolve their sexual tensions
through petty bickering for the entire film? (And you thought the
heterosexual black gay guy was weird and annoying in THE FIFTH ELEMENT.) 
Besson figures that if he just makes his characters odd, it automatically
develops them.  With his attention focused on his odd French characters,
the director pretty much ignores the other supporting characters which end
up going to waste.  For example, with the comic ingenuity of John
Leguizamo, imagine how Besson could've made DiStephano more interesting and
funny.  But instead, we are forced to see Leguizamo suffer as he plays his
character straight... into boredom.
In addition, Besson has to incorporate his kinky French sensibility of sex
into the film.  Ripley, in one scene, is sucked into some gooey bio-matter
and does some soft porn antics with one of the aliens which the director
attempts to sexualize through fade ins and outs.  From what I can gather,
the aliens seem to prefer the traditional missionary position.  Hence, this
brings up the question: Is Ripley a Catholic?   The director never explores
this possibility and leaves yet another possible moment of character
development behind.  At this point, Besson rather subjects us with graphic
details of the alien queen giving birth to an albino mutant alien out of
her new human-like womb which is much more grotesque than those explicit
health videos that  you're forced to watch in the 10th grade.  And yes, it
does get worse when we see the new albino mutant progeny French-kiss Ripley
with its eight foot long tongue.  Did I forget to mention that these aliens
also ooze lots of bodily fluids out of their mouths onto the humans as
well?  YUCK!!!
Due to the director's incompetence, the story never grows beyond the gross
visual spectacles.  And the characters are more like mannequins, acting as
mere decorations to the film.  In particular, Call had some potential in
becoming interesting, but she ends up not doing much for the film except
looking good.  Winona Judd never seems to quite fit into the role and looks
out of place especially during the chaotic action sequences.   Her sister
Ashley Judd would've faired much better in the role, especially after
audiences got to see her as the "I'm no victim" kickboxer/doctor in last
fall's  KISS THE GIRLS with Morgan Freeman.  Maybe Winona should go back to
her former  singing career and leave the acting talents with her much
better-looking sister.
In all, ALIEN RESURRECTION gets lost is its artsy visual spectacle, leaving
us with a unexplored story with lots of unresolved holes and bodybags of
empty characters.  Hopefully by the time Alien 5 is made, the studio and
producers will understand that a good script, not an expensive budget, big
stars, and a foreign director with a keen eye, is the secret magic in
making a good sequel.
Reviewman  "I give it a clap and a couple yawns"  (Out of four claps)
Starring 
Sigourney Weaver......Ripley Clone 8
Winona Judd...............Annalee Call
Ron Perlman..............Johner
Dominic Pinon............Vriess
Stephen Dorff.............Dr. Guinan
J.E. Freeman..............Dr. Wren
Michael Dudikoff.........Elgyn 
Gary Dourdan.............Christie
Leland Orser...............Purvis
Dan Hyhena................General Perez
John Leguizamo..........DiStephano
Kim Flowers................Hillary

Title
Review for Scream 2 (1997)
tag line: "Someone (could it be the producers?) has taken their love for
Sequels too far" 
The much over-hyped Scream 2--directed by horror-veteran Wes Cavern (first
known for his Halloween films) and written by the industry's latest hip
screenwriter Kevin Smith---exemplifies the latest tastelessness and greed
of Hollywood franchise movie-making in unrelenting pursuit of the ole
mighty dollar by hitting its Gen-X viewers over the head with its bag of
tired plot twists and hollow characters. For a couple of film makers known
for having a track record for "getting it" in terms of knowing what the
audience expects, Scream 2 shows that Cavern and Smith do NOT definitely
"get it" this time around. 
This "must see sequel" begins with the sneak preview of "Stab" with Maureen
McCormick (Jada Pinkett of Facts of Life) and Phil Stevens (Cuba Gooding
Jr.of Jerry Maguire) bitching about how long the damn line is. At one
point, smart-mouth Jada does well to sum up the mood of most of the
viewers, "I don't wanna see some dumbass white movie about some dumbass
white girl being chased by some dumbass killer." For me personally, I don't
wanna see a dumbass movie of any dumbass nationality period! 
They finally get inside the theater where we constantly cut to scenes of
"Stab" which is just a poor excuse to use clips from the original movie
Scream. This is just a lame gimmick for the studios to save a buck, last
seen in Back to the Future Part 2 where they used numerous footage from the
original movie. 
However, one difference is that they unsuccessfully attempted to disguise
this trick through today's technological advancement in visual effects.
What they do is they CGI the new faces over the original actors face. For
instance, Tori Spelling (of Melrose Place) is morphed over Neve Campbell
(of Party of Five) in the role of Sidney for the movie "Stab." Last time I
checked CGI is pretty expensive...what was Miramax thinking? Did they watch
too many Robert Zemeckis flicks?...this explains the the Back to the Future
Part 2 influence. 
The smarter thing to do would've been the old fashion method...hire NEW
ACTORS to play the roles! But again why would Tori Spelling be stupid
enough to accept a part in this sequel when she was the main butt of jokes
in the original. Tori would be the last to wanna play some dumbass white
girl in this movie. No wonder they had to CGI Tori for this film. 
Not only does this CGI scheme backfire the studio's plan to save money, but
it also just plain insults the audience's intelligence...what idiot would
not notice the horrible cheesy CGI effects?! Everyone knows Tori does not
look that grotesque on the big screen. Last time I've check, Tori was a
blond bombshell, not some sagging bleached brunnette. 
Anyways back to the story...if there is one. Returning in the sequel are
the survivors of the first original horrid horror film: hapless idiot
Sidney (Neve Campbell), superbitch reporter Gale (Courtney Love),
video-geek Randy (Jamie Kennedy), OJ wannabe Cotton (Liev Taylor) and
asinine security guard Dewey (David Arquette). 
Also joining them are a crop new stabbing victims up for Ghostface's
picking. They are Sarah Jessica Gellar (Buffy the Vampire Slayer), Jerry
O'Connel (Stand By Me, Star Trek), Elise Neal (A Different World), and
Laurie Metcalf (Roseanne). These characters are never really developed and
just are brainless cattle that add to the sequels higher bodycount. 
And for the plot? Well, being too stupid to take a relaxing trip to Europe,
Sidney and the rest of them decide to go to college where there's nothing
more like calculus homework to soothe one from the emotional trauma of
being almost butchered the previous year. 
As soon as the copy cat killer makes its presence known on campus, the
movie shoves its copy cat script of the original up the audience's naive
ass. Instead of a bunch of superficial high schoolers, the movie sets its
havoc amongst superficial sorority gals and fraternity brats whose lives
are already complicated enough with big problems such as finding kegs,
eating pizza, and getting laid. (Lots of change between high school and
college hey?) These characters get so much of the audience's sympathy that
when one is killed by Spookface, yawns from the audience fill the theater
with a great sense of loss (...of attention that is). 
Moreover, the sequel constantly backfires on itself by the way it continues
to unintentionally remind the audience of how awful the movie is. In
particular, at one point we watch a scene with a bunch of uptight film
students discussing how awful sequels are compared to its predecessor. Was
the writer and director too oblivious to see this inside joke that we the
audience chuckled at? Why in the hell would you keep reminding an audience
that's watching a sequel that sequels suck? That's like Taco Bell telling
its customers to their face that the burritos they're eating will give them
diarrhea. 
To avoid being castrated by the latest Scream fanatic, I won't reveal
details of who gets killed and what happens. You'll just have to waste the
7 bucks yourself to find out. 
One thing I can tell is that you don't have to be a psychic to figure that
there's gonna be a part 3 sometime in the near future. 
An Idea for Kevin Smith: In "Scream 3," the killers behind the masks are a
fat, four-eyes movie critic and his boney-ass bald partner, trying to
discredit horror movies so they won't have to sit through anymore and then
get their heads shot by Sidney so regular folks don't have to listen their
bitchy and moaning critiques anymore either. 
I hope one day Kevin goes back to making witty twenty-something films
instead of writing worthless horror trash. 
