Authors
Larry McGillicuddy
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
*** (out of 4)
Directed by Joel Schumacher
Starring George Clooney, Arnold Schwarzeneggar, Chris O'
Donnell, Uma Thurman, Alicia Silverstone, Michael Gough
This 4th installment of the immensely popular movie
series is not as good as the original, but far better than
both of the sequels. It boasts great FX, good chemistry
between the leads, and two outstanding villains. I don;t
understand why people are proclaiming it to be so horrible.
I admit that it's not very intelligent, but it is more
visually impressive then the overrated 5th Element, and we
don't have to suffer through Chris Tucker's performance in
that movie.
The film gets started right away with an exciting opening
sequence (at last, no drawn out, lengthy introductions to
the villains) where Batman and Robin try to stop Mr. Freeze
from stealing a valuable diamond. Right off the bat (no pun
intended) Clooney shows he is a far more interesting Batman
than the dull, miscast Val Kilmer was. He's no Michael
Keaton, but he acquits himself nicely.
Later we learn that Mr. Freeze is a doctor who was trying to
revive his wife, and accidentally froze himself. There are
some great shots of Freeze looking sadly at his wife. Arnold
is an underrated actor, and he pulls these scenes off.
Uma Thurman is even better as Poison Ivy, a botanist who is
angry at the destruction humans cause to the earth. This is
keeping in with the Batman villain introduction, but it is
far less lengthy and annoying as The Penguin or Catwoman in
Batman Returns. Uma has a great deal of fun with the role,
and deliciously overplays every scene.
Once again, Gotham city is a wondrous creation. The visuals
are even better than in the other films, and many of the set
pieces are fun and exciting. The chemistry between Clooney
and O' Donnell is very impressive for two actors who have
never worked together before. Alicia Silverstone, as Batgirl
doesn't match up well to the other performers, but she
really isn't given much to work with, except for a fun fight
scene with Poison Ivy. People like Elle MacPherson and
Vivica A. Fox have roles so small, inconsequential, and dull
that they shouldve been left on the cutting room floor.
I'm not going to try and convince you Batman and Robin is a
great, or even good movie. But it's not nearly as bad as
most of my peers are making it out to be. It's a good piece
of eye candy; exciting, fun, and over before you realize how
dumb it is.

Title
Review for My Best Friend's Wedding (1997)
Former lovers Julianne and Michael once made a pact that    
when they turned 28, if neither had found someone else, then
they would marry each other. Three weeks before the deadline
he calls Julianne and tells her he's getting married, to    
someone else. She is obviously upset by this, but agrees to 
attend the 4 day wedding party in Chicago so she can have a 
chance at fouling up the wedding.                           
Cameron Diaz plays Kimmy, Michael's fiance who immediately  
asks Julianne to be her maid of honor. As it turns out,     
Kimmy is more resourceful than Julianne imagined. An attempt
early in the movie to embarass her in a karaoke bar         
completely backfires, as Kimmy ends up singing to a cheering
audience. This is more than just an extraneous third        
haracter that you get in most love triangle romantic        
comedies. Diaz invests her character with so much energy,   
cheerfulness, and innocence that you just want to leap      
through the screen and give her a hug.                      

Title
Review for Nowhere (1997)
1/2* (out of 4)
Directed by Greg Arraki
Starring James Duval, Rachel True, Kathleen Robertson, Ryan Phillippe,
 Sarah Lassez, Christina Applegate
Gregg Araki's The Doom Generation was possibly the very worst film 
ever made. So why did I see his latest teen bisexual angst opus? 
First of all, some of the reviews were fairly positive. Also, the 
cast, consisting of cameos from dozens of washed up ex tv stars 
(including Christopher Knight, Eve Plumb, Shannen Doherty, and David 
Leisure) was promising. Last of all, I wanted to give Arraki one more 
chance. I mean, the guy can't be THAT untalented, can he? The answer 
to that question is three letters long.
Nowhere follows the character Dark on his wild and odd journey 
through Los Angeles. Since Arraki doesn't know how to make anything 
coherent, it's hard to describe the plot. Let's just say that Dark 
spends the bulk of the movie whining that his girlfriend won't make a 
commitment to him and jealous because she sleeps around with other 
guys and girls. The only remotely compelling storyline involves Sarah 
Lassez as a teen who has a chance encounter with a famous tv star. He 
turns out to be a nice guy who doesn't care for fame and wishes he 
could walk down the street without being mobbed by fans. This story 
has a shocking twist and a tragic end that I did not see coming. It 
is the first time I ever felt any compassion for a character created 
by Arraki, and this can be attributed to the appealing performance of 
Lassez.
I thought maybe Arraki was improving in his craft. He works better 
with the camera this time around, especially in the early scenes. 
Halfway through the film, I didn't necessarily find myself enjoying 
the film, but it seemed like a considerable improvement on The Doom 
Generation. Then as the movie went on, Arraki loses all sensibility 
and introduces us to exploding heads, twisted sex games, and alien 
abductions. It's sad, because he almost actually had some decent 
material here, but he ruined it with his usual in your face "I'm such 
a renegade maverick filmmaker, look what I can do" attitude.
The performances are generally better than in The Doom Generation, 
which isn't saying much. At least we don't have to suffer Jonathan "I 
am the most hideous man in America" Schaech. We are, however treated 
to another round of James "I'm more wooden than Keanu" Duval. Sarah 
Lassez gives the best performance in the film, and Kathleen Robertson 
(formerly of 90210 and now Arraki's wife) and Rachel True are 
talented actresses caught up in this mess. Of the tv star cameos, 
John Ritter is the most interesting as a deranged right wing tv 
evangelist.
If I prefer Nowhere to The Doom Generation, it is only in the way 
that I would prefer being assassinated than receive constant physical 
torture. Maybe Greg Arraki doesn't want you to like his characters. 
Maybe he wants to laugh and make fun of those of us who try to care 
about them. Maybe he just wanted to piss me off. If so, he was 
successful.

Title
Review for Kicking and Screaming (1995)
**** (out of 4)
Directed by Noah Baumbach
Starring Josh Hamilton, Olivia D' Abo, Chris Eigeman, Eric Stoltz, 
Carlos Jacott, Parker Posey, Jason Wiles, Cara Buono, Elliott Gould
"The prose is like the bastard child of Raymond Carver", one 
character in a literary class says. You would think a character with 
such a great line would be a main character in the movie. However, he 
is a nameless character, and never shows up or says anything else for 
the rest of the film.  This line is spoken about halfway through 
Kicking and Screaming, during a flashback scene demonstrating the 
first time two of the characters met. There are several lines like 
this in the scene, also said by nameless people, as they discuss how 
a short story has a "1,000 years of solitude bend to it", and is 
written in "that pseudo russian novel ilk." The professor says no 
dialogue, but conveys a character that is simultaneously proud and 
condescending of his students. All of this happens before the scene 
even gets to it's purpose, which is showing the first time Grover and 
Jane met each other. Noah Baumbach is interested in details. Baumbach 
gives us a vivid background so his characters can exist and interact 
in the rea
 world, amongst extras who say real dialogue and have real facial 
expressions. He starts with a beautiful canvas, and onto it he paints 
one of the most memorable stories ever told with a camera.
Kicking and Screaming opens as it's main characters have just 
graduated from college. In one brilliant extended scene, a college 
graduation party, we learn more about the characters and their 
relationships than most movies tell us in 2 hours. Grover is a 
stubborn individual who doesn't accept change. So when his girlfriend 
Jane tells him she has received a scholarship to Prague, he decides 
to stick with his plan of living in Brooklyn.  Max is a bitter man 
who uses sarcasm to hide his true fears of having a meaningless 
existence in this world. Otis is an intelligent but odd character 
with strange habits like wearing a pajama tops underneath his suit.  
Skippy is their naive friend whose girlfriend Miami adores him the 
way you adore a puppy. 
The movie focuses mainly on the relationship between Grover and Jane. 
After the breakup, Grover tries to live on, but his attempt to do so 
is challenged as Jane constantly leaves messages on his answering 
machine. She speaks in a sad, desperate voice, afraid that Grover has 
forgotten about her. He just stands there emotionless and listens, 
and cuts the answering machine off before she says something that 
will make him pick up the phone. The movie intercuts these scenes 
with flashbacks that show the beginning of their relationship, 
including their argument in the literary class, and subsequent 
encounters in coffeehouses and bars as they begin to confide in one 
another. Grover and Jane are confused and nervous as they learn about 
each other and begin to fall in love. Rarely before has chemistry 
been so evident in a movie.
Max spends his time sitting at home trying to find something to do. 
Usually he ends up singing songs inspired by household items, filling 
out the crossword puzzle, or berating himself in the mirror because 
he "does nothing." This maudlin existence is interrupted when he 
meets Kate, Grover's 16 year old tutee. She is an intelligent beyond 
her years, no nonsense teenager. She doesn't take sarcastic rants, 
from him or from anybody else. He responds to that. He's finally 
found someone who won't take his crap and he likes it.
Otis has majored in mechanical engineering and is supposed to go to 
graduate school in Milwaukee. At the last minute he decides not to go 
and delays his admission. He spends the year working in a video store 
with the most ridiculous categories fo rit's movies (terminal illness,
 dog-buddy pictures, interesting failures). This is the weakest part 
of the movie I think, because it is played too broadly. It's 
basically making fun of Blockbuster and other big video chains, and 
while much of this is really funny, I think it belongs in a different 
movie.
In a similar situation as Otis is Skippy, who re-enrolls in college 
to stay near Miami, who was a year behind him. Skippy has the habit 
of saying inappropriate things at the wrong time, and stating the 
grotesquely obvious followed by "if you know what I mean."  
Late in the film, Grover sees something and actually gets a 
spontaneous idea. He tries to talk himself out of it, but can't 
resist. He runs up to a counter, but someone prevents from achieving 
his goal. In a heartfelt monologue filled with confused anger, 
apologetic sorrow, and inspired pleas, he begs this person to allow 
him to accomplish this. It's something he has to do. It will be a 
great moment in his life, and it would be criminal for anyone to 
prevent him from doing it. His speech is convincing, and she pulls 
some strings to allow it to happen. He is elated. He finally did it. 
No more giving up and letting things be. Unfortunately, he is missing 
an item necessary for his quest, and is turned away at the last 
minute. He can do this tomorrow, but that's 24 more hours for him to 
talk himself out of it. Will the enthusiasm still be there?
The constant theme in Kicking in Screaming is that these characters 
are afraid to move on with life after college. They don't know 
anything else except staying together, and are afraid of what the 
outside world has to offer them. Grover refuses to move with Jane to 
Prague, Max stays at home doing the crossworld puzzle, Otis defers 
admission to grad school, and Skippy re-enrolls to stay near Miami. 
Each of them is afraid of the challenges life is offering them. 
Probably the most admirable thing about Kicking and Screaming is that 
it has answers for some of the characters, but others it does not. 
For some it will take them longer to figure out what their purpose in 
the real world will be. Or maybe they will end up like Chet, the 
local bartender who has been going to college for 10 years because 
that's what he does in life.
Baumbach has assembled a brilliant ensemble of first-rate character 
actors, all perfectly suited for their parts. Hamilton and D'Abo find 
the perfect notes in their scenes together, as they speak with lumps 
in their throats while falling in love. Carlos Jacott gives one of 
the funniest deadpan performances in recent memory as Otis, and Eric 
Stoltz adds another great character to his resume as Chet. Eigeman, 
whose Max is similar to characters he essayed in Metropolitan and 
Barcelona, is perfectly cast and Jason Wiles perfectly captures the 
endearing lost puppy quality of Skippy that Posey's Miami finds so 
attractive. Also showing up in a memorable cameo is Elliott Gould as 
Grover's father, a sad-eyed man who has not recovered from his 
separation with his wife, and whose relationship with his son 
primarily exists of talking about New York Knick games.
Noah Baumbach is a master of meaningful and relevant dialogue. Every 
line, wether spoken by a main character or an extra makes sense. He 
is also a master with the camera, as his freeze frame introduction 
into the flashback scenes gives them a poignant, bittersweet feel. 
This is his first movie and he has already mastered filmmaking at 
every single level. It is an experience I will never forget. Ten 
years from now, people will talk about the debut movie of the 
greatest filmmaker in America, and they will call it Kicking and 
Screaming.
