Authors
Jeff Foehringer
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
Cast: Tom Cruse, Nicole Kidman, Sidney Pollack
Screenplay: Stanley Kubrick, Frederic Raphael
(based on the novel "Traumnovelle"  by Arthur Schnitzler)
Produced and Directed: Stanley Kubrick
      The most frequently mentioned aspect of this movie has been the fact
that it is Stanley Kubric's last film.   We have heard it called 'Kubricks
final masterpiece' so often that it is east to forget that this is totally
irrelevant to the quality of the movie.  Kubrick did not plan to die after
the filming, so it's not likely that he looked at this film as a finale
statement of any sort, a grand summery of everything he felt and knew about
filmmaking.    Most likely, he thought he had one or two more films in him,
as did most of us.  And had he survived to make a few more movies, "Eyes
Wide Shut" would probably be remembered as one of his lesser works, a great
director making a highly idiosyncratic choice of scripts, rather than as a
final masterpiece.
    Kubrick  is in top form as a director and story-teller in EWS.
But this is ultimately the film's only redeeming quality.   The script, both
story and dialog, is trite and contrived.   There were at least a dozen
times I knew exactly what the next line would be and the plot held no
surprises or revelations.  In the hands of any other director, and probably
without the star power of Cruse and Kidman, EWS would have come across as
another lame adventure in sexual psychobabble.
     We start of being introduced to Kidman's butt.   Cruse plays a doctor
and Kidman his unemployed art-dealer wife, living an expensive Park Avenue
life.  They attend a dinner party held by Pollack, where they both spend
time flirting with other people, both obviously thinking the other won't see
or mind.  Kidman's scenes are the more important here.  She gets tipsy and
dances with a slimy rich Hungarian who gives her his philosophy on marriage
as he tries to seduce her.
This sets up for a conversation later at home when the couple gets high as a
prelude to lovemaking.   Here the scripts starts to fall down as Kidman's
character mentions her flirting and tries to start a fight when Cruse says
it would be understandable that a man might try to seduce her.  The rest of
the scene follows a pattern of nothing he says is going to be the right
thing, and comes across as contrived as Kidman seems to do her best to start
a fight about nothing.   The failure of this scene is the most unforgivable
in the film, as the main purpose for the exchange is for Kidman to tell him
about an incident where she almost slept with another man and had for a
moment been willing to sacrifice her marriage for a one-night stand.  His
confidence in his wife's sense of emotional monogamy shaken, Cruse sets off
an what will become a sexual odyssey into the underside of sex that Cruse's
character was only vaguely aware existed.
   Cruse's odyssey is beset not only with unforeseeable temptations, it is
beset with coincidences which the story relies on for froward motion.  Just
as Cruse is recoiling form his wife's confession, he is called to the
bedside of a friend and patient who died and whose daughter Cruse needs to
console.   The daughter confesses her love for him and tries to seduce him,
but Cruse is rescued from temptation as her fiancée arrives.   Later Cruse
drops in to a nightclub where an old classmate is playing piano.  And the
old friend just happens to mention a sex party where he plays background
music.  Cruse of course gets him to reveal the location and secret password.
An earlier encounter with a hooker who comes on to Cruse is believable
enough, but again he is rescued at the last by a call
on his cell phone from his wife.  Cruse comes to his senses and leaves the
prostitute's apartment.
   Even at the masked sex party, Cruse is saved form committing adultery as
he is persuaded to leave by some one who know him and warns him he has been
detected.  Later, he is rescued from complication of his being at the party
when it turn out that a close friend of his was there under on of the masks.
     The constant coincidences are further marred by cliched lines or
situations.  At most turns of the movie, I could just feel what was going to
happen or be said next.
      Kubrick certainly put all of his skills and talents as a filmmaker
into telling us this story.  His trademark shots and scene placements
continue to give a you-are -there feel to the story.  We can feel the menace
as Cruse walks into the costumed sex party, which is part religious rite,
part theater, and certainly becomes an orgy.   The film is visually
beautiful and as always, Kubric has chosen his background music effectively.
But for me, one of the effects of all the artistic work in direction and
lighting is that the film almost takes itself too seriously for such a weak
script.
   Of the much argued placement of digital figures to cover up
the genitals of couples in the orgy, it is not something one would notice
unless you knew about it before-hand, and no real detriment to the film
unless you absolutely have to see penis-vagina contact to enjoy your films.
I do not fault Kubrick for putting them in his original cut as the scenes
both artful and chilling.  But I don't think the European audiences who will
see the film  unaltered are really getting that much more for their money.
   The cynic in me is now starting to believe that the secrecy and rumors
surrounding the film's release were done intentionally to hide the fact that
the story is so lacking.  There is practically nothing about this film that
needs to be kept secret.  Most likely, the secrecy was a marketing ploy.  I
almost wish that the rumors of Cruse and Kidman having sex on screen (they
don't)
Cruse wearing a dress (he doesn't) or Kidman shooting up heroin (she smokes
pot)  were true.  This would probably made for a much more interesting film.
    In short, this film is for Kubrick fanatics only.

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
The new Austin Powers film continues a movie tradition begun in the
eighties.   Produce something, anything, that will get the high school and
junior high kids in the theater because they
buy more soda and popcorn than senior citizens.  The usual hallmarks of this
filmmaking tradition are all here.  Gross humor, sex jokes, silly sight
gags, more sex jokes.   And the film is a strong contender in the current
race to be cruder, grosser and more outrageous than that last film.    What
the film is not, however, is funny.
The plot centers around the return of Dr.Evil, who goes back in time
to steal Austin Powers' mojo (a liquid with red stuff in it extracted from
Austin's pelvis) which gives Austin his
sexual prowess and the charisma to defeat his enemies.
Austin must go after him, and returns to the swinging sixties
where free love and sexy secret agents had their heyday.
I almost avoided this film because I did not like the original.   But
the films premise sounded like an excellent comic vehicle and the film
received many good reviews.  I wish I had stuck to my first impression.
Myers is trying to be the Jerry Lewis of this generation.   And he
has the talent to do it, at least as an actor.  But the material he is
working with here, much of it his own, falls short of anything resembling
comic genius.  This movie tries to carry the day with sight gags about
drinking distilled feces, a five-hundred-pound fat man's butt crack, and a
barrage of sex jokes
aimed at the level of the average 15 year old.  After some of these scenes,
one has to wonder how gross the next generation of films will have to go to
get an audiences attention.
The direction also helps the film achieve a new low point in cinematic
humor.  For the most part, I felt as if I was watching a Saturday morning
chalderns live action TV show.   There is no sense of comic timing or
subtlety.  The director just throws the material at us, giving us nothing
except the hope that anyone with a camera could be a film director.
I am sure the film will have appeal to many of the under 22 crowd, at
least the one's who have yet to discover literacy.  Certainly the movie is
directed towards the generation that prefers everything described as 'in
your face,  kick you in the teeth, take no prisoners, (action-verb +blah
blah blah).'
   If you see the film and you find you're not laughing, there is nothing
wrong with you.  It just means you grew up since seventh grade.
