Authors
Nicholas Amado
Number of Reviews
16

Title
Review for Truman Show, The (1998)
Starring: Jim Carrey, Laura Linney, Noah Emmerich, Holland Taylor and Ed Harris
The 1998 Summer Movie Season is still in its infancy. But after
diasappointing films such as "Godzilla" and "Fear And Loathing In Las
Vegas", it would be nice to see a really good film. But I doubt you
could have expected this.
The Truman show is one of the most unique films I have ever seen, and
it deserves a spot on the "Decade's Best" list. There is no way to
isolate any single component of this picture and proclaim, "Yes,
THAT'S what makes this film great." The blend of Peter Weir's
masterful (and in many ways brilliant) direction, Peter Biziou's
stunning photography and Jim Carrey's performance is what makes this
film work so fantastically.
There is something strangely beautiful about every shot in The Truman
Show. It may be the use of color or the placement of characters in the
frame, but everything about this film looks intentional and perfect.
Carrey has made a very wise choice. By playing mild-mannered Truman
Burbank, he allows himself enough room to be comical, and therefore
not alienating his true fans, while still showing a vulnerable and
human side. That is a side which has been missing from nearly every
major character he has played in his numerous commercial successes.
Truman Burbank was born to an audience of millions. He was chosen
before birth to be the focus of a 24 hour television show. Everything
in his environment is controlled by a team of technicians, led by the
show's director, Christof (played by Ed Harris). Everyone in Truman's
life is an actor or an extra. They are all being watched by millions
of people around the globe, people who can tune in at any time of the
day to see what is happening in Truman's life. But he is the only
person that is not aware of it.
The classification of The Truman Show may be tricky. The audience
reacted to many of Truman's revelations with laughter. I did not laugh
much during the film because I was so emotionally wrapped up with the
character. The things that made the audience laugh gave me glassy
eyes, because what was happening to him , indeed what had been done to
him his whole life was wrong. So is this going to end up labeled as a
comedy? A drama? It really depends on the audience. But to me, The
Truman Show was a touching, sad tale about the extents to which a
corporation will go to exploit human life for the entertainment of
others.
But above all else, The Truman Show was a stunningly beautiful picture
with humor, heart and scary realism. Oscar predictions in June are
pointless, but if The Truman Show had been released on schedule in
late fall or winter of 1997, as originally planned, James Cameron
would be Oscar-less.

Title
Review for Two Girls and a Guy (1997)
Starring: Robert Downey Jr., Heather Graham, Natasha Gregson Wagner
Two Girls And A Guy is a perfect example of how a single actor can turn around a script and an entire film. The first 15 minutes of the movie made me nauseous. The dialogue was trite and insipid, the acting below mediocre. Graham and Gregson Wagner open the film awaiting their boyfriend's return from LA. After chatting a bit, they come to realize that they are both involved with the same fellow. They break into his appartment and wait. At one point, I turned to my friend and told her that I planned on leaving if Gregson Wagner's character, Lou, didn't shut up.
Enter Robert Downey Jr. From then on, the film took a dynamic and thuroughly entertaining turn. The acting by Graham and Gregson Wagner improved and the screenwriting became fresh. Each character develops more and more deeply as the film progresses. 
The entire story takes place inside the appartment on a single afternoon. Blake, an actor for hire, comes back to what he thinks is his empty appartment in NY one afternoon. After a brilliant turn as an "actor alone in his appartment", Carla (Graham) pops out from behind a doorway to surprise the man she thought she loved. The following exchange is classic. Eventually, Lou comes out and the fireworks begin. I was never sure of the motives of any of the characters, and so I did not have any clue what was going to come of the confrontation. There is no action, there is no suspense, there are no wild characters that appear out of nowhere to distract the viewer. What you get is a unique tale and a marvelous performance by Downey Jr. Enough to make one wonder what he could do if there were no nasal or needle distractions in his life.
The production quality is perhaps the film's biggest flaw. There are countless voice-overs to fill poorly recorded dialogue. (Which is curious since it was all filmed in an appartment.) The volume level of the actors goes up and down and in and out. It almost seems like a sound experiment. Focus is another strange thing in this film. There are numerous focus changes. But they are so minor that I wondered if they were the mark of a bad cinematographer and focus puller or some brilliant artistic element that I just didn't get.
Two Girls And  A Guy is a fresh and energetic film that is stylishly told. It may serve as inspiration to prospective screenwriters who wonder if a three character, single location script can be written well. Yes.
Š 1998 Nick Amado
Email me with comments, questions, debate welcome. namado@concentric.net

Title
Review for Red Corner (1997)
At one point during Red Corner, I found myself more interested in following
along with a famous tune in the soundtrack, "I Heard It Through the
Grapevine", than I was in the film itself. Bad sign.
Red Corner, directed by Jon Avnet (Fried Green Tomatoes, Up Close and
Personal) stars Richard Gere as Jack Moore, a general counselor for a major
American entertainment conglomerate. He is in Beijing, trying to close a
multi-billion dollar deal to bring top tv trash to China. (Basically Baywatch
type stuff.)
It starts off interestingly enough. Moore meets a Chinse woman at a fashion
show and goes to her place for some good old fashioned movie sex. (You know
the routine. She wears his clothes, shots of champagne overflowing out of a
glass is a metaphor for orgasms.) He is awakened the next morning by a
Chinese soldier who drags him from the bed in his curiously blood-stained
shirt, shows him the slashed body of the woman from the night before, and
throws him in prison. Moore soon learns that the justice system there is
vastly different from our own, and is told repeatedly that those who confess
get off easier than those who try to fight it. Guilty until proven innocent,
and that is highly unlikely. 
Gere gives a flat, lackluster performance. His character is confused by the
goings on in the courtroom at one moment, then proves the judge wrong by
siting examples from Chinese law books a moment later. Moore becomes
emotionally, but not romantically involved with his attorney, and yet we are
never clear why. Neither shares a great deal with the other about their
personal lives. The emotional aspect is muddled and lost within  the attempt
at suspense. 
The editing is incredibly obvious in some scenes. There are occasional
flashes back to seemingly miscellaneous shots from earlier in the film. Breif
fades from black and white into color pull us out and makes us wonder what is
going on. Edits from the climactic scene cut between two similar-looking
rooms in which important action is taking place with two seperate sets of
characters. Yet the there are no transitions. The dialogue in these scenes
are all in Chinese, and so the viewer is forced to read subtitles, and gets
lost between rooms on the cuts.
This uninspired film tells us that if we are blamed for a heinous crime, we'd
better not be in China, because of what we'd have to go through. However, if
we are, there is certainly a way for the cocky American to beat hundreds of
years of tradition, and show China how its judicial system is wrong. Thumbs
down for everyone in and involved with this film. The only visually
impressive aspect is the Chinese courtroom. Production designer Richard
Sylbert manages to create an imposing, massive room that makes the accused,
and the viewer, feel incredibly unlucky to be there. There is nothing here
that we havn't seen numerous times before.
1 1/2 out of 4 stars.
Copyright (C) 1997 Nicholas Amado

Title
Review for Rebel Without a Cause (1955)
Rebel Without A Cause spoke to an entire generation of young men and women,
struggling with thier own identities, while living in the confining 1950s. It
taught them how to speak for themself, laugh at authority and wear blue
jeans. But that generation is now in control of this country. They are in
their 50's now, long since moved on from their teen years, and they should
have taken Rebel Without A Cause with them.
James Dean's most breakthrough film, the picture that would have made him one
of the biggest stars in history (and three films alone almost put him there),
does not stand the test of time. Frankly, I don't see how it even stood at
all during the 50's, for bad filmmaking has always been bad. Nicholas Ray
does some interesting things with the camera, has some thought-provoking
metaphorical and symbolic aspects, but fails from a directorial standpoint,
as does the film's screenwriter with his ludicrous story.
The biggest problem with Rebel Without A Cause is what it asks us to accept.
The film opens with Jim Stark (James Dean) being hauled into a juvenile
detention center for public drunkedness. He is a lost and confused soul
because his mother dominates his immasculine father. The next day, he begins
school, and the major events of the film unfold. This is where the tall tale
begins. Jim matures from new kid on the block to punk veteran in the course
of one day. We see him snubed by the pretty girl on campus (Natalie Wood) in
the morning. He's challenged to a knife fight by mid-afternoon, and he gets
the girl and becomes Mr. Cool Rebel by midnight. The tough-guy character of
Buzz is a violent punk, but he comes off like a pussycat. Right before the
Chicken Race, he tells Jim how much he likes him personally, though just
hours before they were slashing each other with switchblades. Judy (Wood) is
Buzz's main squeeze, but when he dies in the Chicken Race, she immediately
falls for the now-cool Jim Stark. By midnight, she is professing her deep
love for him.
Though James Dean gives a fantastic performance, he and all the other teens,
save for Sal Mineo, look more like they are ready to graduate from college
than from high school. Because of that, Mineo, the only one who does look
like a high schooler doesn't fit in! He too gives a fine performance as a
crazed, confused youth, looking for normalcy and a family life.
Basically, all three main characters, Jim, Judy and Plato (Mineo) are looking
for a family that they can't have except with each other. Jim has a weak
father (Jim Backus, who looks stunning in a frilly kitchen apron) who won't
take a stand against his wife. Judy doesn't get the affection she needs from
Daddy, and Plato is being raised by a housekeeper. But only Plato's rage and
confusion is understandable. We never meet his parents, because neither of
them is around for him. But Jim's parents are quite normal (with the average
family quirkiness) He could do a lot worse. But there is never any foundation
laid for his emotional problems. He is reckless, but why? Because his loving
parents aren't quite loving enough? Because the film essentially takes place
in a 24 hr. period, we never get a feeling of why he is the way he is. 
The unrealistic time frame and lack of proper character development make me
wonder why this is regarded as one of the most woderful films of the 50's.
One should only see this film for Dean's performance and perhaps to see what
all the hoopla is about. Should you happen to check it out in it's newest
form, Warner' Bros. widescreen editon, you may be interested in the 25 minute
trailer that shows parts of a TV show hosted by Gig Young. It has behind the
scenes looks at the filming (though the "behind the scene" part is very
stagey) and contains interviews with Jim Backus and James Dean. But by all
means, if you havn't seen it, view this "classic" and come to your own
conclusions.
1 1/2 out of 4 stars
Copyright (C) Nick Amado 1997
*******************************
Comments? (I expect plenty!) Complaints? (Those too) Debate? (Lots of that)
Email me at NAMIAM@AOL.COM

Title
Review for Devil's Advocate, The (1997)
Taylor Hackford has crossed over to the Dark Side. Perhaps he has tiptoed his
way there with films like "An Officer and a Gentleman", "Against All Odds",
and "Dolores Claiborne", but with his latest "The Devil's Advocate", there is
no turning back. 
He has assembled quite a fine group of talent for this twisted satire;
 Veteran Director of Photography Andrzej Bartkowiak, 8 time Oscar nominee Al
Pacino, and special effects and make-up guru Rick Baker. Bartkowiak is of
particular interest to this writer because of his extensive work with master
filmmaker Sidney Lumet. Baker is known for his work on "The Nutty Professor",
"Coming To America" and "Wolf" (as well as Michael Jackson's "Thriller"
video.)
Reeves stars as a Florida Assistant DA turned defense lawyer Kevin Lomax who,
after the realization of his client's guilt, decides to go for the gold and de
stroy a key witness on the stand in a cruel and heartless manner. His
unblemished record catches the eye of a major Manhattan law firm and it's
senior partner John Milton, played by Al Pacino. Reeves and his wife
(Charlize Theron, in a break-through role) are given the royal treatment and
a glorious appartment on the upper west side.  Lomax is the new ace of the
firm, aided without question by the mysterious Milton, and is given a triple
homicide trial. But as Lomax becomes more greedily involved in his case load,
his neglected wife witnesses gruesome and violent scenes, from
disembowelments to gruesome murders and flashes of demonic faces. Her visions
lead to insanity, and Lomax is forced to choose between  his wife and the
case. We realize that Milton is indeed Satan, and is controlling the lives of
this young couple, and virtually everyone else around him. (And Milton
spelled backward is Notlim...think about it.)
This bold and daring film makes a number of interesting statements, some more
 obvious than others. It is no mistake that attorneys are chosen to represent
evil here. They control the law, and the law controls us. But the movie is
telling us that evil easily appeals to our vanity, and that our egos will
give in. Even when we think we've managed to dodge it, or even stop it, evil
remains, lurking around the corner.
"The Devil's Advocate" is dangerously close to an NC-17 rating. The violence
is rather grotesque, but spread out in small amounts over two and a half
hours, and thus not terribly overdone. The full frontal nudity and graphic
sexual situations, though, rival that of any erotic piece of recent
filmmaking. Demi Moore would have needed a lot more than $12 million to
expose her breasts as long as some of the women in this film. Due to the
extensive and intense dialogue, the intriguing storyline and the beauty of
the cinematography (and again, a two and a half hour running time....) this
can't be categorized as a horror film, but it comes close. Don't bring your
10 year olds, folks.
Pacino gives a top-notch performance as Lucifer. His loud, over-the-top
actions that became so popular with his performance in "Scent of a Woman" are
brought out again, this time in a much more devious and cocky manner. Pacino
manages to get in a few chuckles from the audience as well. Indeed, this fine
actor is worthy of another Oscar nomination. And you can certainly win for a
bad-to-the-bone villian. Just ask Anthony Hopkins. Pacino certainly may once
again be nominated twice in the same year for an Academy Award. Recall his
performance as Lefty Ruggerio in "Donnie Brasco".
Reeves is trying so hard to show us that he really thinks he is a good actor,
and he certainly manages to impress now and again. But as happens so often,
the actor's power is lessened by his silly attempt at holding an
uncomfortable accent. Reeve's southern accent, though always slight, flutters
in and out so often, you just don't know who he is trying to be. This
inconsistency really knocks a few points off of an otherwise superb
performance. Theron plays Reeve's wife and may have just signed a letter of
intent for stardom. Her sexuality and porcelain doll face make her the
perfect victim for Satan to crush. Though she spends much of her time yelling
and crying, she does a perfect job of portraying her frustration at not being
able to communicate with her husband. Theron breaks to pieces in the film,
but does so slowly and methodically, and really gives a grade-A performance.
Jones and Nelson met with chuckles from the audience upon their first
appearance on-screen. Obviously, "Mr. Rooney" and "Coach" were the first
thoughts on the minds of many, but that shouldn't get in the way of these
fine performances.
This twisted tale of sexual depravity and omnipresent evil makes for a good
scare, and some deep thinking. Some of the visuals may be a bit harsh now and
again, but it isn't overbearing. The editing is astonishing throughout.
Mostly because it is so bad in some cases and so fantastic in others. But
Bartkowiak's and Hackford's camera work is brilliant and worth a second look.
The special effects are simple but un-aviodable. They make themselves
apparent in every effects scene, however they don't ruin a thing. Rick Baker
certainly leaves his mark. "The Devil's Advocate" doesn't need to be as long
as it is. (Yes, two and a half hours.) Fifteen minutes could easily have been
cut. But Pacino, Theron and even Reeves to some extent, as well as
Bartkowiak's masterful work, and the exceptional Art Direction, make this a
thrilling and creepy ride. It keeps you on your toes to the end. And when I
say "end" I mean the final shot. Don't leave to go to the bathroom. 
Three out of Four stars.
Copyright (C) 1997 Nicholas Amado

Title
Review for Wilde (1997)
Starring: Stephen Fry, Jude Law, Jennifer Ehle, Gemma Jones, Michael Sheen
It seems a trend in modern works about Oscar Wilde to narrow him down
to nothing but a man ruined by his homosexuality. "Wilde", which
opened friday, can't be excluded from that group. Both San Francisco
and Broadway in NY have a play called "Gross Indecency" about the
trial surrounding Oscar Wilde's sexual affairs with younger men. SF
also had a one man show last winter that focused largely on the
torment he had to endure because of his sexuality. What "Wilde" and
all these other plays forget is that behind this "scandal" was a
brilliant, witty and successful writer in the late 19th century who
contributed to world literature.
The first 30 minutes of "Wilde" does nothing but pound into the
viewers heads that the character is indeed homosexual in spite of his
wife and two children. Moderation was not used to introduce it. Each
scene of social and family events seemed intercut with homosexual love
scenes. After the first half hour, I found that the film up to that
point lacked focus and drive. I wondered where it was going, and if it
was going to live up to it's name. After all, a film simply named
after a real person should cover that person's life, their personality
and what was important about them, or at least how their work
influenced culture. "Wilde" has the amazing ability to turn such a
fascinating man into a nobody. Oscar Wilde did not need to be the
focus of this film, and, should you decide that you want to see this
to learn more about him, you will be disappointed. The story is one of
a man who has a social status and how his sexual affairs with younger
men, one in particular, ends up ruining him. The fact that he is Oscar
Wilde, playwrite, poet and author, seems secondary. The successful
opening nights of "Lady Windermere's Fan" and "The Importance of Being
Earnest" as well as references to "The Picture of Dorian Gray" and
"Solome" are tossed in to remind the viewer who they are watching.
Stephen Fry did a fine job of portraying the tormented writer, but his
talent seemed wasted on a character who never lived up to what the
real man really was. Jude Law played his younger lover, Lord Alfred
Douglas, "Bosie" as he is known, quite well. His performance as a
snotty, slutty pretty boy is another thing that makes the film
watchable.
Perhaps a year of anticipation of a film about the life and times of
Oscar Wilde in which the lead role would be played by one of my
favorite British comics, had something to do with the letdown, but not
much. The costumes are glorious, the sets decadent and the
performances good, but "Wilde" does not hold together as anything
other than a preachy film about how difficult it was to be homosexual
120 years ago. I am still waiting for a production about a man who was
known for his wit and intelligence, a true artist, rather than the men
he slept with.
** out of **** stars
 Copyright Š 1998 Nick Amado
Comments, questions, complaints? Email me at namado@concentric.net

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
David Fincher's previous film, "Seven" showed great improvements on his 
first, "Alien 3". "The Game" is another step forward for Fincher, though 
in a slightly different direction. This is a thrilling, suspenseful and 
frightening, though somewhat unsatisfying film. As with many of today's 
pictures, a certain amount of "suspension of disbelief" is necessary in 
order to appreciate the events unfolding before you on the screen. But 
Douglas' performance, Harris Savides' photography and Fincher's gothic 
(though not at all grungey) direction makes this a classic thriller.
Douglas plays Nicholas Van Orton, a middle-aged investment banker living 
in the lap of luxury in San Francisco. He is divorced, he has no 
children, seemingly, no life at all. When he is not ruling the corporate 
world from the office, he is sitting at home, watching financial news, or 
flashing back to his childhood, when his father leapt from the family 
mansion to his death. Van Orton's younger brother Conrad (Sean Penn)  
visits him and gives him a birthday gift certificate for a company called 
Consumer Recreation Services, CRS. "Tell me you'll call", he says, trying 
to convince his older brother that this game will change his life 
forever. The events that occur after the call make it impossible for Van 
Orton to tell the difference between his own life and what he thinks is a 
game. Events based in reality happen in his club, in his home, in his car 
and in his office, and as the film progresses, things get worse. He 
begins to confront more and more people in a haze of paranoia, never 
having a firm grip on what is actually happening to him. Each non-related 
disaster that hits him justifies his paranoia, when he begins to feel 
that this CRS is out to destroy him financially and even kill him. 
Sean Penn is terribly miscast as Conrad Van Orton, the black sheep 
younger brother. Penn, who  receives second billing only because of his 
stardom, has essentially three scenes totaling approximately 15 minutes 
over the 128 minute film. An actor of his depth and intensity is wasted 
in such a small, unchallenging role. Only the cleft in his chin makes him 
the right choice to play a Douglas. Second billing would much more 
appropriately go to Deborah Kara Unger, who's performance as Van Orton's 
mysterious femme fatale is sexy and sinister.
San Francisco is used quite beautifully in this film. Fincher's expected 
grunge look is nowhere to be seen in this film. Rather he cleans up the 
look and shows us San Francisco in a rather different light. Very little 
in this film is bright and colorful, but the blues and grays that he uses 
give the buildings of the financial district an overpowering look at 
times, almost as if they are a big part of the world Van Orton is trapped 
in. Unlike "The Rock", in which San Francisco is primarily shown through 
tourist-like skyline shots, "The Game" shows San Francisco's downtown 
from mostly street level and constricts Van Orton and all the other 
characters, creating a claustrophobic feeling.
"The Game" is a thriller of the highest degree, with lots of things that 
you probably won't expect and probably havn't seen before. The shock 
ending will make you think about the events that developed, and justify 
some of them, and others may just bug you. But either way, Fincher keeps 
you glued to the seat. (I really had to go...I held it in the whole 
time.) He gives you an interesting look at an interesting city, and he 
gives you some things to think about. The frustration that builds up 
during the film should be relieved at the end, but whether or not it 
builds up again after you think about all of it, is up to you.
Three and a half out of Four stars.
Copyright (C) 1997 Nicholas Amado
*****************************
Comments? Complaints? Criticism? Debate? Email me: NAMIAM@AOL.COM

Title
Review for As Good As It Gets (1997)
As Good As It Gets
Director: James L. Brooks
Starring: Jack Nicholson, Helen Hunt, Greg Kinnear, Cuba Gooding Jr.
Approx Running Time: 135 min.
In the film's opening scene, Melvin Udall (Nicholson) grabs a cute little
fuzzy dog who looks remarkably like an Ewok on all fours and tosses him down a
garbage chute. It was at this point I knew I would love this movie.
Not that I was happy to see the little guy suffer, mind you. As it turns out
the dog is fine and he remains throughout the rest of the film. He manages to
wiggle his way into your hearts too. But As Good As It Gets has so many things
that Hollywood films need these days. It has fantastic dialogue, lines you'll
be wanting to remember and use for years, extremely touching moments of
sentimentalism, and some brutal emotion. They all blend perfectly. 
The only negative I could possibly pin on As Good As It Gets is it's slight
edge toward being formulaic....but I won't. It is too good a film to do that.
Simon Udall is a fantastic character, a sort of modern Ebneezer Scrooge. But
he is more developed than Srooge ever has been. He is a successful romance
novelist who locks himself in his upscale NY appartment and writes constantly.
But his quirks are what make him so unique. He is obsessive compulsive. He is
also obnoxiously superstitious. But most importantly, he is one nasty, horrid
man. Somehow, though, we can't help but love him. Probably because his
nastiness is so witty and original. Nicholson was born to play this role, and
any other actor would probably have failed to do it with such heart. His
performance is as close to perfect as it gets.
Carol Connoly (Helen Hunt) is a waitress at a local restaurant, the only one
that Simon chooses to eat at, and she is the only one on the staff who will
wait on him. (He brings his own plastic knife and fork each time...you gotta
love him.) Hunt really gets a chance to shine in this film. She turns in a
marvelous performance because she hits all the marks. She hits every chord at
the right time, whether it is silencing a room with her grave sincerity in
anger, or crying, or being goofy. She does it all so well. Hunt surely
deserves numerous nominations for showing the world that she is more than a
sitcom actress. To be honest, as much of a Helen Hunt fan as I was going into
it, I am in love with her now. She needs to dump Paul Buchman and move to
Hollywood, become an actress.
Greg Kinnear has come a long way from Talk Soup too. He plays Simon's next
door neighbor, a gay artist who is badly beaten when he tries to stop a
robbery in his own appartment. Kinnear proves his worth as a top notch
performer here. He avoids the gay stereotypes that so many straight actors try
to include when they play homosexuals, and yet you see his sexuality at all
times. It is a very interesting and touching performance, mostly because he,
like Helen Hunt, can tell a joke one moment and errupt realistically into
violence or emotion the next. To say the very least, As Good As It Gets is
filled with memorable performances.
It is pretty easy to see where As Good As It Gets is going throughout. The
film turns into a sort of pep talk for being good people, but that doesn't
really matter. It is so funny, so emotional and so incredibly well acted that
you don't care about that formula stuff. You just want to see what happens
next. Absolutely one of this years best films.
(Point of interest: Brooks could not decide on a title. For a while, the best
he could settle on was "Old Friends". Apparently, the fact that there were no
old friends in the film bothered him. He also threw about "Rock Bottom" and
"The Bright Side Of Life" which is a song Simon repeatedly played on his
piano)
Four Stars

Title
Review for Ice Storm, The (1997)
The events of Ice Storm unfold over the span of Thanksgiving weekend in
Connecticut, 1973. The title is both a literal component of the film as well
as a metaphor for what we see within the characters. Ang Lee (director of
Sense and Sensibility) puts together a marvelously chilling, darkest of dark,
seriocomic melodrama. The characters all have two lives, one with their
families, the other a dark chamber within their own minds that controls each
of them. Stellar performances, and expert camerawork and cinematography round
out this look at the lives of the nuclear families in the early '70's.
The main characters are comprised of two sets of parents, each with two
children. All of them, in one form or another explore their own sexuality.
The children, ranging from age 12 to age 17 are the most experimental, especia
lly Wendy (Christina Ricci) who at the age of 17 is a nymphomaniac in
training. We come to understand that each child has his or her own emotional
problems linked to their disfunctional parents. While the folks are off at
swingers parties, the children are left alone, free to explore themselves and
each other. Though the parents often discover the acts as they occur, they
are never seriously scolding, but rather passive. It left me with a very cold
feeling, as does much of the film. The parents, who obviously love their
children, never seem to know exactly how to handle them, and all of the
communication in the past has been fluff, never really getting to the heart
of the matter. In one scene, Ben (Kevin Kline) attempts to explain to his son
the nature of sexuality, but, unable to find the right words, he downgrades
to talking about masturbation, until he finally drops the subject entierely,
asking his son not to tell anyone what he had just said.
There is an icy chill between all the characters as each of them interacts.
The children have no substantial connection with their parents, the two young
brothers have  an non-aggressive, but uncaring relationship. The adults all
have problems with each other because of their personal agendas. The film is
coated with different cold images, mostly of ice being broken in an ice tray,
or frozen, crystalized trees and electrical wires. The interlacing of the
literal storyline  the visual icy metaphor is incredibly well done. Any warm
or cozy shot is broken in one way or another by ice or by coldness. Comfort
between characters is never long-lasting. No one in the film is quite as
chilling as Jane, played convincingly by Sigourney Weaver. In her attempt at
explaining sex to her neighbors' child, she begins to go off on a tangent
about how Samoan children are sent off to the wild until they learn a thing
or two. After sex with her adulterous neighbor Ben, she tells him that she
"already has a husband" when he is talking to her about golf.
Christina Ricci gives the best performance among a very talented cast. She
plays the daughter of Kevin Kline and Joan Allen. She is always in control,
does as she pleases, and never seems upset about disturbing events. 
There are a number of funny situations in Ice Storm, but overall, this is a
deep, disturbing look at two families. One may want to compare it to Ordinary
People, the Academy Award winning film of 1980. But though there are
similarities in terms of the "disturbed child" and the freezing finale, these
two films are distinctly different, and Ice Storm is much more compelling.
Ordinary People succeeds at its attempts at occasional warmth. Ice Storm
never makes those attempts. It is a dreary but moving drama with fantastic
visuals, done to cinematic perfection.
3 1/2 out of 4 stars
Copyright (C) Nicholas Amado

Title
Review for Critical Care (1997)
After a series of disappointing motion pictures, one of cinema's most
brilliant and powerful directors shows us he really hasn't lost a step.
Sidney Lumet, who brought us such fantastic films as Dog Day Afternoon, 12
Angry Men, Network and The Pawnbroker, presents us with a stylish, darkly
comic and poignant picture in Critical Care.
James Spader is excellent as Dr. Werner Ernst, a young man in his third year
of residency who is seduced and blackmailed by hopeful starlett Felicia
Potter (Kyra Sedgwick). Potter, and her half-sister Connie are battling over
the fate of their comatose father. One wants him kept alive, one doesn't want
to see him continue to suffer. Spader is caught in the middle.
Critical Care points an accusing finger at the medicare system. Who cares?
Who doesn't? And is everyone in it for their own selfish reasons? Dr. Ernst
is trapped between doing the right thing or continuing with what promises to
be a successful career. In this cold hospital environment, no one is really
there to help anyone else when they need it. The doctors aren't there for the
patients, the administration isn't there for the doctors, and lawsuits
surround the administration. 
Albert Brooks (completely unrecognizeable in white hair and extremely well
done makeup) is fantastic as scatter-brained old Dr. Butz. He spends most of
his onscreen time calling Dr. Ernst up to his office to give him advice on
patient care, which boils down to dedicating time only to those patients who
have extensive insurance coverage, and to hell with the others. He is a
symbol of what is wrong with the system, and why things aren't getting any
better. Though Brook's Dr. Butz is often redundant in his dialogue, we get
the feeling he is supposed to be that way. It is an effective effort to
frustrate both the young Dr. Ernst and the viewer. Helen Mirren is good, but
understated as a compassionate nurse. Her character never gets to make much
of an impact.
Visually, the film is quite impressive. We spend most of the time in sterile,
spacestation-looking Intensive Care Unit rooms. The ICU is circular, and the
nurse's station is in the middle of it all. The beds are inflatable blue
plastic. They look like something you'd want to float on in a pool. The
machines are all futuristic and complex. But most striking is the lack of
background inside the rooms. There are no walls, just endless white space.
But this look in the ICU area is extremely important. It helps ease the
transition between realism and surrealism. There are a few dreamlike
sequences that show us the fears of certain characters. One patient, played
by Jeffry Wright (Basquiat) is visited by an assistant to Satan, played by
Wallace Shawn. Angelic Anne Bancroft visits James Spader in a dream sequence,
and helps him form his future by suggesting a course of action. Both sets of
sequences, though, take place in these other-worldly ICU rooms, so the
transition is not jarring, but rather smooth and almost expected. 
The production design by Philip Rosenberg certainly is one of the most
amazing aspects of Critical Care. Early in the film, there is an impressive
shot of Sedgwick and Spader going up an escalator in an intricately
structured mall. It suggests equilibrium and and calm. Things at this point
in the film are peaceful. But later, as Spader is pleading with a prestigious
doctor about his own future, the same camera angle shows us a twisted and
cold steel staircase, blocking most of the character. Dr. Ernst is trapped,
and no one will help him.
Lumet has really approached new territory with Critical Care. Presenting
controversial material is nothing new. He loves to make films about police
corruption, and he has touched on racism, and the judicial system before.
Here, he tackles ethics and the structure within the medical profession. But
Critical Care has an independent feel to it. It is fresh, and modern. Some of
the dialogue fits the black comedy mold quite well. Lumet makes all the
elements of this film, the acting, the set design, the camera work, and the
fantastic script by Steven Schwartz come together beautifully. It is an odd
film, no doubt, but also a treat to see a master filmmaker doing great work
again.
3 1/2 stars out of 4
Copyright (C) 1997 Nicholas Amado

Title
Review for Jackie Brown (1997)
Jackie Brown
Director: Quentin Tarantino
Starring: Pam Grier, Samuel L. Jackson, Robert Forster, Robert De Niro,
Brigette Fonda and Michael Keaton
Approx Running Time: 150 min.
The problem that "Jackie Brown" will face is that it will always be compared
to "Pulp Fiction", and that's a battle "Jackie" will lose. 
Tarantino's first full-feature directorial effort since "Pulp" is a well acted
and well written crime caper. But through the brilliantly developed
characters, the realistic and gritty dialogue, and the signature of one of
America's newest hotshot directors lies a dull and uninteresting story. As I
sat through "Jackie Brown", I realized how much I liked the characters, and
cared about them, but hated what they were doing. 
Tarantino seemed to involve himself so much in developing Elmore Leonard's
characters (the film is based on Leonard's novel "Rum Punch") that he lost
sight of the fact that the story he drags out over the two and a half hour
time period is mundane to say the least. Every time I got lost in the
intensity of any given character, it seemed that the storyline whacked me in
the face with something too common to be in a Tarantino film. 
Before I get to the good stuff, one last complaint must be brought up. Michael
Keaton was terribly miscast in the film and brought down each scene in which
he appeared. The problem was that his character was too ordinary for such a
recognizable star to be overplaying him. Keaton was the only character flaw in
the film.
Now, for those of you that can't get enough of "Pulp Fiction", rest assured,
Tarantino lets you know that they guy who directed that one, did this one.
There are a number of things in "Jackie Brown" that reminded me of his last
film. Some were distracting, some weren't. Just as in "Pulp", Tarantino makes
brilliant use of one of the screen's best actors, Samuel L. Jackson. His
character, Ordell Robbie, is almost like Jules decided not to walk the earth ,
but instead decided to be a "badder muther fuc*er" and ended up here. Both
Ordell and Jules have striking similiarities, but this guy is ten times the
tyrant. Jackson is unforgettable in this film and has some of the funnies
lines as well as the most chilling glares.
Music plays a big part in the film. At times it seems destined to be a top-
selling soundtrack comprised of songs that are popular again because  they
were in a Tarantino film, but he manages to capture the mood of so many scenes
that the music fits the scheme perfectly.
Pam Grier did a smart thing by letting Tarantino cast her. Though it may or
may not do for her what "Pulp" did for Travolta, Grier, at the very least, has
shown people that may have forgotten about her that she is a good actress, and
that she deserves more recognition than she has gotten in the past twenty
years. She plays Jackie Brown, a flight attendant who runs cash from Mexico to
LA for Ordell. The film losely focuses on her struggle to keep Ordell happy,
the FTA happy, the cops happy and herself alive. She seems to have deals going
in all different directions that culminate in a sadly unsatisfying ending.
Robert Forster is also a man who is being brought into the spotlight as Max
Cherry, a bailbondsmen who gets wrapped up with Ordell and Jackie. He gives a
very strong performance which , though deserving of recognition, will probably
be overlooked come awards time. He has a tough look, but we see how normal and
lonely he is. He is never a fun guy, but for some reason (and by some reason I
must mean the script and the actor) we really care about him. At times, he is
the central part of the film.
Both De Niro and Fonda turn in exceptional performances as completely lame
people. Fonda's character is a life-long pothead and slut; she excels at it.
De Niro's character, Louis, is quiet and has few lines but uses them
effectively. He plays a man who has just been out of prison for a few days,
and he really looks and acts like it. Watching De Niro is still a thrill after
all these years.
Tarantino has left his mark, and "Jackie Brown" will command its portion of
discussion and respect, but will most likely suffer in the long run from a
lack of newness. The only way someone like Tarantino can continue to be fresh
is by writing his own material. Though he breathed fantastic life into these
characters, it was, above all else, merely an adaptation of someone else's
work. On the strength of this film, I look forward to his next screenplay. He
seems to have shed the "one hit wonder" label with "Jackie". And I think
Tarantino learned one other important thing; he doesn't have to be in all his
films. He wisely chose to stay out of this one and let the other actors do
their jobs.
Three stars
Copyright (C) 1997 Nick Amado

Title
Review for Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998)
Starring: Johnny Depp, Benicio Del Toro
Terry Gilliam is a very strange fellow. But why he thought Hunter
S. Thompson's book would make a good film is beyond me. It isn't as if
Gilliam and his team of talented artists didn't make a fine attepmt,
indeed they did. But Fear and Loathing is a two hour mind trip. And
like a trip it has no substance and no purpose.
What makes the film watchable is the performance of Johnny
Depp. Though some may wonder why he chose such a pointless story to
work with, it is clear that the character was a challenge to
re-create. (Apparently , he did a great amount of research on
Thompson.) Benicio Del Toro gives a fantastic performance as well,
perhaps the best of his career to date. But Del Toro's character is as
unappealing as Depp's is strangely compelling.
Depp plays the part with a certain goofiness that never crosses the
line into menace or threat. Del Toro plays a slob of a scary scumbag
that never approaches goofiness or appeal. The two have a great deal
of screentime together, sharing acid and ether trips in various Las
Vegas locations. But there is never really a development of comraderie
between them. Seeing as the film lacks a central point, it seems that
the least Gilliam and co-screenwriters Todd Dunes and Alex Cox could
give us a good pair of buddies to carry the film. But sadly, we are
left only with Depp's funky facial expressions and whacky walks to
amuse us.
Johnny Depp, who is rapidly proving why he is one of the most gifted
actors of his generation, also creates a fantastic vocal sound for his
character, a kind of cross between Elvis Presley and Robert
Mitchum. That voice, combined with the cigarette holder which dangles
from his lip in every single shot, helped form an otherwise bland
character into something watchable and slightly entertaing.
Fear and Loathing begins with numerous trips that required digital
effects. Carpet paterns coming to life, bats flocking toward Depp's
eye, and faces being pulled and distorted in all directions. It is
rather a letdown, then, when the effects suddenly stop and all of the
following acid trips are portrayed only in the reactions the actors
have to them. One is an incredibly vivid and rather annoying scene in
which Depp trys to calm Del Toro who is sitting in murky bath wather
with grapefruit peels floating around him.
Indeed, the visuals in Fear and Loathing are unique and often cool to
look at, but if Depp's fine performance can't save this film, then
neither can they. Nor does the fine camera work by Nicola Pecorini do
enough to save it.
Gilliam is certainly better than this. Fear and Loathing suffered from
a lack of point, drive and in some spots, ambition. Other than telling
you that Depp is a writer on an assignment and he goes to Vegas with
his junkie attorney, I can't tell you what I really watched for two
hours. That's about as far into plot synopsis as I can get. But one
thing I can tell you...Terry Gilliam is a very strange fellow.

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
Starring: Matthew Broderick, Jean Reno, Maria Pitillo, Hank Azaria, Michael Lerner, Kevin Dunn, Harry Shearer
Godzilla is a nuclear freak. He is a lizard that has been mutated over
the years and has become a new species, one that has a foot as long as
this bus, and a claw as long as this sign. This aquatic creature made
its first attack in the Pacific Islands. He tore up a ship that
carried dozens of Japanese men. One survived. Only he was left to
recount the terror that he had seen. He was merely able to repeat the
words "Godzilla...Godzilla...Godzilla".
The film then introduces us to Matthew Broderick, a biologist who has
been studying the fascinating growth of Chernobyl earthworms. "They're
17% larger than they used to be!" he proclaims. The U.S. military
pulls him off this three year project and assigns him to figure out
what Godzilla is. And, boy, does he find out.
And, boy, does Godzilla suck. I hate to use such a word in a review,
something that is supposed to inform my audience, but I really need to
drive this one home and I refuse to use explitives. It is
unbelieveable to me how the producers of this movie saw the final cut
and said, "Ok! It's great! Let's show this puppy."
Roland Emmerich needs a good horse whipping. His latest piece of trash
makes ID4 look like a masterpiece of modern American cinema. And if
Steven Spielberg had never made the Jurassic Park films, Emmerich and
his team of talent-challenged imbeciles would never have had a clue as
to how the creature should look.
Let me give you a few examples of this terrible attempt at
filmmaking. I plan on giving some things away here. Belive me,
Godzilla holds no surprises for anyone with an IQ higher than their
shoe size, so...no worries. However, if you are looking for that
"first time thrill" and you refuse to let me do you this favor, by all
means, stop reading now.
A.) Godzilla makes his first ever attack in the Pacific Islands. He
next strikes in New York City. Um...anyone have a map handy?
B.) The Mayor of New York City is a heavy set individual with parted
gray hair and thick glasses. His name is Mayor Ebert. His assistant is
named Gene. Gene gives Ebert a thumbs down at the end of the film. I
couldn't make this up if I tried, folks.
C.) Stay with me on this one... Ok. Godzilla can out run
torpedoes. Hank Azaria can out run Godzilla babies. (Which look more
like Jurassic Park raptors than the Jurassic Park raptors.)
D.) The U.S. Military, upon realization that Godzilla has disappeared
after running rampant through the city, decides that he "might be
hiding in a building."
E.) (oh yeah, I can go all the way to E.) Godzilla strikes at
Manhattan. Manhattan, an island approximately the size of San
Francisco holds three million people. They evactuate to New Jersey in
about one day. No problem.
F.) Early on, they bait Godzilla with fish. (He likes fish, you know.)
The thing is on an Island. The Atlantic Ocean is three steps east, but
pile a whole bunch of grouper on Fifth and 57th...oh he's gonna come
running.
G.) You know what? I'll stop with the list now...the alphabet isn't
big enough anyway.
The dialogue makes me wonder if Producer Dean Devlin had his five year
old do a re-write. "The kid is GOOD!" he must have said. Maria Pitillo
is looking to become a name in Hollywood by starring in this potential
blockbuster. Bad move, Maria. Acting doesn't get much worse than her
turn as Broderick's ex-flame. Matthew Broderick is a good actor, but
you'd never give him a chance if Godzilla were the only film of his
you'd seen. Jean Reno needs to pick his American films a bit more
carefully.
At times, Godzilla seems to be headed toward a Zucker, Abrahams,
Zucker film. (Airplane!, Naked Gun.) The jokes are indeed that
bad. But just when you think the filmmakers are having fun with you,
they take themselves seriously. How dare they! Godzilla would have
been better if it had only thrown in visual sight gags and fart
jokes. At least then we would know we were supposed to laugh. Each and
every character in Godzilla is beyond stupid and I was really pulling
for the beast to kill more of them.
Emmerich did do one thing, though. (And I've no idea if it was
intentional.) He made me sympathize with Godzilla. His attackers were
so damn dumb that I felt sorry for him being pelted with bullets and
missles. But what made me feel even sorrier for him was that his
famous name will always be attatched to one of the worst films
Hollywood has ever produced.
Comments, complaints, questions, debates? Email me at namado@concentric.net

Title
Review for Deconstructing Harry (1997)
Woody Allen's latest film, Deconstructing Harry, is a fine addition to his
masterful body of work. It doesn't have the sweetness of Annie Hall, or the
goofiness of Sleeper. What it does have is originality that blends well with
the bitterness, the autobiographical aspects, and the brash humor. Allen has
taken a new approach technically with "Harry" while he returns to some of his
classical short story writing, many traces of which can be seen here.
Harry is a writer who has just completed a book, based strongly on his
experiences, that upsets all of the women in his life. The film is a montage
of his current predicament and scenes played out on screen with other actors
in his role. (Richard Benjamin, Stanley Tucci and Tobey Maguire all play Harry
in various embelished stories from the book.) Occasionally, to break even
further with conventional narrative, Harry will meet these characters who are
based on himself and have conversations with them. Though it doesn't really
matter, this film doesn't flow terribly well, but it is obvious that Allen
doesn't want it to. 
One of the technical aspects that Allen employs here is a unique editing
approach. Much of the film consists of scenes in which dialogue is cut
abruptly to flash forward only a few seconds in time. Cuts will also be made
to show brief passages in time. For example, a character may be sitting in one
position and rather than show them shift in their chair, a quick cut will be
made to their new position. It is extremely unique and works well with the
overall concept of the film, which is expressed in the title, deconstructing
this writer and all of his immoralities.
One of the best sequences in the film involves an "out of focus" Robin
Williams, which must be seen to be believed. It is one of the most original
and hilarious concepts I have seen in modern filmmaking. That brief sequence
alone is enough for me to recommend this picture to even those who are not
Allen fans.
The language in Deconstructing Harry is much more abrasive than in most of his
films. It helps to illustrate the nastiness of Allen's character who is as
neurotic and whiny as he always was, but now has a bit of a gruff and bitter
edge.  The film is fun for many reasons, not the least of which is the cast
which includes Elizabeth Shue, Billy Crystal, Julia Louis-Dreyfuss, Demi
Moore, Eric Bogosian, Amy Irving, Judy Davis, Julie Kavner, Kirstie Alley and
Robin Williams. There are many lines in the film that you will probably be
using for years to come. And Allen isn't afraid to let inventive filmmaking
take the place of solid narrative here. Plus, fans of his books will see many
references to old stories. Deconstructing Harry is strange to say the least,
but a must for Allen fans and most likely enjoyable for anyone who wants a
good laugh.
3 stars
Copyright (C) 1997 Nick Amado

Title
Review for FairyTale: A True Story (1997)
Fairy Tale claims to be based in truth, from the writings of Sir Arthur Conan
Doyle. However,the title and the special effects might lead you to believe
this is a children's fantasy. Unfortunately, this inspired attempt at a sweet
story fails on both accounts. It's subject matter and dry storytelling are
much to advanced for children, and is too dry for adults.
The film focuses on a pair of little girls, cousins who roam the meadows
looking for fairies. What sets them apart is from the adults in the film is
that they believe in the existence of these little people, not only because
they are girls at play, but because they have actually seen them. The adults
don't develop faith until the girls take two photographs of fairies, at which
point a controversy arises, do they exist, or was this an act of trickery?
The little girls and the fairies should be the focus of this film, but too
much screen-time is devoted to Harry Houdini (Harvey Keitel) and Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle (Peter O'Toole). Because of the claimed truthfulness of the
story, Doyle and Houdini are important to the story, but that doesn't mean
they work. This film would have been much more entertaining both for children
and for adults if they had taken the Doyle storyline, and applied more of a
fantastic twist. The true disappointment for me was that the fairies only
appear onscreen briefly, and we never get to meet any of them. They look like
wonderful characters, but none are ever explored, we don't know their names,
we don't even get to hear them talk.
There are some good aspects of the film, however. Though much of the
photography is standard and not terribly challenging, it manages to capture
some beautiful scenery quite well. There are also some interesting looks at
the early days of photography, showing us cameras from the early 20th
century, and glass plate exposures. The little girls are quite good,
especially Frances (Elizabeth Earl). She has a cute,  smart and almost sassy
attitude that translates quite well for her character. Her energy is always
high and she has some of the more enjoyable dialogue.
Unfortunately, type-casting does have its place in filmmaking, and even the
most versatile of typecast actors have trouble now and again. Physcially,
there couldn't be a better match for Harry Houdini than Harvey Keitel, but
when I watched him in this, I couldn't stop images of the pimp from Taxi
Driver, or "The Wolf" from Pulp Fiction from flooding my head. Aside from the
fact that Houdini doesn't make much of an impact as a character in this film,
Keitel adds to the distraction. 
Fairy Tale  A True Story could have done a lot more. Had it decided to take a
turn into more fantasy, less realism, this could have been a real success.
But the only time the children in the audience seemed excited, and asked
questions of their parents as children so often do at the movies, was when
the faires were onscreen. It seemed a shame that they were only able to enjoy
the film for those fleeting moments.*
*Coincidentally, the two girls grew up to become old women, and confessed
that the photographs were indeed fakes. So why couldn't this film have gone
deeper into fantasy than it did if there was no truth to it.....?
Two out of four stars
Copyright (C) Nicholas Amado 1997

Title
Review for From Here to Eternity (1953)
The fifties provided some of the greatest films in the history of cinema. New
ideas were developed, new themes explored. Anti and post-war feelings ran
high in Hollywood, and, as a result, films like From Here To Eternity were
made. This Oscar winning picture has ranked among the greatest films ever
made, and with good reason.
>From Here To Eternity takes a hard look at the American Army during World War
II. Corrupt officers, rebellious privates, and an emotionally unstable
Seargent are the focus of this cinematic masterpiece. Mostly, it chronicles a
brief period in the lives of Private Pruit (Clift) and Seargent Warden
(Lancaster), their loves and their sense of duty and honor. 
This picture offers filmmaking excellence at every turn. Each main actor
gives the performance of his or her career, particularly Clift, Lancaster,
Sinatra and Reed. (The latter two both won supporting Oscars for thier work
in the film.) Clift is masterful as Pruit, and after viewing this film, (or
re-viewing it, if it has been a while) one cannot imagine anyone else in the
role. He portrays his character with such depth and subtle emotion that a
film about his life prior to where the film picks it up would be thoroughly
engrossing.
Zinneman brings together all the elements of the film brilliantly. His edits
between scenes of Warden and Pruit courting their respective loves are
flawless. In one sequence, he dissolves the crashing waves of one cathartic
episode between Lancaster and Kerr into the rippling smoke of Clift's
cigarette as he opens up for the first time to Donna Reed. 
As all the men grow gradually restless on the base, subtle visuals warning of
the attack on Pearl Harbor creep into the frame. Lancaster leans against the
wall while on the telephone, for the first time making us aware of any
time-related element; the calendar shows December 6th. Shortly thereafter, he
moves along a boardwalk , pausing in front of a directional marker, showing,
amongst other things, a sign reading "Pearl Harbor 8m". And on the morning of
the strike, a clock looms in the background, clearly showing ten minutes to
eight, the first bomb hits seconds later. The attack sequence includes
authentic war footage that blends well with the staged action.
This 8 Oscar motion picture helped define the filmmaking of the fifties. It
manages to express anti-war, and in many cases anti-military sentiment while
never allowing us a moment away from a military man. Daniel Taradash won a
well deserved award for his brilliant screenplay. He has each main character
starving for release from what they claim to be their one true love, the
Army. While Warden becomes involved with his superior's wife, Pruit is
falling for a woman who is paid to keep men company in a private club. Each
man picks an emotionally dangerous (and in some respects career-threatening)
situation to break the drudgery of their military lives. The dialogue is
realistic and involving, and each character speaks to us from an emotional
level.
>From Here To Eternity should be viewed by anyone with a respect for fantastic
filmmaking. It begs for a repeat viewing from those who havn't seen it in
ages, and it needs to be seen by anyone who has never had the pleasure. 
Four out of Four stars
Copyright (C) 1997 Nick Amado
*************************
Questions? Comments? Complaints? Email me: NAMIAM@AOL.COM 
