Authors
Jer Fairall
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Tommy Boy (1995)
     I know that the critics of America all disagree with me but I think
that Chris Farley is pretty funny. He was enjoyable back when Saturday
night Live was still watchable and he had a funny cameo in fellow
SNL-alumni Adam Sandler's vehicle "Billy Madison" and he is just as
amusing in his first starring vehicle "Tommy Boy." 
     The plot is pretty simple. Farley plays Tommy, the clumsy, overweight
and dim witted son of the wealthy owner of an automobile company (played
nicely Brian Dennehy). When tommy's father has an untimely passing, the
company is in danger of slipping out of the families hands and into the
posession of two scam artists (Bo Derek and Rob Lowe). So Tommy, with the
help of one of the companies ass-kissing employees (smugly played by SNL's
David Spade) goes on the road in order to sell enough goods to save the
company. 
     The bulk of the movie consists pretty much of things going wrong on
the road and Spade getting mad at Farley who is always screwing up
somehow. Alot of it seems to be trying to imitate the same formula from
the great John Candy/Steve Martin film "Planes Trains and Automobiles." 
     This is not a very hard movie to review. It's pretty much a
hit-and-miss comedy. I did enjoy Farley and I especially like the scene
where he and Spade end up singing along to the Carpenters shmaltz classic
"Superstar."  I just wish that the movie hit more than it missed.  

Title
Review for Nine Months (1995)
(1995) *** (out of *****)
Starring Hugh Grant, Julianne Moore, tom Arnold, Joan Cussak, Robin
Williams, Jeff Goldblum
Directed By Chris Columbus
     "Nine Months" is one of those movies that isn't worth going to the
touble of paying a babysitter, getting cleaned up and going out to the
theater to see but is just fine when viewed on a small screen with smaller
expectations. 
     Hugh Grant playes the polite, somewhat snotty boyfriend of Julianne
Moore who at the beginning of the film is starting to think about having a
child. Grant objects, of course, and then flips out when he later finds
out that his girlfriend is pregnant. During this strife, Grant and Moore
are befriended by another expecting couple played by Tom Arnold and Joan
Cusak. Arnold is an overbearing boor who manages to make life even more
miserable for the distraught Grant.
     Grant is incredibly nervous about his impending fatherhood which
leads to complications in his relationship with Moore. Things are made
even more hectic when their doctor turns up sick and and they end up with
his new assistant,  who is working on his first human pregnancy after
being a vetrenarian in Russia. The doctor is played with usual energy by
Robin Williams whose mispronunciation of the word "thesarus" provides the
movies single biggest laugh.
     "Nine Months" was directed by Chris Columbus whose previous credits
include "Home Alone" "Mrs. Doubtfire" and "Adventures in Babysitting." He
doesn't take very many chances in this film particularly with the casting.
Everyone in the film is playing their usual type of character. Grant is
really doing the same thing here that he did in the overrated "Four
Weddings and a Funeral" and even in a much darker film like Roman
Polanski's "Bitter Moon" which is that he is always both nervous and
charming. Tom Arnold is also doing pretty much here what he did in 1994's
"True Lies" and on television as Arnie in "Roseanne" and in his own funny
but short lived sitcom "The Jackie Thomas Show." And the rest of the cast,
including Joan Cussak and Jeff Goldblum, also give us just what we would
expect from them as well.
     "Nine Months" fails when it goes for scenes of really broad slapstick
like the overplayed scene in the delivery room when both Moore and Cussak
just happen to both end up in the same room. And I could have really done
without the extended sequence in a toy store where Arnold gets into a
fight with an insipid Barney the dinosaur clone. Yet "Nine Months" is not
without it's charms especially when seen from your sofa.

Title
Review for CrissCross (1992)
     "CrissCross" is an odd little film that played in theaters for about one 
day back in the spring in 1992, recieved mediocre reviews and quickly went to
video. It's a small film, which means that it's about people, not explosions
and it's set in that popular cinematic time period, the late 1960's. Goldie Hawn
plays the single mother who lives in a hotel and works after hours as a stripper
in order to support herself and her 12 year old son. Despite her top billing,
however, the film is more focused on her son Chris, played by newcomer David 
Arnott, than it is on Hawn.
     The early part of the film mostly deals with Chris's father, a Vietnam vet
who joins a monastary in order to block out the trauma he experienced in the
war. There are a few scenes between Arnott and his father, played by Keith 
Carradine, that make you think that the rest of the film will be about the 
father coming to terms with the war and re-entering society (much like Kevin
Costner's 1994 film, "The War"). But the father is soon forgotten about and
most of the film takes place in the family's small Florida town in the summer
of '69 and is about Chris's attempts to save his mother from the stripping 
business. Chris learns that the cook at the hotel where he lives is secretly 
dealing cocaine so Chris decides to steal the drugs and sell them himself in 
order to raise enough money for his mother to quit stripping. Meanwhile, Hawn
has a new boyfriend (Arliss Howard) who Chris naturally feels resentful towards.
     "CrissCross" is an uneven film that at times relies too heavily on period 
atmosphere (for example - in case you forget that the movie is set in 1969, 
director Chris Menges includes many shots of the moon landing). But at least
the film doesn't overdose on "hits from the era" the way that "Forest Gump" 
sometimes did. There are maybe four or five recognizable tunes in the film, but    
it's clear that selling a soundtrack one of the aims of this film. 
     The cast is interesting. Hawn ins't given much to do here, but her young 
co-star, Arnott manages to carry the film quite well. While most young actors 
tend to broadly overact in lead roles, Arnott is nicely understated and quiet,
although sometimes a little too understatedand and quiet, in the lead role. This
movie was likely intended to launch him as a young actor who can handle drama
(like Edward Furlong or Brad Renfro) but, perhaps due to the films failure, 
Arnott hasn't been seen in much since. (This David Arnott is not to be confused
with the "Last Action Hero" screenwriter of the same name). Also included in the
cast is Steve Buscemi of "Reservoir Dogs" fame in an early role as a druggie.
     Despite its awkwardness, "CrissCross" isn't nearly as bad as the you would 
think. Though it moves at a leisurely pace, eventually, through some unexpected
twists in the plot and because of Arnott, the film began to grow on me after a
while. There are several good scenes in the second half of the movie as Chris
interacts with the drug dealers, his Mom's new boyfriend, the hotel manager and 
his girlfriend from next door (they have one of those adolescent love scenes 
where the parents come home and almost catch them in the act just as they are 
about to do something). Unfortunatly, the ending of the film is so contrived 
that it's nearly unforgivable. In the last fifteen minutes of the movie, many
of it's key characters are brought together for a confrontation that is not at
all believable and too neatly resolved. 
     It's not hard to see why "CrissCross" didn't thrive in theaters or engage
film critics. Yet risk taking video renters will come away from a film that is
hardly perfect but often rewarding.    
