Authors
Mattias Thuresson
Number of Reviews
17

Title
Review for Beck - Öga för öga (1997) (V)
Svenska och tyska pengar har inte kunnat slita
sig frĺn Sjöwall/Wahlöös romaner om mjukissnuten
Martin Beck. I början av 1990-talet hade Gösta
Ekman rollen som Beck och nu har ytterligare
ĺtta filmer spelats in, nu med Haber som Beck.
De nya filmerna är inte baserade pĺ nĺgra
böcker av Sjöwall/Wahlöö men har samma karak-
tärer. Becks mjukisprofil har försvunnit och
här handlar det nu om en vanlig snutfilm som
inte skiljer sig frĺn sĺ mĺnga andra. Ja, en
sak förstĺs. Mina misstankar om den skyldige
kom pĺ skam tvĺ gĺnger under filmen och slutet
blir överraskande. Nĺgon samhällskritik som i
böckerna finns inte heller.
En seriemördare dödar kvinnor över hela Sverige,
till en början till synes planlöst men snart be-
griper man att kvinnorna gick i samma skolklass
i Östhammar. Mördaren misstänker man var en i
samma klass, nu handelsresande som reser runt i
Sverige.
Det är svĺrt att sätta fingret pĺ det men
filmen har nĺgot av TV-film över sig, nĺgot
av samma känsla man fĺr av en miniserie pĺ
SVT. Roligt att se Lena T. Hansson som knappt
igenkännbar plufsig hemmafru.

Title
Review for Ungkarlspappan (1935)
Den gamle greven pĺ Ekenäs, Kristian Örnklo, berättar
för sin doktor om sina barn, utspridda över världen. "Under
min tid som militärattaché ute i världen hände det ju ett
och annat". Greven har aldrig mött dem utan bara skickat pengar
till deras mödrar. Doktorn förebrĺr greven för att han
inte lĺtit sina barn se Ekenäs och skrämmer honom med att den
dag han dör kommer hans barn, som aldrig sett Ekenäs, lĺta
sälja godset. Det hotet tar skruv: 'Sälja Ekenäs? Varför
det?'. Efter en stunds funderande: 'Barn kan man lära sig en hel
del av!"
Doktorns son John skickas ut i världen för att kalla hem de nu
vuxna barnen. Ett barn finns i Spanien, ett i Danmark och ett i
Norge. Spanien skildras lika schablonartat som man kan vänta sig:
Enrico domineras av sin dominanta mor som kräver att han snart
kommer tillbaka sĺ att han kan bli tjurfäktare. Utanför
konsulatet stĺr en spanjor i sombrero och spelar gitarr. Jurgen
Schildt menar i sin bok om den svenska 30-talsfilmen att när det
gäller utlänningar sĺ växer främlingsskapet med
avstĺndet.  Danskar och norrmän behandlas i stort sett
rättvist men övriga nationaliteter enligt de folkliga
fördomarna: finnar slĺss med kniv, tyskar är ordningssamma,
fransmän sitter pĺ kafé med en basker pĺ huvudet och sĺ
vidare. Enrico är filmens pajasfigur, likt en papegoja fĺr han
lära sig 'Hej pĺ dig, gamle galosch' som han kan utbrista
närhelst man vill fĺ publiken att skratta. Han är en
utlänning och i Sverige pĺ 1930-talet betyder det att man kommer
frĺn en annan planet.
Olof Winnerstrand som den gamle greven kan sätta in ett ögonglas
och knipa ihop med ögat som ingen annan. Han var specialist pĺ
barskt grymtande herrar i överklassen med glimten i
ögat. Visserligen fick han spela samma roller under sin
filmkarriär, tjugo ĺr senare, i Bergmans 'En lektion i
kärlek' spelar han samma gamla barskt grymtande herre.  Men vad
gör det, när dessa gamla uvar alltid är sĺ charmerande?
Filmens manus är kanske inte lika lysande. John har visserligen
lite problem med att kalla hem barnen, men efter deras ankomst till
Ekenäs verkar Molander ha fĺtt skrivkramp.  Det händer inte
mycket. Ungdomarnas alla glada pĺhitt kontrasteras mot grevens
butterhet mot att hans barn vänder upp och ned pĺ allt -
samtidigt som han uppenbarligen lever upp igen och filosoferar över
hur nyttigt det är med att omge sig med unga människor.

Title
Review for Hon dansade en sommar (1951)
Sverige 1951
Regi: Arne Mattsson
Medverkande: Folke Sundquist [Göran], Ulla Jacobsson [Kerstin], Edvin
Adolphson [Anders], John Elfström [kyrkoherden]
Hon dansade en sommar lär vara den svenska film som setts av flest
människor, bĺde i Sverige och utomlands. Visst är Ingmar
Bergman känd men hans filmer har aldrig lockat nĺgon
storpublik. Inget fel pĺ filmen i sig men anledningen till
uppmärksamheten runt filmen lär snarare bero pĺ att Ulla
Jacobsson visar brösten i en scen. Helt oskyldigt men nĺgot
enormt pĺ den tiden.
Under slutet av 1940-talet och början av 1950-talet har Arne
Mattsson sin storhetstid. Rallare (1947), Farlig vĺr (1949), När
kärleken kom till byn (1950), För min heta ungdoms skull (1952)
tillkommer vid denna tid.  Dessa filmer är sinsemellan olika och
det speglar även hans hela produktion.  Kriminalfilmer, romantik,
krigsfilm, mjukporr och dramatik, ingen genre var för svĺr
för honom. Dock är det under första halvan av hans karriär
som han gör minnesvärda filmer.
Hon dansade en sommar är historien om 19-ĺriga Göran som tar
studenten frĺn ett läroverk. Det är sommar och den skall han
tillbringa ute pĺ landet hos sin farbror Anders, bonde och hans
dotter Sigrid. Snart nog träffar han den 17-ĺriga Kerstin, en
ung och blyg skönhet som han snart har förälskat sig i. Hans
känslor är besvarade men Kerstin är rädd för att hennes
strängt religiösa föräldrar skall fĺ veta om det. Deras
kärlek fördjpas dock trots att de vet att Göran en dag
mĺste ĺka tillbaka till stan. Tillsammans med de andra
ungdomarna i trakten försöker de genom ungdomsföreningen
ställa iordning en lokal för dans och teater men kyrkoherden
är inflytelserik och motstĺndare till sĺdana pĺhitt och
vill stoppa dem.
Folke Sundquist var med i mĺnga av Mattssons filmer under
femtiotalet, här i filmen gör han i mitt tycke ingen
anmärkningsvärd prestation. Den görs istället av Ulla
Jacobsson, som med stor talang lyckas visa hur Kerstin slits mellan
att släppa fram all sin kärlek och att vara sĺ ren och dygdig
som hennes föräldrar vill.
Göran Strindbergs foto är enastĺende vackert och tillsammans
med musiken blir vissa scener rena naturromantiken. Strindberg räds
inte för att använda bĺde rörlig kamera, som i scenen
där Göran svimmar pĺ ĺkern eller i scenen där Göran
och Kerstin dansar pĺ midsommarafton och kameran följer dem
tätt intill.
Som alltid i svensk femtiotalsfilm finns nĺgra minnesvärda
biroller.  Främst John Elfström som den bigotte kyrkoherden, som
nästan spricker av moralism och sträng gudstro. Där är han
lĺngt ifrĺn Ĺsa-Nisse. Tydligen blev filmen stoppad i
katolska Spanien för detta medan den tvärtom distribuerades i
Östtyskland med myndigheternas goda minne pĺ grund av just den
bild den ger av ortodox kristendom.  Edvin Adolphsons klurige bonde,
väl medveten om hur det är att vara ung och förälskad och
bo pĺ landet är en annan minnesvärd figur.
Min främsta anmärkning mĺste nog vara att slutet inte är
särskilt bra.  Efter att ha varit med om deras trots allt ljusa och
skira romans skulle man ha kunnat lämna biografen med en varm
känsla i maggropen om inte Mattsson med detta slut hade krossat
eventuella illusioner om att kärleken övervinner allt.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Title
Review for Eva (1948)
Cast: Birger Malmsten, Eva Stiberg, Eva Dahlbeck, Stig Olin
This is an early Ingmar Bergman. But it's not he who
has directed it, that was made by another giant in
the swedish film history, Gustaf Molander.
It's WW2 and the sailor Bo is returning home to
meet his parents for the first time in two years.
His father works as a station manager at the
railway and when train passes a certain place
he remembers what happened on the same place
when he was 12 years old.
The train drivers had always let him see the
engine, blowing the whistle or test-drive the locomotives.
But one night a group of travelling musicians
stopped in the neighbourhood for the night
and Bo met a girl in his age. She was blind
but to show off he stole one of the train engines
and off they went. Being inexperienced he caused
a trainwreck and the blind girl died without ever
knowing what hit her. Ever since then, Bo
has had feelings of guilt, and his faith in
God has disappeared. Visiting his neighbours,
he tells Eva, a girl he falls in love with, of his fear of
death: "There is something called the closeness
of the death: Can your feel it? It's awful, awful!"
and "Death is like a giant shadow who catches hold
of everything and destroys it. There is nothing
alive that won't die!"
Pretty heavy stuff. Speaking for myself, I can't
imagine somebody in Bo's age talking about his
fear of death to a girl he wants to date.
Anyone who has seen a few of Bergman's works from
the 1940s and 1950s understands that this is
obviously his writing: the religous doubts of a
man, the feelings of guilt for the lack of faith
and the envy for those who have it since this
means a solution to all problems.
Bo's fear of death is a theme that is repeated through
the movie: Back in Stockholm, he shares an apartment with
his best friend Göran and Göran's flirtatious wife
Susanne. She is obviously sexually interested in Göran
and one night he has a nightmare that he and Susanne
kills Göran. He wakes up screaming: once again he
has caused the death of someone.
The third time, Eva and Bo has married and moved
to an isolated island off the coast. Eva is pregnant in
the eight month when it is time to give birth. Being
on an island, Bo has to row like an Olympic Games champion
across the sound to get her to the midwife. During this his
nightmares returns: Will it be the third time he kills
somebody, this time his wife?
This was also a pleasant surprise coming from director
Gustaf Molander. He is mostly known for his silly
upper-class comedies or heavy drama. This shows
the importance of a good writer having the benefit
of a good director and vice versa. And for the actors,
Birger Malmsten is certainly impressing as Bo. And
Eva Dahlbeck, here making her first of her eleven
Ingmar Bergman movies also gives a convincing performance
as the sexually starved but flirtatious wife.
E-mail: mattias.thuresson@mbox300.swipnet.se
Hey! Don't forget my A Star is Born page:
http://home1.swipnet.se/~w-18501/Bilder/Star/sib.htm

Title
Review for Boys' Night Out (1962)
Cast: Kim Novak, James Garner, Tony Randall, Howard Morris,
Howard Duff, Oskar Homolka
I love this movie, and I've just seen for the
umptenth time. Unfortunately, it is also completly
unknown and very few have seen it. It's my mission
in life to spread the word: see this movie!
Fred, George, Doug and Howie are reaching middleage.
Three of them have a wife, kids and a house in
the suburb with a mortgage to pay. Only Fred
is still a bachelor.
Together they take the local train every morning
to work in town. On one of their organized Thursday
evenings at a bar, Fred tells them of his boss and
the arrangements he has made to keep a mistress.
He has gotten an apartment in downtown where he
can meet her but has told his wife that he
needs the apartment to spend the night after
staff meetings every Thursday night.
Since they always split everything four ways,
they decide that they should get an apartment
with a young woman as well, Kathy. However,
Kathy isn't completly honest to them. In fact,
she is a sociology student writing a thesis
about the sex life of the suburban male.
With these four species she believes that she
will make a very good paper.
OK, have one thing clear though. The romantic
rendezvous' between Kathy and each of the men
are completly innocent. The script stays above
the waist - or to be precise, above the neck.
Noboyd claims that Kathy is their mistress, the
four guys call her their 'companion'. The
censorship board here in Sweden considered it
to be suitable only for people above 15 years,
but that only shows how long ago 1962 was. Small
children could watch this without being corrupted.
Kim Novak is as lovely as always in this movie,
even if she seems to be a bit too old for a
student. James Garner is the playboy just like
in many other movies. I liked Howard Morris the
best as Howard the accountant who has to diet
to support his wife. Tony Randall is funny as
always.
1962 was more than 35 years ago. How many
accountants, copywriters or investment bankers
can today afford to live in a house in the suburb
with a lot of kids and a wife who does not work?
This is the white middle class, I can't remember
that I saw any blacks on the commuter train
they use. These are the people who can count
on their kids to live an even better life than
themselves. Perhaps this should also be a
subject for a thesis in movie sociology?

Title
Review for Easter Parade (1948)
Cast: Fred Astaire [Don Hewes], Judy Garland [Hannah Brown],
Peter Lawford [Johnny Harrow], Ann Miller [Nadine Hale]
An MGM musical doesn't come much nicer and
sweeter than Easter Parade. Someone who found
anything in it upsetting should reconsider
what is valuable in life. I think it's
obvious that the production didn't start with
a screenplay, it began with someone thinking:
"Hey, let's do a musical filled with the songs
of Irving Berlin!". The plot between the
singing and dancing is the standard musical
plot: Boy meets girl, boy and girl fall in
love, boy and girl gets seperated, boy and girl
meets again. This time it's Fred Astaire and
Judy Garland as the couple in love.
Don Hewes and Nadine Hale is a dancing team on
various theatres. But Nadine wants to build a
career on her own and leaves him. He picks up
the next dancing girl he meet, Hannah Brown, as his
new dancing partner. Although he falls in love
with her, he keeps their relationship strictly
a business arrangement. Hannah falls in love
with Don but believes incorrectly that he loves
Nadine and that he only keeps her as a temporary
stand-in until Nadine comes back to him.
Gene Kelly was first cast as dancer Don Hewes.
After breaking his ankle he suggested that
he was replaced with Fred Astaire, at the time
in semi-retirement. Production couldn't be delayed,
since Garland was in a good mood and the
producer's was afraid that her mood should change
for the worse. No one seem to have remembered that
Astaire was old enough to be Garland's father.
Fred Astaire was a wonderful dancer and he shows
it in several sequences, most impressively in
"Steppin' Out With my Baby", where an Astaire
in slow motion proves his talent to the audience.
Although Garland got first billing, Astaire is
the one who makes the movie memorable.
Ann Miller plays Astaire's ex-partner Nadine.
Is it a coincidence or did she always play self-
centered unsympathetic roles? Anyway, she
replaced Cyd Charisse who had a broken tendon.
Rumour has it that she (Miller) was dating MGM boss
Louis B. Mayer at the time.

Title
Review for Under ytan (1997)
Historien handlar om 23-ĺriga Sandra som tas in
pĺ behandlingshem för att slippa ifrĺn sitt
drogberoende. Hennes knarkande pojkvän/hallick
Roffe riktar dĺ sitt intresse mot Sandras
18-ĺriga syster Jannika. Hon är Sandras motsats,
flickan som studerar ordentligt och spelar piano.
I filmen finns dock nĺgra frĺgor som förblir
obesvarade. Varför Jannika överhuvudtaget dras
till den obehaglige Roffe och systrarnas
förhĺllande till föräldrarna (det antyds bĺde
incest och alkoholism)
Visst är de tre huvudrollsinnehavarna
väldigt duktiga, särskilt Sällström och
Appelqvist som övertygar som knarkare.
Lennart Jähkel och Liam Norberg är med
för lite för att nĺgon skall kunna ge
en seriös bedömning av deras skĺdespeleri.
Jag gillar inte heller den här typen av
foto med bleka, matta färger som man har sett
i nĺgra filmer de senaste ĺren. Ett
plus dock till Johan Söderqvists musik,
som passar perfekt till Sandras och Roffes
otaliga knarktrippar.

Title
Review for Opposite Sex and How to Live with Them, The (1992)
Cast: Arye Gross, Courteney Cox, Kevin Pollak, Julie Brown
David hangs out on a bar with his best friend Eli. Both are trying
to pickup women to take home and have sex with. Also in the bar are
Carrie with her best friend Zoe. As you can expect from a romantic
comedy David sees Carrie and can't keep his mind from her, although he
and Eli eventually go home with two other women. However, the four of
them meet at a football stadium the following weekend. David takes
Carrie out and they fall in love. Not before long, Carrie moves in with
David. What follows is just what you can expect from a romantic comedy,
they have to face the ups and downs of a relationship,
somewhat like Rob Lowe's and Demi Moore's About Last Night (1986).
What really annoyed me about this movie is the many times when
the film suddenly stops and Eli starts to talk to the audience,
giving his views about men, women and relationships. I guess he is
supposed to be the funny side-kick that provides the comedy,
but I just think it slows the movie down. Besides that, what he
says is pretty silly anyway.
When it comes to the actors, Arye Gross is a much too pale actor
for a leading role. On the other side, Courteney Cox is perfect in
the role of Carrie and Julie Brown does a good job as Carie's
exuberant girlfriend.
All in all, this is a good movie for a quiet Monday evening in front
of the TV. Renting it on video? I don't think so

Title
Review for Bodies, Rest & Motion (1993)
Cast: Phoebe Cates, Bridget Fonda, Tim Roth, Eric Stoltz
The word 'rest' in the title should be stressed since this is
a movie that lacks any action scenes at all. What does takes
place is more based on character development. The film starts
right in the middle of the lives of four people: Nick, Beth,
Carol and Sid. What they have done earlier is for the most
part only hinted at. Nick and Beth have a relationship and
have decided to move from Enfield, Arizona to Butte, Montana.
(and I who thought that Butte was pronounced slightly
different...) Carol is Nick's ex-girlfriend and Beth's best
friend, Sid is a joint-smoking painter that comes to repaint
their house before the new tenants move in.
Obviously based on a stage play, the problem with the movie
is that there's a lot of things left out. It's not obvious
that Nick and Beth are in love with each other, the reason
why Nick was fired from his job isn't mentioned. And why Nick
suddenly decide to go visit his parents remain a mystery,
when he hasn't seen them for many years.
Set in a small (fictional?) town in Arizona was a good move,
since this makes the film focus on the four characters and not
on their surroundings. The name of the city is not important,
this could take place anywhere with four young people in a
house discussing life and the future. Particularly impressive
is Bridget Fonda as Beth who end up in bed with Sid when
her fiance Nick leaves her. Not an actress that I have found
interesting earlier or seen many pictures with, but I'll
keep an eye on her in the future.
Interesting trivia: this was rated R in the US but rated
'barntillĺten' in Sweden wich means that anyone at any
age can see it.

Title
Review for Välkommen till festen (1997)
Medv: Charlotte Stĺhlberg, Olle Sarri, Jenny Lindroth
Ella Lemhagen gjorde en väldigt bra debut med
'Drömprinsen - filmen om Em' och nu har hon
ĺterkommit med denna. Hon har behĺllit flera av
de unga skĺdespelarna frĺn sin förra film, och
de flesta gör anmärkningsvärt bra prestationer.
Isabells föräldrar ĺker bort pĺ nyĺrsafton och
lämnar henne kvar i huset. Till dem har hon sagt
att hon känner sig sjuk men det egentliga syftet
är att kunna ha fest för sina allra närmaste
kompisar. Snart nog spĺrar festen ut när de jämn-'
ĺriga killarna i hockeylaget kommer. I huset
bor ocksĺ en inneboende, Peter, som oväntat dyker
upp med nĺgra flaskor vin. Ungdom, starka känslor
och alkohol blir ingen lyckad kombination. Var och
en av ungdomarna är innerst inne osäkra pĺ sig själva.
Isabelles kompis Vera är dominant och har sett
till att omge sig med viljesvaga ja-sägare. Hon ser
ned pĺ sina jämnĺriga, men frĺgan är om hon skulle
accepteras pĺ en fest för äldre ungdomar. När hon
kommer hem till Isabell som bjuder henne pĺ alkoholfri
bĺl blir hennes kommentar: 'Är det barnkalas?'
Länge skulle filmen ha hetat 'Varför gĺr tjejer alltid
tvĺ pĺ toaletten?' och det är inne pĺ den som tjejerna
samlas mellan konfrontationerna för att dra upp nya
planer. Toaletten är Veras territorium där man bara
fĺr vara med hennes tillĺtelse. Pojkarna pĺ festen har
däremot ingen skyddad zon, den skapar de själva genom
att spela apa, gapa och skrika och därmed undvika
närhet till andra.
Genomgĺende bra rollprestationer, utom i en scen
där det lät alltför mycket skolteater.

Title
Review for Änglar, finns dom? (1961)
Den här gamla klassikern har nu restaurerats och har visats pĺ
bio sedan i somras (1997), ĺtminstone för de som bor i nĺgon
av landets större städer. Filmen spelades in i Eastmancolor, och
pĺ nĺgot sätt mĺste färgerna ha varit annorlunda pĺ
den tiden för det ser inte riktigt som idag.  Färgerna är
pĺ nĺgot sätt väldigt klara och tydliga. Jag har för
mig att jag tänkte pĺ samma sak när jag sĺg Att angöra
en brygga. Bĺda filmerna är inspelade i skärgĺrden och
leder tankarna till TV-reklamen för Pripps.
Själva filmen är ocksĺ den riktigt bra. Jag skrev ett referat
om den för Internet Movie Database för ett och ett halvt ĺr
sedan och lyckades fĺ handlingen om bakfoten, men nu förstĺr
jag bättre. Unge Jan Froman ärvde en mindre förmögen efter
sin mor för nĺgra ĺr sedan och har slagit dank sedan
dess. Efter att ha läst boken 'Vägen till framgĺng' rycker
han upp sig och tar jobb som vaktmästarassistent i en affärsbank
vid Blasieholmen i Stockholm. Den ordinarie vaktmästaren Hagson
vinner flera tusen pĺ poker och ber Froman att hjälpa honom med
pengarna. Froman lyckas ta reda pĺ vilka aktier disponent Raeder,
styrelsemedlem i banken, tänker köpa, och köper sedan samma
aktier. Raeder sysslar med att som journalist skriva ned ett
företag för att sedan, när aktiekursen dalar, köpa
aktierna billigt.
Froman förälskar sig även i Margareta, kontorist pĺ banken
och dotter till admiral Günther. Han bjuder ut henne till en stuga
ute i skärgĺrden för nĺgra dagars romans (samt nakenbad
och vackra bilder för filmens fotograf).
Men när det gäller skĺdespelarprestationer mĺste jag nog
istället sätta Edvin Adolphsons roll som admiralen i främsta
rummet. Han var en riktig karaktärs- skĺdespelare. Han gör
admiralen till en riktig sjöbuse med saltvatten i ĺdrorna, som
endast har förakt över för landkrabbor och handelsflottan. I
andra hand kommer Sigge Fürst, även han en duktig
skĺdespelare. Det kanske visar hur mycket tvĺ enormt duktiga
skĺdespelare kan lyfta en film. Jarl Kulle i all ära, men jag
tycker nog att han, dĺ 33 ĺr gammal, var nĺgot för
ĺldrad för att spela en sexuellt oerfaren yngling. Schollin
är antingen docksöt eller butter, med nĺgot begränsat
register som skĺdespelare.

Title
Review for Smultronstället (1957)
When I was younger I put my cassette player in front
of the TV and recorded the sounds from Wild Strawberries
to a tape. I used to listen to this tape when I couldn't
sleep. It was much more satisfying than counting sheep.
As a side effect, I learned all the lines from the movie.
I also learned to appreciate it.
This is the Bergman movie that everyone should have
seen. Naturally because it's his best but also because
of Sjöström's performance as the old professor. He
received his doctorate fifty years ago and now he's
going to Lund to become 'doctor jubilaris'.
The professor, Isak Borg, takes the car from Stockholm
to Lund together with his daughter-in-law Marianne. Along
the way, he is confronted with his past. They take a break
at the summer house where he spent the summers of his
childhood. A very good scene is where he steps into
the dining room where his siblings and relatives sit around
the breakfast table just like in the 1890s. Something
similar was used by Woody Allen in Crimes and
Misdemeanors if i remember correctly.
At the summer house, they pick up three hitchhikers. Sara,
Anders and Viktor. Sara looks just like Isak's teenage love
Sara who eventually married his brother Sigfrid instead.
Anders is studying to become a priest, Viktor to become a
physician. This provides Bergman with a symbol for the
distance betwen religion and science. The two boys even
go into the forest to fight about God's existence.
Another important scene is where they stop at a gas station.
The proprietors, Henrik and Eva, tells the professor what a
wonderful provincial doctor he was. 'Maybe I should have stayed',
the professor replies. But the truth about his past becomes
clouded when Henrik answers 'Stayed here? I don't understand
what you mean.' The reasons why he moved out isn't revealed
to the audience.
All the dreams and hallucinations that he has during the
trip make it obvious to the professor what an empty life
he has led. The loveless marriage and the emotional distance
to his only son Evald. "I'm not really sure if I am his son",
Evald tells his wife Marianne. In the end, the professor
and Marianne both tell each other how fond they are of each
other. He also wants to release Evald from his debt but
is interrupted. His proposal to his old housemaid, miss Agda, that they
should stop addressing each other with titles and say
'you' to each other is however rejected by the old woman.
Bergman at his best with a perfect mix of comedy and drama,
funny one-liners and surrealism.

Title
Review for From Noon Till Three (1976)
Charles Bronson doing comedy? Well, I've hardly
seen any of his movies, just heard of action or
westerns where he's a tough guy with a gun.
The western genre is not my favorite, since many
of them lack originality. It's the same old thing
in most of them: an outlaw, a sheriff and a bank
or farm to fight about and a twist of love. Some
manage to stand out though, like this one. Graham
Dorsey and his gang is on the way to rob a bank
in a small western town and stays at the isolated
house of a young widow, Amanda, to steal a horse.
While the others stay on, Dorsey stays at the
house with the beautiful woman. They very quickly
fall in love with each other (if you buy that a
woman would fall in love with a man who first tried
to rape her). They spend a few wonderful hours
together. Afraid of getting caught, Dorsey leaves
Amanda. On the road to the town, he quickly changes
clothes with a travelling salesman, then escapes
with the salesman's goods. The salesman, wearing
Dorsey's clothes, is killed by the posse. Believing
that he is dead, Amanda and a ghost writer writes
a tearjerker about their few hours together which
becomes a success. The story is not completly true,
she has rather refined the story to make it sell better.
It's a quite nice little movie, not overlong or
filled with clichés. The only thing I found disturbing
was Amanda's reaction when Dorsey returned. Who
could anyone not recognize Bronson if they had met
him once. Amanda, played by Bronson's wife Ireland
is a good actress too. That she was forty when the
film was made is hard to believe, she looks more
like twentyfive.

Title
Review for Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (1958)
Cast: Paul Newman, Elizabeth Taylor, Burl Ives, Jack Carson
Paul Newman was one of best actors of the 1950s.
Elizath Taylor was one of the best actresses during
the 1950s. So what can you expect from a film from
this decade where they both appear? No disappointments,
they both give their best here.
There's also something very appealing with the way
how the works of Tennessee Williams has turned out
on the big scren. The Glass Menagerie, A Streetcar
Named Desire, Baby Doll, Sweet Bird of Youth and
Night of the Iguana have all become good movies.
The most memorable performance is by Burl Ives
as dying Big Daddy himself. Surprisingly, Ives
was not even 50 years old but looks as old as 70.
He plays the big, blunt hardworking plantation-
owner who has worked all his life to get some-
where. But despited that he has only contempt
for his wife Ida, for his well-behaving son
Gooper and Gooper's fertile wife. His other son,
Brick, is an ex-football star who has turned to
drinking. The future is not all bad, since Dr.
Baugh's examination has shown that Big Daddy's
cancer is not terminal.
The controversy takes place between Maggie and
Brick on the one hand and Gooper and his wife Mae
on the other. Mae use her children (the 'no-neck
monsters' to use Maggie's words) to suck up Big
Daddy and to show him which couple is the most
suitable to inherit the plantation. But he can't
stand their cynical attention and interest in his
health. But Maggie too is eager to get her hands
on the plantation.
Brick, a drinker with a broken leg, has also contempt.
Most of all for his wife Maggie, but also for all the
greed the inheritants-to-be show, waiting for Big Daddy
to die. As it turns out, Dr. Baugh hasn't told them
the truth. The cancer is terminal after all.
Jack Carson seem to be an underestimated actor. He
appeared in a lot of comedies or musicals but after
having seen him both in this one and A Star is Born
I understand that he had dramatic talent that perhaps
wasn't always appreciated.
Five Academy Award Nominations include Best Actor (Newman),
Best Actress (Taylor), Best Adapted Screenplay, Best
Cinematography and Best Director.

Title
Review for Sheepman, The (1958)
Cast: Glenn Ford, Shirley MacLaine, Leslie Nielsen
This movie is a combination of comedy and drama. Jason Sweet comes to
a small town in the wild west, Powder Valley.  Within half an hour,
he has gotten to know young Dell Payton (Shirley MacLaine), he has
bought an excellent horse for only $40 and beaten up the toughest
cowboy in the town, Jumbo (Mickey Shaugnessy). After that, he tells
the people in the town why he has come: he is a sheep farmer going
to setttle down in the town. The grazing rights are open to everybody
but sofar nobody has dared to bring sheep to a town ruled by cattle
ranchers who are afraid that sheep and cattle won't mix.
One of the ruling cattle rancers is his old partner Johnny Bledsoe.
They haven't seen each other since they became enemies. Bledsoe now
calls himself Colonel Bedford and has kept his old life a secret in
order to be able to romance Dell Payton.
So far as I can remember, I have never seen a Glenn Ford movie (where
he has gotten principal credits) who has disappointed me. He has done
all kinds of movies: film noir as in The Big Heat (1953), comedy as
in The Gazebo (1959) and drama, The Blackboard Jungle (1955) but in
general he is playing the same kind of character in his movies, the
calm and collected everyday-hero, showing courage under pressure.
Playing a cowboy who beats up people might be an exception, a
middle-class civil servant is his kind of characters. It was during
these years, the end of the 1950s his career peaked. None of the
main characters, Ford, MacLaine or Leslie Nielsen are doing
something special, but I notice the supporting characters: Mickey
Shaughnessy as Jumbo is doing a great job.
Copyright Mattias Thuresson 1997
E-mail: 
Hey! Don't forget my A Star is Born page:
http://home1.swipnet.se/~w-18501/Bilder/Star/sib.htm

Title
Review for Egen ingĺng (1956)
Medverkande: Maj-Britt Nilsson, Alf Kjellin, Hasse Ekman, Sigge Fürst,
Bibi Andersson, Lars Ekborg
Det finns nĺgra drag som gör en film till en typisk Hasse Ekman-film. Alltid
stiliga och snygga miljöer likt Gustaf Molanders 1930-talskomedier. Hasse
Ekman finns förstĺs med i nästan alla sina filmer. Redaktör, skĺdespelare
eller lebeman i allmänhet verkar vara vanliga sysselsättning för hans karaktärer.
Har har vi historien om Marianne Stenman, numera ensamboende i ett hyreshus.
En spökröst talar om för tittarna att hon bara har sex timmar kvar att leva.
De boende i huset är välfödda borgare med konventionella uppfattningar. Pĺ
hennes ytterdörr brukar nĺgon i huset skriva 'hora'. I hennes säng ligger hon
och tänker tillbaka pĺ lyckligare tider. I början lyckligt gift med Arvid, ung
läkare som ständigt begraver sig i arbete pĺ bekostnad av sin hustru. "Jag
tycker att en kvinnas första uppgift är att ta hand om man och barn" säger han
och vill inte lĺta henne tjäna pengar pĺ egen hand. Hon lär istället känna
redaktör Sture Falk som blir hennes länk till omvärlden. Palm är bitter pĺ
omvärlden, pĺ sin hustru och civilisationen i allmänhet. Arvid Stenman kommer
med ursäkter för att inte skaffa barn men sanningen är att han inte tänker lĺta
sina tankar störas av barn när han vill koncentrera sig pĺ att utveckla ett
konstgjort hjärta.
Till slut, fem ĺr efter bröllopet, lämnar hon sin man. Sture Palm hjälper
henne med att fĺ jobb som fotomodell. När han ber henne att ställa upp som
underklädesmodell vägrar hon först men nĺgra mĺnader senare tvingas hon
ändĺ ställa upp för pengarnas skull. Herrarna i huset gottar sig ĺt modell-
bilderna medan deras fruar blir avundsjuka. 
Vad som stör är det ständiga hoppen. Ibland är det nutid men ofta är det
nĺgon som minns bättre tider; svĺrt att veta vad. Ett genomgĺende tema är
ocksĺ att världen är för jäklig. Till och med radiopoliserna sitter och
drömmer om en annan värld.
Bäst är förstĺs Maj-Britt Nilsson som kvinnan som dras allt längre ned.
I början en läkarhustru, nu en underklädesmodell. I hennes filmer är hon
alltid duktig skĺdespelerska och tilldragande. Vad jag vet gifte hon sig
i början av 1960-talet och slutade med skĺdespelandet.
Nĺgra fina biroller finns det förstĺs. Sigge Fürst pĺ 1950-talet har lämnat
25-öresskurkarna bakom sig och gör karaktärsroller. Rolig är han i restaurang-
scenen med Hasse Ekman där han tror att de pratar om hans hustru medan Ekman
tror att de pratar om Marianne. Holger Löwenadler gjorde alltid bra roller,
även här, som den gamla fastighetsägaren som drömmer om att mörda sin hustru.

Title
Review for WarGames (1983)
Cast: Matthew Broderick [David], Ally Sheedy [Jennifer],
Barry Corbin [Gen. Beringer], John Wood [Stephen Falken]
It's a fact that a good thriller or
action movie doesn't need violence to
be good or worth watching. All it takes
is potential violence to make the
audience bite their nails. And what
kind of violence could be more efficient
than a global thermo-nuclear war?
And potential violence is the premiss WarGames
is built upon. A computer whiz-kid, David,
is usually contended with hacking into
the school computer to change his grades.
But after having read an advertisment
for an upcoming computer game, he wants to
be the first to play it. Instead of
getting into the computer at Protovision
Software he accidentally comes to the frontgate
of NORAD. With the help of Jennifer, a girl
in his biology class, he starts to play a
nice game of nuclear war with WOPR, War Operation
Plan Response (a top-notch computer at the time,
but now hardly faster than my own computer)
I remember being 12 and watching this
at the cinema. It was very efficent at giving
you a scare in those days and that hasn't
changed. Of course, a nuclear war seemed to
be much more of something that could actually
happen back in 1983. I wouldn't be surprised
if this gave people nightmares. I hope it still
does since you still hear about school kids
hacking into the computers at Pentagon.
Broderick and Sheedy are just fine as the
young teenagers (although her interest in David
remains a mystery). But the rest of the actors are,
by no fault of their own, restricted by the script
to play one-dimensional grownups. David's parents
are the same kind of parents that populate all
these college comedies from the 1980s, movies like
Secret Admirer, Porky's or Zapped and the NORAD general
Beringer is straight out of Dr. Strangelove.
If for no other reason, you should see this movie to enjoy
how far the computer technology has gone since those days.
David uses the same telephone for calling friends as calling
other computers. The modem is some kind of device that
he puts the headset on. Far from any 56K modem my guess
is that it's some kind of 2400 bps modem, the kind of
technology you now find at your local technical museum. The
big computer at NORAD has a lot of flashing lights (just like
those you see on Star Trek or any old sf-movie) but it's
hardly impressing compared with what you can get today.
What are the lessons we can learn from WarGames?
1. Make sure there are no secret backdoors into
military computers.
2. Thank you, whoever it was, for giving us
a graphical user interface when we use our computers!
