Authors
George Wilcox
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for U.S. Marshals (1998)
        The best way to approach "U.S. Marshals" is the same way I go
into the NBC Tower as an audience member for the Jenny Jones Show. (Is
she still on?) Just check your brain at the door, and try to enjoy the
ride.
        It might be a difficult concept to accept for "U.S. Marshals,"
the sequel to "The Fugitive," the hugely popular and 1993
Oscar-nominated film. The expectations are high, but the payoff is
low. The bottom line is that screenwriter John Pogue and former
editor-turned-director Stuart Baird have dropped the ball. This is not
like "The Fugitive" sequel you would have expected to see. Expecting
another tense drama, mano a mano, between Tommy Lee Jones'
Oscar-winning role as Deputy Sam "The Big Dog" Gerard and an A-list
star on the run, Pogue and Baird have delivered a confusing,
directionless film featuring a boring array of government bureaucrats
and spies. Ho hum.
        The producers seem to have forgotten what made the first film
such a success. The only thing we ask for is a testosterone-pumping
thriller as Gerard and Fugitive X butt heads. Instead, "U.S. Marshals"
is light on action, heavy on the international intrigue. The movie
feels like Pogue originally wrote a separate "Fugitive"-type of story,
and then inserted Gerard's grunts and groans to suit Jones' character.
        Gerard's crew, including Joe Pantoliano as Cosmo, is back, but
they only help chase the bad guy and actually have little input into
solving the case. Fugitive X this time out is Wesley Snipes as Mark
Warren, who in a matter of minutes goes from being mild-mannered
Chicago tow truck driver to extradicted federal prisoner falsely
accused of a double homicide in New York City. The drop-dead gorgeous
Irene Jacob plays his girlfriend, Marie, but Jacob is totally wasted
in the role.
        Soon after, Mark is aboard ConAir, gets attacked by a fellow
prisoner and then escapes after a high-budget, effects-laden airplane
crash, much like the bus crash in the original film.
        Mark goes by many last names and that's because he's not just
any tow truck driver speeding down Halsted Street. He's a covert
government assassin.
        This is where asking too many questions becomes a dangerous
thing. How did a smart guy like Mark get involved in a political mess
about South Koreans-Chinese and U.N. officials? How does a secret
agent-tow truck driver meet a Starbucks server and why should we care
about them? And my favorite, just where does Mark think he's going
once he's accomplished his mission in New York?
        The second half of the film takes place in New York City, but
don't believe it. It's still hometown Chicago in disguise, including a
shootout at the Graceland Cemetery (supposedly Queens) over by
Wrigleyville.
         Halfway through the movie Gerard is way out of his
jurisdiction, but that doesn't seem to matter. He already has the
evidence that prooves Mark is innocent, but he might as well chase
after him anyway.
        This needlessly complicated plot began to remind me of
"Mission:Impossible." Sometimes the chase is more important than the
reason for the chase.
        Pre-convict Robert Downey Jr. steps in as a government special
agent assigned to help Gerard with the case. It's never fully
explained what Downey does. In one scene, he identifies himself with
the DSS. That must be the Department of Stupid Spies. This film leaves
you with a lot of uncertainty about the intelligence of our
intelligence agencies.
        Maybe "U.S. Marshals" was doomed from the beginning with
Pogue's convoluted script. His only previous effort was as an
uncredited co-writer to the equally confusing "Eraser" with Arnold
Schwarzenegger.
        Director Baird ("Executive Decision"), who edited impressive
and unimpressive action films like "Demolition Man," "Die Hard 2," and
the first two "Lethal Weapons," keeps the film well-paced, but fails
to find the heart of the story. The sorrowful part for blockbuster
hit-less Warner Bros. is that Baird's "U.S. Marshals" may have killed
a potential film franchise. After four "Batmans" and the fourth
"Lethal Weapon" on the way, it is apparent the Brothers Warner could
use an injection of new blood. Of course, that's assuming Kevin
Costner's "The Postman Rings Twice" ever get green-lighted.
        Rating: Two stars

Title
Review for Dark City (1998)
"Dark City" gave me a splitting headache, but one day later the movie
makes less sense to me than it did when I watched it.
Director Alex Proyas' followup to the underrated "The Crow," is a
loud, bulky, visual-effects laden mess of a movie. It's a cross
between Stephen Soderbergh's "Kafka" and "Hellraiser: Bloodline" by
legendary B-movie director Alan Smithee. At least, I think it
was. "Dark City" made as much sense as "Spawn," and how could I ever
forget the worst movie of 1997 since it is five months, 20 days and 14
hours since I've seen it?
Proyas should have brought Smithee in to finish "Dark City," but it
appears he had too much invested in the convoluted story since it was
his idea to begin with. He also co-wrote the screenplay and
co-produced the movie.
How do I tell you about a movie that I didn't understand? It's films
like "Dark City" that give science fiction movies a bad name. A
mult-million dollar budget spent on a 10-cent script. "Dark City" is
set in an unknown world, on an unknown planet in an unknown part of
the galaxy.  The city looks as dreary as Metropolis, or even
futuristic L.A. from "Blade Runner," but there are no spaceships
here. Only 1940s era Studebakers and elevated trains.
Even more is unknown about its citizens. How did they get there? Who
are they? There is never any daylight and no one is quite sure of what
the world is like outside the city. The script gives few details about
any backstory, and that is Proyas' main downfall. Go ahead and spend
tons of dough on George Liddle's production designs, but send this
story back to re-write.
The film begins with an opening pan of the city stolen from the
aforementioned "Metropolis."
Rufus Sewell ("Dangerous Beauty") stars, in his second film to open on
the same day, as amnesia victim John Murdoch, who awakens from his
bathtub to discover a dead woman in his hotel room. Murdoch becomes a
suspect in a series of killings involving hookers. With a memory lapse
lasting three weeks, Murdoch searches for his lounge singing wife,
Emma (Jennifer Connelly). He also has a strange mind power borrowed
from "Dune," but that's never explained as well. Sewell's performance
is clearly mailed-in as he seems to sleepwalk through much of the
movie.
>From there, you're on your own as to understanding the rest of the
plot. Check your brain at the door. "Dark City" joins a long list of
films that make absolutely no sense, beginning with such recent
story-impaired movies like "Mission:Impossible," "The Jackal," "Johnny
Mnemonic" or "Destiny Turns on the Radio."
In "Dark City," the Strangers, a group of Pinhead wannabes, control
the city from their underground lair. Each day (each half day?) they
make time stop at the stroke of 12 so that they could change the
buildings around in the city while everyone else is temporarily
asleep. Ahem.  Fine British actor Ian Richardson plays the boss, but
he's not so fine here, barely recognizable in his Cenobite look-alike
garb. His right-hand man, Mr. Hand (Richard O'Brien), is one of the
ghouls that chases after Murdoch for no apparent reason.
The disfigured Dr. Daniel Schreber (Keifer Sutherland) acts as an
agent between the city dwellers and the underground dwellers.
Oscar winner William Hurt, who disappeared from major studio films
through much of the 90s, begins the year with the first of four
movies. He starts off as the meaningless Inspector Bumstead. Bumstead
is brought in to take over the serial hooker killings case, but that
subplot is completely forgotten by the end. I don't get it. Hurt is
trying to mount a comeback starting with "Dark City" and "Lost in
Space?"

Title
Review for Wedding Singer, The (1998)
        I cringed when I first saw the trailer for "The Wedding
Singer." Uh-oh. Another Adam Sandler movie, I thought. I didn't
remember the statue of limitations running out after "Billy Madison"
and "Happy Gilmore."
        Enter Drew Barrymore and imagine my shock when Sandler capably
handles his first-time role as a romantic lead, Robbie, the ex-rocker
turned jilted guy in the title role. It took a while, but Sandler and
writer Tim Herlihy have discovered that Sandler doesn't have to scream
and be obnoxious all the time to elicit a few laughs.
        Barrymore saves the day proving she can play cheerleader cute
instead of bad girl hussy. Barrymore is just what Sandler's previous
films needed. An engaging co-star to keep us distracted from Sandler's
periodic, uncomfortable-to-watch rants.
        Set in 1985, "The Wedding Singer" is Sandler's best
film. That's not saying much, I know, but finally we have a period
comedy for Gen X even my Phillip Michael Thomas-loving friends can
enjoy. The film overdoes the 80s comedy a bit with jokes about
"Dynasty" and Rubik's Cube, but you've got to admire any movie that
includes scenes with such classics as Nina's "99 Luftballoons" and
Kajagoogoo's "Too Shy."
        Was I really listening to Frankie Goes to Hollywood my
freshman year in college? I must be dreaming.
        The constant retro 80s tunes is supposed to sell soundtracks,
but director Frank Coraci manages to keep his main aim in mind -- the
chemistry between Sandler and Barrymore. They are refreshing.
          Sandler's Robbie is a smooth-talking, hopeless romantic
looking forward to his wedding with punker Linda (Angela
Featherstone), his long-time girlfriend. He meets Julia (Barrymore) a
new waitress at the banquet hall, who is also engaged and looking
forward to her wedding to long-time boyfriend Glenn (Matthew Glave).
        Robbie's life turns to shambles when Linda is a no-show at
their wedding. Julia helps pick up the pieces.
        The film is sprinkled with cameos from Sandler's former
"Saturday Night Live" cohorts such as Jon Lovitz and Kevin
Nealon. Billy Idol steals one scene playing himself.
        "The Wedding Singer" is a wonderful reversal of fortune for
Barrymore, who has appeared in a string of bad movies as the dangerous
femme fatale, such as "Poison Ivy," "Guncrazy," "Bad Girls" and "Mad
Love." Barrymore's Julia is perky, smart and level-headed. For a
change, Barrymore plays the kind of girl you'd want to bring home to
mom as long as Barrymore manages to hide her six tattoos, none of
which are revealed in the film.
           Julia is the loveable babysitter type Barrymore would have
played in "Scream," had she lived longer than the film's first 10
minutes.
        Here's to more of Barrymore in the future, and I'm not talking
about flashing herself to David Letterman.

Title
Review for Sweet Hereafter, The (1997)
        There is nothing simple about an Atom Egoyan film. The
Canadian filmmaker excels at challenging the mind as well as the
senses.
           In Egoyan's followup to 1994's excellent "Exotica," Egoyan
adapts Russell Banks' novel about a small British Columbia town
dealing with the tragedy of a school bus crash that killed 14 of the
town's children.
        Just a simple plot summary wrenches the heart, but Egoyan
deals with the subject matter in his trademark fashion as a simple,
lyrical poem. I believe today's closest working director to Ingmar
Bergman is Egoyan. Bille August, a Bergman disciple, comes
close. Egoyan's films, like Bergmans, are psychological and emotional
dramas from the head and the heart. They ask more questions than they
provide and refuse to indulge in simplistic, "My,
aren't-we-all-happy?" endings.
            Like "Exotica," Egoyan attacks the story from many
angles. "The Sweet Hereafter" is told from three time elements: the
present, 1997, when attorney Mitchell Stephens (Ian Holm) is flying to
meet with his troubled, drugged-out daughter; the recent past, 1995,
when Stephens arrives in town hoping to gather evidence for a
class-action suit after the accident; and then one week earlier at the
time of the crash told from the view of babysitter Nicole Burnell
(Sarah Polley), who survived the accident but now lives as a
paraplegic.
             As in "Exotica," the film centers around the babysitter as the
most important character, the bridge between the adults and the
children.
            Stephens arrives in town with the disturbed belief that he
will help the town get over its grief with a lawsuit. What else would
you expect from a lawyer? As Stephens explains to one couple, "There
is no such thing as an accident. That word doesn't mean a thing to
me."
        But Stephens is dealing with his own grief, the increasingly
distant relationship with his daughter who keeps in contact with him
through desperate phone calls. Egoyan's script calmly builds as Holm's
Stephens realizes the error of his ways by eventually sympathisizing
with the town's folk, not as a lawyer, but as father.
        The film's two discoveries, actually one discover and one
re-discovery, are Polley and Holm. Newcomer Polley, who also appeared
in "Exotica," is mesmerizing as she connects with distraught father
Billy Ansell (Egoyan regular Bruce Greenwood) as the town's only two
citizens questioning Stephens' motivation. Polley even does her own
singing in the film's soundtrack.
          The film's title come from the "Pied Piper of Hamelin," the
children's tale Nicole reads to Billy's children while
babysitting. The parallels between the B.C. town and Hamelin, another
town which lost its children, are on purpose.
          This is the first lead role I can ever remember for veteran
Holm, who has suddenly become a hot property after 1996's "Big Night."
Holm appeared in four 1997 features, but gives one of his best
performances since "Chariots of Fire." He transforms from a
manipulative lawyer planning to capitalize on the town's grief to an
attorney with a conscience. Of course, it's Nicole that helps him make
that transformation.

Title
Review for Good Will Hunting (1997)
Two up-and-coming actors you probably haven't heard of, Ben Affleck
and Matt Damon, have only recently been featured in their first
leading roles this year, and already they have their pet project
coming our way. Now that's show business.
The rising young stars have created a personal postcard of their
hometown with "Good Will Hunting," the screenwriting debut of the best
friends, high school classmates and current Los Angeles roommates.
The Boston-area natives enlisted the help of New England-educated
director Gus Van Sant to create a rewarding film about a young genius
from blue-collar South Boston, who must deal with the recent discovery
of his mathematic problem-solving powers.
This is clearly a personal triumph for co-writers Affleck ("Chasing
Amy") and Damon ("The Rainmaker"), who return to their Beantown roots,
accents included, and provide snippets from the best of the Hub: the
Charles River, Harvard Square, Charlestown and the T's Red Line.
Damon gets the better role as Will Hunting, a 20-year-old orphan with
photographic memory working as a janitor at M.I.T. The film's title is
an oxymoron, since there is little goodwill with Will. He drinks with
the guys too much, gets into a street fight and punches out a cop. For
kicks, Will likes to prove complicated mathematic equations provided
by M.I.T. professor Lambeau (Stellan Skarsgard, currently of
"Amistad").
Ironically, Affleck hasn't written much of a role for himself as
Chuckie, one of Will's drinking buddies along with Affleck's brother,
Casey, as Morgan. Chuckie has one big scene, but the film is built
entirely around Will.
Affleck and Damon's influences are clearly from New Jersey ndependent
writer-director Kevin Smith, who has been riding a roller coaster with
heralded "Clerks," spiteful "Mallrats" and quirky "Chasing Amy." "Good
Will Hunting" is well written. It is raw, down to earth, lively, and
cynical about life and society. Affleck and Damon aren't afraid of
challenging the establishment, whether it is high-minded academia or
government bureaucracy.
"Good Will Hunting," however, follows similar territory about previous
movies involving discovered genius. More recently, "Little Man Tate"
or even the 1968 Cliff Robertson-Oscar winning film "Charly," also set
in Boston, dealt with how genius is found in the unlikeliest of
people. "In Little Man Tate," it is a small boy. In "Charly," it is a
retarded older man subjected to medical experiments.
Genius is seen as a burden each time, and troubled Will Hunting
doesn't seem any different. He is undecided about a purpose in his
life, undecided about a woman, Skylar (Minnie Driver, Damon's
real-life girlfriend), he has recently met. Undecided about pretty
much everything.
Robin Williams is brought in as a junior college psychology professor,
Sean Maguire,who is enlisted to help Will. The role is similar to
Williams' teacher in "Dead Poets Society," without the
hysterics. Maguire is more wise beyond his years and opens young
Will's eyes to a world he has only memorized in books.
Maguire agrees to see Will at the urging of Lambeau, who took over
temporary custody of the rebellious Will after his legal
problems. Lambeau hopes to tutor Will in advanced mathematics and then
send him off to a think tank.
It's difficult to take your eyes off Damon, who broke through this
year with the lead role in Francis Coppola's film version of another
John Grisham novel. Damon's first major role was as a drugged-out
Persian Gulf war veteran in the underappreciated "Courage Under Fire."
Damon's three main roles already have a few things in common. Damon,
with his wry smile and shaggy brown hair, excels at playing insecure
individuals with a secret, wounded past. He seems sincere and
trustworthy when he is lying, which is why you'll be seeing more of
his name in the near future.
I'm not sure if this is a one-shot deal for the co-writers from
Cambridge, who might appear to be at a crossroads after writing a fine
first script. It could be a Catch-22 for them. Both have refreshing
new faces that should lead to greater acting success, but do they wish
to be considered actors or proven screenwriters? We shall see.

Title
Review for Great Expectations (1998)
As an English teacher, I'm sure this is one film you've been waiting
for. Like "Clueless" and "Romeo & Juliet," "Great Expectations" is
another modern update of a classic novel. I think, however, this is
the far weaker effort of the three.
 The story somewhat follows Charles Dickens' 19th century classic,
right down to the happy ending. But like the other two films, this
version is aimed at the Gen X set, who will end up thinking of this as
the version of record rather than the original on their must-read book
list in high school English class.
My freshman English teacher, Ms. Weinstock, may not like this version
either, barely reminiscent of David Lean's traditional classic 1946
film. This is the fourth feature film version of "Great Expectations,"
but the memorable names have all been changed for some reason by
screenwriter Mitchell Glazer. I remember Ms. Weinstock spent an entire
class demonstrating the importance of Dickens characters' names as
irony. I wish Glazer attended that class.
Dickens' protagonist Pip, which means small seed, made sense since the
novel follows Pip's growth into manhood.  The mysterious Miss
Havisham, conniving and misleading, is literally Having-a-sham against
young Pip.
Throw all of that out the window here. Ethan Hawke plays Finn Bell
(Pip), Anne Bancroft is Ms. Nora Dinsmoor (Miss Havisham), Chris
Cooper is Joe Coleman ("Uncle" Joe Gargery) and Robert De Niro is
Arthur Lustig (Abel Magwitch), an escaped convict who befriends Pip,
ahem, Finn as a 10 year old. Only Finn's love interest, Estella, has
the same name with Gwyneth Paltrow starring. Even attorney Mr. Jaggers
has become Mr. Ragnow.
The focus is clearly on the alluring combination of Hawke and Paltrow
as they exchange glances between a pounding Patrick Doyle score and
songs by Tori Amos and Pulp. "Great Expections' " greatest
contribution will be in CD sales, rather than book sales.
Director Alfonso Cuaron's second American feature is also his second
consecutive remake. That's originality for you. Cuaron debuted in 1995
with "A Little Princess," the remake of "The Little Princess" with
Shirely Temple in 1939.
In this version, orphan Finn Bell (Jeremy James Kissner, at 10) is
startled one day while drawing along the Florida Gulf coast. Lustig
rises out of the water and threatens Finn's life if he doesn't return
with food and bolt cutters for his shackled legs.
The next day Finn is called to the mansion of Ms. Dinsmoor, an
eccentric old hermit who was jilted on her wedding day. Dinsmoor's
niece is the beautiful, young Estella, a bossy snob,who calls Finn,
"the gardener." Finn makes regular visits to the broken-down Dinsmoor
mansion.Finn falls in love.
As revenge, Dinsmoor has taught Estella how to be the ultimate tease,
a real man killer. The worst kind of woman in my book, the type that
knows they're gorgeous, uses it, and then dumps all over you when you
show the least bit of interest. A black widow spider comes to mind,
without the culminating murder.
When a grown-up Finn is approached by a lawyer, preparing to make all
of Finn's wishes come true, Finn is led to believe that his secret
benefactor is Ms. Dinsmoor.
Suddenly, Finn is flying to New York City to make his entry into the
high-profile art world. Estella has already left for school in Europe.
Cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki tries hard, but too often Finn is
running or walking through downpours along Big Apple sidewalks. At
least he looks good, but there is little chemistry between Finn and
Estella and for all the beautiful shots, the film lacks charm, energy
and heart.
Lean's film version won a best cinematography Oscar for Guy Green.
A needless voice-over narration provided by Hawke's Finn doesn't
help. Hank Azaria enters the picture as stiff-shirt Walter, Estella's
boyfriend, replacing Dickens' Bentley Drummle from the novel.
You'll have to judge for yourself, though, just so you know what your
students are talking about in class.

Title
Review for Primary Colors (1998)
        It almost seems appropriate that the much-anticipated
political flick "Primary Colors" is as two-faced as its main
character, Gov. Jack Stanton played by John Travolta.
        Based on the best-selling book by Newsweek editor Joe Klein,
aka Anonymous, "Primary Colors" follows the eerie parallels of the
Clinton 1992 Presidential campaign. Travolta really is a look-alike,
sound-alike to President Bill Clinton, right down to the home-spun
stories, jogging suits and appetite for women and food. In fact, where
ever Stanton is seen, there is something to eat. In the course of this
movie, Stanton has eaten barbequed ribs, fried chicken, donuts, apple
fritters and Chinese food.
        The first half of "Primary Colors" is a wonderful,
humor-filled political satire that rivals Tim Robbins' "Bob Roberts,"
one of the best movies of 1992 that nobody went to see. When Stanton
is accused of an unforgivable sex act, "Primary Colors" makes a wrong
turn near Albuquerque that takes the film in an unexpected direction
that it is not completely able to recover from. The first half may
follow closely to Clinton's first presidential campaign, but the
second half is quite fictional. "Primary Colors" uneasily turns from
comedic satire to moody drama. There is not a single laugh in the
film's second half.
         Frank Capra's classic "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" can pull
off the adjustment from satire to moody drama. Its ending, when Jimmy
Stewart's Smith nearly becomes a beaten man, is as dark as any other
Capra film. I know Jimmy Stewart (figuratively) and Travolta is no
Jimmy Stewart.
        It appears director Mike Nichols ("The Birdcage") and
screenwriter Elaine May wanted to have it both ways. The former
University of Chicago comedy partners try to cover all grounds with
subplots right out of TV's "Spin City" and final ethical tests similar
to what Spencer Tracy faced in Capra's "State of the Union."
        The satire in "Primary Colors" follows "Bob Roberts," a funny
semi-documentary, behind-the-scenes look at a Pennsylvania
businessman's run for senator. Jack Stanton and Bob Roberts could feel
right at home together as couch potatoes watching college football on
the tube.  Actually, they are both frauds. They know it. The voters
don't.
        When "Primary Colors" opens, Stanton is a Southern governor
from an unnamed state, who is trying to get known in New Hampshire,
site of the first presidential primary. Ivy-League trained political
advisor Henry Burton (British actor Adrian Lester) is reluctantly
brought in to assist. Emma Thompson plays Stanton's wife, Susan, while
Billy Bob Thornton is the skilled campaign manager and Kathy Bates
steals the show as troubleshooter Libby Holden.
        Need a scorecard to find the modern parallels?
        Travolta is Bill Clinton, Thompson is Hillary Rodham Clinton,
Lester is George Stephanopoulos, Thornton is James Carville and Bates
is advisor Betsy Wright. There is also a Gennifer Flowers look alike,
who publicizes her affair with Stanton -- Clinton -- through a popular
supermarket tabloid.
        Bates clearly steals the show in an Oscar-caliber supporting
performance as the hired gun brought in to fight off troubling news
about Stanton's philandering ways. Bates has mastered the style of the
tough-as-nails, cranky boss.
        One problem with May's script is that we never fully get to
know Stanton. Why is he running for president after all, and beyond an
adult literacy issue, what else does he stand for? I guess I shouldn't
feel so badly that I would rather vote for Kevin Kline's Dave rather
than a politician that seems more like the real thing.
        In 1993, documentary filmmakers D.A. Pennebaker and Chris
Hegedus released "The War Room," which filmed Clinton's Little Rock
campaign headquarters in '92. It's easy to see how Stanton's small
staff equalled Clinton's inner sanctum, though "The War Room" is set
only a few months after "Primary Colors."
        "Primary Colors" clocks in at a too-long 2 1/2
hours. Travolta, who seemingly dances in every one of his movies
("Saturday Night Fever," "Grease," "Perfect," "Pulp Fiction," and
"Michael") gives his worst dance performance of his career since
"Staying Alive."
        One trivial note: That's former "Dukes of Hazzard" tow truck
driver, Rep. Ben Jones, as one of Stanton's campaign advisors.
        Rating: Two-and-a-half stars

Title
Review for Replacement Killers, The (1998)
For fans of Hong Kong action star Chow Yun-Fat, the greatest
anticipation is for his first English words in a Hollywood film: "My
condolences."
In a premiere showing, the crowd cheered. All hail the king! Chow, who
attended the premiere, said he was so nervous his first day on the
set, that he was unable to get the words out. It didn't help that he
was without a gun in each hand.
For those who haven't heard of Chow, he is one of the biggest names in
Asian cinema rivaled only by Jackie Chan. Chow made his debut in
director John Woo's "A Better Tomorrow" (1986), which became the
top-grossing film in Hong Kong history. Since Britain relinquished its
sovereignty over Hong Kong last year to China, it was only a matter of
time before Chow crashed our shores.
Like "A Better Tomorrow," he's done it with a bang in a slick, action
thriller, "The Replacement Killers," directed by first-timer Antoine
Fuqua and co-produced by Woo and his long-time partner Terence
Chang. Woo made his Hollywood debut with "Hard Target" (1993) and more
recently helmed "Face/Off" last summer.
Chow stars with Mira Sorvino as two toughies on the run from the
Chinese mob in L.A. Sorvino is an un-Romylike loser, who helps forge a
passport for assassin John Lee (Chow) after Lee becomes a marked man
for refusing an assignment. Sorvino, the girlfriend of gun-happy
director Quentin Tarantino, is the toughest bad girl since "La Femme
Nikita." Tarantino, a long-time admirer of Chow, used HK Chow films
like "City on Fire" and "A Better Tomorrow III" as the inspiration for
"Reservoir Dogs."
"The Replacement Killers" features an impressive debut by Fuqua, shot
by cinematographer Peter Lyons Collister and includes a thrilling
score by Harry Gregson-Williams. Ken Sanzel wrote the script,
rewritten especially for Chow.
Fuqua was wise in trying not to copy Woo's over-the-top directing
style, given the fact that the master actionmaker stood nearby as a
producer. Woo and Chang were wise to let Fuqua develop his own
visionary mayhem.
Fuqua's influence is from the Bruckheimer School of Film, named after
the producer of "Beverly Hills Cop" and "Top Gun" where visuals are
everything and plot comes later. Early disciples from commercial TV
included the Scott brothers, Ridley and Tony, and Adrian Lyne
("Flashdance"). The current generation of former music video directors
consists of Michael Bay ("Bad Boys," "The Rock"), Simon West ("Con
Air") and Alex Proyas ("The Crow," "Dark City"). The fast-paced action
is furious, shots last milliseconds before edits, the camera is
constantly moving and the lighting is always in contrast between dark
shadows and warm blue hues, usually with dry ice from somewhere
filling up the screen for atmospheric reasons only.
Fuqua gives "The Replacement Killers" a slick, quick-edit look,
especially during the opening shootout in a nightclub. The scene
concludes with Fuqua's version of the famous mirror shot from Robert
Clouse's "Enter the Dragon" with Bruce Lee. It's an example of why
Fuqua's debut stands out. With Collister's assistance, he has created
his own visual style, while also adding a few tributes from Woo's
masterpiece, "The Killer," such as slow-motion walks, the sliding
gunslinger and using a church or temple as a headquarters for the hero
signifying peaceful tranquility in a violent world.
 Given Chow's limitations due to learning English, Fuqua sticks with
what Chow knows best. Minimal dialogue with plenty of hail Mary
gunfire. A shootout at a car wash is on par with some of HK films'
best shootout scenes such as the opening teahouse massacre in Woo's
"Hard-Boiled" or the concluding raid on a warehouse in Ringo Lam's
"City on Fire."
"The Replacement Killers," the title refers to the assassins brought
in to kill Lee, goes into motion early on when Detective Stan Zedkov
(Michael Rooker) breaks up a drug shipment involving the son of crime
boss Terence Wei (Kenneth Tsang). After Wei's son is killed by Zedkov,
Wei seeks revenge. Jurgen Prochnow stars as Wei's second in command.
The film will take your breath away, that is when you have time to
come up for air between all the blazing gunfire.
Rating: *** 1/2 (Three-and-a-half stars)

Title
Review for Wag the Dog (1997)
CLICK ON CAROLINE.
Dear Caroline Film Reviews: http://www.geocites.com/Hollywood/Studio/7066
Here's a movie, director Barry Levinson's latest filmed in just 29
days, that takes Ivan Reitman's "Dave" to another extreme.
Co-written by former Chicagoan David Mamet, it's a dark comedy about
how White House aides and spin doctors manipulate the news for the
sake of saving their jobs and their president's image. Presumably, not
in that order.
Rollins was Ronald Reagan's bearded campaign manager, a master at
images such as the "Evil Empire," and Evans is the perpetually tanned
producer ("Chinatown") and former Paramount studio boss ("Love Story"
and "The Godfather").
Robert De Niro stars as Conrad Brean, the professorial-looking spin
doctor known as Mr. Fix It, who is brought into the White House for an
emergency when the President is caught in a sexual molestation scandal
involving a Firefly girl less than two weeks before the election.
In a meeting held deep in the White House basement, on a set right out
of Stanley Kubrick's "Dr. Strangelove," Brean introduces the
non-existant B-3 Bomber and orders the President to become ill while
in China for a trade mission. The point? Take the focus off the
Firefly girl scandal by getting the media to focus on something else.
Brean, along with presidential aide Winifred Ames (Ann Heche), travels
to L.A. to meet with Hollywood producer Stanley Motss (Dustin
Hoffman). Brean needs Motss' help to engineer a fake war with Albania.
The film, based on Larry Beinhart's novel "American Hero," has many
targets to spoof from Grenada to the Persian Gulf War, to yellow
ribbons, "We Are the World," and country singer Lee Greenwood.
Motss brings in his own crew of spin doctors, including songwriter
John Dean (Willie Nelson), the Fad King (Denis Leary) and fashion guru
Liz (Andrea Martin).
In small performances, Kirsten Dunst plays a girl caught in war-torn
Albania and Woody Harrelson is a freaked-out war hero.
It seemed appropriate "Primary Colors" starring John Travolta was
among the trailers, another story about spin doctors manipulating a
presidential election inspired by Joe Klein's (aka Anonymous) novel
based on the Clinton campaign.
"Wag the Dog" features crackerjack dialogue and engaging performances
by De Niro and Hoffman. The film's only troubles occur in the final 30
minutes when the story turns surreal, almost too good to be
true. Maybe that's just the point Levinson was trying to make. That
everything about politics is too good to be true.
It's a fun romp for true cynics about the politic process. I think
even Jefferson Smith would laugh.
