Authors
Jim Straus
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Guarding Tess (1994)
GUARDING TESS
DIRECTED BY: Hugh Wilson MPAA RATING: PG-13 RUNNING TIME: 96 Minutes
     Two clever, entertaining movies featuring Secret Service
characters have dominated screens recently.  Last year, it was the
dramatic IN THE LINE OF FIRE.  Now, it's the comic turn GUARDING TESS
in which we're given a different look at the everyday hassles of
protecting important public figures.  This surprisingly off-beat,
character-driven comedy features the great duet of Shirley MacLaine and
Nicolas Cage.  They have so much comic chemistry that one wonders why
it took Hollywood so long to bring them together.
     When Secret Service agent Doug Chesnic (Cage) has had enough of
the fussy, bossy, widowed ex-First Lady he's been assigned to protect,
he tries for a new post.  He's sent right back in to guard Tess
(MacLaine) at the behest of the President of the United States, (played
over the phone to comic perfection by the director himself, Hugh
Wilson).
     Doug is trapped in the detail from hell and our laughter doesn't
stop as we're treated to memorable scenes: on a golf course, in an
opera house, and in her motorcade.  Although the agent is in a
compromising position, the two leads prove worthy adversaries.  Cage's
tough Chesnic is every bit an equal to MacLaine's crusty Tess.  By the
time the two come to terms, the by-the-book agent has learned to loosen
up and embrace life, and the cantankerous First Lady has emerged from
her hard shell.
     The plot excellently maneuvers through a believable storyline
laced with hilarious jokes and poignant, touching insights into the
private lives of the powerful.  This comic drama has a Capra-esque
populist charm.  It manages to be that most rewarding type of film that
makes you laugh and cry.
     Anyone who has had a nightmare boss, a domineering mother or
nagging spouse will relate to the funny battle of wills. We come to
admire Tess so much that we hope she's a mirror to future First Ladies
of a special-spirit and integrity.
     "Tess", is one of those rare movies that comes to an end sooner
than you want it to.
