Authors
Adam Taylor
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Clear and Present Danger (1994)
     Well, what can I say?  Harrison Ford still hasn't done a bad
movie; he must be one of the most successful actors ever.  The movie
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER is a complicated political action/thriller.
The main plot is that the US wants to get revenge on a Columbian who
killed a US businessman, and also would like to stop drug smuggling
from Columbia into the US.
     Do not expect to go to this movie and just sit back and not
think.  CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER in some parts is hard to follow so if
you are expecting a easy-to-follow, "full-of-action" movie you may not
want to see this one.  It deals with more legal and political subjects
than action, but this movie has a great finish and the acting is
superb.
     Although this film is mostly serious, some humour has been
slipped into it to make it a bit more entertaining during the "slow"
parts of the film.  Harrison Ford plays Jack Ryan, who works for US
intelligence and is forced to take over James Earl Jones's job as Deputy
when James Earl Jones finds out he has cancer.  Harrison Ford then
falls into a deadly trap since he has to fly down to Columbia under the
President of the US's orders to apprehend a man who is wanted for the
murder of a woman working for him.  Ford finds that this flight becomes
a lot more dangerous than he expected since he barely gets out alive
after many Columbians (from a drug smuggling clan) begin a small war by
shooting at Ford's car and other vehicles around him.  Ford does get
out alive, but just barely.
     The movie starts off quite slow but by the end you are into it
since the action and suspense is classic (sort of like that of the
previous Harrison Ford/Tom Clancy movie PATRIOT GAMES).  This is not
one of Ford's best movies, but I would say it is worth the 8 bucks to
go see it since it is fit for the big screen, and it is a nice lengthy
entertaining yet complicated movie.
