Authors
Atul Akhare
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Bure Baruta (1998)
"Look long enough into the abyss, and the abyss looks at you" said
Nietzsche, and as the ending credits of the film rolled by, I silently
wondered if they had forgotten to credit *him* w/ the screenplay for
the film. Indeed, the bottomless pit lies at the very heart of this
film's characters, and although yours truly recommends it, it certainly
isn't an easy film to watch.
The film is set "in the country formerly known as Yugoslavia", and is a
set of loosely connected vignettes. The Cabaret style "emcee" sets the
tone for the rest of the film -- we are the ass**** of the world, we
are really f***ed up -- and these nihilistic sentiments are more than
borne out by the events that follow.
When a teenager rear ends an old Volkswagen in a seemingly harmless
accident, this sends the other driver into a state of angered frenzy.
The teenager manages to escape, but is hunted down by the driver, who
barges into his apartment, accosts his father and proceeds to smash
things. A taxi driver who has once been wronged by a policeman exacts a
terrible revenge.
A jealous man stabs his best friend to death after seemingly
reconciling w/ him. He then proceeds to commit a suicide in a macabre
fashion, killing a hapless victim in the process. A deranged young man
hijacks a bus and proceeds to humiliate and terrorize the passengers,
much to the amusement of a new married couple who continue to make out
in the backseat.
The girl who is the object of his humiliation manages to escape, but is
accused of being the provocateur when she narrates the episode to her
boyfriend. While they are arguing about it, they are kidnapped by coke
snorting drug pushers, and in a scene that puts Dennis Hopper's Blue
Velvet scene to shame, the boyfriend is forced to sing at gunpoint
while his girlfriend is subjected to unspeakable horrors.
So, what is the movie really about? IMO, ravaged by years of unrest and
wracked by impotent rage over their inability to do anything about it,
the characters in the film have paid the ultimate price: the loss of
the human soul.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Title
Review for Twin Falls Idaho (1999)
Well, trying to escape the ~90 degrees heat I sneaked into a local
multiplex that showed artsy films, and was pleasantly surprised at how
much I liked the film.
The movie is set in a forlorn town in Idaho, where two conjoined twins,
Blake and Francis (played by the Polish brothers, who also co-wrote and
directed the film as well), have checked into a ramshackle motel. Well,
Blake and Francis are literally joined at the hip and share three legs
and two arms between them.
Most of the story is narrated from the viewpoint of the beautiful
hooker (played by newcomer Michele Hicks), who has been summoned to the
brothers' room in the opening shot of the movie. Apparently, the
brothers are celebrating their birthday, and they have decided to give
themselves a gift on the occasion.
Understandably, startled by the brothers, and flees the room, but
returns to retrieve her purse and gradually warms up to them. She
learns that Francis is sick (but not Blake!!!) w/ flu, and manages to
get hold of a doctor to treat him.
Well, I won't describe what transpires thereafter as I don't want to
spoil the experience of those who haven't seen the movie yet, but
suffice it to say that plot isn't this movie's forte. The movie is rich
w/ visual metaphors like the two dollar bill, and in some ways, too
rich if you ask me.
The movie loses focus during the second half when it delves too deep
into the hooker's problems, but in my opinion, the sheer originality of
the film, and the first half, which offers some rather keen insights
into the twins' lives, well make it worth the price of admission.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.
