Authors
ram@csb.stanford.edu
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for My Fair Lady (1964)
My Fair Lady
http://www.ram.org/ramblings/movies/my_fair_lady.html
/My Fair Lady/, released in 1964, is hailed as one of the greatest
films ever made and I had the opportunity to watch the remastered 30th
anniversary edition for the first time while spending Christmas at
Yosemite National Park.
The film is based on the story /Pygmalion/ (1912) by George Bernard
Shaw (the name refers to the King of Cyprus who fell in love with a
statue of his own making). Henry Higgins (Rex Harrison) is an English
Linguistics Professor who takes on Eliza Doolittle (a beautiful Audrey
Hepburn) under his tutelage to change her from an unrefined flower girl
with a Cockney accent to a genteel who brings forth the majesty and
grandeur of the English language (which hasn't been used in America
for years) with every utterance. Higgins is a misogynistic bachelor
who pushes Eliza day and night, while wondering why a woman can't be
more like a man, so she can learn to speak properly.  Riding on
Eliza's success is a bet Higgins makes with his friend, Colonel Hugh
Pickering (Wilfred Hyde-White), wherein Higgins claims he will be able
to pass Eliza off as a Duchess in six months.  As Eliza and Higgins
train together, they become accustomed to each other even though it is
an abusive relationship on Higgins' part. Finally the inevitable
confrontation occurs: Eliza has surpassed the teacher's expectations,
but the teacher still considers her a common flower girl.  How does
one move forward in such a situation?
The script, by Alan Jay Lerner, retains Shaw's acerbic wit and
delicious irony and succeeds for that reason. Both the dialogue and
the song lyrics are crafted extremely well. The music itself has a few
high points but there are plenty of low ones as well.  The acting is
impeccable: Rex Harrison's role as a happy-but-cynical misanthrope
(his excuse for treating Eliza badly is that he doesn't treat anyone
any better) is played out extremely well. Audrey Hepburn's
transformation from a common girl to a cultured lady is extremely
convincing, particularly in terms of her accent (although her songs
were dubbed by Marni Nixon).  The supporting cast is excellent:
Eliza's father Alfred P. Doolittle is played in a irreverent and
charismatic manner by Stanley Holloway who gets some of the coolest
lines in the film and was my favourite character; Jeremy Brett shows a
bit of the talent that would later come in handy when he played
Sherlock Holmes; and Gladys Cooper as Henry Higgins' mother also gets
to deliver a few barbed lines of her own ("Henry, what a disagreeable
surprise").
Even though the film's tongue is firmly in its cheek, the degree of
social commentary that occurs amidst the happy songs and the
straight-forward story is amazing.  The film comments about the
British class system, class systems in general, and the notion of
language being the reason for there being a class division (an almost
Universal concept prevalent in any culture). Further the movie
addresses the virtues of being "civilised" (when Eliza becomes a lady,
all she can do is sell herself), the virtues of morality when one has
nothing to left to lose (as Eliza's father says, he can't afford it),
and the repressed nature of British society in general.
The direction by George Cukor is amazing: the use of pausing
characters, the fantasy of Eliza thinking about Higgins' death, the
detached race track scene (with the classic "move your bloomin' arse"
line), and the use of novel devices to measure Eliza's speech, which
is a tangent on its own and done as a throwaway, are brilliant.  The
remastered audio and video brings the film to a vibrant life, with the
latter presenting an extremely colourful and bright Technicolour look
that is not seen in movies today.
I still think Higgins gets away too easily considering the poor way he
treats Eliza, reflecting the mentality of the era the movie was
made. At about three hours, the movie is a little too long, but is
great to watch with a date or as a group event. I highly recommend it.


Title
Review for Mask of Zorro, The (1998)
The Mask of Zorro
http://www.ram.org/ramblings/movies/the_mask_of_zorro.html
I used to read a lot of Zorro comic books, and like Batman and
Phantom, Zorro is a normal human without any extraordinary super powers
fighting to overcome injustice and oppression.  /The Mask of Zorro/ is
an exciting tale that occurs a bit after the original Zorro years, and
unlike recent movies about the other two characters, this one is done
more in the style of the early novels and comic books.
The film begins in 1821 (the Zorro character himself was introduced in
1919). Don Diego de la Vega (Anthony Hopkins), the original Zorro, is
finally baited and captured by his arch enemy Don Rafael Montero
(Stuart Wilson). Montero's attempt to capture Zorro results in de la
Vega's wife being killed and Montero adopts de la Vega's infant
daughter as his own.
Fast forward twenty years. Montero returns from exile with an evil
plot to turn California into an independent Republic.  This enrages de
la Vega who escapes from prison and begins planning his revenge.  He
runs into Alejandro Murrieta (Antonio Banderas) who once help saved
Zorro's life and who now has a grudge against Montero's right-hand
man.  De la Vega begins training Murrieta to become his successor and
Murrieta begins wearing the mask and thwarting Montero's plans.  As he
does this, Montero's adopted daughter Elena (Catherine Zeta-Jones),
who is now all grown up (and how), runs into the new Zorro and sparks
fly. You can fill in the blanks.
The action in the film is cheesy, but it is good cheese. It is
refreshing to see that, in this day where action scenes involve
numerous explosions and crashes and death-defying stunts, the scenes
in /The Mask of Zorro/ rely on good old-fashioned choreography and
inventiveness to liven things up. In particular, the scenes are all
done comic-book style, where things happen that are highly unrealistic
but are acceptable only from a panel-by-panel perspective (for
example, the classic use of Zorro's sword as though it were a man to
mark whatever he chooses).  The acting is pretty good, and both
Banderas and Zeta-Jones are good looking people with plenty of
charisma and chemistry.  The dialogue is humourous and irreverent and
the naturally-filmed cinematography is bright and attractive.
Due to rather odd circumstances, I only got to see the second half of
/The Mask of Zorro/ and what I saw was pretty cool. Definitely worth
renting.


Title
Review for Cube (1997)
/Cube/ has been compared to the recent spate of virtual reality films,
such as /The Matrix/, /eXistenZ/, and /The Thirteenth Floor/. However
I don't think the comparison is merited.  /Cube/ is really about a
character study of people trapped in an artificially constructed
world, whereas the latter movies are primarily about the nature of the
worlds the character inhabit (and not the characters themselves).
The Cube at first glance (from the inside) appears to be a bunch of
interconnected cubic rooms with six openings, forming some sort of a
maze. Some of the rooms are booby trapped to render death with quick
succession.  Five people suddenly find themselves thrust together in
the Cube: Quentin, a police officer with ingrained prejudices and a
lot of anger; Leaven (Nicole de Boer of Star Trek: Deep Space
Nine fame) a bit of a mathematical prodigy (even though she
takes too long to figure out a number ending in 5 cannot be prime);
Worth (David Hewlett), an architect partially responsible for the
design of the Cube; Holloway (Nicky Guadagni), a doctor; and Kazan
(Andrew Miller), an autistic savant.
As the five strangers become acquainted with themselves and their
surroundings, they are unable to figure out what the purpose of the
Cube is, and who or what is responsible for its construction.  The
only visible purpose appears to be intimately tied to the plight of
the five people (i.e., the Cube is defined by those trapped in
it). Each must depend on the skills of the others in order to survive.
For some, this is easier than others: Kazan has no choice but to trust
those around him.  For Quentin, this is incredibly difficult given his
profession. Needless to say, given the claustrophobic nature of the
rooms, the fact that they have no means of nutrition, and frustration
at failed attempts to unearth the mystery of the Cube, there is a
tremendous amount of interpersonal conflict.
Director Vincenzo Natali's skills are definitely laudable in that he
takes the story of five people trapped in a room and makes it into an
interesting and worthwhile movie to watch.  The claustrophobic nature
of the story is reminiscent of Jorge Luis Borges and Harlan Ellison
(/The Library of Babel/ and /I Have No Mouth and I Must Scream/
respectively). The performances are solid.  The bleak set design
almost transcends the low-budget nature of this film. There is a very
cool suspense sequence at the end, where the characters must traverse
a cube in total silence.
The science fiction aspect of this film lies in the fact that each of
the rooms is identified by a set of numbers, and the characters must
utilise mathematics to understand the nature of the cube and to escape
from it (with some interesting cryptographic implications given the
relative difficulties of testing primality (which Leaven possesses the
ability to do) and factoring).  But this is only of marginal interest.
As I say above, /Cube/ is really a study of the human condition. As a
result, we never know anything about the Cube itself.  In the end, it
is the people who are primarily responsible for each others' fates,
and not the object they're trapped in.
The ultimate "moral", if you can call it that, is that in spite of his
limited abilities, Kazan is the only person who gets out of the Cube
(a la /Pi/ and /Forrest Gump/).  The contrast between a character like
Kazan and the angry Quentin is stark: who is a better and a more
content person?


Title
Review for Haunting, The (1999)
The Haunting
http://www.ram.org/ramblings/movies/the_haunting.html
/The Haunting/ uses a classic horror plot device: a group of strangers
are trapped in an isolated location and are susceptible to the
supernatural force around them.  They have to get out before it's too
late, but said force keeps them from leaving.
In this particular case, the group of people consist of psychology
professor Dr. Jeffrey Marrow (Liam Neeson) (who allegedly is doing a
study on insomnia but is really looking at the dynamics of fear) and
his experimental subjects who have difficult sleeping: Eleanor Lance
(Lili Taylor), a single young woman who has spent most of her taking
care of her recently deceased mother; Theodora (Catherine Zeta-Jones),
a bisexual; and Luke Sannerson (Owen Wilson).  The location is Hill
House, a mansion belonging to the late Hugh Crane, believed by the
locals to be haunted by the ghosts of the children who died working in
Crane's sweatshop that he ran.  Within the crowd of these motley
dysfunctionals, it is Eleanor who holds the key to unlocking the Hill
House's mysteries and freeing the souls of the trapped children.
The movie is great because there are some comic moments here, some
even intentional.  The unintentional moments arise because of the
cheesiness of the plot and effects.  The movie is scary at times,
particularly at the beginning but peters out the end when the face of
the evil within Hill House is exposed to us deliberately and slowly
(unlike in the 1963 classic and Shirley Jackson's novel). The main
problem is the lack of suspense. Rather than shock us, Director Jan de
Bont (/Speed/, /Twister/) shows us everything: eerie ghosts floating
around, statues coming to life, and the evil that is Hugh Crane, but
all this does is remove the suspense within the story.
The movie tries to be serious by touching upon various intriguing
aspects to the characters' lives, but doesn't linger upon them to do
any character development (for example, it's mentioned that Theodora
is bisexual, but to what end?).  The set is magnificent and the sound
track has its moments.  One particularly scary moment involves Eleanor
sifting through the ashes in the fireplace and being surprised by a
human skull, and one particularly hilarious moment occurs when Luke's
head is taken off (in the same location) and Marrow winces.  The
acting is passable, with Wilson doing an extremely bad job, but
well-suited to generate a few laughs.
/The Haunting/ is a fun movie---it made me laugh out a lot and there
very a few times when I jumped.  It's B-grade entertainment that's
worth that matinee fare.


Title
Review for Celebrity (1998)
You can learn a lot about society by seeing who it celebrates. That's
the message in /Celebrity/, a funny typically-neurotic Woody Allen
film.
/Celebrity/ follows the life of an estranged journalist Lee Simon
(Kenneth Branagh) who appears to be blessed with some of the best and
worst luck a human being could have.  On the one hand, he attracts
gorgeous women who are willing to do almost anything for him (though
one claims her body is owned by her husband but her head isn't?!?).
On the other hand, he invariably screws things up such that in the end
he is left alone, as his dreams and ambitions drift away with the
waves.
The movie is also about the lives of the rich and the famous and the
power they wield over others. Brandon Darrow (Leonardo DiCaprio, in a
non-typical bad boy role), for example, is a famous actor sought after
by Simon to star in the script he's hawking. Simon does everything to
please Darrow but that only lands him in trouble (and a $6000 debt!).
Likewise, people currying favours from Simon (given his journalist
status) are left in the cold.  The lesson: like with everywhere else,
there are few nice people in the industry.  There is some commentary
about celebrating and glorifying people, but it gets lost in the
shuffle that is Simon's woes.
/Celebrity/ remains interesting because of the famous actors playing
the characters that Simon flirts with, including Wynona Ryder, Melanie
Lee Griffith, Famke Janssen, and Charlize Theron.  As is typical with
many Woody Allen films, the movie is extremely hilarious at times and
manages to keep you amused through-out.  The film is done entirely in
pretentious artsy-fartsy black and white.  
Lee Simon as a character is reminiscent of Sherman McCoy from /The
Bonfire of the Vanities/.  It's tempting to look at the character of
Simon as a portrayal of Woody Allen (particularly given Branagh's
excellent mimicry), and perhaps this is what the Director intended. If
this is the case, Allen either has a confused view of himself or
enjoys taking us all for a ride.

