Authors
Steve Rybin
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for American Buffalo (1996)
Directed by Michael Corrente.  Starring Dustin Hoffman, Dennis Franz, 
Sean Nelson.  Rated R.
"I'm not here to smother you in theory," says Dustin Hoffman's character 
in "American Buffalo".  Don't believe a word of it.  Teach, played well 
by Hoffman, does nothing but theorize.  Dennis Franz plays Teach's friend,
 an owner of a part-junk, part-antique store who has been scammed out of 
some money in the sale of a rare buffalo nickel.  Don wants the nickel 
back, and maybe something else on the side; a kid named Bobby 
(resourcefully played by Nelson) often hangs around his shop, asking for 
money, and he wants part of the plan too.  Teach wants to cut Bobby out 
of the plan.  In fact, Teach seems to want to run the whole show.  Why?  
Maybe because he has nothing better to do.
"American Buffalo", written by David Mamet (based on his stageplay), is 
well-directed by Michael Corrente, but what's most noticeable is the 
three strong performances in the film.  Hoffman, Franz, and Nelson work 
well together.  The role of Teach was one many actors in Hollywood wanted 
- simply because it provides them with a LOT of dialogue - and colorful 
dialogue at that.  The "F" word is used quite frequently throughout, and 
it's used mostly as a defensive tool for the characters.  Their 
volcabularly is not large.  They use profanity as a crutch.  Technically, 
these people are lowlifes; men who once had dreams, but who must now 
settle for simpler goals.  Overall, this is an interesting character 
study, although it probably plays better on stage than on film.
Visit "Another Shmuck on the Internet Reviewing Movies"
http://pages.prodigy.com/oldman/shmuck.html

Title
Review for Island of Dr. Moreau, The (1996)
Directed by John Frankenheimer.  Starring Marlon Brando, Val Kilmer, 
David Thewlis.  Rated PG-13.
Stan Winston's special effects and William Fraker's wonderful cinema-
tography are the main highlights in this retelling of H.G. Wells' novel.  
The movie has a terrific visceral impact, but it's hard to take it 
seriously at times: Marlon Brando and Val Kilmer both give over-the-top 
performances, and too often the film seem to be going for cheap laughs 
instead of moving the plot forward.
Brando plays Dr. Moreau, a brilliant scientist whose genetic experiments 
have gotten out of control.  Val Kilmer is his right-hand-man, but Kilmer 
doesn't get much screen time here.  David Thewlis' character, the lone 
survivor of a plane crash, becomes trapped on Moreau's island, and it 
doesn't take him long to figure out what is going on.
Frankenheimer's telling of this story is visually exciting and well-made, 
but the film is not quite sure what it wants to be.  For the first hour, 
it's straight-up science fiction with a bit of humor thrown in; the last 
forty minutes or so, it's basically an action-thriller.  It does, however,
 succeed at being consistently bizarre.
Visit "Another Shmuck on the Internet Reviewing Movies"
at http://pages.prodigy.com/oldman/shmuck.html
