Authors
Noel Wood
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Ghosts of Mississippi (1996)
The following review is property of MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED and cannot
be quoted or referenced without proper credit. For more information, go to the
homepage at http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr
A couple of months ago, I remember some customer telling me that they liked
FARGO because it was based on a true story. And I was like, yeah, that's kind
of cool that that's a true story. When people ask me about DONNIE BRASCO,
People say "another gangster movie?" and I'll be like "Yeah, but this one is
based on a true story." I thought that it being a true story somehow made it a
better movie.
For every GOODFELLAS or FARGO, there are FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND made-for-TV
shitfests that are based on every single goddamn true story that ever happened.
Life itself is boring as shit. That's why we need movies. But every once in a
while something hapens in real life that is worthy of a movie. Quite simply, a
movie is a movie, whether its source is reality or or the mind of Yahoo Serious
or a best-selling pulp novel. 
This all brings me to Rob Reiner's GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI. This movie was
virtually ignored at the box office and by critics (except for James Woods'
performance, and rightfully so) but it really isn't all that bad. Alec Baldwin
was a little stiff and Whoopi Goldberg has been better. The supporting cast was
good and Reiner's directing is solid. But I was watching this movie and
thinking, "This is boring." Why was it boring? Because I had seen it all
before. It was familiar ground. There wasn't anything original about it. 
What bothered me about these observations is that it was a true story.
GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI tells the story of a civil rights leader named Medgar
Evars who was shot in his driveway by an assassin in the early sixties. Thirty
years after the crime, the killer is finally brought to justice by the
Mississippi DA. Alec Baldwin plays the Great White Hope lawyer who loses his
wife and his respectability and gets his life threatened because of his
dedication to the case. He gets called a "nigger lover" and cries a lot and
shit. At the end, they get the conviction and everybody's happy. 
Before seeing this movie, I did not know anything about Medgar Evars. I still
do not. A daring movie to make would have been a biography of Medgar Evars, but
they didn't do that. Instead, they reduced the film in to the generic courtroom
drama that we've seen a million times in Grisham adaptations and the like. The
white DA gets the case, and dedicates himself to it against the advice of his
wife and other people involved. He goes around gathering evidence with the help
of a few loyal friends (one of which plays comic relief) and then goes to court
and gets death threats and learns something about himself and then makes a
heart-stirring closing argument and justice is served and everything is okay in
the end. A TIME TO KILL and A FEW GOOD MEN (also by Reiner) are the same exact
thing. That's just off the top of my head. I'm sure there are more. 
The Great White Hope thing didn't bother me as much as others because of the
way it happened and and also because, well, I'm white, and we've been taught to
feel that we are the world's only saviors. It was the fact that this TRUE story
was presented in such an unoriginal way. But how else could they have presented
it?
The dream racial courtroom drama would take the cast of A TIME TO KILL and and
have them play the parts in GHOSTS OF MISSISSIPPI because it's a true story. I
dunno. Everything's been done I guess. Even stories that have never been done
before have been done before. That sucks.
"If Al Gore invented the internet, then I invented the spell-check."
-Danforth Quayle
HEY! Check out MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED:
http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr

Title
Review for Breakfast at Tiffany's (1961)
The following review is property of MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED and cannot
be quoted or referenced without proper credit. For more information, go to the
homepage at http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr
May we hope that somewhere in heaven, George Peppard is resting peaceably.
After all, this is the guy who played Hannibal. No, not the cannibal and not
the guy who crossed the Swiss Alps. The leader of the force that compromised
the most wonderful television program to ever appear on a major network.
By the way, who played Murdock? Peppard was 
Hannibal, as we've already established. And the true Hollywood Icon Mr. T
played B.A. Baracus. And if I recall correctly, Dirk Benedict of BATTLESTAR
GALACTICA fame played the Face. And later there was some useless chick in the
group but nobody really gives a damn who played her. But everyone I ask draws a
blank when I ask if they remember who played Murdock.
How could anyone NOT love the A-Team? Only in
the Reagan era could a show this violent do so 
well on a major network. Sure, there are action
shows on today like Xena: Warrior Princess and Renegade, but they're relegated
to syndication and basic cable and piss-ant studios like UPN. NBC would never
have the balls to run a show as macho as the A-Team in the Clinton-dominated
liberal 90's. 
After all, this was a show about Vietnam vets who apparently were like
vigilantes and shit who got sick of the way the government was treating them so
they took matters in to their own hands. Or something like that. I mean, I was
pretty young when the show was running so I didn't really understand the
dynamics of it. I just loved it because of all the unneccessary violence that
was well above and beyond what I could see on the Dukes of Hazzard.
Even the intro montage to the A-Team was cool. There were all these big action
scenes with explosions and stuff and then they'd freeze-frame on one of the
actors in an action pose and put the little caption that said "Starring George
Peppard as Hannibal". Then at the end of the title sequence they shot bullets
at the A-Team logo and the faces of the team members appeares in the bullet
holes. Man, that was cool.
And of course they had that van. I used to have the A-Team van and all the
figures from Galoob but I think they got sold at a garage sale or something. It
was kinda cool because they were the same size as my G.I.Joes so I could
pretend Mr.T had joined Cobra or something. I did go to Universal Studios as a
kid and got to lift the A-Team van with my bare hands. Actually it was hollowed
out so that the average little kid could lift it. But apparently it was from an
episode where Murdock got trapped under the van so B.A. had to lift it up in a
fit of adrenaline. So they used this hollowed-out prop van so Mr.T could lift
it because apparently Mr. T was a pussy in real life, much like Richard Donner.
Actually, Mr. T's character was pretty much a pussy on the show too. Remember,
they always had to slip him a mickey or knock him out to get him in to a
helicopter because big bad B.A. was afraid to fly?
And what was the deal with Murdock anyway? I know that I can't remember for the
life of me who played him but it was also weird because his character was crazy
but not really crazy.I mean, he acted like he was crazy and it scared the shit
out of the bad guys but when it came down to it he was kind of smart. Like when
he was handling bombs or something and he acted perfectly normal. And didn't he
have a cat that he ran around with all the time? I can't remember exactly but
I'm pretty sure he had this cat that he talked to all the time and B.A. hated
it. And the cat had a name but I can't remember for the life of me what the
cat's name was. But at least it had a name unlike that damn cat that Holly
Golightly parades around with in BREAKFAST AT TIFFANY'S.
Speaking of which, I guess I should be talking about that movie. 
Okay, for a second we almost see Audrey Hepburn naked at the beginning of the
movie. That's pretty cool because back then she was really hot. But then she
got really old so now if I
think about her I think about the old wrinkly 
Audrey that's in ALWAYS or worse yet I think of old and wrinkly Katherine
Hepburn, which is far worse. Either way, the mood is ruined. So Audrey Hepburn
playes Holly. Oh, and Mickey Rooney plays a Chinaman. And Buddy Ebsen plays a
horse doctor who used to be married to Holly, and I'm thinking "Jed Clampett
and Audrey Hepburn? No way!". And a young Hannib...er, Peppard looks a lot like
Cary Elwes in THE PRINCESS BRIDE so I keep waiting for him to put on a silly
accent and say "as you wish." So Peppard, as Paul Varjak, moves in and meets
Audrey and they have this fling but decide to just be friends because she has a
thing for rich men but it's all unfulfilling to her and Peppard tries to win
her back and they have this long argument and she loses that damn nameless cat
and he helps her find it in an alley in the rain and they kiss and it's a happy
ending.
As Hannibal would say, "I love it when a plan comes together."
"If Al Gore invented the internet, then I invented the spell-check."
-Danforth Quayle
HEY! Check out MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED:
http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr

Title
Review for Dick (1999)
The following review is property of MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED and cannot
be quoted or referenced without proper credit. For more information, go to the
homepage at http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr
Yep, That's Dick. As in President Richard M. Nixon. Or as in penis, which this
film likes to point out every chance it gets. 
Now before I continue, Let me say that behind GO and EYES WIDE SHUT, Andrew
Fleming's DICK is the film I've enjoyed most in 1999. I honestly laughed my ass
off as I watched this Clueless-cum-Gump comedy unravel. It was a brilliant
concept from the getgo, and with a few exceptions, pulled off the story
excellently. But I am here not to talk about how good the film was, I'm here to
let the director know where he went wrong.
Andrew, I've seen two other of your films, which were fatally flawed. 1996's
THE CRAFT was pure cut-and-paste MTV Generation tripe that I only watched
because of my weakness for Robin Tunney and Neve Campbell as Catholic
schoolgirls. 1994's THREESOME was a terrible romantic comedy viewed primarily
for a similair reason, this time involving Lara Flynn Boyle and the guarantee
we'd see some flesh. But Since you're not a name director at this point who's
ammassed a body of shitty work like, say. Joel Schumacher, I'll cut you a
little slack and wipe the slate clean.
Like I said, DICK had its good points. The main cast was fine. Dan Hedaya was
born to play Nixon. Why Oliver Stone even thought of casting Hanks or Hopkins
before considering Hedaya is beyond me. Michelle Williams and Kirsten Dunst did
what they were supposed to do without making me want to strangle them for their
bubbliness. David Foley was the group's most underrated performer, really
breaking all laws of typecasting to play Bob Haldeman. But from there, things
get a little shaky. 
Saturday Night Live fixtures Will Ferrell and Jim Breuer just didn't cut it.
Ferrell is not funny, and will never be funny. No matter what the role calls
for, he's always that annoying male cheerleader from those wretched new SNL
skits. For some reason, people think this guy is marginally amusing, and I
can't figure out why. So putting him in DICK as Bob Woodward can only mean
trouble. I'll cut Breuer a little more slack, since his role was ultraminimal
in the film and he didn't seen to be over or underexerting himself. But what
really saddens me is the downward spiral of Bruce McCollough. Why couldn't the
other Kids in the Hall stay as funny as Foley and Thompson (even if Thompson
has limited his repertoire to only playing the gay comic relief, but that's
another rant.)? His bumbling Carl Bernstein is truly one of the lower points in
this film. Together with the already insipid Ferrell as Woodward, they make for
some of the most unfunny moments in the film. I will, however, point out that
Harry Shearer is dead-on as "G-Man" Gordon Liddy and Saul Rubinek couldn't be
better in every aspect in his portrayal of Henry Kissinger.
But once again, I can be forgiving with the cast, seeing as to how the
supporting members are the only ones that need retooling. My main problem was
the diatribe of cheap penis jokes that just never seemed to stop. They even
manage to work their way all the way to the final scene in the film; which,
ironically, is the only time I thought a Dick pun really worked in the movie
although the buildup to the joke seemed tedious and forced.  But every
crowd-scene "I love Dick/There's more to life than Dick" was telegraphed poorly
and was utterly unnecessary. Most of the script was brilliantly creative, but
was only harmed by the incessant need for brainless phallic puns. 
A small complaint of mine is that Nixon is painted in the most unflattering of
colors in this film without any positive light shown his way. It's not
sympathetic to the controversial late President in the slightest. Granted,
that's been the media's take on Nixon for eons, so it's not that big a deal.
Besides, it's shown in such a tongue-in-cheek manner that one can't be expected
to take anything seriously as biography of any of the characters found within.
But unfortunately, it adds to the myth that Richard Nixon was a complete
failure as Commander-in-Chief, which the uninformed (and slanted youth of the
world) will probably take with them as gospel. Then again, I'm probably taking
this way too personally, which I shall now refrain from doing in order to wrap
up this review.
So, the big picture here, although you'd be suprised after reading the
criticism found within this review, is that I highly recommend DICK. The good
fortunately far outweighs the bad. The way the two girls unwittingly change the
course of history through childish antics is clever and is carried out well. We
now know who Deep Throat is, and why "he" was called such. We now know what was
contained on the 18 minutes of tape that was erased in the Watergate evidence.
Major events of Nixon's presidency are  highligted as the result of a
hypothetical situation, and for the most part, are done to perfection. Even
minor events of the day and nuances of the characters are laid out on the
table, ones that may go over the heads of viewers less knowledgeable. The
setting is flawless, the trends are accurate yet not overbearing (as it was in
THE WEDDING SINGER, among other nostalgia pieces), and the pacing is fine. So,
for the most part, Andrew Fleming did a pretty good job with DICK.
Just don't expect much from Fleming if he releases a film called PETER, ROD, or
JOHNSON.  Or worse yet, the highly anticipated Bill Clinton biopic WILLY.
"If Al Gore invented the internet, then I invented the spell-check."
-Danforth Quayle
HEY! Check out MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED:
http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
The following review is property of MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED and cannot
be quoted or referenced without proper credit. For more information, go to the
homepage at http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr
First off, a personal note. This is the first film I've reviewed in retarded
mode in a year and a half, since the video store where the concept was born
shut its doors. So if this sucks, bear with me, I'm just trying to be like
Stella and get my groove back. 
The Blair Witch Project. Great fuckin' movie. You heard it here. I don't care
how much buzz and hype is going around, ther is no room for dissenting opinion
in this matter. Blair Witch is amazing. If anyone tells you otherwise, they're
wrong. There's no debating it. 
Why, you ask? Because this is the scariest movie I've seen since Kubrick's THE
SHINING. Because the filmmaking style is so bold. Because you are literally
part of the action. 
If you read my essay ARTHOUSE MOVIES IN FRATHOUSE THEATERS, you know about the
conditions that I saw the film in. People threw shit at the screen, talked
during the whole thing, and basically booed the film. These people failed to
grasp the whole intent of the film. I think I heard someone say "You didn't
even get to see the witch!" as if that were a disappointing issue. I just
wanted to grab the fucker's neck and yell "OF COURSE you didn't see the fucking
witch! THAT WAS THE POINT!" 
Here's some perspective for you. Blair witch was made for about $25,000. That's
roughly one one-thousandth of what a typical Hollywood movie costs to make as a
bare minimum. I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER and THE HAUNTING probably cost
way more, and neither one of them could hope to achieve what this film did so
well. So with $25,000, it's not like we're going to see any amazing special
effects. No computer generated images, no elaborate costumes or make-up jobs,
no explosions, no elaborate sets. We get woods, three scared people, and a
whole bunch of frightening sound effects. We don't HAVE to see the witch. We
don't HAVE to have everything spoon-fed to us. It's a super-fucking-frightening
experience because you are there, in those woods, seeing and hearing what the
actors do. 
Remember the old adage that man's greatest fear is the fear of the unknown?
Well finally that idea is captured on film. After decades of being shoveled
crappy horror movies where we are supposed to be frightened by actually seeing
the antagonist, some people haven't grasped that that's not what's scary. The
human psyche is a much more tender spot to fuck with than the eyes. I was
nervous as shit after the trio realized they were lost, and I wan't even sure
why. Being lost in the woods is a scary thing. Being in the woods at night is
even scarier, especially when there's not a town for miles to provide any
light. EVERY noise seems like an explosion. EVERYTHING is scary in that
situation, so it's especially scary when there's some weird shit going on like
piles of stones arranged around your tent and Christian Death symbols hanging
from trees. You don't know if it's bears or crazy rednecks or child-murdering
witches, and you don't care. 
You know what really scared the shite out of me? The scenes where they turned
the camera off and you only had the audio from the DAT. For the first time in
as long as I can remember, I felt uneasy in a movie theater. I was actually
releived when I realized that day had broken again. Yeah, I knew that the
characters would all be dead by the end, but none of that mattered. I was
there. I was in that tent. I was walking along with Heather and Mike and Josh.
That's how powerful the use of POV in the film was. I wasn't just concerned for
the lives of the characters, I was concerned for my own life. 
And another beautiful thing about this film is that you can tell someone
everything about it and not spoil it for them. It isn't even important that
they all die. You know they're gonna bite the big chicken in the sky by the
end. You can tell basically all the little details to everyone and not ruin the
movie for them. It's the execution of the film that matters. It's all the
little quirks involving the characters and their reactions to the environment.
It's the way the two mediums of Hi-8 video and 16mm black and white are
alternated to give you two different views of what's going on...the reality of
the video camera transposed with the control aspect of the 16mm. There's SO
much going for this film and the way it jars you emotionally that I could talk
for hours. 
And you know what's interesting? As great as this movie is in the theater, it's
going to be even better on video, because the jerky-cam won't be quite as
dramatic, and you won't have the comfort of 500 strangers nearby to lessen your
fear. 
Some people didn't find it scary. Too bad. I pity them, because they are
failing to grasp what true fear is all about. So for you people, have fun
watching the latest slasher films with a singly named psycopath that keeps on
magically rising from the dead. Keep on admiring Jennifer Love Hewitt and her
predictable getways from the forces of evil. Enjoy the newest hack job by the
creator of Dawson's Creek who needs Wes Craven to make anything amount to less
than a 2 hour sack of steaming shit. That stuff's fun, but it's not scary. The
only thing scary about it is that people will continue to pack theaters to see
it. 
As for me, I'm gonna wrap up and check out blairwitch.com to involve myself in
the backstory a bit more and suspend my disbelief a whole lot. And then I might
just see THE BLAIR WITCH PROJECT again. 
"If Al Gore invented the internet, then I invented the spell-check."
-Danforth Quayle
HEY! Check out MOVIE CRITICISM FOR THE RETARDED:
http://www.homestead.com/mc4tr
