Authors
Joe Van de Zande
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Naked Lunch (1991)
     Well now.  What do you say to sheet lightning dropping from a baby
sky?  Not much.  Even the German shepherd cross I bear has enough sense
to dive for shelter, then peek out at the fireworks.  Lashing and
thrashing.  This is an ugly movie that walks like it talks.
     Details?  Forget it!  Okay, one.  The movie is *not* based on the
novel, not really, though there are two readings and one character from
it.  (Readers of the long gone and sorely missed B&H annals may
recognize Dr. Benway.)   Instead, it's a fantasy about Big Bill himself
in Morocco during the period NAKED LUNCH was written.  Very loosely
based on the recent biography, perhaps.
     Curious about the novel?  It's on my credenza, heavily dog-eared.
Just open it anywhere and read a couple of pages at random; it's one of
those.  Like Delaney's DHALGREN, right?  And would you like to meet the
real Burroughs?  Well you could run him to ground in Lawrence, Kansas,
last I heard, or you  could check out the defrocked priest toward the
end of DRUGSTORE COWBOY.  That's your man.
     Funny?  Umm ... do you laugh when Joan is shooting bug powder into
her breast and describes the sensation as "Kafkaesque"?  Some did,
others blanched.  A matter of taste.  Genri; Uncle Duke in a nasty mood.
Ever read Ciline?  Heh.  Try to him at the River Oaks Waldenbooks.
"Sure.  Behind the Hallmark cards".  One thing: I know it would have
ruined the atmosphere of decay and  corruption, but if I were the
director I'd've been tempted to slip Woody Allen in as ten second cameo
hallucination of the Ginsberg character.  
     This is an atmosphere movie, not one for a big screen.  You can't
go  wrong if you see it in Chicago; I believe it is only playing at the
Esquire on Oak, and the Broadway.  (Yes, silly, on Broadway.  Near
Belmont).  I went to the latter.  Packed.  Get your ticket early then
watch basketball for a while at Reflections two doors south.  (Did you
see DA BULLS work out on Utah?  Mercy.)
