Authors
Phil Curtolo
Number of Reviews
23

Title
Review for Evita (1996)
By Phil Curtolo
"Madonna - Antonio Banderas - Jonathan Price - in an Alan Parker film -
with music from Andrew Lloyd Weber - and lyrics by Tim Rice -   Evita."
Now I have to admit, the trailer for this rock-opera-turned-major motion
picture is almost breath-taking for some. The soundtrack is wonderful to
listen to. So why wouldn't the movie be wonderful to see. Simple, a
little over 2 hours of constant singing can almost drive you insane.
The story of Eva Duarte (Madonna), Evita is full of drama that's
trapped inside by all the notes and chords. She was an orphaned child
who ends up becoming a hooker, then goes into the field of acting, and
finally meets Juan Peron (Price), the soon-to-be first President of
Argentina. They fall in love and eventually marry. Sounds pretty good,
doesn't it. Well the story gets better, as Eva goes on the "Rainbow
Tour" across Europe, trying to win respect. Eva Duarte was a wonderful
lady.
However, all of the drama-packed moments above were never understood
because the actors and actresses sang to fast to be understood.
I went into Theater 4 at Magic Cinemas with the attitude that Evita was
going to be terribly boring and I left with happy, because I was right.
They only thing that kept me awake during the movie was the loud bangs
of the drums and strums of the guitar.
Although it did come off as dull, the beautiful cinematography is
eye-catching, as was Madonna's performance. As the "spiritual leader of
Argentina," Madonna would have definitely been an Oscar-contender had
she spoken a single line. But her chance was taken away with the
stubbornness of making an exact replica of the Broadway musical a film.
Don't get me wrong and don't look at my grade. I am not a big fan of
musicals on the big screen. If you're going to pay to see a movie, you
want to see a movie. Now I have to admit, it's a lot cheaper to pay $5
than $200 plus to see the play, but that's what did me in. 
All this review contains is my opinion and my grade was set before I
even saw the movie. Now you may be saying, "What kind of critic is he?,"
and you're right. As a critic, I should have given the movie a chance.
But as a 17-year old Quentin Tarantino fan, it was way too hard.
Grade: F-, 0 out of *****

Title
Review for English Patient, The (1996)
Lengthy and lousy are two words to describe the boring drama The
English Patient. Great acting, music and cinematography were nice, but
too many dull sub-plots and characters made the film hard to follow.
Ralph Fiennes (Strange Days, Schindler's List) gives a gripping
performance as Count Laszlo Almasy, a victim of amnesia and horrible
burns after World War II in Italy. The story revolves around his past,
in flashback form, making it even more confusing.
Anyway, he is taken in by Hana (Juliette Binoche, The Horseman on the
Roof), a boring war-torn nurse. She was never really made into anything,
until she met an Indian towards the end, developing yet another
sub-plot.
Count Almasy begins to remember what happened to him as it is explained
by a stranger (Willem Dafoe, Basquiat). His love (Kirstin Scott Thomas,
Mission Impossible) was severely injured in a plane crash, and
eventually died in a cave. He returned to find her dead and was
heart-broken. So he flew her dead body somewhere, but was shot down from
the ground.
Don't get the wrong idea, it may sound good and the trailer may be
tempting, but good is the last thing this film is. Maybe if it were an
hour less, it may have been tolerable, but 2 hours and 40 minutes of
talking is too much to handle.
The only redeeming qualities about this film are the fine acting of
Fiennes and Dafoe and the beautiful desert cinematography. Other than
these, The English Patient is full of worthless scenes of boredom and
wastes entirely too much film.
Grade: D, ** out of *****

Title
Review for In Love and War (1997)
Sandra Bullock may seem to be a good  actress in a role like Annie in
Speed or Lucy in While You Were Sleeping, but when it comes down to
solid performances in strong dramas, she just doesn't cut it.
Fortunately, Richard Attenborough's new film In Love and War didn't call
for Bullock to carry the film. Instead, it based the movie on Chris
O'Donnell's brilliant performance as Ernest Hemingway. 
Set in Italy in World War I (just like the Golden Globe award-winning
The English Patient),  the story is centered on Hemingway's epic war
adventures, especially how he attempted to carry a wounded Italian
soldier through a bombardment. He is seriously injured and is sent to
the local American Red Cross hospital. It is there where he meets the
love of his life, Agnus (Bullock).
Things don't exactly fall into place as Ernie wanted them to. Agnus
feels that he is just an adorable child and that their relationship is
nothing more than a fling. She eventually turns him down for a wealthy
Italian doctor, leaving her war-torn love in pain. The end of the film
leaves a teary Hemingway alone at his father's cabin in Michigan.
The cinematography in the film was twice as beautiful as that in The
English Patient. Background shots ranged from a beautiful mansion on a
river bed to a gorgeous, blooming forest.
In Love and War also features the great young actor Mackenzie Austin
(Iron Will) as Ernie's best friend Harry. He played some what of a
middle man, at first caught in a bitter love triangle and later, as
their messenger.
Attenborough's attempts to recreate the drama behind World War I were
definitely successful. Although most of the film took place in the
hospital, the few battle scenes were one of the best of their kind, much
like Oscar-winner's Glory and Braveheart.
Although the trailer looks to be similar to the disastrous "love-story"
The English Patient, In Love and War shines way above it, in more ways
than one. The cinematography, the acting (of O'Donnell, not Bullock),
and the directing were all much better. 
If you want to see a real love story, don't waste your money on Patient,
instead, see an interesting, romantic drama like In Love and War.
Grade: B, *** out of *****

Title
Review for Dante's Peak (1997)
Recently, disaster has been fresh on the minds of many movie
director's. For instance, just last year, director Jan De Bot released
the blockbuster hit Twister. It's success surprised no one, from
esteemed critics to ordinary fans. It toppled the box office charts,
remaining in the number one spot until the next disaster flick was
released. Director Roland Emmerich's  Independence Day, the 6th highest
grossing film in movie history, again, took critics and fans to the edge
of the seats in suspense and awe. It's astounding special effects
astonished sell-out crowds in every theater throughout the nation.
As of today, just about every natural disaster has been covered in
movies. Earthquakes, typhoons, hurricanes, alien invasions, towering
infernos and whatever else picks at your brain has been covered by movie
directors, each one having it's own high points of success. Yet the only
natural disasters yet to be focused on and to become successful are the
terror-wrenching volcanoes. On February 7 of this year, this fact ceased
to exist, as director Roger Donaldson let loose on of the most
death-defying, special effects enhanced films ever made. Dante's Peak
had finally arrived with much acclaim.
Dante's Peak, Washington has just been named the second most desirable
town in America, population under 20,000, in which to reside. It seems
all is perfect for Mayor Rachel Wando (Linda Hamilton, The Shadow
Conspiracy) and the town's people, as the huge celebration kicks off
with a mammoth, possible multi-million dollar investment by a large
corporation. However, little do they know the danger they are actually
in, due to their dormant, fire-breathing mountain.
In Vancouver, Washington, word spreads of reading from the near extinct
Dante's Peak. Head of Operations Paul Dreyfus (Charles Hallahan,
Executive Decision) sends his best volcanologist, Harry Dalton (Pierce
Brosnan, Goldeneye) to examine the napping beast.
Dalton has quite a past with volcanoes. As it turns out, he lost his
only love and  fiancée to a volcano in Columbia. Yet he still proceeds
with all tasks at hand.
Now for the main event. When Dalton investigates the mammoth creature
of destruction, he becomes suspicious of his scientific evidence,
revealing a possible eruption. However, his boss, Dreyfus, doesn't want
to alarm the people and scare off the investor over something that had
no hard-core proof. When Dalton presents the evidence needed, it's too
late, and the evacuation is on. In a mad panic, the people of the town
rush to escape without thinking of the consequences. In an extremely
well done scene, citizens are trampled, cars are smashed, and roads turn
to ruins, as the volcano spits out it's fiery flem. 
But this is just the beginning, as the party has just begun and Dante's
Peak has only just begun to begin it's reign of terror. In a desperate
attempt to escape, Dalton's team of experts barely make it alive.
However, he, Mayor Wando, her children, their grandmother, and her dog
are stranded on the mainland, as the town's only escape point, a rickety
old bridge, has already collapsed. So it's survival of the fittest
between man and nature.
The movie is filled with many strong points. It's release date was it's
only weak point. Why would someone release this big-budget flick one
measly week after the much anticipated re-releasing of the first episode
of the critically acclaimed Star Wars Trilogy. There is simply no
logical answer to this question, however, no movie could go flawless,
even though this one came pretty darn close. It's astonishing special
effects, were obviously the strong point of this movie. With the
creeping lava, the incredibly detailed, exploding buildings, throwing
each brick through the air, the blinding ash storms, and the acid-filled
lake, Dante's Peak's effects were twenty times more powerful than
Twister's and ten times more captivating than those of Independence Day.
Although a poor release date may hamper this movie's success, any movie
fan would do anything it takes to see this movie. Beat up your grandma
and steal her Social Security check, or rob a homeless man of his pencil
money and see one of the best special effects movie's of our time, in
our opinions. Dante's Peak is a must see.
Grade: A+, ***** out of *****

Title
Review for Jing cha gu shi IV: Jian dan ren wu (1996)
I can sum up First Strike in one word: awesome. Never in my life have I
seen an actor as insanely dedicated as Jackie Chan. For the simple
reason that he has performed his own stunts in his every movie he's ever
appeared in, he should be awarded greatly.
The same Tom and Jerry formula that was used to make Chan's Rumble in
the Bronx and Supercop so entertaining can be found here as well.
However, First Strike was probably the most exciting out of the three,
for the simple reason that practice makes perfect.
His last two movies were almost like practice and this one was great.
Like Rumble, this film is about the Mafia, the former KGB. Now Chan must
do battle in the freezing arctic temperatures of the Ukraine against a
group of very large bad men.
The trailer for the film sums it up quite well. First Strike is
action-packed, but the fight scenes are so fast and furious, they almost
have a witty, Italian-like humor to them. 
Jackie Chan is a regular comedian. Well, he's no Eddie Murphy, but he
can really crack you up. For example, he is hanging off a roof and he
humorously taunts his foes to come and get him, as he claims to be the
Korean 007 (that's secret agent James Bond).
Even the plot to this film improved above the others, as a sort-of
twisted nuclear-weapon smuggling deal is botched and Jackie takes the
blame. But never fear, as the Chinese Mafia aids him in uncovering the
truth behind the incident.
With some of the most high-flying stunts and side-splitting comedy,
First Strike is a sure-fire hit that's guaranteed to draw some major,
world-wide attention.
Grade: B+, **** out of *****

Title
Review for Scream (1996)
Since his New Nightmare, director Wes Craven has released several
terrible films, like Mangler and Vampire in Brooklyn. However, the end
of 1996 brought Craven's Scream to the big screen to frighten more
people.
The film stars Neve Campbell (The Craft) as Sydney Prestcott, a
character much like Heather Langencamp's in Craven's first big horror
hit, A Nightmare on Elm Street. She plays the innocent virgin who the
maniacal killer preys upon. 
The plot is a simple as any horror movie. A psychopath with a machete
or a knife or some sharp weapon preys on the youth of a small, quiet,
rural town. In this movie, someone takes their love of movies one step
too far.
The film bled talent, no pun intended. It featured some hot young stars
and a few old ones. Courtney Cox (TV's Friends), co-stars as a tabloid
reporter. Drew Barrymore (Boys on the Side) plays Casey Becker, the
first victim in the crime spree. Liev Schrieber (one of the kidnappers
in Ransom) appeared Cotton Weary. But the appearance of Henry Winkler
(THE FONZ!!!) as Principal Himbry took the taco. If you've seen the
movie, you already know that he's another victim, but how do you kill
Fonzie?
Anyhow, the story revolves around Sydney's obsession with her mother's
murder. And on the one year anniversary, the killer strikes again,
murdering innocent teenagers left and right.
Some references were made to the original horror films of the late 70's
and early 80's. For example, the school's janitor was dressed exactly
like Freddy Kreuger, minus the sharp glove. And Sydney's boyfriend's
last name, Billy Loomis (Skeet Ulrich, Albino Alligator), is the name
John Carpenter gave to his main star, Dr. Loomis, in the Halloween
series.
The climactic end of the movie throws a wicked curve ball, as the
killers are revealed. Throughout the movie, clues are given here and
there, but too many for anyone to pinpoint the actual killers other than
by guessing. Truthfully, I don't think anyone would've guessed the
killers identity until he took off the creepy mask.
If you liked Wes Craven's New Nightmare, then you'll definitely like
this witty, bloody horror movie. If you like to Scream the go see it.
Grade: A-, **** out of *****

Title
Review for Inventing the Abbotts (1997)
Adapting the story of Inventing the Abbotts into a film is a risky and
doubtful move. The story possesses a genuine sense of everyday mystery
that Hollywood doesn't easily tolerate-not exactly the stuff from which
spring blockbusters are made. What the film does offer is a slew of hot
young actors playing period of the 1950s, and engaging in a fair amount
of unnecessary sex. The lead performances from Liv Tyler and Joaquin
Phoenix (who both co-starred in That Thing You Do!) are youthful and
vibrant, but they deserve a better film in which to throttle their
engines. 
Set in a small Midwestern town dominated by the wealthy Abbott family,
the film revolves largely around Doug (Phoenix) and Jacey Holt (Billy
Crudup, Sleepers), two poor sons of a widowed mother (Picket Fences'
Kathy Baker), who covet the Abbott lifestyle. As directed by Pat
O'Connor (Circle of Friends) and scripted by Ken Hixon, Inventing the
Abbotts turns into a uproarious coming-of-age tale infused with
fistfights, tragedies, and a gushy happy ending. The culprit here may
actually be one of the producers (director Ron Howard),  who has been
known to drain good material of texture and potency. 
The character Jacey (Billy Crudup), who runs through the Abbott girls
one by one to acquaint himself with their family, is a narcissistic
menace. As the middle sister, the obscenely devilish Jennifer Connelly
(Mulholland Falls) plays a serviceable tramp; as the eldest and divorced
daughter, Joanna Going (Nixon) is all morose and gloomy.
The real show is Phoenix and Tyler as the youngest and most sensible
Abbott girl, Pam. Their playful childhood friendship morphs into a
traditional "I-loved-you-but-didn't-know-it" movie romance, but O'Connor
is smart enough to just let them hang out and be normal. 
Burdened by a narration that reminds the viewer too much of The Wonder
Years, Inventing the Abbotts is so full of dull, character write-ups,
that the only interesting points revolve around the relationship between
Doug and Pam. There's a definite sense that Howard, O'Connor, and
company go off on the wrong foot in creating this film and made
something they didn't intend to, even though it was enjoyable, none the
less.
Grade: C+, *** out of *****

Title
Review for Star Trek: First Contact (1996)
The crew of the Enterprise is back to do battle with their most lethal
enemies, the Borg, in Star Trek: First Contact.
The film stars the cast from the Star Trek: The Next Generation
television show. Captain Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick Stewart), Commander
William Riker (Jonathan Franks), Lieutenant-Commander Data (Brent
Spiner), Lieutenant-Commander Geordi LaForge (LeVar Burton) and
Lieutenant-Commander Worf (Michael Dorn) should all be familiar names to
Trekies, which is the name given to fans. Some new faces are seen in the
film, including James Cromwell, Alfre Woodard and Alice Krige.
This 8th episode in the long-lived series rotates around an event
called "First Contact."  Zefrum Cochrane (Cromwell, Babe) and his
partner Lily Sloane (Woodard, Primal Fear) are to make the first warp
speed launch in the history of the planet. Aliens are to pick this up
and eventually land, peacefully, on Earth. This is a turning point in
history, where the world stops fighting each other and starts fighting
inter-galactic enemies. The Borg, lead by the evil Borg Queen (Krige,
Sleepwalkers), travel back in time to stop this event from happening,
and the Enterprise follows.
In past films, the battles were fought between the Enterprise and the
Borg ship. Well not this time, as the Borg army of half-human robots get
onto the Enterprise, in attempt to take it over. One by one, the crew
members are turned into Borgs.
The usual acting performances were delivered by the usual stars, but
Cromwell's Zefrum Cochrane, a drunken professor living in the past,
which is our future, who is to change the course of history. Needless to
say, his character is quite memorable, as he tries numerous times to run
away.
To my surprise, Jonathan Franks not only starred in the film, but also
directed it. He did a fine job, as the finished product turned out
wonderfully.
Excellent special effects, gripping music, and clever turns are just a
few of the surprises in Star Trek: First Contact.
Grade: B+, **** out of *****

Title
Review for Breakdown (1997)
Imagine that you're driving along unfamiliar mid-western roads, desert
on both sides of you.  Your faithful and loving wife rests near you in
the passenger seat. 
Imagine, now, that your car breaks down.  A friendly trucker is happy
to lend a helping hand.  Your wife takes a ride with the polite and
innocent fellow to a nearby diner, leaving you to wait, unaware of the
world, in the car.  Finally, imagine that your wife never returns.
This is the horrifying situation that average, everyday guy Jeff Taylor
(Kurt Russell) faces in the epic suspense masterpiece Breakdown.
Taylor takes a closer look at his car after waiting for his wife, Amy
(Kathleen Quinlan), to return for about a half hour and finds a
disconnected cable.  He reconnects the cable and the car is mobile
again.
He drives to the diner where his wife was supposed to have been taken. 
Amy is nowhere to be found, neither is the trucker who gave her the
ride.  The chef at the counter knows nothing.  Taylor is baffled and we
can feel his frustration.  He leaves a message with the cook to tell his
wife to stay at the diner if she happens to show up, and he speeds off
in the direction of the next town.
His course is altered, however, when he spots the truck his wife had
hopped in driving along on a side road.  Taylor follows behind and
catches up.  He signals for the man to pull over, and the trucker
ignores him.  Taylor pulls in front of the trucker, forcing him to pull
his vehicle to the side of the road.  When confronted, the trucker (J.T.
Walsh) disputes that he's never seen Taylor or his wife.  What's going
on?  That's the question that drives Taylor through a convoluted maze of
terror.
Russell is good at getting the audience on his side, so it's easy to
understand him.  He plays a common, regular guy driven by desperation to
find his one true love: his wife.  That type of dramatic drive can
destroy a film if done incorrectly (Mel Gibson's love for his son didn't
help the already flawed Ransom), but in Breakdown, the audience falls
for Russell and wants to follow him in his pursuit.  
Perhaps what makes Russell's struggle work is the masterful style of
the film.  Director Jonathan Mostow keeps the pace quick, and
cinematographer Doug Milsome keeps the visuals sharp.  The film shows us
a beautiful landscape with plenty of snakes along the road.
Breakdown is so well done that it plays out like an old Alfred
Hitchcock film.  The terror isn't Texas Chainsaw Massacre scary, it's
real.  What happens in Breakdown could happen to any one of us.  That's
what evokes horror in an audience.  There's nothing scarier to me than
feeling disoriented and desperate.
Breakdown's physical make up is a reminder of another successfully
horrific film, The Hitcher; in which, Rutger Hauer stalked the
unsuspecting C. Thomas Howell.  Breakdown's break-neck pacing and
inclusion of human emotion is comparable to Speed.  However, Breakdown
doesn't steal from these films, it has its own style and heart. 
Breakdown is put together with such brilliance that it proves to be
superior to all three of the fore-mentioned films.
Kurt Russell is a good choice to play Jeff Taylor.  Russell has a
down-to-earth quality.  Although he's rich and living it up in
Hollywood, he seems like a regular guy you might run into at the local
mall.  That is why he works in the lead.  Since this story can happen to
any regular Joe, a regular Joe was the right person to cast.
Kathleen Quinlan plays an exceptional part as Russell's missing wife. 
She's cute, smart, and innocent.  She too, is someone you could imagine
seeing in your neighborhood.
The villains in this film are impressive as well.  J.T. Walsh, who has
had dozens of roles as someone's brother, or another guy's uncle,
finally gets to show his stuff as the not-so-innocent trucker.  He's
convincing as a liar, as a murderer, and as a loving father.  Those
three elements are tough to juggle in one film, but Walsh pulls it off.
His crew of criminals are the most unappealing crowd since the
hillbillies from Deliverance, and they're almost as scary too.
Breakdown is a wonderful mix of style and heart that will keep you on
the edge of your seat from start to finish.  It's easily one of the
year's ten best, and it should turn a decent profit.  I hope, at least
for Russell's sake, that it does; his last effort, Escape from LA,
breezed through theaters.  I wish him good luck on getting back on top. 
After seeing this masterpiece, no one deserves it more than he does.
Grade: A+, ***** out of *****

Title
Review for Jerry Maguire (1996)
Tom Cruise emotionally portrays the title character, Jerry Maguire, in
a story of a sports agent who develops a conscience. Maguire is a guy
who has everything to lose, and nothing to gain. So he decides to make a
difference, and types up a mission statement voicing his opinion about
his profession, and distributing them to his co-workers. He gets fired
from his agency and has to attempt to make it on his own.
With the help of Dorothy Boyd (Renee Zellweger) and his only client,
wide receiver Rod Tidwell (Cuba Gooding, Jr.), Maguire sets out on a
mission to get back on top. 
This is definitely another great film for Cruise, as he turns in a
heart-felt performance. Jerry Maguire is up there with some of Cruise's
most memorable characters, including Cocktail's Brian Flannagan, and
Born on the 4th of July's Ron Kovic. His character continually develops
as the film goes on, as Maguire's emotions continue on a windy
roller-coaster ride. 
Jerry Maguire features some cameos and supporting roles by big stars,
both athletes and actors. The Dallas Cowboy's Troy Aikman, the New
England Patriot's Drew Bledsoe and figure skater Katarina Witt are only
a few of the sports stars in the film. Beau Bridges (The Fabulous Baker
Boys), Jerry O'Connell (Joe's Apartment), Bonnie Hunt (Jumanji) and Eric
Stoltz (Pulp Fiction) are a few of Hollywood's stars.
This film is definitely a drama, and it was about 2 hours and fifteen
minutes. Unlike The English Patient, however, Jerry Maguire's audience
was constantly interested, with comedic scenes involving Gooding singing
at a wedding, Hunt blabbing at a women-against-men meeting, and
Dorothy's son, Ray (the adorable Jonathan Lipnicki), who was probably
the funniest part of the movie. He added a child's point of view, as
Jerry confided in him with what was on his mind.
It's hard not to say that all the character's were well developed,
because they were. There hasn't been a film in a while that the audience
felt some thing towards every character in the movie.
This film is very witty, combining hilarious comedy with
heart-wrenching drama. Tom Cruise's performance is definitely
Oscar-worthy and Jerry Maguire should be considered, too.
Grade: A, ***** out of *****

Title
Review for Absolute Power (1997)
In his career, Clint Eastwood has directed some of his best movies. For
example, The Outlaw Josie Wales, Unforgiven, A Perfect World and The
Bridges of Madison County were all done by Eastwood. He has recently
been married to Dina Ruiz in March of last year. Then he made a mistake:
Absolute Power. 
Although this film had some interesting grounds for a potentially good
plot, its gaping holes and poor character development left Absolute
Power in the dark, which was where Luther Whitney (Eastwood) spent the
first half hour or so of the film. As one of the best thieves of the
past 50 years, Whitney was on another routine job, stealing a few
million dollars of jewels and cash. However, unexpectedly, the owner
returns with a man, and both are drunk. It turns out that he witnesses
the President of the United States beat the woman and the secret service
murder her in cold blood.
Then, Whitney sees the chief of staff try to cover up the murder and
make it look like the girl stumbled on an attempted robbery. However,
she and the secret service men leave behind a key piece of evidence: a
letter opener with the president's blood and fingerprints on it. After
they leave, Whitney takes the knife and escapes out the window.
So it is up to veteran police lieutenant Frank James (Ed Harris, The
Rock) to solve the case and he suspects foul play. And foul is exactly
the way the game is played, as Whitney leads him on a wild goose chase
to the truth.
Now the plot sounds very interesting and rather original. However, the
disappointing final conflict comes down to a press covered event between
an old man and the President. You have to see the film to know what I'm
talking about, but if you have, you're probably as disappointed as me.
Most of the characters were atrociously put together. Harris' character
was a pathetic single cop, with a likeness for Whitney's daughter, Kate
(Laura Linney, Congo). She, too, could've been more explained, although
her fondness for her father is played out rather well. The President
himself (Gene Hackman, The Birdcage) was a poorly developed character.
The only really excellent characters were Eastwood's Whitney, a
conflicting father and artist with "great hands," and secret service
agent Bill Burton (Scott Glenn, Courage Under Fire). He ends up
confronting himself when faced with the question, "Do you love your
country?," which is also very interesting to see played out.
Although the plot was wide open and the acting could have been pulled
off by a bunch of ambitious young actors, this film is full of talented,
Academy-Award winning stars, which gives it some enjoyment. But when it
comes down to entertainment, Absolute Power comes up absolutely
powerless.
Grade: C-, **1/2 out of *****

Title
Review for High School High (1996)
The Substitute + The Naked Gun + Dangerous Minds = the hilarious new
satire, High School High. Lovitz (A League of Their Own) is hysterical
in his portrayal of a high school teacher trying to make a difference in
the lives of his students.
He feels that the only way to get through to his students is by
reaching their role model, a newly reformed, ex-gang member named Griff.
Of course, spoofing directly off of Dangerous Minds, his stu-dents
change their ways and the gangsta' look of Marion Berry High into
something more like West Beverly High (think Clueless?)
However, when the senior's take their SAT's, and all mysteriously fail,
it is up to Lovitz & Carrera (True Lies) to search for the culprit, who
turns out to be the school's principal, Fletcher (Flower's in the Attic)
and her gang of lowlife "homey-g's", who are also running a drug
smug-gling ring (hence The Substitute, which can also be seen in the
hysterical library scene).
So where does The Naked Gun fit into all of this. Throughout the film,
shots of idiocy can be seen in the background, with some serious
conver-sation in the foreground. For example, a few Afri-can-American
students can be seen stumbling down a flight of concrete stairs, trying
to walk up and hold up their baggy pants at the same time.         Although the
film is full of hysterics and ludicrous comedy, it lacks in the plot
department. Despite copying Dangerous Minds' reform plot, nothing was
really done to build up the plot's real potential.
What made this great comedy even more enjoyable, were the plush,
reclining seats at the new Magic Theater in the Northampton Crossings.
Even though, a small soda still costs a small fortune, you will never
have to worry about kicking them over again, since you can rest them in
the cup holders on the chairs, not taking any elbow-room away.
Sur-prisingly, the new Magic Theaters costs only $5.75, which is a good
price for what you get.
So if you want to see a good comedy and sit in good seats, then pick a
good Saturday night, find a couple of good friends, eat a good dinner,
and go to the Magic Cinema and see High School High.
Grade: B, *** out of *****

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
Bruce Willis is a type-casted actor. In Die Hard, he played John
McClaine, a rough and tough Chicago cop who gets caught in the wrong
place at the wrong time. Again, in Pulp Fiction, as Butch Coolidge, an
over-the-hill boxer, he steps on the wrong guys toes. In Luc Besson's
The Fifth Element, Willis plays Korben Dallas, a New York cabby who
takes in the wrong passenger at the worst possible time.
A stylish science fiction epic, The Fifth Element's complex plot begins
right away, in the deserts of Egypt (think Stargate) in 1914. An
enormous spacecraft lands above a pyramid where the "5 Elements" are
stored and takes them away, vowing to return them when the evil comes
back.
Cut to present day, which is our future. The year is 2023, and New York
is the city. The only basic differences between Besson's futuristic
depiction and the real life New York is that the smog is thicker, the
buildings are higher, and the traffic floats! 
Anyway, the "evil" comes back as a ball of fire to wreak havoc on the
fair citizens of the earth, so back come the tortoise-like aliens to
return the "5 Elements" to Earth, in order to defend themselves against
the "evil." In the process, however, the ship is intercepted by 2
fighter pods and is destroyed before landing. When officials arrive at
the site, all that remains is a hand. What can you do with a hand? Hey,
its the 21st Century here-DNA reconstruction! This hand turns out to
belong to a beautiful, but mysterious woman named Leeloo (Milla
Jovovich, Dazed and Confused). She escapes and, attempting to escape the
police by swan diving off of an enormous skyscraper and crashing through
the roof of Korben's floating cab.
It's love at first site, as Korben and Leeloo elude the lazy-as-always
cops. When Leeloo begins mumbling about a Cornelius (Ian Holm, Night
Falls on Manhattan), Korben searches the "Yellow Pages" and delivers her
to the door of the good reverend, the only man who knows of her
background and duties. Now, Korben, Leeloo, and Cornelius must journey
to a foreign planet to board a cruise ship (special effects were
spectacular here) to find the remaining four elements. It is here, where
they discover that they have been followed by the evil Jean-Baptiste
Emmanuel Zorg (Gary Oldman, Murder in the First). He, too, wants
possession of the elements, as do a group of pig-like warriors (think
the Gamorreans in Return of the Jedi). 
In a spectacular ending, with time running out, Leeloo is faced with a
problem-why should she save a people who live to destroy each other? The
question is a good one, and one that could be pondered. But enough of
that. When Korben points out his love for her, Leeloo is inclined to
become the "5th element" and save the world from total destruction.
The Fifth Element features good performances by Willis and Holm, an
excellent portrayal of a comedic villain (who reminded me a lot of Jack
Nicholson's The Joker in Batman) by one of the masters of villainy,
Oldman, and a heartfelt offering by relative newcomer Jovovich. The
supporting cast, which includes Brion James ( Tango & Cash), Tim "Tiny"
Lester (No Holds Barred), Luke Perry (Buffy the Vampire Slayer), and
Chris Tucker (Friday), added a comedic effect to the film.
Although Besson's The Fifth Element can be criticized for the
outlandish use of cliches, it is a solid motion picture with a definite
point. Some other directors (like Anaconda's Luis Llosa) should take a
lesson from this guy-using ideas from epic motion pictures the right
way. Ideas from Star Wars and Stargate were utilized for the improvement
of this film. Sci-fi fan or not, any movie-lover should see this
wonderfully stylish motion picture.
Grade: A-, ****1/2 out of *****

Title
Review for Daylight (1996)
Most of the time, with a trailer like the one Daylight has, it's
audience can expect a thrill-filled film with plenty of wild special
effects and basically no plot. This is not the case with Daylight, as a
good plot was added to good special effects to bring a well-done final
product to the big screen on December 6th.
During a routine auto theft, a car full of teens crashes violently into
a truck carrying toxic gases, causing the entire Lincoln Tunnel to burst
into flames, leaving only a dozen or so survivors. Actually, the blast
(which many critics called cheesy) was incredibly well done and was,
without a doubt, the best special effect in the film. 
The lucky survivors ranged from a few convicts, to a vacationing family,
to a wealthy couple and their dog, to a woman trying to escape the
madness of the big apple. They're only hope was Kit Latura (Sylvester
Stallone, Rocky), a taxi driver and former EMT Chief who jets to the
rescue. As a matter of fact, Sly hasn't been so good in a movie since
First Blood.
After the explosion, the survivors were gathered and acted very
naturally, which was an excellent characteristic of the film. They
panicked and began yelling and arguing amongst themselves and causing
more mayhem. If you think about it, 9 out of 10 real people would do the
exact same thing.
Walking through rubble and fiery waste for a while, the ceiling
implodes, and water starts to gush in. Now the fire's out, but they're
stuck in freezing water with no basic hope for survival, except for the
instincts of Latura, the only real character in the film. The other
stars weren't really characterized, but an actual feeling of sorrow can
be felt for Sly's character. He goes to rescue a dozen strangers,
knowing he has no way out. That takes guts and he's definitely got them.
Some really suspenseful scenes had Stallone trying to weave his way
through a maze of exhaust fans (taken from Sly's Tango & Cash) and
dangling from a wet beam trying to set an explosive without dropping it
(taken from just about every movie).
By all means, Sylvester Stallone has never been better, and his son,
Sage, wasn't too bad either (he played one of the convicts). Most of the
survivors' characters could've been developed more into people, but
their human-like actions made up for it.
It is hard not to say that Daylight is one of the best films of the
year, packed with everything from emotional drama to suspenseful
thrills. Get to a theater near you and see this great action-adventure
film.
Grade: A-, ****1/2 out of *****

Title
Review for Ghosts of Mississippi (1996)
This summer, one of the most racially charged novels in John Grisham's
series, A Time to Kill, was made into a major motion picture. On January
3 of this year, director Rob Reiner basically re-released the film under
the title of Ghosts of Mississippi.
Based on the true story of 1963 civil rights leader Medgar Evars'
assassination, Ghosts of Mississippi revolves around the 25-year legal
battle faced by Myrlie Evars (Whoopi Goldberg, Sister Act) and her quest
to have her husband's obvious assassin and racist Byron De La Beckwith
(James Woods, Casino) jailed. So she turns to Assistant District
Attorney and prosecutor Bobby DeLaughter (Alec Baldwin, Heaven's
Prisoners) to imprison the former KKK member.
Ghosts sets its tone with an opening montage of images from
African-American history, from slave-ship miseries to life in the racist
South of the 1960's. But all too soon, the white folks take over,
intoning lines like "What's America got to do with anything? This is
Mississippi!"
As Beckwith, James Woods, with his head larded with latex most of the
time as an old man, teeters between portraying evil and its character.
Meanwhile, Goldberg turns in a very serious and weepy performance as the
wife who wouldn't let her husband's death rest until she got the
conviction. Both deserve serious Oscar-consideration.
This brings us to the dull performance of Baldwin. Let's face it,
trying to match Matthew McConaughey's wonderful acting in A Time to Kill
is basically impossible. And Baldwin is living proof of this, as no
emotions could be felt. It seemed as if he actually had to struggle to
shed a single tear. Either poor acting or poor directing, but something
definitely went wrong.
Another strange mishap was the fact that Goldberg's facial features
didn't change, as she looked the same in the courtroom as she did
holding her husband's dead body 25-years earlier. Yet Woods' was
plastered with enough make up to make him look like Goldberg's father.
At least the make-up was realistic.
With some emotional moments in the poorly written script, Ghosts of
Mississippi lacked in heart, when its predecessor, A Time to Kill,
brought tears to everyone's eyes. Don't get me wrong, the movie wasn't
all that bad, but if you've seen Grisham's masterpiece, then don't
expect this one to be an excellent film.
Grade: B-, ***˝ out of *****

Title
Review for Romy and Michele's High School Reunion (1997)
What do you get when you combine Clueless and Dumb and Dumber? To
answer the question, you get director David Mirkin's new comedy Romy and
Michele's High School Reunion. 
Romy White (Mira Sorvino, Mighty Aprhodite) and Michele Weinberger
(Lisa Kudrow, TV's Friends) have been inseparable buddies since they
graduated from Sagebrush High in 1987. However, when former classmate
Heather Mooney (Janeane Garafolo, The Truth About Cats and Dogs)
confronts Romy about the 10 year reunion, she is astounded that she
forgot.
Watching Pretty Woman for the um-teenth time, they are reminded of how
they wouldn't let Julia Roberts' character shop in the expensive stores
because of her appearance. Then it hits them: they are not successful.
What are she and Michele going to do? Romy's instant solution is lose
some weight off their already slender frames, "bag a couple of
boyfriends," and get jobs. Romy says this will be easy, but Michele
retorts that if it is so easy, why hadn't they already done it. 
Robin Schiff's script keeps the show moving with some nice one-liners.
One of the best has Romy reminiscing about her life's battle against the
bathroom scales. "I was so lucky getting mono," she says looking at her
thinnest high school picture. "That was like the best diet ever." The
casting for the film is so perfect that one begins to suspect that the
leads were chosen and then the script was developed.
Romy and Michele use their high school yearbook to discuss the caste
system at their high school. The film's editor David Finfer dissolves
the stills from the yearbook to live action flashbacks which makes the
past come to life. 
At Sagebrush High, the hierarchy consisted of the A group
(cheerleaders), the B group (drama club) and the C group (nerds). Romy
and Michele were none of the above. Ridiculed as "the weirdoes," they
were constant targets for abuse. Even though they were quite attractive,
they had so much fun being together that they did not care about the
others. That they make their own outlandish clothes helped keep the wall
around them.
Complementing Romy and Michele's lightness, is Janeane Garofalo as the
dark, pudgy Heather Mooney. Heather, who invented a new cigarette paper
for cigarettes with "twice the taste in half the time for the gal on the
go," has the success and the money that they would like. Heather was
even more of an outsider than they were in high school. Garofalo's
one-dimensional role is only a side show. This is a two person film with
the other characters there merely for the two leads to bounce their
lines off of. The genuine chemistry between Sorvino and Kudrow makes for
a sweet and sometimes touching comedy. They have so much fun acting out
their parts, their enjoyment spreads to the audience. 
Grade: B, ***1/2 out of *****

Title
Review for Ransom (1996)
By Phil Curtolo
Mel Gibson (Braveheart) gave a gripping performance as the father of a
young kidnapped boy in Ron Howard's Ransom.
Gibson plays Tom Mullen, a wealthy business tycoon whose past actions
are coming back to haunt him as a deranged psychopath, played by Gary
Sinise (Forrest Gump), and his band of low-life thugs kidnap his only
son for $2 million. Tom and his wife, Kate, played by Rene Russo (Tin
Cup) were instructed not to inform the police, but they contacted the
FBI. Minutes later, an elite team of agents led by Delroy Lindo (Broken
Arrow) are in Tom's house and wiring every phone.
The plot sounds average, just like most other kidnap  movies that
you've already seen, and it  was nothing more than that. That is until
about half-way through the movie.
Suddenly, Tom goes to the Fox 5 news room and makes a live broadcast
saying, "This is your ransom. But this is as close as you will ever get
to it. Instead, I am offering this money as a reward on your head, dead
or alive." 
At this point, the plot thickened, and the unusually slow start of the
film turned into a suspense-filled action film with great stunts. The
last half of the film is very well done.
Another thing that carries this film are the superb performances by
Gibson and Sinise, as they collide in a game of wits over their cellular
phones for most of the movie. Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly  
commented   on   the subject: "It makes you wonder what kidnappers did
before cell phones."
Before this movie, Sinise played mostly "good guys," first in Of Mice &
Men, then in Forrest Gump, and most recently, in Apollo 13. But he was
surprisingly devilish and cold in his portrayal of a cop-gone-bad.
Gibson, of course, was just being Gibson, in an Oscar-worthy
performance.
Although most of the scenes were quite predictable, Ransom is a very
entertaining and suspenseful film.
Grade: B-, ***1/2 out of *****

Title
Review for Beavis and Butt-head Do America (1996)
What do you get when you combine two ugly cartoon characters with the
voices of some of today's most talented actors? You get MTV's newest
production Beavis & Butthead Do America.
The moronic duo set out to find their stolen TV and end up as the most
wanted people in America, as they are chased across the country in an
old folks touring bus by a perverted FBI director.
Along the way, they get mixed up with Muddy Grimes, a man who want to
pay them to "do" his wife, Dallas. They misunderstand and instead of
trying to kill her, they try to have sex with her. Well, she's on to
them and slips them a deadly chemical weapon, which they end up taking
to the White House to create mass hysteria and chaos. In the end, they
end up pinning the whole thing on their neighbor, Tom Anderson.
The celebrity voices in the film were amazing, including Demi Moore,
Bruce Willis, David Spade, Greg Kinnear, and David Letterman. Also
featured were Cloris Leachman, whose "oh, that's nice" line appears in
the trailer and Unsolved Mysteries Robert Stack, who played the FBI
director who constantly asked for "full cavity searches"
In their first trip to the big screen, Beavis' memorable Cornholio
still was a favorite, as he walked around in his underwear chanting,
"You will give me T.P. for my bunghole!" and "Are you threatening me?"
The film or the television show couldn't have come together without the
voice and mind of Beavis & Butthead creator, Mike Judge. He provides the
voices for the title characters, Tom Anderson, their fruity teacher Mr.
Van Dreesen, and the nervous Principal McVicker. His abilities made the
entire production possible.
Don't get me wrong here, this is not a movie for people who liked The
English Patient. It is short, sweet and to-the-point, allowing a stupid
but funny plot to complete itself and end the movie with the audience in
hysterics. If you like the TV show, then the movie is a must see. If you
don't, then you shouldn't waste your time.
Grade: B-, *** out of *****

Title
Review for Star Wars (1977)
In May of 1977, just 2 years after Steven Spielberg's success with Jaws
and 3 years after Francis Coppolas' The Godfather, a risky, ambitious
young director named George Lucas went for the same unpredictable box
office success. Little did he know that Star Wars would become the
greatest science fiction epic in the history of film.
In January of this year, Lucas re-released Star Wars on its 20th
anniversary. In this new, remastered version, the added effects, which
range from leathery desert beasts inserted into already existing shots
to an awkward new scene in which Hans Solo bargains his way out of a jam
with a computer-generated Jabba the Hutt, don't do much but call
attention to themselves. Other than these, the film is exactly the same.
Why pay to see it in the theaters, you might ask? Simply because when
this movie was released, most of us were a few years short of being
born. We should all get up and go to the movies for the experience,
especially if you haven't seen it.
The plot is basic but in the same way, complex. It has many themes, but
the one rotates around Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and his quest to
become a Jedi Knight. His mission begins when a droid named R2-D2 plays
back a secret message recorded by the beautiful Princess Leia (Carrie
Fisher), which tells him to contact the mysterious Obi-Wan Kanoby (Alec
Guiness). 
He and Kanoby then, joined by two inter-galactic renegades, Hans Solo
(Harrison Ford) and Chewbacca, and Skywalker's two droids D2 and C3PO
(the voice of Anthony Edwards), wage war upon the corrupt Empire,
commanded by an evil general (Peter Cushing) and the traitorous Darth
Vader (the voice of James Earl Jones). Skywalker defeats the evil Empire
by rising out of himself to embrace something larger: the force. 
The film is obviously quite star-studded. But how was Lucas to know that
Ford would become one of the most sought after men in Hollywood and
Jones' voice would appear so many more times in the future? It just
happened to work out for him.
The magic of Star Wars lies in the way that Skywalker's triumph is
symbolized by the audience's sense of becoming something larger than
life itself-a universe of fans, young and old, recreating a movie
atmosphere that will impress generations forever.
Grade: A+, ***** out of *****

Title
Review for Romeo + Juliet (1996)
Leonardo DeCaprio (What's Eating Gilbert Grape) and Claire Danes (TV's
My So Called Life) star in director Baz Luhrmann's modernized version of
William Shakespeare's classic, Romeo & Juliet. Surrounded by a superb
supporting cast, in-cluding Paul Sorvino (Goodfellas), Brian Dennehy
(Tommy Boy), Pete Poslethwaite (The Usual Sus-pects) and John Leguizamo
(Executive Decision), DeCaprio and Danes shine throughout the film.
The story starts off at a gas station, where the "Montague Boys" meet
the "Capulet Boys" and square off with one another. Symbolizing the
swords of Shakespeare's day were their weapons, like the "Rapier-9mm" or
the "Longsword- Shotgun." Instead of killing each other right away, they
shoot around, just like in sword fights of old.
Another great thing about the film was the performance of Harold
Perrineau as Romeo's best friend. Mercutio, who in Shakespeare's novel
was quite a stud, was portrayed as an Afri-can-American cross-dresser
whose violent na-ture, was a definite plus. Miriam Margoyles, a
virtually unknown actress was astounding as Juliet's nurse, even though
she was never given a name. She was the only one who could keep Juliet
out of her fantasy world.
Verona was the home of the rival families in Shakespeare's version,
only slightly changed in Luhrmann's. Now known as Verona Beach, the
Capulet's (led by Sorvino) and Montague's (led by Dennehy) are now rival
corporate dynasties. And their small family skirmishes were now huge
gang wars.
One slight problem with the film was the difficulty to comprehend the
dialogue, since it was spoken in old English. Sub-titles could have
helped in the beginning of the movie, but toward the end, it became
easier to understand.
This excellent movie poses another prob-lem: what genre is it? Romeo &
Juliet contains so much drama, yet enough comedy and action to be placed
in either of those categories.
With the same award-winning formula that was used by Quentin Tarantino
in Reservoir Dogs and Pulp Fiction, Romeo & Juliet is a sure fire modern
masterpiece.
Grade: A-, **** out of *****

Title
Review for One Fine Day (1996)
Michelle Pfeiffer (Up Close & Personal) and George Clooney (this
summer's Batman & Robin) are not compatible. It's as simple as that.
Pfeiffer's wrinkles don't exactly match Clooney's handsome, young looks.
So how could anyone expect the romantic comedy One Fine Day to be any
good?
Actually, it wasn't that bad. It depicted the hectic city life quite
well, but it failed in the romantic parts. You might ask yourself, "what
romantic parts?" Much like Sleepless in Seattle, the two don't get
together until the end, and when they do, they don't have the strength
to stay awake to enjoy the moment.
The chaotic movie revolves around two divorced parents, Jack (Clooney),
a self-conscious, stuck-up reporter,  and Melanie  (Pfeiffer), a
stubborn, tough-as-nails architect. They are both late for work and have
to get their kids to school. Their bosses' are breathing down their
necks and they have to find someone to baby-sit their kids. So they help
each other out. 
Jack watches his daughter, Maggie and her son, Sammy, while Melanie is
at her presentation. Then, Melanie watched the kids while Jack was at a
press-conference. And everything worked out okay, right? Wrong. 
The kids get into mischief wherever they go, with Sammy getting a marble
stuck up his nose and Maggie chasing after a stray cat and getting lost.
Sammy ends up wrecking his mother's model, the cat then eats Sammy's
class fish, a police search is issued for the return of Maggie and they
discover that they've accidentally switched cellular phones! Talk about
mayhem.
But it's not over yet. Sammy has a soccer game at 6 and is going to be
late because his mother has a meeting with a potential client. So they
end up rushing to the game to make it on time and Sammy and Maggie win
trophies. Isn't that just great.
Cellular phones can be a good thing, but in this movie, they turned out
to be more trouble than they're actually worth. Jack and Melanie end up
becoming each other's receptionists and mix up message after message.
The movie was relatively enjoyable, with fine performances by Clooney
and Pfieffer. Again, however, they just did not look good together, and
believing Clooney could find her to be "the most beautiful women he'd
ever seen" is basically impossible. If there's nothing else playing,
then go see it. But if you've got a choice, save One Fine Day for a
rainy day rental.
Grade: C+, **˝ out of *****

Title
Review for Return of the Jedi (1983)
There's an old saying that states something about leaving the best for
last. George Lucas certainly followed that adage when crafting the
original Star Wars Trilogy. Return of the Jedi, the final installment of
the series, is easily the most innovative, action-packed, and
entertaining of the three films. 
The dark, eerie atmosphere that oozed from every frame of The Empire
Strikes Back is gone. Instead, for Return of the Jedi, we have good
triumphing decisively over evil, a resolution to a love triangle, and
walking teddy bears. Even Darth Vader doesn't seem very intimidating
this time around. With the arrival of the Emperor (an apparition-like
creature played by Ian McDiarmid), Vader has turned into somewhat of a
henchman. 
Return of the Jedi picks up at an unspecified time after the conclusion
of The Empire Strikes Back. Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), Princess Leia
(Carrie Fisher), Lando Calrissian, (Billy Dee Williams), Chewbacca
(Peter Mayhew), C3P0 (Anthony Daniels) and R2-D2 (Kenny Baker) are on a
rescue mission to Luke's home planet of Tatooine. Their goal: to save
Han Solo (Harrison Ford) from the clutches of the intergalactic gangster
Jabba the Hutt. It is at Jabba's home, a creepy-looking stone fortress
guarded by hog-nosed beasts, that most of the added special effects come
into play. From a hysterical scene involving a music group to the
dreaded beast outside Jabba's sand barge, the effects are top notch.
As soon as Han is freed from his cryo-freeze and rescued from the
clutches of the evil Jabba the Hutt, it's back to outer space, where the
Rebel alliance is about to face the Empire's newest threat: a second,
more powerful Death Star, that, if activated, could spell doom for
anyone who stands against the Emperor. So, while the fleet prepares for
the final battle, Luke and company travel to the forest moon of Endor to
knock out the shield that defends the Death Star against all attacks.
There, they are befriended by the Ewoks, the teddy bear-like native
race, and Luke, fearing that his presence is endangering the group,
turns himself over to Vader. 
Return of the Jedi has some interesting elements. The scenes which
pitted Luke against the Emperor and Vader are suitably tense and
well-acted. From a technical point-of-view, the space battles are
amazing, easily hindering anything depicted in the previous films. Not
only are there many, many more ships, but their speed and range of
movement have been dramatically improved. On one level, Return of the
Jedi is almost worth watching for the special effects. In the Special
Edition, even more ships are added, making the final space battle
incredibly fun to watch.
The acting in Return of the Jedi is stronger than in the previous
films. By now (or then - 1983), Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, and Carrie
Fisher have all matured in their on-screen personas. The chemistry
amongst the trio is terrific. As in Empire, Billy Dee Williams gives us
another human hero to root for. Newcomer Ian McDiarmid plays the Emperor
as a suitably creepy, cunning, and evil creature, although he's not as
imposing as Vader was in Star Wars. 
Although it was great fun watching Star Wars and The Empire Strikes
Back on the big screen, Return of the Jedi generates a greater sense of
enjoyment. With the spectacular, new special effects, the adorable
Ewoks, the sinister Jabba the Hutt, the evil Emperor, the same old
Millenium Falcon, Darth Vader's incredible betrayal, the destruction of
the new Death Star, and the always lovable Yoda, Return of the Jedi
concludes one of the greatest trilogies ever made with a huge bang. 
Congratulations to George Lucas, whose innovative mind entertains us
now and will continue to entertain generations to come.
Grade: A+, ***** out of *****

Title
Review for Relic, The (1997)
Occasionally, everyone needs to see a movie where they can let it all
down and get a good scare. If you're that kind of person, then I would
recommend seeing director Peter Hyams' new film, The Relic.
This originally frightful film stars Penelope Anne Miller (The Shadow),
as an over-worked and under-credited biologist at a wealthy Chicago
museum and Tom Sizemore, (Devil in a Blue Dress) as an ironically
superstitious police detective. Both performances were filled to their
extents, as there was not much character build-up other than the
recurring "superstitious" ideas.
The Relic may look to be just another Alien-like movie, but to my
surprise, it was much more than that. It contained some wicked plot
twists, especially about the monster itself. When it came to keeping the
audience guessing, no one had a clue of the monsters appearance until
the end of the movie, where it's hideous figure was revealed to all.
It turns out that the monster is actually a genetically-cloned freak,
containing parts from many animals of the African jungles, making the
beast the perfect hunter. The monster had a lion-like appearance,
scorpion-like claws, ant-like tentacles, and lizard-like scales.
Obviously, the special effects were breath-taking, as the creature
looked unbelievably realistic.
The plot is relatively average, like most movies of its caliber. Yet
The Relic throws in some interesting plot twists and slight changes. It
puts a group of rich aristocrats in a Chicago museum for the grand
opening of the brand new "Superstitions" wing. The police warned the
party to cancel, after the brutal murder of a museum security guard,
failing miserably. The people obviously don't know what they're up
against, and they are trapped inside after the beast attacks the
museum's central control room. So it's survival of the fittest in harsh
conditions, pitting the rich folks against the ferocious creature.
The Relic was, again, very original. Director Hyams uses very dark,
shadowy shots mixed with loud, suspenseful music to instill an eerie
feeling of fright into his viewers.
If you have not seen this one yet and you like suspenseful, science
fiction movies, then you would love The Relic..
Grade: B, *** out of *****
