Authors
Wendy E. Betts
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Secret of Roan Inish, The (1994)
     I've now seen THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH twice, and what I've
noticed most about it is that it's the only movie I've ever watched
that, to some degree, captured the feeling of reading a book.  That's
partly because much of the movie is told as stories, but it's also
because the movie unfolds so deliberately, developing with such
delicate momentum it gives the rare illusion that you're moving at your
own pace.  I was afraid that a second viewing of the movie might be
boring--but like a rereading of a really good book, the second viewing
was even better than the first, as I could now appreciate the
significance of each event.
     THE SECRET OF ROAN INISH is a story about a little girl named
Fiona.  But it's also the story of her ancestor Sean, who almost
drowned but was rescued by a seal; and of her ancestor Liam, who stole
the sealskin coat from a selkie (half-seal, half-human) and married
her; and of her baby brother Jamie, whose coracle-like cradle was swept
out to sea, moving with unbelievable swiftness.  Most of all it's the
story of an island where seals and people lived in harmony--until the
people deserted it.  As Fiona's relatives tell her the history of her
family and the island of Roan Inish, she comes to believe that her baby
brother was taken deliberately by the seals because her family deserted
their island ... and that he is still there, a last representative of
her family on Roan Inish.  Strong and steadfast in her belief, Fiona is
determined to bring her brother back to her family, even though her
"daft" cousin Tadhg says that he's just with "another branch" of it.
But a bargain must be kept between the family and Roan Inish before
Jamie can return.
     With utterly natural performances, perfect authenticity in every
detail and exquisite cinematography that captures the atmosphere of
solitude and wild beauty of the sea and those who live in it, this
movie quietly reveals its secrets--and we delight in believing them,
feeling the wonderful rightness of a story happening just as it
should.  It may be the most fitting homage to storytelling ever
filmed.  See it.  Twice.
-- 
Wendy E. Betts, Editor "The WEB: Celebrating Children's Literature"
finger web@deepthought.armory.com; http://www.armory.com/~web/web.html

Title
Review for Everyone Says I Love You (1996)
Parodies of Busby Berkely's famous geometric musical numbers have
become so common in film that some people may think of them as
defining the classic musical number, but in "Everyone Says I Love
You," Woody Allen reminds us of how much more there was to the movie
musical.  Lovingly making use of virtually every standard except the
overhead shot of geometric patterns, Allen has created a movie that
isn't just a parody of, or even tribute to, the classic movie musical;
it's a genuine rediscovery of the form.  Watching it, I finally
realized what, for me, is the test of a real musical:  it made me wish
I could be in the movie.
The somewhat rambling story concerns the romantic vicissitudes of a
wealthy, liberal New York family, as enthusiastically and confidingly
narrated by one of the daughters.  I don't feel like dwelling on the
plot, which has its ups and downs:  some of the scenes are charming,
some very funny, and some--particularly during Allen's chemistry-free
romance with Julia Roberts--are tiresome, but not too painfully so.
But the plot--as so often in musicals--is really secondary to the
musical numbers.
>From the very beginning of the film, in which a lovestruck young man
sings to his girlfriend and people on the street join in, I knew I was
going to like this movie.  I can pinpoint the exact time I was sure:
when a long-haired panhandler, holding out a cup for change, starting
to sing along; it was perfect, not just because it was funny, but because
it was so exactly what Busby Berkely himself would have done, if he
were alive today.  Such touches are evident throughout the film, not
as cheap parody but as bridges to an earlier mode of film-making.
But if this film merely replicated modes of the past, it would just have
had me longing to see the originals, just as the film "Brain Donors"
only made me wish I was watching the real Marx Brothers.  There is much
more to it than that.  The songs, almost all sung by the actors
themselves, have a shy, unsophisticated quality that doesn't exactly
emulate most old musicals (although who _really_ thought Ruby Keeler
could sing or dance?) but which captures some of the same _feeling_ as
those films in which nobody was afraid to burst into song or dance at
the drop of a hat.  And the dancing--oh the dancing!  I don't think
I've ever consciously realized before how wonderful it feels to see
people dance, how exciting and alive and freeing it is.  Especially
when they just seems to be dancing from sheer joy.
I think the strongest barrier to the making of musicals today is
_embarrassment_.  A lot of what went on in the genre seems silly by
current standards, only fit as a subject for parody.  "Everyone Says I
Love You" works because it's not afraid to look silly.  Some of the
actors were obviously shy about singing, and mostly it works:  I
haven't liked Allen as much in years as I liked him timidly singing
"I'm Through With Love."  Dancing, on the other hand, really needs to
be done with gusto and bravura and here it is; it's mostly ensemble work by
professional, although one character gamely, if clumsily, joins in and
succeeds through sheer chutzpah.  The only dance that didn't really
work for me--although my husband adored it--is an attempt at a
half-Kelly, half-Astaire romantic number between Allen and Goldie
Hawn; Allen was obviously too timid to pull it off well, and (perhaps in
compensation) has Hawn magically floating and flying around like Peter
Pan.  It's both silly and rather beautiful, but I would have preferred
seeing Allen just really throw himself into the dance, without relying
on gimmicks.
"Everyone Says I Love You" has some flaws, especially in the
non-musical parts--but then, that's almost a standard of the genre in
itself.  For the most part, it was a genuinely magical experience and
I, for one, would be thrilled to see others join in the attempt to
revive the movie musical--as long as they do it with as much love and
understanding of the form as this film shows.
-- 
Wendy E. Betts, Editor, "Notes from the Windowsill."

Title
Review for Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love, The (1995)
Written and directed by Maria Maggenti
Starring Laurel Hollomon and Nicole Parker
     As sweet and refreshing as a frosty glass of lemonade, this is a
lovely little movie that leaves the heart both warmed and aching.  It's
a tender, very funny, utterly sincere look at first love for two
teenagers who seem to have nothing in common--except that they're both
girls.   Randy, who lives with her aunt in a poor but happy lesbian
household, is a social outcast, failing in school; Evie is rich,
intellectual and popular.  The fact that Randy is white and Evie is
black is the least of their problems.
     The inevitable culture conflicts that arise when Randy and Evie
fall in love are played largely for laughs, as when Evie comes out to
her utterly vapid friends, who advise her to try and rent that movie
about the two girls who went to the prom, and a marvelous slapstick
scene in which the two girls are caught in bed by Evie's mother, who's
far more freaked out about the mess they made of her house than about
her daughter having sex.  But the often broad humor takes nothing away
from what the story is really about: falling in love. The typical
cliches of first love are shown here with such warmth and charm that
they seem newly fresh and unique--just as they do in real life when
people fall in love.  The girls playing Randy and Evie were so
believable that I felt a little embarrassed during a tender scene in
which they make love for the first time; although respectfully and
fairly modestly filmed, it seemed too personal for a stranger to be
watching.
     Both comic and romantic, naturally THE INCREDIBLY TRUE ADVENTURES
OF TWO GIRLS IN LOVE is a "feel-good" kind of movie, an accolade it
deserves far more than many slicker, more professional films.  But
although Evie and Randy's problems as a lesbian couple are treated
lightly, they're an undercurrent that can never be totally
disregarded.  The ending of the film doesn't offer a perfect
resolution, but poignantly symbolizes both the difficulty any
mismatched lovers have of shutting out the censorious voices of the
world, and the fact that it is still worth trying.
-- 
Wendy E. Betts, Editor "The WEB: Celebrating Children's Literature"
finger web@deeptht.armory.com; http://www.armory.com/~web/web.html

Title
Review for That's Entertainment! III (1994)
     After using all of the most beautiful and spectacular numbers from
MGM musicals in the first two THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT movies, what could
they find to put in a third?  Some backstage shots, rare outakes, and
surprising amount of lesser known numbers that make up in enthusiasm
and novelty what they may lack in style or elegance.  The result is an
enjoyable pastiche that's a special kick for musical buffs.
     THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT III shows numbers from MGM musicals, from the
first filmed vaudeville routines to Elvis Presley in JAILHOUSE ROCK.
Included are rare songs cut from THE HARVEY GIRLS, EASTER PARADE, THE
BANDWAGON and others. Split-screens are used for some interesting
effects: in one number, we see Eleanor Powell dancing on one half of
the screen, while the other shows the number being filmed and sets
being moved around so the camera is always on her.  An even more
effective use of split-screen shows two version of the same dance by
Fred Astaire, revealing the incredible precision of his dancing.
     It seems to be a rule that these movies have to have commentary
more fulsome and tedious than a TV awards show. I found the commentary
for THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT III--done by Gene Kelly, Debbie Reynolds,
Micky Rooney, Esther Williams, Ann Miller, Cyd Charisse, Lena Horne,
June Allyson and Howard Keel--somewhat less annoying than the previous
films, except when it repeats their jokes.  Lena Horne is even
permitted to make a few comments on the racism that interfered with her
MGM career.  But nothing is really allowed to interfere with the rosy
nostalgic glow the movie tries to create, which is tedious but
bearable.  Less bearable are the technical errors in the movie,
primarily Technicolor scenes restored so badly they are literally
painful to watch--surely it shouldn't be that difficult to get a decent
copy of "Fit as a Fiddle" from "Singin' in the Rain"?  Fortunately,
these problems seem confined to the first half of the film.
     Overall, THAT'S ENTERTAINMENT III is pretty much more of the
same. I would have been happy to see less flash and more substance--but
there's no denying, it's a delight to see these wonderful songs and
dances, especially on a big screen.  If you're the kind of person who
dances out the theatre after seeing a musical, don't miss it.
