Authors
Albert Sanchez Moreno
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Man of La Mancha (1972)
Man of la Mancha -Review by Albert Moreno  (retrospective)
When the film version of Man of La Mancha was released in 1972,it was
greeted by howls of disapproval from pretentious critics who claimed
it was a distortion of Cervantes' "Don Quixote",which was supposedly a
satire on knight-errantry. Never mind the fact that literary critics
have found much more profound meanings in the book and that Broadway
critics praised the musical for being faithful to the spirit of
Cervantes'novel. Perhaps the critics were prejudiced by this,and by
the fact that United Artists had hired the original creative team of
the show and then fired them because they were unhappy with the screen
tests. Mostly non-singing actors were used in the film (Peter O'Toole 
was dubbed),and only one member of the original cast, Gino Conforti,as
the barber,repeats his stage role. In spite of the singing
limitations,the film is quite good-splendidly acted and photographed
(by Fellini cinematographer Giuseppe Rotunno). Peter O' Toole, Sophia
Loren,James Coco ,as well as Shakespearean actors Harry Andrews, John
Castle and Ian Richardson bring real sensitivity to the spoken
dialogue,and some of the singing voices,such as Richardson's, Julie
Gregg's, James Coco's and the muleteer's chorus are actually quite
passable.  The sets are picturesquely shabby, as the original stage
set and costume designers wished. Those who fault the movie for not
being glamorous enough should read Don Quixote and check out the
locales of the story for themselves. I wonder if  any of them actually
read the book.
Man of La Mancha begins with a burst of bright color in the middle of
the town square in Seville,as a festival is taking place(an opening
completely different from the play.) Cervantes,playwright,poet,and
part-time tax collector, is arrested by the Spanish Inquisition for
putting on a satirical entertainment supposedly offensive to them. He
and his manservant are taken to a prison and thrown into an
underground dungeon (it is here that the original play begins).In
prison,they are attacked by their fellow inmates ,who stage a mock
trial with the purpose of confiscating Cervants'belongings. One of
these belongings is a manuscript,and in order to save it, Cervantes
pleads his defense-he ,the manservant,and their fellow prisoners will
improvise the story of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza. The remainder of
the film alternates between the Don Quixote scenes and the prison
scenes. Cervantes transforms himself into his fictional counterpart
with makeup and costume, and we see the effect his fantastic but
moving story has upon his fellow prisoners.The transitions between the
prison and the locales of "Don Quixote" are very smoothly
done,although this was one of the sore points of the film.On stage,one
set was used for the entire play, and the audience filled in the rest
with their imagination. In the film,the real locales are quite
literally shown.
Still,none of this detracts from the enjoyment of the film,and those
who like a good cry should love this film. "Man of La Mancha" is of
course, far more sentimental than "Don Quixote",but one is surprised
at how much of the original style of Cervantes' dialogue is
retained,despite the fact that most of the plot is not found in the
novel,but wholly original to the play. Don't miss "Man of La Mancha".

Title
Review for Don Quixote (2000) (TV)
                  Miguel de Cervantes' great seventeenth century Spanish
classic, "Don Quixote de La Mancha", is universally acknowledged as one of
the greatest books ever written,and the first truly "modern" one (i.e., a
novel in which the main characters evolve emotionally and
intellectually,and change over a certain period of time). It is an
enormously long work,and an extremely difficult one to adapt to the screen
without sacrificing the philosophical insights of the novel,some of which
may seem undramatic on screen, others of which are subtly hidden beneath
the comic surface of the book.
                   Most filmmakers since the beginning of movies have opted
for two approaches, a superficial stringing together of just a handful of
the tragicomic misadventures of the knight and his squire Sancho
Panza,while carefully pruning most of the philosophy out of the work, (as
in the 1948 Spanish film,considered a monumental achievement in its native
country)or a film merely suggested by the novel and heavily revising its
plotline to suit dramatic purposes (as in the famous stage musical "Man of
La Mancha",filmed in 1972, or the 1933 semi-operatic Chaliapin version). I
have nothing against this if it is done with integrity,as in "Man of La
Mancha",but some film versions,notably the Rex Harrison 1973 BBC-TV
version,drastically change the entire tone of the work.
                     This most recent television version, starring John
Lithgow as Don Quixote and Bob Hoskins as Sancho Panza,tries to do both,and
succeeds remarkably,due to an excellent script by British playwright John
Mortimer,who seems to be one of the few writers to truly understand how to
adapt this brilliant novel without substituting his own inventions to bring
out the inner meanings. Director Peter Yates also seems to understand that
"Don Quixote" doesn't need to be treated in a heavy-handed,tragic style;
that it is all right to trust Cervantes' own style as well as the
intelligence of the audience,something that obviously isn't always learned.
Lithgow is brilliant as the Don,hilariously nutty in the early scenes,and
poignant in the second half of the film,in which Quixote is made the
dignified victim of cruel and insensitive practical jokes. Bob
Hoskins,despite his pronounced Cockney accent,does an admirable job as
Sancho Panza.
                        The other roles are little more than cameos,even
the misleadingly third and fourth-billed Isabella Rossellini,as a seemingly
sweet,but inwardly horrendously insensitive Duchess,and Vanessa Williams as
both the milkmaid Aldonza and the Don's imaginary ladylove,Dulcinea del
Toboso,who makes HER appearances in the Don's imagination. 
                          Director Yates is intelligent enough to resist
the temptation to overplay the insensitivity of the outside world as much
as possible; unlike so many other directors, he does not take sides with
the characters.and tries to be as objective as Cervantes himself. He allows
us to discover for ourselves the insensitivity of the Duke and Duchess,and
perhaps the only unfortunate change he makes is in turning Sanson Carrasco
into a wholly sympathetic figure,rather than the full-of-himself clod that
Cervantes creates, and even Yates couldn't resist a "Man of La Mancha"
touch in the final scene (nobody can,now,actually).
                            The period of the film has been updated to
about 1800, to make the idea of knight-errantry seem even further in the
past,though this does not really hurt the film. It is
unfortunate,though,that producer Robert Halmi couldn't resist providing a
sop to the now wildly popular notion of working special effects into
everything. Unlike any other version, Quixote's hallucinations are vividly
shown onscreen,and it must be admitted,it does lend a certain flavor to the
story to see them,but the "monstrous giants" shown onscreen have more in
common with a  George Lucas "Star Wars" film or a Ray Harryhausen Sinbad
flick than with "Don Quixote". 
                                   Still,this latest version of the novel
is excellent and not to be missed. It has been beautifully photographed on
location in Spain,and enhanced with a Spanish-flavored musical score. It is
easily the best version of Cervantes' original novel done in English.

Title
Review for Othello (1965)
     Laurence Olivier's film version of Shakespeare's "Othello" stands
out as one of his greatest and most controversial performances.Having
resisted playing the role until 1964 (onstage),Olivier was not content
to simply put on blackface makeup and act the role sounding like his
real self,as all previous white actors had done.He assumed the role
only after Kenneth Tynan said he would not assume co-directorship of
the National Theatre of Great Britain unless Olivier played Othello, a
role he had always resisted partly because he felt it was
Shakespeare's most difficult character,and partly because he felt the
character himself was a "loser" who gave way too easily to jealousy.
    But Olivier reconciled himself to the challenge and played Othello
so convincingly that every actor since then,white or black,has had to
measure up to his performance. Always searching for a different way to
play a role, he took voice lessons to deepen his voice to a rich bass.
He also adopted a foreign accent somewhere between Jamaican,regular
British,and South African. He developed an unusual way of walking,
much like the jungle dwellers. Of course,he risked incredible
controversy in choosing to play his Othello like this.
Nevertheless,his performance garnered rave reviews and an Academy
Award nomination for Best Actor when it was filmed. The film was
released in 1965,and played at reserved seat showings for only a few
days.Unlike other Olivier Shakespeare films,this one was shot on a
very low budget,due to unwillingness on the part of movie studios
(Olivier's previous Shakespeare producers had all passed away by 1965)
to put up the money. Thus,the movie is virtually a duplicate of the
stage production,with no real locations and obviously phony lightning
and thunder. The sets and props,although duplicated,have been greatly
enlarged to soundstage size,and the production has been filmed as if
the camera were actually onstage,so that extreme closeups and unusual
camera angles are possible.
  In an article in his book "Profiles",Kenneth Tynan explains how
stage director John Dexter,influenced by a famous Shakespearean essay,
deliberately chose to have Othello played somewhat unsympathetically
as a warrior overly pleased with himself and his marriage to
Desdemona,yet prone to displays of  hysterical self-dramatization when
he becomes jealous. If this is true,he didn't count on Olivier's
amazing ability to create a character who is proud,yet so
vulnerable,and so heart-rending in his collapse,that we never lose our
sympathy for him,even when we see how easily he is duped by Iago
(Frank Finlay). His pride,rather than seeming obnoxious,is rather
comical,like a teen-ager who has snagged a date with the most
beautiful girl in his class,and makes Othello rather lovable. Frank
Finlay,who onstage and on the vinyl LP made from this production was
swamped by Olivier's portrayal,comes across magnificently on film. His
performance,unlike Olivier,has been filmed with numerous close-ups
which emphasize his subtle facial expressions,most of which wouldn't
be easily visible in a live performance. His Iago is the most
convincing I have seen--he is the only actor who can make Iago seem
like a "nice guy"to those around him. His friendliness to Cassio
(Derek Jacobi) is entirely believable,and yet he can switch from
giving concerned advice to showing utter contempt in an instant. A
very young Maggie Smith is sweet and touching as Desdemona,Othello's
bewildered wife,and Joyce Redman is amusingly cynical yet tragic as
Iago's wife and unknowing accomplice.
   This "Othello" may be controversial nowadays, because of the
influence of "political correctness",and the fact that black actors
such as James Earl Jones have been acclaimed in the role. But
audiences who pass it up will miss one of the greatest portrayals of
the twentieth centuty.

Title
Review for Carousel (1956)
Just as "Oklahoma!" and "Carousel" were  Richard Rodgers and Oscar
Hammerstein II's first two stage musicals,so too were they the first
two R&H stage musicals to reach the screen. Frank Sinatra (of all
people) was originally set to play Billy Bigelow,and while he
certainly had the required toughness and acting ability, as well as a
great voice,he did not have the soaring ,huge baritone (or tenor) that
most stage Billys have.He didn't have the husky build,either.
Fortunately,he walked off the set when he found out that every scene
was to be filmed twice(for the then-new CinemaScope 55 process), and
so he was replaced by "Oklahoma!" star Gordon MacRae.who was perfect
for the role,and gave his best acting performance ever in the film.
The show is based on"Liliom", a once-popular,and now seldom revived
play by the great Hungarian playwright,Ferenc Molnar,which had itself
already been filmed three times-a Hungarian silent version,an early
talking version in 1930,and a French version in 1934 starring Charles
Boyer. The film version of "Carousel" is excellent,following the show
quite faithfully in its retelling of the doomed romance of carousel
barker Billy Bigelow (who was called Liliom in the Hungarian play)
and mill worker Julie Jordan. The biggest alteration,aside from the
cutting of some of the music, is the addition of a flashback framework
which gives away a vital plot point in the story ,and spoils a
surprise for those not familiar with the show. MacRae and co -star
Shirley Jones sing unforgettably,and Jones and the other cast members
(including musical star Barbara Ruick,opera stars Claramae Turner and
Robert Rounseville,and Cameron Mitchell singing quite well in his only
musical role) are also better-in fact I would go so far as to say that
this "Carousel" cast is possibly better than the original 1945
Broadway cast. The only section in which the film falters is in the
scenes in Heaven. Instead of showing the afterlife scenes as rather
eerie,and the ghosts as ghostly (as was unforgettably done in the film
version of "Our Town"(1940),we get a blue backdrop with styrofoam
stars hanging from wires and very realistic -looking people who are
supposed to be ghosts. Aside from this, "Carousel"has been very well
directed by Henry King,and the score boasts such memorable tunes as
"If I Loved You", "The Carousel Waltz", "You'll Never Walk Alone" and
the deeply moving "Soliloquy". The only performer who falls almost
completely flat is Susan Luckey as Billy's daughter Louise,who has
zero acting ability but dances very well. "Carousel"is one of the
great movie musical adaptations,beautifully filmed in Technicolor
(partially on location in Maine,and on the beach at San
Francisco,where Gordon MacRae sings the "Soliloquy". Perhaps because
of its somber,downbeat,yet uplifting story,this was the first and only
Rodgers and Hammerstein film to flop at the box office, but it
certainly deserved better than that.

Title
Review for Camelot (1967)
                    Lerner and Loewe's "Camelot" has always been one of
those underrated musicals that has always suffered from unfair comparison
to the team's previous successful effort, their monster hit "My Fair Lady".
To critics who enjoyed both "My Fair Lady" and the witty screen musical
"Gigi", "Camelot', with its basically tragic plot, slower pace, and its
lack of dialogue by George Bernard Shaw, was a letdown, as if Lerner and
Loewe couldn't be any good unless they were dulplicating their previous
successes, or at least imitating it. 
                      The screen version, produced on a huge scale by the
same Jack L. Warner who gave the world the film version of "My Fair Lady",
surpasses the Broadway version of the musical in every possible way.
Lerner, perhaps aware of some of the faults in the original show, here does
more extensive rewriting than in his "Fair Lady" screenplay, and his
revisions only serve to heighten the drama in the story. Gone, for
instance, is the silly comic interlude in the second act between Morgan le
Fay and Mordred, in which Mordred convinces his aunt to cast a magic spell
on Arthur to keep him away from Camelot during a crucial moment in the
story. Instead, this is replaced by a beautiful, magical interlude in which
Arthur reminisces in the forest and relives some of the lessons Merlin
taught him. And Lerner, not wishing to commit the so-called "breach of
faith " that he committed in the 1960 stage production (switching abruptly
from a comic first act to a somber second act) , begins the film with a
melancholy forboding of the tragedy that is to come much later. 
                            None of the stage actors recreate their roles
in the film, but that is a distinct advantage here, and I say that as
someone who became familiar with the original Broadway cast album two years
before the film's release. Richard Harris, as King Arthur, gives the
performance of his life as King Arthur, and reminds us of how tragically
this underrated, but magnificent, actor, has misused himself in most of his
later films. His King Arthur is a performance to cherish, worthy of being
ranked with Yul Brynner's in "The King and I", Rex Harrison's in "My Fair
Lady", and Robert Preston's in "The Music Man". And as a portrayal of an
ultimately tragic figure, Harris' may be the single greatest  male dramatic
performance in film musicals ever. And he can sing reasonably well.
Although he is no Gordon MacRae (and who could ever imagine MacRae as King
Arthur?) , that sort of voice isn't even required for the role, as
evidenced by the fact that Richard Burton, an actor not known for singing,
played the role on Broadway. Harris brings much more inflection and variety
to his songs than Burton ever did, and under the intimate gaze of the
camera and the guidance of director Joshua Logan, tones down his portrayal
at all the right moments, as he later would not in his misbegotten 1980's
stage performance.
                        Vanessa Redgrave, in one of her first screen roles,
is equally impressive as Guenevere, convincingly portraying a sensual woman
that any man could convincingly fall for and/or lust after. She makes the
Queen far more than the innocent young woman that Julie Andrews (from the
evidence on the Broadway album) made her onstage, and she, too, sings
surprisingly well for a non-singing actress, "acting" her numbers as well
as singing them.
                            Franco Nero plays Lancelot, and he  does not
sing. He is dubbed by Gene Merlino, who is good enough, but no Robert
Goulet. His acting is reasonably good, but not on the level of Harris and
Redgrave. However, David Hemmings, (shorn of his silly musical number) is a
thoroughly nasty Mordred, Lionel Jeffries a hilarious, lovable Pellinore,
and Laurence Naismith a completely believable Merlin.
                            Of the three film musicals that stage director
Joshua Logan made, ("South Pacific", "Paint Your Wagon" and "Camelot") this
is easily the best, although it is true that some of the time the actors
are photographed in what Mike Myers of "Saturday Night Live" would call
"EXTREME closeup". The sets are breathtaking, as are many of the locations
(much of the outdoor work was done in Spain!). Alfred Newman's
orchestrations are among his best. It is a scandal that "Camelot" did not
garner Richard Harris and Vanessa Redgrave Oscar nominations for their
memorable portrayals, and it will always be a shameful blot on the
Academy's record that the musical they chose to nominate as Best Picture
that year was not "Camelot", but the totally forgettable, critically
drubbed, and justly neglected Rex Harrison version of "Doctor Dolittle". I
guess the lobbying at 20th Century-Fox that year must have been incredible.

Title
Review for Show Boat (1936)
It is commonly thought by most movie experts that Jerome Kern and
Oscar Hammerstein's stage classic "Show Boat" has been filmed three
times. This isn't quite true;in 1929, Universal Pictures made a silent
film of the Edna Ferber novel from which the show was adapted.
However,talking pictures had begun in 1927,the year the show opened on
Broadway,and by 1929, the studio became concerned that the public
wouldn't accept a silent Show Boat. So they added a few talking
scenes, some spirituals, and at the last minute bought the rights to
the stage version,adding a 20 minute sound prologue to the silent film
in which stars of the show sang five of its songs.  The result was a
disaster.   But Universal redeemed itself in 1936, when Carl
Laemmle,Jr. produced and James Whale directed what is considered to be
the finest screen version of"Show Boat" with Irene Dunne, Allan Jones,
Charles Winninger, Paul Robeson and Helen Morgan. Winninger (as Cap'n
Andy) and Morgan (as Julie) repeat their original stage roles, while
Robeson,for whom the role was actually written, plays Joe and sings
his famous rendition of "Ol' Man River", the most powerful song in the
show. Irene Dunne, the first touring company Magnolia ,also repeats
her stage role,and unlike Kathryn Grayson in the MGM1951 Technicolor
remake, gives a memorable acting as well as singing performance. In
fact, one of the things which distinguishes this screen musical from
films like the Jeanette MacDonald -Nelson Eddy operettas is the
quality of the acting. The entire cast,from Irene Dunne down to the
bit players ,breathes real life into the characters,so that the movie
never becomes one corny wait between the hit songs. This is probably
due more to the director James Whale( his only musical) than to the
actors,because Allan Jones never gave a better acting performance,and
Charles Winninger gives the most memorable performance of his career.
As for Helen Morgan,she is truly exceptional as the tragic Julie
,especially when she sings "Can't Help Lovin'Dat Man" and "Bill".
The script for the 1936 "Show Boat", far better than the insipid
script for the 1951 version, is by Oscar Hammerstein II,the original
librettist and lyricist,and relies heavily on his stage dialogue.
Hammerstein and Kern were not about to let their baby fall into the
wrong hands,so they worked on the film, retaining nine songs from the
show, and adding three new ones just as good (or almost as good) as
the ones they replaced. Any changes from the show were made by them,
and director Whale was wise enough to hire original orchestrator
Robert Russell Bennett and original conductor Victor Baravalle. He
also insured complete historical authenticity in the sets .props,and
costumes(including the show boat itself).  For a long,time,this
version of" Show Boat" was suppressed ,partly because MGM owned the
rights,and partly because of the controversy surrounding Paul Robeson.
Now you have your chance to see it,either on TV,video,or laserdisc.
Don't pass it up. This is one of the truly great musical films. 
