Authors
Jef Poskanzer
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for River Wild, The (1994)
     Meryl Streep does a good job with flawed material in this rafting
drama.  She plays an aging former river guide who remembers the glory
days on the river and is dissatisfied with her boring married life in
Boston.  She takes her son on a river trip, and her husband, after
almost wimping out, comes along to try and save the marriage.  But they
run into trouble in the form of a wonderfully creepy Kevin Bacon.  He
hijacks their trip and they end up doing some much wilder whitewater
than they had planned.
     The story was riddled with minor idiocies and amazingly clumsy
dialog.  Too bad, all the problems I remember could easily have been
fixed by a little script doctoring.  Example: the plot requires that a
man on foot in unfamiliar territory with no trails be able to get
downriver faster than the boat.  He does have a map, but in general it
would be impossible.  The exception would be if the river did a big
meander that he could cut across.  And in fact there was a scene of him
way up high looking down on the river.  All it would have taken to fix
this bug is one shot of the map showing the meander, and another shot
from up high looking down from another angle to the other part of the
river.
     Oh, and you can't start a fire with the magnifying glass on a
Swiss Army Knife.  And unless you're Superman you can't dump people out
of a raft by lifting up one end.  Mere mortals have difficulty lifting
an empty, unrigged raft by themselves.  There were a lot more of these
niggling details.
     And check out this dialog.  The husband and wife are smooching,
and the kid starts yelling for them.  Hubby says "I'm going to put him
to bed."  Wife: "And I will bathe."  Huh??  Who talks like that?  Not
anyone I know, and not Meryl's character anywhere else in the movie.
     Now, the whitewater footage in the last third was pretty darn
good.  Oh, some of it was faked a little clumsily, the raft on too-calm
water in the foreground with out-of-scale raging whitewater in the
background and a blurry matte line in between.  But a lot of it was
quite real, and exciting.  Should have had more of that and less
shoot-em-up and McGyverism.
     I saw this at a free sneak preview with a bunch of rafting
buddies.  Their reaction was much the same.  I'm glad, though, that the
movie is getting positive reviews from others who were not driven to
distraction by the above-noted bugs.  If the movie had been a flop,
that would have closed the door on rafting movies for five years.  Now
it looks like they will be a mildly hot topic.  Maybe someone will
actually make a good one.
