Authors
Sheri K. Goh
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Phenomenon (1996)
If you're a fan of happy-happy-joy-joy flicks of the working-class kind,
and you watched FORREST GUMP fifty-three times while making your
catch-phrase "stupid is as stupid does," then PHENOMENON is a movie
you'll definitely enjoy. George Malley reprises the role of the lovable
common guy, except this one walks out into the night on his birthday,
stares at the sky and the brain explodes into activity, and his life is
never the same again.
John Travolta plays George Malley, a mechanic whose idea of wooing his
lady love, Lace (Kyra Sedgwick), a really bad chair maker, is to buy the
chairs she makes, just so she will make more chairs and keep coming back
to the stand outside his garage where they are put for sale. He even
gives them to his best friend, as he has so many chairs he doesn't know
what to do with them. *gush* After he gets zapped by the light in the
sky his brain is so energised he reads two or three books a day, learns
Portuguese in 20 minutes, predicts earthquakes and experiments with
solar energy.
His long-time doctor (Robert Duvall) and conscience of the town tries to
goad him for a medical checkup, as all this brain activity is so (duh)
unusual, but of course George refuses till its too late. The ending is
quire predictable once you realise why hes suddenly become so smart.
The plot kind of falls apart from that point onwards.
Apart from being thoroughly impossible in a realistic setting, it
fails because the characters take far too long to get going. Most of the
film is spent in trying to wow us with the new-found prowess of Georges
brain. Also, why Lace is such an absolute wet blanket remains a mystery.
It is also never quite explained how someones accelerated brain
activity occurs so suddenly, and even gives him the power to zap a dozen
wooden beams off the side of a tree. HOW??!! They never tell us!
Travolta's role as a SNAG (sensitive New Age guy) is a mark of how
versatile an actor he is, and that his success as a Ah Beng exterminator
in PULP FICTION wasn't just a one-off comeback. It is a shame,
however, that he does not get to exhibit much of an acting range in this
soppy tear-jerker. Also, Robert Duvall spends most of his time looking
rather perturbed, as he ponders the mysteries of George's brain and acts
as his surrogate father. Very two-dimensional characters here.
But, as the trend goes in movies nowadays (cf. A TIME TO KILL,
THE HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME, FORREST GUMP) the issue of prejudicing 
those who are different from us is addressed. Rather than accepting 
George's change, the townsfolk are crude and critical - they make up 
stories about how he had probably seen a UFO and maybe the aliens 
altered his brain, as well as media-bashing the insensitive press. Makes 
a point, thought rather un-subtly.
The Flying Inkpot Rating System:
 * Wait for the TV2 broadcast. 
 ** A little creaky, but still better than staying at home with Gotcha! 
 *** Pretty good, bring a friend. 
 **** Amazing, potent stuff. 
 ***** Perfection. See it twice.

