Authors
Matthew K. Gold
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Stop Making Sense (1984)
STOP MAKING SENSE, the 1984 Talking Heads movie, is a masterpiece of
the concert film genre. Conceived for the stage by lead singer David
Byrne, and directed by Jonathan Demme (Silence of the Lambs,
Philadelphia, and Swimming to Cambodia), the film is a visionary
presentation of stage performance, sound, rhythm, choreography, and
soul.
The film begins when Byrne, wearing a gray suit and impeccably white
sneakers, walks onto the barren center stage and sets a boom box down
on the floor. "Hi. I've got a tape I want to play," he says, as if the
crowd consisted of three friends sitting on his living room couch. As
the opening beats of "Psycho Killer" emerge from the tape player, the
camera slowly rises from Byrne's tapping sneaker to his guitar, and
then up to his head, which bobs hypnotically to the music.
STOP MAKING SENSE contains well-edited footage from three concerts. It
eschews elaborate sets, long-winded speeches, and special effects, and
relies instead on Demme's minimalist camera skills and the band's
considerable performing capabilities. Three of the band
members--Byrne, bassist Tina Weymouth, and drummer Chris
Frantz--attended the Rhode Island School of Design, which may be why
the set looks so good.
After the first song, during which the boom box is Byrne's only
accompaniment, Weymouth enters the stage and joins Bryne in a spare,
beautiful rendition of "Heaven" (whose haunting refrain is "Heaven is
a place where nothing ever happens"). One new band member arrrives
with every song, so that the film builds with rhythmic intensity.
Demme's pace, and his use of light and color (deep blues and reds),
reminded me of Stanley Kubrick, who displayed similar skills in his
masterpiece, 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY. In STOP MAKING SENSE, Demme
includes shots of black-clad stagehands wheeling pieces of the set
onto the stage. The cumbersome metal objects, which float serenely
through hazy backlighting, resemble the ships that drift through space
in Kubrick's austere epic.
The relationship between the core musicians of the Talking Heads, who
are white, and the musicians who perform with them, who are black, is
fraught with interesting contrasts and tensions. In many ways, the
band draws its energy from the intersection of a variety of
cultures. The Talking Heads temper punk, soul, avant-garde design
aesthetics, and new-wave style with a nicely skewed sense of irony. As
he dances through the show in white sneakers, Byrne forms a bridge
over a wide variety of cultural gaps. The only weak spot in the film
comes when Byrne steps off the stage to let the remaining band members
(the Tom Tom Club) perform--without his vision, the sound is just
ordinary.
The performers have a great deal of fun with one another. At one point
in the movie, Byrne turns to face the two background singers. He
smiles, and starts to imitate their dance step. Without missing a
beat, one singer begins to strum an air guitar in imitation of
him. It's just one of the many moments of pure exuberance that grace
this film.
Most of that exuberance is conveyed through dance--these musicians
know how to move. Watch all of them dance--especially the backing
vocalists (Ednah Holt and Lynn Mabry), the guitarist (Alex Weir), and
the percussionist (Steven Scales)--and your eyes will be dazzled, your
feet will start to tap. Watch Bernie Worrell (of
Parliament/Funkadelic) swivel his head as he adds dollops of funk to
the proceedings. Watch Tina Weymouth swing her knees and
shoulders. Watch Scales, who personifies the movie's energy, cheer on
the crowd. But above all, watch David Byrne, who seems to dwell in the
eye of a dance hurricane.  Whether he's slithering like a charmed
snake, stumbling like a confused professor, or hanging his arms like a
crucified office worker, Byrne's movements are precise and hypnotic.
In the end, however, it's the choreography (the coordination of music
and movement), rather than the dancing alone, that makes STOP MAKING
SENSE such a treat. One shouldn't forget that this movie was carefully
molded, that it was crafted from the footage of three separate shows;
it wasn't just cobbled together without thought. There's someone
moving in almost every frame of the film, and Demme's camera is rarely
still--he's always approaching or circling or panning. There are
limits to a concert film, to be sure, and I'm certain that this movie
will appeal most to people already interested in the Talking
Heads. But fanhood is not a prerequisite because this is more than
just another concert film: it's a celebration of manic energy, a
tribute to the joy of performance.

Title
Review for Pillow Book, The (1996)
Peter Greenaway's THE PILLOW BOOK, a lush, spell-like movie, weaves
together words, flesh, ink, paper, and celluoid. The main character, a
young Chinese woman (Vivian Wu) whose father wrote a poem on her face on
every childhood birthday,
grows up with a fetish for words written on bare skin. At first, she
looks for lovers who will write on her; later, one lover (Ewan
McGregor) convinces her to inscribe her masterpiece (a series of "books"
based on a thousand-year old volume that lists things
which "make the heart beat faster") on his body.
THE PILLOW BOOK is as disturbing as it is pretty. It provocatively draws
analogies between human skin and paper and entrances the viewer's eyes
with beautiful, breathtaking imagery, but it also displays human bodies
as denatured objects. Naked bodies (particularly McGregor's well endowed
naked body) litter the screen, which can be either liberating or cruel,
depending on how one understands Greenaway's use of the human form.
Greenaway's distinctive style is a postmodern cinematic expression of
the Microsoft Windows 95 operating system: multiple
scenes float freely across the screen like lost ships drifting on
celluoid winds. It's an Altman-like concept of cinema seen through
the eyes rather than heard through the ears. Words spill across all of
the images like misplaced subtitles written with a
calligraphy pen.
Sensual and enticing, but ultimately problematic, THE PILLOW BOOK is a
unique vision of immoral beauty.

Title
Review for Alien (1979)
The first third of Ridley Scott's Alien contains a brilliant reworking
of Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY. In the
opening scenes of the movie, Scott appropriates Kubrick's modernistic
set design and lighting, and finds a similar, patient sense
of rhythm and pace. Where 2001 is theoretical and abstract, however,
Ridley adds a dimension of gritty realism. He photographs a crew of
space travelers emerging from cryogenic sleep like butterflies unfolding
from their chrysalises, but when these characters come to life, the
first thing they do is gather around the breakfast table, slurp coffee,
smoke cigarettes, and argue about the wages they're receiving on the
trip. On board a commercial towing vehicle, they're like a bunch of
space-age
mechanics tooling around in a run-down jalopy. At one point early in the
film, we see the crew trying to land their vessel. Scott
shows this as a difficult, stressful task, which is unusual for the
sci-fi genre: usually directors cut from shots of a
tractor-beam-pull-in to shots of mechanics walking up to a safely landed
ship. In ALIEN, by contrast, we see the characters
sweat and grimace, and we come to know that grit is an indelible aspect
of the human spirit.
As exhilarating as the first third of this movie is--with Scott's long,
snake-like continuous shots, which mirror the motions of the aliens who
appear later in the film--the movie takes a downward turn exactly when
the alien kills its first victim. Scott replaces the deliberately slow
pace of the opening scenes with the dull rhythms of generic conventions.
Suddenly, instead of watching a great movie, we're watching a great
sci-fi/horror flick. The eccentric cast of characters, who are set up so
well at the beginning of the movie, are transformed into shallow,
murder-by-numbers victims by the end. Plot contrivances begin to build
up and annoy the viewer: why, for instance, when she has only seven
minutes to meet up with her companions, does Ripley suddenly obsess so
much about her cat? Yes, it shows that she has an execeptional
understanding of species other than her own, but it feels forced.
Earlier in the movie, she had an iron will, and was willing to sacrifice
two humans; near the end of the film, she turns unexpectedly
sentimental.
For many people, the ALIEN series is valuable because it places a woman
(Ripley/Sigourney Weaver) in the role of the action
hero. Weaver does a great job, and the battle-of-the-sexes scenes at the
beginning of the movie have an extremely realistic feel.
However, near the end of the film, Scott's camera resorts to the
familiar male gaze as it watches Weaver get out of her uniform.
Although this scene is undeniably sexy, it's also completely
gratuitous--I'm simply not convinced by explanations such as "her
nakedness is symbolic--she has to fight her last battle with the alien
when she is at her most vulnerable." After all, she gets out
of one uniform in order to get into another. It feels like a step
backward to me.
If I could split a movie in two, I'd take the first third of ALIEN and
put it in the shrine, and take the last two-thirds and give it a
3.5. Overall, it's a fine film, but in the end it doesn't live up to its
own promise.
     Directed by Ridley Scott. Cinematography by Derek Vanlint.
Production design by Roger Christian, Leslie Dilley, Anton
     Furst, and Michael Seymour. Written by Dan O'Bannon and Thilo
Newman.
     Starring Sigourney Weaver, Tom Skerrit, Veronica Cartwright, Harry
Dean Stanton, John Hurt, Ian Holm, Yaphet
     Kotto, Bolaji Badejo, and Helen Horton.

Title
Review for Romeo + Juliet (1996)
ROMEO + JULIET does to Shakespeare's play what CLUELESS did to Jane
Austen's novel: it modernizes and updates a classic work for the 18-24
year-old market. After seeing this loud, ambitious movie twice, I remain
conflicted about it: while I was moved by it, I also think that it is a
piece of manipulative fluff--a kind of "Teen Beat" magazine in
cinemascope.
Each generation reinvents Shakespeare for itself. This ROMEO + JULIET is
ridden with 90's kitsch. It uses Shakespeare's
words, but takes its imagery from the exaggerated vocabulary of soap
operas, MTV, and Andy Warhol. It was filmed in
Mexico City, which is an exaggeration of urban life in itself. The
kitsch works well in some sequences: in an invigorating party
scene, at which Romeo (Leonardo DiCaprio) and Juliet (Claire Danes)
first meet, characters wear costumes that effectively
communicate their personalities: Romeo wears the stylish armor of a
post-modern knight, Juliet wears the foam wings of an
earthbound angel, Capulet (Juliet's dominating father) wears the
Caesaric robes of an august patriarch, Mercutio (Romeo's
friend and the Prince's kinsman) wears the sequined dress of a drag
queen, and Paris (Juliet's establishment-minded suitor)
wears the dorky space-gear of an enthusiastic astronaut. I appreciated
the way the movie updated Shakespeare's characters.
In this movie, the Prince of Verona is a tough police commissioner, the
Capulets and Montagues are rival gangs, the chorus is a
TV anchorwoman, and the Friar Laurence (Pete Postlethwaite, who gives a
fun performance) is a hip priest who proclaims the
benefits of "herbs." Many of these touches are original and
thought-provoking; this movie could be understood as a comment
on recent racial disturbances in Los Angeles, Bedford-Stuyvesant, Miami,
and Crown Heights. The problem is that I'm not
sure what, exactly, it might be saying.
As Romeo and Juliet, Leonardo DiCaprio and Claire Daines give effective
performances. The camera adores these young stars. As soft golden light
plays over DiCaprio's wet hair, skinny torso, and sensuous lips, one
thinks of James Dean's body and Marlon Brando's cheekbones. As the
angelic Juliet, Danes looks pristine--until she smirks naughtily while
considering that "other part/ belonging to a man." The single best scene
of the movie occurs when DiCaprio and Danes first lock eyes through a
fish tank. For a few brief moments, pure innocence and charm take
command of the screen. These actors, both on the cusp of puberty, convey
the wonder and the angst of two young lovers in the throes of an
overpowering, but impossible, love. DiCaprio and Danes are a perfect
Romeo and Juliet for the 1990's: their budding bodies are completely in
sync with the recent trend of unisex ad campaigns.
At a certain point during the movie, the many excesses began to bother
me. The brashness that was at first charming soon
became tiresome. In many scenes, such as the one in Church where Juliet
reposes amid millions of crosses and candles, the
layers of kitsch became so thick that I had trouble locating any glimmer
of sincerity or feeling. The imagery of ROMEO + JULIET has the puffed-up
ethos of a TV commercial. Watching this movie made me think of Thomas
Carlyle, who, in Past and
Present (1843), decried the effects of advertising on shoemaking: "Thy
shoes are vamped up falsely to meet the market;
behold, the leather only seemed to be tanned; thy shoes melt under me to
rubbishy pulp, and are not veritable mud-defying
shoes, but plausible vendible similitudes of shoes." At their best,
movies like ROMEO + JULIET cannot create true emotions,
because they themselves evince none; they can only produce "vendible
similitudes" of emotions. In the end, that's just not
enough for me.
ROMEO + JULIET is rated PG-13. Cast: Claire Danes (Juliet Capulet),
Leonardo DiCaprio (Romeo Montague), Harold
Perrineau (Mercutio), Pete Postlethwaite (Father Laurence), Paul Sorvino
(Fulgencio Capulet), Brian Dennehy (Ted
Montague).
Directed by Bas Luhrmann. Screenplay by Baz Luhrmann and Craig Pearce.
Based on the play by William Shakespeare.
Running time: 120 minutes.
The Book-Lover's Guide to Cinema
http://www.panix.com/~mgold/meter.htm
copyright 1998 Matthew K. Gold
