Authors
reiher@onyx.Jpl.Nasa.Gov
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Thiassos, O (1975)
[This is a review of a film that I saw at the recent AFI Los Angeles Film
Festival.  More reviews of films I saw there will probably follow.  For a
summary of the festival, see rec.arts.cinema.]
     There's a small, unusual genre of films I call Red Tragedies.  Red, as in
Communist.  What is a Red Tragedy?  Well, by and large, Communists do not give
much thought to individuals.  Their concern is the collective.  So, clearly a
Red Tragedy is a tragedy that happens to all of a country's workers, not just
to one bourgeois (or, worse, aristocratic) person or family.  And there's only
one event sufficiently shattering for a Red Tragedy - the failure of a
Communist revolution.
     That's why the genre is small.  The filmmaker has to be in sympathy with
Communism, to begin with.  Then, he has to live in a country where the
Communists failed to take over.  (Countries where they did have neither the
need to bemoan the failure, nor, as we have seen lately, much general sympathy
for the idea that such a failure would be a tragedy.)  Moreover, the existing
government has to be sufficiently liberal to permit someone to wail about the
failure of a revolution.  And, finally, there actually has to be enough money
in the country to make a film.
     1900 is probably the most famous Red Tragedy.  Bertolucci tried to make us
feel the classical tragedy of the failure of the peasants to take over  Italy,
instead of the Fascists.  Having Fascists around to stack the deck certainly
helps put a Red Tragedy across, but Bertolucci's film, while greatly
entertaining, was not a success in the U.S., and probably didn't convert
anyone.
     THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is a Red Tragedy from Greece, made by Greek
director Theo Angelopolous.  I doubt if it will find much favor in the U.S.,
either.  It's just as long as 1900, has no familiar actors, has much the same
point of view, and isn't particularly entertaining, at least not for audiences
yearning for more kung-fu reptiles.  However, this film was not made with
wowing American audiences in mind.  THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is a Greek film for
Greek audiences.  Anyone else must watch it as an outsider, separated from the
themes of the film by culture and history.
     The plot of THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is Aeschylus' Orestia superimposed
lightly on the fortunes of a group of actors travelling around Greece
performing a bucolic tragedy.  The film starts just before the Second World
War, and continues through the troubling times Greece faced after the war, when
a civil war broke out between the right and left wings.
     The leader of the company is the Agamemnon figure, his wife is
Clytemnestra, and they have two children actually named Orestes and Electra.
(You'd think that Greek actors would know better than to choose those names for
their children.)  The company's leader favors the leftists in Greece.  The
wife's lover is a Fascist.  When war breaks out, Agamemnon goes off to fight.
And the classical tragedy plays out.  Slowly.  Very, very slowly.  THE
TRAVELLING PLAYERS is ten minutes short of four hours, if they don't give you
an intermission.
     Angelopolous has made a very unengaging film.  The characters have no
reality.  They exist almost as icons, except that most of them do not carry any
meaning, either.  Certainly, they never give the impression of being real
people, and Angelopolous didn't seem to intend that they should.  They are
practically placeholders, human hooks to hang not a story, but a political and
historical lesson on.  Nor is there much that could pass for action.  Shots are
fired, people are murdered, adulterers adulter, but these incidents are not
punched up to excite or entertain.
     Combining with the remoteness of the characters and the distancing of
conventional plotting, Angelopolous has a distinctive cinematic style that is
rather Brechtian in the way it distances audiences from the story.  In the
entire three hours and fifty minutes of THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS, Angelopolous
uses only 80 shots.  Some of these shots are 8 minutes or so.  This style has
some obvious implications.  We see none of the conventional handling of
conversations, for instance, where two-shots showing both actors are
interspersed with close-ups of the performers.  Of course, there aren't very
many conversations in THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS, anyway.
     Angelopolous' camera is not static, however.  He uses many complicated
camera movements in this film.  But they, too, are very, very slow.  He will
take 30 seconds or a minute to pan around 180 degrees.  It is an unnatural, and
sometimes disturbing, slowness, not at all like the way people move their heads
to look at things.  At its worst, this style makes the viewer want to leap up
and forcibly push the camera to where it's obviously creeping.  At its best, it
encourages the viewer to take a closer, unblinking look at details that are
usually lost by snappier photographic styles.
     Perhaps the most amazing thing about THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is that,
despite the extreme length, despite the unengaging characters, despite the
overstretched plot, despite the long takes and languid camera,  THE TRAVELLING
PLAYERS is still not really dull.  It's not fascinating, exciting, pulse-
pounding, but it's not quite dull, either.  I never felt like going to sleep,
leaving the theater, conversing with my neighbor, or doing anything other than
watching the film.  Angelopolous has a hypnotic effect, of some kind.  That the
camera work is quite beautiful undoubtedly helps, but the director clearly has
the sort of talent that allows him to work in a style that would not work for
almost anyone else.
     Also, Angelopolous achieves some fine moments in the film.  Perhaps the
best is a showdown in a dance hall between leftists and right-wing supporters
during the civil war.  In a single extended shot, Angelopolous uses music and
dance to show the conflict between the factions, the final triumph of the
conservatives, the violence behind that triumph, and the frightening ideology
the right wing represents.  It's one of the finest five or ten minutes of film
I've seen this year, and serves as a summary of the whole film.  Another fine
moment is when an American soldier marries a Greek girl.  A traditional wedding
song sung by an old lady is cheerfully, brainlessly corrupted into
boogie-woogie by the American guests.  It's a perfect example of the heedless,
naive way that Americans ignore, usurp, and unwittingly crush foreign cultures,
without even realizing that they are doing anything wrong.  Unfortunately,
these highly insightful moments are separated by lengthy scenes that have no
intellectual or emotional impact, to speak of.
     Still, THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is moderately effective, as a Red Tragedy.
My knowledge of the Greek civil war is limited, and worked from the typical
anti-Communist assumptions of Americans.  Angelopolous' presentation of the
victors as little better than re-labeled Fascists, and the American and
British intervention as hardly an improvement on the German occupation, was
provocative, if nothing else.
     THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is perhaps the quintessential film that's not for
everyone.  It takes patience, and a willingness to accept a foreign style.
This is not a film that was made for universal audiences.  An American must
look at this film as a window on a foreign culture, more so than most foreign
films.  THE TRAVELLING PLAYERS is a Greek film about Greek issues for a Greek
audience.  If one can accept its conventions and viewpoint, it returns the work
put into watching it.
