Authors
Lon Ponschock
Number of Reviews
29

Title
Review for In weiter Ferne, so nah! (1993)
Written and directed by Wim Wenders
Starring Otto Sander, Peter Falk, Nastassja Kinski, Bruno Ganz,
     Willem Dafoe, and Solveig Dommartin
146 mins.
     The signature quotation you see at the bottom of these pieces is
from another Wim Wenders film: UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD.  And his
PARIS TEXAS is another extraordinary piece of filmmaking and look at
life.  In WINGS OF DESIRE and FAR AWAY SO CLOSE Wenders explores the
lives of Angels.  Angels are quite popular these days.  There are scads
of books on the subject.
     From the first frames of FAR AWAY SO CLOSE, a film which
was the grand prize winner at Cannes in 1993, I was enthralled with its
approach.
     Cassiel (Otto Sander) becomes human when he cannot bear to see a
child die needlessly and his adventure as a human begins.  Funny thing
is that as you watch and listen to him with his fears and isolation he
actually speaks from our own hearts.  This is my take on it anyway.
     FAR AWAY features an all-star cast.  Lou Reed and Peter Falk have
cameo roles.  Solveig Dommartin I remember from UNTIL THE END OF THE
WORLD and she is wonderful once again in this work.  Nastassja Kinski
is Raphaela, a companion angel and Bruno Ganz plays Damiel. Damiel's
story is told in WINGS of DESIRE.  Willem Dafoe is ... what? a devil?
a bad angel ... something that wants to see the new 'Karl Engel'
destroyed?  Even after the film I am uncertain.
     The camera work in FAR AWAY is extraordinary in that it
accomplishes so much with so little.  This is not a big budget film.
Wenders can get away with merely suggesting all that an angel is with
the camera and a few simple props.
     There is great humor in the film as well.  And the story is a
complex one of a long search and finally a rescue.
     With its companion piece, WINGS OF DESIRE, FAR AWAY SO CLOSE
presents us with images that refresh the spirit and strengthen our
hopes in the future.  That's what the little signature file which
closes these pieces is about.

Title
Review for Backbeat (1993)
Directed by Iain Softley
Stars Sheryl Lee, Stephen Dorff, and Ian Hart as John Lennon
     See that?  'Never put the band credits on one of these things
before.  That's it's importance.
     BACKBEAT is about the early Beatles: the 1960 Beatles in Hamburg
on the Reeperbahn: the red light district.
     I never liked the Beatles ... at least the Ed Sullivan version of
them.  The music was over-played.  It was a media phenomenon.  It was
the 60's version of the bobby soxers screaming for Sinatra 20 years
before.  It was hype.  It's a bad memory for me, not a good one.
     BUT there are no Fab Four tunes in BACKBEAT, nothing to jerk your
chain about where you were in 1962 and what you'd be doing at Woodstock
a few years later.  No nostalgie du la boue or "reminiscence of the
mud."  What a relief.
     BACKBEAT put me in mind of THE COMMITMENTS and SWING KIDS.  This
Is The Grunge Beatles; something to put you in mind of a more
contemporary group. These days Nine Inch Nails or Nirvana would not
play strip clubs on the Reeperbahn to start a career though.  Perhaps
there is a lesson in that too.
     The music is Rhythm and Blues... and Lennon wearing his Buddy
Holly "super glasses."  All that.  All the lowlife and fights, fights
to be heard.  And we hear the Lennon wit, as he storms around like Sid
Vicious... Sid Vicious had no wit as I recall.  And the Cockney
accent.  I thought of Ken Loach's film RIFF RAFF during this too.  RIFF
RAFF: that film with the Cockney cast and English subtitles.  Ha!
     Before the new look of the Beatles there was the energy that rock
and roll and little blue pills could produce.  And those little Blue
Meanies produced a bunch of hard day's nights.  Before YELLOW SUBMARINE
and the Richard Lester films, there was Lennon, Stuart Sutcliffe, Paul
McCartney, George Harrison and Pete Best.  And there was Astrid.
     The story here as about Lennon, Sutcliffe and Astrid Kirchner, a
German photographer.  They want to play Lennon and Sutcliffe as
intimates.  To me it's insignificant that the legend might be
"contaminated" with a homosexual influence--insignificant that Lennon
and Sutcliffe had a relationship deeper than that which might be
tolerated by the screaming girls at The Cave in Liverpool or at Shea
Stadium in New York.
     This is Sutcliffe's story too.  Stuart Sutcliffe abandoned a
painting career to play with the band.  His career and reputation were
more firmly established than that of his rock and roll friends.
     We know that Sutcliffe was not a member of the Beatles when they
hit America and Shea Stadium,  so I don't think I'm giving anything
away when I relate the following scene and it's effect on me:
     We see Sutcliffe in the audience as the quartet version of the
Beatles is playing--in the audience with this longing look on his
face: the look I associate with an old cartoon which these days is
still probably broadcast at 5 am some- where.  It's a scene of a boy on
crutches who is left behind as the hole in the mountain where the land
of toys and candy is closing faster than he can keep up with.  I think
the cartoon was "The Pied Piper of Hamlin;"  one of those cartoons you
see at 5 am because of the partying from the night before: one of those
1940's cartoons drawn with a childlike and schizophrenic mania.  The
boy on crutches is left behind to tell the story of how the children
disappeared to the townsfolk of Hamlin.
     BACKBEAT is a good film all the way around.  Easily worth watching
a couple of times for the subtlety of language and the music itself.
It may be one of the best music biographies ever made.  This is rock
and roll.  And the film history of it is pretty scant or left wanting.
THE BUDDY HOLLY STORY should have been a lot better than it was ...
should have been a lot less saccharine.
     But here with the maturity of a European backdrop, the director
Iain Softley has given us the 1960 pre-Carnaby Street Brit homage to
the music which, like that of Buddy Holly, owes its soul to rhythm and
blues.  The Brit homage before the Brit invasion.

Title
Review for Hangin' with the Homeboys (1991)
Directed and Written by Joseph Vasquez
Rated R for extensive use of "street language"
     We saw the trailers for this film as long ago as last summer, if
memory serves, but the show got buried amidst the release of other
larger 'street' films such as BOYZ 'N THE HOOD and NEW JACK CITY.
     That is a shame because, though the teasers would lead one to
believe that this is another show about juveniles with their hats on
backwards, the reality is that HANGING WITH THE HOMEBOYS owes more to
such serious works as the play MARTY done many years ago.
     The film follows four young men, two Black and two Hispanic, on a
Friday night on the town in New York.
     There is much good humor in this film but there is another element
that goes beyond the average "on the town" adventure.  The director, who
also wrote the show and dedicates the film to those of his friends who
inspired it, manages to reveal some uneasy truths.
     A fine ensemble cast including Mario Joyner and John Leguizamo play
off of each other nearly perfectly.  Nestor Serrano is a new name to
film and his character of "Vinny" is memorable.  Watch for this fine
actor in newer films.  Doug E. Doug rounds out the ensemble as a
militant but misguided young man.
     HANGING WITH THE HOMEBOYS gets full recommendation for the kind of
acting and drama which is normally only available to a stage audience.
It is a small film with a lot to say.

Title
Review for Vanishing, The (1993)
     Okay, okay, it hooked me again.  Pretty similar though.  But like
the opening quote says, the devil is in the details.
     Like the two halves of the infinity symbol, VANISHING I and
VANISHING II are two halves, Moebius-like--intertwining very
effectively.  I'm glad I took Greg's advice and saw both.  As a double
bill, these two Vanishings make excellent viewing.
     The scene is changed from Holland to Seattle, the cast is
American.  The director is the same.  Interestingly the women
characters are given more depth in the American version, and more
conventional patterns are shown than in the Dutch version--perhaps a
more personalized view, less objective.  All these things have to do
with the shift in focus in this American version.  Do I sound like I'm
dancing around talking about an actual comparison?  Like the old book
title has it, "I'm dancing as fast as I can."  ;-)
     There is completion in the two works and a balance as well.  It
would be interesting to hear other ideas on these two films.  Not
wanting to provide spoiler remarks, I feel constrained in saying
anything else.
     Do you remember the concluding quote I used for the Dutch version
of THE VANISHING?  It's not too far back, you can find it.

Title
Review for Romeo Is Bleeding (1993)
     It is also about Jack. Jack played by Gary Oldman (DRACULA, SID
AND NANCY, JFK and many more fine performances) is a dirty cop.  Jack
is a cop with dreams: dreams of money, power and women.
     In an erotic thriller, the people talk like we wished we talked,
like we wish a conversation out of thin air could happen--but never
does.  This does not mean that ROMEO IS BLEEDING is a bad film.  Peter
Medak (THE RULING CLASS, A DAY IN THE DEATH OF JOE EGG, THE SNOW QUEEN
and an extensive list of other credits) has crafted one of the new film
noir pieces: not a black comedy, but more of a feeling of low lifes.
     I have commented on the work of Mark Isham in film scores before.
Here, I'm afraid the Mark Isham style has become ubiquitous, over used,
and quite frankly--distracting.  While a sample of the Isham technique
in a film like TROUBLE IN MIND, a technique which uses trumpet solos to
set mood or the cool jazz knockoffs created for a picture like QUIZ
SHOW are interesting, these devices do not require endless repetition.
So here in ROMEO IS BLEEDING, Mr. Isham's work is *all* low key with
not much relief.
     It's a strange story, ROMEO is.  It takes you through turns which
are unexpected and provides just enough action and kink to keep you
watching:  take for instance the "with, or without" scene.  You'll know
it when you see it.
     Written and produced by Hilary Henkin, here is another example of
women as artists in the film world and what they do there.
     The story concerns Jack as a cop on the take and his involvement
with the mob, money and ... Mona (Lena Olin.) As trite as this may
sound and in comparison to what Quentin Tarantino (PULP FICTION) is
doing, Peter Medak has given us a thriller with an edge.
     It's about women and guns, like I said.  Mona is sublimely evil.
You see her face looking out at you on the rental box.  What you
*don't* see is her smile.
     Lena Olin is extraordinary in ROMEO IS BLEEDING.
     With all that trumpet skittering in the background, it takes a bit
of effort to stay with ROMEO.  But it is a picture with those sorts of
arresting images that this writer watches films to see.  I will leave
you with this: one of those images from Medak's THE RULING CLASS which
was made in the early 70's stays with me still.
     Oh yeah, that bit about "the hole" up there.  Well, like I said,
Medak's images can be very powerful indeed.

Title
Review for Como agua para chocolate (1992)
     Here is a romance which is bittersweet like the chocolate
mentioned in the title.  The title refers to the emotions one feels
during the film.  It's a romance you know, and you are supposed to
become excited by it ... hot ... Like Water for Chocolate.
     It is the story of Pedro and Tita and Tita's mother.  Tita is the
last born so she must care for her mother until her mother no longer
lives.  She cannot marry Pedro for this reason and therein lies the
story of the film.
     More and more I see less and less in American releases ...  the
fineness and rhythm of language are just not there ... there is nothing
to learn from the experience and the viewer does not touch *humanity*.
     In LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE we *do* touch this humanity and this
is why it is a special film.  It is in Spanish and subtitled.  And in
this particular film the English goes by quite quickly.  This is the
first time I have rerun the film to catch all the dialog.  And only in
works by such masters as Wim Wenders can the art of language be
compared.  So take some time with this one.  It's worth it.
     I was reminded of a previous film which I wrote about more than a
year ago.  What is said of Babette in BABETTE'S FEAST could apply to
Tita in the current film as well:
     (There are so many similarities between BABETTE'S FEAST and LIKE
WATER FOR CHOCOLATE that I have reprinted the previous item so that the
reader might know more about BABETTE.  See the item which follows.  It
is not written to the same style ...  but then again, I rarely write to
the same style or the same reference.)
     I have seen a number of romances lately: ROBIN AND MARIAN was one
such.  I did not post a review of that because, well it's an old
picture from the 1970s directed by a master.  Richard Lester has
directed some high comedy such as the early Beatles films and HOW I WON
THE WAR starring John Lennon.  But ROBIN AND MARIAN, while touching,
fell prey to the cliches which have been exposed by John Cleese, Graham
Chapman and the rest of Monty Python's Flying Circus.
     So I did not comment on ROBIN AND MARIAN.  It was unintentionally
humorous.
     But here in LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, the proper amount of the
willing suspension of disbelief: that quality which one needs to view a
work of the imagination to find the truth therein ...  with enough of
that, this film can be a grand experience indeed.
     Perhaps I am getting soft.  Perhaps I am getting old.  Perhaps I
am getting old and soft,  but I enjoyed LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE
immensely.  Maybe it is because I learned that I was still able to cry
myself.  There is great sadness and great happiness in the film.  But
to choose which was in greater supply I would have to say sadness even
if, in so doing, this skews the idea of what a good romance should be.
     We have spoken of good double bills in the past (and I'd like to
see some new recommendations too.)  So here I would recommend LIKE
WATER FOR CHOCOLATE and BABETTE'S FEAST to be viewed as a double bill.
Get both of them together and enjoy the rich experience; that satiation
which only food and romance can provide.  To have one without the other
puts me in mind of a closing quote taken from LIKE WATER FOR
CHOCOLATE:

Title
Review for Glengarry Glen Ross (1992)
     When I first read GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS all of six years ago it had
preceded such film events as WALL STREET and other films which, in the
classic Hollywood patois "rips the lid off of business."  Oh, yeah, I
was working in a sales office at the time, so you may be able to
appreciate my perspective on the play/film.
     Mamet actually worked in a small real estate office such as the
location in which the film takes place.  And as with any film
adaptation of a stage play, I think that the elements of the power of
language captured on stage are diluted in the film presentation.
Everyone wanted to be in this show.  And the ones who made the cut are
are; Jack Lemmon, Al Pacino, Alan Arkin, Alec Baldwin, and Ed Harris.
     The film is denser with each viewing but the central element for
me is this:  GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS is a film about men.  It is a film
about men as you have probably not seen them before.  What you see is
the reason why the men women marry behave differently than women had
always expected them to behave them in the home.  The world of business
teaches men to behave in a certain way: Alec Baldwin asks Jack Lemmon
early in the picture if he has the guts to take people's money.  If he
has the balls.  The office supervisor makes a gaffe during a meeting
which Pacino has with his client Mr. Linkq (Jonathan Pryce) and Pacino
asks him after he has committed his error, "Who told you you could work
with men?" In the final moments of the film, Pacino as Ricky Roma says
"This is no longer a world of men, it's a world of clock watchers.
Where's the adventure?"
     The premise of the film is this: the sales staff in a real estate
office has to compete for the top position or be fired.  The rest of
the action follows.  They are told this in a sales meeting by Alec
Baldwin.  The Pacino character is not present.  He is at the bar across
the road picking up a client.  Yes, picking up a "john" in a bar to
*sell him real estate*.  This is brilliant: to see the mark and
practice ABC: Always Be Closing.  Idle conversation becomes an $80,000
sale of a piece of property in Florida.
     GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS is an object lesson: be good, go to school,
eat your Wheaties, become a computer technician, *do anything* but
enter the world of men.  And in this Mamet has crafted something that
has not been seen before: a play about the powerlessness of men before
their jobs, before their wives, before their responsibilities.
     In the truest sense, it is a film for women to experience.  If
they have not understood it before, they can understand it now.

Title
Review for Trouble in Mind (1985)
A film by Alan Rudolph
Music by Mark Isham
Stars Kris Kristofferson, Keith Carradine, Lori Singer, and Genevieve Bujold
     This is an old film (1985).  Alan Rudolph is a special director.
I've written about his films such as CHOOSE ME and the MODERNS and also
EQUINOX which is his most recent starring Mathew Modine.
     There's a quietness about an Alan Rudolph piece.  And his pictures
are often set out of time and place.  Here, for instance, the scene is
a place which is a major metropolitan area simply called Rain City.
The cars on the street are autos like the 1971 'Batmobile' sharkback
Buick and also one of the earliest Barracudas or 'back-a-rudas' as the
old commercial had it:  Cool stuff in other words.
     A new friend lent me a personal copy of this piece: a purchased
copy.  So I expected something special.
     Rain City, with all it's detail is just slightly skewed.  The
costumes are a bit different, the language is a bit different.  Oh yes,
and Divine is in this and she is a bit different as well.
     Kris Kristofferson (THE SAILOR WHO FELL FROM GRACE WITH THE SEA,
THE SILVER BEARS, MILLENNIUM) was never my favorite actor.  Let's face
it, I hate the somebitch.  Having said that, I can still recommend
TROUBLE IN MIND.  The story is a fairly simple tale of low life in the
big city.  But with light, sound and a wonderful score by Mark Isham
(QUIZ SHOW and THE BEAST, something that was barely released but the
music was broadcast as part of a new age prog. on public radio) Rain
City becomes a magical place... a place that cities always seem to be
to those who don't live in them I think.  But magical anyway.
     It's about low life, small time hoods and ex-cops--the stuff of
which most B-movies are made.  A few elements appear here which on a
single viewing didn't make sense: a Shinto ceremony, an enemy killed in
the style of a Vietnam jungle fight, a shoot-out which has the effect of
looking like a custard pie fight in a Mack Sennet comedy at the end.
     And through all this strangeness, these images out of the mind of
the director, comes that landscape of art deco and modern, almost campy
stylishness there is ...  cool stuff.

Title
Review for Léon (1994)
     THE PROFESSIONAL is a carefully crafted story of revenge ... sort
of what THE CROW tried to be but couldn't compared with this.
     Matilda (Natalie Portman) is a twelve-year-old who has lost her
family in a firefight over drugs.  She seeks refuge with Leon (Jean
Reno), a professional killer.
     So here we have the makings of what could be a piece of
sentimental claptrap arrived just in time for the holidays.  But these
are the makings only.  The story here is wonderful, the language and
script well-done and the revelation of detail occurs in a way that I
wanted the film not to end ... not for a long time.
     *That's* when a picture is really good.  They don't come around
that often and that's the reason that you will see writings here on the
occasion of that triumph and not on the occasion of wasted time on
trayf.
     Mention should be made of the fine performances by Gary Oldman and
Danny Aiello as well.  They always deliver superb performances and
their work here is no exception.  Jean Reno as Leon could be GIGOT in
another era: living out of a suitcase, friendless--with nothing but
his work.  Natalie Portman in what might be a first role makes the part
of Matilda her own in a truly captivating way.
     Captivating is a good word for THE PROFESSIONAL.  It will steal
your heart in a way that other child-adult 'buddy pictures' like
AMERICAN HEART could not reach.  And what you are able to touch in this
film is the emotion of the moment:  a rare gift.
     It's probably just coincidence, but you know what Leon
spelled backwards is, right?  I knew you did.

Title
Review for Leningrad Cowboys Go America (1989)
     It's got accordions in it.  There's cool points for that.  And
subtitles but not many and ... what else?  Oh yeah, the hair.  The
hair is really good.  And the shoes are excellent: just the right
touch.
     If Richard Lester (A HARD DAY'S NIGHT, HELP!) were Finnish, he'd
be Aki Kaurismaki.  And remember, we have a lot of Finnish brethren and
sistren around here.  I run into the Valmet folks all the time.  Here
is an example of Finnish humor at it's most deadpan farcical best: a
Monty Python meets the Flying Burrito Brothers.
     The Leningrad Cowboys are a rock 'n' roll band.  They sometimes
play accordions, but mostly they are a rock 'n' roll band.
     Trust me, LENINGRAD COWBOYS is a lot of fun ... a road movie with
music and Jim Jarmusch (MYSTERY TRAIN, A NIGHT ON EARTH) in a used car
lot.  The band goes from Russia to New York, New Orleans, Texas and
finally Mexico where the accordions and all that come in handy again.
I have tried to explain my love of accordions often whether it be
Conjunto, Zydeco or Oompah music, but alas, accordions are apparently
for discriminating tastes.
     I usually watch these vids by myself.  The sign of a good vid is
if you can pop your fingers and laugh out loud by yourself.  A really
good film like this one will remove all the inhibitions associated with
self-entertainment. ;-)
     Well-directed with a style bordering ... no, right *in* the country
of the absurd LENINGRAD COWBOYS GO AMERICA could be a modern classic if
somebody saw it besides me.  I guess it's the kind of show that is not
recognized by the slackers because it is too low brow and not
appreciated by the "film buffs" because ... well ... no one else saw it
*before* them.
     You can watch it and then amaze your friends with your subtle cool
taste and international erudition.  But mostly it's just plain good
fun.

Title
Review for Olivier, Olivier (1992)
     You will see it at the video shop and think it is a romance or
maybe something on a subject you would like to avoid.
     Actually it's about *a lot* of subjects you would like to avoid
and that is why is a very special film.
     It is about the secret rituals of childhood too.  And in one
wonderful scene (a bit reminiscent of THE REFLECTING SKIN) there is
this image of pain and loss and grieving which may stay with you
forever.  Because these images are so powerful, I will not describe
them further.
     I have written about the work of this director before.  Agnieszka
Holland also did EUROPA, EUROPA and THE SECRET GARDEN.  Here, as in
EUROPA, there are deceptions and revelations, posings and discoveries.
     Olivier is a little boy who becomes missing.  After six years of
grieving and pain a teenage boy comes into the lives of his parents and
his slightly older sister, Elizabeth.
     Somewhat like the way that a stranger changes the lives of the
characters in SIX DEGREES OF SEPARATION, here in OLIVIER we see a
marvelous and disturbing example of that quote from DEGREES:
     In OLIVIER that door reveals all in the end.  And it is well worth
your viewing time to get there.

Title
Review for Slacker (1991)
     People in Austin TX are crazier than people in Appleton WI right?
Who knows?
     SLACKER is a verite style film which means it's meant to look like
it just happened.
     Actually SLACKER *just happened* in the mind of the director,
Richard Linklater.  It's full of spew.  Spew is a word you should get
intimately acquainted with when using these systems.  Some of it is
valuable, other of it is trash.
     SLACKER takes you on a tour of Austin TX.  And there are a few
way-humorous episodes in it ... the Madonna one scored big points with
me.  But SLACKER is mostly spew:  young people with half-baked ideas,
old people with fully baked wacko ideas and a bunch in between who can
hang out on the street all year long because it's warm down there.
     Up here in Appleton, it sounds like spew, the spew you can hear
anywhere people have played out all the ideas they have but are young
enough to be able find each other and chat about it.
     For the discriminating "cult classicist," SLACKER is touted as a
must-see.  So see it if you must.  It'll give you something to chat
about.

Title
Review for Drowning by Numbers (1988)
     If THE COOK, THE THIEF, HIS WIFE AND HER LOVER is a
necessity to see (which I think it is,) then DROWNING BY
NUMBERS is a diversion.
     Take a bit of Fellini and a bit of Agatha Christie and
you get DBN:  three generations of women plot to and
eventually do destroy the men in their lives.  But this isn't
the fun part.
     The fun part is in the detection necessary on the part
of the viewer to find the numbers embedded in the scenes.
But bear in mind that on a video rental, much detail will be
lost and also the copy I saw was not letterboxed, so portions
of the frame were missing from time to time.  It is also a
distraction to be sure, but the film _is_ about games. [After
viewing it a second time, I still missed quite a few numbers,
including #1 !]
     DROWNING BY NUMBERS is a game and a good game at that.
It's a combination of TEN LITTLE INDIANS and JULIETTE OF THE
SPIRITS.  If you follow Greenaway's work you'll want to catch
up on this if you haven't seen it before.
     I am drawn into these works and am glad I have made the
effort to see all the Greenaway films of which I am aware. It
seems that much of the superior filmmaking these days is once
again being done by Europeans (Vincent Ward, Wim Wenders, and
Greenaway.)  And if it weren't for vid. stores we more than
likely wouldn't have a chance to see any of them.

Title
Review for Spoorloos (1988)
     It hooked me.  After a bunch of false starts in watching this
foreign film--winner of all kinds of prizes--it hooked me and I had to
finish it.  I had started watching the show on several occasions and it
looked pretty much like the average import.  But it hooked me with the
idea of 'man who has to know' beyond all costs, out of time ...
forever.
     THE VANISHING is a mystery.  It concerns the disappearance of
'Saskia' and the search to find out what happened to her by her lover.
This search goes on over years, starts and stops, always in the
background of the man's life-- an obsession.
     This man is confronted by another who will tell him, he says, what
he needs to know about Saskia.  From there, the viewer is taken on a
psychological journey into the minds of two men: one obsessed, the
other a sociopath.
     But THE VANISHING said something different to me than 'what is the
perfect crime'.  In the old Hitchcockian mode we have seen many
variations on this and I, for one, just don't care a whole lot about
crime stories.
     What hooked me was the 'need to know' at any cost.  The drama
turns on this.  The man's love turns on this.  And the difference
between the casual discussion of what it means to sustain a loss and
the reality are here ... in THE VANISHING.

Title
Review for Himmel über Berlin, Der (1987)
     Here is the beginning of the story of Cassiel and Damiel: Guardian
Angels.  This film from 1988 is, for me, the first major work by Wim
Wenders.  His previous collaboration with Peter Handke on Handke's play
called THE ANXIETY OF THE GOALIE AT THE PENALTY KICK goes back to a
period around 1973.  This play had become a modern classic in Germany.
Okay, in Germany it's a classic.  But for me the film treatment was
nothing more than 'another bad European film shot on a budget and meant
to look like *art*.'
     But *here* in Wenders' original 'voice' both in language and film
technique, *here* is a wonderful little film.  To do so much with city
streets, suggestions of costuming, and poetic dialogue is the art of
the master or the genius, who can say which for sure?  I've seen
Wenders' work when it was really BAD too.  An item called NOTEBOOK ON
CITIES AND CLOTHES is still on the current rack at one of the vid shops
around town.
     The camera turns in WINGS do not have the flourish of the more
recent companion piece which is called FAR AWAY SO CLOSE, but here the
director can turn a simple building and it's shape into a place of
magic and wonder.  Observe the library sequences in WINGS to see what I
mean.
     The subject is angels--Guardian Angels--a subject which has come
into vogue over the past two years in America.  There is something very
touching about this.  It tells us that in our heart of hearts we yearn
to not be alone. It is a belief that we want to cherish even though
this is a simple work of fiction.  Because the mind has conceived of
it, it has become it's own reality.   The spirits which the mind
conjures become beliefs or, at the very least, wishes.
     So WINGS OF DESIRE like all the angel shows before it, plays to
these feelings.
     With a simple detail like a ponytail tied with a string, Wenders
tells us here are the angels ... they see each other when no one else
can and we see them too.
     And there is this: a man is shown in despair.  An angel embraces
him.  Then his inner voice gives him the strength to go on with his
life.  The embrace of the angel ends.  The man sits up and continues on
his journey.
     WINGS OF DESIRE is categorized as a comedy, like it was some sort
of HEAVEN KNOWS MR. ALLISON or HEAVEN CAN WAIT and other such fluff.
There are moments of humor in WINGS to be sure.  But the film is so
much more than that.  So when you see it displayed do not be put off as
I was *for months* because of a judgement that didn't relate to the
work itself.
     Get WINGS OF DESIRE and FAR AWAY SO CLOSE together if at all
possible.  WINGS OF DESIRE is only available at WorldWide Video on
College Avenue in the Marketplace.  FAR AWAY is probably in wider
circulation.
     I'll conclude this rave-up with a small quotation from the film.
Wenders' work is poetic and he speaks to our hearts:

Title
Review for Babettes gćstebud (1987)
     I eat a lot of junk food.  It's part of my current lifestyle.  But
I've also experienced fine dining and know the joys of it.
     BABETTE'S FEAST was the Academy award winner for Best Foreign Film
in 1987.  It's in Danish and French with subtitles.  The only reason I
noticed this on the shelf is due to a reference I saw to it on Usenet
in a discussion on the currently released Spanish film called LIKE
WATER FOR CHOCOLATE.
     If you can get past the pieties in the picture (and there are
many) you will find that kernel of excellence which makes its 110
minutes all worthwhile.  Like the truffle and goose pate' wrapped in a
roasted quail, it is a hidden treasure.
     In a village in Jutland, Denmark two sisters live with their
ministerial father, hence the piety often expressed throughout the film
which takes place mostly in 1871.  It was a time in which, as the
narrator says, "Piety was much in fashion."  The sisters befriend a
French woman who has escaped the atrocities of her own country.  What
the sisters don't know is that Babette is one of the premier chefs of
Paris.
     After fourteen years of service, Babette wins a lottery prize.
She then requests to prepare the dinner which will celebrate the
memorial to the minister, long deceased.
     The film is constructed almost like a meal itself with an
appetizer being the love stories of the sisters as young women, the
main course and catalyst which is Babette and the resolution which is
the dinner itself.
     Twelve of the locals who are part of the congregation are invited
to this dinner.  They are used to dining on such things as something
called ale bread: bread soaked in water and a bit of beer then cooked
into a gruel.  Boy, are *they* in for a surprise.  :-)
     Babette, you see, is a great artist. And like any artist she takes
this opportunity to do her work.  I was reminded in an incongruous
manner of another film during BABETTE:
     In THE HUSTLER starring Paul Newman from a book by Robert Rosen,
the billiard shark Fast Eddie Felsen has fallen on hard times.  He's
hustling pool in dives on skid row.  As he is trolling for fish, he
lets his opponent win a few games.  The opponent ups the stakes and
says just enough about 'luck' to The Hustler to bring out the artist in
him.  Fast Eddie then delivers one of the great speeches in the film.
He tells this skid row joker in effect, 'You know the game.  Here's
what it's like when it's *great*,' and clears the table of nineball on
the break shot.

Title
Review for Shakes the Clown (1991)
     SHAKES THE CLOWN is Bobcat Goldthwait's directing and acting debut.
It features many of the performers from stand-up TV programs like "Comic
Strip Live" and shows a twisted view of the life of a clown.  Sort of
like Emmet Kelly meets BARFLY.  These clowns have their own hangout
called the Twisted Balloon at which they have their drinks ... in
costume.  Performers such as Adam (Opera Man) Sandler from "Saturday
Night Live" never appear out of makeup.
     We see three classes of clowns in SHAKES:  Party Clowns, Rodeo
Clowns and Mimes.  Robin Williams makes an appearance as Mime Jerry at a
school for these benighted performers.  Mimes are despised by the clowns
and are physically bashed during the course of the movie.
     SHAKES did not receive good notices when it came out.  I rented it
as home video *because* nobody liked it.  Anything that a lot of people
dislike has probably touched enough nerves to make it worth seeing.
This is the case with SHAKES THE CLOWN.
     If you take Homey from "In Living Color" and ratchet him up about
90 degrees, you'll get a feel for Shakes who is a known alcoholic and
womanizer.
     The film will make more sense if you take the following hint: run
the film down to the end and listen to the song over the credits, then
start the film fresh.  Like the commercial says, "You're a grown up.
You can do anything you want."  SHAKES will make more sense if you do.
     In SHAKES THE CLOWN, there are bad clowns and *worse* clowns.  The
character Binky has landed a hosting job of a children's cartoon show
over Shakes and commits several crimes through the course of the story.
     There is a lot of crude humor in the film and it works.  If you are
open to that sort of thing, you'll have many good yucks.
     Like the underground classic KILLER CLOWNS FROM OUTER SPACE (get it
if you can find it!) SHAKES THE CLOWN is not appropriate for young
viewers.  It *is* appropriate for anyone who was ever frightened of a
clown as child and lifts the mystery from behind the makeup.  But with
all of his drinking and womanizing, Shakes is still a bit super human
and magical in his ability to jump and spin as no ordinary man could do.
     I recommend SHAKES THE CLOWN.  Bobcat Goldthwait has taken a chance
with this film that may make or ultimately break his career as a
director.  That's the fate of people who take chances.

Title
Review for Airheads (1994)
Directed by Michael Lehman
Stars Brendan Frazer, Steve Buscemi, Adam Sandler, Joe Montegna
     I really enjoyed this.  I kind of suspected I would enjoy it since
it is about radio and rock and roll but the real treat was the
*language*.
     AIRHEADS has more in the writing of it than the usual round of
expletives: it's a compendium of slang of the eighties and nineties.
Where else are you going to hear a words like 'queve' or 'dufuss'?  And
all woven into a story that is ideal to display this usage: a metal
trio invades a radio station to get their demo played.
     Michael Lehman is a new name to me, can't tell you much about him,
but Brendan Frazer (SCHOOL TIES, ENCINO MAN) Steve Buscemi (RESERVOIR
DOGS, IN THE SOUP) and Adam Sandler (Sat.  Night Live and SHAKES THE
CLOWN) plus Joe Montegna (HOUSE OF GAMES, BODY OF EVIDENCE, and many
more)  are all well known and talented performers.
     This film has a solid soundtrack, and interesting idea which
succeeds in execution more often than it fails and a passable but
unintrusive directing style which lets the story sort of tell itself
without being too arty.
     This film is about rock and roll and radio.  This idea has been
done before on television and in films, always or nearly always to good
effect.  It wasn't really until I did radio myself that I appreciated
the interaction of the two so much.  Radio, more than any other, is
people's media:  something everyone can enjoy and potentially *do* as
well.  And there are enough "holes in the system" to still be able to
get out and do THE WORK if you really want to.  My time for doing that
is pretty much over  but I still appreciate it when someone is out
there with that DIY spirit keeping the independence and the joy of
radio alive.  It's not easy but it can be done.
     AIRHEADS is a feast of language--street language--and has
enough hooks and turns to provide you with some major laughs.  Well, it
did for *me* anyway.

Title
Review for Mindwalk (1990)
MINDWALK is a talkie.  Its three characters: a politician, a
poet and a physicist meet at a medieval castle on the island
of St.  Michelle in France.  The poet, who is also a
political speech writer, is called by the politician who
needs his help to be elected.  This the  set up.
     Low key is the phrase to describe MINDWALK.  It's a sort
of MY DINNER WITH ANDRE for those with a philosophical bent.
     I thought that it would be good for Easter Eve and I'm
running it again in the background as I write this in the
morning.  Though the film is low key, it's not boring but
succeeds in being visually interesting throughout.
     Here is probably a good place to throw in the fact that
A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME will be available on video shortly as
well.
     These two films came out very close together and are
released close together for the home market.  Hey, maybe
they'll be on Public TV in two weeks, how could I know?
     MINDWALK is a conversation.  The writing here is what is
fascinating.  Fascinating because it is captured for a film
audience which will probably remain rather small.  MINDWALK
is a conversation about science and history.  Like James
Burke's _Connections_ programs on PBS, MINDWALK seeks to see
the world in a new way; to get a new perspective on what the
guy on Saturday Night live called 'the big picture.'
     It would be hard to put my finger on a politically
correct issue which is NOT in MINDWALK.  But it's virtually
impossible to talk about one thing without talking about
everything else.
     So MINDWALK is a good video to listen to and watch if
you are interested in _everything_. :-)

Title
Review for Brief History of Time, A (1992)
     This is the documentary on the life and work of
theoretical cosmologist Stephen Hawking.  I am in the
position here similar to the anecdote about some sports
figure who wrote a book and had to have someone else read it
to him.
     In due time, the other Netters here will be able to
explain to us what the actual import of Hawking's work is.
As with every great mind and new scientific discovery we are
reminded of the phrase from the Firesign Theater: "Everything
you know is wrong."  If I interpret what is said correctly,
Hawking is saying that the steady state theory of the
cosmology refutes Einsteinian physics which is to say that
it is Hawking's contention that God truly _does_ play at dice
with the Universe and occasionally throws them in the corner
where they cannot be seen: that there is true randomness in
the Universe.
     In propounding the Steady State Theory (that the
Universe is continually expanding,) it is his contention that
there is no God or that there are limits to the nature of
God's work.  (Neither Hawking nor Morris are familiar with
the work of Julian Jaynes, but this is a digression.) God can
only exist as The Creator if there is a beginning to Time:
The Big Bang theory which is the idea that the Universe began
as a violent explosion fusing bits together to form matter:
the star stuff of which Carl Sagan speaks.
     Morris' documentary combines theory with biographical
details from Hawking's life which were most enjoyable.  The
naturalness with which Hawking was able, through his genius,
to convert from an analytical method to a conceptual method
due to his growing infirmities from a progressive illness is
the center on which the story turns.  This is to say that
_without_ the infirmities, those conceptualizations of the
Universe; Black Hole constructions and a model of the
Universe based on a _reverse_ Black Hole may never have taken
place.
     The film discusses such topics as Imaginary Time,
Singularities and smooth troughs in Black Holes.
     -------------------------------------------------
     There is a story in the mysteries of the Hassidim
concerning the student who told his rabbi that he was
not satisfied with the way God made the Universe.  The
teacher asks the student, "Do you believe that you could
have done better?"  The student replies, "Yes, Rebbe, I
believe that I could."  The Master picks up the student by
the front of his garment, looks the young man in the eye
and with great force says, "Then BEGIN!"
     --------------------------------------------------
     For the discerning viewer, I suggest that after watching
this documentary a couple of times... which you will *need*
to do... that you go out and buy some Louis Prima records.

Title
Review for Mystery Train (1989)
Written and directed by Jim Jarmusch
Starring Youki Kudoh, Masatoshi Nagase, and Screamin' Jay Hawkins.
     MYSTERY TRAIN is one of those secret goodies that cool people tell
their friends about. Often these cool things are cult favorites and
such.  I don't know as how MYSTERY TRAIN has any kind of a following; I
found it by accident at the foodstore where I get my product to write
these things.  I do know this: it is one particular hoot and I will be
looking up some other of J.  Jarmusch's films.  His most recent credit
was A NIGHT ON EARTH, but that didn't get much respect so watch for
future pieces on his earlier work such as STRANGER THAN PARADISE.
Jarmusch can be seen as an actor in a little film called IN THE SOUP.
     MYSTERY TRAIN takes place in Memphis.  It has three intertwined
stories (you can get this much off of the box like I did), one
involving a young Japanese couple going to Graceland, an Italian
heiress, and finally a trio on the run, two of which are Steve Buscemi
(RESERVOIR DOGS, AIRHEADS) and Joe Strummer of the Clash.
     ... in the hotel rooms, on the radio, statues, you name
it, the king is everywhere and where he isn't as a picture or a statue,
there's someone to tell you a story about his ghost and where it was
seen last.
     The sight gags involving Screamin' Jay Hawkins as a hotel manager
are worth the price of admission alone.  :-)

Title
Review for Dangerous Game (1993)
     I noticed something about this film in the first five minutes: It
uses the 'c' word.  I heard the 'c' word once before in CLEAN AND
SOBER.  Hearing the 'c' word is pretty rare these days, both in film
and ... well in real life too.
     Another dangerous game is trying to do verite style film like John
Cassavetes when you are not John Cassavetes.  This is the game that
Abel (BAD LIEUTENANT) Ferrara plays in his film.
     The film within the film with stronger language than Cassavetes
usually deals with is simply a meller.  Madonna (DICK TRACY, BODY OF
EVIDENCE) plays opposite James Russo: a Bruce Willis look and
sound-alike in a a film directed by Harvey (THE PIANO) Kietel.  Ever
notice that in this format the film credits look like nicknames?
There's probably an idea there too.  :-)
     The film within builds to something like fever pitch.  But in
doing this Mr. Bruce Willis-alike sounds more and more like a 90's
version of Stanley Kowolski.  It is a picture of the gone world, a
style where the realities of performance and the pressures are handled
in manner not unlike shooting an x-vid.  The booze and the drugs are
real.  The emotional content of the scene is produced from it's
chemical supports.
     Kietel and Madonna took a plenty big chance, I think in playing
this dangerous game.  Do not be mistaken that the actual film content
has real drugs in it though.  This is one of the plot lines-- kind of
like SIX CHARACTERS IN SEARCH OF AN AUTHOR (the play by Luigi
Pirandello from which this play within style was taken) meets THE LOWER
DEPTHS (by Gorki, another play in the classic literature.)  But this is
a facile analogy ... there are serious problems with A DANGEROUS GAME.
     A DANGEROUS GAME may attain cult status some day for so- called
"film buffs." Something the Slackers can talk about endlessly.
     So, while trying to justify the time spent with this film, I have
to say that it will have limited appeal.  Those like myself who want to
follow the work of Abel (BAD LIEUTENANT) Ferrara should get it when it
turns into basic stock on the dollar rack ... which will likely be very
soon.

Title
Review for This Boy's Life (1993)
Directed by Michael Caton-Jones
>From the life of Tobias Wolff
Stars Leonardo DeCaprio, Robert Deniro, Ellen Barkin
     We've all seen the countless interpretations of "John Boy Walton
Leaving the Mountain to Go Away to a Better Life at the University",
whether it was actually The Waltons, CROSSING THE BRIDGE or a myriad of
other films about getting away from home.  Some of these are
sentimental like  that old tv show where everyone is good and kind and
the way God planned it.  Others as in THIS BOY'S LIFE tell the story of
what it is like to live isolated with a stepfather who could kill you.
     I don't know how deeply this notion effects others: this
primordial fear in a Freudian sense of death at the hands of someone
much bigger than you when you are young.  I think it effects us all...
especially boys.
     Tobias Wolff uses his real name in the telling of his life in
Washington State with his mother and his stepfather and stepdad's
children.
     It is not an easy story to watch.  And De Niro as Dwight the
stepdad really makes you hate him.  That's what the truly superb actor
can do: to be so over the top-- to take the risks of looking foolish
and also treacherous, vain, conniving, cruel and a thousand other of
emotions and traits.
     Leonard DiCaprio as young Tobias is the star of the picture
though.  And Ellen Barkin as his mother shows what it is like to be a
free spirit caught in the 50's who settles down with Dwight to give her
teen aged son a home.
     So this is a good film.  It is not a comfortable film...  but it
is a good film.  What THIS BOY'S LIFE gave me was really only one scene
in the picture: the scene where the boy will either live or die at the
hands of the stepdad.
     And the rage that that produces... the helplessness, bitterness
and anger in the inability to defend yourself.  Those images go very
deep.
     Melodramatic?  I'll tell you a secret as I sometimes do here:  I
was never any good at distinguishing what middle class white people
consider high drama as opposed to the low life monkey shines of people
I actually knew or emotions I actually felt.
     So when you see that signature file which closes these writings,
think if that as well.

Title
Review for Cool World (1992)
     So I ask my companion why she fell asleep during COOL WORLD and she
says, "Well, when the animator and the cartoon character of Holli Would
first meet I was wondering when she was going to say 'Draw me a vagina.'"
Yeah, I guess we all were.
     Ralph Bakshi is known for outrageous animation, and COOL WORLD with
its PG-13 rating goes some way in extending the boundaries of what can
be done with it.
     Animated characters such as Holli Would and Jessica Rabbit are a
part of a collective fantasy based on a variety of sources.  In the
original novel by Gary K. Wolf, Jessica has just recently come up from
pornographic comics: the crudely drawn kind such as the Naughty Nurse we
find Lucas Haas reading under the sheets in RAMBLING ROSE.
    (Fans of this style should pick up on the original WHO CENSORED
ROGER RABBIT? by Gary K. Wolf.  The sense of the novel is completely
different from the film in that the characters from toontown are real:
The cartoon panels that you see in the newspaper are merely photographs
or 'shoots' of real life in toontown.  And when a talking bubble above
their heads completes a phrase, it falls to earth in powder form so that
people think all toons have dandruff.  There's more, but go read the
book.)
     The Japanese style of anime illustration is now readily available
at your video store and is hugely popular here on the Usenet forum.
COOL WORLD shows that American animators can explore just as much
sexuality as their anime counterparts, but not much more either.
     COOL WORLD, unlike Toon Town, is a separate dimension.  It is at
once an invention of an illustrator who has recently been released from
prison for killing his wife and an independent reality.
     The plot element of Jack Deebs killing his wife is curiously
missing from any discussion of COOL WORLD that I have seen.  Has the
illustrator merely been the hand in detailing the characters of COOL
WORLD or has he actually created the reality of it?
     COOL WORLD was up and running fifty years ago.  But the apparent
age of Gabriel Byrne who plays Jack Deebs, the illustrator is early
30's.
     Brad Pitt, another human, had been transferred through the use of
an invention by one Dr. Whiskers at a moment of crisis in his life in
1945.  He has been living in COOL WORLD ever since World War II.  The
COOL WORLD life forms are called doodles.  Brad's character, Frank, has
had a doodle girlfriend (apparently) for the last fifty years.  But one of
the rules of Cool World is that humanoids and doodles don't have sex.
They can touch, feel and eat though.  There are only two female
characters of humanoid type.  Were they drawn or did they have parents?
What is their history?
     Animation allows the director to give full rein to his imagination
and to have full control over the end result.  In COOL WORLD there is
never an idle moment.  Cartoon cliches cavort all over the screen for
the full 1 hour 45 mins. of the production.  There is a lot in COOL
WORLD.
     The kids that were in the matinee performance which we attended had
a great time with the "primitives" hitting each other over the head with
mallets ala the "primitive" style cartoons within cartoons: Itchy and
Scratchy on THE SIMPSONS.  What the kids are supposed to make of the
more mature elements of the show I cannot answer.  I don't even know
what they "see" when humans are falling into the holes of a cartoon
dimension.
     My companion tells me the story of how Bob Hoskins, while he was
making ROGER RABBIT, found his son scowling at him when he was done at
the studio for the day.  Hoskins didn't know why the child was upset
with him.  Upon asking his son what the matter was, the child said,
"You've been working with cartoons, and you never brought any of them
home with you."
     Parents with younger children should be cautioned of the adult
themes contained in the film.
     The best moment in the film for me was near the end during the
climax of the picture in which Cool World and the real world intersect
in Las Vegas (well, maybe it probably isn't that much of a stretch).
Momentarily the humans at the various gaming tables get cartoon
identities.  This worked so well for me that after we left the theatre,
I saw people as what they might look like as cartoons for a time.  The
picture is worth seeing for this sequence alone.
     My conclusion?  In the area of animated sensuality *any* progress
is *some* progress.  So COOL WORLD did not bore me.  How could it?
Bakshi learned his lesson after WIZARDS: don't let the audience get
bored at a cartoon show no matter what!  I am contributing to this
discussion because I think that there is more in COOL WORLD, more
questions to ask than I have seen thus far on the Net or elsewhere.
     Maybe in video and with multiple viewings COOL WORLD will gain a
cult following similar to DETOUR which is currently in remake.  And
while we're at it, how about giving Tim Burton lots of money to do a new
version of THE FIVE THOUSAND FINGERS OF DR. T?

Title
Review for Groundhog Day (1993)
     The premise of GROUNDHOG DAY is well-known by now: Bill Murray
finds himself living over the same day many times and the film recounts
how he takes what he knows from the previous day (the *same* day) and
applies it anew.
     As the film unfolds, we are drawn into this world of the same day
beginning with the same tune on the radio and the same remarks from the
radio personnel, the same photo shoot of the Groundhog Day celebration,
and the same snowstorm etc.  We follow Murray along as he learns more
and more about his surroundings and of the events of that particular
day.  I will not provide any spoilers for the various comic routines to
which  this premise gives rise for those who wish to see the film.
     I will only ask a question:  What would you do if you could live
the same day over and over and learn from each experience?
     GROUNDHOG DAY is a romance.  Bill Murray's object of affection is
his female producer played by Andie McDowell.  I'm not giving anything
away by saying that it has a 'happy' ending.  I didn't run into anyone
with any grumbles about the film when I saw it or in reviews or anywhere
else about this fact.
     Before I get to that, let me say that I always try to look for what
a particular work is saying about the culture ... how it gets made and
why.  What need does it fulfill?  And I came up with this:
     GROUNDHOG DAY is a fantasy fulfillment (for men in this case) of
the need to *control* and *manipulate*.  The day is played over until
the *manipulation* achieves its desired goal, then the day is over and
life goes on.
     What has come out from the professional press and the Usenet
reviewers has been nearly uniform: The director Harold Ramis is
applauded for his ability to shoot the same day again and again without
allowing the repetition to become boring.  He provides enough detail on
each ensuing day to hold the audience's interest.
   But how would *you* like to be Andie McDowell in this scenario?  All
of her buttons get pushed until she responds in *exactly* the right way
and our story ends.
     I want to beg off of being some kind of Women's Rights apostle
here.  But try the shoe on for size and see how you would feel if you
were put through the same drill.  If you *knew* that you were being
manipulated, how would you react?  Well, I suppose there could be a
sequel called GROUNDHOG DAY II: THE WRATH OF ANDIE, but somehow I just
don't see that happening.
     GROUNDHOG DAY is cleverly crafted and nicely edited and contains
many good performances.  If you are a fan of the Sunday night comedy
shows on the Fox television network, you will see quite few familiar
faces including Ken Hudson Campbell of "Herman's Head," Chris Elliot and
Brian Doyle Murray from "Get A Life," and an actress whose name I can't
remember from the short-lived "Woops!"
     As usual, if I am caught or killed, the Secretary will disavow any
knowledge of my actions.  :-)
      Your comments directed to rec.arts.movies or mail are welcome.

Title
Review for Whore (1991)
     There is an old saying which goes something like "The worst sex I
ever had was still pretty good."
     The closest film piece to this work (that I can think of) is TALK
RADIO directed by Oliver Stone and starring Eric Bogosian.  WHORE is
essentially a one-actor drama with other players.  The screenplay was
co-written by a woman and adapted from a stage play called BONDAGE.
     When the film had its theatrical release, there was nothing much
good that was said about it, save for very early on.  Prior to critical
review, WHORE was likened to a darker side of the popular film PRETTY
WOMAN which starred Julia Roberts.
     But as some reviewers today are pointing out, there is a difference
in watching a videotape out of one's house and going to the theatre.
WHORE, as a theatrical release, was a big bomb.  I didn't go to it
because, as many of you, I depend on the word of others to critique the
product beforehand.   And if going to the theatrical release of HENRY
AND JUNE can provide any insight, I think I was right is waiting for
the video release of WHORE.
     WHORE is a brutal film, but I also found moments of significant
humor.  And of course the humor has to do with sex.  This film, better
than any other shows the difference in the perception of sex between men
and women.  We're talking about sexual fantasy here and sexual fact.
Through the eyes of the prostitute, we see how ludicrous and funny
sexual fantasies can be.
     I need not enumerate what these fantasies are.  What the film shows
is the difference in point of view between the fantasy and the reality
and this can be quite funny and disturbing.
     In the concept of the Theatre of Cruelty created by French actor
and director Antonin Artaud, the author describes going to the theatre
like going to see the dentist: you know beforehand that you will be made
uncomfortable, but when it's all over, you will be better off for it.
It's doubtful that Ken Russell had the Theatre of Cruelty in mind, but
this is in effect what he accomplishes.
     See WHORE on video.  There is no need (or really any possibility
any longer) of seeing it in the theatre with guys with their hats in
their laps.  The NC-17 film has yet to made which does not make one feel
ill-at-ease with a room full of strangers.
     Make no mistake, there is much brutalizing that takes place in this
film, but that has all been done before.  What has not been done before
is to cast the cold eye of calculation on sex.  Who else is talking
about the use of condoms explicitly and repeatedly as a fact of life and
a part of *the job* in a work of fiction?
     The May 1992 issue of DETAIL magazine has a feature on the
Cabaret Royale in Houston: a new wave topless club with good taste: sort
of like a Playboy Club with "balls."  The author, after having talked
with the performers and the owner says of the performance:

Title
Review for Airheads (1994)
Directed by Michael Lehman
Starring: Brendan Frazer, Steve Buscemi, Adam Sandler, Joe Montegna
     I really enjoyed this.  I kind of suspected I would enjoy it since
it is about radio and rock and roll but the real treat was the
*language*.
     AIRHEADS has more in the writing of it than the usual round of
expletives: it's a compendium of slang of the eighties and nineties.
Where else are you going to hear a words like 'queve' or 'dufuss'?  And
all woven into a story that is ideal to display this usage: a metal
trio invades a radio station to get their demo played.
     Michael Lehman is a new name to me, can't tell you much about him,
but Brendan Frazer (SCHOOL TIES, ENCINO MAN) Steve Buscemi (RESERVOIR
DOGS, IN THE SOUP) and Adam Sandler ("Saturday Night Live" and SHAKES THE
CLOWN) plus Joe Montegna (HOUSE OF GAMES, BODY OF EVIDENCE, and many
more) are all well known and talented performers.
     This film has a solid soundtrack, and interesting idea which
succeeds in execution more often than it fails and a passable but
unintrusive directing style which lets the story sort of tell itself
without being too arty.
     This film is about rock and roll and radio: an idea has been done
before on television and in films, always or nearly always to good
effect.  It wasn't really until I did radio myself that I appreciated
the interaction of the two so much.  Radio, more than any other, is
people's media: something everyone can enjoy and potentially *do* as
well.  And there are enough 'holes in the system' to still be able to
get out and do THE WORK if you really want to.  My time for doing that
is pretty much over  but I still appreciate it when someone is out
there with that DIY spirit keeping the independence and the joy of
radio alive.  It's not easy but it can be done.
     AIRHEADS is a feast of language-- street language and has enough
hooks and turns to provide you with some major laughs.  Well, it did
for *me* anyway.

Title
Review for Waterdance, The (1992)
     Finally got to rent THE WATERDANCE starring Wesley Snipes and Eric
Stoltz.  I had read about this picture when it was in film release in
the magazines.  This information led me to believe that it would be the
definitive film of the adult handicapped, but read on.
     Written by Neal Jimenez, THE WATERDANCE is the story of a recently
paralyzed writer who has received his injury from a mountain-climbing
accident.  We also meet several other men with spinal injuries which
are as severe.  (It just occurred to me that there are no women
patients in this picture ... anywhere ... but read on.)
     We see how, in their recovery, they have to learn to live with
their disability on an emotional level.  You see, there is the ability
to appreciate a handicap on an intellectual level *when it is someone
else's* like AIDS, for instance,  but it is quite another matter to
appreciate it on an emotional level *like when it's your own.*
     Here's the news.  Always-been handicapped individuals think about
sex as often as you or I do (about every ten seconds).  I say you and
I, but *I* spent much of my youth as an invalid.  Trust me, I'm right
about this.  Through such films as COMING HOME and BORN ON THE FOURTH
OF JULY, there have been attempts to portray what the sexual experience
of an invalid would be like.  But here's the big BUT: not in my
recollection has there ever been an attempt to portray the
always-been handicapped as sexual beings whether they are male or
female.
     Recently I read a book called ENABLING ROMANCE by Ken Kroll
(Harmony Books, 1992, ill.)  It's a THE JOY OF SEX written with much
great humor and compassion for those who are disabled and those who
care about them.  It's available at your local library and I cannot
recommend it highly enough.  I also purchased it as a gift for a
friend.  The book not only talks about technique it also talks about
what a person who is *not* disabled may bring to a relationship in
which there is only one handicapped individual involved; *curiosity*
being the most spiteful and hurting of all.
     In THE WATERDANCE, the three principle characters have had full
lives: success, women, action, and adventure (one of these is a biker
dude, another is married, the third and principal man is a writer much
like Neal Jimenez himself who actually suffered an accident similar to
what happens in the film.)  They cope with their disabilities and with
their despair.  Our biker dude is the first to be shown openly
weeping.  They are conducted through classes about what they can expect
from sex in their new condition.  They bond.  They do *guy* stuff like
going to a striptease house.  The "you can look, but you can't touch"
cliche as regards the handicapped is played out once again here.  Our
writer has a girlfriend who tries to stay with him and they share some
intimacies.  But these are marred by impersonal intrusions and physical
incontinences, this last being particularly embarrassing.  Finally our
writer cuts her loose: she has a husband to go back to.
     As I said earlier, many opportunities to tell the truth were
missed in THE WATERDANCE.  There is another better film to be made on
the subject.  But I recommend THE WATERDANCE as another insight into
the lives of the handicapped .  It attempts to define these men as Men
in their diminished condition.
     But there are other men and women who have lived this way all
their lives.  They have been treated as adult children who could not
express passion or worse; have been *prevented* from expressing it.
     Your comments on this are welcome in rec.arts.movies or as mail.

Title
Review for Reflecting Skin, The (1990)
     The images that I got from this film were paintings: paintings
I've seen and admired, or images which were familiar:
     The first of these is Edvard Munch's  "The Scream": a shimmering,
distorted figure in the act of a primal angst:  the image occurred to
me in a scene with the character Cameron (Viggo Mortensen).
     Second is a painting called "Christina's World" by Andrew Wyeth: a
scene of the wheatfields of the plains with a single figure looking
towards a barren cabin.
     THE REFLECTING SKIN is one of those pictures whose dramatic
content will be compromised by 'home viewing' with its distractions and
lack of an audience to share the experience.
     It is, however, one of the most affecting films I have ever seen.
A second viewing did not change this opinion one whit.
     As with other fine art films, to attempt to describe it and the
power of the images would simply spoil or fail to do the film justice.
