Authors
Stephen Graham
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for General's Daughter, The (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
Susan Granger's review of "THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER" (Paramount Pictures)
 Based on Nelson DeMille's best-selling thriller, this is
serious sleaze. Set on a swampy Southern Army base, the lurid story
mixes rape and murder with betrayal and serious questioning of
powerful West Point principles.  John Travolta stars as a Criminal
Investigation Divison Warrant Officer who is assigned to solve a
bizarre crime. The nude, dead body of the daughter (Leslie Stefanson)
of a distinguished General (James Cromwell) with political ambitions
is found spread-eagled and staked to the ground in the middle of a
training field.  Whodunit? And why? He and his partner, rape counselor
Madeleine Stowe, are given 36 hours to come up with discreet military
answers before the FBI launch their own investigation. Who could have
a motive to kill the beautiful West Point graduate who worked in the
Psychological Operations Unit? Everyone, it seems. From the woman's
Commanding Officer (the always suspicious James Woods) to the base's
Provost Marshal (Timothy Hutton), who seems to pop up repeatedly in
odd places, to the General's fiercely loyal Adjutant (Clarence
Williams III). "How she died seems to be tied to the way she lived,"
Travolta astutely observes, after uncovering some decidedly freaky
films detailing the woman's promiscuous, sordid sex life. Writers
Christopher Bertolini and William Goldman pepper the script with
flippant banter, as if they couldn't make up their minds about how
seriously to take the grisly, gruesome subject matter, and director
Simon West repeatedly contrives to return to the sordid, brutal crime
scene as the murky melodrama unfolds to its ironic, if unlikely,
conclusion.  On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10, "The General's
Daughter" is a perversely kinky 4. It's tortuous, tormented, and
trashy.

Title
Review for Limbo (1999)
http://www.speakers-podium.com/susangranger.
John Sayles makes movies the way James Michener wrote books,
traveling to fascinating places and placing imaginary characters
amidst very real situations. Think of the intelligence and creativity
of Sayles' "Secret of Roan Inish," "Lone Star," "Matewan," "Passion
Fish," and "Men with Guns."
Alaska is America's last frontier. Its vast expanse of rugged,
untamed wilderness is both setting and antagonist in "Limbo," the
story of three isolated people who come together to face their own
demons and to explore the very nature of emotional and physical risk
Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio plays a tough, frustrated bar singer with
a troubled, strong-willed teenage daughter, Vanessa Martinez. David
Strathairn is a quiet, traumatized ex-fisherman-turned-handyman who
invites them to join him for a weekend cruise which goes sour when his
half-brother (Casey Siemaszko), who owns the boat, reveals he's being
pursued by killers after a drug deal went bad. Their lives, past and
present, form the crux of the superbly crafted drama which places them
in a life-threatening survival situation from which they may not
successfully emerge, depending on the whim of a quixotic bush pilot
(Kris Kristofferson).  "Limbo" is John Sayles' most unflinching,
daringly original, and powerfully disturbing film, and Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio's performance of bruising, heart-wrenching intensity is
definitely Oscar-caliber. On the Granger Movie Gauge of 1 to 10,
"Limbo" is a piercing, suspenseful 8. The ambiguity of its ending may
be frustrating, but your reaction and subsequent conclusion reveal
more about you than about the characters in the film.  Remember,
"limbo" is defined as "a condition of unknowable outcome."
