Authors
Eric C. Robinette
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
Starring: Bruce Willis, Milla Jovovich, Gary Oldman, Ian Holm, Luke Perry
Written by Besson and Robert Mark Kamen 
Directed by Luc Besson.
"The Fifth Element" is a dumb, comic-book level story obsessed with it's
look and effects. That's why it's so much fun.
Much has been made of the fact that Luc Besson dreamed up this sci-fi
eyeful as a teenager, and he goes to great pains to prove it, throwing all
kinds of sights and sounds at us with exuberant glee at the expense of
character and plot.  The movie's all the better for it.
Too many sci-fi epics make the mistake of asking the audience to take them
seriously, to bear in mind their heavy-handed morals that are more
tiresome than touching. By wearing it's emptiness on it's sleeve, The
Fifth Element works effectively as a pure shot in the arm that energized
me for two hours and nothing more, and that was fine with me.
Indeedf uge plot is, and aple,lain with a southern accent (Oldman).
That's pretty much it. For some people, this won't be enough to chew on,
but I found the whole confection pretty tasty because I could  feel the
enthusiasm that Besson feels by bringing his lifelong fantasy to the
screen.  Most of the players seem to be having fun right along with him,
too. Though Willis is using his annoying smug mode, it actually works here
as counterpoint to the wild-goings on around him. Jovovich, amazingly,
rises above having been in "Return to the Blue Lagoon" with an energetic
and even affecting performance. Chris Tucker is also fun to watch as an
overhyped DJ on helium, Ruby Rhod. The only real disappointment here is
Gary Oldman who has his menacing stare in place but also uses a weird
"soutvern boy" acaent that setms out of pnace and diletes his vilBainy.
The oook of the eilm has ofte  been comp ved to BladeoRunner, witi its
cast, growded city oapes, but Ufe similarieses end thermv The techios at
Digitac Domain have created bright, fast-moving, landscathat match
tirector's en and are theithesis of B Runner's foding skylinehe chase sce
hrough the vcal levels ors in the cis a dazzlingvel I won't o forget.
Ufunately, Bess enthusiasmvntually proo be too mucf a good thing, and the
picture begins to collapse under its own weight at its too-long
conclusion.  Besson throws so many action scenes and digital effects at
the audience that the movie wears itself out, rather than end with a real
wallop.
Up until that point, though, The Fifth Element works as one of those rare
movies that asked me to check my brain at the door, and I felt no dumber
for having done so when it was over.

Title
Review for Fathers' Day (1997)
Starring Robin Williams, Billy Crystal, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Nastassja
Kinski. Charlie Hofheimer
Written by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel Based on the film ``Les
Comperes'' by Francis Veber.
Directed by Ivan Reitman.
Why do I begin my review of Father's Day by saying that? Because it's
basically the reason I went to see the movie this weekend even after the
tepid reviews came in, and why I wrote what you're reading. I wanted to
hear McCartney's new  song "Young Boy" which I knew played over the
opening credits. It's a good thing it did, too. The lift I got from
hearing the typically jaunty McCartney melodies was about the only fun to
be had in the movie.
What's depressing about the movie  is not that the jokes are bad. Even a
bad joke can inspire laughs in a retroactive kind of way. It's that there
aren't that many of them.  Father's Day has no comic zing it; the movie
just sits there, seemingly expecting to wring laughs out of the mere sight
of Robin Williams and Billy Crystal sharing the screen Unfortunately, the
washcloth that is this movie is so dry there's nothing to wring out of it.
When I first heard the storyline, I wasn't that encouraged:  "Woman
(Nastassia Kinski) dupes former flames Williams and Crystal into believing
they are the father of her wayward son so they will both go looking for
him." It sounded like a setup for some saccharine baby boomer/male bonding
scheme, and my suspicions were proved correct.
But even that would have been okay if someone had thought to write some
jokes into the script or tell what story there is with some kind of flair.
As it is, Ivan Reitman's usually enthusiastic direction is completely
missing and is replaced by a "point the camera this way, then that way"
strategy..  Even the mild "Junior" was filmed with more pizzazz. Crystal
and Williams don't seem to be in the mood to inject the movie with their
usually boundless energy For whatever reason, they seem content to coast
on characters with chips on their shoulders and a couple of mildly amusing
traits which elicit only the occasional "heh, heh." Worst of all, it seems
like Reitman's edited out most of the moments where Crystal and Williams
improvised, which provide the only "HA-HA HAAA''S
What went wrong?  Before the movie made it's way into the theaters, the
prospect of teaming two of the funniest comic actors with a winning
writing team and director seemed like it couldn't miss.  But miss it did,
largely because, I think, usually reliable writers Lowell Ganz and Babaloo
Mandel got a serious case of the mushies.  Instead of One of the "funny"
scenes in the film is  the old "generation gap" gag.: Williams and Crystal
start moovin' and groovin' to an old Sly and the Family Stone tune so the
son shakes his head in amusment and asks them if they were "freaks." Heh-heh.
What's all the more dispiriting about all this is that this kind of male
bonding stuff can be funny, and it's not in this movie, even with all the
top-notch talent on board.. Ganz and Mandel themselves pulled it off quite
nicely in City Slickers, and even the sentimental Nine Months had it's
moments of bawdy laughs. Sigh--a movie is really disappointing when it
brings back fond memories of Tom Arnold.

Title
Review for Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery (1997)
Starring Mike Myers, Elizabeth Hurley, Michael York, Robert Wagner, and
Mimi Rogers.
And the award for Resurrection of the Year goes to Mike Myers, who proves
he can still be funny even with a bad wig and teeth that make him look
like Martin Short.
When I first saw the ads for the movie, I thought Myers was going to be
stuck in former SNL cast member movie oblivion. Thankfully, Austin Powers
turned out to be a pleasant surprise because it works as both a
joke-a-minute satire, and a fish-out-of-water story.
Luckily, writer-star Myers still knows how to wear comic stupidity
proudly, and he wisely uses the "throw everything at the wall and see what
sticks" method in this story of a woman-crazl British sws of the 60n't go
ove ftoo well in this day and age.
It's all fairly thin stuff, but Myers clearly loves the mid-60s spy films
he's spoofing, which makes the comedy go a long way. It also helps that I
also love those films and got most of the jokes. Some of those films were
so grandiose and bloated, they beg to be comedy targets, and most of the
time, Myers, who also wrote, hits the bulls-eye.  His characterization of
Dr. Evil as a nervous nebbish who subscribes religiously to the Fallacy of
the Talking Killer and other villainous clichis is especially funny. The
standard gadgetry scene is targeted when a tube of toothpaste, a
toothbrush, and dental floss turn out to be...
Plastic explosive, wire, and a detonator? No-- a tube of toothpaste, a
toothbrush, and dental floss.
The biggest surprise for me was how well the fish-out-of water jokes
worked. Besides offering great sight gags, such as Powers trying to play a
CD on a turntable, the device gives the gags something to hang on, and
even gives the character some gravity. So help me, the relationship
between him and Elizabeth Hurley actually had a little feeling to it.
Hurley herself also proves to play a good straight-woman to Power's
antics, making an effective comic foil.
What helps most of all, though, is the sheer number of the jokes. Because
Myers cracks so many, even the lamer gags, such as the strategic placing
of phallic and globular objects in the "nude scene," are funny because of
his willingness to try anything for a laugh. 
It brings to mind the image of Myers as Dr. Evil, with me laying on a
table, with a laughing gas cannon aimed at my head.
"Do you expect me to rave about yo objects in the  nufeancly.
"No, Mr. Robinette of his willingness to try anything for a laugh. 
It brings to mind the image of Myers as Dr. Evil, with me laying on a
table, with a laughing gas cannon aimed at my head.
"Do you expect me to rave about your movie?" I ask defiantly.
"No, Mr. Robinette, I expect you to laugh," he responds.

Title
Review for Breakdown (1997)
Starring Kurt Russell, J.T. Walsh, Kathleen Quinlan
Written by Jonathan Mostow and Sam Montgomery. Directed by Jonathan Mostow..
I find myself saying that a lot at action movies. The funny thing about it
is that during Breakdown, I *meant* it when I said it.
Breakdown is that rarity: a fast, efficient, nuts-and bolts thriller that
is both fun and believable at the same time. It's mix of  Spielbergian
action and Hitchcockian suspense is so well constructed, that even when
the screws came a little loose toward the end, I happily hung on to my
seat as giant semi-truck teetered perilously over a bridge.
I must admit, when I first saw the trailers for the movie, I wasn't that
enthralled; it looked like a retread of "The Vanishing," which worked none
too well in it's American incarnation and was even a bit overrated in its
original form. In all these films, a man loses his significant other, then
sets on a seemingly futile pursuit populated by a lot of creepy-looking
people. 
What sets Breakdown apart, though, is that it's story, unlikely as it
sounds, feels like it could really happen. Thanks go largely to Kurt
Russell, who has to carry the entire picture and make us believe that he's
an ordinary guy who can do extraordinary things when provoked. He does,
because he changes from concerned husband to avenging husband gradually,
showing the increasing desperation in his face as the bad guys close in on
him.
Kudos also go to first time helmer Jonanthan Mostow, who displays
surprising confidence in his debut. First-time directors often make the
mistake of blatantly copying their idol or having no style at all. Here,
Mostow deftly steals from two of the greats: Hitchcock and Spielberg. By
combining the suspense of Hithcock's "wrong place at the wrong time" theme
with the suspense of Spielberg's frenzied pacing, Mostow has created an
engrossing blend of realistic suspense and  kinetic action, which
complement each other and keep the picture down-to-earth. Even the
villains have a human dimension, with one caught between an unsuspecting
family and a despicable scheme, just like some real-world villains are.
Only at the end does Mostow lose his grip a little and the action become a
little too outlandish, but by then, I was so carried away, I didn't care.
A movie that can make something great out of such an average premise earns
the right to get carried away.

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
Starring Jeff Goldblum, Julianne Moore, Arliss Howard, Pete Postlethwaite,
Vanessa Lee Chester, Richard Attenborough
Written by David Koepp based (loosely) on the novel by Michael Crichton
Directed by Steven Spielberg
Who's that? Oh, Mr. DNA! Where did you come from? You're not in the sequel
to Jurassic Park!
"No, but I'm everywhere evident in the picture. You see, this time around,
Mr. Spielberg and company have taken  up cloning to produce this sequel to
their earlier thrill machine, not only of the first movie but of some of
Mr. Spielberg's other products."
So I noticed. You'll be delighted to know, Mr. DNA, that unlike a lot of
other critic types, I thought the experiment was successful, for the most
part.
"Do you really think so? That's great! So many of you fellas complain that
I can only create a thin story and cardboard characters."
To be frank, Mr. DNA, those people are pretty much right. But unlike a lot
of those other reviewers,  I'm pretty forgiving of suspense movies, for
better or for worse. As long as I come out of the movie taking small,
stiff-legged strides to my car, I say you pulled it off. I clocked myself
at taking a full minute to limp to  my car, where otherwise it would have
taken me 45 seconds. Not bad!
"Well, thank you. You know, we're bound too make a ton of green stuff  on
the movie, so they'll probably be asking me to come up with another one.
I'd love to hear your thoughts. What did you think of the core helix
structure?
You mean the basic plot? Well, your cloning didn't work too well there,
I'm afraid. It's a typical case of sequilitis, and not too inspired. Dr.
Ian Malcolm, is recruited to go back to a second island filled with dinos
that conveniently escaped the attention of the characters in the first
movie. Personally, I thought that the sequel would be based on that can of
shaving cream with dinosaur embryos Wayne Knight dropped in the first
movie, especially since Spielberg devoted four or five shots to it falling
into a mudslide. That would have made more sense.
Don't worry about it. Spielberg gets things going at a pretty good clip,
which is the right thing to do when you have a thin story thread. At any
rate, against his best wishes, Malcolm goes back to the island with a
stowaway daughter (Vanessa Lee Chester) to retrieve his girlfriend Sarah
Harding (Julianne Moore) and your typical ragtag band of cohorts, most of
whom will be digested by the end of the movie. Pretty simple, but it's
good at getting the characters into one dangerous situation after another,
which is all that counts in this movie.
"Uh-huh. What did you think of the other cloning I did, with Spielberg's
other movies?"
Now, that worked--you did some good gene resequencing. Basically, you were
wise to eschew the mawkish attempts at human relations that tended to bog
down the first movie, which was more in the Jaws mode of a close-knit unit
hunted by monsters, and went straight for one chase scene after another.
In that way, it's more like one of the Indiana Jones movies. Roland, the
game hunter was very vividly played by Pete Postlethwaite, and even looked
a bit like Indy. Spielberg continues to show that he knows just the right
shot to use, and when to use it.  The pacing and visuals are fantastic.
The best example is a scene in which a trailer is pushed over a cliff by a
couple of angry T-Rexes, and Julianne Moore lays against the glass that
slowly cracks bit by bit, threatening to plunge her into the waters below.
That imagery is classic Spielberg. The raptor scene is especially well
done, with a lot of great "gotcha" moments. I especially liked the
overhead shot of the raptors in a grassy field silently closing in on the
hunters, with the dark lines of  collapsing plants converging on the
humans. There were many moments when I thought the characters were goners,
yet they managed to escape in some novel way. Great fun.
"What about the behind-the-scenes stuff, with the effects and all?"
Well. of course those were well done. The dinos are more realistic, and
much more mobile and fluid than before, particularly in a scene where the
hunters try to rope up various species while speeding along in jeeps. It's
nearly impossible to tell where Spielberg stops, and Industrial Light and
Magic and Stan Winston start. Once again, their work is thrilling, and
Oscar-caliber.
"Well, I'm glad you liked it so much.  But what about the humans I concocted?
Well, you still need a little more work there, Mr. DNA.  As I Mentioned,
the best character is the foreboding but charismatic Roland. Arliss
Howard, playing the scheming nephew of John Hammond pales by comparison.
Goldblum is once again bitingly funny, but since he has to carry this
picture, he tends to get overwhelmed by the reptiles. Vanessa Lee Chester
gives a solid performance as the obligatory child in distress, but you
underused her. You didn't get nearly as much mileage from her as the
original kids, Joseph Mazello and Ariana Richards, who make a fleeting
appearance.
"I've got it. Work on the characters, don't change the action."
Hold that thought, Mr. DNA. There is one action sequence that is
disappointingly short: the much ballyhooed San Diego scene with the T-Rex.
"What? I thought people would love a Godzilla reference."
Well, the scene works, Mr. DNA, but it's too short. There are some
wonderful moments, but not enough of them to make it pay off.  It seems
like you were so enthralled with the idea, you didn't try to work it out
to the fullest. After all those other great set pieces, it's a bit
anti-climactic. I did like the set-up for part three, though.
"We're thinking about it. So how'd we stack up with the first movie?"
I'd say almost as good, but not quite. The characters in the first movie
were thin, but they were better developed than most of the people here, so
you need to work on that. Plus there's that old problem with movie
cloning: there simply isn't that sense of discovery and ingenuity that
comes with a first movie. I missed some of the clever touches of the
first, such as yourself, Mr. DNA. 
Don't worry about it. All in all, as a thrill machine, the movie operates
nearly at full speed, just like the first did, and that's the key. . It
just needed a little more gas at the end.
"Gotcha. Well, gotta get back to work on the other summer movies."
It wouldn't be the same without you Mr. DNA. Just ease off on the
volcanoes, OK?
