Authors
Ben Combee
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Dead Man (1995)
Jim Jarmusch makes movies.  He makes art films.  He explores concepts,
and he usually does a competent job.
I saw _Mystery Train_ about two years ago and found it interesting,
but not too special.  _Night on Earth_ sits on my video shelf, but I
never found time to watch it.
This evening, I went with my friend John Oakley to see _Dead Man_,
Jarmusch's take on the American western.  It was playing in the
Egyptian room at the Dobie.  We got good seats, I MSTed the slide
show, and after a couple of previews, the film started.
First thing: it is in black and white.  This was a plus.  Jarmusch's
lighting and composition were perfect for the monochrome medium.
Second thing: it stars Johnny Depp.  Mr. Depp always seems to do
excellent in B&W films.  _Ed Wood_ was the most recent example.  In
_Dead Man_, he plays William Blake, an accountant from Cleveland.  He
plays the character well, showing real emotional growth.
The title is quite appropriate, although a plural form might have been
better.  There are many deaths in the film, most from bullet wounds.
Almost every major character dies.  Shakespeare did it, so why change
the formula?
Two elements of the film really grabbed me.  One was Jarmusch's use of
fade-to-black to represent the passage of time.  These fades were
frequently and consistently used, and they produced a neat, unifying
effect.  During the occasional recollection scenes, he negated the
fade, going to white to indicate a memory.
The second element was the dialogue.  The first half of the film was
quite dialogue heavy.  While not exactly Tarentinoesque, the
conversations reminded me of a Western _Pulp Fiction_.  There were
some very funny lines.  The second half wasn't as colorful and the
conversations were scarce, mainly due to the lack of characters.  It
became more abstract and surreal, but still poignant.
This is an important film.  It ranks very highly on my list of films
for 1996, up there with _Fargo_ and _My Flower of the Secret_.
On the Combee scale of [-4..+4], it gets a +4.
-- 
Benjamin L. Combee (combee@techwood.org) http://www.yak.net/combee/>

Title
Review for Replacement Killers, The (1998)
After a few hours of moving furniture, the urge to do something else
took over, so my friend and I went to the matinee of _The Replacement
Killers_, the latest Hong Kong action film to be shot in the US.
Now, semanticians out there will quibble with my last statement... if
it was shot in the US, how can it be a Hong Kong film?  Well, you see
that many of the internationally acclaimed directors, writers, and
actors of HK's booming film business left that country for the US in
the last couple of years before HK went back to China.  So, a film
effectively done under the same people with the same actors here is
still, effectively, a HK film.
_The Replacement Killers_ (TRK for short) is definitely effective.
I left the theatre thinking that TRK was "John Woo"-lite.  There is
much to be said for that argument -- the film was executive produced
by Woo and many of the action scenes directly quote Woo's earlier
work.  If you're into John Woo drinking games, you'd be drunk by the
end of this movie.  What the film in missing, however, is a story.
The plot is there, but its really just a metal clothes-hanger upon
which an mobile of stupendous gun fight scenes can be hung.  Chow
Yun-Fat (star of Woo's _The Killer_) plays a hit-man, John Lee, with
obligations to Mr. Wei, a Chinese mob boss.  After a cop kills Wei's
son, Lee is sent on a mission against the cop.  His ethics get in the
way, so he tried to flee town with the help of Mira Sorvino's Meg, a
designer of fake IDs.  The two of them become partners in a campaign
to take down Mr. Wei after spending most of a day dodging Wei's goons.
The effectiveness of the movie isn't in its poetry or its emotion.
Leave that to Woo.  This movie is ninety minutes of stylized
gunfights, and they are done quite well.  You won't see the amazing
physical feats of a Jackie Chan movie, but you will see lightning fast
reflexes and great choreography.  Mira even does a great job in her
first big action role.  There is no ounce of helplessness in her
character, just big-hearted toughness.
In conclusion, this is a very effective pastiche of Hong Kong's
stylized violence.  It's not filmmaking on the level of the best of
HK, but it fills the gap until we get to see the next Woo film.  On my
[-4, +4] scale, it gets a solid +2.
P.S. One final bit of trivia... what does TRK have in common with
Egoyan's _The Sweet Hereafter_?  A scene in an automatic carwash.
-- 
Benjamin L. Combee (combee@techwood.org) http://yak.net/combee/>
Signatures are the bumper stickers of the information superhighway.
