Authors
Clay Homerton
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
TITANIC is not only one of the grandest spectacles ever committed to
film (only William Wyler's BEN HUR comes to mind as a comparable
benchmark), it is also a wonderfully told story.
You already know what's going to happen. The largest and most lavishly
appointed luxury liner in the world is going to sail across the
Atlantic towards New York, and is going to strike an iceberg. The
"unsinkable" vessel will fill with water from compartment to
compartment, tip forward into the icy water, and sink.  Fifteen
hundred people are going to die in the water, because the ship's
designers provided lifeboats for only half the manifest, so as not to
clutter the deck.
You know that, but you're still not prepared for the devastating
impact of watching it happen, while people you've come to care about
are right there in the midst of the disaster. You're not prepared for
what James Cameron is going to put you through when you watch his
masterpiece.
I use that word, masterpiece, with care. Certainly, not all directors
ever create any work that can be offered such an accolade. But Cameron
has done it here. Sure, he spent over $200 million. Yes, he took
five-and-a-half months after the scheduled release date of the film to
finish editing it, and it turned out over three hours long. Okay, so
he was demanding and tough on his cast during the difficult shoot
(didn't he learn any lessons from his other water- centric epic, The
Abyss?) Nevertheless, all those dollars show up on the screen, in the
form of the most unobtrusive, seamless effects that allow an utterly
convincing recreation of a documented historical episode. Those extra
months of editing ensured that not one of the film's 194 minutes is
wasted, and they all fly by too quickly. And whether or not Kate
Winslet will ever want to work with him again, Cameron will be the one
to whom she's most endebted when she someday reflects on her
superstardom.
I could not say enough good things about what James Cameron has
accomplished here, with both the spectacle and the story. So I'll just
encourage you to go see this movie, and hope that Mr. Cameron is now
resting from his labor, preparing to accept some nice little statues
from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
I strongly recommend TITANIC to all movie lovers. And to Twentieth
Century Fox, I strongly recommend they give James Cameron whatever he
requires to make his next film; they'll get every penny's worth.
