Authors
Arnold Kim
Number of Reviews
6

Title
Review for Star Trek: Insurrection (1998)
Title:  Star Trek: Insurrection (1998)
Okay, I admit it.  I do like to watch Star Trek on occasion, and might even 
consider myself a slight fan of the series.  I've seen 7 of the 9 movies, and 
many of the episodes of Next Gen., Deep Space 9, and Voyager.  A lot of the 
good and the bad aspects of the series in there, and the latest incarnation, 
"Star Trek: Insurrection" (1998) mixes both.  It has the premise and the ideas 
of the wonderful TV series, but with the execution of some of the worst 
films.  
"Star Trek: Insurrection"  once again brings us back to the familiar company 
of Captain Picard, Commander Riker, Lieutenant Data, Worf, and the rest of 
the "Next Generation" crew.  This time, we are reunited with them amidst 
a plot between corrupt Starfleet officials and an alien race called the Baku, 
who attempt to basically evict the peaceful, agrarian Sona people from their 
home planet, which is basically a giant fountain of youth.  This, of course, is 
in the interests of research, as discoveries about the planet can potentially 
help millions of people suffering from variosu illnesses or whatnot.  Of 
course, when Picard finds out about the intention to move these people, 
him and his crew revolt against the officials and their alien allies.  
Now here's the main problem with the film.  When I was watching it, I 
thought to myself, what was so bad about moving them- 600 people- if it 
were in the interests of millions of others?  On the other hand, it _is_ the 
eviction of 600 innocent people.  The story would have been made a lot 
better if  it addressed this moral dilemma- do you sacrifice the few for the 
greater good?  Rather, it answers this question way too quickly and then the 
story just turns into a fairly mindless "sci-fi flick", using film cliches like 
the child going back into a dangerous area to save his pet.    And in order to 
try to make up for the lack of plot, it attempts for a "twist" towards the end 
revealing something about the relationship between the Sona and the 
Baku, but that twist feels contrived.  
Similarly, I think the characters and their relationships seem to suffer as a 
result of the disappearance of strong plot as well.  I liked the way things 
were going with the characters in the beginning, articularly the rekindling 
of the relationship between Counselor Troi (Mariana Sirtis) and 
Commander Riker (Jonathan Frakes, who also directed).  The moments 
they shared were snappy, smart, and with some welcome sexual energy.  
But those moments, of course, are gone later in the film.  Captain Picard 
also starts up a romance of his own with a young-looking Sona woman 
(actually a few centuries in age) and I think that the chemistry between 
them can be pleasant and beautiful, just like the woman herself is, but 
again, that suffers as the romance tries and fails to integrate into the latter 
half of the film with the phaser blasts going in every direction.  
Many believe that today, good special effects are taking the places of a good 
story, and that pretty much seems to be the case with "Insurrection".  The 
visual effects are probably the most remarkable element of this film, and are 
a step above those that are offered in the other Trek films.  Some shots, 
particularly involving the Enterprise itself, are  obviously computer 
generated, while others, like when we see more of Lt. Data's body as he 
strips off the "invisible" clothing that he wore, are pretty eye-opening.  My 
personal favorite is the shot of the invisible Holodeck revealed after water 
had been sprayed on it.  
However, none of this makes up for what I think are the foundations of a 
good film- characters and plot, both of which 2/3 of the film is lacking.  The 
ideas behind this film had pretty good potential; it's disappointing to see 
them with relatively half-baked execution.  My score out of 10: 4.5
They said they tried to make it more like the TV series, but I guess not 
enough.  

Title
Review for Soldier (1998)
"Soldier", by director Paul Anderson, is a film in which any presence of 
originality is fleeting.  The best moments of the film are in the opning 
scenes where Kurt Russel's character Todd is shown growing up under 
strict military supervision.  Brutality through the eyes of the innocent and 
stripped of it every single day growing up is something that has a lot of 
emotional potential power behind it, and the opening scenes tap into it a 
little.  
Then it goes nowhere with that idea.  There is perhaps one rather fleeting 
scene afterwards that deals with the potential trauma of this 
dehumanization, and the rest of the film is just some of the biggest action 
movie cliches I've ever seen.  The whole idea of the inhuman, soldier-type 
character gaining some degree of humanity by defending a potential female 
love interest and family from his evil counterpart out to kill her is done, 
and it's been done much better.  I was able to predict the plot of the 
_whole_ story, which wouldn't be so bad if other aspect of the film 
somewhat interesting.
Between the action sequences, it tries to deal with the aforementioned 
issues of humanity through the performance of Mr. Russel in the film and 
the tiny little window to his soul that is his eyes, since his dialog is 
extremely limited.  His performance in that way isn't all that bad, but 
certainly is not enough to carry this film.  Other performances in this film 
are really not worth much mention at all, and they generally are about as 
weak as their characters.
But enough of this stuff about plot and character, right?  Isn't the most 
important part of an action film, well, the action?  
Even in this aspect the film is a disappointment.  In Mortal Kombat (1995), 
Director Paul Anderson proved that truly engaging use and choreography 
of action in a film can override problems with plot and produce something 
entertaining.  However, he fails to repeat that in this film.  The combat 
scenes, particularly the big one at the end, is incredibly unimaginatve.  
Fighting and combat scenes are supposed to bring about thrills in this type 
of movie, a point which even an otherwise unimpressive film like Starship 
Troopers seemed to realize.   But instead of reaching for something truly 
interesting to end the film with, it goes for the old, shoot-em up, one guy 
vs. an army type of cinema that I thought died with the military action 
films of the 80s.  If the film went with some of the ideas it opened up with 
the introduction more seriously, it could have been a rather engaging 
science fiction film.  However, it utterly failed to go in any new directions 
after that, making the film a big disappointment.

Title
Review for Enemy of the State (1998)
It seems privacy can often be at a premium these days.  a person's credit and 
their purchasing history can be found on the computer.  Bugs and cameras 
have been shrunk down to the microscopic level.  The private life of the 
president is now a national issue.   "Enemy of the State", directed by Tony 
Scott, takes advantage of this paranoia, and runs with it.  
Will Smith, in what is his first true starring role, plays the role of Robert 
Dean, a young Washingto DC lawyer who is slipped a videotape of the 
assasination of  congressman, and other government members implicated 
in the video attempt to track him down and capture him.  All this is done 
via the technology of a national security agency.  
Thsi film successfully preys on the idea that someone, somewhere, is 
watching our every move.  It could be from some hidden camera in the 
wall, or a bug planted in the heels of our shoes.  No matter where you run, 
we'll always know where you are.  The predator knows exactly where the 
prey is going to move, and this sort of suspense done at a breakneck speed 
creates some fairly pulse-pounding moments.  It's an elaborate chase, and 
you feel ike you're just as much the victim.  
"Enemy" features probably as quality a cast as an action film can get.  Will 
Smith is fine as Dean, occasionally showing some of the comic wit he has, 
as well as pulling off the innocent everyman role effectively.  Gene 
Hackman plays the former security agent who helps Dean out in his flee 
from his hunters.  He's not the cookie cutter expert-who-bails-out-the-hero 
type character seen in films- he is portrayed with the appropriate 
conviction.  Also commendable is Jon Voigt as the politician implicated in 
the video, as cold as a member of Congress can get.  
The only major problem I found with the film is that it does tend to drag on 
a bit later on and found myself getting a bit bored at about the last half hour 
or so.  Some of the time perhaps could have been better spent rejuvenating 
the plot a little.  An extra plot twist couldn't have hurt the film, since it for 
the most part runs in one direction the whole way.  
For the most part, however, the film is exciting and breathless, and much of 
the chase was suspense at 100 mph, and that overcomes the occasionally 
lagging plot.  Solid performances, an intruiging and relatively original idea, 
and execution of that idea at high speeds make for a quality action film that 
can even make you think once in a while about being watched.  On a scale 
of 1 to 10, I give it a solid 7.  
Lets hope this review isn't secretly monitored...

Title
Review for Bug's Life, A (1998)
It seems that these days a lot of films are dependent on visuals and
filmmaking technology to "ooh" and "aah" the audience enough to occupy
them for two hours.  Story is often a mere second to visual effects in
movies like "Godzilla" or "Armageddon".  What a refreshment it is,
then, to see a film like "A Bug's Life" where visuals are used to aid
and add to the story rather than take its place.  That is one of the
reasons why I found "A Bug's Life" to be one of the more enjoyable
films I've seen this year.
The story of "A Bug's Life" is probably one of its greatest
assets. The tale of a worker ant named Flik (Dave Foley) and his
attempt to save his colony from the bullyish grasshoppers led by
Hopper (Kevin Spacey) by recruiting insects who turn out to be circus
rejects is absolutely charming and unique.  I've never seen this
"Seven Samurai-ish" told the way "A Bug's Life" tells it, partly
because it couldn't have been done before.  Much of the plot,
especially in the second half, came as a pleasant surprise.  Just when
you think it might be over, a new twist is added to keep you in your
seats.
The story also allows for some excellent characters and character
development as well.  Flik, one of my favorites in the film, grows
from a naive, optimistic ant to an ant who stands up for what he
believes in and can be taken seriously by the end.  The members of the
circus group is probably one of the most eclectic and lovable bunch of
riffraff I've seen in film in a while.  They range from Slim (David
Hyde Pierce), the sticklike thespian wannabe to Francis (Denis Leary),
the unladylike male ladybug with an attitude.  All the different and
unique personalities of the circus crew add quite a bit of color to
the cast.  Their development as a whole, finally finding a place and
an audience that accepts them, should be noted as well.  The littlest
ant, Dot, is absolutely adorable and grows from being a runt with low
self esteem to a confident leader of sorts and princess.  And of
course, the entire colony of ants go from being the bullied to the
ones who take charge and revolt towards the end.  (Oh, and for this
film you really want to stay till the very end, as you'll catch some
amusing "outtakes" from the film.)
Largely responsible for the characters is the wonderful voice cast
behind them.  Dave Foley is perfectly optimistic and full of hope and
charm as Flik, while Kevin Spacey is quite menacing as the villainous
Hopper.  Julia Louis-Dreyfus seems to somewhat reprise her "Elaine"
role on "Seinfeld" fairly effectively as Princess Atta, Flik's love
interest of sorts and next in line to head the colony.  Denis Leary is
perfectly cast as the sarcasm and attitude-laden Francis.  Overall, a
solid performance by the voice cast.
In addition, a solid performance by the animators is put into this
story as well.  An extremely engaging film visually, it seems to use
the most vibrant color palettes that are possible, with bright greens,
deep blues, and solid reds, and everything in between.  Also
remarkable is the incredible detail in the animation, not glossing
over any single nook or cranny.  It is both of these aspects of the
animation that come together to form the film's top artistic
achievement- a beautiful orange-red bird, the fearsome predator that
all the insects fear, even the grasshoppers.  The stunningly lifelike
nature of that figure had me doing double takes.
Of course, this film has drawn a bit of attention as a result of the
similarities between it and another computer animated insect film, the
recently released "Antz".  However, it is at that point that the
similarities between the films stop.  While Antz is an adult oriented
anti-socialist Woody Allen story about the importance of the
individual, "A Bug's Life" is a fable for all ages about believing in
yourself.  Between the two of them, "A Bug's Life" is the superior
film, with a better and more cohesive story that isn't quite so dark.
The characters are more colorful likable in "Bugs", especially in the
two leads.  However, the voice actors may have fared a bit better in
"Antz", as I found Woody Allen, Sly Stallone, and co.  perfectly
suited to their roles.  However, "Antz" also loses out in the visual
department, choosing to be drably realistic with the excessive use of
browns over the use of more varied and lively colors.  "Antz" also
seems to be a bit confused in its audience, as it tries to be an
"adult" film while also using humor that would appeal to the younger
audiences.  "A Bug's Life" clearly lacks that problem.
Three years ago, the same team, Pixar and Disney, brought to theaters
the first completely computer animated movie, "Toy Story", and that
film set the standard for films of its genre with its wonderful
characters and story.  In 1998, Pixar and Disney keep up to those
standards with the release of "A Bug's Life", one of the more
endearing films of the year.  My score, out of 10: 8

Title
Review for Armitage III (1994) (V)
What exactly does it mean to be human?  Does someone of artificial
origin have the same rights as any other person?  Are they to be
treated and considered equally?  It is these questions that the film
Armitage III (read "Armitage the third"), a Japanese anime film
availible here on video, attepmts to answer, and does so in a
reasonably convincing fashion.
The story takes place in the future, the year 2179, on a
long-colonized planet Mars.  This is a society where technology has
evolved so that many of the menial jobs of humans were replaced by
androids, which causes a great deal of unrest with the human
community.  Hidden among these androids are females called thirds,
secretly created by the government to look and act just like humans.
What happens is that one man, Ross D'anclaude, declares war on these
thirds to kill them all.  To stop him, the Martian police puts on the
case detective Naomi Armitage (voiced by Elizabeth Berkely), herself a
third, and her partner detective Ross Sylibus (Keifer Sutherland), who
hates robots because his last partner was killed by one.  The film is
about the growth of the relationship between these two, and the road
to discovering Armitage's reason for being as they get deeper and
deeper into this case.
And this plot is layed out before the viewer relatively effectively by
director Takuya Sato and writer Chiaki Konaka in a careful manner that
manages to keep the viewer on his toes.  In the first half, that is.
The first 50 minute sor so is very exciting to watch, with its share
of fast-paced action and interesting plot developments, and picks up
with the climactic final scene, with the standoff Ross and Naomi have
against a small army.  Some of the elements of the plot really manage
to surprise you and keep things interesting, but that's all I have to
say on that matter.  Suffice to say, the above plot synopsis isn't
_entirely_ accurate, to be so would spoil the film.
However, at the same time, the second half of the film, while
presenting many interesting insights and revelations, can also be
confusing.  It nicely explains the reason for the existence and the
murder of the thirds, but everything else that led to that point from
about halfway through is a little confusing.  There are scenes where i
don't know who's being blamed for what and why they are blamed, and
the way the story goes from one point to another isn't always clearly
explained.  There's a character who inexplicably regains all the
memory that had been erased from him.  Then there's another character
introduced, nicknamed "Pluto", whose very existence (as opposed to hsi
role in the film) brings up a lot of questions that aren't answered.
Certainly the answers in this film that are found this way make sense,
but how they got there doesn't.
In addition to the murders, there is the plot of the relationship
between the two main characters Naomi Armitage and Ross Sylibus, who,
as one might predict, overcome the personal bias of Ross's against
robots and fall in love.  Howver cliched that idea is, the way it is
executed is refreshing and new.  Normally issues of hate in American
animation are dealt with spoon feeding to the viewers the message of
how he hates all robots at the beginning, and how he has been
enlightened at the end in a epiffamy and sees the errors of his ways.
"Armitage III" skirts this and goes in a more realistic and subtle
manner, having Ross slowly open his eyes to Naomi over the film.  His
hatred of robots withers as his relationship with her grows from
friend and partner to romantic lover.
Visually, "Armitage III" is superb.  it doesn't rely on heavy duty
computer generated effects like many animated flms do today, but it
doesn't need to.  .  The exquisite detail in the look more than make
up for its abesnce.  Every nook and cranny of the Martian cityscape
has been crisply rendered here, with some truly slick realistically
futuristic designs.  The character designs are very good and are truly
unique, using a great deal of realism and detail while not forgetting
the advantages of animation.
The audio is fine, but with its problems though.  THe music by
Hiroyuki Namba is very good, registering a pulse -pounding,
computerlike techno- style beat that suits the futuristic yet highly
industrial and dark feel of the film.  However, the voice acting is
more of a mixed bag.  Elizabeth Berkeley, best known for her starring
roles in "Showgirls" and the TV show "Saved by the Bell", is tough,
sexy, assertive, yet tender as Armitage.  Kiefer Sutherland, however,
doesn't fare quite so well as Ross Sylibus, as he is way too monotone
here.  In a role that calls for subtlety, he becomes way _too_ subtle.
To the uninitiated, this film is a work of anime, or Japanese
animation, which, to the uninitiated, is about merely graphic sex and
violence, but in reality is a medium with a great deal of flexibility
and range in subject matter.  It is also a medium that has slowly been
growing in popularity over this decade.  One of the more famous works
of anime in recent years is "Ghost in the Shell", which deals with
some of the same themes that "Armitage III" does.  however,"Ghost" is
much more philosophical and moody in addressing this question, while
"Armitage" is more action oriented.
That, however, doesn't detract from the film's overall performance.
"Armitage III" is an exciting film to watch with some spectacular
animation, but is also meandering and not terribly clear in parts.
Overall, on a scale of 1 to 10: 6.

Title
Review for Edward Scissorhands (1990)
The story of Frankenstein is probably one of the more known horror tales 
of this century, and the famous Boris Karloff image has certainly 
profligated.  Director Tim Burton's "Edward Scissorhands" takes some of 
the basic elements of this story and provides a whole new spin on it.  
The film, written by Burton as well, is about its title character,
Edward (Johnny Depp) and his hands made of scissors, who is a creation
of an old scientist living in a home in a secluded corner of
civilization.  One day, Edward, who lived alone after the scientist
died, is discovered in that castle by a door-to-door makeup
salesperson (Dianne Wiest)and is taken home by her.  At first he is
accepted and welcomed by the rest of the neighborhod, especially
because of his hedge sculptures and women's haircuts.  However, things
go awry when he is persuaded to break into someone's home, and the
whole town turns against him, with the exception of his new family,
especially thier daughter, Kim (Winona Rider), who has developed
feelings for him.
The most noteable element of this film is the presentation itself- it
comes off as a very simple, storybook-like tale.  First of all, it
actually is a tale being told by an old woman to her grandchild.  The
art direction, which is amazing, effectively uses colors without great
detail on neighborhood houses, while using dark, cold features for
Edward's palce of origin, both of which harken back to, once again, a
storybook-like feel.  This is a gorgoous looking film, as are most of
Tim Burton's works.
But beyond that lies the heart of the story- the ideas of the meaning
of humanity through the quickly changing perspective on Edward of the
townfolk, and Kim's realization of her feelings for him.  The
townspeople are in love with him first- but only as a novelty of
sorts.  After he 's caught breaking into a house, he is seen as
nothing but a terrible monster.  Either way, none of the neighbors
ever really saw him for the person he was beyond a superficial level,
except for Kim.  The power of the story is the combination of the two
elements- the expression of the heart through the feel of the story-
enahnces the power and emotion of the film.  The story this film told
moved me, and did so in an original way.
Aiding this, of course, are the performances of some of the actors.  Johnny 
Depp creates a very moving character in Edward, showing us his shy, 
innocent, childlike ways effectively.  Winona Ryder is also commendable, 
showing first fear, then frustration, then respect, then loveand making the 
transitions without much of a hitch.  Dianne Wiest was charming, in the 
doting, motherly role.  Only real weak link might be Anthony Micheal Hall, 
but I think his "Breakfast Club" identity might have gotten in the way.
These three main elements- the visual style of the film, the story
itself, and the performances, all combine under the master plan of
director Tim Burton to create an effective, moving film- truly a
Frankenstein with a twist.  On a scale of 10, I give this film an 8.
