Authors
Yamamoto
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Maximum Risk (1996)
There I was, trying to get out of an elevator.  And what happens?  This
woman tries to block my way by trying to get in, before I can get out. 
So, I said "excuse me", hopin' this pushy woman will at least let me get
out of the elevator.  Well, she side stepped and bumped me by the door
just so that she can get in.  Of course, the elevator ain't gonna go
anywhere until I get out.  Does this behavior make sense to anybody?  And
why is this not an isolated incidence?
Speaking of things not making any sense, MAXIMUM RISK came out and I had
to go check it out.  It's another one of Jean Claude's movies where he
kicks few butts but he's trying to put more acting in it.  I hate to say
it but he's not going to win any Oscar any time soon.  And yes, there was
actually something that resembles a plot but you had to look hard for it
after Jean Claude's twin gets killed in first 5 min of the movie.
One nakkid boob (yeah Natasha!).  4 Doz bullets.  2 doz dead bodies.  48 on
the vomit meter.  One moon shot (sorry, not Jean Claude).  What we got here
are:  Running-fu, jumping for life-fu, attack of killer car chase-fu,
mysterious dead body that flipped over-fu, funeral-fu, trip to the
lawyer's office from hell-fu, homeboy in the hood-fu, free drink-fu,
key from heaven-fu, attack of garbage can lid-fu, and of course attack of
killer cabbie-fu.  Video hall of fame nominations to Natasha Henstridge
for saying stuff like "you got harder since the last time" and to Jean
Claude Van Damm for saying stuff like "why didn't you tell me".  Two
stars.  Shaggy Bob says wicked!
Spoilers - Jean Claude's character's twin is getting chased by two guys
and well, he dies.  Enter Jean Claude.  Now, he didn't know that he had a
twin brother.  So, he wants to find out what kind of person his dead
brother was.  Of course the FBI and the Russian mob are mixed in the whole
mess.  Oh yeah, you can't forget about Natasha who acts like a guide
through the movie so the audience won't get lost.  No one is going to win
any awards for acting but some of the fight scenes were pretty cool.
If you're waiting for a call from Elizabeth Anne Holden, then stay by the
phone.  If she actually gives you call and wants to go out with you, don't
take her to this one.  If she asks for an action movie to get some release
but not too much brain dead beatings, then consider this one.  But only then.
Alien Alert!  I don't get it.  A part of a freeway was torn down and
effectively increased the traffic.  Of course, this particular stretch of
the freeway was the only link between northern and southern part of the
city during major event like a marathon.  Now, more freeway got torn down
and because there hasn't been any major gridlock, it's considered a
success and therefore, the freeway does not need to be replaced?  Hello? 
Is anybody with any synaptic activities in the city hall?  I used to be
able to get out of town in 8 min.  After the first demolition, I was able
to get out of town in 15min.  Now, it takes me 20 min just to get to the
freeway.  And that's success?  Hello?
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that reply key now.

Title
Review for Congo (1995)
     Have you ever noticed that stuff happens to ya at the worst time?
Is this some sorta curse someone placed on everyone?  I mean take
today for example.  I had an experiment (no, not that kind--it was one
of those science stuff) going for two days and I was about to take it
off.  And what happens, power goes out and I get stuck in a garage.
     Speaking of being stuck, CONGO came out and I had to go check it
out.  It's about this gorilla who learned how to talk and this
scientist dude who wanted to return her back to Africa.  Of course he
can't find any grants to return the monkey so he gets help from other
sources.
     No nakkid boobs.  15 dead bodies (and 14 same monkeys dying all
over).  147 bullets.  53 on the vomit meter.  No moon shots.  What we
got here are:  Expedition-fu, skinny dippin'-fu, attack of killer
chocolate craving-fu, paranoid dude in charge-fu, Mr. Ed-fu, Dr.
Dolittle-fu, attack of killer fuel prices-fu, sesame seed cake- fu, air
conditioner-fu, and of course attack of killer apes-fu.  Drive in
academy nomination for Dylan Walsh for saying stuff like "what is
that?" and to Earnie Hudson for responding "when moon like that comes
out, every money in two hundred miles thinks they're Elvis."  To Tim
Curry for saying stuff like "help me pick these up" and to Joe Don
Baker after sending a group to a volcano "please use the fire
extinguisher on that".  And of course to Laura Linney for saying stuff
like "Do you remember my promise?"  One and a half star.  Shaggy Bob
says check it out!
     Alien Alert!  Did ya hear about his guy paying some one to rape
his wife so he can watch?  Well, the rapist got caught and the wife
sued the guy.  She won and was awarded $64million.  I dunno 'bout you
but where in the world is a sleazoid like that gonna come up with that
kind of money?  I sure would like to get my hands on that kind of piggy
bank.
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that Reply key now.

Title
Review for Star Trek: First Contact (1996)
[Note that followups are directed to rec.arts.movies.current-films and
rec.arts.movies.startrek.current only, not to rec.arts.sf.movies.  -Moderator]
Have you noticed that right after you get your clothes back from dry
cleaners, they attract stains?  And only for first week or so.  Then
you never spill anything on the dirty clothes again.  I swear there
must be a conspiracy going on around here.  I bet the dry cleaners
add stain attracting chemicals on your clothes that last about a week
or so.  Of course, if you keep it in the closet, it won't attract dirt until
you first put it on again.
Speaking of conspiracies, STAR TREK: FIRST CONTACT came
out so I had to go check it out.  It's the latest of the Star Trek movie
series.  This time around, the Federation's arch enemy come
knocking on the front door so of course Star Trek: The New
Generation crew must come to the rescue.  And they go through the
trekkie techno babble along the way just to save not only earth but
the whole world as we know it.
No nakkid boobs.  33 bullets.  Ship loads of dead bodies.  32 on the
vomit meter.  No moon shots.  What we got here are:  attack of the
killer borg-fu, drill to the eye-fu, implant-fu, dreams from hell-fu,
attack of killer comet-fu, targetting of non essential area-fu, techno
babble-fu, futile resistance-fu, ankle grab-fu, attack of bullet proof
body-fu, touchy feeling-fu,  tequila shots-fu, bad whisky-fu, and of
course, more techno babble-fu.  Video hall of fame nominations to: 
James Cromwell for saying stuff like  "Engage" and to Alice Krige
for saying stuff like "You strive to be imperfect?" and to Brent
Spiner for saying stuff like "You mean sexually?"  Of course to
Gates McFadden for saying stuff like "captain has made his
decision" and to Alfre Woodard for saying stuff like "captain Ahab"
and to Michael Dorn for saying stuff like "it made me sick to my
stomach".  And we can never forget Marina Sirtis for saying stuff
like "This is a primitive society" and to Patrick Stewart for saying
stuff like "I will make them pay!" and to Jonathan Frakes for saying
stuff like "you mean you told him" and to Levar Burton for saying
stuff like "that's funny".  Three and a half stars.  Shaggy Bob says
wicked!
Spoilers -- Another one of the Borg ship heads to earth to assimilate. 
Jean Luc is placed out of the loop because the higher up things he's a
liability.  Of course, he proves all the higher ups wrong and saves
the day.   In defeat, escaping Borg ship time travels and attack earth
in the past.  Hmm... didn't Cyberdine System 101 and T1000 try to
do something like that?  Anyhow, the Enterprise and her crew
follows and prevents altering of time line and saves the world from
being conquered by the Borg.  All the cameo by people from the
different series adds flavor to the flick.  But you really do need to
follow the TV series to fully appreciate the little quirks and inside
humor.
If you're waiting for the phone call from Paulina Porizkova, take the
cell phone and go see this movie.  If you follow Star Trek at all, I
doubt I'll even have to say that.
Alien Alert!  Why do politicians like to make people's lives
difficult?  And why do we elect these people who try their darnest to
make our lives miserable?  For example, the another freeway is
coming down but may not be replaced.  Gee, that makes spending
what, extra 40 min on the surface road instead of extra 20 min the
commuters spend now.  And if there were freeway system as it was
furst intended, we would be saving all that time for something more
constructive than sitting in the car, getting aggrivated by the BMW
who just cut you off.  No wonder people go postal.
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that reply key now.

Title
Review for Mission: Impossible (1996)
What do you say to people you sort'a know?  I mean what do you do when 
you come across people you casually know but nothing beyond that?  Ok, 
so you say "hi" since you don't want to come across like you treat them 
like a plague but then what?  Uneasy silence?  Isn't that more awkward 
than if you didn't say anything at all?  If you ingore them, at least 
you don't have to deal with the person.  On the down side, they'll 
think you're prude or something.  Do the opinions of those who you 
really don't care matter?  Then again, you could aways tell 'em you had 
a bad day...
Speaking of having no real good solutions, MISSION IMPOSSIBLE came out 
and I had to go check it out.  It's a spin off from the old TV series 
of the same name.  Yup, it's packed with actions.  Minimum dialogs.  
And will keep you on the edge of the seat.  Yeah, what else is new?  
They got all kinds of cool toys but upgraded to today's technology.  
And of couse the cold war is over so different kind of villain is 
needed.  Of course the guys have to accomplish impossible missions to 
save the day.
No nakkid boobs.  No bullets.  7 dead bodies.  19 on the vomit meter.  
No moon shots.  What we got here are:  playing dead-fu, smoking in the 
airplane-fu, attack of killer briefing-fu, breath freshner from hell-
fu, finger printing-fu, glasses-fu, attack of killer elevator-fu, 
exploding car-fu, exploding bubble gum-fu, finding religion- fu, 
hellucinations-fu, attack of trackable software-fu, sweat-fu an of 
course knife-fu.  Video hall of fame nominations to Emmanuelle Beart 
for saying stuff like "Jim is dead" and to Ving Rhames for saying 
stuff like "There was no physical evidence" and to Jon Voight for 
saying "When did you know".  And of course to Henry Czervy for saying 
stuff like "He wanted us to know" and to Tom Cruise for saying "I'll 
always remember you this way."  Three stars.  Shaggy Bob says wicked!
Spoiler - The cold war is over but deep undercover agents are still 
about.  A half of a list of all the agents has been stolen.   The team 
has to not only recover the list but also pin the guy who took the 
first half and the buyer.  If you recall any of the TV series, it's not 
all that hard to do.  But what do you do when there's a traitor in your 
midst?  Who can you trust?  Better yet, who can you not trust and why?  
Of course, to prove your innocence, you have to break in to the most 
secure place in the world.
Alien Alert!  Ok, so Bob Dole quit his day job to see if he can get a 
better one.  I guess with all the free time he now has, he came out 
with a brilliant plan to cut down on welfare.  In it, he restricts aid 
to 2 years and upto 5 years during one's life time.  Correct me if I'm 
wrong but isn't the reason why you get welfare because you can't find 
a job?  And peoeple want goverment to solve the problems.  Not unless 
we elect people who knows what they're doing.
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that reply key now.

Title
Review for Hong faan kui (1995)
There I was, about to save this damsel in distress and this wicked
witch shows up and ruined everything.  Actually, there was this cute
woman lost and wanted directions.  I was about to give her her the
correct directions and this woman comes up and start mouthing off
as if she knew it all and gave the woman the wrong information.  Of
course being the conscientious guy that I am, I told the woman that
she just gave wrong directions and gave the woman the correct 
information.  And they all lived happily ever after.
Speaking of stupid things people do, RUMBLE IN THE BRONX came out
and I had to go check it out.  It's not really an action film but
a comedy packed with actions.  Yes, it dubbed.  Yes it does first
come across like one of those late night kung fu movies.  No, it's
a lot funnier than you think.  And no, you won't have to worry about
a plot 'cause it ain't there.  No, it's more entertaining than you
expect.
No nakkid boobs.  4 doz bullets.  5 dead bodies.  32 on the vomit
meter.  2 moon shots.  What we got here are:  airplane-fu, baggage-
fu, Manhattan-fu, grafitti-fu, one way mirror-fu, attack of killer
zit-fu, shop lifting-fu, ultimate jacket-fu, dream car-fu, attack
of killer bikers-fu, wedding of the century-fu, more bikers from
hell-fu, diamond-fu, attack of killer bottles-fu, forgive and for-
get-fu, FBI-fu, whole lotta kung-fu and insatiable action-fu.  Drive
in academy nomination for Jackie Chan for saying stuff like "we 
should be drinking together" and to Anita Mui for saying stuff like
"I should never have trusted you" and to Francois Choi for saying
stuff like "you'll get use to it" and to Kris Lord for saying stuff
like "I don't bargain."  Two and a half stars.  Shaggy Bob says 
wicked!
Alien Alert!  Why are so many people protesting the 3rd execution
in this state this decade?  It cost what, $50k per year per inmate
to keep 'em inside while a bullet cost what $0.10?  You figure the
math.  Do you realize what you can do with that kind of money?  May
be if we save enough money, and put them in education, we won't need
such extensive justice system.  Ok, I can always dream can't I?

Title
Review for Star Wars (1977)
There I was, chillin' as usual and walking down the street.  And guess
what I get?  This Mormon guy comes up to me and start preaching about
their belief and everything.  What really bothered me was that the guy
was carrying a Russian bible.  Talk about redundant.  Anyhow, I escaped
their grasp.
Speaking of being born again, STAR WARS came out and I had to go check
it out.  You know the story, it's about the good vs the evil.  Throw in
the princess in distress, two goofy rescuers and a wise ol' teacher.
Yeah, it's what the legends are made of.  And no, it never gets tired.
And the edits and the added scenes are really cool.
No nakkid boobs.  No bullets (but with bullet sounds).  Kazillion dead
bodies.  12 on the vomit meter.  No moon shots.  What we got here are:
In the galaxy far far away-fu, attack of killer star destroyer-fu,
storm troopers-fu, Mr Darth-fu, droids from hell-fu, elephants in
rags-fu, little rats-fu, more star destroyers-fu, astroids from
hell-fu, attack of killer death star-fu, and of course, the force- fu.
Video hall of fame nominations to Harrison Ford for saying stuff like
"May the Force be with you" and to Mark Hamill for saying stuff like "I
want to learn about the force".  And of course to Carrie Fisher for
saying stuff like "You listen to me, got it?" and to Alec Guiness for
saying stuff like "Use the Force Luke".  Four stars.  Shaggy Bobs says
wicked!
Spoilers -- There was once a wise man who told me this -- digital means
you can play it loud! (without distortion)  Go see it on the big screen
with good sound system.  It's the whole reason why you want to go see
it.  Ok, the added scenes are cool.  And they did a good job editing
the special effects.  But Star Wars is one of the few movies that has
that certain magic.  And you won't get most out of it unless you see it
on the big screen.  If you're waiting for the phone call from Rachel
Blanchard, just call her up and take her to see this movie.  She won't
hate you for it.  Well, that's assuming that you already know her and
you're not being a pain.
Alien Alert!  What's this I hear about da mayor wanting to bring
Steinheart to SOMA?  Just what goes through morons' minds (if there is
any)?  Hello?  Oh, I forgot, we're talking about people who'd demolish
freeway one level at a time and never replace them.  Just once, I'd
like to hear about sound decisions.  I guess I'll be dead before that
but I can always dream can't I?
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that Reply key now.

Title
Review for French Kiss (1995)
     Is there a law that says the road workers can only work on nice
smooth surface?  I mean every time they repave a road, they immediately
dig it up and do some stuff on it.  After which, you have an uneven
road with bunch of patches on it.  And if they come around to repave
the road again (after forever and few alignment adjustments), the whole
series of road work begins again (so you can never have a nice road).
     Speaking of missed cues, FRENCH KISS came out so I had to go check
it out.  It's about this woman who got dumped by her fiancee while he
went on a business trip to Paris.  And she's determined to get this
looser back for some reason.  Ahh, women -- I'll never understand their
reasonings.
     No nakkid boobs.  No bullets.  No dead bodies.  2 on the vomit
meter.  No moon shots.  What we got here are: airplane-fu, old folk's
home-fu, attack of killer telephone call-fu, little booze-fu,
tourist-fu, goddess-fu, attack of killer train food-fu, wine-fu and of
course a plant-fu.  Drive-in academy nomination for saying stuff like
"All men are bastards" and to Kevin Klein for saying stuff like "What
can I say?  I'm an asshole."  And to Jean from Professional for saying
stuff like "I owe him more than mere money".  One and a three quarters
star.  Shaggy Bob says check it out!
     Alien Alert!  Did ya hear about this woman accusing a Santa Clara
Deputy for raping her in a courthouse?  Apparently this occurred during
the middle of a day in a busy courthouse.  Hmmm.  Either way, we got
some sickos out there.

Title
Review for Island of Dr. Moreau, The (1996)
There I was, chillin' as usual and what do I see on the bus?  I see
this woman who wanted to get off but didn't know that she was
supposed to step down into the stairwell so she yells "back door"
to the driver.  And another girl yells "step down."  Of course the
woman gets to get off without further incidence but the girl says
"I guess people don't read the signs" while eating sunflower seeds
right under the no food sign.  Since when did we start accepting
hypocrites as a daily norm?
Speaking of counter productive behavior, ISLAND OF DR MOREAU came
out and I had to go check it out.  It's about this doctor who's
doing this genetic research in a secluded island in south Pacific
and the inhabitants he made.  Of course something goes wrong for
the plot to develop.  And yes, there is one survivor who's going to
be able to tell the tale for others.
1 mammary scene.  9 dead bodies.  2 doz bullets.  38 on the vomit
meter.  No moon shots.  What we got here are:  more counter
productive behavior on the raft-fu, attack of killer shark-fu,
search and rescue party-fu, IV-fu, a shot from hell-fu, rabbits-fu,
dancing in the rain-fu, attack of killer flower child-fu, locking
door-fu, piano concert-fu, and of course cat chase-fu.  Video hall
of fame nominations to David Thewlis for saying stuff like "I'll be
back" and to Fairuza Balk for saying stuff like "I'm reverting." 
Of course to Marlon Brando for saying stuff like "I am closer than
you can possibly imagine" and to Val Kilmer for saying stuff like
"You'll like it, well, I like it."  One and a half star.  Shaggy
Bob says wicked!
Spoiler - Stories based on Victorian era science may have a
tendency to not to follow the science practiced today but they
usually have a really good idea.  And this one is of no exception. 
The problem is, that was all they had.  Ok, the make up for the
animal people were cool but how far can make up take you?  No plot
gets in the way of the story line.  And you certainly aren't going
to sympathize with any of the characters unless you're one of those
animal rights activist who's bordering on insanity.
If you're waiting for a call from Jenny McCarthy, stand by the
phone.  You ain't gonna miss much.  And if she does call, don't
take her to this flick.
Alien Alert!  Bill signed the welfare reform bill which Bob said it
was Republican idea.  My question is, what's going to happen in 2
years?  Better yet, what's going to happen in 5 years when people
can't get more aid?  Don't get me wrong, I'm all for abolishing
welfare but it would be irrisponsible to take away people's
dependancy without replacing it with something so that they won't
revert back to the cycle of handouts.  I bet you in 5 years that
both parties are going to blame each other for the mess they
created which the librals are going to blow it out of proportion.
For wisdom according to Shaggy Bob, hit that Reply key now.

Title
Review for Kokaku kidotai (1995)
Why is it that whenever there's a woman with funky do which happens
to stick straight up, they have to sit right in front of you at the
movie theatres?  It doesn't matter where you sit, and the movie may
have just started.  Out of nowhere, poof, they'll waltz right in
and sit infront of you and block a good portion of the screen.  I
guess it's one of those life's unexplainable mysteries.
Speaking of difficult concept to grasp, GHOST IN THE SHELL came out
and I had to go check it out.  It's a Japanese anime taking place
in supposed future in the year 2029.  Yes, it's loosely related to
the comic book (which by the way 2 pages worth has been censored
for the conservative American public).  Anyhow, the secret service
in this era tries to capture this super hacker and well, things
don't ever the go the way you planned.
2 dozen nakkid cyber boobs.  9 doz bullets.  3 dead bodies.  42 on
the vomit meter.  No moon shots.  What we got here are:  long
distance peeping tom-fu, killer briefcases-fu, transparent body-fu,
garbage collectors from hell-fu, AP rounds in submachinegun-fu,
dodging crowd-fu, attack of the invisible zombie-fu, one way water
way-fu, runaway truck-fu, soul searching-fu, and of course your
standard issue big gun-fu.  Drive in academy award nominations to:
Bateau for saying stuff like "If I lose contact, I'm pulling the
plug", to Togusa for sayin' stuff like "set them up as a decoy" and
to Aramaki "did you hear me?"  And of course to lovely "Major"
Motoko Kusanagi "have you ever seen your own brain?"
Spoilers - Motoko Krsanagi is the top field agent of section 9, the
secret service.  And yes, most of her body is cybernetic and hear
cloaking device only works when she's nakkid. hmmm.  Anyhow, in the
future, the 'net gets so enormous that without people's knowledge,
one of the black ops programs acquired a "ghost" or a soul.  It
wants to be recognized as a sentient being and of course people
don't want to do that.  Then again, you can't really define real
human's soul so they can't prove anything.  The story revolves
around this premesis of the artifical soul and such.  Oh yeah, you
get your usual share of the guns and explosions too.  And the
animations are to die for.  Three and three quarter stars.  Shaggy
Bob says wicked!
Alien Alert!  Why do I get this feeling that whole country is
wrapped up in Jessica Dubroff's death?  And why is media making
such a hype, not only after the accident but even before?  Are we
supposed to feel the way media wants us to feel?  If you think
about it, don't you feel like you've been manipulated?  Ok, so I
may be bit paranoid but isn't there more important news to cover?
Just wonderin'.
> From: jfg115@psu.edu (John Gorzkowski)
> not that I have an opinion on the death penalty or anything, but
> just one argument that I heard was that after all the court costs
> of appeals and shit like that, executions cost more than life in
> prison--just something to think about....
That's why I believe in passing this new bill about the truth in
sentencing.  You can teach people who doesn't know better but you
can't change people who just don't care.  Heck, with arrest rate so
low and conviction rate being dismal, the least you can do is limit
the appeals to one and have it done with within a year.
