Authors
Alex Patison
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for As Time Goes by (1988)
     I like things that play around with time.  THE TIME TUNNEL (remember
that?), BACK TO THE FUTURE, even Graeme Murphy's choreography for the SYDNEY
DANCE COMPANY.  So when a film like AS TIME GOES BY comes along I go and see
it.  I'm glad I did.
     Billed as a sci-fi comedy it has all the right ingredients for a good
movie.  The idea of bringing together a weird mix of characters is a small
outback town lends itself to some good situation comedy and it works well.  The
script, by Barry Peak, progresses along an unpredictable path with a few
interesting and comic twists thrown in.  The pace, though not frantic (would
you expect it to be in a small outback town?), never drops and I often thought
what was going to be next.
     Mike (Nique Needles) is the main character, a surfer who ends up in a small
country town.  This lends itself to a small cast which is great for a couple of
reasons.  Cost - this is a small-budget film.  Development - no character is
redundant.  Simple - the simplicity of the plot does not complicate matters -
it allows the film to exploit the comedy available.
     The acting is good and Max Gillies does a great job displaying his vocal
dexterity as one of the aliens.

Title
Review for Navigator: A Mediaeval Odyssey, The (1988)
     This movie has been playing for a few months but I have only just caught
up with it.  It is a New Zealand/Australian co-production but it is but no
means typical of the films that have been produced in this part of the world
over the last decade.  The feel of the movie is more European, even though half
of the film is seen to take place in New Zealand.  As a winner of 6 Australian
Film Awards it is bound to get a showing outside of NZ/Australia.
     Without giving away more than the flyer advertising the movie, it is set
in England 1348, the year of the Black Death.  The Navigator is a boy who has
visions - dreams.  He dreams of tunnelling through to the other side of the
Earth to a Great Cathedral, to save his village from the Black Death.  The
movie follows this voyage and when they emerge at the other side of the Earth
it is New Zealand.  And it is 1988.  (Yes, another "time" movie.)
     No, the movie is not medieval meets the 20th Century.  Far from it.  It
deals with the people and their determination to achieve their goal - the goal
set by the young boy.  The fact that they are in New Zealand had nothing to do
with it.  One of the skillful parts of the movie is the way in which the modern
day cities are presented with the same medieval feel as the village "back
home."  1988 has its own terrors (cars/highways), its own "Black Death," and
all things familiar to the religion back home.  The camera angles used in the
modern towns do not give any detail - they just add effect.  And some of the
camera effects are good - the desolate, snow-covered landscape is all the more
desolate for the use of black and white.  Top marks for the cinematography.
     I came out of the theatre feeling that I had shared in an adventure, not
just watched one.  And the music, by Davood Tabrizi, with a feel similar to
THE MISSION, added all the more.
