Authors
Christian MacInnis
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Dark City (1998)
Upon arriving at the theater during the opening credits, I took my seat
and prepared myself for what appeared to be "Hellraiser meets The Crow". 
But as soon as Kiefer Sutherland began speaking the narrative monologue,
describing "The Strangers" and their reasons for contacting human beings, I
was hooked.
There was something especially compelling about the nature of his voice. 
I knew from the start that I was going to witness the actions of his
character rather than the actor attempting the character.  Sutherland
played the role as a true veteran.  Upon the completion of his monologue,
the camera arrives on Sutherland in such a fashion that you can only wonder
how long Alex Proyas spent on cinematography.  I would imagine, for a film
of this caliber, that maximum hours of work were spent where they were
needed the most.  The film flowed beautifully.  
As I was being taken through the intricate regions of the "Dark City", a
clever plot began to unravel, to the point where the last time I had seen
such clever plot twists were in "The Usual Suspects".  Not to mention a
series of special effects that would make James Cameron literally turn
green with envy.  
But if you're not exactly the biggest sci-fi fan, caveat emptor.  Get
ready for the atmostpheric darkness of "12 Monkeys" or "The Crow" without
the boredom or depression.  The concept of the plot is as mindstretching as
"12 Monkeys" was, however, so be prepared and be sophisticated.  And
imagine a picture that finally does justice to the
comic-book-gone-feature-film fad that Hollywood has recently become abusive
of.  DARK CITY simply puts "Spawn" to shame.  In fact, during the climax of
the film I couldn't help but feel the strong presence of an "Akira"-esque
explosion throughout the general feeling of the movie.  So my initial
predictions were wrong.  This film is anything but the meloncholy of
"Hellraiser" parts one through five.
I'm never one to base a film entirly on special effects, so know that when
I give DARK CITY 
it's actually because the film contained all of the neccessary ingredients
to keep me entertained and awake from storyline to plot twists to
camerawork to even (tsk, tsk) special effects.  Not since Contact have I
recieved such deep insight into the way the human mind operates and never
this year have I been so blown away.  The best film I've seen all year, and
easily one of the best I've ever seen

Title
Review for Copycat (1995)
While I was still in midst of finding a thriller that did the genre
justice, I decided to detour around the usual
stalker-wearing-the-white-mask flick for something more of a contemporary
nature.  Coincidentally, I was also somewhere towards the middle of Caleb
Carr's novel "The Alienist", which focuses on the quick uprising of serial
killers in New York City in 1896.  Having been captivated by the mindset
that Carr's killer seemed to have, I was curious to see just how nutty
Harry Connick Jr. was capable of being.  I decided to take my chances with
yet another Sigourney Weaver movie.
The movie opens with a scene which was psychologically shocking and clever
enough to keep even the desensitized interested.  The film begins to unfold
into the life of the housebound psychologist Dr. Helen Hudson (Weaver) who
has been unable to leave her house (without experiencing vertigo) for
thirteen months due to her agoraphobia, at which time she had an
unfortunate run in with serial killer Daryll Lee Cullum (Connick Jr.). 
>From her private apartment she connects with the outside world only through
her computer and her housekeeper Andy (played by John Rothman, whom I
haven't seen since BIG), until a copycat killer decides to step into her
world and tease her with knowledge of the crimes he is about to commit.  As
the killer continues to copycat some of the world's most infamous serial
killers, Dr. Hudson is forced to work with two detectives (Holly Hunter and
Dermot Mulroney) in order to catch him before he catches her.
What COPYCAT lacks in acting ability it picks up in script.  The
not-so-convincing performance by Will Patton as the third-wheel cop who can
never seem to get his man or get the girl, is counter-balanced by the
clever plot twists and the emphasis put on the urgency of finding the man. 
William McNamara plays Peter Foley, a sexually frustrated computer geek
who's character potential gets patronized by McNamara's inability to
capture certain moments.  For the brief moments where Harry Connick Jr. is
in the film, he consistently scares and disturbs in more ways than any
other pianist out there.  As the bumpkin-esque Daryll Lee he convinces you
throughout the film that there are way too many sick people floating around
our there.  I just feel bad that all of the main stars were unable to pull
their weight when it came to character development.
Biderman & Madsen's script hits you right until the end credits begin
rolling.  I congratulate them again in reactivating the talents we saw from
Connick Jr. in Little Man Tate.  Other than a few not-so-believable
performances and some continuity errors that only a communication and film
student would notice, COPYCAT delivers some right moves at right times,
partially thanks to the strong development in the way of Holly Hunter and
Dermot Mulroney. 
Witty, suspenseful, fun (if that's your kind of thing), and definitely one
of those movies which probably worked much better as a novel, COPYCAT
receives 
***1/2 (out or *****) simply because it doesn't rip roar you around as you
expect it to. But, if you're looking for a way out of what's become a
monotonous line of thrillers, give it a try and you probably won't be
disappointed at all. 
