Authors
Billy Bud Vermillion
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Twelve Monkeys (1995)
Twelve Monkeys, a film by Terry Gilliam
starring Bruce Willis, Madeline Stowe, Brad Pitt, 
and(hee-hee!)Frank Gorshin
        I've always been a great admirer of Terry Gilliam's films. His 
dark, often humorous, always edgy vision of the world has had  me 
enthralled since Time Bandits(one of my favorite films--favorite as 
opposed to those films which I acknowledge as great; it just has that 
certain magic which grabs me). 
Twelve Monkeys, in a lot of ways, is sort of a follow-up piece to 
his other films. He manages to incorporate the idea that insanity is 
relative(seen in The Fisher King), the concept of a dystopian future 
where one cannot trust anyone else(Brazil), and, the death of loved 
ones(seen in Time Bandits--though they weren't really so well-liked in 
that case, The Fisher King, The Adventures of Baron Von Munchausen, and, 
in a weird kind of reversal, Brazil). In fact, Twelve Monkeys seems to 
place Gilliam in the position of reworking many old ideas, often those of 
other people(La Jetee is mentioned as source material, and Vertigo is 
actually paid tribute to in the narrative, itself). 
This aside, the film is very much Gilliam's own novel work. He 
has created a strikingly original time travel movie, drawing some fine 
performances out of Bruce Willis(wow, I didn't use to think this guy 
could act!)and Brad Pitt(who, for a welcome change, isn't playing a dumb 
bohunk in this one, but rather an intelligent lunatic). 
Time travel movies tend to be difficult for filmmakers to present 
in realistic ways, the paradoxes involved often clouding up viewers minds 
to the point of numbness. Gilliam doesn't elude this bugaboo, though he 
does throw some interesting tricks into the mix. I especially enjoyed the 
ambiguity Willis felt towards his perceptions of reality. At the end, we 
are left wondering whether Willis' character, James Cole, caused the end 
of the world or not. 
Lemme explain: sometime in the future, Cole is sent back in time 
by a group of scientists to learn about the Army of the Twelve Monkeys 
who, in 1996, allegedly let loose a virus capable of destroying the 
world.He is sent back to 1991, however, where he meets Pitt and Madeline 
Stowe, a psychiatrist. He's incarcerated in a mental institution(Gilliam 
may be making a strong statement of social and moral outrage at the state 
of mental health care by his depictions of the hospital). He tries to 
warn them about the future, but it only helps in cementing his status as 
"insane." He is then brought back to the future, sent back to 1996, where 
he kidnaps Stowe(who has written a book on lunatics with end-of-the-world 
theories, shuttles back and forth a few more times, becomes convinced 
he's crazy, gets shot in 1918, Stowe ends up believing his story, they 
search for the Army of the Twelve Monkeys, etc. etc. Kinda confusing, but 
the confusion is necessary for Gilliam to keep his form consistent with 
his intentions. Did Cole, by going back in time to 1991, cause Stowe to 
write her book, which was read by a virologist/nutbar,which in turn led 
to the unleashing of the plague and the endanger-ification of mankind? 
Don't know the answer to that one. Gilliam gives us a few clues, but no 
hard and fast answers. The film's final shot is touching and provacative 
and is the best pseudo-answer available: a boy's eyes, staring up into 
the sky, weeping. The boy is Cole(woops, gave it away!sorry to those who 
ain't done seen it)and this scene seems to suggest a circularity to time, 
that the future has ramifications for the past and present and vice 
versa. 

Title
Review for Crossing Guard, The (1995)
        Weinstein, Harvey Weinstein, Richard N. Gladstein. Miramax
This is definitely the best movie to be released last year(hey, I 
didn't see Crumb, so sue me). It speaks to the soul, humming softly at 
you, urging you to look inside and see if you'd do  the same thing as the 
figures on screen. Really. A powerful, moving piece of work every one 
who's ever felt the need for vengeance or justice in an unjust world 
should see just to show you how justice can be unjust, too.
The film opens as John Booth, convicted of manslaughter in a 
drunk-driving accident, is released from prison. We meet his parents, who 
love him very much, and obviously miss him. We see him as a tortured 
soul, guilty for what he did, for killing a little girl. We see him in 
flashbacks, beating his head against the bars of his cell, we see the 
scar this makes. He is a horribly depressed man,a  man in a lot of pain. 
Then we meet Freddy Gale, one of the most complex characters 
Nicholson's dealt with in a long time. He is obsessed with fantasies of 
revenge. He's been counting off the days on a little wall calendar, 
waiting for Booth to get out. He's planned to kill him since the trial, 
for his daughter's death. He is man lost to his dreams. All he has is 
revenge, liquor, and the strip bars where he picks women up from time to 
time. His wife(Huston)has long-since divorced him an married another 
man(Robbie Robertson)and thinks Freddy has forgotten her and her other 
kids for what she sees as selfish wish-fulfillment fantasies. Huston 
looks more haggard in this role than I think I've ever seen her. She's 
been worn down by her husband's madness. 
Booth meets a woman(Wright)at a party his friend(David Baerwald, 
nice touch)throws for him, and she falls in love with him, though he 
can't love because of his oppressive feelings of guilt. Gale eventually 
makes his way to Booth's trailer and tries to shoot him, but the gun 
won't fire. He gives Booth three days to live. The movie then follows 
both characters during the three days, with Wright's character trying to 
bring Booth back to some semblance of life and Nicholson's moving farhter 
and farther from life into a kind of dead-eyed obsession. The three days 
pass, and Booth decides he wants to live, so he runs. The best scene in 
the movie comes during this part.Nicholson chases him onto a bus, but, 
polite jewelery store owner and former family man that he is, he decides 
to sit down and wait for the bus to stop before pursuing Booth(he knows 
the consequences of killing Booth will probably be the chair,  but he 
still can't bring himself to go nuts on a bus--brilliant!). The ending is 
one of the most touching I've ever seen(though a little predictable). 
Penn has proven himself a fine director, and Nicholson has reaffirmed his 
status as a damn fine actor, too.
Coincidence, perhaps, that this film deals with the same basic 
idea as dead man walking(starring Penn)? I think not. And this one was 
released first. Hmmm....
This film may not be out in theaters any longer, but wait for it 
on video, because it's definitely worth your time. A fine film.
