Authors
Alan Jay
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Texasville (1990)
     Below are a number of short reviews/comments of movies I have seen
in the first week of the London Film Festival.  I have no idea what the
distribution of any of these films is likely to be -- last year I saw
Icicle Thief in the festival and it has just appeared both in the US and
UK.  I have tried to give a rating on the -4 to +4 scale as used
elsewhere.  Anyway here goes in the order I saw them last week:
The sequel to THE LAST PICTURE SHOW opened the London Film Festival.
The movie picks up 30 years on and shows the state that the characters
have got themselves into.  I thoroughly enjoyed the movie and thought
that the small town farce that was played out was exquisite.  (+3)
This is the first feature by Alfonso Arandia and is the story of a
failed exam and a not-so-anonymous letter, stolen mail boxes (like the
large red ones we have in London but yellow), and an underworld
sub-plot.  An enjoyable if rather silly movie that reminds me of my
youth -- though I never lugged a letter box up 5 flights of stairs!
(+1)
A fascinating and beautifully crafted film that intertwines the lust for
money and the serenity of the Vermeers in the Met.  The movie is
remarkably well-paced especially considering that Jon Jost told us after
the screening that the entire film was improvised -- though well
rehearsed.  This is Jon's fist film in 35mm and looks excellent it shows
what can be done filming entirely on location with no additional lights.
(+2.5).
JU DOU  (SECRET LOVE, HIDDEN FACES)
Dir: Zhang Yi-Mou and Yeng Feng-Liang
Chinese-Japanese collaboration that is set in China in the 1920s around a
dye factory and its owner, wife and nephew.  The young wife falls for
the nephew and we are taken through his seduction and the consequences
over 10 years.  Beautifully shot and very colourful.  (+1.5)
The poignant tale of a young man returning to his village, after two
years away, to discover that his promised bride is married to his
father.  The ensuing problems with their love and its fulfillment make
enjoyable watching even if the culture that we are seeing is completely
alien to the western view of things.  (+1.5)
This Russian tale of two youngsters growing up in a remote mining town
near Vladivostock in 1947 was an unexpected delight.  As such the tale
doesn't sound promising but the resulting movie is a touching and
beautiful tale of young innocence in a harsh world.  (+3)
This true Hungarian tale about a young boy who shoots his father while
his mother is in hospital and continues life as before.  The story of
this true incident is well told and cinematically very interestingly
portrayed with a variety of B&W film qualities used to signify different
time frames.  Unfortunately it comes across as someone trying very hard
to tell a story in visual terms and not quite succeeding.  (0)
This brilliant movie tells a fictionalised account of a your German girl
in Bavaria who tries to write an essay on "My home town during the third
Reich."  The story is well told combining pseudo documentary style;
recreations of the past and stylized scenes from the story.  The film is
based on a true story and is fascinating to realise the level of
cover-up that took place after the last war and realise that we should
never forget what happened.  Usually movies portray people larger than
life in this case and the real "Nasty Girl," who was at the screening,
came across as even larger than the fictional character portrayed in the
movie.  (+3.5)
Well, this has been reviewed to extinction on the net so my very short
comment would be that I enjoyed the film but can understand why it might
be thought a pretentious load of drivel it is not main stream cinema in
many ways and its tarring with the NC-17 certificate has given Universal
a chance to hype the film into something it isn't (a sexually charged,
erotic movie).  (+2)
This Hong Kong movie takes a splash of Indiana Jones and mixes with a
dash of Chinese history and creates a delightful movie with some very
nice touches.  Without giving too much away the movie tells a delightful
love story through the turmoil of the plot and some spectacular sword
fights (that make the, should have been, legendary sword fight from
Raiders seem tame [well I can't imagine Harrison Ford doing the balletic
dancing technique that the Chinese go in for]) (+2)
Based on the life of Juana Ines de la Cruz (a 17th Century Nun in
Mexico) this film tells of her persecution by the church and her
friendship with the Viceroy of Mexico and his wife.  A marvelously
constructed world is created in the movie through a limited selection of
sets that a reworked but highly minimal.  This movie is quite hard work
and relatively slow but I now want to know more about Juana Ines de la
Cruz (now considered one of the great Spanish poets of the 17th century)
so the evening was not wasted.  (+0.5)
This excellent adaptation of Rostand's classic play is completely
enchanting.  Gerard Depardieu was born to play Cyrano and he is
brilliant in the part and yet still believable in the more romantic
moments.  Anne Brochet, Roxanne, is also excellent and the whole
production is well worth seeing.  The French dialogue is said without
sounding too silly and the English translation has been done by Antony
Burgess.  All together excellent.  (+3.5)
     If anyone would like more information on any of the movies listed
then I email me and I will see what I can do.  More films next week.

Title
Review for Volere volare (1991)
Shown at the 35th London Film Festival.
Directors: Maurizo Nichetti, Guido Manuli
Leading Players: Maurizo Nichetti, Angela Finocchiare, Patrizio Roversi.
Italy 1991
Capsule: After THE ICICLE THIEF Nichetti continues his exploration of
mixing reality and fantasy with VOLERE, VOLARE a film in which the
main character (Nichetti) evolves with the animated films he dubs.  +1.5
     VOLERE, VOLARE has Nichetti's look and feel all over it.  He is
star, writer, director and producer of this film and here he plays a
wimpish sound technician fascinated by real sounds and their use for the
cartoon films he adds effects to.  Nichetti's character is obsessively
devoted to that perfect sound and the first half hour or so of the film
is devoted to slapstick style views as he gets the perfect sounds, which
we later see him use while dubbing a cartoon.
     The story revolves around this reclusive character his brother
with whom he shares a sound studio and who dubs porno movies (or as he
describes them, "artistic") and the love interest of a young girl who
provides pleasure for others in some perverse and hilarious ways.
     The film drags slightly towards the latter half of the movie as it
runs out of steam on one track before taking up the final idea brought
to first view in WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT the mixing of live action and
cartoons (with shadows).  The film was originally conceived nine years
ago but Nichetti was unable to raise finance for this film due to the
feeling that cartoons are for children.  When ROGER RABBIT was
successful he was able to raise the $4 million it took to bring this to
the screen.
     Overall this is an enjoyable film with some great visual gags --
especially in the first half of the film -- so if it gets distribution
go see it.
     The London Film Festival Continues until 21 November at the
National Film Theatre and around London.  For further information call
071-928 3232.

Title
Review for Valmont (1989)
Capsule: A freely adapted version of the novel LES LIAISONS DANGEREUSES"
this film gives a new light a feel to the version that many of us have
already seen.  Beautifully shot in widescreen this is an excellent
entertaining adaption of the book. +3
     This film has taken nearly three years to reach the UK as it was
made around the same time as the Stephen Frears version with Glen Close
and John Malcovitch.  This version does not take the Christopher Hampton
play as its staring point but goes back to the original book.
     Again rather than leaving us with a highly florid language of the
original Milos Forman has created a naturalistic dialogue and image of
the protagonists.  No longer do we see nasty evil people doing
unpleasant things to each other but we see characters who show a veneer
of harmless normality while they scheme.
     The film look stunningly beautiful throughout and the performances
are excellent.  The cast is all very young and the 15-year-old virgin
who is being married really does comes across as a sweet innocent.  The
manipulation is still there but it is less blatant to the players while
the audience gets the overview of the game and can see how things start
to go wrong.
     Colin Firth and Annette Benning's performances are excellent.
Colin Firth who was at the screening said how interesting it was to play
as Milos Forman insisted that the character be very naturalistic and not
give any impression of his nature through his behaviour or speech.
     I would thoroughly recommend this film whether you have seen the
other version or not it is a fine piece of film making.

Title
Review for Ucieczka z kina 'Wolnosc' (1991)
Capsule:  This film is about a censor and a film where the actors decide
to take their life into their own hands.  (+0.5)
     ESCAPE FROM THE LIBERTY CINEMA centres around a provincial Polish
censor and the problems that happen when the actors in a film playing in
the "Liberty" Cinema decide they can't take it any more and go on
strike.  The film plays homage to Woody Allen's PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO
and even includes an excerpt from it.
     The film is an odd mix a comedy about a serious subject that varies
from being truly hilarious to very serious.  This means that the film
is, in my opinion, not quite walking the tightrope perfectly but making
a good attempt.
     The film includes some scenes from THE PURPLE ROSE OF CAIRO which
Woody Allen arranged to have provided royalty free after seeing the
script.  This segment where the senior Party officials are called in to
sort out the problem is one of the best in the film as it shows how
farcical the whole thing has become.
     I'm not sure that I would recommend this film to my friends but it
makes its points sufficiently well that I do not feel that I wasted my
time seeing it.

Title
Review for Triple Bogey on a Par Five Hole (1991)
Director: Amos Poe
Leading Players: Eric Mitchell, Daisy Hall, Alba Clemente, Robbie Coltrane
USA 1991
Shown at the 35th London Film Festival.
Capsule: A fictional investigation into the lives of the children of
parents killed while robbing a golf foursome some 14 years before.  +2
     This fascinating little film takes place on a 120-foot motor yacht
that circles Manhattan and is home for three children whose middle class
parents were killed at the end of a summer of bank robberies while
holding up a golf foursome.  The story is told as a screen writer
interviews the protagonists and associated parties to get a feel for the
lives and what led up to the death on the golf course.
     The film mixes colour Super-8 footage home movie footage shot by
the parents with black-and-white photography of the rest of the movie --
the majority of which was shot on the boat with the Manhattan skyline as
a backdrop.
     This film is fun; its whole premise is unbelievable and as you
learn more about the characters and the lives they leave the become even
more unreal, and yet there is a feeling that given just the right
circumstances it would all be possible.
     If you get a chance to see this movie jump at it.  TRIPLE BOGEY
shows that a pure flight of imagination made by a film maker for just
$350,000 can be so valuable in cinema.
Here is a bit more about the plot of the film which may be of interest.
     The film starts with an interview with a literary agent who by a
fluke of lunch appointments took a phone call from a 13-year-old girl
with a book.  The literary agent tells how the orphans without any
surviving relatives are about to be sent to various foster homes when
the daughter stands up for herself and sells an alternative scenario
pleading to the passion of the American masses and with a cheque for an
advance on her book being waved in front of the cameras.
     The plot then follows the story of the current set-up and mixes the
extraction of what happened in the past with the current changes that
are going on in the lives of those aboard the boat.

Title
Review for Urga (1991)
Capsule:  Set in Mongolia, this film is about love, friendship and a
lost heritage. (+1)
     An Urga is a long pole with a lasso on one end that the Mongolians
use for catching their animals on the steppes.  They also use it as
parting of their mating rituals by catching their wives with it and then
planting it in the ground so that they are not disturbed during their
love making.
     URGA is about a family unit 60 miles from the nearest town who have
already got three children (under Chinese Law they are restricted to
two) and the husband wants another.  Into this situation arrives a
Russian construction worker.
     Within this premise the film show life on the steppe and the
killing and preparing of a sheep for dinner with their guest in graphic
detail.  The husband is sent out to buy condoms and returns to town with
the Russian.
     URGA is a film that slowly and beautifully tells its tale but on
occasions one was wondering if it too long at two hrs for the plot
involved.  There are some wondrous moments and so the film is definitely
worth seeing as a display of the way life was in Mongolia.

Title
Review for Enchanted April (1992)
Capsule: Four Ladies clump together to rent a castle in Italy for the
month of April in the early 1920's.  The film revolves around the four
of them their relationships with men and with each other as they go on
their journey from a rainy London to Italy and their stay there.  (+2).
     This year's London Film Festival opened with the World Premiere of
ENCHANTED APRIL, a film made by the BBC, in conjunction with Miramax,
and in the same series as TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY.  The film is a
delightful little picture that, although not fast in the early stages,
blossoms once the participants reach Italy.
     The performances are exquisite as each of the four leading women
blossom in turn as they find a new facet of their existence.  Although
it was made for television, I would reckon that the film works better in
the cinema where the audience can't switch over before the film takes off
and the beautiful photography of Italy is enhanced on the large screen.
     ENCHANTED APRIL takes place in the early 1920s when four ladies,
strangers at the beginning of the film, decide to rent a house in Italy
for the month of April.  The film is based on the novel by Elizabeth Von
Arnim.
     The film will be getting a theatrical release in the UK later this
year and I thoroughly recommend it as an enjoyable evening's
entertainment.
     The London Film Festival Continues until 21 November at the
National Film Theatre and around London.  For further information call
071-928 3232.
