Authors
Aaron Sanders
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
I got paid today, so I shelled out six bucks to see a sneak preview of
Roland Emmerich's GODZILLA. Of course the special effects were great, but
this is 1998--aren't we all very used to spectacular special effects? By
themselves, special effects just don't cut it anymore, and they sure
aren't enough to save this movie.
The main problem is that the movie was given the wrong name. It should
have been called THE LOST WORLD GOES TO NEW YORK. It really shows no
stylistic or dramatic influence from the original GODZILLA series, but
plenty--embarassingly much--from the two JURASSIC PARK films.
Sure, there were a lot of dumb things about the old Japanese Godzilla
films which are better left unemulated; but there are also some reasons
why the Godzilla phenomenon has survived for almost 40 years...and
absolutely none of them are apparent in this new version.
First of all, the original Godzilla was a MONSTER. While he was overweight
and oafy, he at least had a frightening alien/mutant look about him. But,
alas, not only is this new creature unrecognizable as Godzilla, he's also
pitifully unoriginal: he looks uncannily like the Tyrannosaurus Rex in THE
LOST WORLD. Rather than looking alien or mutated or frightening, the new
Godzilla is just another computer-animated dinosaur, right down to the
familiar scale patterns on his skin. Boooorringg!
The original Godzilla also had a real thing for destruction, which made
him scary. The new Godzilla does comparatively little damage as he bounds
through the streets of New York, stomping on cars, his tail gouging out
the sides of buildings. Any Godzilla fan knows the Big Guy should be
THROWING the buildings, or starting a domino-effect with the skyscrapers,
or at least causing an inferno at an oil refinery. In the new movie, more
damage is caused by the military seeking to destroy Godzilla than by
Godzilla himself. As Matthew Broderick's character points out, this new
creature is not really a mutant enemy of mankind, but just a big animal on
the loose.
Oh, and wasn't the original Godzilla able to spit radioactive plasma or
something? There are a few scenes in this version which could be
interpreted as Godzilla spitting fire, but if you're not expecting this,
they could easily be mistaken for coincidental explosions. Nobody ever
says anything about this ability in the script. 
Besides, it seems like you only see Godzilla himself for a total of about
15 minutes in the movie's first 2 hours. What takes up the other 1:45?
Insipid soap-opera sub-plots among the cardboard human characters, that's
what. They were so bad, I was actually BORED. I can only imagine how the
indispensible pre-teen moviegoer will react.
This movie also sabotages its own plot in a way similar to ALIEN
RESURRECTION: Within a few minutes after Godzilla is first sighted in New
York City, Manhattan is completely evacuated. Now, where is the pathos or
suspense in watching Godzilla ravage an EMPTY city? Of course, they would
evacuate Manhattan in the event of a giant lizard, but it would take a
LOOOOONG time--easily long enough for Godzilla to wreak untold havoc on
the population. As it is, he spends most of his time burrowing through the
subways and concealing himself in hollowed-out buildings, playing
hide-and-seek with the inept military. 
Maybe there were some good things about GODZILLA. If it entertained you,
fair enough. But for me, in comparison to what it should have been,
GODZILLA was an immense disappointment.
