Authors
L. O'Connor
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Harriet the Spy (1996)
        I had high expectations of director Bronwen Hughes,
having read Louise Fitzhugh's quirky, insightful children's book
no fewer than twenty-six times since the age of eight.  The book,
published in 1964, bears these irresistible words:  "The zany
adventures of a child spy."  Director Hughes, producer Marykay
Powell, and the screen writers do not disappoint:  the film is
refreshingly imaginative and sensitive, from casting to sound-
track to characterisation.  Just as author Fitzhugh credits her
young readers with intelligence, Hughes presents us with a fully
believable Harriet.  Eleven-year-old Michelle Trachtenberg is an
intense, bright-eyed, intelligent young actor with a wide experssive
range and an arresting credibility.
Harriet is in Grade 5 or 6 and lives in New York City, the
only child of uninvolved parents, whose true caregiver is her nanny,
Golly (Rosie O'Donnell).  Golly's function is more that of a mentor,
and behind her stern exterior we know immediately that she takes
Harriet's individuality and ambition to become a writer seriously.
Nothing Harriet sees goes unnoticed -- or unrecorded in her
spy notebook, marked "PRIVATE" -- from thoughtful musings on the
characters and antics of her New York neighbourhood (the movie was
filmed in Toronto, quite convincingly) to scathingly accurate 
commentaries on her classmates, friends, family, neighbours and
teachers.  The singular child spy has two remarkable friends:
Sport (Gregory Smith), who at age eleven is the capable caretaker of
his "starving artist" writer father, and Janie (Vanessa Lee
Chester), a young Marie Curie.  But the most influential person
in Harriet's life -- and Harriet knows it -- is certainly Golly,
who sees to it that Harriet is given ample opportunity to explore,
observe, and record.  Golly is Harriet's source of wisdom and
encouragement, and delivers pithy one-liners:  "A good spy never
gets caught."  "You're an individual, and that makes people
nervous."  When Harriet's parents fire Golly, Harriet is on her
own, and pursues her "spy route" with redoubled energy.
Harriet's spy route continues to our delight (with an
unforgettable cameo appearance by Eartha Kitt) until, one day,
Harriet's secret notebook is found by the hateful Marion
Hawthorne, and each classmate finds himself or herself skewered
in writing by Harriet's "dossiers", even Sport and Janie, who
too turn against Harriet in an affecting scene.  Even the quality
of light in the film changes as Harriet's life is turned upside
down.  Harriet, always an outsider, now finds herself completely
shunned.  She turns inward again;  What would Golly say?
Harriet's classmates form a "Spy Catchers' Club" to
torment Harriet and follow her on her spy route, and Harriet 
finally retaliates by targeting each classmate and exposing or
using a conceit or a vulnerability:  she knows all, because she 
has observed them all.  Hostilities escalate -- director Hughes
"tells it like it is" in the often-ruthless world of children --
and Harriet's frantic parents finally take her to a psychologist
(whom Harriet is forced to admire because he, too, keeps copious
notes!), and her notebook is taken away.
Just as Harriet declares "I have nothing left to lose,"
Golly reappears for a visit and solemnly tells Harriet what she
must do:  apologise, and lie!  Harriet's strong character is
revealed as she sincerely attempts to tell her friends she is sorry.
"Good friends", in Golly's words, "are one of life's blessings.
Don't give them up without a fight."  
Sport and Janie soon lose interest in the petty hierarchies
of the Spy Catchers' Club, and events finally turn around when
class elections are held for the position of class newspaper
editor, for which Harriet, despite the still-hostile environment,
is nominated.  Not only does Harriet redeem herself by publicly
retracting what she had written privately (a white lie, graciously
handled), but she embarks on a writing career, her long-held
ambition.  Harriet is able to conclude:  "The truth is important,
and so are your friends... if you can have both, it's a good life."
The film has captured the atmosphere and the wisdom of the
book, of equal charm for child and adult viewers.  It is a delight to
see a film about individuality and integrity which never misses
a beat in telling, with humour and depth, a story of an exceptional
girl.  The casting is faithful to the spirit of the book, and the
soundtrack is energetic and upbeat. 
I would recommend "Harriet the Spy" to viewers of all ages.
