Authors
Ian Waldon-Mantgani
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Bone Collector, The (1999)
Rated on a 4-star scale; Screening venue - Odeon (Bromborough); Released in 
the UK by UIP on 14 January, 1999; certificate 15; 118 minutes; country of 
origin USA; aspect ratio 2.35:1
Directed by Phillip Noyce; produced by Martin Bregman, Michael Bregman, Louis 
A Stroller.
Written by Jeremy Iacone; based on the novel by Jeffery Deaver.
Photographed by Dean Semler; edited by William Hoy.
I arrived just in time, and got into the screening of "The Bone Collector" 
just as the lights were going down. I rushed to a good seat, settled in and 
quickly got comfortable -- the opening montage was pieced together in a 
luxurious, soothing way. It took me a minute to realise that the images it 
contained were depictions of horrific murders.
Nauseating brutality has become commonplace in Hollywood. Gone are the days 
when filmmakers expected us to be shocked by such releases as "The Silence of 
the Lambs", "Seven" or "Copycat" -- gather the kids round, folks, because 
savage slaughter is now considered fit material for any popcorn movie.
This one has the premise, pacing and structure of a cheap paperback thriller, 
but it's hard to dismiss it as disposable trash entertainment -- the 
big-budget production shows off glossy photography, pristine locations and a 
big star, Denzel Washington, in the lead role. Washington plays Lincoln 
Rhyme, a forensics expert who was paralysed from the neck down by a falling 
object at a crime scene. Rhyme once had the energy to write twelve 
criminology textbooks; now he's resigned to making defeatist sarcastic 
remarks about everything under the sun, and begging his doctor to inject him 
with something lethal.
Rhyme's former cop colleagues come to him for help: A serial killer is 
deliberately leaving clues, but nobody can decipher them. Our hero does, of 
course, initially object but eventually agree to assist in piecing together 
this puzzle, on the condition that he can work with Amelia Donaghy (Angelina 
Jolie), the young detective who gathered the initial scraps of evidence. He 
likes her attention to detail.
The movie's method is straightforward: Lots of policemen sit around Rhyme's 
apartment and figure out what the killer's latest hints mean; squad cars are 
rushed to the expected crime scenes, and arrive just too late; Rhyme uses a 
walkie-talkie to guide Amelia on how to collect the evidence. She does a lot 
of grimacing at the disgusting situations, and I don't blame her, since she 
has to get stuck into the aftermath of mutilation, flaying, boiling and 
drowning. One guy has bits of his flesh cut out, and is torn apart by rats 
attracted to the blood.
There are preposterous patches throughout all this -- in one scene, for 
example, Amelia is instructed to cut off a victim's hands, to preserve 
physical evidence the killer might have left on them. I am not the first 
person to notice that, using this logic, the corpse might as well be 
decapitated, in case anyone needs to check dental records. This is nothing 
compared to the closing fifteen minutes, in which all dimensions of all 
developments are so absurd that I could write essays on them. Just as 
annoying is the director's overuse of creepy hand-held point-of-view shots, 
which appear in every scene.
The quality of the human presence varies. Ed O'Neill's small role shows he 
could be a good character actor; Washington is forceful and passionate, but 
with subtle undertones of weariness that convince us he really is a cripple, 
rather than an actor lying down and waving his head a lot. Jolie, however, 
who is a good actress, has little to do but stand across from these guys 
while looking tough and responding to their questions.
Conventional and petty criticisms aside, what really disturbs me about this 
flick is how casually it deals with grisly horrors. Today I saw Spike Lee's 
"Summer of Sam", which depicts serial killing with potent realism. Sadly, the 
nonchalant tone of "The Bone Collector" is a clearer reflection of the way 
modern thrillers are headed. I'm glad I do not eat in the cinema -- 
entertainers don't want us to munch on our snacks anymore; they want us to 
puke them up.
COPYRIGHT(c) 2000 Ian Waldron-Mantgani
Please visit the UK Critic's website, located at 
http://members.aol.com/ukcritic
