Authors
Mark Brader
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Fourth Protocol, The (1987)
     Frederick Forsyth has written several thrillers, and several of them have
been adapted into movies, starting with his first, the excellent THE DAY OF THE
JACKAL.  THE FOURTH PROTOCOL marks the first time that Forsyth also did the
screenplay adaptation.
     Pierce Brosnan, who wanted to play James Bond, is now on the other side:
he plays a top Russian agent who is sent to England to do a very dirty piece of
work against the NATO alliance.  (It will violate "the fourth protocol" of a
certain treaty, hence the title.)  Michael Caine, who has starred in spy movies
from THE IPCRESS FILE up to the current THE WHISTLE BLOWER, plays the man who
is trying to stop him.  Caine's world in this movie is not far removed from
that of THE IPCRESS FILE, though perhaps a bit less grotty.
     Caine and Brosnan, and the supporting cast also, turn in decent
performances; the direction was unspectacular but the story kept moving along.
On the whole I found the movie entirely satisfactory -- except for the most
important thing, the script.  (Some types of movies can stand large-to-middling
implausibilities in the script: I loved THE LIVING DAYLIGHTS, rate it $7.50
(Cdn), and recommend it just for fun even to other non-fans of James Bond.  But
a serious thriller such as THE FOURTH PROTOCOL must meet higher standards.)
     I'll be vague about details to avoid any spoilers.  But to give you an
idea: The premise of the Russian plot made sense, but their implementation did
not; it allowed too many chances for the discovery of one piece to tip NATO off
to the whole thing.  (Just as well, otherwise there would have been no movie,
but still...)  One piece of tactics is used so many times that by the last time
it has become predictable; that scene also contains a silly mistake (I was
thinking, "Ah, he's doing it that way so as to avoid that cliche error giving
away his plans", and one minute later, the cliche was shown as having occurred
anyway.)  Also, the ending seemed abrupt, with an explicit unanswered question;
I wondered if a sequel is contemplated.

Title
Review for Pelican Brief, The (1993)
     Alfred Hitchcock used to say that some movies were slices of life,
but "*I* give people slices of *cake*."  Well, Hitchcock is alive
again, and his name is Alan J. Pakula.  THE PELICAN BRIEF is one of the
best thrillers I've seen for a long time.
     The title refers to the film's McGuffin: the reason why two
justices of the U.S. Supreme Court were assassinated in the film's
opening minutes.  Law student Darby Shaw (Julia Roberts) sets herself
the exercise of figuring out that reason.  Soon after, a narrow escape
from death convinces her that she must have guessed right, and also
that in this case it is not safe to go to the police.
     So now she is on the run, from New Orleans to Washington to New
York, while she tries to turn her suppositions into a solid case
against the chief villain.  Along the way she makes the good decision
to trust a Washington reporter, Gray Grantham (Denzel Washington), and
now it's two smart people against a set of adversaries who are also
smart, and well connected, and well equipped, and considerably more
numerous, and entirely willing to kill.
     The movie is 2 hours and about 25 minutes long, almost certainly
the longest thriller I've ever seen.  But it did not seem padded,
except for the surprisingly long denouement.  During the heart of the
movie, Pakula's direction and pacing just kept the movie flowing--and
my adrenaline along with it.
     And that direction is exceptionally restrained.  There are several
murders during the movie, but they generally take place off-screen.
The chief villain is seen, as far as I can recall, only in a
photograph--this is Darby's story, we never stay long away from her
point of view, and we learn his fate only when she does.
     (Pakula does show us more blood than Hitchcock would have, but he
does not linger on it.  For those who are counting, there is also no
nudity--though for some of us male viewers, Julia Roberts's kilowatt
smile can have an equivalent effect.  This too is used in restrained
fashion.)
     This is a director's movie more than an actor's movie; only
competence rather than brilliance was required of the performers.
Roberts delivers this in the lead role, as does Washington, and so do a
number of well-known actors in smaller parts.  (I won't try to
enumerate everyone from memory; see one of the other recently posted
reviews for a cast list.)
     I haven't read John Grisham's book that the movie was based on,
and judging by what I've seen in those other reviews, that's just as
well.  There are plenty of authors whose books are just too complex for
film adaptations to retain much of their content, and by those remarks
and the similar remarks made when THE FIRM came out, it looks as though
Grisham must be one of them.
     I therefore recommend highly that thriller fans, and Hitchcock
fans in particular, see the movie--unless they have already read the
book.
