Authors
Dave Jones
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Silence of the Lambs, The (1991)
     The story would have worked great as a straight documentary, but
they tried to play it as a "monster-in-the-house" thriller.  As a
result, there were more loose ends than you see in a Deal-a-Meal
commercial.
     The biggest flaw, a real whopper, was that the main bad guy
(Anthony Hopkins), after a lengthy escape sequence, simply removed
himself from the plot about two-thirds of the way into the film, not to
figure in the climax and resolution at all.
     In an attempt to smooth this over, the main character (Jodie
Foster) *announces* gratuitously to a minor character that the bad guy
will not be heard of again, and goes off to deal with bad guy number
two.
     All the main conflict was based around the heroine trying to get
from bad guy number one information about bad guy number two, whom we
did not even meet until well into the film.  Once she had as much info
as she was going to get, about half way into the film, the lengthy
escape-sequence contributed absolutely nothing to the plot.  The only
excuse, a poor one, is that it really happened that way.  Of course, I
didn't know that, and since he was the genius at psychology, and she the
talented beginner, I kept expecting Jodie to be proven wrong -- for the
main bad guy to show up when we least expected him.  The other shoe
never dropped, and I felt very dissatisfied: Wait a minute!  Is it
over???  Whaaa???
     Well, he did get a joke cameo at the very end, after Jodie had
vanquished the bogeyman, which she somehow accomplished despite her
utter incompetence in the "monster-in-the-house" scene.  I still don't
know how she offed him in a pitch-dark room, with him wearing infra-red
glasses, and carrying a pistol, while she was flailing around helplessly
on the floor.  Some people in the audience apparently thought it was
scary, but I thought it was just dumb.  She's supposed to be one of the
brightest recent grads of FBI school, and she doesn't know the first
thing about hostage situations.  Oh well, the monster gave her a second
chance to get it right.
     Jodie Foster did not turn in nearly as good a performance as she
usually does.  The high points of the film were Anthony Hopkins's
portrayal of the demented psychologist and the creepy images of the
insane asylum, although those scenes were marred by an "auditory cue," a
deep rumble in the sound-track, which was no doubt intended to make the
audience uncomfortable, and which, in my case at least, succeeded.  I
wonder what Orion Pictures will come up with next: audience thumb-screws
to heighten anticipation?
