Authors
Rick Klau
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Point of No Return (1993)
Director:     John Badham
Producer:     Art Linson
Starring:     Bridget Fonda, Gabriel Byrne, Dermot Mulroney
With:         Anne Bancroft and Harvey Keitel
Screenplay:   Robert Gechell and Alexandra Seros
Music by:     Hans Zimmer
Length:       1 hour 55 minutes.
Rated:        R. brief nudity, graphic violence, language.
Released by:  Warner Bros.
In brief:  Maggie (Bridget Fonda; SINGLE WHITE FEMALE) is a heroine
addict arrested for the murder of a police officer.  Recognizing her
potential, the government offers her a choice: serve her country or
die.  What follows is her training and eventual service.
     Based on Luc Besson's stylish NIKITA (released in the States as LA
FEMME NIKITA), POINT OF NO RETURN is surprisingly good.  While its
trailers and print ads profess to be a run-of-the-mill action flick,
the strength of the original and good performances by Fonda and
Mulroney earn POINT OF NO RETURN good marks.
     I first saw NIKITA two years ago at the Key theater in
Georgetown.  Anne Parillaud won the Cesar for Best Actress in her role
as Nikita, and Luc Besson won acclaim in France for his efforts.
Somewhat difficult to understand (from my point of view) were the
negative reviews NIKITA received when it was released in the summer of
1991.  The Washington Post complained that it lacked substance and
mistook style for content; The New York Times had similar comments.  I
have seen NIKITA several times since that summer and each viewing
brings only more appreciation for a wonderful film.
     But this is a review of POINT OF NO RETURN.  My initial fear as I
entered the theater Friday night was that this would Americanize the
plot without keeping the psychological crisis that the lead female
experiences.  Having seen several trailers on TV, I was already aware
that POINT OF NO RETURN copied some scenes verbatim from NIKITA ... it
seemed as if they had forsaken originality for expediency.
     The plot and indeed the direction borrows heavily from Besson,
although there are some notable departures.  In an interview, Badham
talked about Americanizing the characters - a gamble that in retrospect
paid off.  Even avid fans of NIKITA will feel as if they're seeing
another side of someone they're very familiar with.  Without taking
away from the story, Badham manages to add his own touch to the
characters (especially the part of Marco, Nikita's boyfriend and Bob,
her sadistic supervisor).  The net result is that Badham succeeds in
tweaking the story while maintaining the thoroughly believable
chemistry between the three principles.
     The action scenes are very well choreographed.  Fonda carries off
the rebel attitude that undergoes a remarkable transformation while
under the tutelage of Bob (Mulroney) and her instructor (Anne
Bancroft).  The only "improvement" on the original, I would argue, are
the scenes between Fonda and Bancroft: Bancroft acts as if the part
were written for her and Fonda seems to enjoy her "learning."
     Harvey Keitel, in the role of Victor the cleaner, is credible,
however he does not convey the same electricity that was present in the
original.  The role calls for a very intimidating persona; Keitel
manages the mental intimidation but fails to instill physical fear.
     The film does have its flaws, some technical and some artistic.
Washington, DC does not have a death penalty yet Maggie (Fonda) is
condemned to death after killing a DC cop.  Badham's direction is not
nearly as stylish as Besson's; often Badham mistakes a skewed camera
angle for "style" and is often blunt when subtlety would serve his
purpose better.  Studio politics obviously had a hand in the directing
as well: nowhere in the film are non-American cars obvious.  Especially
considering the environment that Maggie operates in, it's hard to
believe that her targets would be driving Chevy Cavaliers.  The product
advertising was unnecessary (even an AfterDark box next to a Macintosh
at one point) but did not distract from the film as a whole.
     Of the two, NIKITA is by far the better, if only because it was
original.  Instead of seeming like a cheap imitation, POINT OF NO
RETURN manages to come off like a decent copy.  It's certainly
enjoyable, although I would urge anyone who likes it to rent NIKITA as
soon as possible.
