Authors
Matthew Biller
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Prophecy II, The (1998)

The Prophecy II
 Starring :Christopher Walken,Russell Wong, Jennifer Beals,Brittany
Murphy,with Glen Danzig as Samayel and Eric Roberts as Michael
The war in heaven between angels over God's love for humans rages on and
is reaching a point of biblical anarchy. Something must be done. Lucifer
no longer wanting Gabriel (Christopher Walken) sharing any power with
him in the bowels of Hell, resurrects Gabriel and sends him forth to
complete this war and let order come once again to heaven and hell.
Unfortunately for all of us, the battle will be fought on earth. This
storyline has grasped me from the start. The first movie was a triumph
of imagination and Gothic storytelling, the second one is not greater
nor of lesser value, it is simply.a second chapter, but as far as
sequels go, and especially ones like this which go straight to the video
shelf, The Prophecy II has power. Christopher Walken is hypnotic as the
archangel Gabriel, who despises humans and renounces God for loving
them. His movements are fluid and professional. He is on a mission and
does not ever waver from his task. Walken's dialogue seems written
especially for him because he delivers it with such smoking sarcasm and
fury. This time the savior of Earth comes in the form of an unborn child
growing inside an LA nurse. (Jennifer Beals) given to her by another
angel;Danyael whom she befriends (Russell Wong) She learns of her
mission to keep the child alive and is pursued by Gabriel. Brittany
Murphy who played Tai in "Clueless" makes a surprising turn around in
her role as Izzy, a poor depressed teenager who is brought back to life
by Gabriel after an attempted suicide. Gabriel does not know how to
manipulate things like a gun or computer in the real world,so he enlists
the help of this lost soul. Best line in the film belongs to Izzy "Your
keeping me alive because you dont know DOS?"
Great performances all around although there were too many shots of
Jennifer Beals with her eyes wide open. Walken is always a treat to
watch, images of angels at war with each other including, bloody wings
and carnage in the clouds lingers in your head long afterwards and the
film's dedication to the strong and compelling story makes this movie
not just another horror sequel. And definately leaves the door open for
The Prophecy III. IMHO They should complete the story with a third
chapter and movie goers like me can own a trilogy unlike any other. 
***1/2 out of *****
:please note that all of my reviews will never turn me from the fact
that Titanic is the greatest movie that I have ever seen in my 19 years
of life. Thank you.
