Authors
Doug Skiles
Number of Reviews
25

Title
Review for Deep Impact (1998)
Starring: Téa Leoni (Jenny Lerner), Elijah Wood (Leo Biederman), Robert
Duvall (Spurgeon "Fish" Tanner), Morgan Freeman (President Beck), Leelee
Sobieski (Sarah Hotchner), Maximilian Schell (Jason Lerner), Vanessa
Redgrave (Robin Lerner)
Directed by: Mimi Leder, Written by: Bruce Joel Rubin and Michael Tolkin
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence and other intensity, strong
langauge, and sexual references
Earthquakes, tidal waves, flaming debris, and all that jazz.
It's the stuff that disaster movies are made of.  And DEEP IMPACT is
clearly a disaster film.
As our story opens, Leo and Sarah unwittingly stumble upon a comet. 
They send the information off to a scientist, who is then (stupidly and
predictably) killed before he can tell anyone that a flaming ball is
headed for Earth.  A year later, we find the government has gotten ahold
of the records of the find somehow and knows of the impending disaster,
but has yet to tell the world.  Jenny Lerner, an aspiring reporter at
CNBC (what's with aspiring reporters this summer?), unwittingly stumbles
upon the government's plans to deal with the heavenly body heading our
way, forcing President Beck to step up his announcement of the
approaching comet.  He makes the announcement, and then details his plan
to stop it - they're sending a group of astronauts, led by moon landing
veteran Spurgeon Tanner, up into space to land on the comet, plant
nuclear bombs in it, and blow it to pieces.  Before our story ends,
we'll have to try this plan out, Jenny will have to reconcile with her
father, Leo will get married to Sarah (apparently at age 14 or so...
yeah, that's healthy), and basically, a lot of crazy crap will be goin'
on.
DEEP IMPACT owes a lot to the Irwin Allen disaster films of yore, with
their collection of characters all facing down personal trials in their
lives at a time of crisis.  And like many disaster films, some
characters are engaging, others are inane.  Leoni is questionable as
Jenny Lerner.  Sometimes, she's excellent.  Sometimes, she's downright
bad.  And she bounces back and forth quite a bit.  Her parents are
stronger though.  Redgrave is wonderful as always, but perhaps the best
part of her family is Schell, who turns out a fantastic performance.
The film's weakest links go to Wood and Sobieski (who looks an awful lot
like a little Helen Hunt, and even sounds like her in a few scenes). 
Elijah seems to be trying, but the horrible performance of his love
interest, and their positively idiotic and laughable romance seriously
hurts this movie.  Their parents (such as the always-great Richard
Schiff who plays Elijah Wood's father) are better, but do almost
nothing.
Morgan Freeman conveys real emotion and power as the President.  He is
the kind of President that you would respect and listen to.  A
commanding presence, as always, even though his screen time is rather
limited.  He really should've been used and developed more.
The film's strongest aspect is the group of astronauts.  All of their
roles are well-acted, particuarly Robert Duvall's as the aging American
icon.  We truly care about them, and when they face danger, we're right
there with 'em.  They are the thread that holds this movie together. 
Still, one question sticks out - why is it that they are in their
uniforms in some scenes, but fly through space wearing plain street
clothes in others?  Of course, that's a very minor gripe. 
Oddly, James Cromwell makes a brief appearance as a senator.  An actor
of his superb skill should've had much more to do, especially since he's
saddled with a bit of foolish dialogue in his minor role.
Mimi Leder's direction isn't as impressive as it looked back in THE
PEACEMAKER (1997), her feature debut, but it's still quite good.  James
Horner delivers a great score, of course.  The script, though, is fairly
weak.  The performances either let all the script's weaknesses shine
through, or rise above them triumphantly, depending on which one of the
film's plots are in question.
The astronauts' scenes and those belonging to Morgan Freeman, along with
a few of Leoni's moments, are powerful and at times, touching.  Some
audience members broke down and cried at times, and that's
understandable.  On the flip side of the coin, Elijah Wood's subplot is,
unfortunately, laughably bad, and at times, Téa has the same problem. 
The end note of the movie is a depressing one.  There is an attempt at a
final upbeat scene, but it falls flat after the numerous deaths that
came before.  Like last year's TITANIC (1997), this is film that can
leave you disquieted by its tragedy, although TITANIC was the story of a
real disaster, whereas this is clearly fictional.  Both, though, can put
you into the position of wondering what you would do in such a
situation.
Still, Wood's plot and a number of Leoni moments really hurt the film,
because they're the two plots that take up the most running time,
unfortunately.  In the end, because of that strong flaw, a film that is
sometimes notably touching generates unintentional laughter.  And when a
climactic scene doesn't quite work, that's another problem.  In the end,
this is an above average disaster movie, but nothing fantastic overall. 
Be warned, there's only two action/special effects sequences in the film
- the astronauts' visit to the comet and the title sequence, and, while
both are nothing short of absolutely spectacular, summer action junkies
would do better to check out GODZILLA (1998) for their adrenaline and
CGI fix.  DEEP IMPACT is more of a dramatic film than an action film. 
It poses interesting questions about how the planet's population would
react to the impending end of the world, and then fails to answer them
satisfactorily or very believably.  Fans of disaster movies will enjoy
it quite a bit.  Fans of drama or action films, though, are likely to
feel disappointed.  Expect a disaster movie with more character
development and less action, and you'll be alright.
"Heroes die... but they are remembered." - President Beck

Title
Review for Substitute 2: School's Out, The (1998) (TV)
THE SUTSTITUTE 2: SCHOOL'S OUT (1998)
Starring: Treat Williams (Carl Thomesson), Susan May Pratt (Anya), B.D.
Wong (Warren Drummond), Michael Michelle (Kara), Angel David (Joey Six),
Edoardo Ballerini (Danny)
Directed by: Steven Pearl, Written by: Roy Frumkes & Rocco Simonelli
(who are probably really, really embarrassed)
It probably goes without saying that this "film" is a piece of frozen
crap...  
What do you expect when the biggest names in the movie are Treat
Williams and B.D. Wong?  Most people don't even know who Wong IS.  He's
probably best known for playing Howard Weinstein in FATHER OF THE BRIDE
(1991) and FATHER OF THE BRIDE PART II (1995), or perhaps for his small
role as Dr. Henry Wu in JURASSIC PARK (1993).  
Treat Williams is a likable guy though.  He always has a nice presence,
and that presence is the only thing good in this movie.  He doesn't even
get to show much of it here.  He was a lot more interesting in THE
DEVIL'S WON (1997), THE PHANTOM (1996), THE LATE SHIFT (1996), and hell,
he was even more interesting in DEEP RISING (1998).  In this movie, he
doesn't really get to show off his skills, and, as a result, he barely
has more presence than he did in THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK (1980).  That,
of course, was the best film he's ever been in, and it's not saying much
when his best role was an uncredited cameo. 
For those who you didn't care - and who can blame you - THE SUBSTITUTE
(1996) featured Tom Berenger and Ernie Hudson in a story of Berenger,
who played John Shale, infiltrating a high school in Miami as a
substitute to try to bring down the drug ring being run through the
school and catch the men who assaulted his girlfriend, played by Diane
Venora.  A little personality from Berenger (far from the days of
PLATOON (1986), a touch of charisma from Hudson (forever thought of by
most moviegoers as "the fourth Ghostbuster"), and a mildly amusing plot
pretty much carried the film - or tried, since it sure as hell wasn't
carried very far.  It was another example of an action film as strictly
below-average entertainment.  The movie tanked at the box office, and
rightfully so.  However, apparently it doesn't take much money to get
Live Entertainment pleased enough to make a sequel, and here it is,
appearing on HBO.  It's a little questionable why they funded the
original, and even more curious why in the hell they paid for this pile
of cow droppings.  Maybe they plan to continue the series endlessly, so
that every actor who's left with nothing else to do can join in and kick
around some gangs.
This time around, Carl wants revenge when his brother Randal
(Christopher Cousins) is killed by gang members in New York City.  So
naturally, he travels to New York to track them down.  Yawn.  
Stuck at home with nothing interesting on TV on a Friday night, I got
roped into watching this mindless sequel, and, upon seeing the name of
the charasmatic Williams in the lead, had a blink of hope.  No go.  A
couple of somewhat amusing scenes (such as Williams wielding a yo-yo as
a weapon in a classroom) don't make up for a strong dose of
unoriginality and a lot of boring action.  
Incidentally, though this is supposed to be a sequel to THE SUBSTITUTE,
the only character to return from the original is Joey Six, who has a
larger role here, but still remains strictly a supporting player. 
Berenger and Verona's characters are only briefly mentioned.  Six was
played by Raymond Cruz in original, and is here replaced by Angel David,
who is moderately likable, if nothing else.  Cruz has since been seen in
last November's excellent ALIEN RESURRECTION (1997).
In the end, the movie stays short, approximately 90 minutes, but it
still isn't worth the time.  Viewers who see THE SUBSTITUTE 2: SCHOOL'S
OUT show up on HBO as they flip through the channels will do best to
just keep on flippin'.  I certainly hope that Live Entertainment isn't
planning on subjecting anyone to THE SUBSTITUTE 3: THE LUNCHROOM with
Tom Selleck, or some other such crap, any time soon.

Title
Review for Halloween (1978)
Starring: Jamie Lee Curtis (Lauris Strode), Donald Pleasance (Dr. Sam
Loomis)
Directed by: John Carpenter, Written by: John Carpenter and Debra Hill
Rated R by the MPAA for blood, violence, nudity, sexual situations,
strong language, drug usage, oh hell you name it.
Why, you ask, is this labeled as a review and not a retrospective?  And
why, you ask, are you reviewing this in Febuary?
Alright, here's the deal.  Back in October of 1997, a nice little
theater here in the St. Louis area, the "Mid Rivers 6" (one of those
little mall theaters) decided to show the original HALLOWEEN film on one
of its big screens - you know, like they say all the time, "the way it
was meant to be seen." Anyway, since I didn't see HALLOWEEN for the
first time until October of '97 (yes, sad isn't it?), and it was playing
in a theater, it's a review.  As for why I'm writing it now... well I
just got around to it, that's all.  Sorry I couldn't have a better story
for all this.
Anyway, this, the first of what is about to become seven HALLOWEEN
films, is quite the damn good show.  You have to keep in mind, this
movie was made for less than 1 million dollars, is scored via John
Carpenter's keyboard, and is the film that spawned oh, say... ALL the
slasher flicks of the 80s.
So in other words, the plot here has become the stuff of legend and the
stuff of so many imitators that it's predictable on a level that most
people don't even know existed.  And so what?  It's still effectively
spooky, and a good time.
Okay.  Here's the story.  This guy, Michael Myers, killed his sister in
Haddonfield, Illinois, when he was six.  And then he got shipped off to
the mental hospital and all that kinda stuff.  With me?  Good.  So this
Doc, Dr. Loomis, is studying the freak, and realizes that he's is "PURE
EVIL" (a Dr. Loomis catch-phrase).  And that means he's one of the most
wigged people when Mikey escapes over a decade after his original crime
and heads home... on Halloween.  Hence the title.  And hence the line
from the ads: "The Night HE Came Home." Get it?  Good.  Oh yeah, and
this girl, Laurie Strode, happens to be babysitting this night, and so
are her friends, and they're all doing this in the same area, and, well,
you can figure out the rest.
It's suspenseful, that's what this comes down to.  The music, cheesy
though it may seem at first, works.  The acting, particularly from our
two leads, works.  It's a classic, and it deserves to be, it's damn
fun.  Sure it's predictable.  But so?  A lot of movies are - you knew
that John McClane was going to kick terrorist ass in every DIE HARD
movie right?  It's all of matter of how you get to that point.  
So yeah, it lives up to the test of time.  It has the FEEL of a classic,
and that goes a long way towards the fun - even at the hokey times, you
know it only seems hokey because of the time period it was made in.
Anyway, that's enough from me.  All I really have to say is, you've
heard it's a classic film, and I'm agreeing that it deserves the
mantle.  Not many horror/suspense DO, after all.  All that without the
KWC.  And you know, nothing's scarier than a William Shatner mask,
either.  

Title
Review for GoodFellas (1990)
Starring: Ray Liotta (Henry Hill), Joe Pesci (Tommy DeVito), Lorraine
Bracco (Karen Hill), Robert DeNiro (James Conway), Paul Sorvino (Paul
Cicero)
Directed by: Martin Scorsese, Written by: Nicholas Pileggi and Martin
Scorsese, based on the novel WISEGUY written by Nicholas Pileggi
"As far back as I can remember, I always wanted to be a gangster." -
Henry Hill
Martin Scorsese's GOODFELLAS is one of the great mafia movies.  Every
part is acted so well, with every directorial touch perfectly done
(including the longest stedicam shot on record), every plot detail is so
relevant, that in the end, the only thing irrelevant are the reviews
like this one.  What is there to say about a movie like this?
If you had to make a complaint, it would be that there's not really any
characters in this movie worth liking.  There's too many scumbags. 
Sure, at first you like all of 'em, just like Henry.  But soon you see
the truth.  Then again, why would you want someone to like in a story
like this?  It would go against the entire message.
Henry is a kid who grows up in New York, and dreams of being in the
mob.  He gets in, and we follows his life for decades as things go from
bad to worse for him.   
His life in the mob starts enjoyable enough, and we're enjoying it with
him.  Everybody is a smiling face, everybody wants to help.  Sure,
they're all criminals, but they're nice criminals, who're always willing
to stick out their neck for a friend.
But, as Henry warns us, in the mafia, your murderers come with smiles. 
They're all just as willing to have their friends brutally murdered as
they are to give them a hand.  If you don't do what you're supposed to
in the mob, you wind up "whacked", sometimes by a gun, sometimes a
knife, sometimes hanging, frozen, in a meat locker, gutted.  Just as
fast as things seemed fun, they turn evil, dark, and sinister.  Life in
the mob looks glamorous on the outside, in the movies of Hollywood's
Golden Age.  But Henry Hill soon learns that the reality is far, far
harsher.  Life in the mob isn't heaven, it's hell.
GOODFELLAS is a true story, and that only further drives home what we're
learning here.  The mob isn't a colorful crowd of wacky criminals like
in "Dick Tracy" - it's a brutal underworld of murder and deceit.  And
sure, that's not really a lesson - we all knew it, inside.  But it's
rarely showed to us quite so clearly how one can be drawn in by the
glamour, only to end up fearing death at every turn.

Title
Review for Alien: Resurrection (1997)
Starring: Sigourney Weaver (Lt. Ellen Ripley [Clone]), Winona Ryder
(Annalee Call)
Directed by: Jean-Pierre Jeunet, Written by: Joss Whedon
Rated R by the MPAA for blood and violence, strong language, and some
minor nudity.
I gave an A+ to THE LOST WORLD this year and one to FACE/OFF too.  Okay,
that's nice.  Those movie met my expectations.  I expected a sequel that
was more based on action scenes than the original was with THE LOST
WORLD and I expected FACE/OFF to be, well, a John Woo action film.  
Now, what do I do when a movie *exceeds* my expectations?
I guess I should consider that I can't give an A+ to every movie that
meets my expectations.  I mean, if I get crap, and I expected crap, then
crap doesn't get an A+.  I expected BATMAN & ROBIN to be crap, and I
still only gave it a D+, because, well, it *was* crap.
Still, the point is, if I expect good things out a movie, and get them
all, I can't immediately slap it with an A+.  It should get more like an
A.  A+'s should be reserved for movies that exceed my expectations. 
Maybe.  Or maybe I'll just be lazy and stick with the old way.  Well
anyway...
Why am I talking about this?  Well, because I'm not sure what grade to
give to ALIEN RESURRECTION.
This is a movie that is a sequel to a classic series.  The original
ALIEN (1979) is a classic.  ALIENS (1986), the second film, is a classic
as well.  In fact, it's probably the greatest and most intense action
film ever made.  ALIEN 3 (1992) had its problems and didn't quite
measure up to the first two films, but it definitely had its positive
points as well, not the least of which were great acting, lavishly
dismal sets, and good direction from David Fincher (who has since worked
on SEVEN [1995] and THE GAME [1997]).  
So can a *fourth* film measure up to the tradition?  Can it possibly be
better than the admittedly somewhat disappointing third installment? 
After reading the first draft of the script, and seeing just a few short
scenes from the film, I was filled with hope.  It looked like this movie
could blow people away.  The legacy could live on.
I tried not to get my hopes up too high, and yet somehow I knew that I
would be blown away.
Sure enough, when November 26 came around, I was sure as hell blown
away, and even in some ways I didn't expect.
ALIEN RESURRECTION takes place 200 years after ALIEN 3.  Ripley has been
long dead, but it seems that way back before her demise, during the
medical examinations Ripley in ALIEN 3, the medical officer Clemens (or
possibly someone else?) took some blood samples from Ripley.  Well, that
was when Ripley was inpregnated with an alien queen, and, as you may
recall learning from ALIEN 3, aliens can take on some physical
attributes of their hosts by intertwining with the host's DNA.  And the
United Systems Military (or a somewhat renegade branch thereof) realizes
that, by cloning themselves a new Ripley from these blood samples,
they'll be getting a Ripley that has a nice fresh alien queen inside of
her, due to the DNA in the blood samples being a mix of Ripley and
alien.  However, due to the slighty difficulties of the cloning process,
Ripley as become somewhat of a hybrid creature - a human with some alien
attributes.  For some examples: Ripley is now stronger than before, and
her blood has acidic properties.  By the way, since the aliens have a
hive mind and therefore have a collective memory, mixing those alien
memory cells with Ripley's own cells has given this new Ripley clone
some (rather sketchy) memories of her past.
Now the military scientists of the U.S.S. AURIGA have gotten a hold of
their very own alien queen, and they're keeping their new Ripley clone
alive as sort of a curiosity to study - their intrigued by her genetic
mix and the fact that she ("IT" corrects Dr. Wren) actually has
memories.
The crew of THE BETTY pays a visit to the AURIGA to deliver some
unorthodox cargo - sleeping people in cryotubes.  These smugglers, of
which there are six (Elgyn, the cool-headed, smooth-talking leader;
Hillard, pilot of THE BETTY and Elgyn's lover; Vriess, a mechanic who is
paralyzed from the waist down [and seems to have a thing for the
attractive young Call]; Call [played by Winona Ryder], apparently
another mechanic, who Elgyn refers to as a "little girl playin'
pirates"; Christie, a calm, cool, and collected man of action; and
Johner, the group's loose canon, a hard drinker with an attitude
problem) will do pretty much anything for money, and they don't know why
they're getting these dozing innocents for the ship's science division,
but there's good pay in it, so they're up for it.  The reason that the
scientists want these unsuspecting nappers is that they intend to use
their bodies as hosts for a new army of aliens which they then plan to
"tame" - an idea that is obviously a bad one.  
Director Jean-Pierre Jeunet has infused this film with his own style, as
have the previous ALIEN film directors (Ridley Scott on ALIEN, James
Cameron on ALIENS, and David Fincher on ALIEN 3), and, as always in this
series, the director's unique style is an impressive and highly
effective one in its own way.
The acting, another thing with consistent quality in this series, is
great.  Sigourney Weaver reprises her OSCAR nominated roll (for ALIENS)
as Ripley with a whole new angle that is creepily effective and
gradually evolves throughout the pictures in a way that works quite
well.  She is, rightfully, the highlight.  Winona Ryder plays the humane
and moral Call with all the right touches.  Ron Perlman is funny and
cool as can be in the role of Johner.  I could keep going down the
entire list, but suffice to say that all of the players are fantastic.
Sets and gorgeous and eye-popping.  Same for the effects, both
animatronic and CGI.
The entire movie is excellently written.  Dialouge is absolutely
wonderfully scripted.  The dramatic scenes *do* make you care about the
characters and keep you interested, and when the action sequences are
going on, you're glued to the screen.  Joss Whedon (creator of the
"Buffy The Vampire Slayer" TV show as well as a writer for a number of
movies including TOY STORY) deserves credit for a great script and great
revisions to boot.
Incidentally, if you're wondering, complaints about the last third of
the film being poor in comparison to the rest of it are quite unfounded
in my opinion; the entire portion of the movie is of just as high
quality as the rest of the film.
I could go on and on, but it's best to just say that this is a wonderful
film.  If you love action, sci-fi, or just the ALIEN series, go see it
and enjoy.  Even if you disagree that it's good as I say, it's hard to
say (with a straight face anyway) that it's not at least enjoyable and
entertaining.
To 20th Century Fox, I say, please, make an ALIEN 5!  Yes, I'm going to
encourage the production of a sequel.  There's certainly a lot of
possibilites that could be explored with these creatures, and I think
that we can at least try to end the series on a number less awkward than
"4".  Maybe this could become a series like STAR TREK or JAMES BOND -
one that could go on for many years, perhaps with a new character taking
over in Ripley's stead when Sigourney is ready to retire (preferrably a
character that could introduced in an episode before Sigourney steps
down).  Still, an ALIEN film without Ripley would be difficult to
imagine and would take a lot of work, Sigourney and the amount of work
and skill she brings to each story is a staple in an important staple in
these series... for now, let's just keep her around and give her new,
interesting things to do.  And make sure not to let the quality on the
series slip - don't any entries turn out like rushed crap like BATMAN &
ROBIN.  Yes, this is a challenge - keeping it fresh, keeping it fun,
keeping it high quality, and still keeping it going - but I don't think
it's necessarily impossible.  If it could be done, it could be a first. 
If it couldn't be, I still think a fifth and maybe a sixth film at least
could provide nice closure on an excellent series, and could be done in
new and interesting ways, and also, by being the final installment(s),
could stop the story from getting stale in the end by dragging on too
long.
Alright, enough with my "final thoughts", time for that
difficult-to-decide-on rating. 
RATING A+ (with extra credit?  I really need to work on my grading
scale... ) or ****+ (four [possibly more? five?] stars... and again, I
need to work on this blasted scale)

Title
Review for Blues Brothers 2000 (1998)
Starring: Dan Aykroyd (Elwood Blues), John Goodman (Mack McTeer/Mighty
Mack Blues), Joe Morton (Cabel Chamberlain), J. Evan Bonifant (Buster),
and just about every blues artist you can think of, both past and
present
Directed by: John Landis, Written by: Dan Aykroyd and John Landis
Everybody... needs somebody... everybody...
THE BLUES BROTHERS.  It's a classic.  It's John Landis.  It's John
Belushi.  It's Dan Aykroyd.  It's blues music.  It's great comedy.
Now it's 18 years later.  Now it's BLUES BROTHERS 2000.  It's John
Landis.  It's Dan Aykroyd.  It's John Goodman.  It's Joe Morton.  It's
J. Evan Bonifant.  It's blues music.  It's good comedy.
BLUES BROTHERS 2000 starts off just the way you'd want it to - with a
card that says "for" followed by the names of John Candy, Cab Calloway,
and John Belushi.  Then, with "John the Revelator" playing over the
soundtrack, we watch Elwood Blues emerge from prison.  He stands and
waits for his brother Jake (originally played by John Belushi), until
the prison warden (Frank Oz, who was the corrections officer in the
original film) approaches him, puts his hand on Elwood's shoulder, and
says, simply, "I'm sorry."  Elwood understands.  He bows his head,
silently, in grief.  It's a moment that reminds us that these
characters, as screwball as they may seem, still have a heart and soul.
Elwood recieves a letter from Sister Mary Stigmata - now Mother Stigmata
- asking him to come see her.  He does, and when he arrives, he learns
that his surrogate father, Curtis (Cab Calloway in the first film), has
also passed on.  It's then that Elwood realizes that he's lost his
family, and, left yearning for his old friends, he decides that it's
time, once again, to get the band back together.
But Mother Stigmata wants him to a mentor to a young troublemaker,
Buster.  And Elwood wants his sort-of step-brother (the sort-of gets
explained by Stigmata and Elwood through a couple of dialogue
sequences), Cabel, who happens to be an Illinois state police captain,
to join the band.  And pretty soon Elwood meets a bartender who can
actually sing pretty well, Mack McTeer.  And of course, Mack joins the
band.
And pretty soon, also, the police are after the band, as are the Russian
mafia, a group of white supremacists, and a collection of orphanage
workers who fear Elwood's kidnapped Buster.  And they're all chasing the
newly reassembled Blues Brothers Band across state after state as they
head to a "Battle Of The Bands" contest in New Orleans.  Naturally this
results in lots of wacky chase scenes and the like.  It's a Blues
Brothers speciality.  
The comedy here is good.  It's fun.  But it's not on the same level as
the hilarious, classic stuff from the first film.  It does, however,
recreate the feel of the first film, and that's important.  The city
backdrops that line all the scenes as Elwood travels through Chicago
during the first half of the movie add to that feeling, too.
The music, though, IS pretty much on the same level, and offers a wider
variety of blues acts from both today and yesterday, ranging from Aretha
Franklin to Blues Traveler.  It's great fun, very exhilerating, and is
sure to get you moving to the beat with some area of your person.  It's
probably the film's strongest aspect.
As far as annoying aspects, well, the fantasy in this film is heavier
than in the first.  Both films ignore the laws of physics in favor of
wild comedy, but this one also tosses magic into the mix periodically. 
Of course, that's not too hard to accept, really - this is the Blues
Brothers, you weren't expecting something serious, were you?
But in all of this, the movie still has an underlying heart and soul to
it.  In the original, it was about getting the money to save the
orphanage.  Now, it's about Elwood getting a new structure for his
life.  Even if this isn't a major theme, there remains something
satisfying about seeing Elwood build himself a new family to hold his
life together, out of old friends from the band, plus new friends like
the large-yet-shy Mack and the lovable Buster, who feels the blues in
him even at age 10, and steals a lot of scenes.  Out of the four major
players, Cabel is the least characterized, but it doesn't really matter,
because Joe Morton always holds a presence on the screen.
The sign that, even if it isn't a classic, this is still a good movie,
is that it leaves you wanting more.  Does that mean there should be
another sequel?  I'm not sure about that.  I don't know where else the
band could go from here.  Even this one borrows a number of elements
from the first movie.  And while that's not a serious problem for this
sequel, as it still takes those elements in new directions, one has to
note that, if these elements were used a third time, they most likely
wouldn't be able to hold up.
So, see BLUES BROTHERS 2000.  Enjoy it.  It's fun, and the music is
great.  Maybe it's not nearly as hilarious as the classic first one, but
it still manages to be funny, and it's just likable.  Most importantly,
even though John Belushi's wild antics are obviously missed, this
manages to be a respectable, well-done follow-up to THE BLUES BROTHERS,
despite what many naysayers feared.  To have that be pulled off, after
18 years, is something to be proud of.  John Landis has made his best
movie in a long time, and it looks that, perhaps, Dan Aykroyd, thanks to
this and his memorable-yet-smaller role in GROSSE POINTE BLANK (1997),
may be entering into his renaissance after a long dry period.    

Title
Review for Titanic (1997)
Starring: You already know the whole damn list
Directed by: James Cameron, Written by: James Cameron
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for disturbingly realistic violence, nudity,
sexual situations, and strong language - in other words, it should've
been an R
It's hard to say something about this movie that hasn't already been
said.  Yes, it's brilliant.  Yes, the performances are all excellent. 
It's very well-written, and expertly directed.  What else needs to be
said?
Well, since you know that this film is an epic of excellence, maybe some
of its flaws should be pointed out for a change.  I'm not saying that
it's not excellent.  But somewhere, in the shuffle, we forgot that it's
not perfect.
There's little things, like the fact that the special effects, usually
excellent, also have clear flaws (obvious stunt doubles with
texture-mapped Leo and Kate faces in some scenes, obvious CGI people in
some daytime overhead shots).  There's big things, like the fact that
Billy Zane's Cal Hockley and David Warner's Spicer Lovejoy, who act as
the villians, are ridiculously one-note and depicted as having no
redeeming qualities.  It's even taken so far as to have Lovejoy put Jack
in a James Bond-style slow-moving death trap, where Spicer mocks Jack
briefly and then leaves him to his fate, just as someone like Goldfinger
would have done to Sean Connery.  You almost expect the dialogue to go:
 "Do you expect me to talk? - Jack Dawson
 "No, Mr. Dawson, I expect you to die!" - Spicer Lovejoy
That's never said, but the dialogue that IS there does sound a little
cheesy at times.  However, it's usually excellent, the stuff that
Cameron's legacy is made of.  All of his movies have dialogue that
always sticks with us, from the emotional union between Ripley and Newt
in ALIENS (1986) to the simple one-liners like "Hasta la vista, baby" in
TERMINATOR 2: JUDGEMENT DAY (1991).  
But perhaps the problem with the farthest-reaching implications is the
destruction of moral standards.  Why does Hollywood feel the need to
always depict marriage as a trap?  Is it because Hollywood marriages so
rarely last?  Maybe Cameron wanted to justify his own three marriages? 
And why do we always promote teen sex in Hollywood films?  We give
teenagers everywhere a license to have sex even when they feel nothing
for their partners.  We tell them to do what feels right, regardless of
how they feel about the person they use to get it.  When you see Jack
and Rose in this film, they're like a latter-day Romeo and Juliet -
star-crossed and doomed lovers, who fall in love with their idealized
images of each other rather than the truths.  Like Romeo and Juliet,
they believe that they've found love, but they barely know one another -
they've found infatuation, a temporary, yet powerful feeling that leads
them to do anything in their power to protect their relationship.  Only
as the years go own, and Rose grows older, does she realize that, yes,
Jack was someone she will always cherish for all that he did for her. 
But it's pretty doubtful that she could've understood that at her young
age on that Titanic voyage, after having only two days with the boy.
Some of these problems sound serious, but Cameron's narrative is such
effective storytelling that it doesn't matter very much.  It's the thing
of legend - an epic in the style of Hollywood's golden age.  It can
leave you disquieted, or it can leave you uplifted - or, more likely,
both at once.  Today, parents look at their children and smile, telling
them how it felt to see STAR WARS (1977) in it original theatrical
release.  Years from now, the youth of today will have their own movie
stories to share, and surely TITANIC will be one of them.

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
Starring: Jack Johnson (Will Robinson), Gary Oldman (Dr. Zachary Smith),
William Hurt (John Robinson), Matt LeBlanc (Major Don West), Lacey
Chabert (Penny Robinson), Mimi Rogers (Maureen Robinson), Heather Graham
(Judy Robinson), Dick Tufeld (voice of Robot)
Directed by: Stephen Hopkins, Written by: Akiva Goldsman 
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, strong language, and sexual
situations
"We're lost... aren't we?" - Penny Robinson
Yes, the Robinson family is lost again, with Dr. Smith, Major West, and,
of course, the Robot, all in tow.  You probably know about this, though,
since it's been advertised since last August or so.  It's been
advertised as much as your typical effects-heavy summer film blast, but
it sure as hell isn't summer yet.  At any rate, as you can probably
guess, LOST IN SPACE is based on the TV series of the same name that
aired in the 1960s.  And, as such, the plot has a number of similar
aspects in it.
In the future, the Earth is dying.  In only two more decades, it will be
uninhabitable for human life.  However, one planet has been found that
can be colonized to save the human race - Alpha Prime.  The planet is
ten years away however - and that's where the Robinson family comes in. 
The Robinsons, their pilot Major Don West, and a defensive robot are to
take the ten year journey (spent in cryo-sleep - by the humans at least)
on board the Jupiter 2 to Alpha Prime, and build a hypergate there. 
This gate can then be used along with the identical gate built next to
Earth so allow the citizens of our lovely blue planet to transport
instantaneously to Alpha Prime.  It all seems like a fine plan, but no
one counts on Dr. Zachary Smith, who, working in cooperation with
terrorist faction, attempts to sabotage the Robinsons' mission. 
Unfortunately for Smith, he's caught on board the Jupiter 2 when it
takes off, and, thanks to his own efforts, he, along with the Robinsons,
West, and, yes, the Robot, are now "lost in space." And I'm sure you
know what that leads to...
"Danger Will Robinson, Danger!" - Robot
And then the real questions arise.  What will happen when the Robinsons
become lost?  What will they do with Dr. Smith?  What kind of strange
dangers will they encounter out in the unexplored regions of the
galaxy?  And what happens when talented director Stephen Hopkins and
lord-of-destruction Akiva Goldsman team up to create a big-budget, major
release, highly-anticipated film?  
LOST IN SPACE swings wildly around the quality spectrum.  It has moments
of intense coolness, as well as moments of intense idiocy.  In the end,
though, despite cheesy aspects, I had a good time.  At first I felt like
I had taken part in a guilty pleasure - perhaps I had no business
enjoying a movie with the problems that it has.  But then, why should I
feel guilty?  I had fun, and damn it, that's gotta be a good thing.  
The direction is well handled, thanks to Stephen Hopkins, who worked
well on films like PREDATOR 2 (1990) and THE GHOST AND THE DARKNESS
(1996).  The production design also looks great.  Gorgeous settings fill
the screen.  Details down to the costumes - even those slightly BATMAN &
ROBIN-like rubberish cryo-suits - looked good.  And the Robot was just
plain nifty.  
The special effects are incredible all around, from start to finish. 
Well, okay, there's on exception to that, but I'll get to that in a
second.
The sci-fi elements are, for the large part, well handled, even when
they could turn out convoluted.  The things the Robinsons encounter are
always interesting and fun (or creepy), whether animate or inanimate. 
Well, okay, there's one exception to the "animate" part, but I'll get to
that in a second.
Time is actually taken in this film to get to know the characters a
little better.  Even in the midst of their problems, we learn a little
more about their personalities.  A couple of these scenes are cheesy,
but largely, they fit in, and help move the story along well, as well as
helping us to care more about John, Will, Maureen and the gang, all the
way down to dear old Robot.
As for the performances, the real find is Jack Johnson as Will
Robinson.  Child actors often come across as annoying, but Johnson is
extremely good in this role.  Gary Oldman's Dr. Smith is often somewhat
of a friendly villian, but whatever take on the role that he's aiming
for, he does it very well, as you'd expect.  William Hurt and Mimi
Rogers are solid as the Robinson parents, with Hurt doing well as a
busy-yet-caring father (almost becoming a film cliche) and Rogers...
well, not having enough screen time.  Chabert also does nicely in the
role of young Penny, but, this being the first time I've heard her
voice, I was pretty surprised at the distrubingly inhuman
crazed-chipmunk-that-rode-the-bat-out-of-hell high-pitch intonation in
her voice.  And can someone explain why the special effects boys decided
to obviously enhance her cleavage?  Matt LeBlanc, as West, was also
surprising, but in a good manner.  He fit exactly as he should have into
the role of the good Major, and, even though he didn't stray terribly
far from his character Joey on "Friends," he might be able to have a
real film career - something I always thought only Courtney Cox and
Matthew Perry (okay, maybe Jennifer Aniston... ) would muster.  Dick
Tufeld's vocal work on the Robot is something fans will recognize from
the original series, as also Tufeld voiced the original Robot.  His work
here is an indispensable asset to the production, and really drives up
the old fun factor.  The Robot turns out to be not just another effect,
but another good character.  
But what about Heather Graham?  Well, this is the first film I've seen
Graham in.  Maybe it's the fact that her role was underwritten, but
Graham doesn't show much talent here.  She seems to have been hired
largely for her looks.  Of all the cast members, she is the most painful
to watch, mostly since too much of her time is taken up serving one of
the film's lamer subplots.  And, as such, she's going to serve as my
segue way into the bad elements of the movie.
That lame subplot is the flirtation between Don West and Judy.  It's
pointless, it's stupid, it's badly written, and it really didn't need to
be there.  It even leads into a short sexual-tease scene that feels very
out of place in a film that's otherwise fine for most families (as long
as they don't mind the profanity).  But there the subplot is, and it
takes up screen time, as well as allowing for two or three fair jokes. 
I guess we have to let it live.
Remember my certain "animate" problem?  And my one special effects
problem?  Well, if you want to know what it is that manages to
inexplicably be the only bad effect in the film, as well as be a
slightly lame subplot in itself, I say only this: monkeyish Ewok-spawn
must die. 
The first half hour of the film gives a couple of indications that you
might be lined up for something unsettlingly campy.  Never fear, though,
as things definitely get better once people get frozen on the Jupiter 2.
And, yes, the dialogue reaches a number of points where it sounds overly
dumb.  But most of the time, things are alright, and even when it sound
stupid, it's not so bad that it can't be forgiven.
Despite all this, though, the film is a good time.  Cheesy at times,
foolish at times, beautiful at times, unrelentingly cool at others, it's
a mixed bag that finally stacks up to be a fine show.  Akiva Goldsman,
who killed BATMAN & ROBIN (1997) and damaged BATMAN FOREVER (1995) seems
to be going up, and maybe, with work, will be a solid screenwriter at
long last.  Or hey, maybe not.  Just stay away from the superhero
franchises, Akiva.  Hopkins is still solid.  The cast is good - Johnson
is a real find - and the effects/settings/production designs are
frequently dazzling.  It has humor, adventure, and creepiness.  It has
good, and bad, and luckily for us all, the good wins out.  Yes, this is
LOST IN SPACE.  There's been a lot of films created based on TV shows. 
And for every funny THE ADDAMS FAMILY (1991) there's a painful CAR 54,
WHERE ARE YOU? (1994).  And, sure, you can't expect them all to turn out
as good as THE FUGITIVE (1993) or even MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE (1996).  But
LOST IN SPACE manages to join the ranks of the more entertaining movies
in the genre.  It's not the best, but it's one of the good ones, and I
have no problem with seeing more of the Robinson famly in the future. 
"Get lost," and enjoy.
"Breathe, Penny, breathe." - Will Robinson

Title
Review for Deep Rising (1998)
Starring: Treat Williams (John Finnegan), Famke Janssen (Trillian),
Kevin J. O'Connor (Joey Pantucci), Wes Studi (Hanover), Anthony Heald
(Nigel Carlton)
Directed by: Stephen Sommers, Written by: Stephen Sommers
This becomes the catch-phrase for John Finnegan in DEEP RISING, a movie
that starts off like kinda like SPEED 2, turns into a poor rip-off of
ALIENS/ALIEN RESURRECTION, and in the last 15 minutes, actually becomes
semi-original, leading up to a final ten seconds (yes, SECONDS) of film
before the credits roll that I think are gonna be pretty memorable for
me.  
Okay.  There's a cruise ship that's attacked by a big beast thing.  And
there's this group of bandits on their way to do... something (but we're
not supposed to know what) to said cruise ship.  Of course, when they
get there, they find the place mostly devoid of people, and why?  Some
kind of big squid thing, of course.  Add to that the fact that their own
boat is too damaged to be seaworthy, and you've got yourself an ALIEN
movie ripoff.
And what a ripoff it is!  I mean, they seem to try to take the
underwater scene from ALIEN RESURRECTION, make it as devoid of momentum
as possible, and slap the remainder of the copy into this movie. 
There's even a scene where exact dialogue from ALIENS is slapped into
the show just for kicks.  Yes, exact lines.  It's annoying on some
level, but wait a second...
...is this a spoof?  With such intentional ripoff signs, and the fact
that this movie sure as hell isn't scary at all, floating around in the
mist, I'd be inclined to say... maybe.  If so, and if viewed as such,
this is a funny flick.  Only bout **1/2 to *** star level, though,
because it doesn't quite take it far enough.  But it's still a good
satire.  But if viewed as another one of these traditional
monster-in-enclosed-space flicks, then, it ain't that hot.  *1/2 star
kinda movie.
Either way, the acting is alright (Treat Williams is always a likable
guy, and O'Connor is loads of fun, too), the evil CGI tentacles look
cool (but the big head thing didn't quite measure up), and the final
chase scene is actually worthy of... well, a better movie.
For me, the final moment of the film was just hilarious.  The rest of
the audience didn't seem to think so.  But for me, those final seconds
add about another 1/2 star to this baby.  I won't forget those ten
seconds anytime soon.
Overall, what do I give this, this exercise in
what-kind-of-movie-am-I-watching?  Well, I'm going to go ahead and give
it a medium rating of **1/2.  You'll have the most fun if your view as a
spoof of the ALIEN movies and their numerous ripoffs rather than a
serious monster flick.  But you'd certainly still be better off heading
down to the dollar theater to check out ALIEN RESURRECTION again, or
shelling out the bucks for another three glorious hours of TITANIC. 
Still, if you're in the mood for something else, sit back and... well,
just look at those darn cool tentacles.  Wait, there's a mouth inside of
another mouth on that thing there... uh... where have I seen that
before?

Title
Review for U.S. Marshals (1998)
Starring: Tommy Lee Jones (Sam Gerard), Wesley Snipes (various character
names), Joe Pantoliano (Cosmo Renfro), Robert Downey Jr. (John Royce),
Irčne Jacob (Marie), Tom Wood (Noah Newman), Daniel Roebuck (Biggs),
Kate Nelligan (Walsh)
Directed by: Stuart Baird, Written by: John Pogue
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, gore, and strong language
I'll lay out the basics first.  Sam Gerard, the Chief Deputy U.S.
Marshal from THE FUGITIVE (1993), and his team of crack deputies, are
back.  Another man has fled from the clutches of the state, and Gerard
must chase this new fugitive down.  But what's the story this time?  Why
is he running?  Did he do what he was accused?  If not, who did?  Who's
doing the cover-up?  Why?  And so on.  All the stuff you love from your
traditional action/suspense/mystery flicks, but with better characters
(especially Jones' Oscar-winning Gerard role) and better action
set-pieces, pushing it into the above-average fun-film range.  Plus,
it's a Warner Bros. film, and everyone knows that ever since about 1994,
it's been a red-letter day any time that Warner has actually released a
good film.  '97 was their best run in a while, what with CONTACT,
ROSEWOOD, and L.A. CONFIDENTIAL.  Maybe things will look up for them
this year.
Now then... I've never felt the need to adress what other critics have
thought of a movie before, but this time, I'm afraid I must.  It's just
that this time, I've read a number of reviews with differing opinions,
but many of them made various statements that left me with one vital
question: What movie did these people see?  I'm not talking about
disagreeing with their opinions.  I'm talking things that seem to be
factual, and yet, also just seem... well, wrong.  
I guess some of these could be taken as opinions.  Regardless, I have no
idea where anyone could get these impressions.  I'll just ramble them
off for you, to give you an impression of what I'm getting at here.
The following statements, made by a number of unrelated, anonymous film
critics, appear to be nothing short of, well, FALSE:
1) U.S. MARSHALS is nothing more than a copy of the THE FUGITIVE.
3) Tommy Lee Jones doesn't even seem to playing the same character in
U.S. MARSHALS as he was in THE FUGITIVE.
4) Sam Gerard's opening raid serves no purpose whatsoever to the movie.
5) After discovering things about the fugitive he is chasing, Sam Gerard
appears to forget them repeatedly later on.  He still chases Snipes even
after he finds the truth about the character.
6) Wesley Snipes' character plays little importance to the story.
7) Wesley Snipes' character doesn't try very hard to clear his name.
8) Every detail of the plot is solved within one hour, leaving nothing
more to do than to catch Snipes.
9) None of these characters ever seem to be in any real danger at any
point in the film.
10) Certain plot points are left hanging at the story's end.
Now, stand back, while I turn each of these claims into a smoking pile
of rubble.  Incidentally, I apologize to any critics that feel offended
by reading this review, but I am accusing no one person of wrong-doing.
1) So let's see, there's another fugitive running from the law, and Sam
Gerard has to catch him, and that makes it a copy?  Is it so
unbelievable that a U.S. Marshal might have to chase more than one
fugitive in his lifetime?  I think not.  I mean, what else was copied
here?  Okay, both fugitives escape via a vehicle crash.  That's one plot
point.  What else?  Don't use that lame "a man jumped from a high place
in both films" excuse.  A man jumped from a high place in DIE HARD
(1988) and BATMAN & ROBIN (1997), too, but THE FUGITIVE sure as hell
isn't a DIE HARD clone, BATMAN & ROBIN is by no means a FUGITIVE clone,
and so, clearly, since nothing other than a fugitive and a crash is
taken from the first movie, neither is U.S. MARSHALS just a clone of THE
FUGITIVE.  
2) Even though the fact that it's not a copy has already been adressed,
let's take a look at this.  Okay.  Let's talk about the James Bond
series.  It's up to 18 films at this point.  They all have Bond saying
"Bond, James Bond."  Bond always sleeps with beautiful women.  Bond
always uses interesting gadgets.  Bond always dresses suavely.  Bond
always defeats the villian in the end.  Bond always makes cheesy puns. 
The fact that TOMORROW NEVER DIES (1997) copies these elements from the
other 17 films doesn't make it horrible automatically.  In fact, it
received mostly favorable reviews.  But, gasp!  How can that be!  It's
such a copy, it must be horrible!  After all, U.S. MARSHALS isn't
anywhere near as copied from its first film as TOMORROW NEVER DIES was
from its first *17*, and so U.S. MARSHALS is already bad for having
copied a fugitive and a crash, right?  Sure.  Right.  Whatever.
3) You were in the bathroom throughout the entire movie, weren't you?  I
mean... I can't barely fight this one, because it's too obvious that
this is the same guy.  Struggling to get the job done above all else
short of taking care of his teammates.  Barking orders powerfully even
while taking a moment to smile good-naturedly and joke with his
colleagues.  Hey, this is Sam Gerard.  The one we loved in THE
FUGITIVE.  Of course, it's no longer an Oscar-worthy performance,
because it's not original anymore.  We've been here before.  But still,
it's a strong character, it's the same character, and wow, Tommy Lee can
carry a movie.  With some help of course, but we'll get to that later.
4) It's nice to have it established who Sam is for those who didn't see
THE FUGITIVE (this film DOES work as a stand-alone, incidentally), but
that's not the real reason this needs to be here.  It's nice to get
reaquianted with the faces of his team that we might not remember... but
that's not the reason we need this here either.  We need this here so
that Sam has a good reason to get on that plane.  If not for this scene,
everyone and their brother would be screaming "Contrived!  Stupid!" when
Sam climbs onboard that flight.  Now he has a reason.  Aren't you glad
the filmmakers took the time to make it NOT contrived?
5) Yeah, stop chasing a man who fled from police and knows the real
story behind all the weirdness that's going on.  That'd be real smart. 
Sure.
6) Huh?!  He's the fugitive that Gerard chases!  He has nearly as much
screen time as Jones does!  He's the reason there's a plot here!  
7) So you really DIDN'T see this movie.  You know, you really shouldn't
write reviews unless you see the movie first.  I don't want to list
spoilers here, but since every scene Snipes is in involves him using
every method he has to track down the whole story behind his situation,
I wonder, where was the person that made this comment?
8) God, this is just too wrong.  Not only is the whole not resolved
until the final FIVE MINUTES, but you couldn't even possibly predict
every detail of the plot until the moment that it's all laid out before
you.  
9) Yeah, that would explain the characters who are shot, or the others
who are seriously injured, during the course of the action.  That's not
a danger, obviously.  
10) When the whole "conspiracy," along with the people/person behind it,
is taken care of, and Snipes' character's fate is resolved, what more
were you expecting? 
Sorry about the ranting.  I apologize again.  But don't worry about it. 
Just go out and see U.S. MARSHALS.  I mean, aren't you getting sick of
seeing TITANIC (1997) now?  You've been 47 times!  For the love of God! 
Just go check out U.S. MARSHALS, and have fun.  It may not be near the
excellence of THE FUGITIVE (thanks largely to less emotional involvment
and no Harrison Ford), but you'll have a good time.

Title
Review for Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1990)
Starring: Judith Hoag (April O'Neil), Elias Koteas (Casey Jones), a
bunch of guys in turtle suits
Directed by: Steve Barron, Written by: Todd W. Langen, Based on a story
by: Kevin Eastman, Peter Laird, and Bobby Herbeck
Rated PG by the MPAA for violence and mild language.
Well folks, last week I went to go check out THE REPLACEMENT KILLERS. 
Not a bad flick, thanks largely to Chow Yun-Fat.  However, when I saw
it, I also saw the trailer for WILD THINGS with Kevin Bacon, Neve
Campbell, and Denise Richards.  I fell ill at this.  I have never seen a
more idiotic-looking film trailer in all my life.  This is worse than
BATMAN & ROBIN's trailer.  This film looks like the total scum of the
movie world.  If it grosses dollar one in its opening weekend, I'll have
to fear for humanity.
Naturally, this turned me off to going to the theater for a little bit,
in fear of seeing it again (cue cold chill running down my spine here). 
I'll go back for DARK CITY, but right now it's just stay home, watch tv,
yadda yadda.  And lo and behold, what's this?  Why it's 1990's TEENAGE
MUTANT NINJA TURTLES film.  And you know what?  I'm going to shock you
all by saying this, but it's not a bad film at that.  In fact, it's
pretty fun.
I remember seeing these turtle flicks before.  This would be the good
one.  A nice, dark vision of New York (quite the cool production
design), and of course, four turtles and a rat.  If you don't know the
old story of the "green machine," it goes like this - a glass jar with
four baby turtles fell into the sewer and shattered, leaving them to
crawl around in some radioactive ooze that was coming out of a nearby
cannister that also fell down there.  So, when a rat from Japan (whose
owner had recently been killed after moving to America, leaving him to
crawl through the sewer) comes across the turtles and decides to take
care of them, it gets some ooze on himself, too, and of course, they all
grow and become intelligent.  The rat teaches the turtles the martial
arts and he saw his previous master practice so many times before, and
gives them all names of renaissance artists: Lenardo, Raphael,
Michaelangelo, and Donatello.  Oh, and the rat's named Splinter.  I
don't know why.  In the course of this movie, they also become friends
with a Judith Hoag who plays the new reporter April O'Neil, and with
another avenger of justice, who happens to have a fetish for sports
equipment, named Casey Jones.  That's Elias Koteas.  And of course,
there happens to be this huge crime wave sweeping New York, crimes
committed by the Japanese Foot Clan, which is led by the mysterious man
known as The Shredder (James Saito, voiced by David McCharen).  Who's
gonna stop this?  I'll give you three guesses, and the first two don't
count.
This whole thing sounds like a bad Troma (TM) film, but it turns out to
be pretty fun.  The turtles all have discernable personalities, and
they're fun ones at that.  They tend to make a lot of jokes, and just
about all of the wisecracks hit home.  It's not just a bunch of
now-old-news pop culture references, as I remember the third film being
chock-full of.  This is stuff that could actually still seem funny years
from now.  Koteas makes a memorable role himself here, if not an
entirely fulfilling one - he could've used more screen time.  Hoag is
also good in her part, doing a fine job at portraying the disbelieving
friend of the large reptiles.
But the real stars here are the turtles, and rightfully so.  The
technical expertise on display in the turtles' (and Splinter's) suits is
still impressive now, eight years later.  The facial expressions they
get out of these animatronic outfits are amazing.  To this day, the only
thing to top this or come close would be the Mangalores in THE FIFTH
ELEMENT.  This was all done thanks to Jim Henson's workshop of
puppeteers.  Henson died two months after this film was released. 
Though his family and many others still work to make his legacy live on,
this movie is just another reason why he will be missed.  
Another great thing about this show?  It's so damn loyal its roots.  The
original (four?) issues of Eastman and Laird's dark Teenage Mutant Ninja
Turtles comic book are replicated pretty faithfully by the movie's plot
- now there's something you don't see very often in comic films today. 
This sure kicks the pants off of a comic-based movie like BATMAN &
ROBIN.  Sure, the blood is gone, and there's more humor - and the
turtles wear different colored masks - but otherwise, this follows that
original series nicely down to the big finish.
So go on, don't be afraid, I don't care how old you are - if you have
the time, check out TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES.  You might want to
avoid the sequels unless you really love the turtles.
Incidentally, what was with Tatsu's (Toshirô Obata, voiced by Michael
McConnohie) funky hand signals when he said "Go, play" to that one kid
in the warehouse?  That just killed me.  Unintentional comedy there, I'd
say.
If you can never watch any film with such a premise, refuse to accept
it, or just hate these turtles, then you can drop my rating down about
1/2 a star or maybe a full star.  If you're a huge turtle fan (I don't
think there's any of those left... hello?  Hello out there?) then you
can add on another 1/2 star.  But if you're like me, and you're in the
mood for a weird, fun time...

Title
Review for Scream 2 (1997)
Starring: Neve Campbell (Sidney Prescott), Courteney Cox (Gale
Weathers), David Arquette (Dewey Riley), Jamie Kennedy (Randy Meeks),
Sarah Michelle Gellar (Cici Cooper), Jerry O'Connell (Derek), Liev
Schreiber (Cotton Weary), Elise Neal (Hallie), Jada Pinkett (Maureen),
Laurie Metcalf (Debbie Salt), Duane Martin (Joel), Timothy Olyphant
(Mickey), Omar Epps (Paul Stevens)
Directed by: Wes Craven, Written by: Kevin Williamson
Rated R by the MPAA for blood and gore, strong language, and some sexual
references
Alright, let's talk horror flicks.  Or, more specifically, horror
sequels.  They suck.  You, I, or anybody could write a cheesy
1980s-style horror sequel.  Just remember all the key ingredients: an
attractive group of horny teenagers to kill off, an unstoppable
murderer, and lots of scenes where things pop out unexpectedly while
accompanied by loud noises (referred to as "jump scenes" by those in the
know).
Now let's talk SCREAM.  It came out almost exactly one year ago, to a
less-than-stellar opening weekend gross.  But word of mouth spread, and
in the end SCREAM made more than 100 million dollars here in the US of
A.  It's still praised by many overzealous teens and gen-xers as being
one of the great films of our (or any) time.  This basically functions
to make it one of the most overrated movies of all time.  It was pretty
fun for what it was, which is a shocker since most horror flicks
*aren't* nowadays, and the opening scene was honestly chilling
(something most movies can't pull off).  The comedic aspect of the film
was what made it most entertaining, as it worked much better than the
majority of the horror angle.  It even had some great characters (Jamie
Kennedy's film geek "Randy Meeks" will always be treasured).  But it
also had a few *major* flaws.  The main character, Sidney Prescott
(played by Neve Campbell) was probably the worst character in the
movie.  She pulled a lot of stupid stunts like having sex with a guy and
then, afterwards, telling him that she still suspected he was the
killer.  Oh, so she didn't care about her feelings that he could be a
mass murderer, she was just out to get laid?  Aside from her bad traits,
she basically *had* no personality, leaving us a female lead who was
essentially an obnoxious and annoying little bitch/slut.  Another
problem with the movie was the KEVIN WILLIAMSON CURSE (TM), or KWC. 
This is the problem with pretty much all films that are thus far written
by Kevin Williamson which makes it so that likable characters are often
killed off and the most easy-to-hate ones (like Sidney) tend to make it
to the finale.  When that happens, you just stop caring.  How can the
supposedly tense ending be tense at all when you want the main character
to just get what she deserves anyway?  The KWC (tm) is apparent in
various forms in SCREAM, his original treatment for HALLOWEEN 7, and
now, in SCREAM 2 (I'm told by a number of sources that he did it again
in I KNOW WHAT YOU DID LAST SUMMER, and once again damaged the movie by
it, but since I haven't seen that movie yet, I can't be certain).  It
really makes you wonder what kind of friends this guy has that he feels
the need to make the heros of his stories obnoxious human beings and
then kills off all the nice ones.  Anyway, despite all this, SCREAM was
still fairly fun, especially in its references to other horror films and
its attempts to do away with their old cliches, and it did leave enough
of the likable people alive in the end to make it finally all add up to
being about a *** film.  Nothing overly special, but definitely
something worth seeing.
Okay, now, let's talk SCREAM 2.  Basically, you're getting more of the
same here.  The story is that the survivors of the first film come
together along with their friends when a copycat killer appear in
Sidney's college town.  This happens just as "Stab," the movie based on
the book that Gale Weathers (Courtney Cox) wrote about the first movie's
killings, premieres (providing us with some cute in-jokes for those who
saw the first one - Tori Spelling, anyone?)  Overall, the comedy is
actually stronger than it was in the original for about the first half
of the film, but the horror (at least what there was of it) is actually
somewhat lessened.  There's no scene that compares to the opening of the
last one that just sets your nerves on edge.  In fact, characters in
this movie don't simply mock horror cliches, some of them perpetuate
them!  For example, hasn't anyone been taught *not* to run up the stairs
when you could run out the door?  Didn't Sidney point out how foolish
this is in the first film?  Still, there are scenes that have more
tension than their closest counterparts in the original had.
Now I'll be straight for a minute here.  I read the script for SCREAM 2
a month or two ago, and I must admit, it was mostly pretty strong.  It
would've been downright excellent if not for a few things - an extreme
case of the KWC (tm) and an ending which was so positively horrid that
it came close to ruining the entire rest of the story.  Now, in light of
the movie, let's deal with these problems.  This flick's been changed
quite a bit.  The ending is different, and I do believe it's better. 
But it's still not great.  It's way too "Scooby-Doo."  You just wait for
the killer(s) to say "And I would've gotten away with it too, if not for
you meddling kids!" or something to that effect.  Anyway, because the
ending is different, many scenes earlier in the film had to be altered,
and some of the more dramatic ones seem less tense than they were in the
script.  However, if you want to view these scenes in light of *only*
the movie itself, which is probably the smart way to go, then these two
or maybe three scenes still do have tension and are still moderately
strong in that sense.  Okay folks.  Now let's deal with the KWC...
I'm getting worried about Williamson.  He comes close to making SCREAM
and SCREAM 2 into being almost *great* movies, but this KWC (tm) causes
severe damage.  It really kills him.  It's what sucks him down from
making "films" or "movies" to making "flicks."  Somebody's got to teach
this guy to have some common sense.  SCREAM 2 has got the worst case of
KWC (tm) that I could've imagined.  He manages to kill off the one
character who was probably *THE* most likable one in the movie, a
character who could've stuck with the viewers and loved for years to
come if not for this act of pure idiocy.  What purpose does it serve?  I
supposed you might be able to argue that it makes the later tense scenes
more effective, giving the viewer a feeling of "well if they killed that
person off, anyone could be next!" But that just doesn't cut it.  The
audience on opening night where I saw it here in St. Louis didn't
exactly feel the tension.  The reaction was primarily a large collection
of profanity from the primarily late teens/early 20s group.  Shouts like
"What is THAT s---?!", "F--- YOU, CRAVEN!!!" and yes, even "Williamson
will BURN for that sick s---, THE LITTLE F----R!!!" were rather common. 
Well, at least you can say that Williamson *did* get an emotional
reaction from his audience.  But, for God's sake man, do you think that
*now* you'll learn that people don't want to see their favorite
character bite it? 
Well once this character died, the humor in the movie just about died
with him/her.  Comedic moments got kind of rare without his/her jokes
and insights.  There were occasional ones, but just not as many and
certainly not as good as you got from him/her.  The greatest moment of
humor after that came when the killer(s) was/were revealed.  Can you say
cheesy?  When the audience saw who was responsible for our little trip
into flick-land, the initial response was widespread laughter.  I've
checked on the reaction at other showings in other theaters, and it was
pretty much the same.  At my own showing, shouts once again came out of
the crowd, like "I don't even know who the F--- THAT IS!!!" and "It's
SCOOBY-F---ING-DOO!!!" Yes, I feel that the choice for who the killer(s)
was/were was a pretty goofy one.  And yet, it was certainly better than
the choice(s) in the original script, by quite a lot.  And of course,
this final scene is also not exactly tense, since we don't care much
about these characters.  
Overall, I think that the ending and the KWC (tm), along with the loss
in comedic quality as a result of that KWC act, knocks this film down to
a level below the original.  Neither is an excellent film in any sense -
these are glorified B movies people, pure and simple.  But the first was
probably the more fun.  At least Sidney doesn't do anything as bad in
this movie as what she did in the first movie, but the thing is, she
just plain *doesn't do much* anyway.  We don't get that much of an
insight into her character.  The closest we get is seeing that she tries
to remain strong despite what's going on again around her (ultimately,
she basically fails).  Sidney does get one of the (unintentionally)
funnier scenes though, when her college acting coach (she's a drama
major it seems) tells her what a good actress she is, prompting Neve
Campbell to do a bit of... questionable acting which the professor
actually approves of.  This was another scene that got a good amount of
laughs at the showing I attended on opening night.
Overall, I guess SCREAM 2 will be enjoyed by those who liked the
original.  It's moderately close to the first one in quality, despite
its glaring flaws.  In a world where horror movies and particularly
horror sequels suck, this is certainly above most sequels in the genre. 
Still, the comedy aspects of both these movies is stronger than its
horror angle.  Perhaps the third and (hopefully) final installment can
emphasize the humor more?  And maybe Kevin Williamson can prove to us
that he's not a hack by fighting off his curse.  In the end, SCREAM 2 is
fun for those who attend who like these kinds of movies, like the
original, or just attend a crowded screening with people who aren't
afraid to voice their opinions.  If you didn't care for the first one or
can't see it with many people... well, you're probably better off
checking out the latest exploits of Ellen Ripley or James Bond to get
your sequel fix.
Oh, my new rating system (which hopefully will work) just rates a movie
based on its overall quality (expectations no longer factor in).  It's
purely star based, with four stars most likely being the higest (I might
make it go to five someday if I change my mind) and zero beings the
lowest.  That being said, I give SCREAM 2...

Title
Review for Steel (1997)
STEEL
Starring: Shaquille O'Neal (John Henry Irons/Steel), Annabeth Gish (Lt.
Sparks), Richard Roundtree (Uncle Joe), Judd Nelson (Lt. Nathaniel
Burke)
Directed by: Kenneth Johnson
Written by: Kenneth Johnson
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence and strong language
Los Angeles street thugs are being supplied with a whole new kind of
weaprony.  These are weapons that can injure and incapacitate a target,
but do not kill.  Lt. Nathaniel Burke is supplying these weapons to the
gangs so that the world can see the power he has available to them, for
the right price.  But these weapons were created by John Henry Irons,
and Johnny's not happy when he comes home to LA to find his weapons
being used for evil.  Feeling responsible for this, he calls on his old
friends Lt. Sparks and Uncle Joe to help become someone who is able to
stand up to the gangs.  Man.  Metal.  Hero.  STEEL.
Let's face it, STEEL is one goofy flick.  Any movie starring Shaq is
already asking for trouble.  Add to that the retro-'70s SHAFT-esque
soundtrack, and the fact that Shaft himself (Richard Roundtree) is
actually in the movie, and you've got one seriously wacked-out
production.  But that's part of what makes STEEL kind of amusing.  I
smiled every time I heard them play that funky music, white boy.  I
grinned when Judd Nelson strutted right up to our hero actually tried to
be intimidating towards O'Neal (who, of course, is at least two feet
taller than him).  I even laughed when a street gang member, decked out
in leather, gold chains, and weaponry, uttered "word?" to the prospect
of a turkey hot dog.  I doubt that this was actual intentional humor...
but it was so downright silly that I liked it.  What can I say?
That's not to say that this is good cinema in any sense.  STEEL is
pretty basically average, or slightly below that.  Some aspects are
irritating, like Johnny's Grandma, and the running gag about how Shaq
can't make free throws (basically true).  Shaq's no thespian (I'd love
to see this guy try Shakespeare... "Othello," anyone?), but he does a
better job here than George Clooney did in this summer's BATMAN & ROBIN
at least (then again, *I* could do a better acting job than Clooney did
in that movie).  And the action sequences, though likable, are also
unspectacular.
Still, there's something pleasant about the feel of all this.  The disco
music playing while our nice-guy superhero takes down the bad guys is
something to see.  When Steel first stops a mugging and returns the
stolen wallet to its rightful owners, the lucky couple is on the news
that night, saying, in amazing "He was so... polite!" Kinda makes you
wish we were a little more like Steel, doesn't it?  After all, who among
us *wouldn't* like being seven feet tall?

Title
Review for Batman & Mr. Freeze: SubZero (1998) (V)
Starring the voices of: Kevin Conroy (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Michael
Ansara (Mr. Freeze), Loren Lester (Dick Grayson/Robin), Mary Kay Bergman
[well, I'm... fairly sure it was her] (Barbara Gordon/Batgirl), George
Dzunda (Dr. Robert Belson), Efrem Zimbalist Jr. (Alfred Pennyworth), Bob
Hastings (Commissioner Gordon)
Not Rated (but it's probably a PG, just like the last animated Batman
film was)
That having been said, let it be known that possibly the greatest
interpretation of Batman to hit tv or movie screens IS the animated Bat
that first appeared in the fall of 1992 on Fox.  It quickly became a
prime time series before hitting the big time - an animated theatrical
release film.  That was BATMAN: MASK OF THE PHANTASM (1993).  Clearly,
it was and still is the best Batman film to yet hit theaters.  The plot
was intelligent, the action loud and exciting, the voice-acting perfect,
and the score beautiful.  
As of this year, on TV, Batman has moved his animated adventures to the
WB network.  Characters have grown, and, most noticably, design styles
for many of the characters have changed - mostly for the worse.  As a
result, for both those who watch the series, and those casual Bat-fans
who have only seen the first animated film, this second animated feature
(which has gone straight to video), BATMAN & MR. FREEZE: SUBZERO, is
like reuniting with an old friend.  The film tells a story that takes
place before the current season of the show and after the final season
on Fox, so the character designs the like are all in line with those of
the earlier part of the series.  Only better animated than usually seen
on the show.  This is a level of animation slightly under that seen in
BATMAN: MASK OF THE PHANTASM but still slightly higher than that seen on
the tv series.  One thing this movie does have other MASK OF THE
PHANTASM is more use of computer animation.  There's a CG submarine,
Batwing, and highway scene for your viewing pleasure, and all of them
look very nice.
Of course, animation comes secondary to plot.  Plot, action, dialogue,
and of course, acting are what drive a film.  Well, on the old Batman
scale, SUBZERO is not quite as good as PHANTASM was, and maybe not even
as good as the first two Tim Burton live-action films, though that could
be debated.  It's certainly much better than the last two Joel
Schumacher films - and it's truer to the characters than any of the live
action films to date.  The plot goes that Mr. Freeze's wife, Nora Fries,
still in cryo-sleep, has her stasis tube broken open in an accident. 
Now Freeze knows that the only thing that can save her is an organ
transplant.  He enlists the help of Dr. Belson, and, when no deceased
donors of Nora's rare blood type are found, Freeze decides that he will
use a live donor - which of course, will kill said donor.  There's 18
live donors of Nora's blood type in Gotham.  And one of them is Barbara
Gordon.
Luckily, Barbara only appears in Batgirl garb for about one minute near
the beginning of the movie, and stays out of costume for the rest while
Batman and Robin try to save her - and she tries to save herself.  The
whole thing is better animated than most of the non-Disney stuff you see
(Well, those big-time other-studio releases like ANASTASIA [1997] not
withstanding, I guess) and has that same simple-yet-beautiful character
design of the Max Fleischer Superman cartoons from the days of yore. 
All the characters are well-done.  Of course Batman is cool, but wow, so
are Robin and Barbara.  Now THAT'S a feat.  Belson is interesting, and
Mr. Freeze is cold and emotionless, as he should be, thanks to Ansara (I
promise he's not at all jokey, like Schwarzenegger), and overall, I
assure you, this is a much better experience than that Schumacher piece
of crap BATMAN & ROBIN (1997) that had many of the same characters.  
In all, though it runs a too-short 67 minutes, and yes, it has
appearances by Batgirl and Robin (come on, you *know* that Robin isn't
always a bad character), this is still definitely worth a rent... and if
you're a big Batfan... it's worth a purchase.  Watch it, then rewind,
and enjoy it again.
Hey WB... you want a good Batman film to add to your live-action
franchise?  WHY NOT PUT PAUL DINI AND BRUCE TIMM IN CHARGE?!

Title
Review for Mortal Kombat: Annihilation (1997)
MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION Starring: Robin Shou (Liu Kang), Tailsa Soto
(Princess Kitana) Directed by: John R. Leonetti, Written by: Brent V.
Friedman and Bryce Zabel from a story by Lawrence Kasanoff, John Tobias,
and Joshua Wexler.  Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for some strong language
and  plenty of violence, mostly of the martial arts variety.
*Bah-buh-bah-bah-buhbuh, bah-buh-bah-bah-bahbuh, bah-bah-bah-buh-bahbuh,
bah-bah-buhbahbuhbuhbah*
Okay, so chances are you've heard that now-famous outcry and the techno
music that follows it, either on commercials for the movies, or the
video games, or on the soundtracks for the games or movies, or in the
movies themselves.  
In this, the sequel to the original MORTAL KOMBAT film, titled MORTAL
KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION, that theme music is still intact, and, just like
the last time, bolts into our ears right from the New Line Cinema logo. 
However, it's almost the only thing that's still around from the first
film.
In order to review MORTAL KOMBAT: ANNIHILATION, one must have an opinion
of the original, since this essentially just tries to be more of the
same.
Okay.  I truly liked MORTAL KOMBAT.  Yes, I really did.  Maybe the plot
was sort of basic, but it was *fun*.  It was one of the most *fun*
movies of the summer of 1995.  It had some funny dialouge, some
appealing actors (and some not-so-much), some nice effects, plenty of
extremely well-choreographed martial arts battles, and a cool, pumping
soundtrack.  And, of course, it was directed very well by the talented
Paul Anderson, who could have a great career as long as he avoids crap
like EVENT HORIZON from now on.
Now the sequel is upon us.  The martial arts battles aren't as well
choreographed, but they're still pretty good.  Unfortunately, the
directing is nowhere near as good as in the original, and it dilutes the
quality of the fights.  The villian isn't nearly as imposing, many of
the original actors have been replaced for the worse, the effects might
have been impressive in 1992, it's filled with extraneous subplots and
characters, and, well, basically this movie just plain sucks.
Robin Shou is honestly trying here.  You can tell.  He wants this to
really not suck.  Sandra Hess wants to have an acting career, that's
obvious... so it's good news for her that she's better than the original
actress behind Sonya Blade (Bridgette Wilson).  In fact, she's not bad
at all.  I wouldn't mind horribly if I saw her again... in some other
film, of course.  
Talisa Soto seems sort of bored with this.  She obviously beefed up her
martial arts training, but when she's acting, she's rather stiff, just
like in the original.  Of course, that's Kitana's character for you, I
guess.  As a side note, her sudden romance with Liu Kang is utterly
ludicrous, and has no place here - it's just another piece of excess
baggage for the plot to carry.  The only person putting forth anything
resembeling effort is Litefoot, who plays Nightwolf, at least for the
whopping two minutes that he's on the screen.  This guy deserves
better.  James Remar replaces Christopher Lambert as Rayden, and does a
shoddy job.  Lambert was perfect for this role.  However, Remar isn't
given much to work with here, anyway.
Our villian, Shao Kahn (Brian Thompson) shouts a lot, but that doesn't
mean he's threatening.  Kahn's father is more interesting, but doesn't
do much.
Johnny Cage, the most fun of the characters in the original, is played
by another actor as well (Linden Ashby is having fun doing "Melrose
Place" by now), and is killed in the first five minutes.  This is pure
idiocy at work, people.  There's no reason for his death.  It just opens
up for another comic relief character to appear, Jax, played by Lynn
"Red" Williams, previously known as "Sabre" on American Gladiators.  He
gets a few funny lines, but is no where near as amusing as Johnny Cage
was.  Williams just tries too hard to be Will Smith.  He seems to have
some talent buried in him that briefly shines through here and there,
but overall, it's not really on display here.
Tons of characters show up for no reason, and bring up sub-plots that
have no point.  One example is when Sub-Zero (Keith Cooke) appears.  He
states that the Sub-Zero that Liu Kang killed in the original was his
brother, and that a robot, Smoke, has been reprogrammed to go after
Kang, instead of original target, Sub-Zero himself.  Why was the robot
going after Subbie?  Why was it reprogrammed?  Why did Sub-Zero bother
to save Kang?  Why did he take up the mantle of his brother?  How does
he do those cool ice manuvers?  Why do none of the writers of this movie
care to tell us any of this?  Sub-Zero is off the screen about three
minutes after he appears, and never comes back.  What was the point? 
Other characters, like Rain (Tyrone Wiggins) and Mileena (Dana Hee), pop
up in gaudy costumes and don't even last the three minutes that Sub-Zero
does.  And who honestly cares about the woman that shows up calling
herself Jade (Irina Pantaeva)?  This is worse than the "Street Fighter"
movie's overflow of characters.  What were they thinking?
Considering the advancements in effects since the original KOMBAT, it's
also distressing that the effects in this sequel are rather shoddy.  In
fact, we had some movies that had better CGI effects back in 1992, such
as TERMINATOR 2 and ALIEN 3.  Oh well.  Some things in this movie seemed
to be tossed in just because they allowed the chance for cheesy
effects.  C'mon, did we really need that lame "animality" sub-plot?
At least the soundtrack succeeds in doing what the original's did: it
makes hard rock and techno sound good and fun by setting it to martial
arts battles, and making those genres of music sound good is not a
horribly easy feat.  But still, the original's is better.
Overall, this is just another bad sequel.  It's about on the level of
this year's BATMAN & ROBIN, and that's really a shame.  The whole plot
is a jumble - it's tough to care much about what's going on.  The first
one was fun, but this is just a big mess.  It looks like 1995's MORTAL
KOMBAT remains the only truly *good* video game-based film so far.  The
mistakes here are so obvious.  This should've been better. 
Feel free to send comments or questions to rskiles@mail.win.org

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
Starring: Matthew Broderick (Dr. Niko "Nick" Tatopoulos), Maria Pitillo
(Audrey Timmonds), Jean Reno (Philippe Roache), Hank Azaria (Victor
"Animal" Palotti), Harry Shearer (Charles Caiman), Kevin Dunn (Colonel
Hicks), Arabella Field (Lucy Palotti), Doug Savant (Sergeant O'Neal),
Vicki Lewis (Dr. Elsie Chapman), Michael Lerner (Mayor Ebert), Lorry
Goldman (Gene), and Godzilla as himself
Directed by: Roland Emmerich, Written by: Dean Devlin & Roland Emmerich
Rated PG-13 for violence, mild profanity, and mild sexual innuendo
Plus he's mad, he's bad, and he's either green or grey/black depending
on your point of view.  He's Godzilla, and he's been a long time in
coming to Hollywood.  Back in the summer of 1992 I got a small poster
advertising the coming of this Tri-Star film, to be released in the
summer of 1993.  He didn't come.  JURASSIC PARK (1993) dinosaurs came,
but no Godzilla.  Well, now it's the summer of 1998.  Five years is
pretty damn off target.  
Still, now that he's arrived, he certainly did it in style.  $120
million dollars were spent on the big guy.  Not bad for someone who's
essentially a reptile with a nasty growth spurt.
Godzilla's story, in this new film, is that he was a simple lizard who
got nuked.  Yes, while merely a young egg at a nuclear testing site, a
bomb was dropped in the area and the resulting radiation has caused our
little green friend... well, he looks green to me... to grow to enormous
proportions.
This incident isn't without precedent - turns out that Dr. Niko
Tatopoulos - you can call him Nick - has been studying the effects of
radiation on the earthworms in Chernobyl in the Ukraine.  It turns out
that they've grown 17% in size since the incident there on April 26,
1986.  With his experience in the effects of radiation on biological
specimens, the U.S. military is soon calling on the good doctor to help
investigate a new creature who's managed to take out a sub and go
traveling across Panama.  The only survivor of the sub attack is a
Japanese man who seems only able to say one word - "Gojira." 
Turns out that this "Gojira" is heading to New York.  He gets there,
causes trouble, and pretty soon a local reporter has gotten ahold of a
video of the previous sightings of this beast, leading to the network's
anchor, Charles Caiman, misinterpreting the Japanese man on the tape and
calling this gargantuan beast "Godzilla."
GODZILLA is yet another example of a movie that's dumb... but fun. 
Often very fun.  Of course, it's from Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich,
the creators of INDEPENDENCE DAY (1996), which was a prime example of
"dumb fun," although it glorified we Americans a bit too much.  I
imagine it didn't play too well outside of this country.  Well, I'd say
that GODZILA is a better film, if only because I prefer the green guy to
anonymous aliens.  
Fans of the classic Godzilla will be pleased to note a few things. 
Godzilla's roar still sounds pretty much the same, a scientist is still
the hero, and Godzilla is once again bugged momentarily by electricity
in one scene, as he was in KING KONG VS. GODZILLA (1962), even though
electricity didn't bug the big G at all back in the original GODZILLA,
KING OF THE MONSTERS (1954).  There's a few other touches from the past,
too, that I won't reveal here.
The characters are paper-thin, but at least everyone does their job
well.  There's really not a person in the bunch that doesn't perform
satisfactorily - it's just a shame that their parts weren't written
better.  Of course, compare these characters to those in all of the old
Godzilla films, and they're look like they've got a full psychological
profile by contrast.  Hank Azaria is a particular standout, and Jean
Reno is the epitome of cool, as he always is.  Matthew Broderick is
surprisingly strong as well.  Maria Pitillo plays her role quite nicely,
but the fact is, she has the most underwritten role of the group.  She
seems to be there primarily to take up screen time and act as a love
interest for Broderick.  Still, I doubt anyone else could've played the
role much better, and I'm sure she's happy to be in such a major release
film.
Oh, I should mention the Siskel and Ebert mayor and sidekick.   Yes, the
mayor is named Ebert, and his assistant is named Gene.  They also use
"thumbs up" and "thumbs down" symbols for campaigning, yelling at each
other, etc, throughout the movie.  I'm not sure if it was a homage or an
insult, but either way, it's just a weird little joke that doesn't
detract from the movie at all - it's just there.
The direction by Emmerich is nicely handled, and the score by David
Arnold, who also worked on INDEPENDENCE DAY as well as the recent
eighteenth James Bond film, TOMORROW NEVER DIES (1997), is his usual
expert work.
But, of course, the real star of the show is Godzilla himself.  And boy,
does he look fantastic.  The new design of the beast isn't the way you
remember Godzilla, but it still FEELS like Godzilla, and that's what
counts.  Plus it's huge, threatening, and quite cool.  The effects on
the monster?  Flawless.  All of the movie's effects are perfect, with
nice little touches throughout, such as the damage Godzilla does by
scraping his tail along the side of a building.  It's the little things
like that that really take your breath away.  After all, we've seen
large scaly beasts before.  Of course, not THIS large... 
And when the action sequences get going, they're the best part of the
movie.  Thrilling, and sometimes adding genuine tension to the mix,
especially in the last 40 minutes of film, these alone are worth the
price of admission.  Some people have complained that they resemble
elements of JURASSIC PARK too heavily.  Well, I promise you, only ONE
scene resembles anything from JURASSIC PARK, and that is a face-off in
the latter half of the movie that's somewhat similar to the "raptors in
the kitchen" scene from the first Spielberg dinosaur film.  However, I'm
happy to report that it more than holds its own with that great
sequence, and in fact, in a number of ways it surpasses it.  Absolutely
nothing else in GODZILLA resembles anything from JURASSIC PARK or its
sequel in any way, shape, or form.
It's interesting to note that most of the movie's action takes place at
night, and pretty much all of the entire show occurs in the rain.  It's
a very nice atmospheric touch, almost making this a monster noir film. 
Interesting.
GODZILLA is another typical American summer film.  It's dumb, but it's a
lot of fun.  Will something better come along this summer?  I guess
we'll have to wait and see.  Some people will find that GODZILLA doesn't
live up to the hype, but then again, what COULD live up to this much
advance promotion?  It's still a good time.  Dumb writing and thin
characters hurt it, but this movie isn't supposed to be art, it's only
supposed to be fun.  And on that level, it delivers just fine.
"Wrong floor." - Dr. "Nick" Tatopoulos

Title
Review for Starship Troopers (1997)
Starring: Computer Generated Bugs And Lots Of 'Em, Plus A Lot Of People
You've Never Heard Of And Let's Hope It Stays That Way
Directed by: Paul Verhoeven, Written by: Edward Neumeier, Based on the
novel by Robert A. Heinlein
Rated R by the MPAA for gratuitous nudity, gore everywhere, strong
language all over the place, and probably a lot of other stuff that
didn't need to be in there
Where do I begin?  Okay, how about with this: STARSHIP TROOPERS is one
of the worst movies to hit theaters in a long time.  In fact, it might
even be the worst *major* release film to come out in years... or even a
decade.  This is bad beyond belief.  I would *not* suggest paying money
to see this.  There's a good chance you'll regret it.  If you see it for
free, you could still want to walk out.  Go right ahead. 
The movie starts off with cheesy 90210 scenes set in the future world
of... Buenos Aires.  Here we meet the group of horrendously bad actors
and actresses playing obnoxious, easy-to-*despise*-with-a-passion
characters that have love triangles, love rectangles, and love hexagons
screwing up their life.  Before long they all go off and join the
military, primarily in the interest of having sex with the other
youngsters that joined.  They train.  They strut around nude for no
reason whatsoever.  After an hour of making the audience scream in
agony, they start fighting bugs.  The big bugs look nice, even though
their design is only "okay."  Unfortunately, the fights are boring since
we *want* all of the characters dead anyway.  Cue more agony.  Then some
characters have sex.  Then some more die.  ***Who cares???***  Cue more
agony.  The movie ends, the audience runs out to their cars, vomits over
the pavement, and attempts to drive home.  Unfortunately, after that
torture, they can't think straight, don't pay attention to the road, and
many are in ugly car wrecks. 
You remember how BATMAN & ROBIN was bad?  Well, BATMAN & ROBIN kicked
this movie's sorry butt, people.  STARSHIP TROOPERS does not succeed as
an action movie.  It does not succeed as a drama.  It does not succeed
as a war movie.  It does not succeed as a comedy.  It does not succeed
as a satire.  It does not succeed as a parody.  It succeeds as being
horrible.  Terrible.  Gut-wrenchingly bad.  I wanted to run away from
that movie every minute.  But I paid my money and I owed it to others to
see if the movie got any better.  So I stayed.  It never got better. 
Frequently, it did the impossible, and got *worse*.
The movie as written, acted, directed, and basically just feels as a
whole like it's about on the mental maturity level of a FREE WILLY 4. 
The whole thing feels like a movie that only three-year-olds could
enjoy... except for the ridiculously gratuitous blood and gore, and
pointless nudity.  It's written for little children, but children should
definitely *not* go anywhere near it.  Of course, I recommend the same
for everyone.  Don't go anywhere near it.     
Verhoeven's got a streak going now.  His last movie was SHOWGIRLS.  He
seems to be trying to see how bad his movies can get before people
finally stop coming.  SHOWGIRLS was a failure, but it appears that,
though it'll be lucky to make near its budget, this movie will still do
okay gross-wise.
Is it really *all* bad?  Well, no.  TROOPERS has about four or five
lines of dialouge/short humorous scenes that are actually funny, mostly
from the "Do you want to know more?" commercials that pop up throughout
the story, promoting the joys of the joining the troopers.  So that adds
up to about 30 seconds of entertainment and still about one hour, 59
minutes, and 30 seconds of miserable torture.
I'm totally confused as to the way that some people are really enjoying
this movie.  But I do admit it.  So, if you're willing to possibly put
yourself through torture, go ahead and see it, and decide for yourself
if you love it or hate it.  I don't know how anyone or any*thing* could
love this movie, but hey, to each his own.  Feel free to give it a
shot.  Of course, in the interest of saving your souls, I don't
recommend it.
But guess what?  ALIEN RESURRECTION comes out November 26th, and, having
already seen some of it and having read the script, I assure you that it
will blow pretty much everyone away.  Though opinion on STARSHIP
TROOPERS is reasonably split, it'll be difficult to find someone that
*won't* like ALIEN RESURRECTION when they've seen it.  This is possibly
the year's best intense action film, or at least *one* of the best.  If
you really want to see alien warfare that's played out intelligently and
seriously, see ALIEN RESURRECTION.  Please, avoid this.

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
EVENT HORIZON
Starring: Laurence Fishburne (Captain Joe Miller), Sam Neill(Dr. William
Wier), Kathleen Quinlan (Peters)
Directed by: Paul Anderson
Written by: Phillip Eisner
The event horizon is the boundary of a black hole... and, in the future,
it's also the name of a spaceship that vanished when it tried to go
faster than the speed of light by traversing through its own portable
black hole.  Naturally, this is the setup for the other EVENT HORIZON...
the movie.  When the ship suddenly appears at the point that it vanished
at, just outside of Neptune, the crew of the ship called the "Lewis and
Clark" has to go to investigate, and Dr. William Weir, the creator of
the "Event Horizon," gets to come along for the ride.  If you've glanced
at a poster for this movie, you know that, supposedly, what follows is
"Infinite Terror." Well, I don't know about the "Terror" part, but
"Infinite" certainly seems to qualify... 
EVENT HORIZON is a mean-spirited, gory, sick excuse for a film.  It
starts off as an ALIEN rip-off, and then degenerates into a pointlessly
bloody slasher flick after about 40 minutes.  At least for those first
40 minutes it's an *interesting* rip-off of ALIEN.  That's a lot more
than can be said for the rest of them movie, which seems to go on
forever.  It not a scary monster movie, nor is it a psychological
thriller.  It is simply a movie which tries again and again to make the
viewers feel sick to their stomach at the site of extreme gore.  You've
seen this kind of movie before.  The HELLRAISER series had plenty of
scenes containing this sensibility.  This is a kind of movie for which I
have no respect, a kind of movie which I had hoped died out years ago.  
It is quite possible for a movie to frighten or shock its audience
without resorting to nothing more than gore, but EVENT HORIZON takes the
low road, and the viewers pay the price.  There are many good,
respectable performances, from Fishburne and Neill most noticably.  Paul
Anderson's direction is impressive, as it was in MORTAL KOMBAT.  There
are many nice special effects, mostly dealing with numerous common
objects floating around in zero-gravity.  The sets are beautiful to gaze
upon.  And Richard T. Jones' character (Cooper) is hilarious and
extremely likable (more so than most characters I've seen in recent
movies) for the little screen time that he has.  And none of this can
save the movie from being a D-grade level of film.  The idea of a ship
that has some sort of life within its walls, a life that knows the fears
and inner skeletons of the human passengers, is a promising one.  A
haunted house story in space isn't such a bad idea.  But the final
execution is extremely disappointing.
That's not to say that Philip Eisner (here making his feature
film-writing debut) doesn't have talent.  For those first 40 minutes, he
manages to make a tired premise interesting, adding in aspects of unique
flavor into a rip-off story, and that's something that not too many
writers can do.  He even has one scene that, though it also tries to
sicken the audience, has a honestly tense feel to it (the scene in
question deals with one of the crew being in an airlock while others try
to save him from floating into space).  He definitely has something of a
gift, but it's not fully on display here.  I certainly will look forward
to seeing more from him, and I hope that his future work fully explores
his talent and the story possibilities of the premise.  But because of
what this movie degenerates into, I have little or no respect, and got
little or no enjoyment, out of it.  If this is what we have to look
forward to in the future of film, then I agree with Laurence Fishburne's
sentiment - "God help us."

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
Starring: Val Kilmer (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Jim Carrey (Edward Nygma/The
Riddler), Tommy Lee Jones (Harvey Dent/Two-Face), Chris O'Donnell (Dick
Grayson/Robin), Nicole Kidman (Dr. Chase Meridian), Michael Gough
(Alfred Pennyworth), Pat Hingle (Commissioner Gordon), Drew Barrymore
(Sugar), Debi Mazar (Spice)
Directed by: Joel Schumacher, Written by: Lee Batchler & Janet Scott
Batchler and Akiva Goldsman, based on characters created by Bob Kane
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, strong language, and a sexual
implication or two
This is where Joel Schumacher takes over.  Luckily for us, at this
point, Warner Bros. and producer Tim Burton keep Schumacher's crazy
vision of Batman on a leash, and we end up with a movie that's not
half-bad, even if it can't compare to Tim Burton's first two
installments.  
This is where it becomes obvious that the Batman series could be the
next James Bond franchise.  This series could go on forever, just think
about it.  There's endless stories to tell.  There's gadgets, girls, a
cool, actor-changing hero (as the reviewer who calls himself "Stimpy"
pointed out, yes, aside from being one hell of a tailor, cook, and
mechanic, Alfred is quite the plastic surgeon).  As long as they don't
kill off all of the villians, it's the perfect eternal franchise.  It
doesn't even have to repeat itself like Bond often does!  They just need
to make sure that the installments don't end up being all crap, and then
Batman can truly go on forever.  But I digress.
Well, Two-Face, the villian with two sides to his personality, half a
face scarred by acid, and who makes his good-or-evil decisions based on
whether his trusty two-headed (two faces... amazing, huh?) coin comes up
with the clean "good heads" side or the beat-up "bad heads" side...
damn, this is a run-on sentence... is on the loose.  Of course, Batman
is chasing him, and, as we see in the well-done opening sequence, is
on-and-off in terms of his luck in the pursuit.  
Meanwhile, an employee of Wayne Enterprises (wondering how Bruce keeps
his fortune going, were you, non-Batman afficionados?), Edward Nygma,
has created a device which will make television viewers "feel like
they're inside the show" - a "3-D TV" invention, if you will.  Wayne is
reluctant to fund such a project, since it deals with brain
manipulation, and his fears are well-founded - Nygma soon discovers that
his machine has the interesting side effect of allowing him to utilize
the brain power of anyone using his 3-D TV to grow smarter.  Naturally,
he wants to use this discovery to aid him in his revenge against Wayne. 
Confused yet?  It gets worse...
The circus is in town!  No, not the Red Triangle Circus, you ninny. 
This is a kinder, gentler show, featuring the trapeeze artists known as
"The Flying Graysons," a family... what?  Yes I said "Graysons."  Yup,
that's right.  This is the Grayson family, one of which includes... Dick
Grayson.  If you know anything about Batman, then you know what THAT
means... it means that circumstances will lead to Dick needing to move
in with Bruce and Alfred, which will in turn lead to... oh hell, you
KNOW where this is going.
Did I mention Chase yet?  No?  Oh, goodie!  Well, Dr. Chase Meridian is
consulting with Commisioner Gordon on the Two-Face case, since she's an
expert on multiple personalities.  Multiple personalities, hmm... nope,
don't have any of those in Gotham.  Well anyway, Chase is attracted to
"the wrong kind of man," so of course she ends up having a thing for a
certain hero-in-black-rubber.  And Bruce Wayne ends up having a thing
for her.  But when Wayne likes Chase, and Chase likes Batman but not so
much Wayne, well gee, kinda like the old Lois/Superman problem, isn't
it?
After a list like that, you're probably looking for the kitchen sink. 
Well, here it is: Drew Barrymore shows up in a small role as one of
Two-Face's girlfriends (she plays the girlfriend to his good side, which
is exactly the opposite of what you'd expect from Drew, isn't it?). 
Just thought you'd like to know.
Schumacher is filling in for Burton, and his direction is a little...
off-kilter.  A few of the fight scenes are confusing due to his flying,
zooming, wacked-out camera work.  But most of the time, he does a fine
job keeping things from getting too odd.  His vision of Batman's world,
on the other hand, leaves something to be desired...
Gone are the dark, dreary streets of Gotham that we knew and loved, as
Schumacher, with the aid of production designer Barbara Ling, has made
Gotham into a land of, yes, some dark streets, but also of neon lights
that appear for no apparent reason, gangs that are lit up by
black-lights - again for for no apparent reason - and buildings that,
instead of being detailed, beautiful models, are basic, CGI-created
rectangular-style skyscrapers.  It's passable, but not anywhere near as
gorgeous as the vision of Gotham that fit so well with Batman in the
first two films.  Even the Bat-vehicles like the Batmobile are
redesigned, and, though they look quite nice, Burton's versions remain
the ideal - perhaps in part because they came first, and also because
they weren't neon-lit.  As for the nipples on the Bat-and-Robin-suits,
gratuitous codpieces, and shots of rubbers rears, I only have to say -
why?? 
Elliot Goldenthal is filling in for Danny Elfman, and, though he writes
a good and memorable score, it's not as majestic as Elfman's beautiful
work.  Still, it fits in with Batman just fine.
Now to the actors.  Okay, Val Kilmer... um... well, he's a good Batman. 
He speaks with gravel on his voice, as he should, like Keaton did.  But,
you know how theh thing you see most clearly in the Batsuit is the
chin?  Well, Kilmer's chin just doesn't fit in with the image as well as
Keaton's or even Clooney's.  I know that sounds odd, so I'll just blow
that off.  It's no big deal.  Kilmer also looks more like one might
expect Bruce Wayne or Batman to look than Keaton did - he's just a more
imposing figure.  But as Wayne, he always wears black, which is just
wrong - Batman is the morbid one, and Bruce Wayne is supposed to be the
facade of a light-hearted bachelor.  Oh well.  He still does alright in
the Batsuit, even if he does play Bruce in too wooden a manner.  Kilmer
isn't as good as Keaton, but still does alright.  At least it's nice to
learn more about Batman's origin, and spend a little more time with the
hero of this picture than we did in BATMAN RETURNS (1992).
Carrey acts like Carrey, leaping around and doing his best to steal
scenes, and he does get his fair share.  He's appropriately psycho as
the Riddler (do you capitalize the "t" in names like "The Joker," "The
Penguin," or "The Riddler?"  Just curious... I suppose it doesn't
matter.), but even though, at times, he plays a fine disturbed villian,
he also ends up playing what basically amounts to himself at other
times, leaping around, cracking jokes, stretching his face.  But in the
end, it's hard to imagine that anyone else could live up to this vision
of the Riddler.  He does nicely.
It's Tommy Lee Jones who gets the movie's most interesting character -
Two-Face.  The duality of this villian makes him one of the most
intriguing in the Batman mythos - but, on a few occasions in BATMAN
FOREVER, Two-Face is played a little too one-note, as just another
wisecracking, over-the-top enemy.  Still, on all those times when he
shows off his dual nature, he's easily the most fascinating person to
watch, and that's when Jones chews plenty scenery of his own.  He and
Carrey seem to battle for who can steal the most scenes, and in the end,
they both have come out about even as far as I'm concerned.  
Nicole Kidman plays Chase Meridian well enough, but, like Vicki Vale in
the first film, this is another love interest/damsel in distress that is
often thankless.  Even so, she has scenes where she shines, and she's
certainly not the same character as Vicki or Selena were.    
And what of Chris O'Donnell?  Of the more understated performances in
this movie, the actual truth is, his is probably the best, believe it or
not.  Dick Grayson/Robin (who, in another no-apparent-reason touch,
wears an earring for most of the picture) turns out to be an interesting
character, and he and Kilmer do have a brotherly chemistry that comes
across to the viewer.  His reasoning for wanting to become a vigilante
partner to Batman is well-acted and believable, and his eager teenage
side that pops up on occasion is likable, too.  Yes, for this film,
O'Donnell and Robin are likable guys.  Don't expect it to last into the
next one, though... although that's not entirely his fault.  But I'm
getting ahead of myself... I can talk about that in the BATMAN & ROBIN
review.
In the end, despite not being as good as the first two movies, BATMAN
FOREVER is actually not bad.  Some of the little touches are especially
nice - Alfred calling Bruce "Master Bruce," Two-Face's henchmen calling
him "Face," Two-Face referring to himself as "we" or "us." Still, the
warning signs of Schumacher start to creep in here, and act of portents
of the downhill slide to come.  Michael Gough, by the way, is and always
remains a great Alfred, and a fine actor.  Pat Hingle seems miscast as
Gordon, but that may just be because he hasn't had a big enough role
yet.  In the end, even though Batman may ignore some laws of physics
here, he does okay for himself.

Title
Review for Jingle All the Way (1996)
Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger (Howard Langston), Sinbad (Myron
Larabee), Phil Hartman (Ted Maltin), Rita Wilson (Liz Langston), Jake
Lloyd (Jamie Langston), James Belushi (Mall Santa), Robert Conrad
(Officer Hummell), Danny Woodburn (Tony the Elf)
Directed by: Brian Levant, Written by: Randy Kornfield
Rated PG by the MPAA for violence and strong language
"Awww, poor baby... heehee!" - Howard Langston
Arnold, as Howard, is willing to do anything to anybody that hinders his
quest to find a Turbo Man action figure for his son for Christmas in
JINGLE ALL THE WAY.  Naturally, since he's Arnold and Chris Columbus was
involved in the production (as a producer), "anything" involves
generally beating the crap out of all kinds of people, animals, and
assorted objects - himself included.
JINGLE is ostensibly a family comedy, and, in the end, it does promote
family values.  Along the way, though, it also trumpets the joys of
brawling and divorce, as well as all but openly declares Santa Claus a
myth - three things that you may or may not want your kids exposed to. 
Most families won't be phased by this, though, and so JINGLE will be
welcome for viewing when the holiday season rolls around.  
The performances are mostly well done.  Arnold always has charisma even
in the most unlikely of roles, and it's a pleasure to see him apparently
having fun while he races around in this film, playing a bewildered
parent that's sharp in contrast to the always-in-control action heros
we're used to.  Sinbad steals many of his scenes, tossing out pop
culture references ("Rodney King... Rodney King... ") and acting quite
insane as the postal worker Myron.  Unfortunately, he's sometimes
portrayed as an unwanted comedic sidekick, and sometimes as a villian -
apparently someone couldn't decide what to do with him. 
The physical comedy in a family show is something we've seen way too
many times before, and it'd be boring if not for the fact that it's
Arnold Schwarzenegger getting his clock cleaned for a change.  At least,
until the scene in the warehouse.  That's the location for the most
inspired part of the movie, in which Howard ends up in a brawl with evil
Santa Claus impersonators who'd rather deck his halls with candy cane
nunchakus than sit down for milk and cookies.  That whole sequence is
beautifully surreal - and belongs in a better movie than this.  How can
you not love seeing an elf announce the arrival of the police by
shouting "It's the Grinch!  Scatter!"
Yes, there's a fair share of flaws to this show, as is the case with any
movie Chris Columbus touches, it seems.  When the story starts, we learn
how Howard is an overworked businessman who doesn't spend enough time
with his family.  And that's got to be one of the most overused
character cliches in all of filmdom.  It's just plain painful to see it
now.  The movie stays in rut for about 15 minutes until Howard gets home
and makes up with his son (Jake Lloyd, aka Anakin Skywalker in episode
one of the STAR WARS series, to be released in 1999), and after that,
becomes light-hearted and fun for some of the time... and painfully
stupid at other times.
Those other times belong primarily to Phil Hartman, who brings the movie
down heavily every time he shows up on the screen.  And he's on the
screen far too much.  Hartman was an asset to "Saturday Night Live," and
continues to be one to "Newsradio" and "The Simpsons," but, on the big
screen, he's playing the obnoxious sleazy guy far too often, and when he
does it, he's just that - obnoxious.  Every moment he shows up on the
screen is a pain, as is the subplot of him moving in on Howard's wife,
Liz.
Of course, not all of the humor hits the mark, either, as if often the
case with family films.  And when it does, it doesn't always hit it as
hard as the warehouse scene.
When the finale finally rolls around, the film is charging ahead at a
full slapstick comic pace, and it all seems so likable that you tend the
forgive the ludicrous nature of the much of what happens in that
ending.  The whole thing is wrapped up nice and neat when the credits
roll.  But after the credits have faded, Arnold, Liz, and Jamie appear
on the screen for one last scene that has one of the strongest comic
payoffs of the whole show.
The cynical - yet accurate - view of Christmas shopping and the strength
of the certain elements of the comedy, along with the likable nature of
the show are all good points.  But Phil Hartman and the stupid portrayal
of Howard at the beginning of the movie drag it down heavily.  It was
tempting to make the rating 1/2 a star higher because of its good
points, but Hartman just hurts the movie too much.  JINGLE ALL THE WAY
is only a mildly diverting time, since all the good moments are hurt by
all the Phil Hartman moments which only serve to make the viewer angry
that he/she is being forced to watch his horrible role.  Sadly, thanks
almost single-handedly to Phil Hartman and merely a few other obviously
stupid plot devices, JINGLE ALL THE WAY only gets...
"Back up!  This is a homemade explosive device!  And I'll blow it up! 
Know why?  'Cause I work for the post office, so you KNOW I'm not
stable!  Tell 'em!" - Myron
"This man is totally insane." - Howard
"THANK YOU!" - Myron

Title
Review for Prince of Tides, The (1991)
Starring: Nick Nolte (Tom Wingo), Barbra Streissand (Susan Lowenstein),
Blythe Danner (Sallie Wingo), Jeroen Krabbé (Herbert Woodruff), George
Carlin (Eddie Detreville)
Directed by: Barbra Streissand, Written by: Pat Conroy and Becky
Johnston, based on the novel by Pat Conroy
Rated R by the MPAA for strong language, violence, sexual situations,
and rape
Something must be said about THE PRINCE OF TIDES.  It is very possibly
the most mysterious of any Oscar nominated film ever made, because it
also one of the worst films ever made.  It is a triumph of horrible
storytelling, ugly images, questionable acting, horrendous directing and
unrelentingly terrible writing, and to appreciate it on any level is
nearly to question one's sanity.  The "glory" of the film is its failure
- very rarely is such a spectacular failure made that nothing can redeem
it.  In the more recent annals of bad films, many have been the major
releases that, unfortunately, fall back on special effects in place of
an actual story or good characters.  But THE PRINCE OF TIDES doesn't
have such comforts, and, as a result, fails on every level imaginable. 
Perhaps something can be stated about Nick Nolte's acting, but then, how
hard is it to play a stereotype of a tough southerner?  Do we celebrate
Judd Hirsch for his stereotypical Jewish role in INDEPENDENCE DAY
(1996)?  No, we celebrate him for his success as a comedian in "Taxi,"
and his acting in ORDINARY PEOPLE (1980).  This movie is as dull as it
is insulting.  A failure of epic proportions.
The plotline is ripped right from the worst of soap operas.  Sallie
Wingo is having an affair.  Tom Wingo's sister tries to kill herself. 
When he goes to visit her and meets her psychiatrist, Susan Lowenstein,
it's discovered that Susan's husband is also having an affair.  So Tom
and Susan have an affair together, which is clearly not only the
not-quite-professional thing for Lowenstein to do, but also totally
disregards the well-being of her son.  That son, incidentally, in
another painfully contrived subplot, is being taught to play football by
Tom, who becomes the boy's surrogate father.  We come to find out that
Tom, his sister, and his mother were all raped by escaped convicts when
he and his sister were children, another soap-ish, and downright sick,
turn of events.  Not only does this serve no real purpose in the
storyline other than to make the audience feel ill when they have to see
flashbacks of it, but it also makes little sense.  How did these three
men escape?  What location did they escape from?  How far did they go to
reach the Wingo house?  Why did they choose to break into that
particular house but none of the others along the way?  Streissand
doesn't know, or care.  She's more interested in making the worst
episode ever of "One Life To Live" than in telling a good story.  Yawn.
Nearly all of the roles here are stereotypes.  It's mildly amusing to
see George Carlin play a flamboyantly gay man in one of the most
anti-typecasting roles ever seen, but that's just another stupid
character/stereotype to toss on the fire.  No one is really notable,
because everyone is so one-note.
What is Streissand's message?  She portrays the affair of Lowenstein and
Wingo as a glorious thing.  These two married people don't love each
other in any sense, but comfort one another with sex, and Streissand
finds that beautiful.  As vomit-inducing as that sounds, it seems to be
a Hollywood trend to try to destroy the institution of marriage. 
Marriage is often portrayed as a trap, where spouses are purely evil men
(or women) who frequently cheat and have no redeeming qualities (like
Lowenstein's husband, Woodruff, is here), and act as an obstacle to
having free sex with anyone who's willing - all of whom, of course, are
better than the spouse.  Even excellent films, like TITANIC (1997), can
fall part way into this trap.  Why does this happen so much in movies? 
Is it because marriages so rarely last in Hollywoodland?  Do they want
to try to justify their multiple spouses, torrid affairs, encounters
with prostitutes, etc?  Streissand's portrayal of the glories of
extramarital affairs is a solid slap in the face to marriage and married
couples, and Streissand herself deserves a solid slap in the face in
return for this infuriating effort to strike down an institution that
the world holds dear using nothing but her ego and lack of morality as a
weapon.
Incidentally, since this was the first of her films that I've ever seen,
I had never actually seen the full extent of her egotistical nature -
until now.  Look at the direction in this film - in every shot in which
she appears, she zooms in on her face, her legs, her chest.  She makes
herself shine for the camera, trying to flaunt her sexiness to the best
of her ability.  Sadly, she doesn't realize that she's not sexy at all -
and, in fact, isn't terribly attractive, at least nowhere as near as
much as she thinks she is.  Especially by the Hollywood standards that
she seems to be holding so dearly.  It was considered a snub when she
wasn't nominated for best director for this movie.  I have to wonder
why... if James Cameron had made himself the star of Titanic and zoomed
in on nothing but his face in every shot, would it be as well-loved as
it is?  I would have to doubt it.
When it's all said and done, and the cheating couples have all finally
returned to their spouses (in a rather uncelebratory fashion, sadly),
Barbra Streissand's THE PRINCE OF TIDES is enough to make you sick. 
Today, we complain that Hollywood makes so many hollow blockbusters that
have nothing but loud explosions and big special effects to guide them. 
But I'd gladly trade this piece of gutter trash for any one of those. 
If you have the poor sense to watch it on video, take heart in the fact
that, when it's finally over, you can rip it from the VCR, declare
"Sermon over," stub out your cigar on the tape, and chuck it out the
window.  Maybe, if we're lucky, it'll sink back into the hell from
whence it came.  

Title
Review for Batman (1989)
Starring: Michael Keaton (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Jack Nicholson (Jack
Napier/Joker), Kim Basinger (Vicki Vale), Robert Wuhl (Alexander Knox),
Michael Gough (Alfred Pennyworth), Pat Hingle (Commissioner Gordon),
Billy Dee Williams (Harvey Dent), Jack Palance (Carl Grissom)
Directed by: Tim Burton, Written by: Sam Hamm and Warren Skaaren from a
story by Sam Hamm based on characters created by Bob Kane
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, blood, strong language, and a
sexual situation
The best way to review this film is to put it in one word: classic.
Yes, BATMAN (1989) is as much a classic film as is SUPERMAN (1978). 
It's Batman as he should be portrayed, living up to all that the classic
comics taught us as kids and all that they're teaching kids about the
character now.  It's not a bastardization of the Batman legend like the
old tv series from the late 60s with Adam West was, or the film, BATMAN
(1966), that spun off from it.  
Batman is a dark character.  As his core is an obsession with his
parents' murder, which he witnessed as a child.  That story, and the
obsession that springs from it, is portrayed perfectly here, and Michael
Keaton fills the Batman role nicely.  He seems like a very unlikely
candidate - not exactly the buff type of guy you expect for Bruce
Wayne.  But his acting makes up for his lack of physical presence.  As
Bruce, he's tormented, a little odd - everything you'd expect.  And when
he's in the suit, he IS Batman.  To this day, no actor yet has held a
candle to Keaton's portrayal.  Only the recent animated Batman can
compete.
And only the animated Joker can compete with Jack Nicholson's expert
portrayal, as well.  He's evil, as he should be, and very funny, as
you'd expect him to be.  Again, not exactly the kind of guy who looks
like the skinny fellow we associate the Joker with, but his acting
speaks for itself.  
Vicki Vale, the photojournalist, is a thankless role when dropped among
scene-stealers like Keaton's Wayne/Batman and Nicholson's Napier/Joker,
but Basinger fits in nicely.  She's not over the top, but at least she
doesn't blend into the background, and she doesn't disappoint in any of
her scenes.  As another plus, Wuhl gets a humorous and notable role as
Alexander Knox, her co-worker.
Speaking of the background, what a nice background it is.  The late
Anton Furst created a fantastic Gotham City, a dark and decadent land
with giant skyscrapers that spike up into the air and have a unique,
dominating presence all their own.  It speaks highly of a design when it
sticks in your memory, and Furst's does.  It's a very fitting look for
Gotham.
Danny Elfman's score is another element of the movie that is now the
stuff of legend.  The main theme is rousing and memorable on the level
of the RAIDERS OF THE LOST ARK (1979) theme, and that's high praise. 
Elfman's music is dark at times, fun at times, and always appropriate.
If you haven't seen the original film in the BATMAN series yet, don't be
put off by some of the later, lamer sequels.  This is a very different
vision, and much better one.  It's a true classic, and something that
must be experienced.

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
Starring: David Duchovny (Fox Mulder), Gillian Anderson (Dana Scully),
William B. Davis (The Cigarette-Smoking Man), Martin Landau (Dr. Alvin
Kurtzweil), Jeffrey DeMunn (Dr. Ben Bronschweig), John Neville (The
Well-Manicured Man), Mitch Pileggi (Walter Skinner)
Directed by: Rob Bowman, Written by: Chris Carter from a story by Chris
Carter and Frank Spotnitz
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, gore, and profanity
So, um, what's the truth?  Well, if you mean you want the truth about
what the new X-FILES movie is titled, I can't really help you.  The
movie titles only said THE X-FILES.  The advertisements all seem to say
THE X-FILES: FIGHT THE FUTURE.  Well, take it either way.  I think it's
just THE X-FILES, but, well, I don't really know.
Oh, did you want the truth about the movie?  As in, is it any good? 
Well, I'm not the biggest expert in this area.  You see, I've only seen
maybe 4 episodes of the television series, give or take one or two.  So
I'm not a big X-Phile.  So it's safe to say that it's quite reassuring
that I can say - Yes.  It's good.  It's very good.  It's great, in
fact.  The first true RIDE of the summer is here, and you'll be kicking
yourself if you don't strap in to this one while it's in theaters - some
of the images just won't translate as well onto a TV screen.  If you
haven't seen the film yet, get up and go NOW.
Wait, not now.  You might want to read this review first.  Of course,
that's really up to you, but still, you might want to.  Don't worry, I
won't spoil anything.  I make a point to only talk about maybe five
minutes of the film and then leave the lesser-known details to you.
Okay, citizens.  THE X-FILES opens up with us seeing a freaky beast
attack ancient humans in the B.C. caveman ages.  The beast remains in
shadows so that we're not quite sure what it is.  Cut to the present
day.  We see a mysterious black ooze (I think fans of the tv series will
recognize this, or so I'm told) inhabit a little boy who goes to the
same spot where the cavemen were attacked so long ago.  Is there a
connection?  Does Bea Arthur look hideous naked?  And from there, we cut
to our heroes, FBI Agents Mulder and Scully.  Previously, they worked on
the mysterious X-Files, files found in the darker rooms of the FBI's
hallways, files which detail cases too strange to be explained by
rational thought and logical explanation.  Cases that seem to deal with
the supernatural, or the extraterrestrial... or both.  But that's
ridiculous.  Well, Scully thinks it's ridiculous.  Mulder believes all
of it.  Anyway, the files have since been shut down after Mulder pushed
his beliefs a little too far and annoyed the wrong people.  Now he and
Scully are still a team, but they're a team of ordinary FBI agents,
dealing with less interesting things, like terrorist threats.  Yeah,
that's a big yawn, huh Mulder?
Of course, when something goes wrong in their new line of duty, the FBI
looks for someone to blame for the foul-up, and even though it wasn't
their fault, Mulder and Scully were there, and they're first in line to
have the whole thing put on their heads.  Now they're going to try to
clear their names, and along the way, they're going to learn a lot more
about the mysterious conspiracy that's being run behind the scenes
worldwide, to hide the real truth about just the kinds of things that
Mulder and Scully used to investigate in the X-Files division.  Of
course, they can't learn everything - there's plenty more episodes of
the series to be had, and future movies to be made.
The performances are all acted by people who've handled these roles for
years on the tv show (with the exception of Martin Landau playing a new
character - and he's never bad, so of course that's just another good
point).  And since they've had to time to develop the roles, they make
us feel like we're watching developed, layered characters even if we
don't watch the show much, or at all.  We really care about Mulder and
Scully - they actually have deep personalities, which is truly something
to be appreciated, especially in today's film world.  The action scenes
are infrequent, but tense, and solid.  Really though, this story is
driven by plot and dialogue.  It's a winding plot that you have to pay
attention to, especially if you're not a series afficianado, but trust
me, it's worth it.  Some of the scenes are awe-inspiring, and the scope
of some visuals, particularly towards the end, make you truly appreciate
that this was made into a movie as opposed to just another episode of
the show.  The plot winds around and around but always holds your
interest, thanks in part to great performances and in part to great
writing that takes the time to give us characterizations of the people
we're watching instead of just putting them through the paces.  The
effects, when they show up, are also great.  Seems like this movie works
even for those who don't watch the show, and I also find it very hard to
believe that those who do watch would be let down by this.
If there's a flaw to this, it's that the villians aren't quite clearly
explained enough.  We understand their motives, but how did they come to
reach these motives?  There had to be some kind of communication that we
didn't learn about.  I know, I know, I'm keeping this pretty vague.  But
I can assure you, I'm not digging too deep here, this is actually a
question you need to ask yourself, and in the end, it's never quite
answered.  Maybe series fans know more on this subject.  Though really,
in such an otherwise great movie, why should I gripe about this?
I can't elaborate too much on things that were great because I wouldn't
dare reveal the plot.  You have to go and see it for yourself.  And
you'd better.  The summer has had some letdowns, and some fun, but so
far, this is the best ride out there, and it's a damn good ride that
could hold its own in any summer... or any season of any year, for that
matter.  One wonders if Chris Carter, the show's creator, can continue
to make X-FILES films that can stand alone as their own series and still
make them interesting and relevant to the viewers at home.  But there's
no need to worry about this now.  Now, all you have to do is go see THE

Title
Review for Batman Returns (1992)
Starring: Michael Keaton (Bruce Wayne/Batman), Danny DeVito (Oswald
Cobblepot/The Penguin), Michelle Pfeiffer (Selina Kyle/Catwoman),
Christopher Walken (Max Shreck), Michael Gough (Alfred Pennyworth), Pat
Hingle (Commissioner Gordon)
Directed by: Tim Burton, Written by: Daniel Waters and Wesley Strick
from a story by Sam Hamm based on characters created by Bob Kane
Rated PG-13 by the MPAA for violence, blood, strong languae, and sexual
remarks/humor
What SUPERMAN II (1980) is to SUPERMAN (1978), so is BATMAN RETURNS
(1992) to BATMAN (1989).
What does that mean?  That means it's a worthy, well-done sequel.  What
is it with these DC Comics heroes having two good entries in their film
series and then going downhill?
This time, the plot might actually need some commentary.  We see before
the eerie credits sequence that, 33 years ago, a boy was born deformed,
and, repulsed by his appearance, the parents (one of which is played by
Paul Reubens, a Tim Burton film veteran) tossed him into the sewer (or a
storm drain - hard to tell) and he floats his way to the "Arctic World"
attraction at Gotham's zoo.  There, it's implied that he's found among
the penguins and is put into the "Red Triangle Circus", where he becomes
the "aquatic bird boy."  The circus keeps him alive, but eventually he
returns to life under the streets.  All of this primarily occurs
off-screen, before the main focus of the story takes place, as we have
other matters to deal with... 
In the modern day, millionaire deparment store owner Max Shreck is
trying to build a new power plant, despite the fact that Gotham City
already has a power surplus.  Why?  Well, because his power plant is
actually a capacitor, which will suck power in and store it.  But he's
not telling the mayor (Michael Murphy) or Bruce Wayne, who are both
opposed to his plan, that.
Of course, Max also has a secretary named Selina Kyle.  Selina strikes
up a romance with Bruce Wayne, but, as you already know, she won't end
up being Selina Kyle for the whole movie, and you can find out why and
how when you watch for yourself.
Michael Keaton now seems even more comfortable in the Wayne/Batman role,
and plays it better than ever.  He even looks better in the suit here
(incidentally, this is obviously the most flexible suit that any Batman
wears in any of the films, and it looks quite cool).  Keaton is still
the definitive Batman, here more than ever - he's even made his hair
look less '80s for this film.  It's too bad that the story doesn't focus
more on him.
DeVito plays a very good tormented, umbrella-wielding Penguin, a man who
wants to return to the world above and "reclaim his birthright" by
becoming an appreciated member of Gotham society - all while secretly
plotting his own destruction schemes and revenge plots with his former
circus buddies who are now his gang.  He even gets to be funny at times.
Pheiffer is an excellent Catwoman, the first foe who is a worth physical
adversary to Batman in the series.  She's sultry, she's fun to watch,
and always chews the scenery.
And speaking of the scenery, it is, again, a beautiful thing to see. 
fills in for the late Anton Furst, and, although he doesn't reach the
same level as Furst, he does an admirable job.  Gotham is again a
beautiful and dark world.
Oh, yeah... Christopher Walken?  He's Walken.  He's pretty much always
Walken.  He's always a pretty good villian, because, hey, he's
Christopher Walken.  He can't compete with the Penguin or Catwoman, but
hey, what did you expect?
Danny Elfman's main theme returns here, and it, along with the other
music he did for this film, is much more haunting and dark this time
around, with chanting often rising up from the background.  This score
is again beautiful, and is just as strong as the one Elfman wrote for
the first film.
If the plot for this movie sounds odd... well, I suppose it is a little
weird, but Tim Burton films are usually quirky.  Still, somehow it all
seems to make sense on the screen, and works just great when you see it
for yourself.  Another Batman triumph for Burton and Keaton, BATMAN
RETURNS has all the strong performances, cool action, great direction,
gorgeous design, and powerful music of the first film.  The only flaws
would be that, this being our second trip through Gotham, maybe we
aren't as dazzled as the last time (sort of like the problem THE LOST
WORLD: JURASSIC PARK [1997] had to deal with after the origina JURASSIC
PARK [1993]), and we could've made do with more time spent with Batman,
and perhaps less villians.  With the next film, however, BATMAN FOREVER
(1995), Joel Schumacher's reign begins, and things get even more
crowded... so be prepared.  

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
THE LOST WORLD: JURASSIC PARK Starring: Jeff Goldblum (Dr. Ian Malcolm),
Julianne Moore (Dr. Sarah Harding) Directed by: Steven Spielberg Written
by: David Koepp RATED PG-13 by the MPAA for strong language and
violence.
When summer hits, sequels can't be far behind.  Often, that means it's
time for a cast of faces we all know playing characters that we all know
as they run the paces through a carbon copy of the original film.
Which is why THE LOST WORLD is such a pleasant surprise.
When was the last time you saw a sequel that you felt was better than
the original, or at least on equal ground with it?  Was it ALIENS? 
TERMINATOR 2?  Maybe BATMAN RETURNS?  These things are few and far
between.  Welcome to THE LOST WORLD, a sequel which outshines the
original JURASSIC PARK.
What makes this a superior film?  How about a better lead character? 
More likable supporting characters?  An army of human villians along
with the dangerous dinosaurs?  More intense action sequences?  Better
effects?  An ending that truly screams "FINALE!!!" and provides a real
sense of closure?  A better pulse-pounding John Williams score?  A
darker overall tone?  And a plotline that ends up being far superior to
that of the Michael Crichton book on which it is based?
Flaws?  Well, the concept of "There's another island!" isn't reasoned
out as well as it was in the book.  Luckily, Jeff Goldblum's own
disbelief as portrayed in both words and expressions helps to somehow
ease the disbelief of the audience.  Plus, Sarah makes one really stupid
mistake, endangering the group on the island, which seems a little
strange considering her supposed expertise in such areas.  However, it's
plausible that, given the hell she was through, she didn't have time to
think straight enough to realize what a boneheaded manuver she was
pulling.  Finally, the only other obvious flaw would be that the Nick
Van Owen character (Vince Vaughn) did some things that seemed smart in
execution, but finally proved idiotic, making his supposedly "heroic"
character easy to dislike.
But these three little problems can't stop viewers from grinning like
maniacs during the whole production and applauding their hearts out at
the end.  Spielberg took audiences into another world with 1993's
JURASSIC PARK.  Now, again managing to work his magic, he gives us THE
LOST WORLD.  Neither of the Indiana Jones adventures after RAIDERS OF
THE LOST ARK managed to top that first one, but THE LOST WORLD does
manage to be a fantastic Spielberg adventure, one that is even better
that his first trip into dino-land.
Maybe all of Spielberg's action films should have LOST in the title...
This is the chance to witness something extremely rare.  The sequel that
improves on the first concept.  The summer of '97 has, so far, proven to
be infinitely better than that of '96 in the movie industry.  THE LOST
WORLD alone is better than any movie released last summer.  May the
INDEPENDENCE DAYs and TWISTERs of the world tremble in fear.  Steven
Spielberg is here to show you how it's done.  Go out there and learn
your lesson while you can still catch it in the theater.  And if you see
just three movies this summer, please, make them CONTACT, FACE/OFF...
and THE LOST WORLD: JURASSIC PARK.
