Authors
Dan Kim
Number of Reviews
7

Title
Review for Anastasia (1997)
Released by 20th Century Fox. Directors Don Bluth & Gary Goldman.
Producers Bluth & Goldman.
Fox takes the plunge into mainstream animation feature films with the
utterly conventional "Anastasia." Few things really stand out about
this movie but at the same time, there is nothing noticeably bad about
it either. It's a pleasing, and successful, one and a half hour sortie
at Disney's megalomaniacal animation division that spells stiff
competition in the future.
The base of the story is taken from the historic Romanov family from
Czarist Russia. A rather unlikely source for an animated feature, Don
Bluth and Gary Goldman (both who have extensive Disney experience)
and their team of writers manage to put together an enjoyable, albeit
routine story that should do well to appeal to young and old.
The year was 1916 and Anastasia's (voice by the always likable Meg
Ryan) family, the Romanovs, was celebrating its 300th anniversary as
the ruling dynasty in Russia. Her grandmother, the Dowager Empress
Marie, returning to her home in Paris, gives Anastasia a beautiful
music box that played their special lullaby. The Empress, resembling
Angela Lansbury after taking classes in royalty (incidentally, played
by Angela Lansbury) had a special inscription placed on the key to the
music box - "Together in Paris." Someone should have warned them that
the evil Rasputin had returned from exile to St. Petersburg seeking
revenge. Sporting a beard that would make ZZ Top jealous, escorted by
spunky sidekick Bartok the albino bat, ultimately consumed by hatred,
he sold his soul for a dangerous power to curse the family. From that
moment on, revolution begins to rage across the country, ultimately
destroying most of the Romanov family. 
With the aid of a courageous kitchen boy named Dmitri, the Empress and
her granddaughter make their perilous escape from the horde which is
attacking the Romanov palace. Pursued by the fervent Rasputin, Marie
and Anastasia's only hope is to catch the last train from the crumbling
capital. 
Rasputin tries to catch and kill the two, but he falls into an icy
death, pardoning the lives of Marie and Anastasia. But as they struggle
to escape the mob that has become St. Petersburg, Marie and Anastasia
are separated when the princess falls from her grandmother's grasp and
hits her head. As the distraught Marie heads toward Paris and safety,
Anastasia lies unconscious, alone and an amnesiac.
Along the way, she comes across a grown-up Dmitri and his friend/
business partner Vladimir. These genial rogues have a get-rich-quick
scheme, that scheme being to get an actress to play the lost princess
Anastasia and then collecting the reward of ten million rubles from the
Empress. Lucky for them, Anya just happens to be the lost princess.
Unlucky for them, she does not even know it despite the telltale
pictures of the royal family in the now abandoned palace.
History purists and devout Russian nationalists will be obviously
perturbed by the watered-down storyline   but the Bluth/Goldman script
works for what is supposed to be, an animation feature geared towards
the young and the young-at-heart.
Fox shamelessly plagiarized the successful formula that earned Disney
so many millions, from the rags-to-riches heroine, the handsome suitor
that crosses her path, to the all too cute sidekicks that no animated
feature can do without. They're almost as successful. "Anastasia,"
though having a plot that is relentlessly conventional, yet serviceable
is saved by the shrewd casting for the voices of the main characters.
Ryan is perfect as the perky yet strong-willed princess, and John
Cusak's voice suits the charm of Dmitri quite well. Christopher Lloyd
is gleefully evil in his ranting and raving. However, Hank Azaria
steels some spotlight as Bartok the ambiguous-conscienced bat. Cliched
lines like "stressed is a killer sir" would not work had it not been
for his lively, if indecipherable, accent.
Ryan and Cusack work well off each other, with a lively banter that
hints at the inevitable romantic tension between the two. Ryan devotees
will recognize the style of that dialogue that made her so likable (and
famous) and "When Harry Met Sally" so enjoyable.
The Disney influence shows plainly in some of the shots of the interior
of the palace ballroom, as does the relationship between Empress Marie
and the grown-up Anastasia. When Anya dresses up for the final ballroom
event, one cannot help but have "Beauty and the Beast" running through
their heads at the moment. Right down to Lansbury's voice to that
elegant yellow dress.
The computer generated animation is near flawless, just slightly less
polished than Disney's best works. The sweeping "cinematography"
covering the ballrooms is especially impressive however; the illusion
of camera movement, or panning, being smooth and realistic.
"Anastasia" will no doubt be the first of many features Fox will throw
into the already saturated movie market, and if the following films get
better as Fox gains experience they will have a bright future indeed.
As it is, this is a pleasing, enjoyable and sometimes too cute movie
that hits its target almost on the mark.

Title
Review for Game, The (1997)
Note: This review contains spoilers at the end.
Watching "The Game" will fill one with quite a few thoughts and new
concerns when they leave the theater. You will never want to misplace
your keys again for one. Anyone suffering from clown-phobia will make
extra effort to avoid circuses and Venice Beach street actors. You'll
be wary of the next time a waiter or waitress accidentally spills
something on you. These are merely three of the many odd twists and
turns people are asked to take in throughout the entire film.
"The Game," starring Michael Douglas, is a psychological thriller in
every sense of the word. It starts off letting everyone know a little
bit about financial baron Nicholas Van Orton, a businessman with a
knack for making millions but little else. It's almost Gordon Gecko
revisited. He lives an empty life of work and stock reports with little
else going on outside of his office and country club. He's cold-
hearted enough that he can fire the head of a publishing company who
also happens to be a former best friend of his father without batting
an eye. His father was also a successful businessman who inexplicably
committed suicide by jumping off the roof of his estate. He alienates
his ex-wife who is also the mother of his child, he has a brother whom
he hasn't seen or spoken to in years (more on that later). His only
personally link to humanity is a kindly old woman who happens to be his
housekeeper for many years. Yet, throughout the movie, you realize that
he is capable of occasional moments of kindness, a dry humor, and other
interesting quirks. An interesting note; despite his riches, his
ability to dine at exclusive restaurants for during lunch breaks, a
membership at a posh country club, his dinners at home are simple fares
of hamburger and fries, or deli sandwiches. Complex? Yeah. Are you
following this so far?
Sean Penn brilliantly plays the seemingly mentally disturbed brother
Conrad. True Penn-ophiles might be disappointed to know he is limited
to only three scenes, but what little screen time he's given is used to
the utmost max. He first arrives on the scene on to wish Nick a happy
48th birthday and give him a card for a company called "Consumer
Recreation Services," or CRS. Incidentally, their father committed
suicide on his 48th birthday and this topic becomes a taboo topic
during their lunch meeting. Conrad guarantees a life changing
experience and Nick reluctantly agrees to it.
Nick meets up with a rather creepy CRS sales associate Jim Feingold.
Upon agreeing to it, he undergoes a battery of physical, intellectual,
and psychological tests to see if he qualifies to play the game. These
tests take quite a bit longer that expected, which as expected annoys
him, and even more frustrates him later to find out his test results
didn't meet requirements. Not all is what it seems however, as oddities
start popping up around him. One of the first being a waitress named
Christine (Deborah Kara Unger) who "accidentally" spills wine on Nick.
She unwillingly becomes a sidekick to Nick's upcoming mayhem.
The movie is expertly cast, with Douglas being the perfect choice to
play the icy and arrogant Van Orton. Few others can play such a
character with enough flair, charm and self-deprecating humor to the
point that he can get an audience to side with someone who just blew
off his kind ex-wife who called to wish him a happy birthday.
Master visual artist David Fincher takes viewers one a brain twisting,
darkly toned, and often depressingly moody view of San Francisco, the
city where Van Orton resides. Fincher, who last thrilled and disturbed
us in the brilliantly gut-wrenching "Seven," takes us on yet another
visual stunner of paranoia and confusion. He has a Hitchcock-ish eye
for setting the mood and tone of movies by knowing exactly how much
tension and suspense to use without going so far as to completely
alienate the audience. It helps to take your brain with you when you go
to see "The Game" since the clues and hints as to what really is going
on is multitudinous, though nothing will prepare you for the ending of
the movie. More on THAT later.
This movie isn't perfect, however. The otherwise well written plot is
so full of twists and turns that it's easy to not notice the artful eye
stimulation Fincher provides throughout the film. (Editorial note: it's
this very style that, in my humble opinion, kept Alien3 from being a
total disaster). Character development is enough for some, not enough
for others. One certainly gets to know the character of Van Orton as
the movie progresses. Unfortunately we're provided few ideas as to why
Conrad is the way he is. We're also asked to assume why the two of them
are estranged. Their relationship also isn't taken as far as it might
have been.
Depending on how the Game struck you, the ending will either be
fulfilling or a disappointment. Whichever it is, the viewers must
decide for themselves.
The first hour and half however, is a definite can't miss.
My view of the ending? I thought it was brilliant! Despite all the odd
occurrences throughout and the overall fast pace of  the film, I had
little trouble keeping up with the goings on of the Game. The plot
contorts itself and eventually tries to lead us to believe that CRS is
little more than a highly skilled and organized group of con-artist
after Nick's substantial wealth. I started to think Nick was
financially ruined and has little to lose -- even his life -- when I
realized that everything that was going on was in fact a Game. It was
truly a life changing experience, as Conrad promised, and we see this
change in Nick's attitude immediately. He finally shows some warmth
towards both his wife and her new husband. He and his brother start
acting like brothers, and the dead, cold look in his eyes prevalent
throughout the movie is no longer there.

Title
Review for Wings of the Dove, The (1997)
The third adaptation from novelist Henry James, "Wings of the Dove" is
a complex and heartbreaking love story taken place in turn of the
century Europe. It's more absorbing and much deeper than what most
moviegoers might be accustomed to. In stark contrast to most of this
summer action blockbusters, or even drama for that matter, "Wings" is a
plot, character, and dialogue driven story that relies on shrewd and
perceptive writing to entertain the audience. Conventional Hollywood
material this is not.
Apparently movie-makers have a strong desire for James' novels. This
last year has seen Jane Campion's "Portrait of a Lady," Agnieszka
Holland's "Washington Square" and now Iain Softley's "The Wings of the
Dove." 
This emotionally involving story explores love, would be lovers, and
the desire to be loved in a status-conscious 1900s Europe. Helena
Bonham Carter gives a subtle but heartfelt performance as Kate Croy.
Her character is introduced just after she has been acquired as a ward
by her aunt, the dominant and aristocratic Maude (Charlotte Rampling).
Maude gives Kate wealth and status and also provides money for the
girl's father, but at a price. Kate is forbidden to marry for love
alone or do anything else that might offend the sensibilities of the
ruling class. Aunt Maude makes no pretense of the fact that she intends
to marry Kate off to an equally wealth-obsessed suitor, and she's shown
doing just that early on in the film.
Unfortunately for her, Kate is in love with a handsome journalist
Merton Densher (Linus Roache). He wants to marry her immediately, but
Kate, is reluctant professing to be "not good at being impulsive." She
also knows such an act would threaten both her own and her father's
security. Her apprehension eventually breaks the relationship apart.
Time passes, and American heiress Millie Theale (Alison Elliott), "the
world's richest orphan," appears in London. A free-spirit blessed with
a warm heart and, she quickly develops a relationship with Kate.
Their friendship grows but Millie doesn't reveal that her trip is also
for medical reasons. Kate starts to suspect that Millie's trip to
Europe is indeed for more than just an impulsive need to travel.
Consequently, she develops a brazen plot that may result in her and her
father's financial dependence on their control-freak aunt.
The two of them eventually run across Merton at a social gathering.
Millie eyes the handsome young reporter and quickly develops a crush on
him. Kate doesn't reveal until later that the two of them were once
involved.
We're led to believe that Kate is just using the friendship to gain
wealth but when suspicions of her fragile wealth are confirmed, it
turns out she does in fact, have deep personal connection with Millie.
This is shown in one of the more touching moments of the movie. Upon
finding out Millie is dying, Kate walks to her bedroom and curls up in
bed next to her with a look of sadness on her face.
Millie's wandering needs eventually leads the two of them to Venice,
Italy where we see the relationship continue to grow. She doesn't hide
the fact that she would like to feel a man's love, but continues to
hide the reason for her urgency. Kate, being quite perceptive,
persuades Merton to join them in Italy. He shows up and eventually
finds out the real purpose of why she is going out of her way to him
and Millie together. When questioned whether the ploy will work, Kate's
best reply is "I know how she loves."
"Wings" is a powerful movie due primarily to the skillful acting by all
the cast. Carter especially stands out, giving a well developed, deeply
moving performance as the lead protagonist. You can truly feel the
romantic desires and passions both expressed and repressed as she
reluctantly pushes herself and her companions to continue in what will
obviously and in emotional tragedy. She's adept at portaying an
enigmatic character; she causes much of the anguish yet we can't help
but feel sympathy when she says, "I hurt so much you can't imagine."
Being required to play someone unknowable and emotionally complex, she
is sensational.
The setting itself is richly appointed and beautifully artistic. The
filming takes place in both upper-crust London and an especially artsy
Venice, which may lead an imaginative viewer to believe this was the
Italy of the renaissance era. Costume designs are equally elaborate,
whether it's the simple tweed of the men's suits or the intricate
dresses and enormous hats that were in vogue during that period. 
The settings being what they are, "Wings" succeeds because of James'
gift for developing charters throughout the story. This is indeed the
quintessential "art-house film" that is all too lacking from the
studios of Hollywood.

Title
Review for Fools Rush In (1997)
Doug Draizin and Anna Marie Davis, co-producers of "Fools Rush In"
manage to put together a spirited and beguiling romantic comedy based
on a true story; apparently their own.
Whether their meeting happened exactly as the movie shows is probably
the least of the concerns of the average moviegoer, who probably won't
even know this little tidbit, which, incidentally might serve them well
in the next movie trivia pursuit they partake in. What they will be
aware of is the chemistry between the two leads, as well as the lively
banter between their best friends, and the overall sweetness and fluid
direction of "Fools."
"Friends" fanatic will immediately recognize Alex Whitman as Matthew
Perry, though the more devout Perry fan will no doubt see him as
"Chandler Bing" on on the big screen. That's not a bad thing, since He
often has the funniest moments in the sit-com. Perry's character is
little more than Chandler on the big screen but the antics and dry
sarcasm that make him the most popular male on the TV show works well
in this movie. He is well supported by the sensual Salma Hayek, whose
presence bellies her otherwise petite frame (she's 5'2").
The fun starts in New York where we're introduced to a career-driven
Whitman, who works for a NY-based night club construction firm, who
ends up with a gig to oversee construction of a ritzy night club right
on the Vegas Strip. The viewer gets an inital taste of his quick wit
which is the source of much of the entertainment throughout the movie.
It's this style of verbal humor that allows Perry to pull off seemingly
innocuous lines into amusing zingers. The film is riddled with lines
like "gee that sounded so much prettier in Spanish." Lines that would
sound otherwise ordinary with any other actor.
During his first few nights in Vegas, while standing in line for a
unisex bathroom is where he comes across the spunky Isabel Fuentes, a
beautiful photographer of Mexican decent. After their initial
encounter, the director cuts immediately to the morning after of their
one-night stand where we see her wake up next to a dozing Alex and gets
that all-too-familiar "Oh my God" look.
Therein lies the turning point. Three months later, she shows up and
tells Alex she's pregnant, with his child. We're treated to a short yet
amusing spiel from Alex about a condom's reason for being. Distraught,
she leaves, he chases her wanting to help and ends up that same evening
eating at her parent's place for a family dinner. Apparently her idea
of "family" involves cousins, aunts, uncle and probably the Mormon
Tabernacle Choir. Alex on the other hand, visits his parents only
during "holidays and stuff."
Alex manages to enjoy himself immensely, so much so that he decides he
and Isabelle should get married. The proposal itself is a riot, with
him proclaiming "you're everything I never knew I always wanted." Both
poignant and hilarious, even Isabelle displays amusement, albeit a
slight bewildered smile. In typical Vegas fashion, they get married in
a chapel with Elvis as a witness.
More hilarity ensues when Alex's parents (played by Jill Clayburgh and
John Bennet Perry, Matthew's real  father) decide to make a surprise
visit. Being the quintessential New York WASP-ish type, they initially
mistake Isabel for a housekeeper. They do find out and she's actually a
wife, and agree to a parent meeting. The cultural difference issues
that seem to be so prevalent throughout the movie is shown here with a
deft touch by Tennant, the most entertaining being the back and forth
between the two fathers.
As with most marriages there will be conflicts, the fights and make-ups
are also done in ways that are easily believable. And while all this is
going on, we're treated to a bit of insight about the two leads from
the goings on around  them. Whether it's Alex's job, old crushes,
construction difficulties, jealous ex-boyfriends, or being surrounded
by snakes in the desert. Jon Tenney also provides some moments of humor
as Alex's libidinous, recently divorced best friend.
"Fools Rush In" is clearly blessed by the expert casting of the
romantic duo. You can almost feel the chemistry between Perry and Hayek
throughout the entire movie. Their acting and charm is what makes the
entire movie seem so real. Their relationship is well paced and
developed in a manner that is plausible considering their near-shotgun
wedding. Both are shown as real people having a real depth and
substance.
Tennant deserves a bit of the credit for his skilled direction. We're
treated to quite a few musical montages, as well several sweeping views
of Vegas, the Hoover Dam, and especially stunning scenes of the desert.
He does an especially good job of letting Hayek radiate through the
lens. The slow-motion shots of Isabel looking lovingly at Alex is
subtle yet but go so far in showing Hayek's sensuality. You can truly
read what's on her mind just by looking at her face.
"Fools" is an immensely enjoyable film, perfect for those romantic
evenings with a significant other. Its Valentine's Day release earlier
this year could not have been more perfect. Few romantic comedies
contain such a well-blended combination of humor, passion, and
believability. Check it out.

Title
Review for My Best Friend's Wedding (1997)
This being my first ever written movie review, I thought it would be
appropriate that I start of with a review that gave me the greatest
theatrical enjoyment in my favorite genre of films this year. Please
feel free to comment on my style of critique; whether or not you think
Siskel and Ebert should be sacrificed in my honor or if you feel that
you should get a new phone cord for ever letting such a vile piece of
literature flow through your modem. Enjoy ;)
This movie caught my attention from the first time I saw the trailer.
Why? Anyone who's ever seen a few romantic comedies will at one point
or another talk about a point in a movie that either touched them
deeply, could really relate to, or have been through a similar
experience and was the cause for loving or hating the movie. On an
admittedly personal note, "My Best Friend's Wedding" did the exactly
that for me; and that was just the trailer. Having seen the trailer a
few more times, plus viewing some commercial, and seeing Julia Roberts
back in the type of part that made her famous, plus seeing who was in
the cast, I had high expectations for the movie.
The opening credit features a silly-but-cute-so-therefore-enjoyable
choreograph of dancing a bride and bridesmaids. They're dressed in the
picture- wedding attire but dance around with a rather mischievous look
on each of their faces. The movie itself starts off with the Julianne
Potter (played by a glowing Julia Roberts) doing what she does for a
living, reviewing restaurants. It is there she tells her friend George
(lovable lug Rupert Everett) about her best friend Michael, who has
left a phone call sounding "desperate" telling Jules "we have to talk".
Apparently they shared a brief but heated relationship which ended with
him making Julianne commit to a pact that should they still be unwed by
the time they reach 28, they'll marry each other. And they've been the
best of friends ever since. George points out to Julianne, whom
everyone calls "Jules", that she'll be turning 28 in 3 weeks.
Apparently Jules has a problem with dating in that her view of
relationships is akin to that of an attention-deficient child during a
math lecture. She has better luck keeping guys around as just friends,
and as her claims with Michael, even best friends. She doesn't realize
until he's unavailable that she granted her belief that Michael had
always have a romantic interest in her. Jules finds out about his
engagement after finally talking to him on the phone and while the
whole time assuming he wants to propose, he drops a revelation that
literally knocks her off her feet. Now she has four days to "break up
the wedding, steal the groom", and she has no idea how. By the books
this movie is not.
The focus of Jules' obsession is sportswriter/best friend Michael
O'Neal (expertly played by the handsome Dermont Mulrony). The fiancee
is the sweet, young Kimmy Wallace play by Cameron Diaz who
incidentally, improves her acting abilities with every role and is
hereleaps-and- bounds beyond anything she's done before. More on that
later.
Though Julia Roberts is the star of the movie, her co-stars are
affectively an integral part of the movie. Scene stealer Rupert Everett
is at his best when he flies to Chicago to comfort the self-pitying
Jules and unwillingly becomes her new fiancee. His attempts at being a
gay man who embarrasses Jules by playing her testosterony-yet-loveable
fiancee flying over for a "pre-conjugal" visit are both effective and
hilarious. Comic mayhem ensues during a meal at a seafood restaurant
where he turns the movie into a mini-musical by leading the family and
eventually the entire restaurant in a lively rendition of "I Say a
Little Prayer".
Credit also goes to Rachel Griffiths and Carrie Preston who play
Samantha and Amanda, Kimmy's two perky, nymphomaniacal bridesmaids.
Their parts are brief but the screen time they share are funny. the
funniest being a scene of an ice sculpture shown in a manner not quite
scene before.
Hats off to Aussie P.J. hogan who does an effective job of keeping the
film lively and entertaining even at parts where it starts to run a
little thin. His willingness to try the unconventional and an uncanny
ability to filter out needless sentiment keeps the movie gleeful and
enjoyably lacking in pretense.
Mulroney is effective if boring as the nice but confused groom to be.
Diaz throws her body and soul into her role as the rich but unspoiled
and highly energetic bride. Keep an eye on her face, not because it's
nice to look at (well, ok that too), but her newfound acting skills
allows her to act in some parts without saying a word. The perfect
example is where Jules takes Michael and Kimmy to a karaoke club, know
quite well that Kimmy is frightened to death of karaoke. Diaz's
expressions of fear is evident from the moment she first walks in and
you can't help but feel sorry for her while at the same time think Jules
as incredibly mean for putting her up to this. I found myself almost
singing along as if trying to help her get through the song and though
most people won't get drawn quite this way, most will be rooting for her
to do well. Diaz is here head and shoulders above her lacking
performance in "She's the One" and anything else she's done.
One thing lacking where you'd except to find is chemistry between the
two main stars. Mulroney and Roberts is believable as best friends, but
the chemistry between him and Diaz is lukewarm at best. Here again
Everett steals the movie by meshing well with Roberts as the friend
trying to help a friend in need and also a sane voice of reason to
Robert's mild "psychotic jealousy". Even the scenes where the two of
them converse over the phone involve lively and meaningful dialogue.
I've heard critics say the movie isn't worth watching due to their
inability to believe that a boy and a girl can still be best friends
after a breakup or that the pact in itself was preposterous. As the
voice of experience, I can say with confidence that it can happen. This
isn't the first movie involving a pact between two friends. "If Lucy
Fell" if you remember (you probably won't) involved a couple saying that
if both of them were still single when they turned 30, they'd jump off
the Brooklyn Bridge. "My Best Friend's Wedding" succeeds where "Lucy"
fell (pun intended), least of which the terms of the pact is not nearly
as morbid. "Wedding" has a lot going for it with Hogan's expert
directing, Robert's bright smile returning to form in what his probably
her best type of role, and the believable and entertaining performance
of her costars. At the end of the movie, Jules won't be the 
only with an ear-to-ear grin.

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
Imagine if you will, a few of the more colorful characters you've run
across in your lifetime. Have you ever pondered their oddball
idiosyncrasies thinking that maybe, just maybe this guy is too weird to
be human? (Editorial note: I myself have often been the focus of such
inquiry). Now along comes a movie that says such people are in fact,
aliens in disguise and are right here, living among us.
`Men in Black' is an hour-and-half movie filled with satire and humor.
Its setting in New York city is obviously not a randomly selected city,
but the victim of much of the human/alien satire. And appropriately so.
Apparently, earth has become refuge for aliens looking for honest work
a place to live, and occasionally a planet where political refugees can
find some degree of security. These aliens are kept accountable by a
top-secret, highly funded, yet little known agency known only as the
Men in Black (MiB).
The movie starts off with a man smuggling illegal aliens in a van going
across the Mexican border. They're soon stopped and interrogated by the
INS when the MiB show up and take over. It seems one of the people is
coming from quite a bit farther than Baja. This individual is taken
aside and interrogated by MiB agent named K (Tommy Lee Jones). As it
turns out this `Mexican," who is wanted for violating seven
intergalactic treaties, is really a "Coyame", a Samarium-based life
form named Mikey.
At same time NYPD officer James Edwards (played by the amusingly
hyperkinetic Will Smith) is hot pursuit of an agile criminal with the
rather inhuman ability to leap off tall bridges unscathed, and climb up
a building without the aid of a ladder, suction cups, spider-power,
etc. Finally running him down, Edwards discovers that this particular
criminal may not be all that he seems after seeing the guy blink his
eyes the sideways.
The ever-resourceful K discovers Edward's running prowess and recruits
him into the top-secret agency. So the fun begins.
MiB entertains most with its deadpan style of humor, aided especially
by Jones' stone-faced line delivery. Few things are sacred in this
movie, especially New York, the butt of much of the humor in this film.
You cannot help but laugh at how casually K describes Earth being a
haven for aliens, much like the movie `Casablanca' but without the
Nazis. Or how the first alien contact was covered up by holding the
World's Fair in New York, and that they are actually real flying
saucers. `Why else would we hold it in Queens?' he asks. Even his stoic
face is the subject of a couple of funny quips. Against expectations,
most of the cab drivers in New York are in fact, human.
Smith chips in with his part as the energetic and impulsive rookie MiB
agent with a street- savvy knack for figuring out who is and who isn't
what they really seem. It seems living in NY City gave him a sixth
sense to be able to pick out the truly weird. His antics dialogue is
nothing really new from him, yet his talents and good writing manage to
keep his character fresh and new and, most importantly, funny.
The cast is rounded with the always reliable Rip Torn as Zed, the gruff
voice of experience who heads up the Men In Black Organization. Linda
Fiorentino is the sultry mortician who has the misfortune to come
across more than her share of weird corpses. Kudos, however, to Vincent
D'Onofrio for playing Edgar the bug. Initially, he starts off as a
redneck who gets his innards sucked out by an intergalactic roach that
crash landed near his farm. This bug dons his skin as a disguise in an
attempt to blend in with his surroundings, which, considering it's New
York, how hard could it be? Apparently the Edgar skin is a rather
ill-fitting one, not good considering the bug itself hasn't mastered
the science of human kinesiology. This causes him to move around with
spasms, facial expressions, and twitches that makes Michael Richards of
`Seinfeld' fame seem like Lord of the Dance by comparison. D'Onofrio
looks to have given his 110% into this role and saying he deserves
Oscar consideration is not too far-fetched.
Other unexpected stars of the film are the myriad of aliens ranging
from cute (the baby squid-being) to grotesque (the bug minus its Edgar
suit) to far-out (the guy with the head that grows back). The equipment
used by the MiB is very hi-tech and also not of this Earth, most used
being the Neuralizer, which has the ability to selectively erase
certain parts of one's memories. The only thing protecting the users
are MiB-issue glasses, which evidently block the neuralizer's effects.
( Editorial note: I guess they don't call them "Ray-Bans" for nothing).
Even their weapons are visually both stunning and ridiculous at the
same time, especially the `Noisy Cricket' which provides yet another
brief moment of humor.
The plot itself is workable despite having more holes than a body-
piercing artist. The first hour of the movie contains the most
amusement. The last forty-five minutes or so feel somewhat hurried;
some things are left unexplained. It winds down to what is essentially
a creatively done beat-the-clock countdown sequence with a high `I've
been slimed factor.'
Then again, you don't go see `Men in Black' for some deep soul-
searching plot or to see political propaganda. You see it for what it
is, a light sci-fi comedy that ranks high on the laugh scale. You see
it because Sonnenfeld is adept at creating a darkly comical, yet almost
realistic atmosphere and because Mr. Jones and Mr. Smith fight the bad
boys with a quick wit and spirited on-screen chemistry, as well as with
attitudes and Series 4 De-Atomizers. Just don't forget to bring the
Ray-bans.

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
    Where to start. This movie has all the substance and believability
of a Steven Segal movie. It's almost hard to fathom that Warner Bros.
actually greenlighted this waste of celluloid that people have the
nerve to call a "movie".
    "B&R" had all the right stuff, it seemed, on paper; a solid cast, a
normally reliable director, and a credible studio backing. It's the
writing and director Joel Schumacher's cartoonish direction that
flushed  it down the drain straight to movie hell.
    The "plot" suffered from the odd sensation of not quite having a
start, beginning, and an end. It starts off decently with the opening
credits, and the very well done score by Danny Elfman. Things start
going south with the very first line of the movie, spoken
unconvincingly and quite annoyingly by O'Donnell. The rest of the movie
is a wretched mix of cartoonish action, horrible one-liners, insipid
dialogue, an endless sea of neon objects, and way too many Bat-tools to
keep track of.
    It's hard to believe this is from the same guy that directed
"Batman Forever" and "A Time to Kill". Much of the "action" asks the
viewer to suspend reality to an unrealistic degree. Scenes with Robin
flying through the air, Freeze swinging from vines, the rocket from the
back of the Freezemobile, never mind that at 30,000 feet any normal
human would die, never mind that we're asked to believe Robin can hang
on the side of launched rocket traveling at a velocity sufficient
enough to send it into orbit by virtue of Bat-magnets.
    The cast, while on paper seemed right, was overridden with bad
lines. Viewers are delt a barrage of terrible one-liners and puns. And
oh, there is way too many comments referring to coldness, ice, freeze,
etc. To call it a dialogue is a gross overstatement. Clooney was decent
choice to play Bruce Wayne/Batman, but he wasn't really acting in the
movie. He did what he does in almost every roles he's given which is
basically charm the audience, head tilt and all. Arnold gives what
might arguably his worst ever performance in his entire career. It
seems that lately, only James Cameron is able to squeeze out a passable
line out of him. Poison Ivy spent the half the movie talking to
herself. O'Donnell's Robin was quite the little punk, and his
rebellious character got old to the point that one would hope Batman
goes solo his next time out. It doesn't say much for a movie when the
best acting was done by a supporting character, which in this case,
Alfred is expertly played as always by Gough. When Alfred's mortality
becomes an issue, it adds the only real character depth to the movie,
but it's much too little. Other cameos (Elle Macpherson, Vivica Fox) in
this movie were so incidental as to be almost forgettable. Silverstone
was, well, Silverstone.
    The most glaring fault was the departure from the traditional
"Batman" mood set so well in the comics. Gotham is a dark, moody city
even in the daytime and Tim Burton set this tone brilliantly in the
first "Batman". Same goes for the Batcave, which is made up to resemble
a laser-tag arena. It's not this bright, neon-slathered pseudo-Las
Vegas Schumacher makes it out to be. Batman himself is a dark,
brooding, character who doesn't say much to begin with while Bruce
Wayne is an suave yet slightly awkward person. Clooney, while looking
very much the part, doesn't help by trying to add a lighter side to
both. Also in the comics, Robin is hardly a partner to Batman. nor is
he such a rebellious brat as shown here. These faults are due mainly to
the director and the writing staff.
    Character moments suffered in this movie. There is almost no
development into the relationship between Wayne and his current
girlfriend Julie Madison. The bickering between Batman and Robin gets
old real fast. Freeze's desires to freeze the world is mentioned only
in passing, just the audience has some idea why he's doing this, and
how he came to be this way. The only parts worth watching in the movie
is the too-brief moments between Bruce and Alfred. The mildly touching
scenes adds a touch of humanity to an otherwise gimmicky movie.
    The Batman movie series has always been about the villains, and
here it falls flat on it's face for the reasons mentioned. Also
straying from the comic norm is the character of Bane. In the comics,
Bane is intelligent as well as inhumanely strong, not the brainless,
monosyllabic lump  he's portrayed as here. Despite going maniacally
overboard, neither Freeze or Ivy measure up to the villains played any
of the previous movies.
    The entire movie reeks of the campiness from the old Adam West
series back in the 60s. I left the theater thinking all the movie
missed was the "Pop! Bang! Whack!" graphics of old. Incidentally, there
are strong but unconfirmed rumors going around that Schumacher actually
wanted these touches in the final cut, but was (fortunately) rejected
by Warner Bros.
    This is a pretty bad step for the Batman franchise. Next time
around, get rid of Schumacher, Silverstone, and maybe O'Donnell.
Clooney is fine as the Dark Knight, but make sure he stays true to form
as portrayed by the comics, in other words, he needs to expand his
acting abilities. Bring back the dark, gothic look of  the first Gotham
city and then maybe, there's hope that "Batman" will once again be
something worth watching.
