Authors
C.J. Webb
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for My Fellow Americans (1996)
   Cast: Jack Lemmon (Russell P. Kramer), James Garner (Matt Douglas), 
         Dan Aykroyd (William Haney), John Heard (Ted Matthews), Wilford
         Brimley (Joe Hollis), Everett McGill (Col. Paul Tanner), Lauren
         Bacall (Margaret Kramer). Directed by Peter Segal.
        In what was termed Grumpy Old Presidents eons before it ever came 
out, My Fellow Americans does not outdo the Jack Lemmon-Walter Matthau 
comedies.  It does not fade in their presences either.  Lemmon is now teamed
with James Garner, and the vulgarisms and infantile behavior still abound.  
Garner, though, replaces Matthau's carmudgeon with vigor.  In fact, Lemmon 
takes the Matthau role as the seemingly older fellow.
        Kramer and Douglas are ex-presidents, but current rivals, who are 
trying to hold onto past glories.  The United States must be in pretty 
bad shape as Kramer beat Douglas only to lose to him four years later, 
who subsequently is replaced by William Haney (Dan Aykroyd), who was 
Kramer's former vice president.  We are taken to the third year of Haney's 
term, when he is alerted of a past scandal that could land him in hot 
water.  Haney's obvious choice is to place the blame on Kramer, who 
being the honorable and reputable Republican and conservative would never 
have been involved in such crimes.  Meanwhile, at a reception, both 
Kramer and Douglas learn of the wrongdoings.  
        Hoping to land himself back in office, Douglas takes the 
challenge of finding if the blame can land on Kramer.  Douglas, a 
verile and newly-divorced man, is the liberal Democrat.  This is a nice 
touch, since Garner looks and sounds like Bob Dole, while Lemmon is an 
older Bill Clinton, and this came out during the Presidential race of 
1996.  
        In their efforts to find out the truth, Kramer and Douglas wind 
up being marooned and need to trek across a few states together, though 
reluctantly.  This is where the high-jinks begin, and the zingers fly at 
a mile-a-minute.  And believe it or not, its simply histerical.  My 
Fellow Americans does not break any new ground, but it rests comfortably 
in its predecessors shoes: the Grumpy Old Men series with the witticism 
of the Naked Gun series.  
        Lauren Bacall and Wilford Brimley put in small, but entertaining 
parts.  John Heard plays a dumber-than-Dan Quayle vice-president, who 
does have some smarts it turns out.  All in all, this is a highly 
entertaining and charming comedy that will make a good rental.
