Authors
Richard Matich
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Kramer vs. Kramer (1979)
Director Robert Benton has not faired well in
the scope of all film history. His autobiographical
1984 movie Places In The Heart was decent enough for
me, but it does not reach the emotional highs that
great film should. His recent effort Nobodys Fool
misses the mark also. He did write a masterpiece when
he co-wrote Bonnie And Clyde [1967]. Kramer Vs. Kramer
pulled at my emotions and at my patience with
its story of a divorcing couple and a rebellous young
son. Justin Henry is the boy who wants to be with
both his mom and his dad. He causes plenty of trouble
for Dustin Hoffman who plays the over stressed father.
Justin Henry's potrayal of the son is the best part in
this dull picture. He keeps you laughing and
you are kept busy wondering what will happen to him
next. The rest of the film is standard family
material that will leave most youny modern adiences
bored with its slow pace.  Save your money when you are
at the video store. Watch this one on television for
free.

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
down with a large crowd of both young and old. They
probably did not know the fragments of film history
that I knew, yet we sat there as Americans of diverse
ages and backgrounds. All where expecting history. An
old man sitting in front of me greeted a freind who
just happened to be sitting across the way. He yelled
to him, "They say this shows a thing or two about
patriotism!". He and his freind were in for quite a
shock. The film proves to be the best war films[showing
much combat] ever made. The
cinematography, by Oscar winner Janusz Kaminski, is
done in a newsreel style. Some of the movements are
done in slow motion, without sound, or with just a
"signifagent" sound effect to add dramatic texture. The
films cast, headed up by Tom Hanks, is another element
to talk about. They almost all get signifagent screen
time to stretch their acting muscles. Without this
element, all the action and carnage in the world would
not make a difference. But Spielberg keeps it as
intiment as its possible to get in a brutal war epic.
That is what makes it worth seeing. In King Vidor's The
Big Parade[1925] the action seems to stop as the
soldiers rest for the night toward the middle of what
proves to be a long film. The action lags and lags!
Spielberg probably knows this. His freind Francis
Coppala seemed to have trouble finding an ending to
Apocalypse Now. Brando mumbles it to a close! One of
Spielbergs movie heros was David Lean. The Bridge On
The River Kwai had a great acting pace to it also. It
was a model for this movie you can be
sure. Also you may recall elements of The Longest Day.
It does not hold a candle to Ryan though. Saving
Private Ryan will stand the test of time. It stays with
you like the Robert Capa photographs that inspired the
movie's look. Film, after all, is a visual medium. No
war film since All Quiet On The Western Front[1930] is
as grand a cinematic war experience as this. The old
"patriotic" man was standing up by the door during the
last 45 minutes. Maybe he was in a hurry to leave. Or
just maybe the film got him. It
was not the "star spangled"/"gung-ho" fighting flick he
was expecting to see. John Wayne or Robert Mitchem were
not in this one. Their movies did not show heads
exploding apart. Nor did they show blood soaked
screeming,crying,begging, and praying young American
boys dying. Their severed limbs, sreams of agony, and
constant confusion aparent to all who view this
powerful screen treasure. This is not your father's war
movie! I cringed and looked away during many parts of
the movie. It just gets to you!
Jean-Luc Godard made Weekend in 1967. At the end appear
the words "The End Of Film" followed by "The End Of
Cinema". Godard did not think that he had any more to
say in film after that. It would have been appropriate
for Steven Spielberg close his war movie with "The End
Of The War Film". After this nobody can make one
better. Right? Thats what people seeing All Quiet On
The Western Front, The
Deer Hunter, or The Big Parade might have thought.
There was a young man in the crowded theatre who
clapped loudly in one section of the movie when planes
come to rescue of the battered troops. That young man
was me. I usually don't do that sort of thing in
public. It just got me "patriotic".

Title
Review for Saturday Night Fever (1977)
              SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER [1977]
           A retro reveiw by: Richard Matich
This film was not only made in the 1970s, it was the
1970s! Fresh from his stint as a high schooler in the
tv sitcom "Welcome Back Kotter", John Travolta became
both a household name and an idol to millions of
adoring fans. Grease [1978] would rocket him into the
stratisphere in the coming year. Long before
Travolta was in Pulp Fiction, he was getting his first
Oscar nomination for this film. The story is based on a
magazine article on the New York night lives of some
working class young people. The film hasTravolta as a
guy that is tough, street smart, and "oh so much" the
womens favorite on [and off] the dance floor. The dance
moves had all of America talking back then. People
would get their hair cut the way Travolta had it done
for the movie. The clothes made the "disco look" out
pace the "Annie Hall look" [women with neckties, vest
and/or baggy chinos] of the same year. Discos became
the hot destination for countless Americans [and even
in other countries] all because of Saturday Night
Fever. The soundtrack to the film won
Grammys and set records for albulm sales for years to
come. At one time it seemed as though everyone had that
soundtrack! The story works well enough and it remains
a cultural benchmark. It made a lot of people plenty of
money at a time when the U.S. economy needed "anything"
to get it going. Travolta &
company helped the nation's finanial and emotional well
being more so than did the Ford and Carter
administrations combined! The power of film!!!

Title
Review for Scarface (1983)
   A retro reveiw by: Richard Matich
I really did'nt like this Brian De Palma film very
much. It is a remake of the Howard Hawks film from
1932, and it is so dirty and violent that the shooting
and bombing become just a tactic to keep you from
turning away. The movie was so hyped at the time of
it's release that it does not live up to the praise
heaped upon it from wild eyed  Brian De Palma or Al
Pacino fans. At 170 minutes in length, the film is just
non stop brutal killing and screaming in Cuban accents.
De Palma directs himself a sleazy, cruelty ridden, and
cut rate Godfather. Palm trees, silk shirts, hit men,
cocaine, and bullets being sprayed at the drop of a
hat. Scarface is a movie that is absolutly desperate
for somebody's attention, and that is why you should
not give it yours!

Title
Review for English Patient, The (1996)
   A RETRO REVIEW BY: RICHARD MATICH
 I was in the local puplic library near my home. The
librarian [an older woman] and I were disscusing the
films we had liked in 1996. I said that this movie, The
English Patient, was both beutiful, epic, and told in a
very different way than the standard "flicks" sold by
the greedy studios. She said that she thought it to be
a bore. A Bore?! I, to this day, can't believe that a
woman would not find this great and romantic story at
least half as compelling as a man like me [a hardnosed
critic] would. Director Anthony Minghella took what was
a very long and "difficult" novel and made sense of it
for the screen. It is wrapped in lush tan hues with
grand desert and skyscapes by cinematographer John
Seale. If thats not enough, veteran sound and film
editor Walter Murch [Apocolypse Now, American Graffiti,
and The GodFather Part II] took to chopping the complex
story into a "non-linear" format. He and his team then
did the hard job of  making every little noise clean
and clear instead of just trying to split audience's
ear drums the way some movie sound is done these days.
Decible levels in movie houses have risen sharply [some
would say dangerously] in recent years. Ralph Fiennes
plays a pilot who is shot down and badly burned. He is
then cared for by a nurse played by Juliette Binoche.
Her life is in turmoil because she keeps losing to
early death every person she has loved dearly. Miss
Binoche makes an audience care for her gentle nurse
while she makes her nurse the most giving person in
almost all of film history. That brings the audience a
very complex and pleasing performance. She stays behind
from her convoy of medical team and patients to care
for this English patient. This mystery man, who keeps
bringing up his own past haunted by tragic loss.
Kristen Scott Thomas has the role of the woman that
ignites a passionate, tored affair with this Englishman
before his burns. Thomas has a screen presence
harkening back to the old studio glamour days of the
30's and 40's, when the studios wanted women to be
"overly stunning" so as to sell a picture to house
wives, secretaries, etc. She does not quite have the
power to keep viewers under her spell the way Garbo or
Crawford did in their heyday, yet she is still very
close. The film has you wanting to know more secrets
right up to the now famous tragic end. Ladies grab your
Kleenex, because The English Patient might just leave
you in tears. Unless you happen to work at the library!
"Promiss me you'll come back for me.-Thomas. "I
promiss. I'll come back for you. I promiss. I'll never
leave you."- The English Patient.

Title
Review for Forrest Gump (1994)
   A retro reveiw by: Richard Matich
Somewhere out there is someone almost like Forrest
Gump. They have a limited Iq. Thats about as close to
being like Tom Hank's charecter as they are probably
ever going to get. Most people of that mental age are
in a "home" out in chicken coop country. Or perhaps
they attend "classes" in the city where they watch
Barney tapes, stare at the walls, or paint bad
watercolor. When they are not busy with those "fun"
activities, they are being cleaned because they wet
themselves. Forrest Gump is a uniquely American screen
figure. Money seems to be at the very heart of the
story. The morel to this tale is that you will live in
happiness and all problems are soon to fade as long as
you are rich and tremendously famous. What a naive and
twisted  vision! My theory on why this film has been so
widely populer is well [don't laugh] simple. Americans
have an extreme guilt for the way they treat the
"mentaly challenged". This film makes the average Joe
sixpack feel better about himself and the American way
of life all at the same time. He does not even have to
think all that much about plot since the music that
fills the movie gives a music video feeling. Take out
the music and you have one dull film that would not
"inspire" half as much as has been claimed by some
reviewers. I do not totaly hate the movie. The end was
done to great effect. It does tug at the heart strings,
even though it takes the mind for granted. It is
intresting as a look back at the times from the 1950s
to the 1980s. But, I must stress, its no substatute for
a great documentary on the era. Hearts And Minds,
Woodstock, and others are out there for you to see.
Hank's performance as Gump was exicuted in great ways.
I liked the accent that he learned from the boy who
plays Forrest as a youth. The score, by Alan Silvestri,
was one of the few treats of the film. I bought the
soundtrack on cd for that reason alone. If you like the
film, more power to you. I just think it is overly
simplistic to believe that this retard ends up winning
the beutiful blond, meeting several Presidents and
celebraties, and becomes a war hero. Want to explain
how any University "gives" a degree to somebody of
Forrest's low Iq? Want to explain how he graduated from
High School [or even passed any classes]? I dod'nt
think you can even begin to defend the "in your face"
problems with the script. If you want to see a movie
about a person of the Gump vein, I must recommend the
Hal Ashby and Peter Sellers collaberation Being There
[1979]. "Thats all I have to say about that!"-Forrest
Gump.

Title
Review for Sergeant York (1941)
                  SERGEANT YORK [1941]
           A retro reveiw by: Richard Matich
I once thought of Sergeant York as a great movie. I now
think its just a good movie. I have every right to
change my mind, especialy when I think I have been
wrong about an opinion or an idea. I try to keep an
open mind. Why is this film so heavily regarded by
some? You must put the film into the proper historical
context. It opened to a world on the brink of war
[WWII]. Some in the country were nuetral. Some,
however,  knew a fight with Germany, Italy, and Japan
was just a matter of time. Now that we have established
the time of the film's release, we can review the story
itself. Classic film "good guy" Gary Cooper is exellent
as the backwoods hero Alvin York. York became one the
greatest war heros of all time. The Collin Powell, or
Dwight Eisenhower type of "living legend" of his day. A
simple man thrust by circumstances beyond his control
into heroic actions. York saved the lives of his fellow
comrads in the
first world war, and also managed to capture enemy
soldiers. But the film over simplifies York's story.
All the action of valor happens much to quickly to seem
real, and there is little payoff from it. The movie
ends without the rousing finnish I expected. What had I
hoped to see before the end? I still do'nt know. I
might never come up with an answer to that question.
Cooper plays York well enough though. He even
made me respect his charecter York's not wanting to
fight because it would sacrafice his princibles of
kindness and passifism. Alvin York was never a man cut
out to be a soldier, and yet the ironic twist comes
when he becomes the big hero. Somewhat, however, I
question the truthfulness about the York story. The
Sergeant himself was part of the making of the movie.
He helped with the realism of the
events. I'll bet he did! I believe he could be accused
by some of "suger coating" his life for the silver
screen. Would'nt somebody you know do the same thing?
Remember that film is forever! My theory about the
movie's realism may never be proven [or be true at
all], yet the movie rings false. Very false! Perhaps
that is my problem with the "payoff" I was illuding to.
Howard Hawkes directed, and its not his best directing
by a long shot!
We were clamouring for heroism and patriotism at that
tumultous time in our history. I just wish we had
clamoured for a piece of our collective  history that
was beyond resonable doubt about its actually having
happened.

Title
Review for Ever After (1998)
   A retro reveiw by: Richard Matich.
Once upon a time there was a movie studio that wanted a
fortune of gold. To achieve this they hired one of the
fairest in the land. Drew[Barrymore] was her name, and
she couldn't have been more lovely than in this story.
They also hired an Oscar winning actress[Anjelica
Huston] to "over" act the wicked step mother role. The
the prince would be played by a talented new
arrival[Dougray Scott]. But alas! The story is an old
one that, for all their gimmicks and updates, appears
to be as bland as the MGM costume dramas of the '30s.
They may find a pot of gold, yet it will be ill gotten.
The story seems pointless. You have seen it all before
in books and on television. Its an expensive "made for
tv" movie or mini series. It looks like, but lacks the
charm of, The Adventures Of Robin Hood[1938]. The movie
is made for that "family values" crowd that never seems
to like anything of much "lasting" value. The
filmmakers get so desperate to keep this sham of a plot
going that they even put Leonardo da Vinci in as a
character. He does not seem to fit in a Cinderella
movie. The studio probably wanted another Leonardo.
Anything to rob the mass movie audience of more cash.
The da Vinci character made me angrier than anything I
have seen on screen in many years. It is like in
Sleepless In Seattle when the two people meet at the
top of the Empire State building. Why that building?
Why not have them a-top of any non famous building?
Doesn't the Empire State Building observation area
close before the famous climactic scene was supposed to
have taken place? The hack who directed this bland
cinematic merriment is not interested in such matters.
He was awfully busy conspiring with composer George
Fenton. They create a score so loud and intrusive so as
to take your mind off the film's many long pauses while
waiting for any real action or dialogue to begin. Is
there any good news about this fractured fairy tale?
The part of King Francis is played with comedic
perfection by Timothy West. The scenes with him are the
funniest of the film. There is some humor to the movie,
but unfortunately, not enough. Soon after this
particular ball begins this chariot turns into a great
big celluloid pumpkin that never seems to get moving.
