Authors
C.J HILL
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Replacement Killers, The (1998)
For a good ten years or so, super cool Chow Yun Fat has enjoyed god
hood status in the Hong Kong Action Scene.  Now, he has followed in
the footsteps of Director John Woo, (who launched Chow's super stardom
in the acclaimed 'A Better Tomorrow') by moving to Hollywood.  I had
some reservations about this move and it would seem I was right to
have them.
Chow plays a hitman who is doing jobs in order to repay a debt.  His
final job requires him to kill a policeman's seven year old boy.  This
he refuses do and runs.  However, he is forced into a violent
confrontation when his family are threatned and replacement killers
are brought in to do the job.
Cue around 80 minutes of various and quite frankly tedious shoot-
outs which take place in various locations.  Some thought had gone
into  making them a bit different but unfortunately they end up being
just plain boring.  The car wash scene, I found myself laughing at how
stupid it looked. Tut tut.  The emphasis during the constant action
seemed to be on the accompanying music, (I could have sworn one piece
was ripped out of a Bruckheimer movie) and not on the content. Mia
Sorvino (a passport forger) is dragged into the affay and also
provides a lame love interest as well as being rather handy with a
gun.  
Director Antoine Arqua has clearly not observed Chow's excellent
acting capabilties and simply requires him to mutter a few lines of
broken english and look flash as he stands and shoots.  Chow's
trademark of twin pistol shooting is saved for the finale (which in
fairness is quite good) and there's not even a toothpick in site. And
as for making Chow shoot like a cop, well that's damned unforgiveable.
To round up, The Replacement Killers is a pretty darned lame first
outing for Chow.  It would appear he has left Asia for a 90 minute pop
video.  This is not what we wanted at all, considering John Woo was
the exec producer. (did he have NO say so at all?)   Watch 'The
Killer' again and weep at the difference. 
Review by Chris Hill.
"There's room at the top, they are telling you still,
but first you must learn how to smile as you kill,
if you want to be like the folks on the hill."

Title
Review for Godzilla (1998)
Based on the infamous Japenese legend, Godzilla is a tale of a huge lizard,
it's mutated size caused by French nuclear testing.  It's taller than the
Empire State Building and has a huge appetite! What's worse, is that
Godzilla has suddenly turned up in New York and is causing loadsa chaos as
it tramples around, it's purpose unclear.
Naturally, the authorities are somewhat distressed at a huge lizard
wrecking buildings and doing untold damage, so the chase is on to destroy
this monster before it flattens the city. Add to the affray Matthew
Broderick, a nuclear scientist and Jean Reno, a French secret service agent
and you have a mix for two hours of fun.
Performances are quite good all round. Jean Reno (Leon) although underused,
is excellent.  There are some unexepected digs at the expense of the
Americans, courtesy of chewing gum and coffee (you'll see) and Broderick
gives some occasional, fine, comic deliveries.
Naturally, the real stars of Godzilla are the special effects.  Seen before
in Independence Day, they are provided again here to provide some quite
spectacular scences of chaos and destruction.
On the downside, the story isn't really strong enough to sustain the two
hours and I felt my attention occasionally wandering.  Some scences in
Godzilla will strongly remind you of Jurassic park and this film could have
been easily wrapped up in 90 minutes.
Putting these flaws aside, Godzilla is a fun romp.  The effects are quite
something, there are some great chase scences and even some quite tense
moments.  Worth seeing, especially for kids, they'll love it.

Title
Review for Lost in Space (1998)
Lost In Space is the Hollywood remake of the terrible, black and white
series.  Unfortunately the lessons learnt over the years on how to
improve on the past have clearly not been adhered to.
The reasons for my conclusions to this are as following.  First
there's the plot.  A modern trend nowadays seems to favour great fx in
favour of a well thought out and well acted story. This is the case
here.  The story is that Earth's resources are almost depleted and the
Robinsons venture off across the galaxy in search of a planet that's
been found to be identical to ours.  The mission is sabotaged courtesy
of Gary Oldman and the family, along with Oldman who was trapped
onboard the ship as he carried out his plan, find themselves lost in
space.  Ahem.  How many times have we had the "Futuristic Earth out of
resources" plot.  Too many, that's how many.  Next, the acting.  With
the exception of Mr Oldman, who's excellent skills are clearly wasted
in this tosh and nonsense, the acting is dreadful.  Next up is the
awful script to accompany the bad acting.  It's lifeless, dull and
does not inspire any interest or empathy for any of the characters.
Finally all the action and some other scenes as well are ripped
directly out of other great sci-fi classics. Star Wars, The Empire
Strikes Back, E.T, Blade Runner and even Aliens come under the hammer.
So, is there any reason to see Lost In Space?  Well, one.  The special
effects.  They are fantastic.  These will induce compulsory
drooling. I do not expect to see these bettered until next year, when,
no doubt they will.
To sum up, Lost In Space is terrible.  It does not have one original
idea of it's own and even having big names in the cast has not helped
it one bit.  Take a tissue for your drool and an incredibly open mind
for the rest.

Title
Review for Armageddon (1998)
Following in the footsteps of Deep Impact, Armageddon is a high octane
action story about a huge asteroid on a collision course with earth.
A plan is devised to drill nuclear bombs into it's core and then
remotely detonate them to destroy it.  A team of the best oil drillers
is formed (led by Bruce Willis) and trained for spaceflight, all in
twelve days.  The team are essentially a bunch of society outcasts or
misfits but this doesn't deter NASA from sending them up.  This motley
crew, believe it or not are mankind's only hope.
Armageddon does not hang about in any way.  Dizzying and spectacular
action scenes bombard you right from the start.  The opening scene of
a meteor shower wrecking buildings and streets is something else.  In
true Bruckheimer fashion, this film is a pyromaniac's dream.
The acting all round is very good.  Bruce Willis gives his very usual
but very watchable performance and Steve Buscemi has all the best
lines and provides some top comic relief.
However, on the downside, Armageddon is let down by being completely
ludicrous.  Deep sea oil drillers/social misfits become astronauts?
Yeah, right.  As you may have gathered, switching off the brain before
you go into the theater will enhance your enjoyment a great deal as
there are many scenes that are just too daft for words.  Also it's
very, very cheesy and some of us brits may find the over the top,
patriotic ending hard to swallow.
Putting these criticisms aside, Armageddon still manages to be a
thrilling film.  The Bruckheimer formula of terrific action
accompanied by pulse racing music should certainly win you over. To
sum up, I felt Armageddon to be very similar to Independence Day.
Utter cobblers but very thrilling cobblers.
