Authors
Jeremiah McVay
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Bringing Out the Dead (1999)
        I think it's safe to say that Martin Scorsese is mostly known
for his crime dramas although that niche is probably outnumbered by his
other works, including Taxi Driver, Raging Bull, The Last Temptation of
Christ, and Kundun. Although, he's been so associated with that type of
film, it's never seemed to stop him from making different types of
films, and this is no exception.
        Although it's a bit uneven, it's extremely pleasing to see
Scorsese take such risks in filmmaking. He really does a lot of daring
things in the film, all the more impressive seeing as how is arguably
the most respected filmmaker working today and that he really need not
take such risks. No, that doesn't sound right. Perhaps that is why he
must be so daring. Or, conversely (and this makes much more sense simply
because it's entirely obvious), he is probably the most respected
filmmaker working today because he does take such risks.
        This film is in the same strain as Taxi Driver, sharing many
thematic elements. In fact, I'd venture to say that the parallels are so
close, it's nearly surprising it doesn't seem like a rehash. Maybe it's
the freshness of the filmmaking, or maybe it's the nearly quarter
century gap between that separates them just enough to really see them
as familiar, yet dissimilar works.
        Scorsese has a knack for picking interesting material and that's
why his direction usually seems even more at ease than it really is.
Here, the source material is a novel about a paramedic, Frank Pierce,
who can no longer deal with what he witnesses on the streets without it
affecting him to the point where he feels entirely responsible and
begins to go insane. The screenplay, by long-time Scorsese associate,
Paul Schrader, maintains a nice balance between objectively observing
Pierce (played by Nicolas Cage) descend into his madness and allowing
the audience to see the situation from a point more subjectively aligned
with Pierce.
        This point is infinitely helped by the strong performance of
Cage, and, to a lesser extent, by his supporting cast. Cage is very
expressive with minimal effort here. He is often very quiet and often
very worked up, but he is always intense and, at least, somewhat
seemingly disturbed. Not once did I think he played over the top (not
something I've been able to say of most of his performances of late) and
not once did I really think he underplayed a thing. The supporting cast
was not quite as strong, but they were close and perhaps the only reason
they weren't just a bit more effective is because they were never really
allowed to express as much. They simply weren't put to the same use as
Cage, and this is a choice that had to be made. Whether it's the best
choice remains to be seen, but it doesn't seem to really harm the film.
John Goodman, Ving Rhames, and Tom Sizemore were all great
characterizations, but they never really became much more than that--
never really characters, that is. The only other real character is Mary
Burke (Patricia Arquette). She could be seen as this film's Iris (Jodie
foster in Taxi Driver), not really a love interest, but more of a rescue
victim (she never really asks for it, but the hero feels the undeniable
urge to help, even against her wishes). While her performance, at first,
seems a bit on the dull side, her importance escalates as the film
moves and she seems to gain from this.
        This is a good solid film, but it is a bit hard to really get
into. I found myself feeling as if I was outside of it for a rather long
time, but once I finally got myself into it (and I'm not even sure how
or when this occurred), it was quite enthralling. Even while I was
feeling outside, it was still quite impressive, even if distanced. I
have a feeling, however, that this will be a film I will be more apt to
enjoy as I see it on other occasions.

Title
Review for Messenger: The Story of Joan of Arc, The (1999)
        This is the third Besson film I have seen. While I liked The
Professional very much, I pretty much loathed The Fifth
Element. Besson definitely has something recognizable that runs through
his films, but I wouldn't call it auteuristic. I'd call it
self-indulgence.
        It would be easy to say that many great filmmakers are
self-indulgent, but I'd be inclined to disagree. Fellini comes to
mind. His is a very a personal cinema, but it isn't marked by
self-indulgence because, while extremely personal in nature, he still
made his films for the audience. He communicated his own personal
feelings and view through his style, and when it worked,
which seems to have been the usual case, it was quite rewarding.
        Besson, on the other hand, seems to make his films mostly for
himself. It's as if he can't really decipher what an audience
will take from any given scene. There just always seem to be things in
his films that don't belong there or in any other film. It's as
if it makes sense in his head, but nowhere else, perhaps. The best/worst
example of this is The Fifth Element. This film just
makes very little sense. Nothing fits together and it becomes a series
of ludicrous images meant to be some sort of grand
tapestry-- ultimately, only mismatched and predictably silly episodes.
        While The Fifth Element is near-masturbatory, The Messenger
merely borders on delusions of grandeur. It endlessly
tries to reposition itself to look at Jeanne in some way that should
reveal her in a new light, but this only tends to be a hindrance
as it becomes increasingly hard for the audience to take on any sort of
alliance or alignment. While I think it is a great idea to try
and examine Joan of Arc from different perspectives, it just isn't done
right here. Usually, the best portraits do not lay judgment
on their subjects, but present them as they were or are. This movie
could have been Lawrence of Arabia, offering Joan as an
enigma and trying to find the hidden motive, but never once alleging to
truly know it and leaving the audience to make the final
assumption. That's involvement and that's connection for the audience.
Any of that in The Messenger really is not due to
anything or anyone other than Milla Jovavich playing Joan herself.
        While the purpose of the writing and direction seems to be
lacking, not knowing even whether it should try to judge the
subject, but, rather, seeming to make an assumption then pull away
haphazardly, unsure of what to do next, Jovavich seems
quite sure of herself. She establishes herself in her role and plays the
whole thing with great consistency. She constantly seems
obsessed and never backs down from that. The power of her performance
comes from the way she plays the obsession.
Sometimes it merely seems to be a driving force, and other times it
seems to be something that could pull her apart. She seems
to be the only one who really makes the subject her own, unafraid of
offending anyone with the way she portrays her
characters, while the rest of the production seems to float somewhere
above the decision or inclination to do the same.
        All this is not to say that the film is horrible. There are
indeed some good things within it, such as the wonderfully shot
battle sequences. They look amazing and really pull you in, only
faltering when they try to focus in on individuals. This is
because the only true character in the film is Joan. All supporting
characters are more like vague and useless charicatures,
mostly ridiculous. So, when the battle scenes begin to focus on these
characters, it just seems silly and uselessly orchestrated
and calculated. Still, this happens few enough times that the battle
scenes are still quite stunning, and, along with the very strong
performance of Jovavich, the film becomes much more watchable than it
would have been without.

Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
         Historical epic. Dark, satirical comedy. Science fiction
parable. Costume drama. Horror.
         If one were to categorize Kubrick's films, these would likely
be the categories some of his greatest known works would fit into. While
much can gained from such a pursuit, I usually try not to categorize
films excessively, but, while viewing Kubrick's final work, it occurred
to me that this may be the one that would be most difficult to place in
a specific genre. Kubrick is an auteur and, like all great auteurs, his
work usually gains more value when viewed as part of a greater body of
work. This may sound as if it is some sort of excuse to like the film
more than I probably should, but it is not. Instead, I am merely trying
to state that Kubrick has always had a unique style and vision. His body
of work can nearly be considered as a genre unto itself-- a quality
seemingly inherent to the films of many auteurs.
         The category Eyes Wide Shut most seems to fit into at times
would be that of the psychological thriller. I often found myself
comparing the film to Carol Reed's The Third Man (1949), and, but for
the pacing, I think the parallels hold up well: A man who seems
relatively happy with his place in the world finds that the whole basis
of his security may have been faulty; he then descends into an
underworld that, while always present, he was never aware of. If one
considers the scene in which Holly Martins (Joseph Cotten) witnesses the
results of Harry Limes' (Orson Welles) black market dealings in the
hospital full of bed-ridden victims as the centerpiece of The Third Man,
it really makes a nice parallel to the centerpiece orgy scene of Eyes
Wide Shut. It is this voyeuristic scene in which Cruise's character,
Bill Harford, begins to finally realize that he has entered a world he
is not prepared to deal with.
         An oddity about this scene is in the simple fact that it is a
centerpiece. Kubrick's films usually conclude with a scene that offers a
final seductive twist or irony, but the "twist" in this film seems to be
nearer the middle section. Oddly enough, considering the controversy
surrounding the sexual content of the film, this may be Kubrick's most
mainstream film yet-- even more so than Spartacus (1960). The conclusion
of EWS is so mainstream that it really changes the entirety of the film
and, in fact, because of this, perhaps one could say that it is a
characteristically "twisted" Kubrick ending.
         The strength of the film's plotting is that it simply flows...
It is much like the frequently repeated piano notes of the film's
highly-recognizable, yet somewhat simplistic, score. The film begins
somewhat lightheartedly [relatively speaking], then seems to crescendo
up to the centerpiece scene and decrescendo to the conclusion. Just as
with the most well-crafted symphonies, every moment of the dynamic
change is as intense as the next-- it is not a case of peaking
intensity, but of peaking dynamic.
         The credit for this can lie firstly with Kubrick himself. His
direction is as fluid as usual, adding just the right touch to every
moment, whether it be with camera angle or movement, mise-en-scene, or
anything else. Secondly, the film is able to rely on great performances
(apparently all those call backs for reshoots paid off). Tom Cruise may
give his best performance to date, and proves that he has come a long
way since his roles in such films as The Outsiders and Risky Business
(both 1883). He matches and compliments the intensity of the film itself
with his own intensity, often quiet. I especially liked the way he
seemed to be faking sincerity every time he would assume his role as
physician-- this may not have been intentional, but it worked. I must
say I was surprised by how little Nicole Kidman was actually in the
film, but when she was on screen, she was incredible. It may have been a
smaller role than expected, but it's the best I've ever seen her.
         Kubrick is a man of details, and that is why his films have so
often taken so long to complete. It pays off here, as it usually does.
The most prominent details are the supporting cast members. Even some of
the seemingly least important roles are filled with actors of apparently
high prowess, making the illusion of the film seem all that more real.
Beyond that, the art direction must be mentioned. The entire look of
this film is composed of details upon details. New York is so
realistically simulated in England that I often found myself thinking I
recognized certain places. A testimony to the attention paid to details:
the Village Voice newspaper dispenser below a street light in the
Greenwhich Village setting. The lighting and decoration of most of the
interiors suggests such decadence that it becomes quite believable that
you have entered another alternate reality where orgies and over-dosed
models are as ordinary as a filthy kitchen sink.
         All of this leads back to the story, as it should. Of course,
every viewer may have their own opinion (and that is one of the charms
of Kubrick), but it seemed to be the story of a man whose faith is
challenged, and, through numerous brushes with danger beyond belief, is
restored-- but not until he has confessed and received forgiveness (or
the nearest thing to it). Basically, it is a double-jointed attempt at
enforcing certain values by challenging them and, in my opinion, it is
successful.
Sent via Deja.com http://www.deja.com/
Share what you know. Learn what you don't.

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
             Here's a hint at how bizarre this film will become before
the end credits appear: the story starts to take shape around a love
triangle including, not three, but four people. You could probably call
the whole thing a descent into madness; or you could call it an ascent
into the mind of Spike Jonze and Charlie Kaufman.
             Jonze's direction is solid, but not really spectacular. It
keeps a good job of keeping the film together, something which, with the
elements of this film, probably proved much harder to do than can be
imagined. The relative calmness of the direction is the grounding wire
for the unbelievably creative, odd screenplay. This screenplay is one of
the most unique I remember seeing portrayed on the big screen. It would
have been very easy for a director to feel the urge to match the oddity
of the screenplay in his direction (and I'm sure the urge probably came
to Jonze), but Jonze does a magnificent job of keeping himself reeled in
enough that the screenplay does not get lost through misdirection and
confusion.
             So, obviously, I think the screenplay is the driving force
of this film. I can't even imagine the pitch that got this film made,
but somehow they found an executive with the guts to bet on something
new, and, in my opinion, it pays off. From the very first frames of the
film, it is clear that this film will be mostly unconventional. Every
environment is imbued with a bizarre energy that tends to charge the
events of the story taking place there. Every character is eccentric in
some way. Every plot point seems to take you somewhere new. I'd really
like to know what habits were involved in Kaufman's writing. Was it
written in stream of consciousness, then given structure? Does he have
an unhealthy obsession with John Malkovich or did he write it without
anyone in mind, then choose him? Suffice it to say that however he wrote
the screenplay, it works.
             And what of the actors? John Cusack is the lead, and among
the most eccentric characters. Just as Jonze's direction calmly grounds
the screenplay, Cusack seems to calmly ground the other actors around
him. His eccentricity isn't nearly as abrasive as the others, so he
serves as a good center to the story. The best performances were
probably those of Cameron Diaz and John Malkovich, himself. Diaz plays
very much against type, as the mostly unattractive, neglected housewife.
However, she's as eccentric as the rest of them and just becomes moreso
as the film goes on. Her performance has the right amount of subtlety
when needed, as well as excitement. Malkovich not only plays himself,
but variations of himself. The great thing is that he doesn't seem very
self-conscious, something which could have ruined the whole thing. He is
quite willing to make fun of himself as sacrifice for a good film, and,
in the meantime, he finds himself giving an excellent performance.
             It's good to see that such names as Diaz, Malkovich, and
Cusack are willing to make films like this. Hopefully they, and other
stars, will continue to bet on such unique material, allowing other
artists such as Jonze and Kaufman to continue creating such visions.

Title
Review for Dogma (1999)
        Hopefully, as Alan Rickman upholds in the movie, God does have a
sense of humor... for Kevin Smith's sake. The
writer-director basically upholds the faith, but in a very
unconventional way. Whether one could truly say his portrait of religion
puts it in a good light or not is really a personal opinion, but it's
clear he doesn't mind questioning his subject-- and what's
wrong with that?
        Smith makes films from the gut. He makes movies that he would
like to see and that's clear. This has paid off for him thus
far because he's pretty much an everyman and a lot of people want to see
the same things on the screen that he does. He
definitely has a strong instinct for filmmaking, but I'd far from call
it developed.
        I found this movie to be quite entertaining, but I couldn't
really say it was all that well made or even, for that matter, good.
None of the peices seemed to quite fit together right. His direction
lacks a lot, often giving in to cliche. I wouldn't even say it's
the classic Hollywood style, exactly, but a self-conscious pop version,
along the same lines as Tarantino. What lacks for Smith
is a definitive style to really set a tone and pace for his scenes and
the movie as a whole. Whereas Tarantino and so many of
pop-culturalist young directors rely on a melding of their writing and
directing for a unique style, Smith's writing comes almost
fully from his writing and it's as if the direction is merely an
afterthought. This is not to say that he is not a competent director,
but I'd venture to say he is not a confident one. I would love to see a
Smith-written script directed by another director who
could show just how much potential is there. Then maybe smith himself
would be able to find a way to mine his own material
for a little more depth.
        Again, as was the case with many in his first films, the
performances just aren't that great, and, in some cases, just
downright bad. I love Chris Rock [as a comic], but he just is not a good
actor. Salma Hayek was just a little better and Linda
Fiorentino had her moments, but none of the performances were really
anything to get excited about. Sure, they were able to
do well with some of the one-liners and other jokes, but that's hardly
acting. I wasn't really even impressed at all with Alan
Rickman, either. He just seemed too rehearsed. There was nothing at all
fresh about his performance. The only characters that
really seemed to meet their full potential were the unlikely prophets-
Jay and Silent Bob. Of course, their potential is to be
entertaining slackers- not a particularly hard task, but Smith and Jason
Mewes do it well. Damon and Affleck were decent
enough, but they didn't really seem to even be part of anything. For
some odd reason, it seemed like they were in a separate
movie than the rest of the cast [I really have no explanation for why I
thought this; I guess they were just out of place].
        As I said before, Smith's style comes almost completely from his
writing, which is steeped in pop-culture and slacker
references. He really has a pretty good story here. The problem is that
he seems unwilling to part with material. There were
jokes and gags that had no place in the film and only slowed or hindered
it. Something else I noticed in the film is that Smith has
his characters explain too much. It seemed so unnatural every time I
learned a new peice of backstory, etc. because it was
explained to death by the characters-- something that was actually made
into a joke itself in the film, but still would have been
better rectified.
        Kevin Smith knows entertainment, and I, for one, believe he also
knows good storytelling through good filmmaking. I just
don't think he realized his full potential yet. I'll probably see his
next film, and I expect it will be a step toward that.

Title
Review for Insider, The (1999)
       This is a hulking mass of a movie. There's just a lot of story,
and, unfortunately, it's not all necessary.
The Insider is fragmented into two main sections, one focusing
on Jeffrey Wigand (Russell Crowe)-- tobacco industry
whistle blower, and the other on Lowell Bergman (Al Pacino)-- 60 Minutes
producer. Crowe does a decent job of apparently
impersonating the real life Wigand (as said by Wigand himself), but
imnpersonation is not always the best route. Of course, I
knew from the beginning that Wigand would eventually decide to speak out
against the industry, but since this was a given, his
struggle to do so should have been more enthralling. There were threats
to his character and his family, but I can't say they ever
convinced me that Wigand ever actually thought about not blowing the
whistle-- it seemed like he was set from the beginning,
no matter how much he tried to act otherwise. This apathy probably came
from the character seeming rather flat. I never felt
like I really knew him-- especially the way I felt I began to know
Pacino's character, Bergman.
Bergman may seem like a bit of a cliché-- the man of
journalistic integrity, but a cliché played by Pacino usually find added
depth. Pacino did a good job of portraying his character, which made it
easier to relate to Bergman, so perhaps the entire
movie should have been slanted more to his position, rather than
spending so much, or any, time in Wigand's position at all. It
surely would have have helped to focus the story as a whole.
The film probably would have been better if it simply kept up
it's theme of upholding journalistic integrity, and simply used
the tobacco issue as a springboard for that, rather than delving so much
into the tobacco industry itself. As it stands, the film
does lean more to this, but it's simply not enough. It becomes bogged
down in trying to create unnecessary and distracting
tension around Wigand when, instead, it would be all the better to focus
on him almost completely from Bergman's position or
point of view [speaking of unnecessary, I'm not sure I'll ever really
figure out what that whole bit about the Uni-bomber was
meant to accomplish].
I loved Mann's last feature, Heat- it was far from perfect, but
it was an interesting and involving film, in my opinion. Of
course, I think it was easy to like it because it was really quite
simplistic-- it was the involvement that made the simplicity seem
to be more than it was. It seems as if, with this film, Mann wanted to
show that he can make a serious film about important
issues. While I think that this film does prove he can do such a thing,
I wouldn't yet say he's been entirely successful. I'll hazard
a guess that he probably worked a little too closely with the editor,
and that's why there's so much material in the final product.
It's easy to lose objectivity in such a situation. Of course, I have no
idea if that's what actually happened...
Perhaps the real fault lies in the writing. The story is just
too unfocused, as I've said. Now that I think about it, what I saw
seems as if they shot a draft of the screenplay that should have been
revised two or three more times. What this means is that
there is a good film on the screen, but not alone. It's there with
extra, unnecessary material.
--
TyroneZero's Movies, etc.
http://members.tripod.com/~TyroneZero/film.html

Title
Review for Limey, The (1999)
         As a follow-up to what many viewed as Soderbergh's mainstream
breakthrough (although nine years after the film that put him on the
map-- sex, lies, and videotape), Out of Sight, he has chosen as a
sequel. Of course it isn't a sequel to one of his films, but to a 32
year old British film many had never heard of. This seems to be the way
Soderbergh works, doing just what he pleases-- if it happens to fall
into what the public is, at the time, considering "mainstream," so be
it, perhaps. I somehow doubt Mr. Soderbergh cares very much. He is quite
willing to make cinema for himself, and this film is a sure example of
that.
        I think it is, indeed, very important to identify this film as a
follow-up to Out of Sight. If you'll remember, that film contained a
love scene in which not one extraneous body part was shown. All the
chemistry of the scene came from the cinema used to build it. In fact,
the scene took place in two different places and times, but these
spatial and temporal boundaries meant nothing to Soderbergh. He freely
mixed the audio of one time and space with the visual of another. In
this way, the scene took places in both settings at once-- I am doing a
poor job of explaining it, no doubt, so suffice it to say that it was
probably my favorite single cinematic moment of 1998.
        Well, why is that scene so important to The Limey? Simply put,
that scene is this entire film. It's as if Soderbergh became so
fascinated with that one stylistic decision, that he decided to expound
upon it throughout an entire film. The result is an experiment that,
while uneven due to its inherent nature as an experiment, is rather
interesting to watch just to see the final results.
        So, the film is constantly shifting it's spatial and temporal
viewpoint through both its audio and visual elements. How does this
effect the other parts of the film? The story, for one, I believe,
suffers quite a bit. There's just not really all that much to it,
although what is there is strengthened to a considerable extent by the
"experiment." It's a tale of revenge and redemption with a rather strong
conclusion, but the journey to that end is not always entirely engaging.
        Perhaps the performances did not help all too much, either. Of
course, the presence of Terrence Stamp is necessary, as he was the main
character of the first film, but his performance is quite stiff and
doesn't really help one to align with his character (that is left to the
direction, I believe, and perhaps that was the intent, but it jut didn't
work for me, I'm afraid). Peter Fonda plays the equivalent of an
antagonist and his performance is a far cry from his magnificent turn in
Ulee's Gold. Where Stamp is stiff, Fonda simply falters. He never once
really seems like any sort of character, but instead seems like an actor
trying to find a character. The other performances were all throw-aways,
in my opinion. I barely remember anything about them other than the
performance were either bad or pretty much ineffective.
        Still, Soderbergh was somehow to carry this film through with
his direction and make it interesting to watch. While, I think he could
have spent more time on characters and story, his experiment was worth
witnessing and, therefore, the film is far from a loss or failure.

Title
Review for Last Night (1998)
        Last Night [as in the last night] begins with a Christmas
dinner-- it's not Christmas. The world is about to end, however,
and two aging parents have decided to bring their family together one
last time just as they do every year for the holiday. They
only have six hours to live and they know it.
        This is more of an ensemble piece than anything else, following
a group of people over the last hours of existence. We see
them cope in different ways, but they all revolve around a central
figure: Patrick Wheeler (played by writer/director, Don
McKellar). He is the core of the film and his rather subtle performance
holds most everything together. It would be a bit much
to say that everyone else supports him because it's more like all the
actors/characters share the light, McKellar simply holding it
a little longer. There really was not one bad performance in the bunch
and none overshadowed the rest.
        The main strength of the film is probably its screenplay. It's a
rather straightforward script that really lets you get into each
character in a way that never seems at all forced. The writing serves
itself well by focusing on a set of characters rather than the
inevitable panic in the streets. It probably would have been easy to let
the feeling of panic that often permeates the film
overshadow the smaller events of the individual characters, something
which would have upset the entire tone of the piece.
        Basically, this film is about people who need things-- mostly
other people. None are truly desperate, even in their final
hours. It's interesting to note that, even through all the human
interaction, not once is a reason given for the end of the world. It's
just an accepted thing, and the entire world is, of course, changed by
it and for it. This, even more so than the lack of focus on
the worldwide panic, is a very intelligent choice in that it would have
simply hindered the story and characters. It would have
seemed totally unnatural for any of the characters to have explained the
reason for the end of the world. It was enough that it
was common knowledge amongst them; why would they have any need of
explaining it to each other?
        As well-grounded as the screenplay was, it could have been less
so if directed differently (luckily this probably posed little
problem since McKellar took on both chores). The direction simply flows.
There was not one point where it drew attention to
itself, which, while not always a good thing, would simply have been a
distraction here.
        This was just a very fluid movie-- it never seemed to linger too
long or put focus where focus need not be. In terms of
craft, it was near flawless, and, in terms of entertainment and
provocation of thought, it approached a level rarely even come
close to by most.
