Authors
Stephen Wong
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
There is an eerie surrealism as we descend from the gloomy skies over  
Omaha beach. The redundant waves mercilessly beat upon the transport  
boats carrying the first wave of American soldiers, each silently
staring at their inevitable destiny. Some begin to vomit, a combination
of seasickness and fear that can only mean one thing, war. The date is
June 6, 1944, otherwise known as D-Day, the single most important battle
of the last great war. And as the US LCVP boats finally begin to drop
their doors to let the soldiers pour out onto the beach, a cold shock
comes over you. You are no longer watching a war film. You have been
transported onto those boats, and all the horrors of war that you have
only read about suddenly become reality. What ensues is the most 
ferocious and horrific sequences in all of film history. Bullets rip 
through the air with wanton lust, tearing apart the first three lines of
troops attempting to make it to shore. The camera is jolted as if to
suggest that there is nothing anyone can do to stop this madness. German
75mm machine cannons relentlessly bombard the shoreline as rounds tear
through the backs of helmets and blow off limbs. This is not Hollywood's
glamorization of death, this is death in its truest form. Bodies drop by
the hundreds, completely limp upon impact from the bullets. Soldiers lie
screaming on the sand with only their hands keeping their insides from
falling out. Medics begin treating the wounded and before long, become
the wounded. The shore is soaked red in blood, yet the Americans continue
on. And for nearly half an hour this onslaught carries forth, until
finally, the beach is taken.
For Spielberg, the point is simple: War is Hell. There's no glory on the 
battlefield. Heroes die. Good men die. What we read in our history books 
means nothing. They merely consist of statistics of death tolls and fancy 
plans laid out by four star Generals. Saving Private Ryan is war 
seen through the eyes of a  soldier, and what better choice to do that 
than with a man whose demeanor alone elicits courage and honor. Tom Hanks 
plays platoon captain John Miller who, after courageously leading his
troops through the hell of D-Day, is sent on a mission to find and bring
home private James Francis Ryan (Matt Damon). The reason: Ryan, who was
dropped behind enemy lines in France as part of the Airborne infantry
attack, is the only surviving brother of four enlisted in the war (his
mother will be receiving all three telegrams at once), and the chief of
Staff of the US military is determined to "get him the hell out of
there." So Miller assembles his best men to help him traverse the French
countryside in search for the fourth Ryan. His platoon includes stubborn
Brooklynite private Reiben (Edward Burns), the strong-willed Sgt.
Horvath (Tom Sizemore), shell-shocked translator Corporal Upham (Jeremy
Davies), wisecracking Jewish-American private Mellish (Adam Goldberg),
Medic Wade (Giovanni Ribisi) and sharp-shooting private Caparzo  (Vin
Diesel). 
As the men march on, we begin to see the true destruction of war-torn
France.  Towns are filled with the rubble of smashed buildings, and
scattered gunfire snaps through the deserted streets. Along the way we
slowly get an intimate glimpse of each of the characters, and we become
closer and closer to the platoon. When one of them dies, we feel as if we
have lost a close friend. But despite the tragedies there's always a
feeling that things are still OK because of Captain Miller's presence.
Hanks' performance is brilliant. He is the quintessential every man's
hero, exuding both fatherly poise and human vulnerability, and is the
binding force behind Spielberg's film. When the epic final battle
concludes, Hanks and Spielberg leave us with a hauntingly powerful
admonition of the truth of war. There is no happy ending. We are left
only with a simple reminder that in war, good men die so that good men 
may carry on the flame. In what is no doubt the greatest war film ever 
made, Spielberg has shown us that even in the darkest moments of 
humanity, there is still hope.
Visit the Entertainment Insiders at:
http://einsiders.home.mindspring.com
