Authors
Michael J. Zwirn
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Dead Man Walking (1995)
I saw Dead Man Walking this past week at the Mall of America. This is
an adaptation of a book by Sister Helen Prejean of New Orleans,
relating her work with two death row inmates in Angola Prison in
Louisiana.
It's not hard to give away much of the plot for this story, simply because
there isn't much of one. That's not a criticism; this film is a fine
character portrayal that offers Susan Sarandon as Sister Helen and Sean
Penn as a condemned inmate the chance to develop strong and
three-dimensional subjects. The point isn't to develop a convoluted
plot but to create the human element of a painful and ambiguous true
story.
Superficially, this plot could be described as a prison drama with Penn
attempting to escape his imminent execution by whatever means possible
with Sister Helen's help. That would be misleading. Really, there's no
doubt that Penn is not only culpable, but a deeply flawed human being
who will not admit his own complicity but is quick to blame the faults
of others -- blacks, lawyers, police, his accomplice, anyone. As his
execution nears the inescapability of his situation becomes more clear,
Sister Helen's motivation changes from achieving a temporal reprieve
for Penn to helping him to achieve an eternal spiritual reconciliation with 
him soul and God. 
Particularly strong points in the film-making were the portrayal of
Sister Helen's developing friendship with Penn, through the bars or
windows of the prison (the two cannot touch one another until Penn is
on his way to the execution room), the acting of the supporting
characters representing the families of the murder victims, and the
soundtrack, which deserves special praise. Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan and
Eddie Vedder of all people duet on the haunting music during the
climactic final scene, during which the execution is quickcut with the
murders (which are seen only in flashback). Other artists on the score
include Springsteen, Suzanne Vega, Lyle Lovett and Michelle Shocked,
who is reemerging from an extended exile from recording.
There are some weak points in the story -- Would a murderer appealing
his death sentence really praise Hitler in a TV interview? And must we
be bombarded with images of the malliciousness and hypocrisy of the
government and the prison authorities, if the larger point of the movie
is to demonstrate the acceptance of personal responsibility for one's
actions? But this is a very strong movie which will certainly get Oscar
nominations for both Sean Penn and Susan Sarandon, and deservedly so.
It's the best work Penn has ever done and Sarandon is better than
usual. Especially praiseworthy in this film is the deliberate ambiguity
of the filmmakers on the volatile issue of the death penalty -- there
is no one-sided propagandizing on the question, and both the accused
and the victims' families make stng cases. Also notable is the
portrayal of a representative of the Church as a real human being
rather than a figurehead for a larger institution.
--
Michael J. Zwirn     zwirnm@carleton.edu    Carleton College   Northfield MN
Senior/International Relations Major/KRLX-FM Station Manager/Pop Music Freak
         http://public.carleton.edu/~zwirnm/index.html

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
        Glancing at the calendar, I note that only two weekends remain
before I leave Washington, more or less permanently, for graduate school
in Boston. This means that, barring an unprecedented burst of enthusiasm
for music reviewing, or a completely predictable disinclination to pack,
this will be the final column I write from my home on Capitol Hill. Had I
thought some things through, I could have wound down my tenure here in
Washington with a comprehensive overview of some local bands, or a
best-of-DC list of some sort, but I tend to be a bit haphazard in my
approach, and this column is no different.
        As turns out, summer 1999 will be remembered for my move from
Washington to Boston, for my somewhat-delayed entry into graduate school,
for my grandmother's move to a nursing home in Atlanta, and for a
misbegotten two-month romance that unfortunately coincided with these
other three concerns. It will also be remembered as the summer of The
Blair Witch Project, a film which has cast a long shadow over the past
year, as rumors and buzz began to circulate about the film and its
directors and cast, all of whom are based nearby in Maryland. Washington
is ground zero for what has become a brilliantly orchestrated cult
phenomenon around a movie that cost less than an SUV and is infinitely
more memorable than George Lucas' limp, lukewarm Jedi Knights. By the time
the film finally opened in limited release on the sixteenth of July, I had
become thoroughly immersed in Myrick and Sánchez' artful mythology, and
perhaps read too many reviews and spent too much time on the website. My
internalization of the arcane details on the site, which allowed for a
more nuanced but perhaps less visceral viewing of the tightly edited 82
minutes of film, came at the expense of many hours that I could have spent
working or packing, but I consider it time well spent. So, on July 16th I
was among the first group of filmgoers in Washington to catch The Blair
Witch Project at the frankly crummy Outer Circle theater.
        Is the film good? Yes, very good. Does it live up to the hype? I'm
not certain, and I'm not the best judge of this. I had become so
fascinated with the film and engrossed in the mythology that perhaps I'd
too many reviews, spent too much time on the website, and already
internalized too much of the storyline to be shocked at some of the
details. Perhaps, in fact, I am more in love with the ideas behind the
film than the film itself. There is something so brilliantly simple and 
elegant about a piece of fiction in which the actors don't act, the
directors don't direct, and the dialogue isn't scripted. The mythology 
of the film, which could have become cloying sentiment of the Friday
the 13th variety, is genuinely eloquent and eerily vague enough to be
resonant with its audience. Is the film scary? Assuredly. What is so
remarkable about The Blair Witch Project is that the fear is derived
internally, rather from the outside. We don't see witches, we don't see
dead bodies, we don't see gore. It's what we don't see that makes us
empathize so thoroughly with Heather, Josh and Mike. The stress, the
misery and the loneliness of being lost in the woods, combined with the
steadily more bizarre and terrifying experiences, conspire to slowly drive
the three into a state of continual near-terror. Everyone is on edge and
cracking under the strain of being assailed by an unknown enemy, including
the audience. There is one (well-described) moment when Heather is chasing
something through a ravine, lit only dimly from behind by Josh's camera,
and she lets out a horrified shriek. "Oh my God what is that?" We don't
see anything, and the film is stronger for it. 
        Ultimately, since we see everything through Josh, Heather and
Mike's eyes, The Blair Witch Project differs from the average horror film
(which makes the murderer or villain the central character). Ultimately,
these are your average college kids, which makes them easy to empathize
with, and their occasionally stupid and self-destructive behavior is all
the more heartbreaking because we all do stupid and self-destructive
things. They know arcane pop culture trivia (Cal Ripken, Gilligan's
Island) but can't read maps or interpret a compass reading, and get
blasted before launching into the woods. Josh's laid-back stoner façade
crumbles first, Mike's stolid core tries to stabilize the three, and
Heather's veneer of overconfidence and machisma collapses with
horrifying finality into stark terror. There is no acting per se, so this
is probably the closest we will ever get to watching three human beings
completely collapse on film. The ultimate realness of the three makes this
a rare film in which we genuinely care for characters even when we don't
like them. The ultimate primal fear of getting lost in a dark, strange
forest is something we can all identify with, and many of us 
have experienced under less gruesome circumstances. As the stress of that
situation mounts we find ourselves put in Heather, Mike and Josh's shoes,
looking through their eyes via the cameras. Heather's confession, which
isolates the tears falling from one eye, is utterly gutting in its
heartrending honesty.
        It seems strange to think of directing or cinematography when the
three characters, all novices at filmmaking, are in charge of the cameras
and sound. But the editing and cutting of the film are quite remarkable,
particularly in a final sequence so terrifying that I won't discuss it,
except to say that it ends with one searing image. Splicing 20 hours of
(mostly boring, one supposes) hi-8 video and 16-mm film footage and DAT
audio into a cohesive 82 minute film can't have been easy, but the
amateurish filming occasionally yields moments of stunning fright and
beauty. Did I say beauty? Yes. There is one scene shot in high resolution
black and white through the window of their car as they drive into the
woods that is simply stunning. Some of the film is completely black as
they turn their cameras off in fear, but leave the DAT recorder running,
and those are perversely among the most affecting moments. The final
sequences are edited frenetically and disorientingly, which probably
serves as an accurate reflection of the actors' own terror.
        The art design and sound were the understated keys to this film. 
In the barest and most minimal way, Myrick and Sánchez use bits of wood,
twine and rocks in utterly ingenious ways to create the impression of an
entire forest suffused with an evil presence. It's brilliant. They create
pure terror out of a bundle of sticks tied together with a bit of cloth,
the likes of which could never be equalled with a grandiose Hollywood
budget. The sound is the final piece to the film's shocking success.
Indeed, the soundtrack to The Blair Witch Project alone, absent the
visuals, could be bloodcurdling. In the interest of authenticity and to
preserve the semblence of faux-verité, there is no sound other than the
voices of the actors, the ambient noise of their journey into the forest,
and the horrible wails that reverberate around their campsite in the
middle of the night. Other suspense and horror films rely on garish
violins, spare keyboards or predictably nihilist industrial or metal to
create an atmosphere of fear and tension; The Blair Witch Project's most
frightening moments are audible only through the gasping breaths of the
actors and the crunch of twigs being snapped. 
        It was several weeks before the release of the film that I had the
idea to make a mix tape to interpret some of the elements and moments
depicted in the film. Obviously, I had to watch the movie first, but by
the time I finally saw the film I was dead set on the idea. For the
purposes of this little project I ended up delving into some of the realms
of my collection that are usually side interests outside the broad
category of pop. Pop musicians are great at selling soundtrack albums, but
generally bad at scoring films, and I was trying to create an audio
complement to the film rather than a marketing tie-in. (Indeed I came to
find out shortly after the film was released that there is an album,
called Josh's Blair Witch Mix, allegedly assembled by Joshua Leonard. His
taste leans toward dour and bludgeoning metal and industrial, music too
vulgar to adequately represent the chilling elegance of the film.) I
relied largely on a mix of modern classical, some experimental and
electronic compositions, a few pop selections, and a number of innovative
multimedia and soundtrack pieces, particularly those with an Eastern
European or Middle Eastern flavor for reasons that seemed more aesthetic
than authenic. I was also able to rely on the superlative Blair Witch
Project website for some brief audio and video segments to cut into the
music. The result is a 90-minute cassette, my attempt to represent the
Blair Witch Project experience on tape.
Heather, Josh, and Mike, "Off to the shack? The shanty?" .mov file. A
seemingly jaunty trio shoulder their packs, leave their car behind,
and head into the woods outside Burkittsville, Maryland.
David Byrne, "Ava" (Nu Wage Remix), from the Forestry EP. A lurching
classical piece presciently remixed with jittery proto-trip-hop drums,
borrowed and adapted from Byrne's 1991 theater piece The Forest. 
Taylor & Rifle, "Main theme" from the soundtrack to Amateur. A luminous
orchestral piece with choral vocals, led by a spare piano line, originally
from the 1995 Hal Hartley film soundtrack that also featured the Jesus 
Lizard and Yo La Tengo. Perfectly evokes the scene shot in high-resolution 
black and white through the window of their car as the three embark into
the forests of rural Maryland. 
The Kingdom of Leisure, "Across-the-Bow," from This is the New America. An
echoing, swampy blues riff from the DC-based innovators of tripgrass.
Heather, Josh, and Mike, "Argument" .au file. The three, lost and hungry,
argue bitterly over their location and Heather's leadership.
Peter Gabriel, "Of These, Hope - Reprise," from Passion: Soundtrack to The
Last Temptation of Christ. Peter Gabriel is perhaps the popular musician
best equipped to produce a full soundtrack score, as he did for Scorcese's
Last Temptation of Christ. Passion makes use of remarkable field
recordings from the Middle East, North Africa and Central Asia, giving
them a lush and overwhelmingly engrossing studio veneer. 
Domácí Kapela, "Prizraky" [Phantoms], from Nedęle. Gripping, off-putting
and to Western ears, unspeakably bizarre, this Czech art-rock composition
gives off the impression of Enya and a lost klezmer band trying
desperately to make sense of fuzzy photocopied samizdat transcriptions of
Queensryche. 
Heather, Josh, and Mike, "Are you happy?" .au file. Josh protests
that he's supposed to be at work the next morning; Mike begs the two to
be civil in the unpleasant circumstances.
Dawn Upshaw, "The Girl With Orange Lips," from The Girl With Orange Lips.
>From the 1990 album of the same name, one of a lengthy series of cryptic
and moving poems (by Stephan Mallarmé, Arthur Rimbaud, and others) set
to brief and often jarring classical orchestration. Also features one of
the most astonishing and lyrical cover photographs in my entire
collection. 
Andie MacDowell, "Define Violence," from the soundtrack to The End of
Violence. Wim Wenders' soundtracks for Until the End of the World and The
End of Violence were models for this project, and Andie MacDowell's drily
accusatory rebuke can apply nicely here. Plays over a nice ambient piece
by the film's music director, Ry Cooder.
Duane Eddy, "Trembler" (remix), from the soundtrack to Natural Born
Killers. Trent Reznor, who shows every indication of being a completely
unpleasant human being, nevertheless is a remarkably ingenious manipulator
of sounds and images. Nothing illustrates his gift more effectively than
the jarring, hallucinatory soundtrack to Natural Born Killers, an album
that conveys the message of the film far more effectively than the film
itself. Eddy's rumbling bass guitar introduction is one of the moments on
this tape that still makes my heart stop, even after repeated listens.
Heather, Josh, and Mike, "My God, what is that" .mov file. Heather,
sprinting through a ravine in the middle of the night, lit only from 
behind by the light from Josh's camera, sees something in the distance.
Lauren Hoffman, "Look Like Shit" (4-track demo), from the A Harmless
Little Kiss EP. Hoffman's numb, aching vocals and raw guitar playing are
testimony to the circumstances of the song's recording and a musical
journal for the strain of sleepless nights and grinding terror. One of the
four musicians on this tape I'm privileged to know personally, even if
only from a distance.
Golden Palominos, "Prison of the Rhythm," from the Prison of the Rhythm
EP. Lori Carson's breathy vocals and Anton Fier's frenetic drum
programming conflate sex with God with fear, which isn't quite the point
of the film, but it works in context.
Nine Inch Nails, "Down In It," from Pretty Hate Machine. The best "wind
rushing through a moral vacuum" noises ever made.
Towering Inferno, "Edvard Király," from Kaddish. Maniacal, hysterical
screaming in Magyar, a thumping, ominous bass drum, and what sounds like 
the ghastly looped braying of some tortured donkey. It seemed apt.
Andie MacDowell, "Unintentional Prayers," from the soundtrack to The End
of Violence.
Low, "Below and Above," from Long Division. By Low standards, this is a
spritely little number. By anyone else's standards, Mimi vocals are
icy beauty over the aching, needful simmer of Alan Sparhawk's
carefully chosen guitar notes, doled out sparingly as if the band is
deathly afraid that they don't have enough to reach the end of the song. 
Heather, "Confession" .mov file excerpt. An excerpt from Heather's
midnight confessional.
Aphex Twin, Disc One, Track 11, from Selected Ambient Works Volume II.
Like sonar pinging the depths of the soul.
Kronos Quartet, "Kyrie I," from Early Music (Lachrymć Antiquć). A
haunting piece of Fourteenth Century liturgy that sounds strangely of a
piece with the modern Eastern European masters.
The Moon Seven Times, "My Game," from 7=49. Perhaps m7x's sparest moment,
with Henry Frayne's ringing guitars excised in favor of a dry, thumping
rhythm line that exposes every breath and quaver in Lynn Canfield's
haunting vocals. 
Crime and the City Solution, "Adversary," from the soundtrack to Until the
End of the World. Perhaps the best pop-music soundtrack ever, the Wim 
Wenders soundtrack for Until the End of the World is a seamless
exploration of minor-key dread and pre-millennial desperation. Crime and
the City Solution's "Adversary," a menacing and completely convincing
open letter from predator to prey, is one of the film's perfect
matches of music to visuals. 
Tama Renata, "Screaming Pipes/Haka," from the soundtrack to Once Were
Warriors. The Maori haka is a ritual chant and dance designed to
intimidate, belittle and terrify tribal enemies on the field of battle. In
Lee Tamahori's frightfully authentic and visceral South Auckland slums,
the embrace of this warrior tradition is both a rallying call and a deadly
siren song. 
Moby, "New Dawn Fades," from I Like to Score. A dense, ominous and searing 
Joy Division cover with a darkly moving vocal from Moby himself.
Forgiveness, "Kol Nidrei," from The Jewish Alternative Movement: A Guide
for the Perplexed. Groaning with the weight of four thousand years of sin
and repentance, this interpretation of the classical Sephardi liturgical
motif from the Yom Kippur service sounds like it could have been performed
in a dark, dank woods itself. It's also my musical elegy for Joshua
Leonard and his undisclosed but presumably dire fate.
Balanescu Quartet, "East," from Luminatza. A jittery chamber piece that
leaps from a buzzsaw cello introduction into a bracing, cutting violin
finale.
Lanterna, "Turbine," from Lanterna. A clattering, churning, surging 
instrumental from Moon Seven Times guitar wizard Henry Frayne. 
Heather, "Confession" .mov file. When The Blair Witch Project is
examined in retrospect, this scene and the mindbending finale will be 
the landmarks that guarantee its place in cinema legend.
Sugar, "Tilted" excerpt, from the Beaster EP. Bob Mould's tortured Jesus
Christ imagery scales new heights in this swirling, anguished piece of
feedback and sampled demogoguery.
Kate Bush, "Army Dreamers," from The Whole Story. Perhaps an atypical
piece for this collection, but I find the contrast between the lilting
guitar and vocal lines and the stately waltz rhythms, and the mournful
lyrics, remarkably effective.
This Mortal Coil, "Fyt," from It'll End in Tears. A rare instrumental from
Ivo-Watts and his assembled 4AD minions. Murky, lurching and resonant with
dread. 
Nine Inch Nails, "March of the Pigs," from The Downward Spiral, intercut
with "News Reporter" .mov file. Despite the remarkable variety of noises
that Trent Reznor manages to coax from his formidable arsenal of machines,
instruments and computers, he's perhaps at his best when he uses silence 
as a weapon instead of bombast.
Towering Inferno, "The Rose II," from Kaddish. An otherworldly vocal in
Magyar by Márta Sebastyén and an eerie poem in English over Richard
Wolfson and Andy Saunder's liquid synthesizers. "This sky will cover you
when you fall down."
Loveliescrushing, "Bones of Angels" excerpt, from Beneath the Icy Floe: A
Projekt Sampler Vol. 4. Perhaps surprisingly, the moody synthesized goth
stylings of the Projekt bands didn't altogether suit this compilation, but
Loveliescrushing's ghostly reverie fits here nicely. 
Mystery Machine, "Pound for Pound," from Decadence: Nettwerk Records boxed
set. It's to the credit of this innovative band from Vancouver that I
can't pin down their sound as dizzying rock guitar with progressive metal 
leanings, blistering punk, twitching indie or soaringly anthemic. This
song from the Nettwerk box set me in search of their other work
immediately.
Moby, "God Moving Over the Face of the Waters (edit)," from Everything is
Wrong. Perhaps the most stunning of Moby's richly orchestrated keyboard
pieces, this staggeringly beautiful eight minute piece has also found a
home on the soundtrack to Heat and in a range of additional contexts. 
Lisa Germano, "...callin'," from On the Way Down from the Moon Palace.
Perhaps it's the optimist in me that reached for a vaguely elegaic
minute-long violin and guitar piece to close this album, promising a
gentler end than Heather, Josh and Mike ever found.
