Authors
C.J Hill
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Event Horizon (1997)
This is a good year if you want plenty of sci-fi on your multiplex.
>From the comedies Mars Attacks and Men In Black, to Luc Besson's
powerful The Fifth Element, and to this, sci-fi/horror that is Event
Horizon.  (More is on the way with Contact and Alien:Ressurection being
released later this year.)
The story is thus:  In 2040 an explorer ship called The Event Horizon
tests out a newly invented gravity drive. A device that enables a craft
to travel anywhere in the universe, instantaneously.  This is achieved
by creating a gateway, infact, a black hole, between the craft and it's
required destination.  In this case, from near Neptune to Proxima Prime.
However, when the Event Horizon attempts this, it dissappears, without
trace, leaving two searches for it fruitless.
Seven years later, it reappears, transmitting a distress signal and this
is where the film starts.
A search and rescue ship is sent out to investigate.  The team is led by
Laurence Fishburne, and joining them is Sam Neill who plays the
scientist that invented the gravity drive.
As the team search the Event Horizon, they find no trace of the crew but
plenty of blood lying around.  Not a good sign...
To make matters worse, as they search the ship, they find themselves
being subjected to a series of illusions based on their own individual
inner secrets and worse, some very bloody events start to occur as they
slowly piece together the events that transpired on the ship seven years
ago.
It soon becomes apparent that, wherever the ship went, it bought
something back with it.  Something very, very evil...
The first thing you'll notice in this film is it's incredible visual
effects.  They really are eye popping, with some great models to boot.
The acting is quite good, with some occasional witty moments.  Sam Neill
does a good job as the scientist that increasingly becomes more and more
disturbed as the search continues, but a tip of the hat goes to Laurence
Fishburne who leads the team, in a cool, calm, take no nonense manner.
It is his acting skills that help hold this film together.
The idea behind Event Horizon is certainly a good one.  It starts off
incredibly well, but the middle section becomes quite confused and
sometimes muddled, leaving the viewer unsure on just what the reasons
are behind some of the bloody and bizarre events that occur.
However, the closing 20 minutes of the film more than make up for this,
producing one the most nail biting (or in my case, straw of my drink
biting!) climaxes i've recently witnessed.
Overall, Event Horizon is a smart film indeed.  It's very enjoyable and
has some amazing visuals.  But be warned, the horror scenes, despite
being very brief are very, very, gory.  Not for the squemish!

Title
Review for Speed 2: Cruise Control (1997)
Director Jan De Bont certainly knows how to make top quality action
films. You need look no further than Die Hard (he was director of
photography), Speed and last years Twister for examples of his hi-
octane, edge of your seat thrill prowess.
This time, the action takes place on a huge cruise liner, on which
Sandra Bullock and Jason Patrick are trying to develop their
relationship.
Yep, that's right, no Keanu Reeves this time, but fear not, Jason
Patrick is more than up to the job.
Speaking of which, the job at hand is to stop completely bonkers
terrorist, Willem Dafoe, from crashing the liner into a huge island,
after stealing a diamond collection.
The reason for this act of destruction is revenge. After years of
working for the company that builds cruise liner computers, he contracts
copper poisoning and is retired.
Naturally, what entails next is a lot of running/jumping about and
general high quality action as Jason Patrick does his level best to save
the day.
Thinking back on this film, you can't help, but admire it's structure.  
The way, Willem Dafoe initiates his plan and throws red herrings to the
crew and passengers.  The race against time to save the liner from
crashing, and of course, the finale chase scence. (Although this is
ruined by an over the top, one too many stunt and explosion.)
Simple in construction, effective in it's execution, and the result, a
clear and concise, highly enjoyable action film.
The acting is adequate, although it's darned obvious that Sandra Bullock
is only in it to create a 'hot totty' appeal to the men (and she does
that perfectly!), Jason Patrick fills the action hero role superbly and
Willem Dafoe is just great as the crazed terrorist.
Overall, Speed 2 is a most enjoyable thrill ride.  Not up to it's
predecessor's high calibre but very good all the same.
There is plenty going on, some of the thrills are quite tense and it
also proves that you do not need blood and guts to make a good action
movie.

Title
Review for Men in Black (1997)
Just who are the Men In Black?  Well, I'll tell you.
They're an unofficial yet highly funded government agency.  That's who.
Their job, to monitor extra-terrestial activity.
Now, this film pulls no punches here.  It starts of letting you know
that aliens have been co-existing with us humans for over 40 years.
The Men In Black make sure those that live here on Earth, stay in their
designated areas (disguised as humans of course), and they also monitor
all visitations and departures.  Should anything alien related be
witnessed by a human, the Men In Black turn up in their dark suits,
sunglasses and armed with a pen with a red light on it, erase the poor
witness's memory of the event.
Yep, it's all very tongue in cheek and in places, and it's atmosphere is
very similar indeed to the Tim Burton masterpiece Mars Attacks.  
This is, no doubt, due to the fact that director Barry Sonnenfeld was
also responsible for the dark comedies The Addams Family and Addams
Family Values.
The plot to Men In Black, doesn't require too much attention, so this
should keep the attention of any young ones in the audience.
It mainly revolves around the discovery of an alien race trying to
provoke all out war for it's own benefit.  Nothing more to it than that,
really.
What really draws the viewer into this dark comedy is it's superb visual
effects provided those masters Industrial Light and Magic, whose
outstanding work can also be drooled over in the special editions of the
Star Wars Trilogy and The Lost World.
Yes, they really are great, including a cute little alien hiding and
controlling a human from the inside with little levers!
Men In Black moves along at a very quick pace indeed.
The script is very lively and funny and this is enhanced by the
excellent chemistry between Tommy Lee Jones (Agent K) and the ever
chucklesome Will Smith (Agent J).
To sum up, Men In Black is a lively, amusing and visually stunning film.
My only gripe is that it's over far too quickly.
Executive Producer Steven Spielberg has, no doubt, some credit owed to
him for the family quality wrapped around this very pleasant diversion
and perhaps I may get to forgive him for the very poor Lost World...
Perhaps.
The overall feel that comes across whilst watching Men In Black, is that
you can't help but feel that Men In Black's purpose is a pleasant and
very enjoyable, short term filler, a bit like my popcorn really.

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
Possibly the years the most anticipated film and finally it arrives here
in the UK.
It smashed U.S box office office records in it's opening weekend and
will no doubt do the same here.
But is it any good?  In a word, no.  I'll elaborate further.
The story is as follows.  Apparently there were TWO islands with
dinosaurs on.  One where the dinos lived untouched by mankind and the
other a tourist attraction which failed before it even opened.  (See
Jurrasic Park.)
Imgen, the company that funded Jurrasic Park, want to reccover their
losses by taking more dinos off the other island and move them to a new
attraction in San Diago.
Realizing what a bad idea this is, Proffessor John Hammond (Richard
Attenborough) decides to send a team to document the Dinosaurs, so as to
rally public support to preserve the island.
Enter familiar mumbling man Jeff Goldblum who only agrees to go when
told his girlfriend is already there.
So, basically, what you have is this.  Two teams, one sent to catch and
move some dinosaurs to the mainland and the other, trying to document
them, being forced to work together, fighting for survival against the 
dinosaurs' firm intentions on eating them.
A fairly good idea, however it's let down by one slight problem.
Over two hours of chase scenes gets way too boring, way too quiclky.
Add to this a terrible script and some feeble attempts at some
occasional characterisation and you end up very disinterested.
It becomes background noise while your mind starts concentrating on
things like, 'what's for tea?' and 'should you cut the lawn later?'
(yes, you should).
It's a shame then really, that Spielberg has lowered himself into making
what essentially is a blatant cash in, which adds practically nothing to
the far superior Jurrasic park.
With only a few creative and genuinely tense scenes and fabulous c.g.i
dinosaurs (the t.rex's have to be seen to be believed), there is nothing
else to recommend The Lost World.
A very dissapointing sequel, indeed.
