Authors
Eric Mankin
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Rapa Nui (1994)
     In the past three decades, archaeologists have decoded the riddle
of the famous statues on Easter Island--Rapa Nui to its inhabitants--as
a clear and terrifying ecological parable for a small planet.
Polynesians reached the remote, once heavily forested island in wooden
boats; built an impressive civilization, and in the process chopped
down the trees--all the trees.
     No more boats, no more fishing, no new wooden tools--just at a
time when more of all of the above were needed for a much-increased
population.  Cut to a futile but increasingly elaborate attempt to fid
a way out through religion (the giant moai figures) and then, abruptly
but predictably, to population crash and no more civilization at all:
just a barbarized, starving semi- cannibal remnant hiding out from each
other in caves, stone age survivalists in an apocalypse of their own
making.
     Here's an attempt to make a feature (Nova has already made a
superb documentary segment) about that apocalypse, on its original
locations.  Director Robin Reynolds and producer Kevin Costner make up
for the noisome pandering of their previous collaboration, 'Robin Hood,
Prince of Thieves': it took real courage to try to make this.
     And it would be an easy film to make fun of.  The story, by
Reynolds and Tim Rose Price attempts to make up for its commercial
improbability by seizing on conventional commercial elements: a
triathlon-like ritual race for sacred priesthood, complete with wise
old trainer; a Romeo and Juliet romance between a scion of the ruling
caste (Jason Scott Lee) and a gorgeous plebeian (Sandrine Holt), with
Esai Morales playing the embittered slave-caste rival.  But hokey as
the elements are, Lee and Morales bring real passion to what they do,
and at least some scenes, like the chopping down of the island's last
tree, have a significance impossible to misunderstand, or to destroy.

Title
Review for Quiz Show (1994)
     Robert Redford's dramatic reconstruction of the 1958 Van Doren
television scandals is profound, unpredictable and scathingly funny,
packed from its center to its bit player edges with acutely observed,
brilliantly acted characters  It consolidates ideas about family and
fatherhood, Gentile and Jew, celebrity and corruption that Redford has
been dealing with as actor and director for years, and does so
effortlessly and organically, without moralizing or contrivance.  It
recreates in achingly perfect detail a tail-finned, wood-veneer
black-and-white TV America without ever retreating into nostalgia.
It's about as good as movies get.
     The audience's guide into the film's universe is young Dick
Goodwin (Rob Morrow), first in his class at Harvard Law School, as he
continually reminds the world; Jewish, as the late-fifties world
frequently reminds him.  He has come to Washington D.C., to work for
the government, postponing the high money Wall Street career he sees as
inevitable for reasons that aren't clear to him; unconsciously looking
for a main chance that will redefine his life.  He finds it in a small
newspaper story about allegations of fixing in quiz shows, hit
programming in the exploding new medium of television.
     The film has already shown, in blistering detail, the origin of
that newspaper story.  Herb Stempel (John Turturro) had reigned for
weeks as resident genius on NBC's "Twenty One," mopping his sweating
brow inside the isolation booth, astounding the nation by knowing not
only the name of the man who lent Paul Revere a horse for his midnight
ride, but the fact that the horse was a mare.
     But then the show's producer, Dan Enright (David Paymer) had
decided, in consultation with the network and the sponsor, that Stempel
had run his string; that the country was tired of a nerd-next-door with
bad teeth from Queens, that it was time to find someone different:
someone more graceful, better looking, classier, less Jewish--someone
like Columbia professor Charles Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes), son and
nephew of Pulitzer prize winners; someone with a fresh face eager to
talk enthusiastically about television's role in educating the American
public.  Moving Herbie out and Charlie in takes Mephistophelean
abilities of manipulation.  But Enright can offer not just vast sums of
money, but the gleaming lure of television itself, "the biggest thing,"
as Herbie accurately tells his wife, "since Gutenberg." By the time the
deal has soured, and Stempel has called foul, Van Doren is a national
hero.  Goodwin's investigation bounces off a seamless wall compounded
from Enright's imaginative deceit, and Charlie's seemingly guileless
charm.
     "Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall," Van Doren quotes
Shakespeare at a glittering literary birthday party in Connecticut,
words spoken precisely at the peak of the trajectory that is carrying
him to a humiliation of his own creation.  The remarkable achievement
of this film is the dimension it gives this fall.
     The contributions to the achievement can be listed.  First, Paul
Attanasio's screenplay is in a class by itself.  Looking back years
into films, it is hard to remember one that does as many different
things in as many different ways as this one.  Ironically (considering
the subject) television may have been a beneficent influence  With the
virtual preemption of film to tell stories centered on vehicles,
explosions, and special effects, (and QUIZ SHOW was passed on
repeatedly by other studios at least in part because of the absence
these elements before being picked up by Disney) TV has become a refuge
for stories centering on character, in shows like "N.Y.P.D.  Blue"
or "Homicide," on which Attanasio collaborated with Barry Levinson
(who plays Dave Garroway in the film).  TV writing in the episodic
ensemble form invented by Steven Bochco long ago broke out of the old
film chestnut of every film being one person's story.
     Attanasio may be the first film writer to have thoroughly absorbed
Bochco's lessons.  While Goodwin remains at the center, the
exceptionally broad focus and reach of the story, the insistence on
seeing and telling the story from multiple points of view creates an
amazing density of texture.
     This sounds abstract, so perhaps one other note is in order.  QUIZ
SHOW is, quite apart from its other virtues, the funniest film of the
year.  Some of its characters are intentionally funny--as Herbie
Stempel's anguished, eloquent rages against the gods of TV--some
equally inspired unintentionally so, as when Dan Enright's cohort
Albert Freedman (Hank Azaria) asks what "a grejus" is, following a
conversation in which Van Doren objects to being simply given answers
to questions as "egregious."  In the same conversation Van Doren has
previously taken a moment to think things over: "I'm just trying to
imagine what Kant would make of this." "He'd go along with it,"
Freedman assures him.
     The actors run with it.  It was obvious from SCHINDLER'S LIST that
Ralph Fiennes--however he wants to pronounce his name--was good; this
film makes clear *how* good.  As the beautiful, flawed Charlie,
intrigued by the glittering new toy of television, trapped by his
vanity and desire to please his father, undone by his own inability to
lie about it, Fiennes turns an historical footnote into someone you
seem to have known all your life.
     Paul Scofield plays his father, the poet.  Scofield has played
Lear, and played him well; here he is given, along with much else, two
transparently simple lines; one about his joy: "not till you have a
son!" and one about his pain: "your name is mine," and makes each one a
world.
     It is no surprise that John Turturro is unforgettable as the
twitchy Herbie, paranoid for the best of reasons--people are out to get
him; the surprising thing is that a performance like this can't steal
the film, because the acting everywhere, *everywhere*, from all sides
is so seamlessly, uniformly, universally remarkable: Morrow (from
"Northern Exposure") subtly shading Goodwin's internal insecurities
behind a big cigar; David Paymer as Enright the wheedling fixmeister
(by the end of the film, you believe that on his deathbed he tried to
buy off the Angel of Death by offering him a job on a TV panel show.)
And on, and on and on, through the small but completely rounded parts
of Goodwin and Stemple's wives, (Johann Carlo and Mira Sorvino); or the
main-battle-tank-like presence of Allan Rich as the President of NBC.
If the film deconstructs conventional wisdom on unitary film story, it
writes in letters of fire another old saw: "there are no small roles.
There are only small actors."
     This kind of texture doesn't happen by accident.  Redford has
always been an exceptional director of actors.  Here, he orchestrates
the performances with a touch so light that it doesn't seem to be
there: the story seems to tell itself, to be assembling itself before
our eyes, absolutely autonomous, yet reverberating with films as
diverse as ELECTRIC HORSEMAN, THE CANDIDATE, DOWNHILL RACER, ALL THE
PRESIDENT'S MEN, THE WAY WE WERE, ORDINARY PEOPLE, A RIVER RUNS THROUGH
IT, suddenly casting all of them into a new line leading here.  If
Redford never exposes another frame of film, he has his place in the
pantheon: this is a great movie.

Title
Review for Imaginary Crimes (1994)
     Here's an unusual cinema event: a chance to watch Harvey Keitel
portray a seedy loser.  The latest one's named Ray Weiler, a low rent
deadbeat/con man and widower father of two in Kennedy administration
Portland, Oregon. "An opportunity like this comes once in a blue moon,"
we see him telling a mark, as his daughter Sonya (Fairuza Balk) cringes
in shame and embarrassment.  Haven't we seen this movie before?
     The details are different.  It's anchored in 1962, Sonya's senior
year in the private school that Ray has managed to talk her into.  She
is writing reminiscences of her earlier life, giving the film an
opportunity to dip into the past and follow Ray through the shipwreck
of a hundred inventions that don't quite work and mining claims that
don't quite pan out, through the death of Sonya's mother (Kelly Lynch)
and the illness of her sister Greta.  Sonya's writing talent brings her
to the attention of a kindly English teacher, and a chance at college,
as Ray's lies build to critical mass.
     Anthony Drazen (Zebrahead) directed the adaptation (by Kristine
Johns and Davia Nelson) of Sheila Ballantyne's coming of age memoir.
The acting is faultless.  Keitel could play this character in his sleep
from inside an iron lung; but he gets effective help from Lynch, Chris
Penn (as a disgruntled investor); and Balk, last seen in GAS, FOOD,
LODGING.  The scene and costume design is predictably perfect, down to
the pastel Melmac dinnerware and the harlequin revival eyeglass frames;
the music (by Stephen Endelman) is effective.  All that's missing is
any raising of the stakes beyond the most familiar strong-child-takes-
on-bad-parent interaction--in short, any surprise at all.

Title
Review for River Wild, The (1994)
     A gloriously buff Meryl Streep floats--literally--through this
lightweight but workable family-in-peril thriller.  Streep plays Gail,
former white-water river guide turned Boston teacher grown apart from
her distant, workaholic husband (David Strathairn).  The Rocky Mountain
river run designed to Dad back together with Gail and his nine-year old
son coincides with the escape of a group of armed robbers--who hijack
the family, demanding that Gail take them through an impassable series
of cataracts called the Gauntlet.
     It's a smart idea for a movie, credibly giving the physical skills
that are the key to the story to the mother, not the father--and Streep
is convincingly physical, radiating power at the oars of her Zodiac.
Unfortunately, she doesn't get a chance to do much more: director
Curtis Hanson, as he did in his similarly clever but under-achieving
HAND THAT ROCKS THE CRADLE, simplifies everything in the script (Denis
O'Neill's first) just as it starts getting interesting.
     Most of the problems are in the characterization of the crook
leader, Wade (Kevin Bacon), who's initially made both charming and
sexually appealing but turns, much too quickly and much too patly, into
a simple, uncomplicated and uninteresting creep from nowhere.  Streep,
an actress who can do anything, is limited to making her
I'm-going-to-kill-you-face, and trying to keep from being upstaged by
Maggy, the family's loyal golden retriever.
     It's not that Hanson doesn't know how to make things infinitely
more subtle: he did it in a whole series of scripts, including SILENT
PARTNER, NEVER CRY WOLF, and BAD INFLUENCE.  The blandness and lack
of shading seems, instead, calculated:  something nice and simple, not
too spicy, lots of pretty river scenery, to go with the Thanksgiving
turkey.  It's not bad--but the elements were there in all departments
for a much better film.

Title
Review for Good Man in Africa, A (1994)
     Director Bruce Beresford's earnest straightforwardness served well
enough in dramas like DRIVING MISS DAISY or even MR. JOHNSON but
rapidly sinks this attempt at an Evelyn Waugh/Kingsley Amis comedy of
manners.  To be fair, it's not likely anyone else could have done better
with William Boyd's script (from his novel of the same name), which
rounds up the usual British comedy suspects, and runs them through
numbingly familiar colonial games of sex and social climbing.
     Set in a fictional West African country, the story offers Colin
Friels as a Lucky Jim-like British foreign service climber named Morgan
Leafy, stuck under the thumb of supertwit High Commissioner Fanshawe
(John Lithgow honking an pseud-Sloane accent).  Leafy has to balance
the logistics of an impending visit from a member of the royal family
and sub-rosa bribery of local politicians with the demands of his
African girlfriend Hazel (Jackie Mofokeng) and sexual targets of
opportunity including Fanshawe's wife (Diana Rigg) and daughter
(Sarah-Jane Fenton), and the wife (Joanne Whalley-Kilmer) of a local
nationalist leader (Louis Gossett Jr.).
     The Africa outside the embassy walls is presented solely as a
source of exotic plot complications to put Leafy into a comic
lather--sketchy, anachronistic, visually lackluster, and, with locals
rolling their eyes fearfully at the name of the thunder god Shango,
borderline racist stereotype.  It's no better inside the embassy, with
Dame Rigg given a line like "I want our loins to mingle."  Friels is
good, in his Michael-J.-Fox frantic way and Sean Connery is perfect as
the "good man" of the title, an incorruptible doctor with a gift for
wry understatement, but neither rescue the proceedings from the level of
not very inspired silliness.

Title
Review for Shawshank Redemption, The (1994)
     Well-crafted, well-acted, and utterly bogus, Frank Darabont's
feel-good prison movie represents a creepy height of denial, escapism
and easy sentimentality, dodging every real issue of crime and
punishment with a hopelessly gimmicky, shamelessly manipulative story.
     Read a paper and see how an epidemic of underclass neglect and
crime has produced a boom in prison construction, an army of brown and
black prisoners, and a profusion of elect-me-I'll-lock-em-up crime
bills.  Comes now a movie (adapted from a Stephen King novella) from
another, simpler planet.
     Set between the forties and the sixties, its protagonist is a
banker named Andy Defresne (Tim Robbins), unjustly (he says) accused of
killing his wife and her lover, who befriends the voice-over narrator
Red (Morgan Freeman, doing a Mr. Bojangles turn), one of the two or
three non-white men in a gangless, generic New England joint called
Shawshank.
     Conflict is provided by three tediously one-note heavies whose
parts have been written with magic marker: a brutal stinker of a guard
captain (Clancy Brown) a hypocritical stinker of a warden (Bob Gunton),
and a sexually assaultive stinker of a prisoner.  Our hearts go in the
warmer as we watch the cultured, plucky Defresne win the hearts and
minds of his benighted fellow inmates by improving the library or, in
one sequence broadcasting a Mozart duet on the PA while Freeman's voice
tells us, voice-over, just how moving it is.
     The denouement is a "surprise" that is telegraphed, faxed, mailed,
messengered and smoke-signaled at least an hour in advance; one that is
so thunderingly obvious that even the most guarded reference would give
it away.  The film does have the virtue of putting the wonderful James
Whitmore (playing an old con) back in front of the camera; one of many
excellent performances in the film: that's not enough.

Title
Review for Nostradamus (1994/I)
     In a tower, we see the Sixteenth Century physician/prophet
Nostradamus (Tcheky Karyo) staring into space, his face filled with
alarm at a vision of the future he is seeing, his lips mouthing an
unspoken "No!"  Clearly, he is looking into the late Twentieth Century
and seeing the film Roger Christian has made on his life, a sickly
sweet dose of mystical mouthwash.
     The guy couldn't have been this dull.  Screenwriters, Knut Boeser
and Piers Ashworth have stamped out his story with two cookie cutters.
One formats the "misunderstood ahead-of-his-time genius confronts
fathead mediocrities" scene.  The other limns the "seer sees woman; she
makes cow eyes at him" encounter.
     Both of these are bad, but the prophecies are worse.  Watch Karyo
rolling his eyes and struggling to pronounce an unfamiliar word:
"Hister ... Hilzer ..." and finally picking up a brush and painting a
red swastika on the wall.  Even believers impressed by this
unforgettable dramatic moment will be frustrated, though: the visions
of the future the film makers have the master seeing are concrete up to
1989 (Saddam Hussein's face floats in the sage's magic water basin),
and then ... abruptly cease, except for brief glimpses of what look
like Deep Space 9 outtakes.
     Amanda Plummer, for once playing a character with an IQ above 50,
generates a little energy near the end as Catherine de Medici.
Otherwise, the prophet penning the words you now read foresees much
greater happiness for those who spend their ticket money on other
films.

Title
Review for Client, The (1994)
     The third, and by far the most successful translation of a John
Grisham legal suspense novel to film.  A tough little trailer park
pre-teen named Mark Sway (Brad Refro) happens upon the suicide of a
mafia attorney and is almost instantly caught between mob hitmen and a
remorseless federal prosecutor (Tommy Lee Jones).  Mark shrewdly hires
himself a lawyer--and is lucky enough to get Reggie Love (Susan
Sarandon), a woman who has lost so much by surrender that she is now
willing to risk everything to win big.
     The story is at bottom just as hokey and nearly as piously
legalistic as THE FIRM and THE PELICAN BRIEF, but director Joel
Schumacher cannily finds the best in it.  He finesses the violence,
putting all of it off camera, and concentrates instead on character and
relationships, specifically the one between Mark and his damaged but
utterly determined lawyer Reggie--a part that Sarandon seizes with
joyful abandon.
     The film, particularly the first two-thirds, is filled with
wonderful setpieces: the opening confrontation with the fat, suicidal
lawyer (Walter Olkewicz) in his car; Mark's visit to a decrepit roach
motel of an office building, full of shady shysters; almost every scene
with Jones as U.S attorney "Reverend" Roy Foltrigg directing his
supporting crew of worried yes-men; and every confrontation between
Sarandon and Jones. (Jones essentially clones his character from "The
Fugitive"--and is every bit as much fun to watch as he was in that
film.)
     The director and screenwriters (Akiva Goldsman and Robert
Getchell) eventually get into trouble following the novel too
faithfully.  All those threats and atmospherics eventually have to pay
off in some kind of action scenes--and Grisham's books seem to have the
least resourceful assassins in the genre.  The letdown, however, is
almost welcome.  In what must be the most over-pyroed, over-stunted
year in the history of the medium, Schumacher sticks with people
instead of falls and explosions, and makes it work.

Title
Review for De eso no se habla (1993)
     The translation of the title doesn't convey the stuffiness of the
original.  DE ESO NO SE HABLA is more, "THAT IS NOT DISCUSSED."  The
reference is to the airtight hypocrisy of the seaside Argentine town
that is the setting of this astringent tale by director Maria Luisa
Bemberg.
     It is the early 1930s: the formidable widow Leonor (Luisina
Brando) refuses to accept the fact that her daughter Charlotte
(Alejandra Podesta) is a dwarf.  On one level, she's Mrs. Gump of the
pampas--"Short is as short does"--but in Bemberg's film the
mother's refusal merges serenely into a municipality-wide structure of
denial.  Everyone in the town systematically avoids discussion of all
unpleasant truths, from the mayor's idiocy to the existence of the
brothel where the entire male population spends every night drinking,
whoring, gambling and listening to scratchily recorded Carlos Gardel
tangos.  The agreement not to communicate is only disturbed when
Ludovico D'Andrea (Marcello Mastroianni) an emigre Italian who is the
only cultured or imaginative man in the town, falls in love with
Charlotte.
     Mastroianni is perfectly cast as the silver-tongued, gallant and
rueful expatriate Don Ludovico.  His presence and the richly detailed,
knowingly satiric period provincial setting both recall Fellini, but
the style is very much Bemberg's own.  The story, narrated by the voice
of an outsider whose identity is one of the film's better revelations,
has a slippery rhythm as catchy and pungent as one of Gardel's
plaintive hymns to love as screwy masculine self-absorption, love in
which the love object is nearly irrelevant.  Bemberg treats Don
Ludovico with affection, but doesn't let her affection for him spoil
her fun.
