Authors
Victoria Baschzok
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Platoon (1986)
Platoon: A film which confirmed its director, Oliver Stone, as the
legitimate heir to Leni Riefenstahl. As in Triumph Of The Will, false
mythology is created making nonsense of reality without seeming to use
manipulation or propaganda.
   Platoon presented itself as the first attempt to reconcile Americans
with what had happened in Vietnam by telling the everyday truth of how
soldiers experienced the war. It was indeed constructed to heal the still
suppurating wound inflicted on the greatest nation in the world by its
defeat in open combat at the hands of a small, poor, third world country.
   Stonešs method was built upon deceptively simple dramatic conflict. His
platoon was made up of a young, naive and well-intentioned officer who
commanded young, well-intentioned soldiers, including the naive hero,
Chris. The source of power in the group was a blondish, pale, beautiful,
gentle yet strong and wise sergeant. These people all believed in the
American dream and saw themselfves as victims of injustice. The source of
power in the company was also a sergeant-a senior staff sergeant. However,
he was dark-skinned, cynical, scarred and cunning. The first represented
the American ideal; the second was the devil. To be more exact, the second
represented a constant in American history-the traitor, Benedict Arnold in
modern dress, the man who believes that men of principle are weak, the
force of evil within each person and therefore within the nation. His
cynicism and crude interpretation of reality enable him to trick others
into temporarily betraying the American dream.
   The film rises through two successive apocalypses. The first ends with
the Christ sergeant being abandoned to a swarm of Viet Cong while the
company rises above him in helicopters in the care of the devil sergeant.
It is a false resurrection. A betrayal. We last see the good man who died
for them on his knees with his arms out as if on a cross. 
   In its final culmination of apocalyptic violence-a confused night of
smoke, explosion, light and sound-the platoon is defeated without the Viet
Cong becoming visible. They remain vague shadows in the trees. They can
not appear. In Stonešs mythology American is neither fighting Vietnam nor
defeated by it. America is struggling to defeat the enemy within itself.
The great and good people are attempting to cast out the devil. The early
morning reveal a wasteland of bodies , some half-alive. One is the devil
sergeant, another the naive hero. He executes the devil, thus freeing
America
   The film ends with his rising from the disaster, again in a helicopter.
In voice-over, Chris reflects as he is evacuated:
This is the true resurrection.
   Stone has vaporized the defeat by converting it into the caricature of
a morality play about a civil war. The would of defeat was converted into
a cathartic experience in which the American dream persisted.
Art heightens memory. As Riefenstahl demonstrated, propaganda can erase it
, as well as any sense of ethical reality. Stonešs visual manipulation
literally exorcised the publicšs memory of failure and of . In the
aftermath of Platoon, other films , such as The Hill, were made,
reflecting this new perception, and slowly the general manner in which the
whole war was treated softened and became positive.
