Authors
David Furtney
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Poltergeist III (1988)
     In June of 1988, the third and presumably final chapter of the
Poltergeist saga was released to both poor reviews and tepid box office
performance. Despite the fact that the film opened in the top five it's
opening weekend, it quickly dropped off. Poltergeist III picks up two
years after Poltergeist II: The Other Side. We find that Carol Anne
Freeling, 12, is now attending a school for gifted children with
emotional problems in Chicago. She is living with her aunt Patricia
(Nancy Allen),  uncle Bruce (Tom Skerrit) and step-cousin Donna (Laura
Flynn Boyle-her first feature film) in a brand new 100 story high-rise
which is chock full of mirrors.
     Carol Anne's psychologist at the school, Dr. Seaton, is trying to
help her via hypnotic regression sessions to remember the traumatic
events of her past. Seaton thinks that Carol Anne can somehow put people
under hypnosis themselves and make them think they see the supernatural.
That's how he explains away Carol Anne's previous encounters.
Unfortunately, because Carol Anne has always been clairvoyant, while
under hypnosis she unconsciously lets the evil Reverend Henry Kane and
the last few remaning spirits find her.
The ghosts then invade the mirrors in the highrise and begin to possess
people's reflections. Fortunately, the psychic Tangina Barrons returns
to help Carol Anne and her now surrogate family.
     The biggest problem with Poltergeist III is the fact that it is a
completely unnecessary sequel. The conflict in the original film was
never really resolved, so Poltergeist II, while not as good as the
first, al least was valid. Part III, on the other hand, merely invents a
story and tries to pass it off as a continuation and ultimately a
resolution to the "Poltergeist Trilogy." Another problem was that only
two members of the original cast returned: Heather O' Rourke and Zelda
Rubinstien. They, while very good, would have been very much helped by
the return of Jobeth Williams, Craig T. Nelson, and Oliver Robins.
     The music of Joe Renzetti was very eerie in this film, but it
lacked the familiarity of "Carol Anne's Theme" by Jerry Goldsmith. The
visual effects were very creative because they were all done live on the
set, but they just could not compare to the awesome optical effects in
the first two movies.
     The most intriging aspect of Poltergeist III is that it contains
the final screen performance of Heather O' Rourke, who died four months
before the film was released. She gave her best and most in depth
performance of Carol Anne in this film. After O' Rourke died,  MGM was
unsure and nervous about marketing the film using Heather's image, so
they cut facial views of her from the trailer and designed a theatrical
poster with no tagline. Only the back of Carol Anne is seen in the
poster, as she looks up at the tall highrise. In fact, the ending was
reshot after she died so a body double was used. Look closely at the
very last scene in the film and you will notice that her face is not
shown.
     Overall, Poltergeist III was not as good as the first two but still
remains eerie because of it's main star's untimely death. 
      www.angelfire.com/ga/poltergeist
