Authors
news@daily-bugle.newsops.execpc.com
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Bound (1996)
Sitting in the sole film criticism course I took years ago
in college, I was suddenly puzzled as a montage of great
moments of movie romance flickered on the screen in front of
me.  While the course didn't focus on a certain era of film,
I suddenly realized that all of the powerfully romantic
movie scenes that I had witnessed were primarily in the
movies of the 30's and 40's.  I thought about the scenes in
more recent movies where characters exhibited romantic
chemistry, and couldn't think of a single one where the
chemistry between the two characters was so great that it
overpowered me like the older films.  Recently, however, I
realized that the kind of powerful romance I thought was
missing in cinema was making a comeback -- there have been
many scenes in films I've seen since 1994 that have taken my
breath away with the amount of love and passion exhibited on
the screen.  The common thread?  All of those scenes have
been between two members of the same sex.
Early in BOUND, Violet (Jennifer Tilly) spots Corky (Gina
Gershon) in an elevator she's riding with her boyfriend,
Caesar (Joe Pantoliano).  The camera hovers at the top of
the elevator, showing an aerial view of the occupants:
pinned to different points in the elevator.  Later, Violet
brings coffee over to the apartment next door that Corky is
working on, to have her turn off plumbing equipment that was
making quite a lot of noise.  Soon after, Corky receives a
call from the landlord that Violet has accidentally lost an
earring in the sink.  Corky goes over, and what follows is
one of the most erotic scenes that I've seen in any recent
movie as Violet, flush with desire, seduces Corky using her
breathy voice.  There's no nudity in that particular scene
-- it combines the kind of seduction present in the great
noir of the 40's with 90's sexuality in a mix which managed
to affect me more than any other romantic moment in any
recent film about heterosexuals.
Next, Caesar walks in the room and shouts in bewilderment.
"What the HELL is going on..." and then stops, realizes that
Corky is a woman, grins broadly and apologizes.  In BOUND
there is constant play between the noir conventions of the
40's and the modifications necessary for the 90's Chicago
the film is set in -- BOUND takes the noir genre and puts a
refreshing new spin on it, without ever succumbing to the
cartoonishness or day-glo absurdity found in PULP FICTION or
one of its multiple knockoffs.  Larry and Andy Wachowski
have the camera move in grand, smooth gestures, as if
they're trying to be parts Welles, Scorcese and Coen. They
engulf their images in such dark, noir tones that if the
film were rereleased in black and white and a few outdoor
scenes were edited out, nobody would notice the difference.
If anything, BOUND is worth the price of admission for the
production design alone.
It's hard to believe that the Wachowski brothers were
writers on the 1995 abomination ASSASSINS, a film which
seemed to showcase tremendous lapses in its characters logic
throughout the script.  In BOUND, on the other hand,
everything makes sense, nobody is stupid, and mistakes
aren't made.  Instead, you see the characters wrestling
through a situation, all trying to find the cleanest way
out... and typically becoming trapped and failing after
taking "the best possible move".  The character of Caesar
seems at first to be a stereotypically stupid mobster: but
as the film progresses, the script treats him with respect
as he tries his hardest to logically wrest himself from the
situation at hand.  Violet also, at first, seems to be the
standard bimbo, the kind who falls in with strong
personalities and can be taken advantage of (by the villain,
typically, as a plot point): but as the movie progresses,
that couldn't be further from the way she is.  There's an
economy of bullets and gunplay in BOUND, and what could have
amounted to a fairly standard standoff and shootout is
turned into a drowsy and dizzying scene by some incredibly
well-choreographed camera movements and realistic gunplay.
I typically dislike "thrillers" of this sort, as they're
typically collections of cliche arranged slightly
differently than another movie, without character
development, suspense, or genuine surprises.  Without the
intelligence, passion and artistry the Wachowski brothers
put into BOUND, the same script could easily have been
modified to make the same sort of boring so-called "erotic
thriller" or Gen-X crime drama that span the shelves at any
video rental store.  Instead, the Wachowskis take the
conventions of noir and bring them new life, creating an
erotic, suspenseful and ultimately very exciting film.
Dave Cowen (esch@fische.com)
Eschatfische. ------------------------- http://www.fische.com

Title
Review for Big Night (1996)
"My brother is a world above you," says Secondo (Stanley Tucci)
to Pascal (Ian Holm) about his idealist brother Primo (Tony
Shaloub).  Primo makes subtle, authentic Italian food and
refuses to serve watered-down, traditional fare at his
restaurant.  "I'm a businessman," retorts successful but
commercial restauranteur Pascal, "what are you?"  One of the
many maddening things about BIG NIGHT is that we never do get to
find out who Secondo really is... and a lot more is missing as
well.
Primo and Secondo have come over from Italy in the 50's with the
dream of making it big in America by doing what they know best:
making the greatest Italian cuisine known to man.  After two
years of preparation, they've just opened their restaurant and
found that the patrons in the unnamed east coast city they've
settled in don't seem very interested in genuine Italian
cuisine, preferring instead the "spaghetti and meatballs" style
of "Italian" food available down the street at Pascal's
restaurant.  The bank has demanded a payment by the end of the
month on their loan, and the brothers don't have the money.
Pascal, in a seeming fit of goodwill, has recommended the
brothers' restauarant to jazz great Louie Prima to hoist the
brothers out of debt and into the restaurant spotlight.  BIG
NIGHT covers the boys on their quest to serve the greatest meal
ever on the last night their restaurant is open.  In doing so,
the film brings up the themes of brotherly love and the myth of
the American dream.
Unfortunately, the movie doesn't stick to that quest, instead
bringing in puzzling subplots about the romantic affairs of the
brothers.  Primo's affair with Ann (Allison Janney), a widowed
Florist, is cute but brings little to the plot.  Secondo's
relationship with his girlfriend Phyllis (Minnie Driver),
however, borders on the nonsensical.  Secondo refuses to make
physical advances to Phyllis, instead telling her that he wants
to wait until they are more financially secure.  Throughout the
film, Secondo ignores Phyllis, showing little attraction or
desire for her, and all of the exchanges between the two are
awkward.  We later find out that Secondo is having sex with
Gabriella (Isabella Rosellini), Pascal's mistress.  At the end
of the film, Secondo seems genuinely distraught that Phyllis,
after seeing Secondo and Gabriella together, wants nothing to do
with him -- something that I really had a hard time believing.
I don't mind not liking a character, but Secondo's motivations
in BIG NIGHT make so little sense that I truly had no idea why
he was doing the things he did.  It's not that his character was
an enigma, but that his actions are never adequately explained.
Later in the film, Secondo insists that he will stay in America,
after his brother reveals that he's lined up a job for both of
them at their Uncle's restaurant in Rome.  Why?  It's explained
only in the vaguest of ways.  While the plot expresses Primo and
Pascal's motivations clearly in the script, Secondo, the focal
character, wanders through the action making idiotic choices for
no explained reason.  Some of the most sympathetic characters in
film are shown as having made poor choices in life -- and it's
easy to sympathize with a character if they make a bad choice as
long as they had a good reason at the time to do so.  I don't
even mind characters who make completely arbitrary decisions
provided that the character's poor judgement is explained in the
film.  However, I get the feeling that Tucci wants us to
sympathize with Secondo, and to like him -- and other
individuals upon seeing the movie seem to have found him a
"likable" character -- but I found the character to be so
idiotic and unlikable as to spoil the rest of the film.
Ian Holm's portrayal of Pascal verges on the ridiculous.  Every
other word out of Holm is an obscenity filtered through an
obviously fake accent, and he comes off as being entirely
unconvincing as an Italian restauranteur.  The comedy in the
film is played as being extremely broad -- overstated reactions
are the norm (the "heavenly" reactions of those biting into
Primo's food are extremely overdone, and by the end of the film,
had me wincing every time any character had anything to eat).
Other than Tony Shaloub's sublime and noble Primo, the rest of
the characters have little depth.
While some of the food prepared by Primo looks truly delicious,
pictures of food are not enough to make me enjoy a film.  While
the static camerawork is acceptable, tracking shots and zooms
seem hesitant and jittery, strange for a film that lists a
Steadicam operator in its credits.
It seems equally strange for a movie that seems to value Primo's
sense of subtlety and richness in flavor of food so highly to
play the comedy in such an over-the-top way, to make only the
basest of observations on the topics it brings up...while
supplanting the film with shallow characters, little plot and
less than amazing camerawork.  So I ask the viewer of this
movie, as the choices this film makes seem less like Primo's
artistic virtuosity or Pascal's commercial mechanations, and
more close to the arbitrary decisions of Secondo, "What is BIG
NIGHT?"  To that, I answer, "confused" -- a quality that left me
with a bad taste in my mouth after the BIG NIGHT.
Dave Cowen (esch@fische.com)
Eschatfische. ---------------------------- http://www.fische.com
