Authors
Benjamin Edward Swire
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Crumb (1994)
     Terry Zwigoff's film CRUMB was the hit of this year's Sundance
festival (the Cannes of the independent film world), winning the
festival's cinematography award and Grand Jury prize for its category.
After seeing the film, Siskel & Ebert begged their audiences to flock to
the local theater and demand that the movie be booked....  Not bad for a
documentary whose subject masturbates to his own cartoons.
     CRUMB focuses on underground comic artist R. Crumb, most
recognized for his X-rated characters (Frits the Cat, Mr. Natural,
etc.) and the infamous "Keep on Truckin'" drawing which has made its
way onto mud flaps, coffee mugs and the like.  The film is essentially
made up of interviews with Crumb's family, colleagues, critics and
Robert Crumb himself.  What emerges is a dark picture of a dark man
whose art and life both border on the psychotic.
     Crumb's work took on its warped, explicit tone in the late 60's.
After experimenting with LSD, he began filling pages with the taboo,
forbidden urges and desires he found floating around his unconscious.  He
puts his darkest impulses out in the public for all to see, proudly
acknowledging rather than nervously concealing his deviant side.  For
better or worse, Crumb's artwork offers up his Id in a pure,
unadulterated form.
     For example, there is a story about a family of characters who
look and talk like the archetypal '50's nuclear family: Dad in his suit,
just home from work; Mother in the kitchen with her apron; Brother and
Sister in front of the TV, etc.  By the end however, Father has ordered
the willing daughter to give him a blow job while muttering things about
lollipops and candy canes.  Meanwhile, Mother has taken Jr. into the back
room and suited herself up in an S&M outfit complete with leather and
chains.  The punch line spoken from one parent to the other is "you know,
we really ought to spend more time with the kids."
     In the film, Robert Hughes, a Time magazine art critic, says he
feels that Crumb uses graphic art as social criticism, "exposing the
seamy underside of American consciousness," turning comics into a
"pertinent social portrait of politics, drugs and religion." Critics
such as Hughes defend Crumb's work as a necessary acknowledgement of
desires which exist and need to be recognized and dealt with rather
than suppressed, ignored, and allowed to continue existing in silence.
     Counterpoised to this viewpoint are perspectives such as the one
held by Trina Robbins, a fellow cartoonist. Robbins is adamant that
Crumb has gone over the line from satire to pornography.  She insists,
that "it is irresponsible" to put the types of desires Crumb deals with
onto paper.  It is between these two camps of necessity vs. obscenity
that much of the film's discussion of Crumb's work takes place.
     The brilliance of Zwigoff's CRUMB is that, like Crumb's work
itself, the issue is presented to the audience unadulterated.  Neither
side of the critical argument is particularly skewed or emphasized, and
both are allowed to articulate their opinions clearly.  The audience is
handed the responsibility of judging for itself.
     Rational judgement however, is pushed to its limits by the
emotional points which Crumb's artwork strikes.  For example, in
discussing Crumb's mock advertisement for canned "Nigger Hearts,"  (in
which clean-cut white kids yell enthusiastically for the product as
lunch) cartoonist Spain Rodriguez comments, "a knee-jerk reaction is
going to be 'yeah, he's a racist.'"  But, he continues, the comic also
turns the reader back on him/herself, leading to a consideration of the
origin of the racism, and eventually a confrontation of one's own
racist tendencies.  The issue of whether Crumb's work satirizes or
supports its racist, sexist content is debated throughout the film.  It
is not, however, the extent of the film's concerns.
     Normally the psyche is hidden beneath the personality, hidden from
the public sphere.  However, when dealing with a man who publicly
paints his psyche for a living,  Zwigoff's challenge was to find the
person lurking behind the psyche--the motivating force behind this
bundle of neurosis.  As a result of this search, much of CRUMB is
dialogue between the smiling Robert and his two brothers, Charles and
Maxxon.
     Robert, though a successful, fifty-year-old artist, still seeks
the approval of his older brother Charles--his original inspiration for
becoming a cartoonist.  "He made me feel worthless if I wasn't drawing"
says Robert of his older brother's influence on him as a child.  In
fact, comics were originally Charles' passion, and to be included,
little brother Robert got involved.  Thus began the rise of one brother
and the descent of the others.
     In adulthood, while Robert had drawn his way across the country,
ultimately settling in San Francisco, Charles had remained at home with
his mother since graduating high school.  At the time of the filming he
had not been outside in fifteen years.  In fact, Charles says he spends
most of his days sedated, rereading through his cluttered stacks of old
paperback novels.
     While reminiscing about their childhood ("Mom used to threaten us
with enemas if we didn't behave") Charles confides to Robert that as a
child he had to stifle the urge to "bash your head in with an axe" and
"put a butcher knife in your heart."  "Geez," says Robert without
blinking, that eerie smile still plastered to his face.
     The brothers' discussion topics range from masturbation to
suicide.  While sitting on a bed of nails, Maxxon, who dwells in some
sort of mental facility, smilingly speaks about his past need to molest
Asian girls.  Meanwhile back at home, Charles speculates about the effects
of his "lack of exterior stimulation."
     All three brothers speak of a lonely, friendless childhood made
all the more miserable by a bullying father and drugged out mother.          
Robert's adolescent feelings of alienation remain intact to date, but he
uses them as fuel for his work--allowing him a sense of revenge.  Still
bitter about the "football types" that laughed at him and beat up
Charles, Robert vehemently criticizes the society that holds them up as
an ideal.  He uses his work to reject the culture which he feels rejected
him.
     "I like the feeling of being removed from humanity," says Robert,
who takes every opportunity to make it clear that there is no love lost
between himself and the rest of the world: "Whatever's the biggest latest
thing, that's all they care about.  I get disgusted with humanity for
not being more intellectually curious about what's behind all that jive."
     Initially Crumb comes off as a spooky, withdrawn, misanthrope.
But then you realize that this man is screwing around with the very
boundaries of what society allows us to think--i.e., how far do you let
your fantasies roam before stopping them and labeling them as perverse
and unacceptable?
     CRUMB is a chronicle of a deranged man spending his life
confronting people with the deranged natures they spend their own lives
hiding.  For some this confrontation is an incredibly liberating
force--one which recognizes the darker, yet inherent, corners of the
mind and airs them out rather than repressing them.  Other people
however, consider these boundaries which Crumb so blithely disregards
to be the very foundation of our society and aren't as amused by his
disrupting sense of humor.
     In rejecting the boundaries of the public, Crumb places himself in
an odd position.  For he is attempting to live outside of the society
he lives within.  That is, he makes art depicting thoughts which
society forbids its members to have, hence he is on the outside. Yet at
the same time he places himself and his thoughts on display within that
very society which he has just placed himself outside of.  By
disregarding society's rules (via acknowledging those thoughts which it
demands remain invisible), Crumb forfeits the securities afforded by
those same rules--he opens himself to its condemnation.
     For instance, him saying "the only one I'd say I've ever been
in love with is my daughter Sophie," sends shivers through the audience
to whom he has just admitted masturbating to his own comics--such as the
50's domestic, father/daughter scene described above.
     The audience, while perhaps enthralled by his rejection of
cultural norms, still dwells and judges from within those norms.  Crumb
becomes a kind of outlaw hero--both condemned and admired for exposing
himself to his audience, flashing them his smile, and dangling his Id in
full view.

Title
Review for Losing Isaiah (1995)
     How much cash does it take to be a mother?  Stephen Gyllenhaal's
new film LOSING ISAIAH delves into the issues of motherhood and race
attempting to separate them.  But if one looks at all closely into what
the film has to say, it is apparent that underlying these surface
concerns is a quickly dismissed issue of class.
     While at times a bit heavy handed, occasionally going for the
easy tear-jerking moments, LOSING ISAIAH is a good film--solidedly
acted, well scripted, and skillfully directed.  It is however, exactly
what you'd expect it to be.  That may be good and that may be bad
depending on your taste, but if you have seen the previews or ads, then
you know exactly what you're in for.  The film knows its audience and
is aimed directly at sentimental viewers with an affection for
heartwarming/wrenching domestic tales.
     The story is about an African-American infant boy (played by cute
'n' cuddly Marc John Jeffries who inspires more "ahhs" than a tornado
in Kansas) abandoned by his crack-addicted mother Khaila (Halle Berry)
and ultimately adopted by the Lewins, an affluent white family.
     Three years pass, and after getting clean, Khaila wants her Isaiah
back.  The Lewin clan however, and especially Isaiah's new mother
Margaret (Jessica Lange), has inconveniently grown fond of the boy and
consider him an important part of the family.  They are after all, the
only family Isaiah has ever known.
     The battle which ensues for custody of the three-year-old traipses
across some volatile and controversial cultural lines--bringing to
the fore valid though contrary viewpoints from both sides of the
argument that "Black babies belong with black mothers."
     Yet while the surface debate concerns itself with the question of
whether motherhood can escape the boundaries of race and biology (as
opposed to being dependent on those very factors), the question which
gets no debate is whether the quality of a mother is determined by her
financial status.  For the film, the answer is unquestionably "yes."
     A major emphasis is placed on presenting Khaila to the court as
a competent mother.  Judging by the steps taken to achieve it,
competence in this film apparently depends upon one's decorating budget
and fashion sense.
     For when she is being prepared for her court appearance there
is a sequence of scenes (reminiscent of the A-Team preparing for the
climactic battle) in which all signs of her poverty are systematically
erased.  Her unkempt hair is redone in a corporate coif; in place of
sweatshirt and jeans, she is outfitted in a well-tailored suit accented
by a string of pearls on loan from her counselor; she is even relocated
from the friend's apartment in which she had been staying and provided
with more "respectable" housing (which she is promptly instructed to
decorate and repair).
     On the one hand, one can suppose that given the need to
convince the court, she needs to appeal to the aesthetics of the court
and its sense of propriety.
     But the affection for the facade is not exclusive to the
courtroom--Khaila is thrilled by the prospect of wearing real pearls
and the camera treats her initial courtroom appearance, the first time
we have seen the ensemble assembled, as if it were the second coming.
There is an utter absence of any sort of working-class consciousness.
The standards are the standards of the wealthy class, validating its
own aesthetic while condemning all else as inferior and
embarrassing--it is humiliating to be poor.
     The film makes no effort to address poverty except to equate it
with criminality and corruption.  "Why should I bother cleaning up,"
Khaila asks, "if someone is just going to look in, see what I've got,
and take it?"
     Beyond this specific impairment in the film's social vision, there
lies a more disturbing matter: the simplicity with which the film
ultimately treats the questions and issues it does recognize.  This
simplicity is both dangerous and damaging.  It is bound up in an idea
of entertainment as catharsis--a purging of emotions.  The idea is that
as one watches the Lewins cry, Khaila cry and Isaiah gurgle, all sorts
of emotions and energy will be stirred up ("I laughed, I cried, it was
better than Cats!" etc.).  By the time one is fed a resolution, all the
energy which was conjured up during the show is spent.
     While during the film one may be horrified by the injustice of
the court system, since it all works out in the end, that horror
evaporates with the credits.  Nothing is left to motivate the viewer
into action--for example to do something about the injustice of the
real court system.  In a sense, the make-believe solution to the Isaiah
dilemma has been substituted for a solution in the real world.  Rather
than a call to action, film becomes a $7 pacifier.
     The film responds to some of the most complex, and problematic
issues of our society by dismissing them with the vacuous simplicity of
"just say no" and "can't we all just get along?"
     Although it is undoubtedly a step forward to even attempt to
tackle this type of subject matter in a mainstream forum, in fact it
does damage to this same subject matter by trying to solve it in a
four-minute, spine-tingling, teary-eyed climax.
     Lurking behind the various cheap emotional tugs of LOSING ISAIAH
are extremely relevant social issues.  The film tries to take a good
hard look at the insane social imbalance which remains virtually
unscathed day after day, and for that LOSING ISAIAH deserves some
credit.
     Unfortunately, these issues are treated as simply another set
of loose plot lines--that type which Hollywood loves to tie up just
before the credits with a big hug and dramatic swelling of the
soundtrack (usually violins).
     Hello?  With apologies to Sherlock Holmes, swelling violins
solve nothing.  If you are going to acknowledge an issue, acknowledge
it and allow it some weight.
