Authors
Victory A. Marasigan
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Saving Private Ryan (1998)
SAVING PRIVATE RYAN
Review by Victory A. Marasigan
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
Steven Spielberg, the so-called Peter Pan of cinema, was thought to have
reached the pinnacle of his filmmaking career with Schindler's List, his
docudrama of the Nazi Holocaust. Critics declared that he had finally
grown up. Saving Private Ryan, his brutal examination of another aspect
of The Last Great War, solidifies this declaration once and for all.
After a brief modern-day prologue,Spielberg takes us to the open holding
area of a seaborne landing craft, where we are huddled with a group of
American troops. A closer look at these men reveals that most are young,
barely out of their teens. An air of dread hangs over all of them as
they sit there hoping for the best, expecting the worst. Those who
aren't vomiting look like they are a boat-rock away from doing so. Our
heartbeats quicken pace along with theirs as the announcement is made
that they will be exiting the craft momentarily. And once the landing
ramp opens on Omaha Beach, the worst hell ever filmed begins and does
not end for twenty-four nerve-jangling minutes.
Never before has the terror of war been depicted so graphically, and
never before has the
boundary between cinema and reality been dissolved so cleanly as in
these opening
moments. The sounds and sights bombard us with a jackhammer frenzy, and
try as we
might, we cannot stop ourselves from the urge to duck our heads. The
blood and guts are
terrifying, but not as terrifying as the reactions of these soldiers --
some of whom we saw in detailed close-up just before the invasion -- to
the surrounding carnage. What would you do if one moment, you were
talking to the guy next to you, and the next moment, his head looked
like an exploded watermelon?
Tom Hanks is introduced in this opening sequence as Captain John Miller,
whose ability to
lead under the toughest of circumstances is put to the test as he and
his men storm the
German opposition's bunkers. After the threat is neutralized and the
battle won, Miller
receives new orders from higher-ups on the military chain: to find and
retrieve a Private
James F. Ryan. The reason? Three of the four Ryan brothers have been
killed within the
past week, and the U.S. government will be damned if it will let another
death notice be sent to their mother. Seven additional men are assembled
to help carry out the mission, including The Brothers McMullen's Edward
Burns and Heat's Tom Sizemore. Giovanni Ribisi does an effective turn as
the crew's medic, as does Barry Pepper as their crucifix-kissing,
cool-headed marksman. Adam Goldberg and Vin Deisel (actor/director of
1997's Sundance entry Strays) make their own memorable contributions to
the company. The odd-man-out of the bunch is Jeremy Davies' (Twister)
Corporal Upham, whose inexperience in combat is reluctantly ignored by
Miller because of his fluency in German. As the film progresses, the
uninitiated Upham comes to represent the lost innocence of his fellow
soldiers, and by the end, we know how the others got to be the way they
are.
Many war movies have suffered from fundamental flaws in
characterization. The soldiers are usually drawn in two ways: as
vengeful, heroic adventurers or as weeping boys who are so scared all
the time you'd wonder how the hell they made it through boot camp let
alone through a single battle. The soldiers in Saving Private Ryan are
presented as real people whose anger and fear can constantly be seen
lurking just below the surface, even as they perform such heroic acts as
throwing bombs at a tank or firing on the enemy from the safety of a
bell tower. Anger, fear, and even relief drive the eight travelers to do
what they do. They are boys, yes, but the horror of war has clearly
hardened the skin on the outside. Only in the dead of night, when they
are in the safety of darkness and seclusion, do the soldiers' pent-up
longings for home come through.
The search for Private Ryan moves the story along as Miller and his men
traverse the
French landscape. Janusz Kaminsky's beautiful but inobtrusive camera
work is
showcased throughout their harrowing journey. Several shots illustrate
how unfortunate it
was that the American soldiers had to experience the grandeur of rural
France with a rifle
rather than a camera on their shoulders. Even the images of bombed-out
towns suggest the beauty which was once there.
Spielberg remains for the most part invisible in the film, but even in
the few moments when
his touch is apparent, it does not push the audience away. Take for
example, a sequence
where an approaching line of German tanks approaches heard but not seen.
The effect is
just as canny as the approaching T. Rex in Jurassic Park, and even more
scary. And the
tour de force action climax shows that his training as conductor of
films like Raiders of the
Lost Ark and Jaws has been put to good use. Everything Spielberg has
learned and
perfected over his 25+ year career as a professional filmmaker has
culminated in this, one
of the most viscerally engaging movies ever made.
The script, a truth-inspired work of fiction by Robert Rodat, is
well-paced and logically
sequenced. There are no clear resolutions or fully-bared souls, a fact
which may frustrate
audiences at first. One must realize that Hollywood has accustomed us to
distinct
morals--solutions real life are never so pat. When Miller and his boys
find the lost private
and don't get what they expect, they don't flip out or get angry.
Rather, they are
understanding, and the reason for their understanding is subtly revealed
in their subsequent
interactions with Ryan. Audiences may at first be put off by the
blandness of Private Ryan's character, but the film's finale drives home
the point that it does not matter that his character was so thinly
portrayed. The point is that he was a man, and that his life was just as
important as all those around him.
The emotions in the film are neither forced nor manipulated. There is
one wrenching
moment halfway through the film where the usually opaque Captain Miller
steals away and
sobs. It is an easy thing to make a filmgoer feel the pain of a gunshot.
It is not quite so easy to make someone empathize with a soldier's
dismay at the realization of what kind of
person he has become. Saving Private Ryan succeeds at both of these. It
is a testament to
Ryan's power that, even days after watching it, the film continues to
haunt. Who will ever be able to forget the image of a disoriented
soldier stooping down to pick up and carry away his severed arm? Think
of it: images like these have haunted WWII veterans for the last 53
years.
Reviewed July 24, 1998 at Loews White Marsh Theater, White Marsh, MD.

Title
Review for Thin Red Line, The (1998)
War movies haven't changed much in the short history of film. Even in
the best of them, the only real new wrinkle offered is the raised level
of gore which the audience is allowed to focus on. Sometime-director
Terrence Malick's The Thin Red Line, an ambitious new film about World
War II's pivotal Battle of Guadalcanal, attempts to take the war movie
to a fresh new level. It presents war as a 166-minute blank verse poem.
Given that Malick intended a different approach to directing his epic,
it's too bad that the film itself is an overlong, pretentious
head-scratcher. Malick meanders between disturbing imagery of his
soldiers in battle, and glowing National Geographic-style portraits of
the wildlife and regional fauna. A monotonous round-robin narrative
(voiced by a handful of the film's main figures) anesthetizes his
strange visuals . This sort of abstract pondering at the film's heart
creates a paradoxical situation: Malick tries to convey dream-like
meditation when his soldiers on-screen are operating at a more urgent
fight-or-flight level of consciousness.
The director seems to have been making things up as he went along,
hoping that somewhere in all of the footage he shot he might be able to
paste together a movie that would do service to its source material (it
was based on the book by James Joyce). This may be why so many "main"
characters seem to come under the camera's scrutiny, only to eventually
disappear without even a scream or a "Tell my wife I love her."
The few characters who appear long enough for us to appreciate come
saddled with clearly-outlined motivating ideals. Jim Caviezel is Pvt.
Witt, a wandering nature-boy who has a habit of taking breaks to enjoy
the scenery. Nick Nolte's glory-hungry Lt. Col. Tall is inscrutably
one-note in his selfish convictions. As the beleaguered Pvt. Bell, Ben
Chaplin spends most of the film in a serene daydream of his wife, who is
is single light at the end of a hellish tunnel.
Sean Penn as 1st Sgt. Welsh is billed as a main character (his screen
time and dialogue are more abundant than most of the other talent), yet
he like so many other players in the film doesn't leave a lasting
impression. A high celebrity-cameo factor presents another problem: It's
very difficult to concentrate when you're thinking about how much John
Travolta and
George Clooney (yes, they're in it too) got paid for their scant minutes
of screen time.
Where The Thin Red Line does succeed is in depicting tense,
heart-pounding battle scenes, especially in an extended sequence in
which the Americans attempt to cut through long grass to take out the
Japanese enemy's bunkers. The scene is not as bloody or explicit as the
similar invasion in Saving Private Ryan, but the hold-your-breath terror
is just as
effective.
Malick's innovative spin in presenting this conflict is not a weakness
in itself. Francis Ford Coppola was able to successfully present war as
lucid dream with 1976's Apocalypse Now. With a confident hand and a less
non-commital attitude towards the subject matter, Malick may have been
able to make a film which is truly cerebrally-transcendent. In its
present form,
The Thin Red Line fails to provoke coherent thought or connect the
viewer with the stark reality of war. Malick has essentially performed
the cinematic analog of a prefrontal lobotomy.
Reviewed January 12, 1999 at Loews White Marsh Theater, White Marsh, MD.

Title
Review for Entrapment (1999)
Victory's World: Movie Reviews
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
There must be a stipulation in Catherine Zeta-Jones' contract which
says that her face must be lit so that her eyes twinkle in every shot
in which she appears.  In Entrapment, the flashy follow-up to her
breakthrough role in The Mask of Zorro, there is nary a scene in which
she doesn't look like a team of makeup people just powdered her nose.
Zeta-Jones is Gin Baker, an eager insurance investigator who sets out
on an impossible mission of sorts to catch master art thief Robert
MacDougal (Sean Connery, in a variation of his escaped con role in The
Rock) in the act.  After tracking him down in London, Baker offers the
aging entrepreneur a sweet deal: he'll aid her in the theft of a
jeweled gold mask at an art exhibit and get a share of the profits
from its sale.  Of course, the sexual tension in their strange
partnership starts building immediately, giving rise to plenty of
boring romantic scenes during which the audience can go to the
concession stand and get refills on their popcorn.
Is Baker setting MacDougal up for a fall, or is she just as cunning
thief as he is?  An even more pressing question: Will director stop
teasing us with his cheesily non-revealing shots Zeta-Jones in the
altogether?  Will we see the liver-spotted skin (ugh) of Mr. Connery
mixing it up with own Ms. Zeta-Jones' own Ivory-soap bod?  Do we dare
keep our eyes open to find out?
Admittedly, when hokey romance isn't getting in the way, the film is
fun to watch.  With its expertly executed heists and sometimes
heart-poundingly tense quandaries, Entrapment actually manages to
reach an adequate level of excitement.  In one memorable scene, Gin
performs a ballet-like navigation of a room criss-crossed by invisible
lasers, moving with the same caution Tom Cruise evoked when he did his
Peter Pan impression in Mission: Impossible (It's probably no
coincidence that M:I's Ving Rhames appears in a supporting role as a
comrade of MacDougal).  But even with all the film's meticulous
dissections of the art of thievery, certain ponderous aspects of their
skill seem to be taken for granted. For example, do all master thieves
have the ability to zip in and out of the tightest places without
being seen, the limits of their own agility and the laws of physics
notwithstanding?  How do the hell do they do this?
Interestingly, the objects of the thieves' passion -- the artworks
themselves -- are given very little scrutiny.  The script never allows
the characters to explain what their fascination is with the pieces
they steal.  Instead, a little more than halfway through the film,
MacDougal and Baker become greedy bank robbers who'd rather go for the
big score than collect priceless masterpieces.
When all's said and done, and the credits roll over the film's
aw-shucks ending, you're left with the echoes of a few cheap thrills,
and also with the idea that there wasn't really that much to be
excited about.  The thieves' nifty gadgets (not to mention their
acrobatic stunt doubles) are the real stars here.  And they hold their
own quite well, considering that Zeta-Jones' face tries its very best
to hog screen time.
Reviewed April 27, 1999 at Sony Valley Center 9, Reisterstown, MD.

Title
Review for At First Sight (1999)
Traveling architect Amy (Mira Sorvino) meets hunky, sexy-voiced masseur
Virgil (Val Kilmer).  Said masseur turns out to be blind.  Amy falls for
Virgil, and within what seems like a week of their first meeting, she
suggests he have his blindness "corrected" with an innovative surgery in
New York City.  Is this love?
At First Sight is just the sort film Hollywood thinks it can pull off
and not seem condescending. What filmmakers more often than not fail to
realize is that it is virtually impossible to succinctly capture the
full scope of the life of a blind person.  You can have an actor stand
there and flail his arms around, but that doesn't make him blind.
All of the lessons on vision that are espoused in the film are
overshadowed by syrupy melodrama and on-subtle preaching. Among the more
unnerving aspects of the film is the fact that Sorvino's supposedly
protagonistic my more often comes off as disruptive to Virgil's life
than helpful. For most of the movie, she's more blind than he is. Even
after the tacked on happy ending, we feel that Virgil would have
probably fared better learning on his own rather than escaping away with
his fawning client.
Besides Amy, many other secondary characters act with unbelievable
insensitivity towards Virgil's unique situation, including the doctor
(Bruce Davison) who helps restore his sight (Come on, what idiot doctor
lets a camera crew shine its lights in the face of a man whose never
seen before!). These ironies in characterization are, of course, the
intent of screenwriter Steve Levitt, but does he have to force it down
our throats?
Granted, the film may prove enlightening for some, if more for the
discussions on sense and perception it will provoke than for what
actually transpires on screen.  How do blind people manage to live their
lives? Should we feel sorry for them or not?  At First Sight works best
when it addresses ideas of the infinite suddenly becoming finite, of the
undefinable being
defined.  If there is a lesson to be taken away from it, it is that we
shouldn't feel sorry for the blind, because what they lack in sense is
made up for by a truly unique experience.  And that can be much better
than what we really see.
Reviewed January 27, 1999 at Loews White Marsh Theater, White Marsh, MD.

Title
Review for Simple Plan, A (1998)
A Simple Plan is a taut, gripping thriller-drama about a pipe dream
which becomes reality...and then strips three unsuspecting men of their
innocence.  At the film's outset, Hank Mitchell (Bill Paxton) considers
his life acceptable, if not spectacular.  He has a loving wife, a baby
on the way, and he's respected as a member of his midwestern community.
There may be hints of a strained relationship between him and his
hyuck-hyucking older brother Jacob (Billy Bob Thornton), but it's
nothing either of the boys feels deserves discussion. If asked, Hank
probably wouldn't consider changing a thing.
Hank's content perspective on life is skewed when, along with Jacob and
his brother's slovenly buddy Lou (Brent Briscoe), he discovers a crashed
puddle-jumper carrying over $4 million.  "No one's looking for this
cash," rationalize Jacob and Lou. "Who's gonna know?"  Hank, the only
one of the trio with an education and a steady job, tries to fight the
notion of keeping the money.  After some goading from Jacob and Lou,
Hank opts to store the cash and see what happens.  It isn't long after
taking the money home that Hank begins to feel his conscience
weakening.  But it's already too late.  Murphy's Law has already gone
into effect.  Before the boys can even begin to appreciate the
life-changing heft of their "lucky" discovery, an innocent man is dead
and people are talking.
Thornton's performance as Jacob is probably the best thing about the
film, laying to rest any post-Sling Blade doubt that Billy Bob is a
great actor.  Jacob is a simple man, a social outcast with with no
dreams to pursue.   His slow toothy drawl betrays his lack of
"book-larnin'," but some of the things that come out of his mouth
indicate a sharp if underused intelligence.
Director Sam Raimi, best known for his bizarre Evil Dead horror series,
is for once aesthetically subdued in his direction.  His camera seems to
care more about the actors on the screen than their visually brilliant
surroundings.   Perhaps this is because the director realized that the
way in which the three men's situation spins out of control is thrilling
in itself, without fancy cinematography getting in the way.  The
sheet-white nothingness of thesnow-covered town adequately illustrates
the moral void these men must traverse.
As another tale of money and murder in the snow, this film is sure to
breed comparisons to the well-crafted murder-and-money flick Fargo.  But
A Simple Plan works on a different level, addressing issues of family
discord and individual self-worth throughout its shocking story.  By the
time poor Jacob woefully asks his brother, "Do you ever feel evil?" it's
clear this film is no Fargo rip-off.
Only towards the end of A Simple Plan are we reminded that we're
watching a movie.  The final act plot twist is all too contrived and
convenient. Thankfully, it leads to a compelling ending with logical
implications.  When all is said and done, we are left with the notion
that sometimes what's best for us is what we already have.
Reviewed January 25, 1999 at Loews White Marsh Theaters, White Marsh,
MD.

Title
Review for Shuang long hui (1992)
Victory's World: Movie Reviews
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
Jackie Chan kicks his way into Van Damme territory with Twin Dragons,
an embarrassingly bland action comedy of mistaken identities.  Chan
plays separated-at-births Boomer and John Ma, whose drastically
different paths...
Aw, forget the plot description, it's not even worth the space.  But
let's face it.  No one goes to Jackie Chan movies for the plot anyway.
The Scenes Where Nothing Happens in Chan's films have always been
little more than glue thriftily spread to hold the action sequences
together.  In the case of Twin Dragons, however, the tiresome
plot-driving scenes fritter away so much of the movie that you almost
want to shout (at the risk of demeaning the artistic value of cinema),
"Get to the good part already!"
Most of the film is devoted to showing the brothers' efforts to hide
the other's existence from their own acquaintances.  Why it is
necessary to do this is not satisfactorily explained, but neither are
a lot of aspects of the plot.  The twins' love interests, demure
club-singer Barbara (Chan-film regular Maggie Cheung) and lusty
bride-hopeful Tammy (Nina Li Chi), get disoriented in all the
brouhaha, yet strangely seem not to mind that they are not sure which
brother they are in love with. The scenes describing the boys'
bumbling antics get stretched so thin we stop caring who Chan is
supposed to be in any given shot (In several shots, in fact, even the
make-up and hair people seem to forget which brother is which.).
Even Chan's so-corny-it's-funny humor is off-kilter in this outing.
Some of the gags are so carefully innocuous they're annoying.  A case
in point: whenever anyone sees the brothers together, they fall to the
ground in a dead faint.  Are we laughing yet?
As usual, the final showdown is the film's jewel, a tour de force
display of Chan' s agility and grace.  Never mind that it's not clear
how the brothers end up fighting suited bad guys inside an automobile
crash-testing facility.  It's all good fun, but too little too late.
Perhaps Chan's next movie should just be a collection of the last
fight sequences of all of his movies.  They could call it Jackie
Chan's The Final Fight Scenes, and everybody would go home happy.
Reviewed April 14, 1999 at Loews Theaters White Marsh, White Marsh, MD.

Title
Review for Shakespeare in Love (1998)
SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE
Review by Victory A. Marasigan
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
There's an old teaching that says that everything a writer writes, no
matter what his outward intentions, is ultmately the story of that
writer's own personal struggles. That reasoning seems to have been the
foundation of Shakespeare in Love, an infectious romantic comedy whose
charm sneaks up on you, and which easily ranks as my favorite film of
1998.
All is not well for Will Shakespeare (Joseph Fiennes), whom we see here
as a young, struggling London playwright. Though he still owes one
theater-owner a play, he promises his services to another (Geoffrey
Rush), a man whose creditors aren't above using torture as payment.
Adding a kink to Will's situation is the fact that he's been unable to
write a satisfactory line of prose in who-knows-how-long (His
pseudo-psychiatric apothecary's explanation? Lack of a love life).
With moneymen breathing down his neck, Shakespeare begins writing and
casting his new production, Romeo and Ethel, the Pirate's Daughter,
without any idea of what the play will really be about. A troupe of
actors -- all men, since women were not considered fit for the stage --
is hastily assembled to fill roles as Shakespeare comes up with them.
The exhilarating trials and tribulations of putting together the play
(eventually to become Romeo and Juliet) are the focus of director John
Madden's cinematic treat.
To reveal the details of the plot here would be to ruin the film,
because part of the fun of Shakespeare in Love is in discovering
familiar story points and picking up on Bard-related inside jokes. I
won't even say how young Will falls in love with the beautiful Lady
Viola (played with a perfect British accent by Gwyneth Paltrow), or how
their forbidden union leads to Shakespeare's triumph with Romeo and
Juliet. Nor will I divulge how the fate of Will's rival Christopher
Marlowe (Rupert Everett) predicts moments from not one but several of
the Bard's later plays, including Hamlet, Julius Caesar, and MacBeth.
There is an inexplicable joy to be had in watching Will toiling away at
his desk with a feather pen, while the ink blackens his fingertips.
Though your typical teenager would quickly say otherwise, Shakespeare
did not write his plays so he could torture countless generations of
high schoolers. His initial reasons for becoming a writer were probably
no different than those of your average modern-day wordsmith. Shakepeare
in Love boldly suggests that something more than an itch to tell stories
and a basic need for survival began his creative streak, something much
simpler and more human.
At the same time that the film asserts that Shakespeare's writings were
inspired by events from his own life, it presents his story as the Bard
himself may have written it. Writer Tom Stoppard and Marc Norman have
meticulously combined moments of high comedy, deep tragedy, and action
for action's sake into a layered spectacle not unlike many a
Shakepearean play.
All-around great performances will have you clapping for an encore.
Fiennes and Paltrow have put just the right amount of oopmh into their
portrayals, something which I hope the Oscar nominations do not
overlook. Judi Dench's deliciously ascerbic portrayal of the Queen
Elizabeth I is good for some of the film's big laughs. And as out-
of-place in this
production as he initially seems, Ben Affleck leaves a surprisingly
positive impression in his minor role as the famous thespian Ned Alleyn.
Historians and scholars be advised: Shakespeare in Love is as much the
true story of the Bard as IQ is the story of Albert Einstein. But for
the film's two hours, the illusion which has been so carefully crafted
is so appealing you wish that it really had happened. To the average
high school grad, the film is a breath of fresh air, like a past due
reward for paying
attention during English class.
Reviewed December 17, 1998 at Loews White Marsh Theater, White Marsh,
MD.

Title
Review for 10 Things I Hate About You (1999)
Victory's World: Movie Reviews
http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~vmaras1/reviewsidx.html
Young Kat Stratford is Padua's resident evil ice queen.  Bianca
Stratford is her seemingly more down-to-earth younger sister.  Bianca
has caught the attention of Cameron, a gawky newcomer who endeavors to
court her the first time he sees her.  Cameron's quest for Bianca has
hit a snag: her father won't allow her to date.  With some prodding by
his daughter Bianca and her hopeful suitor, the patriarch of the
Stratford family slyly agrees to a deal knows he'll never have to
honor: Bianca can date when Kat dates.  Fearless, Cameron takes on the
challenge of making the apparently incorrigible Kat fall in love with
someone.
Sound familiar?  It should, because 10 Things I Hate About You, a
comedy from director Gil Junger, is a thinly-veiled adaptation/homage
to Shakespeare's The Taming of the Shrew.  This version of the story
takes place amongst hip teens at Padua High, a fictional public school
in Seattle.  Given the kitschy premise, it's surprising that 10 Things
manages to be a funny, endearing movie on par with Clueless or even
Fast Times at Ridgemont High.
The "shrew" in this retelling is played with infectious energy by
newcomer Julia Stiles.  As the angel-in-witch's-clothing Kat, Stiles
gets to be both wicked and gentle, slowly revealing the lovelorn
softie behind her character's rigid mask in fleeting, satisfying
emotive bursts.  The guy responsible for Kat's transformation is
Patrick Verona (Heath Ledger), the long-haired loner who has
reluctantly accepted money to date her.  Ledger seems a virtual clone
of Marky Mark Wahlberg, with a soft-voiced Aussie accent substituted
for Bostonian.  Oddly enough, Stiles and Ledger have a charming
on-screen chemistry, even when she's throwing up on his shoes.
Joseph Gordon-Levitt ("3rd Rock From the Sun") is pitiful -- in a good
way -- as Cameron, the transfer student whose simple plan to date the
lovely Bianca (Larisa Oleynik) backfires messily.  He's
unintimidating, his voice cracks just a little bit, and he looks like
he's never dated anyone his entire life (Try to picture Ryan Philippe
playing the same part and you get a hint of the wisdom of 10 Things'
casting directors).
The thematic elements of The Taming of the Shrew -- the social
conditioning of women, family politics, the gender battle of wills --
have been nicely updated for a modern audience.  This contrasts
starkly with 1996's William Shakespeare's Romeo & Juliet, whose
too-strict adherence to the text practicially negated the story's
relevance to the film's ultra-modern setting.  Junger and writers
Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith have made their characters and
story engaging enough that the original Elizabethan-era inspiration
seems more of a noteworthy suggestion than a direct influence.
Here is that once-in-a-blue-moon instance of a film whose fresh cast
is able to carry the film in spite of a totally predictable plotline.
Had a more recognizable, older crop of actors (read: Jennifer Love
Hewitt, James Van Der Beek, or anybody on the WB Network) been chosen
to fill the lead roles, this film's tried-and-true teen-movie cliches
and stock characters would probably be harder to stomach.
The actors not only look like real teens -- they talk and act like
them as well.  Though there are winking dialogue references to the
original source material sprinkled throughout, the script for the most
part shuns the "Dawson's Creek"-inspired trend of having young
characters talk like post-collegiate philosophers.  Let's hope that
Hollywood gets the drift that teens need not be portrayed by actors
who cop adult attitudes and radiate squeaky-clean winsomeness to be
appealing.
Reviewed March 24, 1999 at Owings Mills General Cinema, Owings Mills,
MD.
