Authors
Cameron Shelley
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Braveheart (1995)
In retrospect, I should have seen Mel Gibson's Braveheart when it was
out in theaters. Having failed to do that, however, I finally got
around to renting it a couple of weeks ago. Unfortunately, seeing this
film on the small screen with a single, little speaker did not produce
the sense of epic grandeur that this film obviously aimed at. After
all, these big budget, star-studded, action-packed period flicks are
all about dressing up, talking funny, and grinding the mad-cow beef of
evil into the mincemeat of justice! (Yes, I've been watching "The
Tick," but I do think that these film epics work with the basic
emotions or not at all.) It's interesting, isn't it, that just having
Mel Gibson in a picture makes it count as "star-studded?"
Braveheart does indeed work on the "basic" emotions, love, anger,
lust, and loathing mostly. William Wallace is an angry young man,
fresh from a tough childhood and tempered by a continental education.
Onscreen, we witness the obligatory childhood traumas that will
explain why Wallace is such an unyielding guy: His father is
treacherously murdered by the English, hung from the rafters of a
barn. After this, we know his life will be dedicated to making life in
Scotland as miserable as possible for the English occupiers. At his
father's funeral, he meets Murron, his future wife. They are both mere
youngsters, but the focus on their brief interaction assures the
viewer they will be together soon. What we aren't shown are his
subsequent travels on the continent with his relatives, where he picks
up French, Latin, and a civilized intellect. Upon returning to
Scotland, Wallace elopes with Murron (to avoid the egregious law
enacted by King Edward that gives the local English noblemen the right
of "first night" with new brides) and professes a desire to raise some
kids and some crops. Fat chance!
Getting the character development out of the way like this did not
provide a very compelling opening for the movie. Basically, almost
every B-grade martial arts flick begins with a similar sequence: The
evil warlord burns down the young man's village, murders his parents
(with an option to rape his sister and shoot his dog), and then waits
20 years for the young man to grow up, master Kung Fu, and come to get
him. Braveheart's developmental sequence is not so trite, but it
shares the property of getting any character motivation fixed early so
that the audience can just sit back and enjoy the kicks, punches, and
witty banter. This is fine for B movies, but I think it is ultimately
counterproductive in Braveheart.
There are other options. You could use flashbacks, or possibly just
have characters refer significantly to past events and let the actors'
reactions speak for themselves. If I recall, Rob Roy used this latter
technique quite well to explain why Rob was so stubbornly honorable.
In any case, the setup makes the rest of the plot feel rather
inevitable - the way events unfold seems relentlessly foreordained,
which becomes annoying during a picture with a three hour runtime.
Wallace is understandably angry when the English murder his doomed
wife, and unswervingly pursues them with an army all the way to York.
Frankly, the simple inflexibility of his character made Wallace's
constant occupation with "freedom" seem more like an idee fixe than a
noble frame of mind. At a guess, I would say that the character of
Wallace was written to be ambiguous: either a zealot the way the
English and Scottish nobles saw him, or a sympathetic patriot the way
the Scottish commoners saw him. It is difficult to play a sympathetic
zealot, however, and I think the problem was that Gibson sometimes
sounded like a zealot while acting like the sensitive, heartthrob
type.
While I'm complaining, I'll just add that I found the handling of
Robert Bruce a bit bothersome too. I appreciate the contrast between
him and Wallace: Wallace's father died early and inspired his son,
whereas Bruce's father clung unnaturally to life (or so it appeared)
and served only to poison his son's spirit. Freud would certainly be
nodding his head knowingly at Bruce's predicament - sons must separate
from their fathers to have a healthy adulthood. But the half-shift in
focus from Wallace to Bruce late in the film was distracting in nearly
inexplicable, at least if you didn't already have some idea of the
role the actual Robert Bruce played in Scottish history. In
Braveheart, Wallace's execution, Christlike, redeems Bruce from his
role as a Scottish Judas and shows him that he must carry on the good
fight. But Bruce's introduction and development are accomplished
somewhat laboriously by simply having the camera follow him around
here and there. When this is finally over, Bruce becomes more
interesting and ultimately extracts himself from the backpocket of
King Edward, changing himself from a leaf in the tide to a leader.
This review does little justice to the good points of the film, but
most other reviews I've seen (and they've been out for a while now
too) do an adequate job of this, so I figured some criticism was in
order. As a spectacle, Braveheart is well executed without being
stagey or treacly, and the battle scenes, I think, epitomize this
quality of the film. But the general lack of depth in the characters
is made too apparent by a conventional development and some
unfocussed, lingering direction. Better to see it on the screen,
perhaps, where you can always enjoy the setting when the pacing
wanders a bit.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-1211 x2555
         Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle>
             CEL: http://cogsci.uwaterloo.ca/>

Title
Review for Face/Off (1997)
Face/Off is an action picture in which everyone seems to have "hit
their stride." Furthermore, it shows that an interesting premise can
enliven any movie, even one embedded in such a notoriously
formulaic genre.
Face/Off concerns the fortunes of two arch-nemeses, Castor Troy
(Cage) and Sean Archer (Travolta). Castor Troy is a violent but very
intelligent sociopath who wants to screw the world for what he
imagines it did to him. Archer is an Elliot Ness for the nineties, an
agent of the secretive anti-terrorism squad of the FBI, who wants most
of all to visit upon Castor Troy the pain he suffered when Castor shot
little Michael Archer to death six years earlier. In an all-out slugfest
and shootout in the first act, Archer finally captures Troy, but only
after Troy has planted a chemical/biological bomb somewhere in
downtown Los Angeles. With the clock ticking, Archer must find
some way to turn an apparently Pyrrhic victory into a real triumph. In
desperation, he attempts to save the situation by taking on Castor
Troy's identity, which includes an operation in which both their faces
are removed so that Troy's face can be literally grafted onto Archer's
body!
Although he meets with initial success, Archer's plan goes badly awry.
He is sent to the same prison as Castor's brother Pollux (a throwaway
reference to the Roman/Greek brothers of the same name) and
wheedles the location of the bomb from him. In the meantime,
however, Castor awakens from his coma (induced by his capture in act
I) to find he has no face. He calls in some goons, forces the doctor to
give him Archer's face and then murders everyone who knows about
this super-secret, identity-swapping operation. Troy and Archer have
completely changed places. Describing events from this point on could
become rather tortuous, so suffice it to say that Troy and Archer now
have a unique opportunity to walk a mile in the other's shoes and to
employ a new and unfamiliar set of resources to deal with each other.
The identity-swapping premise works surprisingly well, and at several
levels. First, it cleanly motivates the action of the picture by placing
the two main characters in such direct conflict. After Archer escapes
from prison (in Troy's persona), he wants his old identity back, but
Troy (in Archer's persona) likes being in control of such powerful FBI
resources and so prefers things the way they are. Second, the premise
allows the two men to explore each other's turf. Archer, not
surprisingly, finds the underground world of terrorism and
drug-dealing extremely distasteful, but also strangely compelling. For
his part, Troy finds Archer's workaday life bizarre and comments,
when driving through Archer's neighborhood, "I am in hell." Third,
the not infrequent fistfights constantly present the audience with the
rather disgusting prospect that someone's face will literally fly off
their head!
Fortunately, this premise is seldom overextended and the
presentation of various "dualities" doesn't pretend to a greater
significance than it can sustain. Instead, the basic conflict gives rise
to many well-choreographed action sequences, played out amid a hail of
bullets, pigeons, and religious backdrops. The movie also apparently
includes the boat-chase scene that Woo could not fit into Hard Target.
In fact, Face/Off has much of the look of Hard Target, right down to
the intercutting of slow-motion into the fast-paced scenes, and the
affected intrusion of all those damn pigeons! Also included is a
many-cornered standoff scene adapted from Leone's For a Few
Dollars More, complete with closeups of people's eyes shifting. The
result is a very watchable blend of style and pacing.
Another distinct plus for this film is the acting of the principle
characters, particularly Nicholas Cage. The contrast with the
somewhat bland Cameron Poe of Con Air is quite noticeable. Cage is
as convincing as could be expected for a character caught in such an
outlandish predicament, looking genuinely terrified out of his wits at
the prospect of being locked away as Castor Troy for the rest of his
days. Travolta too puts in a good performance. Playing cool but
psychotic criminals is now old hat for the action flick, and Travolta
certainly can't be accused of not playing to type.
Even with all the high-octane gunfire and chase scenes, Woo has
clearly proceeded thoughtfully. It is a given, of course, that the good
guy will win in the end, but the means of Troy's downfall is kept in
the dark until the late innings and not telegraphed right off the bat.
Naturally, a small detail gives the villain away, but several candidates
are raised in the course of the film and made the subjects of
misdirection. While not rivetingly suspenseful, this sort of attention
to detail is very gratifying. Overall, Face/Off is an interesting and
stylish piece of moviemaking, and definitely sets the mark for action
pictures this summer.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
Dept: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/PHIL/cpshelle/philosophy.html>

Title
Review for Lost World: Jurassic Park, The (1997)
Review by:
       Cameron Shelley -- May 25, 1997.
Review URL:
       http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/Reviews/tlw.html
Cast:
       Jeff Goldblum (Dr. Ian Malcolm), Julianne Moore (Dr.
       Sarah Harding), Richard Shiff (Eddie Carr), Vince
       Vaughn (Nick Van Owen), Arliss Howard (Peter
       Ludlow), Pete Postlethwaite (Roland Tembo), Vanessa
       Lee Chester (Kelly Malcolm), Richard Attenborough
       (John Hammond). 
The Lost World: Jurassic Park gives the distinct impression of
being part sequel and part remake. I think it is largely
disappointing in either respect, although it does noticeably
worse as a sequel than as a remake. Let me explain. 
There are, of course, no fixed criteria according to which a
movie constitutes a good sequel to another one, but TLW does
meet the minimal requirements. Many of the same characters
(or their equivalents) from Jurassic Park return to face the
results of that film. But aside from story continuity, one might
expect a sequel to develop some of the themes raised in the
original, or introduce some new ones. Any such development
in TLW is purely incidental. In the original JP, the dinosaurs
of Isla Nublar served both as a cautionary example of the results
of greed and crass commercialism, and as reminders of how to
lead a life in accord with the dictates of nature. The result was
not really a convincing lesson so much as a warm, fuzzy
feeling, but at least these themes were used aptly to tie the
narrative together into a coherent whole. In TLW, Spielberg
picks up these themes again, but in a purely repetitive way. The
crass commercialism has been transfered from John Hammond
to his shifty nephew Arliss Ludlow, while the exposure of
nurturing talents is transferred from Dr.s Grant and Sattler to
the dinosaurs themselves (most notably the T-rex) which have
been running loose on Isla Sorna (Site B) the whole time. Dr.
Malcolm makes a return visit, and some attempt is made to
explore the nurturing side of his nature, but this element drops
out abruptly around the middle of the movie, after his daughter
drop kicks a Velociraptor (shades of Gymkata)! Of course, no
one expects much themewise from a big budget, effects picture,
but the attempts made in this picture are notably haphazard and
half-hearted. Sequels don't have to be played from the same
hand as their predecessors; something more original would
have almost certainly been an improvement. 
In other respects, TLW works best where it almost constitutes
a remake of the original. The first act of the movie revisits
much of the look and feel (and story - with some insertions
from the original novel) of JP and seems to land Spielberg in
his element, with the result that he recreates much of JP's
suspense and excitement. The timing, direction, and special
effects were generally very good and fastened all eyes on the
screen. (The sound was a bit of a drawback - more on that later.)
Spielberg clearly realized that he could not draw out the
exposure of the audience to the dinosaurs as much as in JP, so
he switched to presenting more dinosaurs doing more things -
good move. Scenes were smoothly and deftly linked by simple
but effective use of visual continuities, and the frequent facial
closeups made the events more involving than they might
otherwise have been (although this last technique started to
look mechanical later in the film). This first part of the picture
works well at the level of an amusement park ride (in fact, I
believe the Universal Studios ride based on TLW is already up
and running), with the humans going from chasing the
dinosaurs to being chased by them. Lots of suspense, some
action, no drama. Ok. 
But with the exit from Isla Sorna, the movie completely
changes tone and coasts home. Roland Tembo, the big game
hunter who leads Ludlow's dinosaur salvage operation, bows
out; a shame, as he was the most interesting and best rendered
character in the film. Two live T-rex (a juvenile and its parent)
are shipped to San Diego to be part of a glorified carnival
exhibit. Suspense goes out the window in favor of a comic
carnivorous romp through various neighborhoods of San
Diego. The comedy works at a superficial level: The audience
recognized and laughed at the car crashes, the fleeing humans,
and the numerous little movie in-jokes. In the first half, people
were marked for death due to their moral failures; now they die
for a quick laugh. This aspect of the TLW is the biggest
letdown compared with JP. In JP the comedy was subtler and
fundamental to the development of the plot, whereas here it is
manufactured and attached with duct tape. But even without
considering JP, the second act of TLW succeeds perhaps too
well as a burlesque of the first act, and inadvertently plants the
suggestion that TLW is just like any generic B movie, but
distinguished by a monster budget. 
As a sideline, I should add that I saw TLW in a cineplex
without the DTS sound system. Unfortunately, it appears that
Spielberg is distributing the movie in only this sound format,
with the result that the sound as I got it lacked some depth. In
an effects picture, this is an important consideration.
Moviegoers should either seek out cinemas with the DTS
system, or take umbrage at this odd (grasping?) commercial
tactic and avoid TLW altogether. 
Anyway, although TLW features lots of technically excellent
effects and direction, it also features a story that lacks basic
coherence and eventually even undercuts itself. TLW does
best where it recreates the sense of menace and spectacle from
JP, but fails as its attempts at independent development simply
turn into diversions. 
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
Dept: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/PHIL/cpshelle/philosophy.html>

Title
Review for Star Trek: First Contact (1996)
[Note that followups are directed to rec.arts.movies.current-films and
rec.arts.movies.startrek.current only, not to rec.arts.sf.movies.  -Moderator]
Star Trek: First Contact (Paramount)
Whereas the previous film, Star Trek: Generations, was
very like a mediocre TV episode, Star Trek: First Contact
(ST:FC) was more like a competant episode from the
Next Generation TV series. Most likely we have director
Jonathan Frakes to thank for that. Frakes certainly seems
to be in his element here, and deserves credit for making
this movie an enjoyable spectacle. Visually, this film
works well, matching the feeling of entrapment and
restriction with the darkness of the Borg-controlled areas
of the ship, the ceiling-height shots of armed patrols
passing through the corridors, and the feeling that being
in orbit is like just starting to fall a very tall cliff.
Although the premise of the film is not especially
promising (more on that below), it is really a film for the
director and actors to lose, and they don't. Being in the
director's chair relieves Frakes from having to "act," so
that Cmdr. Riker can just sit in the background and
smirk at events in the foreground, such as Troi getting
drunk or Cochrane turning up the tunes in his
spaceship. The lead actors, namely Stewart, Spiner,
Woodard, Cromwell, and Krige all perform well to
admirably, although Stewart is the only one allowed to
show any depth of character (but not too much). The
effect is enjoyable and without surprises.
Where ST:FC tends to fall down is the writing. The plot
itself is mildly irritating where it is allowed to intrude
on the events on screen. The difficulty starts with the
tried-and-thoroughly-boring device of time travel.
Remember Roddenberry's injunction, at the start of the
ST:TNG TV series, that the Enterprise wouldn't be
allowed to exceed warp 10 because it had become such an
overused ploy to create tension and plot movement? A
similar moratorium should be placed on time travel (or
at least time machines) right away! Five minutes into
the film, I found myself asking why it was that the Borg
had to fly to Earth, and into the teeth of a Federation
fleet, to travel back in time when they could have done
it far away from Earth with complete impunity?
In fact, the easy recourse to time travel exposes a
fundamental problem with the character of this film.
Besides being a crutch for weak plots (as in ST:Gs), time
travel allows ST to scratch its metaphorical itch for
self-examination. Part of the reason Star Trekkers travel
back in time so much is for the cheap thrill of witnessing
history. Having achieved perfection (as we are repeatedly
assured by the characters on screen), the only place to go
for excitement in the 24th century is the 20th century (or
the 21st, in a pinch). Time travel is the ultimate form of
tourism, borrowing adventure and novelty from events
for which the outcome is safely assured. The problem
with this habit of borrowing is that it makes "genuine"
novelty superficial.
Looking around the scenery, we can see the kind of thing
Picard apparently means when he says that the challenge
in the future is to "improve oneself." Dr. Crusher is now
a blonde, the new Enterprise looks different from the
previous ones, Jordi has some even funkier eyeware
than before, Picard can hear the Borg singing, Data can
turn his emotion chip off, and the Starfleet uniforms are
a little different. Some borrowing is justified, eg, the
"Alien"-like look of the Borg collective, the spacewalk
on the bottom of the saucer section (compare with the
spacewalk in ST:TMP), and maybe even the cameos from
the Voyager TV crew, but the combined effect is too
much. The narrow focus on history and cosmetic change
make ST:FC seem like an ongoing "trvia challenge"
sometimes.
The writers are certainly aware of this problem.
Cochrane (who is known from the original ST series as
the inventor of warp drive) is worshipped in the 24th
century as an icon of virtue but is portrayed as a drunk, a
lout, and a would-be Casanova. Some humor is made by
contrasting his real personality with the myth that has
evolved afterwards. But Cochrane is safely domesticated
by the end of the film. Inadvertant self-parody is
achieved when the mysterious "aliens" prophesied by
the Enterprise crew turn out to be---the Vulcans! Was
there every any doubt? The film leaves us with the cozy
image of something both the characters and audience
already knew would happen.
In a nutshell, ST:FC is a mixed bag. The acting and
direction show that there's life in the old girl yet. The
story, however, is a failure by the same consideration.
Roddenberry used to say that ST was about issues: sex,
war, justice, and so on. Now ST is about ST, and ST:FC is
an enjoyable and largely empty experience.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-1211 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle>

Title
Review for Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery (1997)
By rights, Austin Powers: International Man of Mystery
shouldn't work nearly as well as it does. The very idea of
a James Bond spoof written and acted by Mike Myers
forbodes an old, one-note idea stretched further than it
will really go to fill out a long 90 minutes. The selection
of a '60s theme could have brought on a saccharine
appeal to baby-boomer nostalgia. The obvious
comparison is with a turn-of-the-decade Saturday Night
Live sketch, with a two-minute premise turned into a
ten-minute yawner. Say, wasn't there a SNL sketch (10
years ago or so) that featured a TV panel discussion show
of James Bond's arch nemeses on "How to kill Bond"?
("When you have Bond, just shoot him!")
But Myers has fashioned himself a winner with this one.
The plot, of course, is ludicrous. It begins in 1967, when
Austin Powers is a fashion photographer/secret agent
who's smashingly popular with the screaming girlie set -
despite his bad teeth. Austin's arch-nemesis, the
aptly-named Dr. Evil (that's Dr. Evil - he didn't spend six
years in evil medical school to be called Mr. Evil!) gets
sick of having his schemes foiled and places himself in
cryogenic suspension for thirty years, when he figures he
can make his dreams of world domination come true
without Austin's infernal interference. But British
Intelligence places Austin in suspension too, pending
Evil's return. In 1997 both are defrosted to meet again on
the field of international intrigue. But, naturally, the
world has changed a great deal in their absence.
Of course, all this has basically been done before, most
notably by Woody Allen in Sleeper, and Casino Royale,
as well as various Star Trek episodes. For that matter,
humor at the expense of outdated underground figures
goes back to the various take-offs of Key Largo done on
such sketch comedy shows as Wayne and Shuster before
Myers was born. Much of the comedy has obvious
antecedents as well. Joke names such as Basil Exposition
(who fills Powers in after his unfreezing) and Alotta
Fagina (who, uh, is also involved in warming Powers
up) are reminiscent of Hot Shots, while numerous
winking spoofs of Bond movie cliches (Evil tries to kill
Powers by lowering him into a pool of bad-tempered,
mutant sea bass - the proper sharks being too scarce in
the '90s - with an "unnecessarily slow dipping
mechanism") might have come out of Police Squad or
Get Smart.
Fortunately, though, Myers gives APIMM a life of its
own. Despite being caricatures come to life, both Powers
and Evil are brought to the screen with a lively but light
touch. Despite being seriously warped, both characters
muddle through the same silly problems as the rest of us
- albeit writ large sometimes. (This is where they clearly
differ from characters like Tom Baxter from Purple Rose
of Cairo.) When either character is displaying his absurd
side, we have more normal characters on screen to
observe reacting appropriately, e.g., Vanessa Kensington
and Scott Evil. Jokes are seldom pushed beyond their
limits, so the laughs are natural and not often forced.
And the jokes come from many sources: anachronisms,
movie and TV spoofs, in-jokes, sight-gags, as well as
broad physical comedy. Since they are not solely empty
slots in a Bond film parody, Powers and Evil take on all
these roles without difficulty. But even as Powers and
Evil become more human, Vanessa, as played gamely by
Elizabeth Hurley, becomes more like her
Moneypenny-ish mother as she inevitably falls for
Powers. The result is a pretty good balance of
opportunities for humor throughout the film.
APIMM is also a decent piece of film-making. In
particular, the music and costumes add a great deal to the
impact of the movie. Myers, as usual, does play to the
camera, but always to punctuate a scene and not simply
to beg for laughs. (Well, one or two of Power's "Yeah
baby!"s come over a bit forced.) Here, his tendency to
mugging for the audience stands him in good stead.
There are a handful of awkward moments when the
pacing lets down, but not enough to complain seriously
about. For the most part, APIMM delivers.
It is encouraging to see Mike Myers developing his
strengths as a comedian beyond the narrowly parodic
Wayne's World movies. In an era that has seen several
poor outings by SNL alumni, we can hope that another
Steve Martin is beginning to emerge.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
Dept: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/PHIL/cpshelle/philosophy.html>

Title
Review for Anaconda (1997)
Anaconda is a challenging film to review, since little of any
substance appears on the screen. It is an intensely silly
picture that could probably be adequately discussed during
screening, without missing anything vital. I say this with
some assurance, since several movie patrons appeared to be
doing just that while watching. In fact, Anaconda, I think,
invites exactly that reaction.
According to Variety (I think it was), the end of April is
basically dead-time for the movie box-office - what with
people feeling impoverished over their tax returns and
such. The cruelest month is also the most financially
depressing for the studios, and has, to all appearances,
leveled off films like Volcano and everything else wedged
into the gap before the advent of big summer blockbusters
like Jurassic Park II. Anaconda, however, squeezes
comfortably into the early spring time slot. This film is not
for the ambitious movie-goer out to treat his (or her) eyes to
a piece of cinematic brilliance. No, this film is for the
recently defrosted slacker with five bucks burning a hole in
his (or her) pocket!
Considered formally, the film only has two things to offer:
    1.The black guy (Danny) doesn't get killed first! In fact,
       he survives the whole picture relatively intact.
    2.The chick (Terri) doesn't twist her ankle at all!
Other than that, things are pretty much as you'd expect. A
pretty stereotypical documentary crew goes out on the
Amazon with a snooty, British presenter to film some
mysterious natives. In a setup arranged by their captain,
they pick up a Paraguayan ex-priest (Sarone) who's really in
it for the big snakes. He incapacitates the film crew's leader
(Steven) and leads the gang down the wrong tributary -
with horrendous results! That's pretty much it. Why the
setup? Who knows!
The centerpiece of this movie is not, in fact, the 40 foot
snake, but rather Jon Voight and his B movie acting. He
sneers, smirks, slimes, and slouches across the screen,
delivering his silly lines with real gusto, and all in that
stupid accent! No matter how bad, no scene or bit of
dialogue receives anything less than all the over-acting it
deserves. Opposite him, Jennifer Lopez does a creditable job
of maintaining an air of solemnity (without panic) and
keeping a straight face. To Llosa's credit, I suppose, the
movie focuses on the interaction between these two
characters, leaving the snake on the sidelines for most of
the time. (Except for one or two sequences, the anaconda
itself seems like little more than an "innertube with an
attitude." 

Insofar as there is one, I suppose the moral is that if you
have five bucks and a taste for the ridiculous, then
Anaconda may well be for you. If you are also one of those
people who is repulsed by snakes, so much the better - you
might actually get a kick out of the reptilian sideshow. But
remember, the real reptile is that Sarone guy! Frankly, I
don't think I'd trust him at all, even out for a little gopher
hunt. He probably knows where there are some "real" gophers....
-----
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-1211 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle>

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
The Fifth Element is a hard movie to pin down. Perhaps
the best way to describe it is as a collage of sights and events
organized (if that is the word) around the mission of an
unlikely hero to save the world. For me, at least, watching
TFE had the quality of a daydream, or the fantasies sparked
in adolescent years when reading a comic book. Like a
daydream, the sequence of events makes little sense upon
later reflection, and like an adolescent fantasy, the characters
are drawn from a small stock of simple and familiar types.
But it is the "sparky" aspect of TFE that is most obvious.
Scenes, jokes, and plot devices fly off energetically and
disappear in almost all directions. This is probably what has
prompted so many reviewers to compare TFE to nearly
every other science-fiction movie they've seen. Certainly,
TFE does have a kind of borrowed look. The hovering cars
are reminiscent of Blade Runner, the glowing ball of evil
and the cabbie hero of Heavy Metal, the Egyptian aliens of
Stargate, the farcical police of Brazil, and on and on. Plenty
of action-adventure cliches get screen time as well -
although I think the 3-D car chase scene was pretty good
and deserves credit for originality. But Besson seems
neither to parody nor plagiarize these earlier films. TFE is
simply a pastiche of their more obvious attributes. If you
consider collage to be good art, then TFE could be
appealing; otherwise it will probably seem to be just
pointlessly contrived. My own view is somewhat in
between: I don't get the impression that Besson is just
rehashing used material from the genre, but neither does
his profligate use of such material seem coherently ironic
or tongue-in-cheek. To a large extent, it is all just there.
In any case, Besson does his borrowing pretty well. The
scenery, gizmos, and aliens are generally lively and
eye-catching. The costumes too are interesting and
appropriate. The inscrutable and somewhat maladroit
aliens, the Mondoshawan, have big, clunky environment
suits to stomp around in. The belligerent (and stupid)
Mangalores dress and act like rhinos, at least when not in
disguise. And the bizarre talk-show host, Ruby Rhod, looks
and talks like a sped-up version of Prince with his hair on
amphetamines. And, of course, there are many gorgeous
women in various states of dress and undress. These
characters, and the special effects associated with them,
succeed in holding the viewer's attention and interest
while on screen.
Generally, the acting is also good in the sense that it is
energetic and appropriate to the task. Jovovich, in fact, puts
on a good performance as Leeloo, the genetically perfect
human sent to Earth by the Mondoshawan to save it from
the big evil ball from another dimension. Her role is one of
the naive innocent thrust into a fallen world she naturally
doesn't understand, which she delivers with a sort of
girlish enthusiasm. Gary Oldman also deserves credit for a
deftly greasy turn as the evil industrialist Zorg, who is in
cahoots with the evil ball itself (we know this because the
ball gives Zorg a phone call, calling itself "Mr. Shadow"),
while Chris Tucker goes "over-the-top" portraying the
shrill and mincing Ruby Rhod. At the center of all this is
the character of Korbin Dallas, as mailed in by Bruce Willis.
Willis's performance is often flat (as opposed, say, to
understated), a problem which may be caused by the
similarity of Korbin to most other characters Willis has
played since Moonlighting. Whereas TFE's other
borrowings are generally superficial and lightly handled,
Willis's self-plagiarism comes off as plodding, at least
when there are no babes or firefights to distract attention
from him.
The roughest point of the movie, though, concerns the
plot. Certainly, action-adventures aren't supposed to be
intellectually challenging, but the plot of TFE is
inexplicably arbitrary even for its genre. Every 5000 years, a
big evil ball shows up and menaces the Earth. Every 5000
years, the Earth is saved from the evil ball by the
benevolent Mondoshawan, using the four elements of
earth, air, water, and fire, and a mysterious Fifth Element
(Leeloo). But the Mondoshawan change the plan, with the
result that in 2300 they fail and humanity must be bailed
out by genetic engineering and a heroic cabbie. No
motivation for these intricacies is offered, nor do they
make much sense in retrospect. Well, the Mondoshawan
do actually offer their motivational motto, "Time is
nothing, life is most important," (here they sound like ad
men for Pepsi) upon arriving three hundred years early,
killing an Egyptologist for knowing too much, and then
taking off with Earth's only means of defense. Yeah,
thanks. Attempts to moralize intrude awkwardly from
time to time, as when Zorg nearly chokes to death on a
cherry, or when Leeloo learns about "war" and suddenly
wonders if humanity is worth saving. Fortunately, Korbin
saves the day by declaring his love for Leeloo. Oddly,
Besson seems to really want to make a meal of this
last-minute complication, but only gets well-deserved
snickering from the audience. TFE does alright in the use
of the future to parody the present, but it can hardly claim
to be an exploration of serious issues such as war, love, or
the rather suspect notion of "perfection" in genetic
engineering either.
TFE is carried by its energy and surface appeal, but it is a
precariously thin surface. Having borrowed so heavily
from other works, Besson risks having his film already
eclipsed by its predecessors as well as its successors. The
next big effects-driven, science-fiction picture may indeed
finish the job. As Bruce Willis said, in reacting to some
negative reviews of TFE, "The written word is going the
way of the dinosaur." Presumably, then, the next picture
with an even larger ratio of effects budget to writing budget
will be even better!
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
            CEL: http://cogsci.uwaterloo.ca/>
Dept: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/PHIL/cpshelle/philosophy.html>

Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
Con Air is a strange marriage indeed. It combines the criminal
chic movie recently updated by Quentin Tarrantino a la
Reservoir Dogs and Pulp Fiction with the heroic but tragically
mistreated military man brought to us only last year in
Bruckheimer's The Rock. How can you put together a basically
moral, sympathetic hero with a bunch of America's worst
criminals and have the audience like them all, all at the same
time? The answer, as Con Air shows, is to just do it - embrace
the incongruities!
The plot centers around the misfortune of one Cameron Poe,
an ex Army Ranger, who is sent to the bighouse for killing a
man who attacked his pregnant wife. So unfair!!! After serving
his time, Poe is loaded onto a US Marshalls Service flight for
transport home. As chance would have it, that flight is also
filled with some of the worst criminals currently warehoused
in the US prison system - all on their way to a new
mega-maximum security facility. Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom
leads the cons in revolt and takes over the plane. Poe's
homecoming is irrevocably delayed!
The plot setup for this film is certainly its worst element. A
good deal of time is essentially wasted at the outset of this
picture, during which Poe's character is elaborated. Poe, of
course, is going to need lots of equipment for his flight, so he is
gifted with special training with the US Army Rangers (twice
decorated, if I recall), a very strong but easily bruised sense of
loyalty, and a secure place in society (his lovely family). An
eight year prison term brings him completely up to spec. Each
of these details is laboriously presented and remarked upon, as
if they might be difficult for the audience to understand. Such
an introduction, if better handled, would be appropriate for a
more complex character and I can't help but wonder if there
was originally some intention to make the movie a little more
suspenseful, to make Poe's choice of what to do on the plane a
little more difficult, but there is never really a moment's doubt.
Although Poe and his wife make a couple of remarks about his
"problem" - an overweaning pride or something - nothing
much materializes out of this particular thread.
The criminal mayhem wreaked by Cyrus and his many cronies
gets the movie up to action speed and maintains it for much of
the remainder of the picture. Each of the criminals set free on
the flight comes from a familiar mould. Cyrus seems to be
something of a cross between Jack Nicholson's Joker and the
Unabomber, and is brought to the screen via the standard John
Malkovich performance a la Mitch Leary from In the Line of
Fire. Garland Greene is an obvious imitation of Hannibal
Lector, although Buscemi wisely steers clear of outright
impersonation. You get the idea: a hit parade of murderers,
rapists, etc. Fortunately, each of these characters is played
knowingly and energetically and it is quite clear that no one is
taking them seriously. Even the long-suffering Poe, who could,
in theory, easily end up dead on this flight just shrugs as he
helps the cops and his friend get out alive, making only the
observation,
Funny how that happens! The various policemen chasing the
escaping cons also know their parts. Duncan Malloy is a rabid
DEA G-man whose solution to everything is fast cars and a hail
of gunfire, whereas Vince Larkin is the sandal-wearing
college-boy who quotes Dostoevsky but has a stout heart.
So, everyone knows which side of Con Air's bread is buttered,
and most of the movie is spent listening to amusing dialog and
observing the planes and bullets flying and stuff blowing up.
Perhaps to make up for its slow start, the movie concludes with
no less than three action-packed endings! First the plane
crashes at Lerner field, then it crashes again in Las Vegas, at
which point the action switches to a fire engine which then
crashes elsewhere in Las Vegas. The crashes are spaced out by
lots of chasing, fighting, gunfire and explosions. (Something
about Nicolas Cage and Las Vegas...I don't know.) Finally, there
is the inevitable and thankfully brief reunion between Poe and
his wife and daughter. Anyway, Bruckheimer has taken the
basic elements of the action picture and simply put more of
them on screen. The presentation is generally deft, efficient,
and effective, making Con Air a serviceable entry in the action
picture genre.
The action is interleaved with some occasional attempts at
suspense, as when Poe's true, good intentions are nearly
exposed in flight, and when Greene is given the opportunity to
murder a small child. Suspense aimed at Poe is brief and
quickly comes to nothing, whereas Greene's encounter with
the little girl threatens to wreck the tongue-in-cheek feel of the
whole movie. Fortunately, Greene does not murder the girl
and the whole episode is made subject of an awkward joke, but
it does serve to demonstrate the frailty of the movie's
understanding with the audience. As if to remind everyone of
this tacit agreement, the movie ends with Greene enjoying an
umbrella drink at a roulette table, followed by portraits of the
main cast members smiling for the camera as the credits roll.
"Just kidding, remember!"
In a recent interview, Nicolas Cage remarked that he did Con
Air because he feels he hasn't perfected the art of the action
picture. Well, Con Air certainly has more explosions, gunfire,
and chases than, say, The Rock (but "that's just a rock"), and
Cage plays a tougher character in this one. I'm not convinced
that such changes represent progress, however, even for the
action picture genre. Con Air is a competently professional
piece of work, but plays out a very thin and limited concept
without leaving Cage with any obvious avenue of
development. Mind you, if he does end up playing Superman
next year, he'll be able to endure even more insults and
explosions than he did in this outing.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
Dept: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/PHIL/cpshelle/philosophy.html>

Title
Review for Liar Liar (1997)
Better late than never, right? It was with some misgivings
that I went to see Liar Liar. Physical comedy and "low"
humor make good entertainment when done right, but I
don't have a strong wish to sit through 90 minutes of fart
jokes and pointless slapstick, nor do I need to pay to see
people simply acting like idiots. Jim Carrey's recent
offerings (and let's face it: movies with Jim Carrey starring
are "Jim Carrey" movies, not "action-adventure films",
"chick flicks", or "courtroom dramas") have been less than
inspiring in that regard. But, I confess, my misgivings were
misplaced - Liar Liar was worth the trip.
In LL, Jim Carrey plays a lawyer, Fletcher Reede. Of course,
lawyers are an easy target for humor, beginning with the
fact that the words "lawyer" and "liar" are so similar
phonetically. This little pun is exploited right off the top of
the movie - not a good sign. But LL manages to steer clear
of the easy and resentful humor usually directed at this
target. Fletcher is simply a guy whose success has gone to
his head, to the extent that he has lost the love of a good
woman and is now losing the affections of his son through
inattention. The fact that Fletcher is a lawyer isn't
particularly important in this respect, although it certainly
provides an excellent means for throwing his flaw into
sharp relief. So, LL ends up as a mixture of two types of
story: (1) a romantic comedy in which Fletcher is in danger
of permanently losing the love of Audrey (his ex) and Max
(his son), and (2) a slapstick in which Fletcher is in danger
of losing his chance at a partnership in his law firm due to
a comic and, for a lawyer, devastating flaw, namely an
inability to lie.
The first story is rather flat but, fortunately, mostly serves
to set up the second. Specifically, little Max, after being
disappointed by yet another broken promise from his
father (to attend his fifth birthday party), makes a wish that
his father would be unable to lie for just 24 hours. Well, as
the candles are blown out, a mystic wind brushes through
the curtains and makes the wish come true - and at about
the worst possible moment for Fletcher who is planning on
running some whoppers up the flagpole in court the next
day. Frankly, the results could hardly be described in words.
Fletcher is robbed completely of the ability to tell even the
smallest lie and begins, literally, to wrestle with the truth.
Carrey's unique and bizarre antics, expressions, and
delivery go to good use here. Instead of merely flailing
away like an imbecile, Carrey appears to be possessed by a
demon bent on destroying him in the most painfully
funny way possible. Each social, sexual, and professional
(but truthful) faux pas results in the appropriate contortion,
slap in the face, or fall to the floor. These fits appear so real
that Carrey can sell things like beating himself up with a
toilet and getting the laugh. There is, of course, lots of
parody of the office and courtroom settings, which generally
works well enough. But the movie also has a few moments
of high comedy - particularly a battle Fletcher picks with a
blue pen. In his desperation to lie, Fletcher picks a blue pen
up from his desk and tries to say "This pen is red." (I was
hoping for "This statement is false," but that would be for a
different movie.) He cannot, although he nearly ties
himself in a knot trying to do it. In a shot that would make
Peter Sellers proud, the pen then takes control of Fletcher's
hand and, perhaps resenting his attempt to misdescribe it,
returns the favor. Fletcher loses the struggle and emerges
with the truth written all over his face, in blue ink: "This
pen is BLUE."
Regrettably, but inevitably, the slapstick story starts to run
out and the romantic comedy begins to take over. In the
last twenty minutes or so, the two plots seem to struggle for
control. Fletcher wins his court case, in spite of the truth,
on a technicality. But he now realizes that justice has
hardly been served. Having been made to face the truth
that he's "an inconsiderate prick," Fletcher gets himself
fired, and ends up in jail while speeding to stop Audrey
from flying away to Boston with Jerry and Max. Serious
stuff. But after being bailed out, Fletcher impersonates a
piece of luggage and chases down Audrey's plane on the
runway using a mobile stairway gantry. In the final scene,
Fletcher and Audrey get back together. It wouldn't do to
complain too much about the unremarkable, romantic part
of the story despite its occasional intrusiveness, since it
serves to make Fletcher a sympathetic character. Otherwise,
he'd probably just seem to be pitiably insane.
Each story comes with a moral. First, people need to lie. LL
displays this point in an apt comic style, without preaching.
Second, self-deceit can make good things look bad, and vice
versa. The "vice versa" comes from Audrey, who
convinces herself that flying away with the wrong man is
the right thing to do. But this theme doesn't merit much
scrutiny or screen time. (Playing opposite Jim Carrey must
be intimidating. Hopefully Maura Tierney will get a better
chance to display her own acting abilities.) In combining its
two stories, LL works pretty well because it gives Jim Carrey
a chance to do what he does with a sympathetic, rather
than an asinine character. Certainly, lies and deceptions are
themes that can be revisited many times, if it's done well.
cpshelle@watarts.uwaterloo.ca - Phone: (519) 888-4567 x2555
        Me: http://watarts.uwaterloo.ca/~cpshelle/>
            CEL: http://cogsci.uwaterloo.ca/>
