Authors
Ryan Maves
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Fifth Element, The (1997)
"The Fifth Element" is a fairly decent sci-fi flick by Luc Besson,
Frenchman and creator of other such timeless epics as "La Femme Nikita"
and "The Professional". After some coin-flipping, my girlfriend and I
decided to go see this instead of "Austin Powers". Following some cajoling
of my roommate and another friend, the four of us made our way to the
theater. And this is what we thought.
In short: nice try. "The Fifth Element" is a spectacular-looking movie
with a great soundtrack, but things drop off abruptly after that. Besson
seems to have borrowed its plot from a grade-C fantasy novel I read in
junior high. Not to rob the viewing audience of the thrill of seeing it,
this is the essence of the storyline:
Every 5,000 years, the stars align properly to permit a black hole to
form, unleashing an ultimate Evil with a Capital E that immediately heads
out to destroy life, specifically life on Earth. A band of good aliens
left a weapon on Earth long ago (in Egypt) to destroy this evil; this
weapon is formed out of the classical four elements (wind, earth, fire,
and water) which are united around a mysterious "fifth element". Don't
worry, all of this is explained using lots of little words in the first
five minutes of the film.
The film opens in Egypt in the early 20th century, at the tmeple where the
weapon is stored. The good aliens show up (to say "hi", I suppose) but are
driven away when Luke Perry (I'm quite serious), an archaeologist's
assistant, blows his top and starts shooting at them. They take the
weapon's components away with them for safekeeping until Evil returns.
In any case, the appointed time arrives during the 23rd century, and the
good aliens are unfortunately prevented from personally delivering the
weapon by some evil aliens known as Mangalores. Only "the fifth element"
survives the crash of their ship, and it is taken to Earth to be restored.
What is this ultimate weapon? It is an anorexic supermodel, Milla
Jovovich, who escaped from the Eart authorities to be rescued by formal
elite soldier and current cabbie, Bruce Willis. And you know you're in
trouble when Bruce Willis is the best actor onscreen for the first thrity
minutes or so.
Better acting, in the form of Gary Oldman, arrives soon. Gary is an evil
industrialist who wants to capture the weapon for some reason or another.
He pursues the Willis-Jovovich duo relentlessly as they quest across
planets to retrieve the remaining components of the weapon. En route,
Milla discovers that humanity is capable of great destruction (gasp!) and
that love will keep us together (awwww...).
This movie has, it must be said, moments of greatness. The action scenes
are great, the effects are stunning, and all in all Besson has created a
stunning and rich world out of his mind's eye. It's sad, though, that the
best parts of the film are the parts when (a) no one is saying very much,
and (b) no one is thinking very much. The revelations made in the film
(war=bad, love=good) are about as profound as my breakfast, and the
underlying "mythology" of an ultimate Evil and the four elements are ideas
that any two-bit writer could have scribbled on a bar napkin at 3 AM after
drinking a few stiff Manhattans.
Oddly enough, I think this movie deserves to be seen. It is a great
sensory experience, particularly the backgrounds, effects, and the great
soundtrack by Eric Serra. (Warning: it does look "French". The soldiers
even wear berets.) The impact of this film could be lost on video, so
shoot for a matinee.
