Authors
Martyn C Winkler
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Crash (1996)
        David Cronenbergs newest creation, the intriguingly dark CRASH, is
probably one of the most controversial films in today's cinemas. Until its 
release nationwide Friday, March 21, it was uncertain if the film would be
released at all in the United States, due to Ted Turner, the owner of Fine
Line Cinema. Turner has repeatedly stated that he hates the film and
thinks it is nothing more than pornography. Many people agree fervently
with his point of view. On the opposing side, however, many greatly admire
CRASH, along with countless respected film critics and movie buffs. And
while it has been banned in several countries internationally, it has won
an impromptu invented prize at the prestigious Cannes Film Festival for
"Originality, daring and audacity". It seems that you either love this 
movie, or hate it. This controversy is by itself reason enough to go see
CRASH. Decide for yourself if you will join a boycott group to save our
society from this morally corrupting film, or join the CRASH fan club to
defend the right to make and view artistic trash...eh...Crash.
        For those of you who still need some more persuasion to pay six
dollars for this film, I will try to review it as objectively as possible
(but will probably end up defending it anyway).
        In one sentence the plot of CRASH seems very crude: people get
their sexual kicks from car-crashes. However, the film is not about the
plot. It is about our modern detached society, about destructive
fetishism. More about that later.
        When the film opens, after a terrific credit-sequence, we meet a
couple, James Ballard (named after the writer of CRASH; played by James
Spader) and his wife Catherine (Deborah Unger). Both are engaged in pure
physical sex...with someone else. Catherine is spread over the cold
metallic hood of a small aircraft, James over his own desk. When the two
meet afterwards, they discuss their experiences in a seemingly
matter-of-fact way and appear not to be sexually satisfied at all.
        That night James is driving back to his work. One distracted
glance later he finds himself colliding with another car, killing the
driver, but leaving the passenger alive. It is Dr. Helen Remington (Holly
Hunter). Soon after he is released from hospital, Helen introduces James
to an obscure group of people whose lives evolve solely around
car-crashes. Consequently, all of them are scarred extensively and some
even have intricate prostheses. The leader of this group, Vaughan (Elias
Koteas), who specializes in recreating celebrity car-crashes (like James
Deans fatal collision), explains what the crashes mean to him: "It is
sexual liberation." To put it plainly, it is the fetish of this group. It
provides their necessary sexual pleasure. And a deadly crash would be the
absolute peak of that pleasure.
        Frankly, this plot-outline does resemble that of a shallow
porn-flick. It is true as well, that after every crash there are numerous
sexually explicit scenes; not quite as shocking and perverse as some want
us to believe, however. The question then arises: How does CRASH differ
from DEEP THROAT?
        Director David Cronenberg has always been interested in artistic
gore. His remake of THE FLY involved gruesome devouring of limbs; in DEAD
RINGERS Jeremy Irons operates on his twin brother using gynecological
instruments, killing him. What makes his films artistically successful is
his style and form. Cronenberg always balances on the edge of acceptable
and manages never to go over the top. His mis-en-scene transforms the
ugliest scene into an intriguing portrait. His use of light and camera
(shadows are very important) and his direction of the actors (adding to
them a sense of detachment and aloofness) guarantees subtlety to sodomy,
beauty to blood.
        For CRASH in particular, Cronenberg has managed to pull this off
for sex rather than violence. In portraying destructive sexual fetishism,
he has chosen car-crashes as the instruments of pleasure. Why cars?
Perhaps because in the modern world cars are indeed a symbol for our
sexuality. The bigger the car, the more successful and desirable we are.
Need I go into the allegory of why everybody would rather have a shiny red
convertible over a shabby brown pick-up truck?
        Maybe another reason to specifically use car-crashes is that they
do not arouse anybody sexually, except the characters in the film. I
cannot imagine that anyone could derive sexual pleasure from a collision
with another car. Sure, it can be exhilarating (like the fantastically
thrilling sequences on the highway), but certainly not orgasmic; not in
the real world anyway. Cronenberg forces the audience to view the scenes
with a certain detachment and focuses the attention on the destructive
aspect of fetishism. He forces the viewer to think by using a virtually
non-desirable fetish.
        CRASH is clearly not a pornographic exploitation movie. It is too
cold, too mechanic for that. Rather, it is a dark view on modern society
and its destructive (sexual) forces. The seething critics of this film
have a lot in common with those of THE PEOPLE VS. LARRY FLYNT; they oppose
the film for the wrong reasons. LARRY FLYNT is not about glorifying the
founder of Hustler magazine; it is not even about the sex-industry. It is
about a groundbreaking trial that helped establish and strengthen a little
notion called 'freedom of speech'. CRASH is not about sex or pornography
and it certainly does not glorify it. If only the protesters would
actually know what they are protesting against (i.e., go see the film),
they would realize their ignorance.
        When I saw this film in the cinema, my fellow audience members
mainly consisted of older men. I suspect they did not get what they came
for. Neither will any (premature) critics of CRASH.

Title
Review for 8 Heads in a Duffel Bag (1997)
        The directorial debut of screenwriter Tom Schulman can best be
described as a dark, wacky comedy; a movie reminiscent of 'nouvelle
violence' (think of PULP FICTION), filmed shamelessly in the style of a
farcical sitcom. Schulman is probably most known for his Academy Award
winning screenplay for DEAD POETS SOCIETY, but is also responsible for
writing films ranging from HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS to MEDICINE MAN. For
somebody who has been in the movie business for several years already,
Schulman is refreshingly energetic and original as a first-time director
of his own screenplay.
        The cast of 8 HEADS IN A DUFFEL BAG consists of actors fitting the
nouvelle violence theme (Joe Pesci, for example, in a terrific pastiche of
his usual type-cast performances), as well as the sitcom style (David
Spade, now starring in 'Just Shoot Me'; and the
ever-so-familiar-face-but-nobody-remembers-his-name George Hamilton, from
such TV-shows as 'Dynasty'). This mix of opposite worlds is a potentially
unstable one, but Schulman manages to keep it together and delivers a
highly enjoyable and at times even hilarious film.
        The plot is as ridiculous as it is inevitable. Hit man/thug Tommy
(Joe Pesci) is assigned to deliver the heads of eight dead mobsters to the
Mafia-king who ordered their deaths. He neatly wraps up the heads in
plastic bags, places them in, yes, a duffel bag and takes the next
commercial flight to San Diego. On the plane he meets Charlie Pritchett
(Andy Comeau), a flaky student from Baltimore. Charlie is on his way to
Mexico, where he plans to spend the week with his girlfriend (Kristy
Swanson) and her parents (George Hamilton and Dyan Cannon). It is not very
surprising that Charlie turns out to have a similar duffel bag and that
the two accidentally switch luggage at the airport, but hey, we'll forgive
'm. The switch is the start of Tommy's attempts to retrieve his heads and
of Charlie's adventures in coping with the discoveries of the lost heads
throughout the Mexican hotel. Wild chases ensue, not to mention
unspeakable acts with cryogenically frozen bodies, or rather...their
heads.
        Please give the film the benefit of the doubt, though. It is much
more intelligent than it sounds, greatly due to the fact that it
acknowledges its farcical and contrived situations. It parodies those
situations as much as it shamelessly exploits them for what they are:
shallow and mostly physical humor. Take for example the scene where
Charlie is trying to take one of the lost heads out of a washing machine,
hindered by a blind (!) Mexican cleaning lady. It does not often happen
that you can feel free to laugh aloud in the cinema, without guilt, at an
obviously predictable and unbelievable scene. Again, this is greatly to
the credit of the witty screenplay, as well as the light-hearted
direction. Large portions of the film have been shot on studio sets, which
inadvertently recreate the feeling of television shows, or even the
(comic) theater. Furthermore, Schulman mainly uses wipes, from left to
right or vice versa, for the cuts between scenes. Normally this is a no-no
in modern day cinema, but the wipes give 8 HEADS... a traditional and
easy-going television-look.
        On top of this farcical foundation, the film sporadically jabs at
the viewer with darkly satirical moments. Only in a film like 8 HEADS...
can an audience burst out in uncontrollable laughter when a thug throws a
grandmother off a cliff...from a moving van. And adding to his obvious
homage to traditional television (where nobody is killed on screen),
Schulman reintroduces the grandmother at the final credits, suffering only
from a broken arm and some bruises.
        The acting is highly typecast and stereotypical. We have the flaky
good-hearted student who turns out to be smart after all, his enchanting
girlfriend who grows to love him even more, the stuck up father who still
calls his mother every day, his alcoholic wife and not to forget the
explosively violent Italian gangsters. However, the characters created and
actors cast are purposely flat and unrealistic. They are a satirical
reference to the GOODFELLAS and 'Friends' we have grown to know over the
years and help to create the surreal setting of the film. They are
essential in making the viewer accept the incredibility of it all.
        Now, I must admit the film has its weak moments. Certain built-up
scenes, screaming almost for a humorous resolution, are left dangling.
Characters are introduced, then later ignored. And the 'grand finale' has
promising potential, but is eventually disappointing. However, 8 HEADS IN
A DUFFEL BAG easily makes up for those flaws in its off-beat and highly
original concept.
        8 HEADS is essentially a tribute to the golden age of
television. It inserts stylistic elements of that medium into a twisted
version of the modern gangster genre of American cinema. Thus, Schulman
has created a surprising, intriguing and -heck, I can say it!- funny
movie. It hardly ever happens that a film makes fun of...well...itself!
---------------------------------

Title
Review for Absolute Power (1997)
        Absolute Power, the new film produced and directed by Clint
Eastwood, attempts to be a thriller set in the world of hypocritical
presidents and their murderous political staff. It is about as thrilling
as a lecture on the mating habits of the South American grasshopper. One
can only wonder how an utterly absurd script like the one written by
William Goldman could have ever interested Eastwood. Not only is the plot
unbelievable and contrived, but even the writing itself lacks any
consistency or intelligence. Continually underestimating the audience, the
film gives us information we already know or dont even need. Details
essential to the story are so improbably convenient they are annoying
(like why would two unprepared secret service men carry two night-vision
goggles in their car?).
        Oddly enough, the initial setup for Absolute Power offers
interesting possibilities. A masterful jewel-thief (played by Clint
Eastwood) witnesses the murder of the wife of a powerful millionaire
(played by E.G. Marshall). While robbing one of Marshalls mansions, he is
forced to hide in the bedrooms vault. There, through a two-way mirror, he
sees the wife and another man engage in passionate foreplay. Their game of
love quickly turns into a violent struggle as the man starts beating the
woman. In self defense, the woman grabs a letter-opener and stabs the man
in the elbow. She raises her arm to stab again when she is fatally shot by
two secret service men. The man? He is the president of the United States
of America.
        Where does the film go wrong? It cannot be the acting. Clint
Eastwood, Ed Harris and Gene Hackman as the president give type-cast, but
decent performances. The cinematography is sufficient; wild and erratic
during action sequences, dark and mysterious during psychologically
suspenseful scenes, and calm and warm during dramatic dialogue. Even the
music is not as bombastic as it usually tends to be in the
thriller/suspense genre.
        The fault clearly lies in the screenplay, and the screenplay
alone. While setting up a story about misuse of power, about the true
possessors of that power, and about intrigue and double-crossing, it does
not resolve it. Not one buildup of suspense is resolved by an exciting
climax. Rather, the tense situations are left dangling at the end, giving
the viewer an uneasy sense of incompleteness.
        An example of this is a very promising and tense buildup of a
scene: in an attempt to arrest Clint Eastwood, the police have set up a
trap at a small restaurant. Police officers are everywhere, incognito of
course. At the same time, not one but two hit men are preparing to kill
Clint Eastwood when he arrives. All three parties are unaware of each
others presence. This scene is tremendously exciting and the audience is
wondering how Clint Eastwood, who might suspect this is a trap, will get
himself out of this difficult position. He will probably have a brilliant
plan, involving ingenious preparations. However, when he arrives at the
trap, both hit men miss (how convenient) and in the confusion Eastwood
simply walks away. The buildup of this scene took about ten minutes. Ten
minutes of close ups of the hit men loading their weapons intercut with
the police preparing for the trap. The scene was resolved in less than 20
seconds...
        Parallel to the story line of catching the real killer is a cliche
emotional tale about the estranged relationship between father Eastwood
and his daughter. The daughter blames her father for never being there for
her, because he was either in jail or robbing a house somewhere. Of course
their relationship takes a turn for the better during the adventure and
they end up a happy family. Again, it is commendable that Absolute Power
tries to deviate from the mainstream suspense film by giving room for a
dramatic subplot. However, trying is simply not enough! The second story
line should be subtle, original and preferably unpredictable... everything
this film is not.
        How could a screenplay like Absolute Power ever get the funding to
be produced? How could Eastwood, who has successfully produced and
directed many outstanding films such as the brilliant Unforgiven, ever
believe in a project like this one? I am sad to say that my respect for
the actor/director/producer has diminished substantially due to this film.
Director Quentin Tarantino once said: "I can make a good movie out of any
bad script." Director Clint Eastwood obviously cannot.
