Authors
Alexander F. Relyea
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Alaska (1996)
        Fraser Heston's new film ALASKA has scenery befitting an IMAX film  
with cinematography to match.  Unfortunately, the horrid script and the
sometimes laughable acting make you wish for more scenes without people.
ALASKA is apparently an attempt to cross FLIPPER with CLIFFHANGER, 
featuring Vincent Kartheiser (THE INDIAN IN THE CUPBOARD) as the
Stallone character.  This works about as well as one might expect,
and the result is too much bad acting, too many plot holes, and not
nearly enough shots of the beautiful Alaskan scenery.
        ALASKA features Dirk Benedict as Jake Barnes, a former jumbo jet
pilot from Chicago who came to Quincy, Alaska with his two children
following the death of his wife.  Instead of flying for an airline,
Jake now flies a supply run for the small towns of Alaska.  His 
daughter Jessie (Thora Birch) is thrilled with the move because it
helps her become one with nature, and she is quite adept at handling
a kayak.  His son Sean (Kartheiser) is absolutely miserable.  There's
nothing for him to do, and he's expected to clean up when he spills
motor oil.  He drowns his sorrows in video games and his passion for
the Chicago Cubs (there is a pitiful attempt to create some cub 
symbolism throughout the movie which most audiences will mercifully 
miss).  Charlton Heston also appears from time to time as a poacher 
called Perry.  His role only ties in peripherally to the other 
characters, and although he's supposed to be evil incarnate, he 
comes across as scary as Paul Hogan in FLIPPER.
        The film begins with brief introductions of all the major 
characters, and most of the minor ones.  Soon after Sean tells Jake
"I wish you had died instead of Mom!", Jake is compelled to fly 
emergency medical supplies to some small town.  In the ensuing storm, 
Jessie loses radio contact with her father, and he subsequently crashes.
The search and rescue helicopter finds a gum wrapper and an old shoe
but can't find Jake's *bright yellow piper cub.*  They also manage to 
miss the flare that Jake fires.  After learning that the search is 
being aborted, Sean decides to search for his father himself.  Jessie 
insists on coming along, and the search is afoot.
        The kids quickly find a poacher's camp, and there they find an 
imprisoned polar bear cub.  Naturally Jessie, our budding
environmentalist, convinces Sean to help free the bear.  For some 
reason the bear, cleverly named Cubby, decides to follow the kids, and
is in turn pursued by Perry who wants him back.  Meanwhile, there are 
a number of foolish plot contrivances including the search and rescue
pilot realizing that Sean and Jessie have gone to look for their 
father by finding a bunch of backwoods equipment *on their kitchen
table.*  Cubby effectively adopts Sean, and the relationship is 
consummated in a weird dream sequence which I did not recognize as such
until the credits.
        I won't bore you with the details of the trials and tribulations
that the three face on their way to rescue Jake (without a travois or
any form of radio), but Heston isn't as generous.  The poorly written
script treats Sean most harshly, but Kartheiser's overdone performance
earns him no sympathy.  Perry's function appears to be one of spouting
platitudes, and his opening soliloquy is bound to cause titters.  The
soundtrack is a nightmare, written as if the bombastic score will 
enhance a flat story and fill the holes in the plot.  ALASKA is only
worth watching if you ignore the eminently forgettable characters, and
consider the film as sponsored by the Alaska Department of Tourism,
and it is on that basis that I give it *1/2 of ****.

Title
Review for Kansas City (1996)
        There are two ways to view Robert Altman's KANSAS CITY.  It can be 
seen as either a politically motivated kidnapping with a jazz backdrop
or a movie about Kansas City jazz in the 1930s with a little local 
color.  This is unfortunate, because neither story is done particularly
well.  Any number of context clues in the film tell the observant 
viewer that KANSAS CITY takes place on the first Monday and Tuesday of 
November, 1933, a month before prohibition was repealed.  Nevertheless,
the alcohol is free-flowing in one of the many historical 
inconsistencies in the film.  The most obvious of these are the fact 
that KANSAS CITY has exactly zero homeless people, and that all of the
"colored" people are very wealthy; even the Western Union custodian
is well-off.
        KANSAS CITY stars Jennifer Jason Leigh (GEORGIA) as Blondie, a
telegraph operator who kidnaps Miranda Richardson (THE CRYING GAME),
the wife of a powerful local politician, in order to convince some
colored gangsters, led by Harry Belafonte (WHITE MAN'S BURDEN), to
release her husband Johnny (Dermot Mulroney, THE TRIGGER EFFECT).  A
nearly incomprehensible sequence of flashbacks helps Blondie explain 
her dilemma to Mrs. Stilton (Richardson).  Apparently Johnny had 
conspired with a cabbie with the unfortunate name of Blue Green (played
by an actor with the even more unfortunate name of Martin Martin) to
rob a rich black gambler.  They get caught, and Blondie goes down to 
Belafonte's club to try to get him back.  She gets turned away and 
goes to kidnap Mrs. Stilton and win Johnny's freedom.  Those who can 
follow this sequence are rewarded with the unfolding of Blondie's 
desperate caper as she drags poor Mrs. Stilton around Kansas City almost
haphazardly.  These images are inter-cut with laughable scenes of
Belafonte trying in vain to act tough and scenes of the twenty-four-hour
jazz band that plays at his club.  The jazz is nice, and it is featured
in about ninety percent of the scenes, either as background music, or 
as the focus of the scene, but it is hardly something to base a movie 
on, and Altman doesn't bother to give any background information that 
would provide a solid foundation.  He doesn't develop the characters of
any of the musicians except for a high school saxophonist who appears 
to have nothing better to do than watch the band in twelve hour 
stretches.  KANSAS CITY plods on with plot twists that tend to be 
inconsequential or too confusing to follow to extend it to its full 
length of a hundred ten minutes, and then has a gutless ending.  When 
one of the characters says "You know what I did today?  I forgot to 
vote.", we can sympathize, for it is hard to remember anything more 
important happening in the film.
        On the whole, the acting was solid.  Mulroney stands out as a small
time hood unable to fully realize that he has entered the big leagues.
Leigh is solid, if a little annoying.  Belafonte does his best, but he
comes across as more of a retired gangster, and is best when he relates 
his old war stories.  He is sadly miscast.  Richardson takes Mrs. 
Stilton's opium habit and plays the stock character of "Drug addict".
Scarcely a scene goes by when she doesn't dope up and stagger.  Surely
a woman this addicted had professional help, even in the Great
Depression.  Other than that, the movie seems to depend on gratuitous
violence and nudity, as well as introducing characters who are almost
completely irrelevant to the plot.  Steve Buscemi (FARGO) is an 
excellent example of this, as in his two scenes he is rough with his 
wife and beating some guy with a baseball bat, both for no apparent 
reason.  Before long, anyone watching KANSAS CITY is going to wish for
something to happen either to return to the jazz or to end the film.
It is curious why Altman calls his film KANSAS CITY since it could
take place in any city large enough to have a jazz club.  There is no
discernible local flavor, and we only know that it is Kansas City
because characters say so.  The screenplay and direction conspire to 
make KANSAS CITY too confusing and remote to cause any feelings towards
any of the characters, and I am not really sure what Altman intended to
do with this film.  Nevertheless, Mulroney and Leigh's performances and
the wonderful soundtrack make this film worth ** out of ****.
