Authors
Cyrus Chen
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Batman Forever (1995)
     BATMAN FOREVER is a film made for my age group (14) and I can tell
you that this film really sucks!  The acting was horrible.  It seemed
to me that the producers used more special effects than acting.  Val
Kilmer was pretty bad.  He cannot act.  Michael Keaton, who appeared in
the previous two Batman movies, was a much better actor.  Tommy Lee
Jones, one of the better actors who played in other films such as THE
FUGITIVE and THE CLIENT did not act so well in this movie.  In this
movie, he was just another wannabe Jack Nicolson because the notorious
Two-Face was acting very much like the Joker in BATMAN.  The only good
feature to this film was the human cartoon Jim Carrey.  This man can
just amaze you with his changeable face.  It's like, "How the hell did
you do that?"
     Another thing was the script.  Hated it.  There wasn't too much
dialogue.  Most of the script was the "Spectacular Special Effects"
(albeit the special effects weren't that hot). Tim Burton who directed
the previous two Batman films should have definitely directed this
film.  He could have probably made this dull and crummy movie into a
spectacular film.  If the first two movies were a hit, why didn't he
direct this one?
     They also didn't show the origin of Two-Face; he was sort of just
there.  In the previous two movies, the script at least showed where
the main evil bad guy came from. How about a little explanation?  Where
did this guy come from?  You shouldn't have to read the comics to know
where Two-Face came from!
     Most people think this film is hot because of all the promotion it
has had.  Every time you turn on the television you see that Batman
Forever commercial and that famous 99c cup from Mcdonald's.  The
commercial really fooled me.  It got me all excited and I couldn't wait
for that movie to come out, sort of thing.  Once you see it, though,
it's a big disappointment.
     I am sorry, but this was just a terrible movie.  If you are a big
Batman fan and one of those people who just can't miss a Batman flick,
then it's worth a shot, after all it's only four bucks at the matinee!
But if you care about good movies, save your money!  BATMAN FOREVER, a
movie to be missed.
