Authors
Robin Shortt
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Hideaway (1995)
     If the movie adaptation of Dean R. Koontz's novel HIDEAWAY is
anything to go by, then the lightshow you get when you kick the bucket
almost makes dying worth it.  The afterlife scenes--the movie's
principal special effect--make the most imaginative use of CGI that
I've seen in a film (certainly far outclassing the effects in THE
LAWNMOWER MAN).
     The story begins--notwithstanding a powerful, chilling opening
sequence--with Hatch Harrison's (Goldblum) 'death' in a car
accident.  After two hours clinically dead, he is resusitated (by a
team of medics led by Alfred Molina) and appears to fully recover.
     But, as the movie's tagline suggests, he hasn't come back alone.
A series of visions (also using inspired CGI) leads Hatch to believe
he's developed a psychic link with a psychotic killer who preys on
young girls--and has developed an interest in Hatch's own daughter
Regina (Alicia Silverstone).
     What really makes HIDEAWAY work are the performances by Goldblum
and Jeremy Sisto (as the killer).  Goldblum is utterly authentic as
Hatch--his low key performance never seems anything but real.  Sisto is
a perfect villain, and imbues his character with enough personality to
even make him (barely) sympathetic.
     The other cast members turn in solid performances.  Christine
Lahti, as Hatch's wife, more or less reprises her role in THE DOCTOR.
Alicia Silverstone is believable as Regina.  Alfred Molina has the same
problem he had with SPECIES--his character's a walking plot device,
with no real purpose except to move the story along, but he does what
he can with his limited role.
     I'd give HIDEAWAY a "thumbs up".  It covers more or less the same
territory as THE CROW, and I'd say it failed where THE CROW succeeded
(director Brett Leonard doesn't have the style of Alex Proyas) and
succeeds where THE CROW failed (HIDEAWAY's characters have more
substance and are much more sympathetic than those of Proyas' film).
     If nothing else, see it for the CGI graphics and the pounding
score (featuring music by Fear Factory and Godflesh) which is great and
keeps the film moving.
NOTE: Be sure to stick around during the credits, there's more after they
finish.
