Authors
Michael Zwirn
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Urs al-jalil (1987)
Wedding in Galilee (1987, Israeli, in Arabic with some Hebrew) is
writer/director Michel Khleifi's intimate portrayal of overlapping
romantic, familial and nationalistic tensions in a northern Israeli Arab
village. It was an critic's award winning film in Cannes that year, and is
fairly well-known among world cinema circles, but I'd never seen it until
now. Ultimately, the picture that the film presents is one of Palestinian
impotence, of stifled desires and pent-up frustrations.
An Arab patriarch, Mukhtar (Mohamad Ali El Akili) tries to plan the
wedding of his eldest son in spite of the Israeli military governor's
curfew. In order to get permission to hold the ceremony, he has to invite
the military officials, which rouses the anger of the inhabitants of the
town where he is revered as one of the respected men on the village
council. Most of the film takes place over the course of a single day and
night, as typical wedding-day chaos (vengeful ex-girlfriends, a runaway
horse, family gossip and backbiting in-laws) collides with the nationalist
and ethnic conflicts between the Arab Muslim villagers and the occupying
soldiers. The Israelis are painted as gruff, aloof and domineering but not
explicitly violent. Palestinian women are hot-tempered, graceful and
powerful behind the scenes of a patriarchal traditional society. The group
that comes off worst are the Arab men. Even Mukhtar, respected and sage as
he is, is hidebound by superstition. The enraged Arab villagers are unable
to carry out the attack which they laboriously and incompetently
plan. Even the groom himself is ultimately impotent. All the tensions in
the movie, which build over the course of the carefully drawn-out two
hours, are ultimately stifled and repressed, both internally and by
outsiders, which is Khliefi's perception of the status of the Palestinian
people. While the film is ocasionally a bit didactic, its care and craft
are undeniable, and the psyches of the characters emerge distinctly albeit
slowly. 
There's a definite erotic heat which charges some of the scenes-the
dressing of the bride and groom, the fire of a young Arab woman who taunts
a handsome Israeli soldier, and most of all the transformation of a shy
Israeli soldier into a ravishing Arab princess, thanks to a massage and
makeover at the hands of the villagers. Arab cinema tends to be a bit
paternalistic in gender relations, but this Belgian/Palestinian/Israeli
production is downright scandalous at times. The only part of the movie
that doesn't quite ring true in my ears is the Hebrew: Khliefi gets away
with some of it by presenting some of the Jewish soldiers (including the
military governor) as immigrants from the Arab-speaking world, but
everyone speaks with a definite Arabic accent and the intonations are all
strange. If the film were made today, I imagine Israeli actors could have
been found to play such roles.
