Authors
John Lee
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for All the President's Men (1976)
     Itís not easy to make a gripping movie about politics but All the
Presidentís Men relies for its suspense on the chase of investigative
journalism rather than on the politicians themselves.  Nixon and other
key players of the Watergate farce are kept in the background on
strategically placed T.V. screens and in the headlines of
not-so-casually-placed newspapers.  The real drama in All the
Presidentís Men is in how Bob Woodward (played as an earnest newsroom
virgin by Robert Redford) and Carl Bernstein (the only slightly more
worldly Dustin Hofmann) hang on to the story, ěpursue the money,î and
eventually uncover the web of lies that brings down the presidency.
     On one level, Alan J. Pakulaís movie operates like a how-to, and
sometimes a how-not-to, guide for investigative journalists.  Our two
heroes meet when Woodward catches Bernstein ěimprovingî - or is it just
stealing? - his early report on the arrest of the Watergate burglars.
Establishing himself as the voice of reason, Woodward agrees that
Bernsteinís re-write has improved the piece.  The partnership is formed,
and the two are assigned to cover the case full-time.  Following their
own hunches about snatched facts that just donít add up, they start to
dig into why the burglars seem to have ever higher links to members of
the Republican Party and, eventually, to the White House.
     The task of uncovering the intrigue is laborious (days spent
checking library records and searching personnel lists, for example),
but we know Woodward and Bernstein are  on to something big, so even the
most mundane phone call is made exciting because it might provide the
next part of the puzzle.  These cold calls are presented as a major tool
of the investigative reporter, although most of the people called by
Woodward and Bernstein seem to be remarkably poor liars.  Most stutter
monotone denials that would raise the suspicions of the least
experienced hack.  And the White House librarian who denies even talking
to Bernstein five minutes after their telephone conversation, wouldnít
pass a lie detector test on any question.
     Although both reporters are remarkably persistent, itís their
different approaches to sources - like the good cop/bad cop routine -
that gains them most ground in their investigation.  Woodward doesnít
like sources to think heís pushing them too far but his passive approach
often lulls them to go further than they intended.  The secretary in his
newsroom, for example, quietly places some vital information on his desk
after he has apologised for even suggesting that she might procure it.
In contrast, Bernstein flirts and cajoles information out of potential
female sources, tricks his way past a secretary, and calls people for
information late at night when they are relaxed and out of the office: a
well-used tool of the investigative reporter.
     The two are also helped in their investigation by the ěcharacter
that knows too much,î played by Hal Holbrook, who meets Woodward in the
shadows of an underground car lot.  Although based on a real person,
heís an unsatisfying presence in the movie, and too much of a cliche, to
add to the suspense of the story.
     Ben Bradlee, the editor of The Washington Post, in an Oscar-winning
performance by Jason Robards, offers much more convincing support.
Although Robards overplays the omnipotent know-it-all, his character is
important in the story - and particularly to those movie-watchers who
might be interested in trying investigate reporting for themselves.
Heís not swayed by the story until the evidence uncovered starts to
become overwhelming.  In the chase for dirt, he never loses sight of the
need for corroboration.  If Woodward and Bernstein find two sources, he
demands three.  His mantra - ěcold, hard factsî - becomes the key to the
success of the investigation, and particularly influences Woodward.
