Authors
Adam Joyce
Number of Reviews
9

Title
Review for Everyone Says I Love You (1996)
The return of the musical is upon us. It began with "Evita", and now Woody
Allen has brought the musical-comedy back to life with "Everyone Says I
Love You". It is the story of a very well off family living in New York,
and takes the audience on a journey through their daily lives, highlighting
both the high and lows. 
The basic family set-up involves the two parents, Bob (Alan Alda) and
Steffi (Goldie Hawn), four daughters, a son, a grandfather, and Joe (Woody
Allen), Steffi's ex-husband. Joe is still very much a part of the family
and regularly visits from his home in Paris. Joe seems to have had an
endless array of failed relationships, and continuously pines for his
ex-lovers. Meanwhile, the eldest daughter, Skylar (Drew Barrymore) is
deeply in love with Holden (Edward Norton). In one of the many comical
scenes, Holden has the engagement ring placed on a dessert dish which is
served to Skylar. Unfortunately Skylar eats the dessert immediately,
swallowing the ring. What follows is a highly amusing scene in which the
couple visit the hospital and look at an x-ray of the ring. The hospital
staff congratulate the couple, marvelling at the ring on the x-ray. From
here they break into one of the many song and dances, involving all manner
of patients and staff. 
At first it is somewhat bizarre to see the cast break into a song, but
gradually one becomes accustomed to it. Beyond merely being accustomed to
the singing, one actually begins to enjoy these scenes immensely. All the
singing scenes have been superbly choreographed. This choreography has been
combined with the cinematography to provide the audience with very smooth,
clever, entertaining sequences. They are definitely one of the film's
highlights. By the end of the film, it's hard not to sing along with the
actors. 
Woody Allen's success with this film comes as a result of how he has dealt
with it. He has very much followed the traditional musical-comedy style.
Everything is 'picture perfect'. It's like looking at a postcard: it's
always so much better than the real thing. This is true of the scenes in
"Everyone Says I Love You". There are the scenes in Venice, with the fresh,
smooth, clean water flowing through the channels. New York is covered in a
layer of crisp, white snow, and is unbelievably beautiful. Paris,
particularly in the final scene is beyond perfection. It involves a scene
in which Joe and Steffi dance beside the River Seine on Christmas Eve. The
light reflects off the dark water as the pair dance, and Steffi begins to
fly. This probably sounds ridiculous, but the flying (gliding more suitably
describes it) adds to the perfection of the scene. This is all a key part
of the musical, which in this case could be re-labelled as fantasy. The
script is witty and clever, the acting near faultless. Follow the family
dilemmas of this upper class (near perfect) family, and enjoy the ride! 
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/review.htm

Title
Review for Beavis and Butt-head Do America (1996)
Very few people would be unaware of Beavis & Butt-head (both created and
narrated by Mike Judge). They are the two animated MTV characters who have
the most annoying laughter know to human kind. You may have seen them on
their television program, as they snigger and make lude remarks about
women, anything related to sex, and the music film clips that they watch.
In Beavis & Butt-head Do America the pair finally make their big screen
debut, to the delight of some, and the deplore of others.
Beavis & Butt-head (yes, those are their real names), are two very ugly
teenagers with extremely warped minds driven by raging hormones. They live
their lives in front of the television. The worst possible event occurs to
the pair when their television is stolen. This happens as they sleep, and
when they awake it takes them a few minutes just to decipher that the
television has gone. Beavis even tries to use the remote, though there is
no television there. The two spot a van outside and two sinister looking
men carrying a television. Even at this point they have no idea what has
happened. They look around, seeing all the evidence, but are completely
oblivious to the fact that these men have just stolen their television.
Before the movie I knew that they were stupid, but I didn't realise just
how stupid. This is typical of their behaviour throughout the film.
Eventually they realise that their television has been stolen, so they
leave their sofa to go search for a television. Luck would have it that
they stumble into a hotel room (looking for a television) where a man is
awaiting two guys whose task it is to kill his wife. This man, thinking
that Beavis & Butt-head are the assigned killers, tells them that they can
have $10,000 if they "do his wife". Beavis & Butt-head, being the ignorant
fools that they are, think that he is offering them $10,000 dollars to have
sex with his good looking wife. They are taken to the airport where they
fly to Las Vegas to "do her". To them, this is the best day of their lives.
Not only are they going to lose their virginity (one of their lifelong
aims), but most importantly, they will have enough money to buy a big
screen TV.
Inevitably they become caught up in a huge crime, and unbeknown to them,
are tracked across the country by the FBI. Oddly enough, it is their
complete stupidity that spares them from being caught, as a result the FBI
is convinced they are criminal masterminds. They end up travelling right
across America, visiting places such as the Hoover Dam and Washington DC.
The irony is that although they visit so many grand and spectacular
locations, their one time out in the big world away from their television,
they are completely oblivious to it. At Old Faithful they are far more
fascinated with the infra-red operated urinals than with the geyser itself.
Beavis & Butt-head essentially have the journey of their lives. They even
get to meet the President. But all they care about is getting their
television back, and losing their virginity. This is one of the many
reasons that the film is so funny - it's unbelievable just how stupid they
are, and how they can be so oblivious to everything around them. The humour
is certainly crude, but then Beavis & Butt-head are just that; crude, lude
and rude. In the end you can't help but feel sorry for them, a pair of
anti-social couch potatoes whose life is television. In this respect, and
also with regard to authority (such as the FBI) Mike Judge is quite
critical of Amercian society. If you are easily offended, or find this pair
particularly annoying, steer clear. Otherwise, it should keep you laughing
the whole way through. 
One note of warning: don't take friends who like to imitate Beavis &
Butt-head.....you'll never hear the end of it!
PLEASE VISIT MOVIE MANIA AT http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Title
Review for My Fellow Americans (1996)
When a scandal is about to be revealed with the potential to force the U.S.
President from his position, a devious plan is put into action whereby two
ex-Presidents will take the blame, and for this to happen they must be
killed.
It could be a serious political thriller, but it's not. Especially not when
you bring Jack Lemmon and James Garner into the picture. Jack Lemmon and
James Garner play those two ex-Presidents, one Republican, the other
Democrat. It should come as no surprise that they despise one another, with
a passion. It is from this animosity that `My Fellow Americans' draws its
laughs, because it is after all a comedy.
It had been intended by President Haney (Dan Akroyd) that ex-Presidents
Russell Kramer (Jack Lemmon) and Matt Douglas (James Garner) be sent to
their deaths in a tragic helicopter accident. Unfortunately for President
Haney, Kramer and Douglas demand to be set down on the ground when they
discover that their destination is different from that which they had been
told, and the unknowing pilots set them down moments before the helicopter
explodes. So commences ex-Presidents Kramer's and Douglas's journey across
the heartland of the United States, constantly in comical conflict, but
relying on each other to escape from the President's hit-men.
As the dubious duo travel cross-country in an attempt to find evidence to
prove the White House scandal, they come across all kinds of people, the
people who voted for them. This leads to one of the film's sentimental
moments where they realise what they didn't do while in office, and are
consequently brought back to reality after years of the good life . Despite
the serious sounding nature of this realisation, the film is very much a
comedy, and features scenes such as the ex-Presidents catching a lift with
the `Dykes on Bikes' and travelling with your all-American family in the
run-down station wagon. 
Throughout the entire film Kramer and Douglas are hunted down by the
President's hit-men. In this respect `My Fellow Americans' becomes an
action/comedy, swinging from one genre to the other. Comedy should be drawn
from the action scenes, but it seems that the director, Peter Segal, has
chosen to make some of the action scenes exempt from any comedy. This
leaves one wondering, at times, whether the film was in fact meant to be a
comedy at all. However, Lemmon and Garner work well together, with
competent performances from others - although Lauren Bacall barely puts in
a word as Lemmon's wife. The film is entertaining, with plenty of punch
lines and derogatory comments like, "Let's stop talking, we're about to
bond--that'll make me vomit.". But in the end `My Fellow Americans' is a
soft-edged comedy, that is worth a few laughs now but which will never have
a permanent place in our minds like `Grumpy Old Men'. 
PLEASE VISIT MOVIE MANIA AT HTTP://WWW.HOME.AONE.NET.AU/JOYCE/ADAMFRAME.HTM

Title
Review for Scream (1996)
Scream is a film for all fans of the horror genre. Directed by Wes Craven,
well known for writing and directing the first of the Nightmare on Elm
Street movies (and signing away the rights to the sequels in the process),
the film is an analysis of horror movies within a horror movie.
The film opens with the death of Casey Becker (Drew Barrymore), a young
female, home alone, who lives away from the city. De ja vu? She is
terrorised by an anonymous caller (who just happens to have a deep and
scary voice) who asks her questions about famous horror films, and demands
that she answer them correctly or her boyfriend, who's tied up on the
patio, will die. Eventually both her boyfriend and Casey are killed. Her
death involves the typical chase through the house, lock all the doors
scenario. From here the film jumps to the local high school, where the
students discover the news about their friends. I'm sure you've heard it
all before, but that's the idea.
Sidney Prescott (Neve Campbell) is the next victim of the killer's terror
campaign. Throughout the film the characters discuss the ridiculous aspects
within horror films. Sidney talks to the killer on the phone (not aware of
who he is) about how stupid it is that the people in horror films run up
the stairs instead of out the front door, but once she is the victim, she
does the same herself. In this respect the film is somewhat funny, and it's
meant to be, it's a parody of real horror flicks.
Sidney survives the ordeal, and her boyfriend is taken into custody over
the matter. As the film develops almost every character comes under
suspicion of being the killer, and one has to notice the intricate details
within the film to have any idea of who the killer could really be. Gate
Weathers (Courteney Cox), a tabloid reporter, also becomes involved.
Sidney's mother was killed and raped one year previous to the time in which
the film is set, and Gate Weathers claims that the wrong man is in jail for
the crime. Hmmmm.....I wonder who could be the real killer of Sidney's
mother? Could it by any chance be the current killer in town? Probably,
because this film is all about horror stereotypes, and you have to know
them well to solve the mystery. One by one the characters are killed off,
and in the process so are the suspects.
Scream is a clever thriller/horror/comedy about horror movies. If you're a
horror film fan than you might pick up on the special touches, such as the
school cleaner wearing a red and white striped t-shirt (like Freddy
Krueger's). The film used a record amount of blood, and there is plenty of
gore to keep the audience screaming (and at times, purposely, laughing).
The film's characters even explore the rules for surviving horror films,
for example, characters must be innocent virgins or they die. You can also
watch as the characters break these rules, and then sometime later on,
suffer the consequences. The film plays on the stereotypes of other horror
films, i.e. the seemingly dead killer must come back to life for a final
battle.
The characters are portrayed suitably, in the style of all good horror
films. Scream itself is enjoyable, allowing the audience to both jump and
to laugh. If you're familiar with horror films, and especially if you're a
fan, then Scream is worth your time. 
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Title
Review for Paradise Road (1997)
For the women in this film paradise is freedom, and the road to freedom is
a long and arduous one along which many will fall.
As the sun set over Singapore on the 10th February 1942, all women and
children were ordered to evacuate before the fall of Singapore to the
Japanese. They were packed onto undersized marine vessels destined for
Australia and England, many of these were sunk by Japanese bombers as they
headed south. This was the fate of those aboard the Prince Albert in Bruce
Beresfords Paradise Road, and those who managed to swim to the shores of
Sumatra could be considered by some as less fortunate than those who did
not.
Paradise Road is based on the true story of a group of women and children
who were captured and taken to a Japanese POW camp after swimming to the
shores of Sumatra from their sinking ship. It follows the hardships they
face in a squaller of a camp in which the Japanese soldiers seem to have no
compassion, and in which the women are treated worse than animals. As a
means of defiance some of the women form a choir. It is the uniting power
of music that gives many of the women the strength to continue, and is of
such beauty that even the Japanese guards refuse to stop it.
Bruce Beresford, as the writer and director of Paradise Road has managed
to capture the despair and desolation which the women feel, and despite the
death which surrounds them, hope is ever present in those with the will. He
has also provided a contrast to the despair with humour, which is drawn
from the situation in which the women find themselves. This has been done
particularly well, and the audience finds themselves laughing one minute
and crying the next, being carried with the story, and empathising strongly
with the characters.
There are plenty of actors who will be recognised by Australian audiences
in Paradise Road. Glenn Close plays the lead character, Adrienne
Pargiter, a British wife of a tea planter, who with a musical background
becomes the conductor of the womens choir. Her leadership in this position
is representative of her role throughout the film, her courage and
determination inspiring many of the other women not to give up.
Pauline Collins plays a British missionary, Margaret Drummond, who with
Adrienne forms, to use Margarets very apt description, a vocal
orchestra. Frances McDormand, who has a remarkable ability to take on
extraordinarily different characters plays Dr Verstak, a German Jew, who in
McDormands unique style is somewhat odd, but quite charismatic. Australian
Cate Blanchett makes her big screen debut playing Susan Macarthy, an
Australian nursing sister. After this performance there can be little doubt
that we will see her again in feature films. These actors are in addition
to many other faces which will light a spark of recognition in audiences.
The cinematography, especially the shots filmed in Penang, are spectacular.
The mountains which surround the camp provide a stunningly beautiful and
tranquil backdrop, which is a startling contrast to the filthy camp and the
graphic violence of the Japanese guards, which is particularly disturbing.
The vocal orchestra brings the women together, despite their different
backgrounds. Although death surrounds them like a sheaf, this only provides
them with more reason to shine through in the face of adversity. It is
quite difficult to believe that the sound of a group of singing women could
be powerful enough to prevent typically aggressive guards from breaking up
a prohibited gathering. But the singing literally passes right through you,
sending shivers up your spine. It has to be heard to be believed. See, feel
and hear Paradise Road for yourself.
Please Visit Adam's Attic at
http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Title
Review for My Fellow Americans (1996)
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm
When a scandal is about to be revealed with the potential to force the U.S.
President from his position, a devious plan is put into action whereby two
ex-Presidents will take the blame, and for this to happen they must be
killed.
It could be a serious political thriller, but it's not. Especially not when
you bring Jack Lemmon and James Garner into the picture. Jack Lemmon and
James Garner play those two ex-Presidents, one Republican, the other
Democrat. It should come as no surprise that they despise one another, with
a passion. It is from this animosity that 'My Fellow Americans' draws its
laughs, because it is after all a comedy.
It had been intended by President Haney (Dan Akroyd) that ex-Presidents
Russell Kramer (Jack Lemmon) and Matt Douglas (James Garner) be sent to
their deaths in a tragic helicopter accident. Unfortunately for President
Haney, Kramer and Douglas demand to be set down on the ground when they
discover that their destination is different from that which they had been
told, and the unknowing pilots set them down moments before the helicopter
explodes. So commences ex-Presidents Kramer's and Douglas's journey across
the heartland of the United States, constantly in comical conflict, but
relying on each other to escape from the President's hit-men.
As the dubious duo travel cross-country in an attempt to find evidence to
prove the White House scandal, they come across all kinds of people, the
people who voted for them. This leads to one of the film's sentimental
moments where they realise what they didn't do while in office, and are
consequently brought back to reality after years of the good life . Despite
the serious sounding nature of this realisation, the film is very much a
comedy, and features scenes such as the ex-Presidents catching a lift with
the 'Dykes on Bikes' and travelling with your all-American family in the
run-down station wagon. 
Throughout the entire film Kramer and Douglas are hunted down by the
President's hit-men. In this respect 'My Fellow Americans' becomes an
action/comedy, swinging from one genre to the other. Comedy should be drawn
from the action scenes, but it seems that the director, Peter Segal, has
chosen to make some of the action scenes exempt from any comedy. This
leaves one wondering, at times, whether the film was in fact meant to be a
comedy at all. However, Lemmon and Garner work well together, with
competent performances from others - although Lauren Bacall barely puts in
a word as Lemmon's wife. The film is entertaining, with plenty of punch
lines and derogatory comments like, "Let's stop talking, we're about to
bond--that'll make me vomit.". But in the end 'My Fellow Americans' is a
soft-edged comedy, that is worth a few laughs now but which will never have
a permanent place in our minds like 'Grumpy Old Men'. 

Title
Review for Saint, The (1997)
Based on the 1960's TV series of the same name, but very different from it,
comes "The Saint". The storyline is typical of the action/spy genre. The
lead character, Simon Templar (Val Kilmer) is essentially an executive
criminal and impersonator. He takes requests over The Internet for tasks
such as stealing special Russian microchips, asks millions of dollars per
assignment, and then completes the assignment in disguise. His aim is to
attain $50 million before retiring.
The main component of the story involves an assignment (purportedly his
last) in which Simon must steal the formula for Cold Fusion (limitless
energy from water) for the Russian Opposition Government which wants to
attain political power there. Of course, this Opposition Government is
completely corrupt, is secretly stealing all the heating oil from Russia so
that the people freeze. Without warmth, in the freezing Russian weather,
the people will be incited to revolt (at least according to the storyline),
hence electing the Opposition leader, Sofiya, to power.
There is two quite predictable problems. Firstly, the professor who has
designed the formula is an attractive young female, and therefore Simon
Templar MUST fall in love with her. Secondly, the Russian Opposition plan
to have Simon killed as soon as they have the formula for Cold Fusion (I
never would have guessed!).
Inevitably Simon and Emma Russell (the professor from whom Simon has stolen
the formula) end up in Russia, where Sofiya's evil son, Ilya, tracks them
down to kill them. The police in Russia are of course corrupt, and work for
Sofiya also, meaning that Simon and Emma are in a lot of trouble! It seems
that Ilya has an uncanny ability to track the pair, despite the fact that
they could be anywhere in a city larger than Sydney.
Nothing about this film is particularly surprising. Val Kilmer (who plays
10 very different identities as Simon Templar) gives a reasonably solid
performance, especially given his range of characters. His co-star,
Elisabeth Shue (playing Emma Russell) is equally good. Hollywood newcomer,
Valery Nikolaev (playing Ilya) who learnt English to play his part, is
undoubtably going to be a common sight in Hollywood films from now on,
probably playing equally evil characters who never seem to give up.
However, the storyline gives the actors little to play with. It is very
much a formulaic Hollywood action/adventure film, and although competent
and entertaining, is not original or particularly clever. 
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Title
Review for Dante's Peak (1997)
"Dante's Peak" is the next instalment in a series of disaster movies which
are coming our way this year. It is written and acted very much to a
formula, but this should do it no discredit. After all, when there is a
small town lying at the base of an immense dormant volcano named Dante's
Peak there can be little doubt that it will erupt. Where could the
storyline go if it didn't?
Harry Dalton (Pierce Brosnan), a vulcanologist, comes to the town of
Dante's Peak following reports of seismic activity. He is taken on a tour
of the volcano by the town's mayor, Rachel Wando (Linda Hamilton of
Terminator fame). Both of them are single, and Rachel has two young
children who instantly like Harry. On the tour of the volcano we also
discover that Rachel's mother-in-law lives halfway up the volcano.
Following the discovery of two bodies (which have been boiled to death
quite graphically) in the local hot springs, Harry calls in the US team of
volcano experts. These experts refute Harry's emphatic advice and decide
that there is no need to put the town on alert. Once blessed with this
information the rest of the story is not hard to decipher.
The reason most people see disaster movies is because they are exciting,
'on the edge of your seat' action. It matters little that the storyline is
predictable. "Dante's Peak" features amazing shots of the ominous,
gigantic, but silent volcano which overlooks the tranquil town. The actions
shots are exciting, and the lead characters (most of them, anyway) escape
from death by the skin of their teeth hundreds of times. Although we hate
the tension from these 'skin of your teeth' shots, they are the scenes
which make a movie such as this one. With the digital effects, it is
impossible to tell that the scenes are fake. The fast flowing lava, and
immense water which flows down the local river is terribly frightening and
detailed. "Dante's Peak" should give you enough excitement to last you
until the next disaster movie. 
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/adamframe.htm

Title
Review for Con Air (1997)
Jerry Bruckenheimer and Nicolas Cage, respective producer and star of The
Rock, team up again for an all action thrill ride titled Con Air.
Cameron Poe, played by Cage, with a newly found muscle-bound physique, is
about to be released on parole to see his wife and 7 year old daughter -
whom he has never before met. He has been counting down the days to his
release from prison since being convicted of manslaughter for defending
himself. Coincidentally his release date is his daughter's birthday and
again, coincidentally, of course, he lands a ride home on a special plane
for the transportation of criminals, with psychopaths, rapists and an
assortment of the nastiest guys on Earth as his fellow passengers. This
effectively sets up what is to follow.
The aircraft is inevitably captured by the criminals after take-off, with a
particularly clever but evil character called Cyrus "The Virus" Grissom,
played solidly by John Malkovich, acting as the ring leader. All the
criminals, Poe included, are released from their shackles, and the guards
locked up. Although quite a few characters, guards and criminals inclusive,
are killed in the exciting chaos of the capture - violence is what drives
the narrative. Poe's only aim is to get home to see his wife and child, but
stays on board the aircraft when given a chance to leave in order to save a
friend. 
Poe is the (stereo)typically heroic character, the wholly good saviour of
the day, who acts in-line with the other criminals in order to save his
friend. Meanwhile, the long arm of the law follows the aircraft. John
Cusack plays Vince Larkin, the US Marshal who has the responsibility of
looking after the aircraft, and finds himself trying to convince the DEA
agent, Colm Meaney, not to have the plane shot down, but to spare it in the
hope that Poe will help them.
Con Air supplies its audience with a very generous amount of action and
violence. This is combined with a touch of comedy and those essential
dramatic moments. The performances are convincing, especially from the lead
actors, Cage, Cusack and Malkovich. It's particularly interesting to
discover the histories and backgrounds to each of the criminals, one can
even develop a peculiar fondness for some, and unlike some films, follow
their individual efforts as opposed to a mass of unknown characters
fighting the good guys.
The story is somewhat (to put it kindly) predictable and cliched, with a
most unoriginally happy ending. Most of the characters are also heavily
stereotyped, but what else would one expect in an action movie of this
calibre? However, these seeming negatives detract nothing from an exciting,
involving action packed film. Once Con Air gets flying, the action and
interest doesn't stop. Essentially an entertaining film, one of the best
action adventures of recent times (if you don't judge the script and plot).
As impressive, if not moreso, than The Rock.
Please visit Movie Mania at http://www.home.aone.net.au/joyce/review.htm
