Authors
Bryan Dobson
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
Staring, George Clooney, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Chris O'Donnell and Uma 
Thurman with Alicia Silverstone. Well to start this off I'd just like to 
say a couple things. First is, I miss Michael Keaton, I miss Tim Burton and 
would much prefer to think that these last two Batman films are all like a 
Dallas dream sequence. 
Not even from the first film was Batman really the 'star' though he was 
damn close in the first couple anyway. In 'Batman Forever' and now in 
'Batman & Robin' he's almost pushed to being a bit player. I can't really 
say if Clooney (who regardless was better than Kilmer) was a very good 
Batman or not. He's given next to nothing to do at all, he might as well 
not have been there and it wouldn't have made much difference.
Now, Joel Schumacher has said that he refuses to bend to the masses that 
have hated his films and cheered for the return of Buton that he wont make 
Batman brooding and dark. Fine, I mean granted 'Batman Returns' while being 
an awsome film was a BIT to dark sometimes. Yet his bright neon, campy 
style is just killing anything this series meant to me. I'm usually very 
easy on films. I loved 'CON AIR' and other films some critics have slammed. 
Granted that film really was paper thin, cliche ridden, except for one 
thing, it was FUN. There is virtually no FUN in this film at all. I 
couldn't have cared less. It'll thrill the little ones as theres no 
violence really, none everyone comes out fine in the end like those old TV 
shows where it ends with everyone laughing.
Schwarzenegger is awful, I mean really, really bad... And this is coming 
from a regular FAN of his work. I love his movies most of the time and the 
basic reason is he never says much in any of them. He talks all to often in 
this movie. I would have much prefered to have seen Patric Stewart in the 
roll. I believe to truely like a film you have to CARE about at least 
someone in a film. I liked Alfred but the reason behind it is a cheap shot.

Title
Review for Volcano (1997)
Well, I'll admit when I first heard about this film (which was before 
Dante's Peak) I could just smell what 'Twister' had started. So now it 
seems that we're in a full fledged return to the '70's disaster film 
era. With 'Twister', 'Dante's Peak', 'Volcano' and soon 'Flood' and 
James Cameron's extremly expensive 'Titanic'
I'll say first off I enjoyed 'Volcano' much more than I did 'Dantes 
Peak'. Part of that is just being biased as I usually enjoy anything 
that Tommy Lee Jones appears in. 
I've been reading a lot about the movie being 'cheezy' or 'hokey' and 
really didn't see or think that once during the entire film. I get 
bored easily and this film didn't bore me for a minute. Another thing, 
and boy am I bitching today!, that bothers me is when critics and such 
go on about "Well thats not really possible." You know what? I 
couldn't give a bloody damn if it's possible or not, really I 
couldn't. It's a freaking movie and I don't WANT reality thrown in my 
face. I want to be able to see the impossible, the all might "WHAT IF" 
to many reviewers have seen one to many movies!
The special effects are the second star to this feature. They are so 
amazing that I found it hard sometimes to believe they were indeed FX 
and LA was was not burning to the ground. They did an incredible job 
and come Oscar time (if they remember) some notice better be thrown 
there way.
