Authors
Charles Henderson
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Wings of the Dove, The (1997)
Along comes another adaptation of a great, Henry James novel, the second
this fall, and as is the case of Washington Square which preceded it, we
could endlessly debate the virtues of the movie, compared to those of
the book. One might as well compare a photograph of Pablo Picasso, to a
Picasso painting. Aside from the fact that both bear some relationship
to the artist, there's not much more than the name, Picasso, to connect
the photograph and the painting. The same applies to The Wings of the
Dove. Don't expect a movie like this one to equate with the book. The
Wings of the Dove is one of the greatest novels of a writer whom many
believe is one of the very best American writers, perhaps the best
novelist this country has ever produced. In his writings Henry James
explored such issues as the conflict between cultures European and
American, but as much as anything else his novels are about character.
And his nuanced descriptions of character, together with the dialogue
and narrative out of which his stories are built, constitute the essence
of his work. His novels exist in the form of text; yet in the reading of
the text pictures emerge, and are seen against the screen of the
imagination which one brings to the reading.
With movies things are very, very different. The pictures predominate.
The director (Iain Softley) and the cinematographer (Eduardo Serra)
provide the visual images out of which flow a sense of place and story.
And it's up to the actors by the tone and tenor of their voices, body
language, and other visual cues, as much as through lines of dialogue,
to suggest what is happening within. All of this is supported,
especially in period movies like this one by costumes and sets that
convey mood as well as a sense of time and place. This film is highly
visual....from the lively street scenes of turn-of the-century London to
the luscious interiors of English town houses and Italian canal houses
and churches. Of course, visual images can have symbolic depth and
power, just as words do, but they function on a different wave length
altogether. For example, in one transition, a rather scary looking
medical instrument in an operating room dissolves into a soccer ball
that seems to descend from the heavens into the midst of a soccer game.
In another scene the central characters, riding in gondolas illuminated
by the warm light of oil lanterns, drift off into the distance, and into
the darkness of a Venice canal. And in visual gestures such as these,
the contrast between life and death, light and darkness reinforce what
is happening within the lives of the novel's central characters.
Against this visually rich backdrop, the novel's three central
characters play their parts: Kate Croy (Helena Bohnam Carter), the
protagonist, who is torn between love of journalist Merton Densher
(Linus Roache) and her need for social and financial security; the
young, zestful and idealistic American heiress, Millie Theale (Alison
Elliott) who is fighting for life in the midst of death. These three
form a classic triangle, a configuration of love and hate, commitment
and betrayal, friendship and deceit in which we see all that is both
virtuous and sordid in human relationships combine and collide. In this
complicated and perplexing set of relationships there is some evidence
of what made Henry James a great novelist. James had a profound
sensitivity for the moral complexity of human relationships; he
understood that one cannot divide the human family neatly into tribes,
with villains on the one side and heroes on the other. He knew that both
good and evil can and do reside within a single life, and that for us
all life is a struggle of life against death and darkness against the
light.
I would recommend this movie for three reasons. First, the scenes of
London and Venice are quite well done. You'll want to visit Venice soon
after seeing this movie. Second, the actors all do a very credible job,
with only a modest quantity of dialogue, suggesting and evoking some of
the more complicated themes of the novel. And finally, this movie will
give you a number of reasons to ponder your own motives and examine your
own relationships with what may be an embarrassing recognition of how
closely the desire for friendship and love can be related to the need
for power. Four
flames.
For additional reviews visit our website at
http://christianity.miningco.com/library/weekly/blmovies.htm

Title
Review for Good Will Hunting (1997)
I would nominate Good Will Hunting as one of the ten best films of 1997!
I do this in full recognition that the plot is overly simplistic and
predictable, a flaw certainly to be seized upon by other critics. One is
quite aware where this movie is heading from the moment we realize that
Will Hunting (Matt Demon) is a gifted young man from South Boston, with
a long police record and a penchant for getting into fights with his
drinking buddies. When he confronts an arrogant Harvard grad student in
a Cambridge bar, not with his fists, but with superior knowledge of U.S.
history, Will is up and running as our hero. During the same encounter
he meets a bright, beautiful, Harvard undergrad with a large trust fund,
named Skylar (Minnie Driver) and goes home with her telephone number in
his pocket. With such an obvious combination of talent and good looks,
aided and abetted with a tremendous sense of humor, its clear there's
nothing on earth that can stop him from triumphing over the wounds of a
seriously troubled childhood. Nor is there anything that will likely
stand in the way of Matt Damon as the movie industry's newest superstar!
His acting is superb! Despite the simplicity of the story-line, this
film is filled with wonderful actors, first of all Matt and Minne. They
are followed closely thereafter by Robin Williams as the down and out
psychology professor who becomes Will's counselor and friend. And Ben
Afflect, who with Matt, actually wrote the script and plays Will's best
friend, Chuckie, in the movie.
Then too, there's the directing of Gus Van Sant (Drugstore Cowboy; My
Own Private Idaho) and the cinematography of Jean Yves Escoffur. The
visual impact of this movie is very, very strong. In a few carefully
chosen shots and scenes we are given a realistic feel for the South
Boston neighborhoods where Will and his friends reside, for Cambridge
and the MIT campus, where much of the plot unfolds, and the
interconnecting subways, roadways, riverscapes and skyscapes that make
up greater Boston, which is the backdrop for this very American movie.
Of course it's very much part of America's civil religion to believe
that any young man (or woman) from South Boston (or the South Bronx, or
South L.A., or the South itself -- thank you Bill Clinton) can grow up
to be President of the United States. Since the glow and luster no
longer seem to reside with the Presidency, this film's hero promises to
become the Nobel prize winning mathematician who is smart enough and
honest enough to puncture the hypocrisy of corporate bigshots or
government bureaucrats, even as he gains the personal maturity required
to build real relationships with real people, and heal his own wounded
psyche. As this revision of the American Dream unfolds, there's lots and
lots of good music to listen to in a well rendered sound track, and
above all, a winning sense of humor balanced by an emotional punch that
kept me either laughing or crying during much of the film's hour and
twenty two minutes. What makes it all work, despite the flaw already
mentioned, is the coordination of the camera work, acting, and directing
that make the whole considerably greater than the sum of all its parts.
Leaving the theatre I was struck by the impression that we are living in
one of the greatest visual cultures ever. And while I realize that this
has its downside (namely, the corrosive effects of a growing
illiteracy), one might as well enjoy the visual treasures that movies
like this one truly are. When you realize that this movie was written by
two kids from South Boston (Damon and Affleck), and that these two
talented guys are in a position to receive Academy Award nominations
while still in their twenties, this movie is in more ways than one an
anthem in praise to America. One which is played with prophetic passion,
as well as a genuine love of country. Five flames.
Charles Henderson, Executive Director
The Association for Religion and Intellectual Life
For additional reviews visit our website at
http://christianity.miningco.com/library/weekly/blmovies.htm

Title
Review for Psycho (1998)
Charles Henderson's movie reviews -- written from a theological
perspective appear regularly at:
http://christianity.miningco.com
Following up on his huge success with Good Will Hunting, Director Gus
Van Sant has taken a bold risk in making another ground breaking film: a
remake of Alfred Hitchcock's 1960 original, Psycho. There has never been
anything quite like this. For Van Sant uses virtually the same script,
score, and camera angles that made the Hitchcock version of the film a
classic. I saw the film on opening night in New York and wanted to
review it right away. In doing a "background check" to compare what Van
Sant has done here with the Hitchcock template, I've come to see what a
remarkable effort this is. And thanks to the number of websites that
have been created around the 1960 film, you'll be able to see for
yourself exactly what I mean.
But first, a word about Hitchcock's original. It did not open to
critical acclaim. Its status as a classic emerged over time.  It took
over thirty years to achieve such stature that it regularly appears in
college textbooks, television specials, and now on the Internet, as an
object of veneration. There is even one website created for the sole
purpose of stopping this film from being made. A vain effort to be sure.
Still, the culture-icon status of Psycho will make it all the more
difficult for Van Sant.
In discussing his project with members of the Hitchcock family, and the
screen writer, Joseph Stefano, Van Sant described his project not as a
remake, but as a "revival." He wanted to preserve as much of Hitchcock's
vision as possible. And the extent to which he has gone to do this is
exemplified  in the famous shower scene. A frame by frame comparison
between the two versions of the film is possible thanks to one website
where an animation of the original scene has been assembled. The
similarities are striking. And the same is true throughout the film. The
major differences are, of course, the color, and the acting. Many
reviewers will compare the Janet Leigh/Anthony Perkins face-off in stark
black and white with the Anne Heche/Vince Vaughn re-creation in full
color. The actors follow the same plot, read the same lines, even
retrace the same footsteps and body movements, but in so-doing convey
something quite original and unique. Which brings me close to the reason
I was so interested in reviewing this film -- from the point of view of
a person of faith.
There will probably be as steep an uphill climb for me to persuade
devout readers that the Psycho remake has merit as it will be for Van
Sant to convince Hitchcock true believers that anything like a "revival"
of the Master's work would be worthy of the attempt. This is doubly
true, of course, because this movie -- in either version -- has few, if
any, obviously redeeming qualities.  Its focal point is a bloody murder
committed by a mentally deranged young man.  The book on which the
film-script is based was inspired by a true story of a perverted mass
murderer. That this criminal both in real life and in the movies is
"brought to justice," will not be of sufficient significance to offer
Psycho as a "morality play."  At a deeper level, this movie is about the
traps we all find ourselves in, and the difficulty of escaping them.
Neither will this be a sufficient reason for readers of this review
either to rent Psycho, take one, or go out to your local theater to see
Psycho, take two.
What I find most worthy of attention in this whole situation, and this
may be closer to what Van Sant was getting at in his "revival," is the
larger lesson that this film has to teach about both story telling and
"truth telling."  As any story teller knows (including those of us who
merely read stories to our children) there's as much in a story that is
brought to it by the listeners as the tellers, and each time a powerful
story is told, it takes on new meaning. This is true of the good mystery
stories that Alfred Hitchcock told; it is also true of the "greatest
story ever told, " and, for that matter, the entire contents of the Holy
Bible. Biblical literalists notwithstanding, the truthfulness of the
Bible cannot be validated simply by repeating the words of the text over
and over again. The meaning of the text can only be validated within a
living community of faith and within the personal lives of individual
believers. And, equally important, the truths to be found in the Bible
will vary from age to age as its implications are seen and appreciated
by different people in different ways.
The two versions of Psycho, identical though they may be in sharing the
same script, are vastly different in terms of  look and feel.  More
important, the differences in nuance and meaning are striking. Their
animating spirit is profoundly different. The actors, of course, make a
great deal of difference, the colors less so. Most critical is the
unique event that takes place when film and film-maker, actors and
audiences encounter each other in the viewing of the film. Seeing Psycho
in 1998 is different than seeing it in 1960, whatever version you are
seeing.   During the showing of the film that I attended at a theatre in
Manhattan, two individuals in the next row of seats started fighting and
had to be ejected. Rather than disrupting the film, the conflict seemed
to heighten the suspense, drawing further attention to the
"congregation" that would experience this "revival" as none other.  I
suspect that Van Sant's effort will be studied alongside the original,
precisely for what such a parallel viewing will reveal about what has
become of us, as a people, during the near 40 years between these two
films. Seeing Psycho, take one, and Psycho, take two, side-by-side is
like taking a stereoscopic photo that penetrates into the depths of who
we are as a people. Four flames.
