Authors
Jonathan Knight
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Air America (1990)
     AIR AMERICA is a wonderful movie which actually has the distinction
of making me laugh out loud in the cinema.
     I went to see AIR AMERICA having seen the trailer and thought it
might be a little light relief on a Friday evening.  The movie is based
in Laos while Tricky Dicky (President Nixon) was telling the whole world
that the US government was not in Laos.  Of course this sounds slightly
odd as we can see a vast collection of aircraft and government troops
exactly where they're not supposed to be.
     The government is in fact in Laos, but employing a collection of
civilian pilots to fly supplies to the army the US would like to win the
war.  As a sideline the US major is running a heroin factory and using
the pilots to fly the opium around.
     This then gives a nice set of interactions that the film uses for
both comic effect and also to serious and emotional effect which the
film just about brings off.  The dialogue is cleverly written and has
some beautiful lines which are extremely funny.
     Characters other than the two main ones are not explored, then tend
to be there for contrast and provide the setting for the scene.  The
story is enough to make the film move along at the right pace and it is
easy to follow what's going on and why (good news for Friday evening).
     I really enjoyed this movie, it fitted in exactly with what I
wanted to see.  It is far more funny than the trailer would lead you to
believe.
-- 
JANET :jonathan@uk.ac.keele.cs     Jonathan Knight,
BITNET:jonathan%cs.kl.ac.uk@ukacrl Department of Computer Science
other :jonathan@cs.keele.ac.uk     University of Keele, Keele,
UUCP  :...!ukc!kl-cs!jonathan      Staffordshire. ST5 5BG. U.K.
.


Title
Review for Highlander II: The Quickening (1991)
     I went to see the sequel to HIGHLANDER last night, and I can
honestly say it is very irritating.  HIGHLANDER was "a kind of magic"
where the mystery was maintained throughout the film, the characters
were intelligent and the film made an effort to make us believe what we
were seeing.  HIGHLANDER II: THE QUICKENING makes no effort along these
lines and in fact appears to have been written by someone who didn't
watch the first film carefully.
     The plot is simple: the world has lost its ozone layer and people
are dying from UV radiation from the sun.  McCloud has developed some
ingenious device which places a "shield" around the earth to block off
the UV radiation.  We see it switched on and then skip 25 years into the
future where we find the shield is blocking all light from the sun and
stars and an evil company now controls the shield.  The countries of the
world pay the shield company to keep the radiation from their people and
so this company has something of a monopoly.  The world is a depressing
place which is in constant darkness and decay.
     Having got the plot out of the way in about six minutes (including
the credits) and about four sentences of meaningful dialogue, the film
starts to destroy the magic of the first film.  Firstly we find out that
McCloud is in fact an alien from the planet Zeiss and together with a
bunch of rebels (including Ramirez) was banished to earth.  When only
one rebel was left on earth the winner would gain the prize; either be
mortal on earth (no mention this time of the "knowledge") or return to
Zeiss.  Before McCloud is captured on Zeiss, he and Ramirez go through a
ceremony called the quickening in which they both dunk their fingers in
a pot of water.
     This basic plot causes a whole bunch of problems.  How was Ramirez
sent to a different point in time to McCloud?  This planet doesn't have
time travel and all the other transfers arrive together.  How come
McCloud doesn't recognise Ramirez in the first film if in fact they were
fairly good friends to start off with?  How come the villagers in
Scotland didn't notice McCloud didn't have a Scottish accent when he
turned up?  Why did he have to be taught to sword fight when that was
the main weapon they used on Zeiss?  McCloud had the prize and knew what
everyone was thinking, home come he only solved the ozone problem, what
about war and famine, are we to believe he didn't turn his talent to
those problems after he perfected the shield?
     Obviously, with McCloud aging and all the other immortals dead, the
film then decides its time to add some action.  The ruler of the planet
Zeiss (General something or other) decides that he doesn't want McCloud
back on Zeiss and so sends out a couple of guys to wipe him out.
McCloud dispatches them and because they were immortals, he too becomes
immortal again and returns to being the age he was when he lost his
immortality.  So the General decides to turn up and do the job himself.
He decides to take over the shield company for no reason that is
explained or even questioned during the film and then McCloud and he
fight it out--guess who wins.  Having done this McCloud then destroys
the shield (he has found out along the way that the ozone layer has
repaired itself) and so we wait for HIGHLANDER III.
     Ramirez is reincarnated by McCloud and helps out in a few bits and
pieces along the way.  Nothing significant--basically he's the comic
interlude.
     There is a female in the film, basically a blonde bimbo terrorist
who demonstrates no intelligence, to whom McCloud is attracted.  It is
she who discovers the ozone layer is back when she and a bunch of
friends break into the control room for the shield and take a reading.
She then follows McCloud around for the rest of the movie.
     There are many bits of the film that are just done for effect.
When the general arrives, he lands on earth in a tube train (that's
subway train for the Americans) and decides that he wants some new
clothes.  So he kills the nearest guy wearing something he likes.  Then
he decides to drive the train:
 General: "I bet you've always wanted to drive one of these?"
 Some poor kid he has by the neck nods.
 General: "Me too."
     A curious statement as he's just arrived from a planet where there
was no evidence of anything that even looked like an American subway
train.  He then manages to get the train up to 400 miles per hour, gets
it to look like a Catherine wheel and then ploughs it through a brick
wall in which it stops after about 30 feet without even a dent to the
driver's cabin.
     The special effects are all done to excess; they are also very
poor.  The flight scenes between McCloud and the immortal assassins are
done by speeding the film up.  This presumably was done to make some
fast action; however, the camera moves too fast making it hard to follow
and the flying is jerky and has no grace.  Some scenes are shown at
normal speed and this gives a far better impression of the gracefulness
of a sword fight in the air.
     The scenes where McCloud kills an immortal are seriously overdone.
In the first HIGHLANDER there were usually a few things moving and a few
cars going bang.  In this one he has the effect of a fairly large bomb.
Everything within 100 yards bursts into flames including all the cars,
most of the buildings and a petrol tanker that happened to be passing.
The death toll should have been about 100, but it seems McCloud wasn't
worried about all this destruction he had just wreaked, and calmly walks
away.
     So here are the movie goofs I spotted.  Firstly the script.
Secondly, when the general is transported to earth, you see his ungloved
hand just before he disappears--when he arrives on earth it is gloved.
When McCloud and Ramirez go to the maximum-security prison then are
machine-gunned, we see McCloud's door open and he is shown taking lots
of bullets on the floor.  When the bimbo is taken from the boot she
looks into the car and McCloud is now comfortable in his seat and the
door is closed.  I also got confused between the max-security prison and
the shield.  It seems that at the end these are the same place and yet I
got the impression they were supposed to be separate.
     In conclusion this is a reasonable film, but a very poor sequel.
For that reason I'd score it -2 on a scale of -4 to +4.
-- 
  ______    JANET :jonathan@uk.ac.keele.cs     Jonathan Knight,
    /       BITNET:jonathan%cs.kl.ac.uk@ukacrl Department of Computer Science
   / _   __ other :jonathan@cs.keele.ac.uk     University of Keele, Keele,
(_/ (_) / / UUCP  :...!ukc!kl-cs!jonathan      Staffordshire.  ST5 5BG.  U.K.
