Authors
Prentiss Riddle
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Bis ans Ende der Welt (1991)
     It is directed by Wim Wenders, stars William Hurt and Solveig
Dommartin (who you'll remember if you saw Wenders' gorgeous WINGS OF
DESIRE), and is written by Australian novelist Peter Carey (author of
the wonderful book and movie BLISS).
     Without getting into spoilers, I'll just say that the movie is set
in 1999, when a nuclear satellite accident is threatening to start off
an automated WWIII in the upper atmosphere.  Against this background boy
meets girl and boy, girl, and assorted bad guys chase each other across
four continents of high tech and urban decay.
     I'd describe the movie as equally influenced by film noir,
cyberpunk and magical realism.  The mix doesn't always sit well.  It is
as slow as the rest of Wim Wenders' languorous work, something I usually
enjoy, but the conventions of noir and especially cyberpunk would call
for speed.  Its plot meanders like a Gabriel Garcia Marquez novel,
playing with our expectations about beginning, middle and end, an effect
which worked beautifully in BLISS but doesn't seem to work here.
Wenders pays more attention to the science fiction aspect of his
cyberpunk theme than most so-called cyberpunk movies -- in fact computer
animation and HDTV effects play as important a part in the movie as the
stunning landscapes -- but at crucial points the technology leaves
reality behind and becomes magic or metaphor.
     Still, this movie is trying to do a lot of important and exciting
things.  The sense of "end times" which naturally occurs at the end of a
millennium still has many of us by the throat.  Yet we escaped the Cold
War by the skin of our teeth, and we no longer have a clear focus for
our sense of doom.  Maybe it's already time for movies which ask how
we're going to feel when we wake up on a bright morning in the next
millennium to find a day which is much like the one which went before it
-- dangerous, yes, but not necessarily the End of the World.
-- Prentiss Riddle ("aprendiz de todo, maestro de nada") riddle@rice.edu
