Authors
Stan Sawyer
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Legends of the Fall (1994)
     I am entirely infuriated.  I have just watched the movie LEGENDS
OF THE FALL.  This is by far the worst movie I have ever seen.  Not
that the cinematography had any problems.  Just the scriptwriter and
the director who thought that this was any more that a reflection of
the worst of our own time.
     Here is Tristan, a rugged individualist, who cares nothing for
anyone but himself and his own grief.  Now, don't get me wrong here:
he has plenty to grieve in the death of this brother and the loss and
regain of a mate.  But his answer is self-pitying revenge and
mourning.
     I understand the necessity of mourning as much as any man.  Yes,
I mean man since it is men in our society who have this particular
problem with grief.  I have been as stuck in my own grief as anyone I
know.  I am certain that my desire to move beyond this grief into new
relationships and self-understanding is at least one of the reasons
that I find this movie so revolting.
     Tristan, refuses to face his own grief.  Instead, he first is a
good student, then good at his vocation (rancher?), then ignores the
problem (to the point of totally ignoring triggers like the cow caught
in barbed-wire), then throws himself into his sadness (by throwing
himself into the arms of his dead brothers mate), then runs away in
search of distractions from his mourning, then gets caught up in
enterprise.  Finally, his "bonded males" (in this case a father and a
brother) rescue the man who is still a boy, allowing him to run away
one more time from the grief he should be facing.
     Tristan asks his father if he has damned everyone around him as
well as himself.  His father cannot say "no."  Only that "I won't allow
that."
     Yes, I'm pissed off.  I'm tired of a society that allows for two
types of men: the business-like ones who ignore their "feelings" and
the sensitive ones who totally immerse in the grief and pain of life.
It's time to wake up, men.  Don't let this sort of media/societal
affirmation encourage you to remain stuck in the doldrums of life.
Life into and through these experiences.  Don't let them be a part of
your stuckness!  Let them be a part of your healing and awakening to
the newness of more complete, less self-absorbed relationships.  Let
them give rise to a new you who can "be all that you can be" in ways
that you never imagined.
     Tristan wrestles with a bear in the final scene.  The narrator
tells us that this was a good death.  He is wrong.  Wrestling with our
"nature" in our own death throes is not good.  Good would mean some
manner of comming to resolution with our own sense of self.  Leaving
the nature-wrestling, self-absorbed, dying self behind and becoming the
fullness of the nature-loving, self-fulfilling, living self who
recognizes now as now and then as then.
     LEGENDS OF THE FALL is about losing self.  Don't accept this
encouragement to die while we are alive.  LIVE.
