Authors
Jet Wimp
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Tous les matins du monde (1991)
     When I think of the predicament of French cinema, I envision a
delicate Columbine doll labeled ART being torn apart by a mastiff
labeled THOUGHT AND REASON.  The tendency towards philosophical
abstraction has been the curse of French film since Renoir, culminating
in the soporific headiness of such master anaesthetists as Bresson and
Rohmer.  My own list of the 12 greatest films contains a single French
entry, Clement's FORBIDDEN GAMES (1951).  That film spoke movingly of
the horrifying effect of war on children; no philosophical meditations
crippled its direct and harrowing message.
     But in French film, such achievements are rare, and seem almost to
have to apologize for their presence.  There was a time when I thought
French film might be rescued from its philosophical diaspora.  I
welcomed Godard's BREATHLESS (1960), and even WEEKEND (1968), but that
director began to descend into bombast and politically trendy rant.
Once in a while a filmmaker such as Cocteau in LES ENFANTS TERRIBLE
(1950) would approach a robust subject, then scurry away in cant and
confusion, leaving an unwatchable film.  The promise of LA FEMME NIKITA
and DELICATESSEN remains to be fulfilled.   
     It is remarkable that French cineasts admire from afar a completely
different approach to filmmaking, the American film noir genre, with its
frenetic sense of doom and its headlong momentum.  I think randomly of
four fairly recent American films, THE GRIFTERS, KILL ME AGAIN,
SHATTERED, ONE FALSE MOVE.  None of these films is free from flaws, but
each grabs the viewer by the scruff of the neck neck at the beginning
and at the end propels him/her out of the theater wondering how 1 1/2
hours could have passed so quickly.  The momentum films in this genre
are capable of building is truly marvelous.  The  noir spirit of these
films is the antithesis of what the French filmmakers themselves usually
achieve.  French filmmakers are like the acnaed high school computer
whiz who fantasizes about the cheerleader he can never have.
     The recent film, TOUS LES MATINS DU MONDE (All The Mornings of the
World) is, alas, in the reflective tradition.  The film  details the
relationship between the baroque composers Marin Marais (1656-1728) and
M.  de Sainte Colombe, played by Gerard Depardieu and Jean-Pierre
Marielle, respectively.  Marais is best known, perhaps,  for his
unearthly "Les Sonnerie de Sainte Genevieve du Mont-de-Paris" which is
often played on the classical music stations.  I am uncertain about the
historicity of Marielle's character.  He is certainly obscure, not even
being listed in my Slonimsky.   However, some recordings of his music
have begun to emerge.  In the film Marais is depicted as his protege,
but in reality Marais studied the viola da gamba with Hotterman, and
composition with Lully.  Their relationship is the usual protege
relationship enshrined in filmdom: melodramatic, filled with sullen
abrasiveness, temperament, posturing, and in this case with a seduced,
pining and ultimately suicidal daughter.  
     The film is langorous and atmospheric, and the interplay of the
haunting baroque music with the pastoral scenery is effective.  The
actors handle their duties adroitly, particularly  Marielle, and that
reliable fireplug of an actor, Depardieu.  French actors are, I think,
the best film actors.  Everything comes from the face, and everything is
nuance.  French actors and directors both have obviously studied the
great American film actors of the past.  It is interesting that Stephen
Frears, the director of LIASONS DANGEREUSE, cast that film with
American, rather than French, actors because "American actors are better
with their faces."  I don't think so.  More than once, during the films
JEAN DE LA FLORETTE and MANON OF THE SPRING I burst into spontaneous
applause at the intense subtlety of the performances, particularly those
of Daniel Auteuil and Yves Montand.    When I saw LA FEMME NIKITA, there
was a unified intake of breath from the audience during Jeanne Moreau's
bravura turn as the aging crone.  I could name many other equally
thrilling examples.  Marielle in the present film is so uncanny that one
could easily watch him read a telephone book, or Descartes' "Discourse
on Method," which is an asset, because in this movie that's about what
the viewer gets.
     Yes, unfortunately that age-old succubus of French film, THE IDEA,
is at work.  Seeing the device called  "faction"---  historical figures
in an imagined narrative---in the hands of a French director is ominous,
like a toddler playing with a handgun.  It means the characters can be
anything, in particular, puppets, from whose mouths can me made to issue
maxims, alternatively opaque and sophomoric.  The motivations and
consistency of character in the movie are really non-existent;  Marais'
dialog could be given to Sainte Colombe or vice versa with no
discernible effect.  The characters are pegs on which to hang a series
of ruminations about art and life.  The character of the young Marais,
played by Depardieu's real life son, makes no sense whatsoever.  He
weeps when upbraided by Sainte Colombe and denounces him as a cruel man,
yet, with no hesitation, walks out on his pregnant lover.  "Our bodies
are no longer right for each other."
     There is no historical evidence that Marais liked to dally
destructively.  In fact, he married at the age of 20 and had 19 devoted
children.  More faction, I suppose.
     The film culminates in a ultra-slow-motion Socratic dialog between
St. Colombe and his errant pupil Marais on the nature of art and life.
     "What is music for?"  St. Colombe asks, pensively.  The scene is
filmed in near darkness, the actor's faces fill the screen, an
encyclopedia of facial expressions is exhibited before each word of
dialog emerges.   
     To this question, Marais offers a languid series of abstruse
replies, each of which is countered by a severe "NO!" from St. Colombe.
Finally, the secret is revealed.
     "Music is for before we are born, before we breathe, before we see
the light."
     Watching this philosophical paint dry became excruciating,
unendurable.  I estimated my distance from the exit doors.  I found
myself conjuring up new muffin recipes.  I found myself thinking of
imaginative ways to re-wire my house and reappraising the promises of
that morning's junk mail.  I renewed my promise never to shout "FRENCH
CINEMA!" in a crowded fire station.

Title
Review for Bad Lieutenant (1992)
     In one of Charles Jackson's stories from the collection, "Earthly
Creatures," a suburbanite driving through the countryside with his wife
and two children hits a beautiful collie dog.  He cannot summon up the
courage to stop the car and inspect the dog, and so drives on.  This act
of cowardice becomes the pivotal incident which starts the collapse of
his marriage and personal life--the fulcrum for the transformation of
his world.
     Literature and film are replete with this motif:  the single
incident which signals the transformation of a person's existence.  In
Shakespeare's "Timon of Athens",one of the most cynical of the author's
works, it is when Timon realizes that his highly valued personal
friendships have been based entirely on his largesse, and when his
fortunes fail, his friends shun him.  "NOBODY KNOWS YOU WHEN YOU'RE DOWN
AND OUT...."
     In BRIDGE OVER THE RIVER KWAI it occurs when Alec Guiness suddenly
realizes that the bridge which, under his supervision, his troops built
with the cardinal British virtues of competence, and self-denial, will
be used to transport Japanese troops.  "My God, what have I done?"  
     Sometimes the transformation is triggered by a spiritual
experience.  The protagonist in I. B. Singer's novel THE MAGICIAN OF
LUBLIN, who has led a dissolute and cruel life, is touched by God.  He
seals himself into a small brick hut with a single window, through which
his meals are delivered, and ends his days there.  
     Sometimes the light of God blinds, rather than illuminates.  In
Pasolini's film THEOREMA the angel, played by Terrence Stamp, places the
seal of his sexual seduction on all members of a bourgeois family, and
they are destroyed by it--or at least their lives are transformed
unrecognizably.  
     The psychologist William James called this sort of life experience
"turning a corner within."  It is entirely personal.  Was the magician
touched by God?  Did the Bad Lieutenant actually see Christ?  James
insisted that what was important was not the viridical nature of the
experience itself, but its subsequent effect on the person's life.  He
argued that the "truth" of such experiences could never be decided.  
     Viewers sensitive to this motif will find the film, THE BAD
LIEUTENANT, a rich one.  The incident in the church, where the
lieutenant kisses the feet of Christ and looks up to see an elderly
black woman staring down in amazement at him, is one of the most
trenchant, moving, yet comical scenes in American film.  You thought you
beheld Christ, and see what he turned out to be!!  But the point is, the
vision serves to transform the lieutenant's world, enabling to make a
gesture of forgiveness--towards the two teenagers who had raped a
nun--of which he would have been incapable an hour before.  
     Those who have chosen to focus on the lieutenant's graphically
depicted vices and the squalor of his surroundings have, I think,
totally missed the point.  The Philadelphia Inquirer called the film
"confused."  Nonsense.  It is perfectly clear, as clear a treatise on
medieval scholasticism ( "Theorema" in Italian, see above.)  The
resolution of the film involves what many would call a uniquely
Christian concept: we qualify for forgiveness by extending forgiveness
to others.  In fact, the film is almost a Christian religious treatise.
     The film also utilizes humor brilliantly, a fact its detractors
seem not to have noticed.  The lieutenant's imprecations when Darrell
Strawberry strikes out in a penant game (YOU PIECE OF ****!!!  YOU
MISERABLE, SLIMY PIECE OF ****!!!)  and his firing his gun into the car
radio conveying the bad news, are funnier than nearly any incident in
memory in any Hollywood comedy.  No matter how wrecked any life is,
humor can be found in it.  Because humor is so great a part of what it
means to be a human being, even one in great distress.
     Harvey Keitel gives one of the great film performances: creative,
resourceful, convincing, free from actorish mannerism.   His acting in
the harrowing scene in which he sexually brutalizes two women has drawn
effusive praise from members of this group and the Compuserve film
discussion group.  In my many years of film viewing, I can think of
nothing that can compare with it.
     Harvey Keitel, by the way, was ignored by the Oscars nominators.

Title
Review for Salň o le 120 giornate di Sodoma (1975)
     As you all know, I have solicited best film lists from the
readership of rec.arts.movies.  What has surprised me is that so far
there has been so little overlap in the many lists sent to me.  The
lists have revealed very eclectic tastes, and have been generally
unresponsive to what are often called "The Great Films."  CITIZEN KANE
has appeared on only one list, for example.  I was intrigued by the
fact that the only film common to several lists was the infamous SALO
of the Italian director Pier Paolo Pasolini.  I had not seen this film,
but after an e-mail exchange with one of the readers whose list
contained it, I decided to view it.  Since I have read the book on
which the film is based, THE 120 DAYS OF SODOM, by the Marquis de
Sade (1740-1814) and many have not, I thought my observations on the
film would be of interest to the Net readership.
     SALO is not for everyone.  It's depiction of sexual torture and
murder as well as other perversions is convincing and very graphic.
Full nudity of both sexes abounds.  In the films of established,
"respected" directors, SALO has no antecedents.  A measure of
Pasolini's facility with morally extreme thematic material is the fact
that many consider his THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW (1964) to
be the finest film setting of the life of Christ.  SALO (1975) is the
moral obverse of the earlier film.
     De Sade, from whom the word "sadism" derives, wrote THE 120 DAYS
OF SODOM while imprisoned for sexual crimes.  Though the book is
considered his most important work, it was not published in his
lifetime.
     De Sade professed a philosophy of Rousseauian individualism,
carried to psychopathic excess.  Men have the right to do whatever they
want to do.  (It is not clear whether he would grant women the same
authority, although many of the women in his writings have a startling
degree of self-actualization.)  Pity and compassion are lies,
promulgated by the weak to procure the leniency of the strong.  De Sade
would revile the ideas of humanism as self-deception and folly.
Humankind is divided into two classes, the oppressors and the
oppressed. You must choose to be either one or the other.  While you
may cringe at making such a choice, you cannot change the facts: that's
the way things are, and the history of our species proves it.
     De Sade claimed that his philosophy brought him happiness:  "On
the basis of my errors, I have established principles;  since that
time, I have known felicity."  His writings, as I point out later,
reveal otherwise.  De Sade placed himself in a prison grimmer than the
physical prison he inhabited, a prison of the soul.
     Some may question why we should tolerate de Sade's writings.
Simone de Beauvoir has written a very perceptive defense of de Sade,
and her essay is contained as a preface to the Grove Press edition of
THE 120 DAYS, under the title, "Must we burn de Sade?"  However, rather
than get into a swivet of self-debate about whether such material
should be permitted in even a free society,  I suggest that, if the
first paragraph or so of my description indicates the film would not be
congenial to your tastes, you avoid it.
     What follows is a TOTAL SPOILER!  Also, I warn that my description
of the film and book may offend some.
     For a number of years I have tried to analyze the reasons for the
exceptional texture of Pier Paolo Pasolini's films.  His films seem to
possess a strange kind of stasis, consisting of a series of brief,
isolated set-pieces, not narrative but rather visual in character,
somewhat like snapshots, mathematical lemmas, or pronouncements from a
catechism.  It is interesting that TEOREMA, one of his most striking
films, takes its title from the Italian word for a medieval
theological treatise.
     The methods that Pasolini uses to achieve this effect, as I see
it, are three: i) the frequent use of long shots, often with either
no action or some non-committal action, like walking; ii) almost no
camera movement; iii) the use of untrained actors.  No one has used
untrained actors more effectively than Pasolini.  Directors working
with trained actors rely on the reaction shot to establish film
continuity.  The more skilled the actors, the more emotional momentum
the film has.  When Pasolini's camera captures the face of a young
peasant, the effect is one of disjunction:  the film, in a sense, comes
to a halt.  The face is affectless, bland, passive--not even baffled
or uncomprehending.  There is no bad acting, there is simply no acting
at all.  Such devices allow Pasolini to produce an almost mechanical
passivity, an implicit fatalism.
     "This is the way things are," the films seem to be saying.
"There's nothing that can be done about it."
     Whether you like Pasolini's films will depend to a large extent
not so much on the subject matter but whether you accept his film
language.  Some people can't.  Several years ago I attended a revival
of TEOREMA at the Theater of the Living Arts, in Philadelphia.  There
were titters and even guffaws from the audience during the film.  In
the face of what cannot be understood, Pasolini seems to be saying,
passivity is inevitable.  Audience laughter is a way of resisting this
invitation to victimhood.  On the other hand, Pasolini's films enjoy
a rare timelessness because his style often lifts the material above
social conventions.
     Such a film vocabulary is, I believe, perfect for translating de
Sade's dark vision.  It is safe to say that no other director could
have dealt with THE 120 DAYS OF SODOM, certainly the most appalling
book ever written.  Whether you think that Pasolini himself deals with
it successfully is, I suppose, a matter of personal taste.
     The Duc de Blangis, with a entourage of depraved nobles and
prelates, a rogue Archbishop, servants, armed guards, and congeries of
male and female youths kidnapped for the occasion, retire to an
immense castle in the countryside.  There, over a period of 120 days,
they execute a series of activities designed to explore the extremes of
sexual perversion, generally to the detriment of the kidnapped youths,
including torture and murder.
     The Duc begins the festivities by reading to the soldiers and the
terrified youths certain rules: 1)  the mention of God, or the
undertaking of any religious observance, including prayer, is
punishable by immediate death; 2) any private sexual act is punishable
by immediate death.  All sexual activity must be prescribed by the Duc
and witnessed by him.
     Each morning begins with a dissolute middle-aged courtesan named
Duclos relating one of her past sexual escapades to the assembled
nobles, youths, and soldiers--de Sade's version of matins.  The
assembled leaders impatiently prod Duclos for more details.  These
scenes follow the book closely.  The furious probing for ever more
lurid details suggests that de Sade during these episodes was the prey
of his own fantasies, that he was indulging them as gingerly and
fearfully as one might hand-feed a starving tiger.
     Later in the day, sexual activities, orchestrated by the Duc, take
place.  The activities of the first several days are rather
conventional, but because of the Duc's boredom and impatience, they
soon begin to assume a cruel and bizarre aspect: frequent homosexual
and heterosexual rape, coprophagia, uropinia, morophilia  (I'm having
to reach for my Greek dictionary now), miscegenation, elaborate
tortures.  There is a remarkable banquet with only one entree.  A young
soldier and a maid are found in bed together and are summarily
executed.
     The cynosure of the book is the Duc.  In the Duc de Blangis, de
Sade created an unforgettable character: implacable, fathomlessly
evil, a moral black hole.  He is the most intimidating figure in
literature.  "He may be regarded as the depository of every vice and
crime," de Sade stipulates.  "He has killed his mother, his sister, and
three of his wives."  One has to look to the Jacobean stage to find any
close contenders in villainy.  Even the Duc's lust, fueled by a sort of
ethereal rage ("Today would go badly for them.  The Duc was in a black
mood...") seems theoretical, divorced from human concerns.  For those
of us worried about the redemption of our species, he presents a
terrifying construct.
     SALO is truly shocking.  However, it is neither exploitative nor
sensationalistic.  Exploitation and sensationalism are film devices
adopted for a particular occasion with the response of a particular
audience in mind.  Pasolini's adaptation of de Sade's long (500 pp.)
book is measured, literal, almost reverent.   He selects, but he alters
little.  He places the film in northern Italy during the Second World
War--the leaders, in black business suits,  are higher-ups in the
Gestapo, the guards are SS men.  We hear throughout the film the low
distant rumble of war, as though some gigantic inscrutable machine were
at work, a very effective device.  The suggestion is that the only
difference between war and systematic torture is the ingredient of
specific human intent.  The film attains some resonance because of the
setting, which invites us to reflect on the nature of fascism.  However
the Duc is not a fascist.  Fascism involves values, perverted,
perhaps, but values nevertheless.  The Duc has no values.  The
contemporary setting is useful only to explain the origins of the Duc's
power.
     Toward the end, de Sade's writing becomes frantic.  Sentences
tumble out.  Tortures are more grotesque and abbreviated.  The excised
nerves of a maid servant are wound on red-hot spools of iron.  "In
order to combine incest, adultery, sodomy and sacrilege," we are
informed, "he embuggers his married daughter with a Host."  Like a
racing driver trapped under the carriage of his runaway machine, de
Sade has become the ejecta of his own fixations.
     At this point Pasolini distances himself from de Sade's hysteria
and shapes the material to his own ends, revealing a formidable
artistry.  The Duc and the Archbishop are seated in elegant drag,
almost as though they were holding court.  With binoculars, they watch
through the castle windows the silent, prolonged torture of young males
in the courtyard below: disembowlings, blindings, branding, the
excisions of tongues, scalping.  Beyond the small window panes partly
obscured with dirt we can observe the silent, sprightly glee, the awful
grin,  of the torturer who presides over the mayhem.  Pasolini's use of
this distancing device is a stroke of genius.  The effect it produces
is unearthly.
     The seated Duc peers through the eyepiece of his binoculars, then
the lens piece, then again through the eyepiece, so the action is
enlarged, diminished, and enlarged again.  In just this way, Pasolini
is saying, tyrants can always orchestrate their own reactions to the
cruelty they inspire.
     Then the film ends with an unexpected scene, typical of Pasolini's
lavish use of irony. In an upstairs bedroom two handsome young armed
guards in street clothes are listening to the radio.  One tunes it from
the ominous cadences of "Carmina Burana," which has been playing during
the torture sequence, to a light-hearted '40's dance tune.
     They rise, put down their guns, clasps hands and waists, and
proceed to move in a clumsy, yet stately, dance.
     "What's your girlfriend's name?" one asks.
     "Margarita," the other replies, with a soft, embarrassed grin.
     My feeling is that SALO is a unique phenomenon in the history of
film.  It cannot be dismissed nor ignored, and those who view it must
be willing to live with its images.  It forces us to think in new ways
about the nature of power and victimhood.  Time and again it stresses
that victimhood--far from eliciting pity in an oppressor--is the
posture that is most likely to goad him to increased cruelty.  In its
ability to make such extreme material real, SALO is a testament to the
franchise of film in today's aesthetic world, as unassailable and
nonnegotiable as the hegemony of the Duc himself.
     The Italian government pressed obscenity charges against SALO
which delayed its release for many months.  The film was finally
released in 1975, the year of Pasolini's own death by homicide.  A
17-year-old street tough, towards whom Pasolini had made sexual
advances, bludgeoned him to death, than ran over him repeatedly with
the director's Alfa Romeo.
