Authors
David Cowen
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Sirens (1994)
     SIRENS has been spoken of highly by critics as being a rare mix: a
film that is just as intellectually appealing as it is titillating.
Given the promise of the much ballyhooed nude appearance by Elle
MacPherson, it would seem that if SIRENS could live up to that sort of
praise, it would be one heckuva film.  Amazingly enough, the film turns
out to be considerably more intellectually appealing than
titillating--the film does a good job of exploring the theme of whether
censorship of obscene or blasphemous art is beneficial to the would-be
viewer of that art.  However, the film drags so much in the second and
third acts as to make it overall only a bit better than the average
coming-of-age or sexual awakening film.
     Hugh Grant stars as Antony Campion, a young British priest who is
sent by the Anglican Church to discuss the showing of a painting
featuring Venus being crucified at a Sydney exhibition with the artist,
Norman Lindsay (an underused Sam Neill).  The church would like to see
Lindsay's art displayed, but object to that particular painting, and it
is Campion's task to convince Lindsay to substitute it with another,
less blasphemous painting.  Campion and his frigid wife, Estella,
travel to Australia to meet with Lindsay.  They arrive at his estate
where they find he lives not only with his wife and two daughters, but
three models.  Two of the models embarrass the Campions with their
brazen attitudes towards sex, nudity, the bourgeois, and eating cheese
with one's hands.  The third, Giddy, is a young innocent who won't pose
with her clothes off.
     Lindsay and Campion argue about the censorship of art--or
rather, Campion does.  Lindsay throughout the entire film shows only an
air of bemusement to his guests, simply continuing with his work and
not backing down to the church's requests.  Campion tries his hardest
to argue for the church with a "non-fundamentalist", contemporary point
of view hoping to reach Lindsay, but he ultimately fails miserably.
Campion believes that the displaying of such offensive work as
Lindsay's would make a permanent impression in the mind of the viewer
and corrupt them.  Lindsay and his cronies believe that to be
nonsense.
     In the meantime, the Campions learn they must stay another week at
the Lindsay's, the train they were to travel back on has derailed, and
the track needed to be rebuilt.  Estella, while they wait at the
Lindsays, gets to know the models and, while originally repulsed by
their attitudes and actions, slowly begins to warm to their views on
life, love and sex--and ends up having a affair with the blind
handyman.
     The film never breaks from its investigation of the two different
lifestyles and views on sex, nudity and blasphemy portrayed by the two
families--often this theme takes on a ironic nature and is fascinating
and ultimately thought-provoking.  However, when the film gets into
Estella's "awakening," and she goes from being frigid to being one of
Lindsay's sirens, the film loses a lot of its drive.  We've all seen
the image of the frigid schoolmarm or librarian seduced into letting
her hair down a hundred times, and SIRENS doesn't put a new spin on
it.  We follow this thread of the story for almost half of the film,
and it gets tiring and predictable.  The main driving force of the
story is Antony Campion, and while Estella's sexual awakening is
necessary to the plot, one leaves wishing there had been more plot or
discussion and less of Estella's inane, unexiting fantasizing or sexual
encounters.
     The acting is uniformly good, especially the surprisingly good
performance by Elle MacPherson.  MacPherson's brazen model is so
abrasive as to be stomach churning at times, and shows her character to
be significantly more than a brainless body.  Sam Neill's tired,
bemused performance as Lindsay is well performed, though he is on the
screen very little--it is like his character in UNTIL THE END OF THE
WORLD ... his character is a guiding force of the film but appears very
little.  Hugh Grant as Anthony Campion is just right as the
contemporary young priest, getting enthused and perturbed over all the
right things, all the while displaying a peculiar innocence.  Only Tara
Fitzgerald's unexciting Estella and the mindlessly bad acting of
whoever the blind handyman was (reducing the performance to that of one
of those robo-hunks in soft-core porn) were standouts in an otherwise
good cast.
     Ultimately, I wish the plot would have gotten more into characters
that are presented as being interesting--Lindsay and the models are
fascinating sketches of characters, but we fail to get into them
because the film spends too much time with Estella.  However the
symbolism presented in the film, the subtle ironies of the plot, and
the theme of the film kept me thinking about it long after I had left
the theatre, so it certainly wasn't a waste.  I just wish that the
parts meant to be seductive and sensual were as well done as the parts
which were mentally stimulating.
     5 out of 10.  SIRENS had a chance of being an excellent film,
but squanders that chance in foreign art-film coming-of-age pretension.

Title
Review for Hudsucker Proxy, The (1994)
     The Coen Brothers have found success again.  After producing and
directing four stylish and increasingly brilliant films: BLOOD SIMPLE,
RAISING ARIZONA, MILLER'S CROSSING, and the spectacularly complex
BARTON FINK, one would guess that the brother's stab on the
high-budget, commercial genre would create a watered-down result not
even close to matching the quality of their previous successes.  And
while its doubtful that HUDSUCKER PROXY will be able to recoup its $25
(rumored at $40) million budget in the theatres, the film spends the
budget well, mixing the Coen's brother's usual dark themes (Death,
Fate, Work, Failure, Fear of pretending to be what one is not) into a
lush, magical, accessible, Capraesque family movie.  The Coen brothers
have put cream in their coffee, and the result is nothing short of
amazing.
     Tim Robbins stars as Norville Barnes, a small-town rube from the
Muncie School of Business who came to New York with a huge dream and
considerably less work experience.  He finally finds an exploitative
job at Hudsucker Industries in the mail room, and goes to work "long
hours and low wages," attempting (and failing at) absurdly huge tasks.
     Waring Hudsucker, on the other hand, is at the top of the huge
Hudsucker Enterprise, sitting at the end of a tremendous lacquered
board table, smiling as he listens to his accountant give an assessment
of the company: one of incredible success and optimism for the future.
However, his salubrious smile melts into a frown of serious dread as he
realizes that his pocket watch is ticking perilously close to noon.  He
winds the watch, sets it on the table, and as the watch ticks past
noon, runs down the board-room table, jumping through a huge plate
glass window.
     Paul Newman stars as Sidney J. Mussberger, Hudsucker's right-hand
man.  A cut-throat businessman, Mussberger instantly mans the helm of
the company.  Realizing that Hudsucker had decreed that in the event of
his death, Hudsucker Industries stock would be taken public--a move
that would take control of the company away from Mussberger and the
other power-elite in the board room, Mussberger forms a plan to keep
control of the company--find a stupid, unwitting dupe to be the
president, which would screw the company up so bad that Hudsucker stock
would lose its value so that it could be bought up cheaply by the board
members.
     Coming up from the mail room to deliver correspondence to
Mussberger, Barnes terrorizes Mussberger's office, setting important
documents on fire, letting contracts blow out the window, spilling
water all over the floor, all the while attempting to show Mussberger a
diagram for a crackpot new product--a perfectly drawn circle on a
crumpled piece of paper.  Mussberger, impressed by Barnes' bumbling
naivete makes him the head of the company.
     However, the crackpot plan turns out to be the hula hoop, which
Barnes produces using the Hudsucker's resources.  The ensuing hula-hoop
craze quickly turns the former small-town rube into a paparazzi-stalked
celebrity, hounded to come up with an idea greater than a hula hoop.
Jennifer Jason Leigh plays Amy Archer, a Pulitzer-prize winning
reporter who lies her way undercover into Hudsucker Industries and
discovers Barnes' inexperienced past.  Barnes is made out to be an
imbecile, and his fate turns for the worse as he senses his time at the
top running out.
     Not enough can be said about the Coen's knack for creating an
atmosphere in their films.  Shots of the inner-workings of Hudsucker
Industries, from rooms full of pneumatic tubes and the inner workings
of the huge Hudsucker Building clock to the ticker-tape luxuriance of
the offices of Mussberger and Barnes are striking and beautiful.  The
film's editing moves smoothly between segments, giving it a grace
missing in the somewhat abrupt editing of other Coen brother's films.
The dark, thick tone of dread found in their other films has somehow
given way into the air of a genuine magic one finds in the charm of
40's and 50's Christmas films.  The music adds greatly to this: it
swirls into heavenly, wistful crescendos at all the right moments.  THE
HUDSUCKER PROXY is by far the most handsome and magical American film
to be in wide distribution in a couple of decades.
     The performances are superb as well.  Tim Robbins has proved
himself to be one of America's finest actors in his roles in THE PLAYER
and SHORT CUTS, as well as an impressive director/actor in BOB
ROBERTS.  Robbins' Norville Barnes isn't just a hick
caricature--Robbins plays Barnes as a genuinely charming imbecile: a
wise fool, as it were.  Jennifer Jason Leigh's Amy Archer at first
glance seems to be a obnoxious imitation of the Katherine Hepburn type,
but upon closer inspection it becomes obvious that its the Archer
*character* who wants to be the fast-talking tough dame, not Leigh
imitating one--and Leigh's acting reveals all sorts of subtleties and
innocence in Archer's character a lesser actress would gloss over.  The
only loose point is Paul Newman, who doesn't give his character any
more life than of any other "scheming greedy rich corporate head"
caricature.
     Of course, the dialogue is incredibly well written--in a Coen
Brothers film, it is hard to have a favorite quote because everything
that flies out of every actor's mouth is instantly catchy and
quotable.  The only problem is occasionally, especially with the scenes
in the newspaper office, the actors fly through their dialogue so fast
it takes two or three viewings to decipher everything they say.
     All of this begs the question: why is what appears to be (and is
marketed as) an innocent light comedy given a $25 million dollar
treatment by action film producer Joel Silver?  Silver claims "It's
just ... a good *story*, and the invention of the hula hoop, that's
just *cool*."  Somehow, I never thought retro-cool was the only thing
needed to net a $25 million production budget (well, yeah, there was
Oliver Stone's tedious THE DOORS, but that's another story
altogether).
     But THE HUDSUCKER PROXY is much more than just a well-produced
light comedy.  Somewhere, buried beneath the high-gloss sheen of the
sets, the fine acting, the well-paced jokes and the machine-gun paced
dialogue lurks a bit more ... the Coen Brothers' scripts spawn layers
of themes below the surface of the plot, commentaries on life which
span from the evolution of man's survival, the difficulties of
producing successful art, to a literal struggle betwixt time and fate.
     The Coens proved themselves masters of this sort of
script-writing with the obtuse but engrossing Barton Fink, but in many
ways Hudsucker Proxy may be more successful--it turns the Coen's
twisted, enlightened view of the enigmatic sides of life into a
completely audience-accessible film, suitable for the entire family.
In doing so, the Coen brothers have either made the most realistic,
normal surrealist films ever imagined, or one of the most complex,
multi-faceted family films ever made.  "You know, for kids!"  Either
way, the film is superb.
David S. Cowen2609cowend@vms.csd.mu.edu
eschat@solaria.mil.wi.us

Title
Review for Ed Wood (1994)
     Back when I was in high school I used to sit down in the basement
watching TV late at night, hoping I'd find something bizarre or
entertaining to watch.  I'd flip through the channels seeing the same
kind of banal fare typical of late-night TV ... but occasionally,
flipping past PBS, something magical would happen--I'd flip to Glen
or Glenda, Ed Wood's first film about cross-dressing, and spend the
evening laughing and marveling as to where such a goofy piece of
celluloid might come from.  Now, years later I get the answer, in the
form of a brilliantly crafted film by Tim Burton.
     Ed Wood, a struggling studio worker in Hollywood, has bigger
dreams--to write, direct, star in and produce his own film, just like
his idol, Orson Welles.  When Ed finds out a docudrama about
cross-dressing is being made by a B-film company called "Screen
Classics", he phones up the head of the "studio" and tells him that
he's more qualified than anyone in town to make the film.  His
"special" qualification?  Having an affinity for his girlfriend's
angora sweaters.
     Eventually, Ed gets the job, produces Glen or Glenda, and begins
working on a string of horrendously bad pictures (the film examines the
production of two more, the classic BRIDE OF THE MONSTER and PLAN 9
FROM OUTER SPACE) with an amazing amount of vigor and passion for
his ... "art"--never before have I seen such unbridled enthusiasm for
stilted dialogue, cardboard set pieces, and fake octopii.  The film
also explores Wood's friendship with Bela Lugosi, star of DRACULA, as
he tries to make a former screen great a big star again ... even when
that screen great dies before the production of the film.
     Tim Burton could have done a straight biopic, documenting Woods
"fall" into bad monster/nudie films (the abysmal ORGY OF THE DEAD is
a standout), but instead Burton portrays Wood as enthusiastic,
artistic, and full of life--a true believer in his films, as opposed to
just a bored B-movie director.  Wood's enthusiasm is radiated from
Johnny Depp, who with wild-eyes and a big-toothed (yet somewhat
maligned) smile makes even the worst of Wood's dialogue echo with
poignancy--believe it or not.
     The attention to detail is outstanding--I was lucky enough to
catch BRIDE OF THE MONSTER on TV the night before, and except for a
few minor differences, Burton went to a lot of trouble to capture the
look and feel of the movie--and the actors deliver the lines with the
same sort of stuttered bad-acting flair as in the originals.  I felt I
was getting a real look behind the sets.  The entire film feels like it
was directed by Wood himself, with extra-long establishing shots, the
grey-and-white film stock, the lack of music except in points of
highest schmaltz ... and at the theatre I was at, the frequent
projector problems made it all the more realistic--the matte was set
too high, so every time a boom mike got in the shot, there were squeals
of laughter and applause.
     Out of 10: 8.  I haven't had this much fun at a movie in a long
time.  ED WOOD is funny, passionate, and if you've ever seen any of Ed
Wood's work it'll be amazing to see how it was made.  ED WOOD is a
must-see for any self-proclaimed fan of bad cinema, or movies in
general.
esch@fische.com
(Eschatfische!) -------------------------- http://execpc.com/~esch/home.html
