Authors
Ross Anthony
Number of Reviews
260

Title
Review for Mystery Men (1999)
Great concept, stale on dialogue; "Mystery Men" gives great climax.
Three wannabe superheros (the Shoveler, the Blue Raja and Mr. Furious) are
given a shot at the title, when real (well, spoof of a real) superhero,
Captain Amazing is kidnapped by arch bad guy Casanova Frankenstein.
It's whacky deadpan silliness. And although good performances are given all
a round (special praise to Ben Stiller) "Mystery Men's" humor escaped my
eager clutches for the better part of the first half of the movie. Things
sort of start rolling around the superhero wannabe try-outs, where every
goofy power imaginable pops up.
Great set design, my complements to the art director. I loved the Corvette
limo. I also enjoyed the assimilation of the wannabe superheros back into
their real lives with their real wives or moms or girlfriends, the contrast
of identities and world view is oddly ironic and potentially inspirational
for all of us with a secret superhero wannabe inside.
Besides the concepts; the costumes and that Adam West Batman spoof humor are
noteworthy, unfortunately they don't quite orchestrate well with the dodgey
script. "Mystery Men" is nonetheless charming and as I said, the real power
is in the big finish. Bring your pre-teens.
Starring Ben Stiller, William H. Macy, Hank Azaria, etc.
Directed by Kinka Usher.
Written by Neil Cuthbert.
Produced by Lawrence Gordon, Mike Richardson and Lloyd Levin at Universal.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Talented Mr. Ripley, The (1999)
As the title appears on screen, the word "Talented" arrives only after
shuffling tentatively through a series of other fitting words: passionate,
confused, misunderstood, lost, etc. Telling insight into Ripley's character.
A powerfully strong first act, Ripley (Damon) is commissioned by a rich
American shipbuilder to persuade Dickie (his aloof son) to return home from
Italy. Ripley a master of impersonation, forgery, lying, and the piano
becomes so fatally seduced by the lavish lifestyle with this obsession
extending to Dickie (Jude Law) that his original mission is abandoned at
sea. But when Dickie doesn't share Ripley's jubilance over this new found
relationship -- well, the film takes an ugly murderous twist from which it
never recovers.
Having arrived early to the screening, I took a peaceful stroll in a nearby
park where I came across an unusually shaped tree. Leaning nearly 45 degrees
into the path, it seemed to cut back 90 degrees in the opposite direction.
But further inspection revealed that the tree had been cut to avoid blocking
the path. What I had thought to be the trunk was actually just a very thick
branch, elbowing from its grossly severed trunk. I had no idea this was some
freakish foreshadowing for a movie I was soon to screen. "Ripley" builds at
an interestingly artful angle, takes a lethal twist, then just keeps going;
no peak, no climax, no resolution.
That said, the acting, dialogue, direction and cinematography are fantastic.
I've not seen Damon stronger. And Jude Law is absolutely stunning, he fills
the Dickie character with magnificent fervor. Paltrow is nothing less than
convincing as a fine cast of actors front exacting direction (spectacular
really) and warm wonderful cinematography faulted only slightly with its use
of a soft focus filter that I found distracting. The film's seldom-surfacing
sinister sense of humor is also delightful.
But like Ripley and his mission, this gorgeous film sabotages the bizarre
journey it originally offered -- only to become a serial account of
psychosis, betrayal and murder.
The Talented Mr. Ripley. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Matt Damon, Gwyneth Paltrow, Jude Law, Cate Blanchett, Philip
Seymour Hoffman, Jack Davenport, James Rebhorn.
Directed by Anthony Minghella.
Screenplay by Anthony Minghella based on a novel by Patricia Highsmith.
Produced by William Horbert and Tom Sternberg at Paramount/Miramax.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Boiler Room (2000)
An excellent narrative lead-in brings us up to speed on our main character's
motivations. Giovanni Ribisi isn't about to slip into the conventional work
week only to trudge the rest of his life for a livable salary. Nope, he's a
sharp New York kid and he's going to find a way to make a million bucks some
other way. Even if it's slightly below legal standards.
Enter Ben Affleck (briefly anyway) who can "sell bubble gum to the lockjaw
patients at Bellevue." Giovanni takes the bait, diving into a stock-selling
brokerage of sorts paying larger than seemingly possible commissions to its
obsessed new recruits. It's a young industry as Ben says, "I'm 26 and I'm a
senior citizen."
The bland looking Giovanni is puppy-dog perfect with his attentive, yet
skeptical, always-thinking plain-faced appearance. A very good actor he.
Giovanni's folks aren't so easy to please. The best scenes of the movie are
between he and his judge-dad, "I'm not your best friend, I'm your father."
Giovanni desperately tries to explain his side, his father interrupts, "What
side? You're wrong!"
Vin Diesel also gives a fine performance as the senior partner who takes
Giovanni under his wings.
Backed by rap music, a pretty good script faulters a bit when it rushes the
progress and consequences of one of Ribisi's clients. Still ... quite
entertaining.
Boiler Room. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Giovanni Ribisi, Vin Diesel, Nia Long, Nicky Katt, Scott Caan, Ben
Affleck, Jamie Kennedy, and Ron Rifkin
Writer/Director Ben Younger.
Produced by Team Todd at NewLine.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Vita č bella, La (1997)
Heck, I finally went to see this one. And now that I have, I recommend you
do.
Guido is a happy go lucky Jewish-Italian gentleman with the lovable ability
to make any event, no matter how big or small, work in his favor and lift
the spirits of all "good-hearted" passers-by to boot. Unfortunately, Guido
is living in Italy at a tragic time in world history. His sparkling ability
is put to the darkest of tests when he and his family are shipped off to
Nazi concentration camps in Germany.
This script is so smooth. There's nothing extraneous. It's perfectly focused
and the timing of events (especially in the first half) is smashing. Benigni
brilliantly spectacles the glorious to nauseating extremes the gift of life
affords us ... while encouraging our participation in the former.
Writer/Director/Actor: Roberto Benigni
Produced by Elda Ferri, Gianluigi Braschi and distributed by Miramax.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for American Pie (1999)
I took my 17 year old nephew to this flick. (More on that later.)
"Divided we're flawed and weak, but united we ensure our sexual
destinies" -- or something like that. Four senior male buddies make a pact
to lose their respective virginities by the last of their high school days
(i.e. prom night).
It must be impossible to make a teen movie that doesn't somehow wind up at
the prom. There's some huge film-magnet in the punch bowl or something. But
that's forgivable, because this film is bold, funny, charming, uncomfortably
honest at times, and seldom (if ever) boring. The characters are likable,
roughly believable (or obvious caricatures) and played by apt actors.
"American Pie" is well paced. In fact, as the end approaches, you'll want it
delayed because you'll be enjoying the movie that much. Ultimately, the peak
of a film is important and fulfilling; but it's what leads up to the ending
that makes it so. (Could that be why they call it the climax?)
What about all this talk of sex? Inevitably, parents are going to claim that
this movie condones teenage copulation. And, you know what? It actually may.
However, it's also likely that actual teenagers are actually having sex.
This, despite the fact that I was not one of them. And while I think teens
will enjoy this movie, I don't condone teen intercourse. Unless the teens
are paying their own rent or something. Still "American Pie" bent over
backwards to encourage the usage of condoms -- so that is to its credit.
But enough about what I think. My nephew says parents don't need to get all
uppity about how movies make teens feel or act. "There's bound to be some
film next week that has the opposite message. Hey, they're just movies after
all. People are going to do what their going to do ... regardless." He
enjoyed the film.
We went on a Monday night  at 10:10 or something -- the show sold out,
filling the theater with teens who laughed a lot (me too). There were times
I couldn't even hear the response line to a good wisecrack.
(A few days prior, my nephew attempted to see this film with some of his 16
year old buddies. When the attendant denied them access based on the rating,
my nephew remarked, "These (pointing at his buddies) are exactly the people
they made the movie for -- I can't believe you won't let them in!")
Starring Jason Biggs, Shannon Elizabeth, Alyson Hannign. Directed by Paul
Weitz. Screenplay by Adam Herz. Produced by Warren Zide, Craig Perry, Chris
Moore, Chris Weitz at Universal. Rated R.
Grade ......................................... A-
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com.

Title
Review for Bamboozled (2000)
Bamboozled is a term Malcolm X used to describe the treatment of blacks by
the whites back in the 1900's.
In the film "Bamboozled," we follow TV producer Pierre Delacroix (Wayans)
who's dropped his American accent in favor of a countryless Harvardy dialect
and his American name for a French one. The character is interesting, but
the speech much more annoying than need be.
As the "sole person of color" working for CNS, and frustrated with his
impossible-to-please boss, a desperate Pierre goes for the outrageous and
creates a TV show intended to satire black stereotypes. "Mantan the New
Millennium Minstrel show" boldly black-faces (as in Al Jolson) the black
lead actors (a tap dancer and singer) and proudly hails its anthem, "Nigger
is a beautiful thing." Set in a watermelon patch, this black "Hee-Haw" with
the balls of "South Park" leaves its studio audience (as well as
theater-goers) squinting, wincing, wondering. But the confused watchers
eventually polarize: those who think the show is a funny way to mock
stereotypes on one end; those with shaking fists, dead set on stifling this
revival of old slave-mentality TV on the other.
Every black hackneyed film and cartoon image since the turn of the century
(1800's to 1900's, that is) are replayed with the purpose of twisting
America's stabbing pain of embarrassment a quarter turn in hopes of opening
the minds of those that control the media by enraging/educating those that
watch it.
But the film twists more than this, an underground group of revolutionaries
doesn't quite find the "Amos and Andy" crap funny. "I feel like Dr.
Frankenstein," Pierre confesses as this satirical project slowly slips from
his command.
As in the film, different people within (and outside of) the black community
have their own different ideas on how to best assist the processes of
quelling 20th century racist residue. Some will no doubt find that this film
(like its fictional "Mantan Minstrel Show") heartily takes steps towards
that goal. Others will hark Pierre's own point, "That was 400 years ago, let
it go, move on!" Still others, just won't know what to think. I found myself
rotating among these three perspectives. Either way, this film provokes
thought, pressing buttons while it entertains.
The taping of the pilot sequence is break out fresh and bold. I loved it!
Impressive also, the climax sequence; while simultaneously grossly humorous
and solidly dramatic, it left me with a blinking question mark over my head.
Jade Pinkett-Smith, Savion Glover, and Tommy Davidson give very strong
performances, but Damon Wayans accent is more annoying than satirically
entertaining.
"Bamboozled" is shot on videotape, sometimes this supports the feel and
intent of the film, and at other times hinders it; but for the most part
doesn't effect the play.
Bamboozled. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Damon Wayans, Savion Glover, Jada Pinkett-Smith, Tommy Davidson,
Michael Rapaport.
Written and directed by Spike Lee.
Choreography: Savion Glover.
Produced by Jon Kilik and Spike Lee at 40 Acres/New Line.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Sleepy Hollow (1999)
Tim Burton's films are oft anticipated for his boldly off-center and usually
dark art direction. "Sleepy Hollow" is no exception. The warm colors have
bled from the footage leaving the flesh stark, cold and clammy, and the
darks -- soot black. Burton also enjoys painting a "small world" set with
which to stage his sideways stories. Frequently, these worlds are neither
live action looking nor quite animated. I find them cartoony, claustrophobic
and distracting, but I'm probably one of only a handful; others seem to
enjoy them.
Gadgetry, on the other hand, Burton excels in -- gadgetry and freakish
characters. Ichabod Crane (Johnny Depp) wields coroner's tool that look as
if they were designed for handicapped piranhas. And Burton's Headless
Horseman is simply magnificent; it's the heart and soul (though not brains)
that keeps this "Sleepy Hollow" charging mightily through the foggy twisted
forest. This powerful black torso with limbs spinning sword and hatchet from
atop a pounding steed is as splendid as a bolt of lightening from the
heavens.
Unfortunately, sleepy and hollow all too appropriately describe the first
half of the production (prior to any significant appearance of the
horseman). Wrought with exposition and an elusively wry sense of humor
giving even the artfully apt Depp a larger foe to over come than the one of
high shoulders; the horseman charges on, breathing life (from it's severed
esophagus) into this paling production.
Sleepy Hollow. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Johnny Depp, Christina Ricci and Christopher Walken, Marc
Pickering.
Directed by Tim Burton.
Screenplay by Andrew Kevin Walker.
Produced by Scott Rudin and Adam Schroeder at Mandalay/Lion's
Gate/Paramount/American Zoetrope.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Price of Milk, The (2000)
Director Sinclair states, "So this film is my dream about New Zealand, 
this make-believe country that seems almost empty of people, where love 
stories are played out in silence and loneliness, where white farmers 
make deals with indigenous Maori people, where the land is like a vast 
quilt of fields, where life seems perfect but we find ways to make 
ourselves unhappy ... But like a dream, I wanted this film to have no 
obvious message, more of an invocation of symbols. And mostly it's about 
love, and what it's worth." 
The film begins with a young farming couple pulling a quilt back and 
forth while they sleep, the credits are sown in. The dramatic 
"Fantasia"-esque music plays as awkwardly over this picture as a cowbell 
hung from a kangaroo. 
She loves him, he loves her, but doesn't want kids. Perhaps the kid 
issue prompts her to feel that the fire has slipped from the 
relationship (though the film seems to depict just the opposite). In 
search of sparking the flame, she pisses him off completely and spends 
the rest of the film sorting that out. Not a very interesting story, but 
it's told beautifully, haphazardly, magically, impossibly. 
Planted like seeds in the earth, surrealisms sprout: Two lovers taking a 
bath in a tub in a field, they finish dinner in the tub, then wash the 
dishes in their own bath water. Their dog, afraid of daylight, romps the 
fields in an appliance box. 
Other scenes I enjoyed: Singing by the fire, house moving as she 
"chases" him from the window. The picture is well paced, from the 
standpoint of intensity and comic relief placement. However, it's still 
a film that can be reduced to three crazy women conspiring to drive one 
nice guy crazy. And though Sinclair acknowledges the film has no point, 
I certainly felt one would have been nice. 
Price of Milk. Copyright Š 2001. 
*  Starring Danielle Cormack, Karl Urban, Willa O'Neil, Michael 
Lawrence, Rangi Motu. Written and directed by Harry Sinclair. Produced 
by Fiona Copland at Lot 47 Films (C)2001. Rated PG-13. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for High Fidelity (2000)
Better title: "The Top Five." Of course you'd ask ... "The top five what?"
And that's just where the advertisers would love to have you. Well, the top
five most humiliating break ups for John Cusack, as a matter of fact.
Cusack, mug to camera, provides self-depreciating commentary to his dumpy
little life as a used record store owner/operator on the more urban streets
of Chicago. Fun flashbacks provide entertaining history of the top four
heartbreakers as Cusack tragically lives through break up number five in
real time.
Cusack's two loser employees (Jack Black and Todd Louiso) are hilarious. "I
can't fire these guys, I hired them for three days a week and they started
showing up everyday ... that was three years ago." Louiso is especially
lovable as the bald headed pathetically charming geek. Black is ever on the
attack aggressively defending his musical edicts.
But it's Cusack's cynical rambling that gives "HI-FI" it's biting irony.
Here are just a few juicy quotes. The ever so diplomatic... "You f***ing
bitch, let's work it out." And then on the human attraction phenomena...
"It's what you like, not what you are like." Then there's the crude, yet
clever ... "My guts have sh** for brains." Lastly, the nagging film-opening
question ... "Which came first the music or the misery?" (referring to the
depression itself vs. the depressing songs meant to ease/enable). Cusack
spends much of the film trying to understand why he's such an "F***ing
a**hole."
A little slow getting going, but fills out nicely with rough-toothed
dialogue. Eclectic music snobs are sure to have a good time.
Danish actress Iben Hjejle (who plays the lead female role) sums the film
well, "It's the most direct script about men's struggles with relationships
I've ever read. It really surprised me that it has this honesty and I think
it's very unusual for an American film to deal with subjects like this."
High Fidelity. Copyright Š 2000.  CrimeRated R.
Starring John Cusack, Iben Hjejle, Todd Louiso, Jack Black, Lisa Bonet,
Catherine Zeta-Jones, Joan Cusack, Tim Robbins, Lili Taylor, Natasha Gregson
Wagner.
Directed by Stephen Frears.
Written by D.V. Devincetis & Steve Pink & John Cusack and Scott Rosenberg
based on the book by Nick Hornby.
Produced by Time Bevan, Rudd Simmons at Touchstone/Working Title/Dogstar/New
Crime
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Hamlet (2000/I)
Interviews with actor Ethan Hawke and director Michael Almereyda of "Hamlet"
Ethan Hawke slides into the plush leather chair at the press table with a
smile just as comfortable; his upbeat, talkative demeanor nearly mock his
timid, shaking (often sweaty) screen persona.
(On Hamlets)
It's a testament to why the piece is a masterpiece because everybody brings
something different to it. He's so multifaceted everybody who attacks it
focuses on a different side of the character. Mel Gibson had him real
rambunctious, reminded me of the guy in "Lethal Weapon," which was a good
thing.
 Mostly these other guys who played hamlet were too old. In a modern sense
he's much more of a Holden Caulfield or a Kurt Cobain. Many of his dilemmas
are a young man's dilemmas ... Seeking meaning, feeling overshadowed by your
parents feeling lost and overwhelmed by society ...
We wanted to make it as accessible as possible ... Allow for the audience to
experience ... in a new way and treat it not as some old dusty thing that is
very precious but to break down those walls and let the character's
emotional life live in a new way.
Shakespeare purists, people who really know a lot about Shakespeare will
love it, because they just want it to be a living breathing art form. If you
have some idea in your head that British people are they only people who do
it right, then you're not gonna like it. But I don't follow in that
school... Despite the modern setting, when the movie is done it's the play
that resonates.
(On work and family life)
If you don't make your family a priority then you'll loose them. So now I
try to do things that I really believe in, get the most bang for my buck,
thus "Hamlet."
(On literature)
I wrote a novel, "The Hottest State" came out a couple years ago, it was a
really fun experience for me. The book is about a twenty-year-old guy who's
so in love with a girl that he loses his mind. I was so interested in doing
something else, because I've been in movies since I was young. At the time,
I was adamant to not make a movie out of it, but as time goes by ... I
might.
 (On philosophy)
We live in a community which tries to box us all in. Like you're a
journalist, you just do this or you just do that ... you can't also be a
musician. You know... I just resent that. I think we're all a lot more than
that.
(On other film activities...)
I just directed a picture on DV. I got turned on by "The Celebration" and
how cheaply you can make a movie. If it's any good ... it's call "The last
word on Paradise" it's mildly inspired by Dylan Thomas' "Under Milkwood"
which is it all takes place in a hotel over the course of a day and involves
about 35 people. The hope is to illustrate how close we are in proximity,
and how cut off from each other we are, how similar all our experiences are
but how separate we all feel.
(Favorite non-film thing to do...)
Take my daughter to the park and play guitar, which unfortunately she
doesn't like me to do .. "No daddy No."
Michael Almereyda, eloquent in his soft-spoken boyish manner, replaces Ethan
in the pressroom.
(On his contemporary interpretation of Hamlet)
It never occurred to be not to do it modern. I was thinking about other
plays, but this one seemed to be chasing me.


Every spoken line is by Shakespeare, the original language is very in tact
as much as it's been cut I hope it's more of a distillation than anything
else ... in an attempt to get to the essence of the play.
There's so much that's great. There is no definitive Hamlet, there's
variance, different versions, ... it wasn't published in Shakespeare's
lifetime. It's an unruly play an unwieldy play, part of the challenge and
excitement about taking it on is that you have to make cuts. You have to
decide what means the most.
That's the nature of Shakespeare is that he accommodates extremes, invites
them and demands them in a way. The adaptation was done with an element of
respect. The way you can respect Shakespeare the most is not being too
precious not being to reverent because these plays were always done as
popular entertainment they were meant for big crowds. They were meant for
mass audiences. A scholar explained the Globe theatre had a seating capacity
of 2000. I never realized that. The plays are still alive and kicking, the
idea was to pack it with spirit.
(On Bill Murray)
He's is one of my favorite actors ... He brings a peculiar kind of
tenderness to the role, he warms it up.
He was my first choice, I was glad to have an excuse to work with him and he
was glad to be excused to work with Bill Shakespeare (Laughs).
(On Ethan Hawke)
I think he's just turned twenty-nine ... but he was twenty-seven at the time
we shot it and he looks particularly boyish with the right lighting
(chuckles). He was the first one I thought of for the role and the first one
I went to. I had a six-page treatment, on the basis of the treatment he said
yes. He's an old friend, and when he said yes understanding we'd be shooting
on 16mm and everyone working for scale, we knew we could raise the money.
[Two million]. Without him the movie wouldn't exist for a second. From that
point we had the luxury of inviting our favorite actors to participate, the
key was I needed final cut because I had some bad experiences before. And
that's why the budget is so tight.
(On small budget independents)
We didn't always have permits, sometimes we were just charging around. New
York is pretty filmmaker friendly, you don't have to pay for the streets,
you just gotta get the permits. We went super sixteen because we wanted the
movie to be above all intimate, and you can be more mobile with the smaller
cameras.
I wasn't any more obsessed than when making any other movie - I just thought
I was having fun.
The challenging thing is that the movie was done so cheaply, with everyone
working at scale, and we didn't have much time especially to rehearse, we
were flying at times, so there's an edge of panic to it that I wouldn't have
minded deducting.
I like big budget films. My favorite movie last year was "The Matrix", but
it's maybe my character, my sensibility that makes me think I won't be
having big budgets to work with. I just get a sense that in order to make
films and retain final cut I'll probably stay independent.
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Drive Me Crazy (1999)
A "B+" for surprisingly solid acting and dialogue. But since the plot line
is a road we've traveled countless times before, there's no unpredictable
twists to jerk the film out of the clutches of mediocrity.
Teen next door neighbors, Nicole and Chase, feign a loving high school
couple in order to attract the real objects of their hearts affection -- you
know, through jealousy. But the scam may backfire -- could they accidentally
fall for each other? Ya think? Of course the whole thing climaxes (though
that's a strong word) at the Centennial dance (a teen flick prom
substitute).
The most interesting parts of the story get lost: Chase is a sub-culture,
anti-conformist who delights (along with two buds) in making fun of the
preppy crowd. Nicole is deep into the "in" crowd. Their coupling puts Chase
into Dockers and tames his wild head of hair. Says his ex, "Did you fall in
love or just fall into the Gap?" How he reacts to his new "prep" pals is
very interesting. However, only once he brings Nicole into his culture --
her reactions there are rich as well. Unfortunately, all of this gets run
over by the steamroller of a predictable plot. It is only the solid
performances, direction, dialogue and editing that keep the film from
flat-lining.
But I'm an old fart, perhaps the unknowing teen will be waiting on the edge
of her seat to see if Chase and Nicole "really really" work out.
Drive Me Crazy. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG-13.
Starring Melissa Joan Hart, Adrian Grenier.
Directed by John Schultz.
Screenplay by Rob Thomas.
Produced by Amy Robinson at Twentieth Century Fox.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Opportunists, The (2000)
There's a scene in this slow emotionally reserved film that well describes
how audiences may feel about it. Christopher Walken (who's wonderful) has
been prompted via financial desperation and a small group of slimy
near-do-poorlies to come out of "normal life" and start cracking safes
again. In this particular scene, Walken is practicing on a few combination
locks while the group looks on.
Now, one might ask themselves, "Why are they watching him so intent, neatly
seated?" Ironically, this is the same question I asked of myself about the
film. And why does he want them to watch him? Again, what has the filmmaker
here for me to see (other than a good performance by Walken)? And in their
one last appreciation for my condition, the three thugs, initially excited
about seeing this man open locks ... fall asleep all over each other.
The film opens slowly while introducing us to the characters in the first
third. The second third, picks up the pace to leisurely at best. And just
when a shimmer of anticipation sparks interest, offering a ray of hope that
the pace will finally click into gear, the third third is completely absent.
There's nothing else overly incompetent about the picture. In fact, the
dialogue is quite strong, acting creditable and cinematography fine to
midland - it's just the pace and point.
One viewer who found the film interesting enough, still commented, "If I
were going to give this film a grade, it'd have to be an incomplete."
The Opportunists. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Christopher Walken, Peter McDonald, Cyndi Lauper, Vera Farmiga,
Donal Logue, Jose Zuniga, Tom Noonan.
Written and Directed by Myles Connell. Produced by John Lyons, Tim Perell
and presented by First Look.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for 13th Warrior, The (1999)
By Ross Anthony
A strong B+, "The 13th Warrior" is a medieval adventure picture climaxing in
the big good fight. Antonio plays an Arab poet/scholar banished from his
homeland who bumps into a boatload of Viking-types from the North just as
they decide to help out a village that is being massacred by an evil so bad,
you can't even say its name. Well, unlucky again, Banderas gets strapped in
as the 13th warrior of evil.
Once on the path to the village, Banderas listens keenly to the Northmen as
they gruffly mock each other and especially him in their own language.
Finally, Bandaras defends himself (his mother actually) in their native
tongue -- shocking them all into speaking English. (Well not really English,
I mean it's supposed to be still Northmen-ese. But since we are more or less
experiencing the adventure through the eyes and ears of Banderas, when he
finally learns their language so then do we understand the words.) This
turns out to be a rather clever way of avoiding subtitles, you feel that
you've instead learned a foreign language and therefore need no translation.
Rather straight to the point, the film offers camaraderie, honor, and coarse
field battles (not unlike "Braveheart") with great sound mixed into a fine
score. The dark cinematography is pocked only at times by abrupt color
changes that create bumpy seams between scenes. In fact, I felt a portion at
the beginning of the film had been clipped out all together. Still a strong
"B+" almost an "A-".
Starring Antonio Banderas, Vladimir Kulich, Dennis Storhoi, Daniel Southern,
Neil Maffin.
Directed by John McTiernan. Written by William Wisher and Warrne Lewis.
Produced by John McTiernan, Michael Crichton, Ned Dowd at Touchstone.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B+
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Universal Soldier: The Return (1999)
"We'll have to blow them up and hope the pieces don't fight us."
Hi-tech military department resurrects soldiers killed in battle and
monitors them with brain implanted micro-chips. The soldiers are fierce,
hard to kill, and relatively emotionless. Nonetheless, the program's budget
gets cut which prompts the main computer to take over the Universal Soldier
squad and threaten anything biological that gets in its way. Jean Claude
plays an earlier model minus the chip. He's the only one who has the code
the computer needs to stay alive.
Like a theme park action show in which stunt-people run through a set of
pops and propane blasts into safety nets barely hidden behind facade walls,
"Universal Soldier: The Return" is mildly flashy to look at, but there is no
sense of real danger. The Soldiers themselves are like the little green
plastic guys I used to play with at age five. We expect a bit more from a
Hollywood action movie. In one scene four U-soldiers are shot up by what
seemed like a hundred SWAT guys. Somehow, not one of the four was hit in the
face. That's way too hokey for a Van Damme movie.
The script fails to take any real risks as well. Formula action flick, with
standard dialogue: "What's going on?" "They'll stop at nothing!" ... add
gratuitous expletives. The acting is right on par with my plastic green army
guys. Even Jean (whom I normally enjoy) was plastic.
I'm sorry to say, "Universal Soldier" seems to be a quickly made film, with
uninspired direction, no unique purpose, populated with safe stunts and lots
of shooting.
Starring Jean-Claude Van Damme, Michael Jai White, Kiana Tom, Bill Goldberg.
Directed by Mic Rogers. Written by William Malone, John Fasano.
Produced by Craig Baumgarten, Allen Shaprio and Van Damme at
Tri-Star/Baumgarten-Prophet/Indi-Prod/Long Road.
Rated R.
Grade..........................C
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for AntiTrust (2001)
"In the computer business there is no second place; it's binary, one or 
zero, live or die," a suspiciously familiar hi-tech czar played by Tim 
Robbins propa-"gates" his software product and company (Nurv) as he 
defends his corporate monopoly, "Hey, some kid in some garage could take 
us down at any time." 
Milo is working over time with best bud Teddy (in a garage)... hoping to 
do just that when the phone rings. It's Bill (I mean Gary Winston, Nurv 
CEO) offering him a job. The offer splits these best friends as Milo 
goes off to work at Micros ... (I mean Nurv), and Teddy, repulsed by 
Nurv's fascist strategies, seeks private investors for his own software 
projects. It's actually a great springboard into a movie about best 
friends turned competitors. But that's not how the film is programmed. 
With young sharp techno-geeks dropping like flies, the film changes 
genres midstream; from smart buddy film, to cheap thriller, and almost 
back again. 
Though not a great film, "Antitrust" handles several elements very 
nicely. I especially love Milo's realization scene. It's a crunch of 
sound and video that hit home. Speaking of sound ... the quality of the 
tracks in this production is quite high: the choice of alternative rock 
(which started in Seattle - nudge, nudge, wink, wink), the score, and 
the careful crisp mix. The acting is respectable, while the camera 
movement, direction and editing are very professional. Together they 
make this "B" movie look very good. 
But this is still a "B" movie. At times the sharp script dips into the 
ridiculous, reducing the battle of geniuses to fodder for warehouse 
chase scenes ... complete with false scares and all. More than once, 
this audience giggled at the silliness projected on screen. Still, never 
a dull moment, well paced and suspenseful to the end. You'll fall more 
than once for the film's twist-traps and enjoy being fooled. As with 
"Save the Last Dance" I think it's a strong film for 14 to 18 year-olds. 
Antitrust. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Ryan Phillippe, Rachael Leigh Cook, Claire Forlani, Tim 
Robbins, Douglas McFerran, Richard Roundtree. 
*  Directed by Peter Howitt. 
*  Written by Howard Frankin. 
*  Produced by Nick Wechsler, Keith Addis, and David Nicksay at MGM/Hyde 
Park/Industry Ent. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for End of Days (1999)
Are you charmed by Arnold? (I am) Does a big Hollywood movie with Arnold
sound attractive to you? If so, then "End of Days" fits that bill. Arnold
straps lots of cool weapons to his prize-winning body. Arnold takes bullets
to the chest, baseball bats to the skull and an assortment of other would-be
fatal blows. But Arnold seemingly retains his interminatability (as if it
rubbed off from previous roles under different direction). If that's what
you like -- you'll be happy.
If however, you associate Arnold with smart action a la "Terminator," "True
Lies" etc. you may react as did a fellow in the men's room after the show,
"Disappointed!" he frowned shaking his head as he zipped up. Or the snoozing
gentleman in the row behind me ... after the crashing crescendo of the
climax faded, his steadfast snoring could be heard. Even though I was not as
dismayed as these two, it was obvious that "End of Days" didn't deliver the
powerful immensity we've come to expect from Mr. Schwarzenegger.
Here's the plot ... The millennium on the verge, Satan comes back to Earth
in the form of a man, seeking the woman that's been branded to be the mother
of his son (the antichrist we can assume). The Vatican is well aware of this
prophecy and sends an ugly mob of weapon wielding priests to carve her up.
However, there's a group of "good guy" priests dabbling in stigmata research
and therapy that try to protect the innocent would-be anti-Madonna from
(ahem) Satan's little sword. Arnold, a down and out body guard, stumbles
into this mess and ultimately finds himself defending this freaked out girl
from Lucifer himself.
It's a challenge to pretend that it makes sense to fight the prince of
darkness with traditional Hollywood blow up weaponry. As an arch
enemy/villian/bad guy, this Satan is formidable, but as the devil? He's
rather impotent. Though touched on (especially in a good scene in Arnold's
home), Satan's powers of manipulation were sorely underdeveloped. Also
lacking consistancy, Satan shows off the ability to read Arnold's inner most
thoughts, yet he still needs Arnold to voluntarily verbalize where the girl
is hidden. Lastly, the religious dilemma concerning the murder of an
innocent to save the world could have been realized on the screen with
greater sympathy. Instead, the priests with guns seem to take to thuggery as
if it were second nature.
It's one of those action films where things happen so that the next visual
thing can happen -- not necessarily because the transgression is logical or
developmental. "End of Days" sports some powerfully visual special effects,
but fails to lure you in emotionally or even sympathetically. You're just a
watcher. Another viewer quipped, "The film pulls you through it like a dog
on a leash."
But "End of Days" still displays some shining moments: 1) A scene in which
Satan relieves himself on the sidewalk, then sets his own puddle of urine on
fire. 2) Arnold suspecting his best bud to be the devil, lets a bullet make
the decision. 3) Satan's first shocking deed as a man. 4) The final
appearance of Satan in his "real" bat-winged form.
It's not strong on substance (though it could have been), still, I don't
think you'll have a bad time.
End of Days. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Gabriel Byrne, Kevin Pollack, Robin Tunney,
Cch Pounder, Rod Steiger.
Directed by Peter Hyams.
Written by Andrew W. Marlowe.
Produced by Armyan Bernstein and Bill Borden at Beacon/Univeral.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Breakfast of Champions (1999)
"Nobody's Happy. They're just trying to sell you something."
Breakfast of Champions.
Like it or not, this is an interesting film. I have the feeling that it's
going to be one of those pictures some people just love, while others just
love to hate.
Put it in the odd comedy genre. You know: "Rushmore," "Life Less Ordinary."
Though mostly a dark comedy, this film's got a wonderful sideways feel;
riding like a stunt car up on its two side wheels. In fact, I felt like a
stunt viewer. Not sure what to expect from that teetering perspective, I
still had fun even while suspending worries of the car flopping back down or
over before the end of the trials.
Too bad, that's exactly what happens to "Breakfast of Champions." Perhaps a
shade cockier than necessary, it extended it's own test course (by 20
needless minutes) falling on all fours with just about that much time left
in the film. A harsh disappointment after such an exhilarating ride.
Still, Bruce Willis (as the suicidal car dealer/celebrity) and especially
Nick Nolte give great performances. Actually, Nolte's performance as Willis'
right-hand, dress-wearing man at the dealership deserves Oscar
recognition -- and you can quote me on that.
Starring Bruce Willis, Nick Nolte, Glenne Headly, Barbara Hershey, Albert
Finney, Omar Epps and Lukas Haas. Director/Screenwriter Alan Rudolph.
Produced by David Blocker and David Willis at Sugar Creek. Distributed by
Buena Vista. (C) 1999. Rated R.
Grade ......................................... B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Toy Story 2 (1999)
Magnificent, super fantastic, rich, wonderful, full,
stop-what-your-doing-and-go-see-it appeal.
Where can I start? Voices? Terrific. How about visuals and art direction?
Superb. Action? Comedy? Fun? Yes. Yes. Yes. Okay, then screenplay and story
line? Better than the original "Toy Story." A mere ounce of this carefully
refined script could fuel a rocketship to infinity and beyond!
What are you doing this weekend? Don't worry about that new opera in town,
take a pass on the blues band at the local bar, blow off the Sunday night
game, duck out of your best buddy's big bash -- go see this film. Kids or no
kids, date or no date, heck -- go alone!
Oh, so you didn't see "Toy Story" (a mishap easily corrected). Relax, take
the week to rent it. Go see "Toy Story 2" next week or the one following --
don't worry, it won't be blasting off the screen anytime too soon. This is a
sequel after all, although it could still be enjoyed as a stand alone,
knowledge of the pre-story can only make this excellent production that much
more endearing.
And what a production it is! When 100% of the visual imagery is computer
generated, the director has millisecond control over ever edit, every cut,
every action sequence -- director John Lasseter takes full advantage. A
stream of star-burst colors blend animated characters with a kaleidoscopic
of voices, rock solid scripting and pinpoint direction. It's fun, uproarious
and plainly a great treat you shouldn't deny yourself. Forget the kids, take
two hours and go see it!
Toy Story 2. Copyright Š 1999. Rated G.
Voices of Tom Hanks, Tim Allen, Joan Cusack, Kelsey Grammer, Don Rickles,
Jim Varney, Wallace Shawn, John Ratzenberger, Annie Potts, Estelle Harris.
Directed by John Lasseter.
Screenplay by Andrew Stanton, Rita Hsiao, Doug Chamberlin and Chris Webb.
Produced by Helene Plotkin and Karen Robert Jackson at Disney/Pixar.
Grade..........................A+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Finding Forrester (2000)
If "Good Will Hunting" and "Scent of a Woman" were to meet some moonlit 
night, consummate and make a child, "Finding Forester" would be their 
adolescent son. 
Though less developed, matured, and fervent than its parents, 
"Forrester" draws from the same heart to make the same points. 
It's a warm mellow film. Warm in its development of the unlikely 
friendship between Sean Connery, (a cynical Pulitzer Prize winning 
recluse) and Brown, a 16-year-old basketballer from the Bronx. Mellow in 
its progression. Unfortunately, Director Gus Van Sant kicks back a 
little too long -- never really breaking into the intense back and forth 
of "Good Will Hunting" which he also directed. 
Additionally, the piece feels harshly edited at times. For example, a 
trip to a basketball game ends in a baseball diamond -- not even a quick 
reference shot of a basketball game is given. 
Anyway, it's a nice enough film, quaint even. And one of the few films 
where the lead actor can actually aptly play the sport he's called to 
play. 
I particularly enjoyed the following quote from the production notes. F. 
M. Abraham who plays Crawford the skeptical prep school teacher says of 
his character, "Crawford's ... a victim of his own pride and blindness. 
His tragedy is that he's failed the one great student he ever taught, 
squandered his chance at helping someone achieve true fame." 
Finding Forrester. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Sean Connery, Rob Brown, F. Murray Abraham, Anna Paquin 
(Claire), Busta Rhymes, Michael Nouri's. 
*  Director Gus Van Sant. 
*  Writer Mike Rich. 
*  Produced by Laurence Mark at Columbia. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Wild Wild West (1999)
The opening sequence brings back memories of the TV series it recreates on
the big screen. Not only is Jim West back, but now he's black! I absolutely
love that! Others may criticize feature film remakes of 50/60/70's TV shows
for changing character attributes; but hey, these are the 90's, filmmakers
have got to meet the changes of the viewing public. Taking a white character
and making him black ... it's very bold and I applaud the decision. Oddly,
it was Artemus Gordon's casting I would have liked re-thunk. Every time I
see Kevin Kline in a comedic role, I feel like he's trying to be Steve
Martin. Speaking of casting ... the menace, Arliss Loveless, is played
marvelously by Shakespearean actor Kenneth Branagh.
Jim and Artie are U.S. Marshals trying to protect President Grant from
less-than-pleased Southerners shortly following the civil war. Loveless (who
lost his legs in the war) has developed a steam powered weapon of mass
destruction with which to recapture the union. Salma Hayek plays Rita, a
plainly pointless character.
Artemus Gordon is an inventor bent on using his mind to botch the bad guy's
schemes, while Jim West, in the words of the President is a "Shoot first,
shoot later, shoot some more" kind of guy smooth with the ladies. These
characters haven't much more depth than that. But if you're looking for a
script thick with intrigue and dimension, then you're looking in the wrong
place. Aside for the slightly-adult sexual innuendoes, "Wild Wild West" is
an action comedy for the 10 year old -- give or take 3 or 4 years. They'll
no doubt love it. That's not to say you won't have fun. In fact, I was
having a real good time ... until the climax.
In fact, "WWW" sports some impressive stuff. The sinister Loveless bursts on
the screen from a shattered 10 foot model of Pres. Lincoln's head. How very
morbidly appropriate to his character! Further, "WWW" is also to be
applauded for it's creative design of Loveless' wheel-chair and master
weapon, and for Gordon's method of viewing a murdered scientist's last seen
image, among other less notable steam-powered creations. "A-" for fun,
special effects, and action right up to the climax where "WWW" wanes into a
"B+".
PS: For the record (forgive the pun), I don't like Will Smith dubbing over a
perfectly good Stevie Wonder track.
Starring Will Smith, Kevin Kline, Kenneth Branagh and Selma Hayek.
Directed by Barry Sonnenfeld.
Screenplay by S.S. Wilson & Brent Maddock and Jeffery Price & Peter S.
Seaman.
Produced by Jon Peters and Barry Sonnenfeld at Warner Bros.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Stir of Echoes (1999)
This film has been compared to "The Sixth Sense." While it has the
similarity of a man and boy who see a ghost, the rest is quite different. In
this case, the man (Kevin Bacon) is the boy's father and there is only one
ghost -- haunting their home.
Bacon delivers a strong performance, sporting an picture-perfect working
class Chicago accent. The build up of tension and suspense is sewn together
well, but the conclusion has more of a TV mystery show spirit than that of a
powerful feature climax.
The motions of the ghost (stirred by frame manipulation) create an
excellently eerie feeling to her presence. I also enjoyed the chilling way
Bacon's confrontation left him pale and out of breath. I could almost feel
that chill. However, there was little point in contriving a way to make the
ghost a threat to the living. (I'd have to fault the "Sixth Sense" for
taking a few stabs in that direction as well). It's already scary dealing
with a believable ghost -- there's no need to invent a threat to life.
Also, when the wife "accidentally" stumbles upon some information from
another guy who sees ghosts (and knows how to deal with them), she doesn't
share this information with her husband who is clearly less than stabilized
by his knew found "open-mindedness." Additionally, this character
(ghost-seer guy), though carefully introduced into the script; disappears
from it rather promptly without a trace.
Intriguing and chilling most of the way through, "Stirs of Echoes" is a
solid "B" film.
Stir of Echoes. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Kevin Bacon, Kathryn Erbe, Conor O'Farrell, Illeana Douglas and
Devin Dunn and Zachery David Cope (Jake)
Writer/Director David Koepp.
Produced by Gavin Polone and Judy Hofflund at Artisan.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Snow Falling on Cedars (1999)
When a tight shot of freshly caught fish gasping for air on the puddled
floorboards of a small fishing boat is saturated with all the aesthetics of
a Renoir painting ... you know you're in for an artistically filmed
production. Well "Cedars" won't let you down. Scrupulously, meticulously,
caringly exposed on the negative, this picture is one of the richest
cinematographic efforts of the year.
The art doesn't stop with the image. Attentive and crisp sounds accentuate
the visual buffet. The crackling ignition of a match, the pouring of hot
tea: this is an abundantly textured film. Additionally, the score
refreshingly fuses new age with traditional movie music composition.
Oddly, this love story is really more of a courtroom drama; however, as soon
as we realize this, the artistry and the plot line unfortunately take off in
different directions.
We view this 1930-1950's story mostly through the eyes of hesitant reporter
Ishmael Chambers (Ethan Hawke) who as a child and teen shared a secret
romance with a Japanese girl from his small town. When the woman's husband
is accused of murder, Ishmael has to battle his 20-year-old obsession in
order to decide if he should help defend the man that stole his girl.
One of the film's finest moments finds the widow on the stand, attorney
mouthing muted words while passionate memories of her husband play out on
screen to screaming violins.
The leads aren't particularly strong, but Richard Jenkins as the Sheriff
gives a great supporting performance and Max Von Sydow is charming as the
defense lawyer. Fine casting.
I was trembling with excitement over this film until the halfway mark when
the art became more than a tad indulgent neglecting its responsibility to
story, making the film rather disproportionate. "Cedars" toys with a love
fable, toys with making a statement of Japanese suffrage (the concentration
camps for Japanese-Americans during W.W.II), spends a lot of time in the
courtroom, but is ultimately a tale of one man's wrestle with an obsession
recorded on film in a fashion far superior to its story. Still, it is simply
the most beautiful courtroom drama you'll ever see.
Snow Falling on Cedars. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG-13.
Starring Ethan Hawke, Youki Kudoh, James Cromwell, Richard Jenkins, James
Rebhorn, Sam Shepard, Max Von Sydow, Rick Yune.
Directed by Scott Hicks.
Screenplay by Ron Bass and Scott Hicks.
Based on the novel by David Guterson.
Produced by Kathleen Kennedy and Grank Marshall at Universal/Harry J.
Ufland.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Kikujiro no natsu (1999)
The film opens gently, introducing us to young Masao on the first day of his
summer vacation. Other kids go out of town with their parents, but Masao is
being raised by his working grandmother, so he has no one to play with. Sad
and lonely, one day he sets out to visit the mother he's never known and who
resides off in some distant city making money to support him.
A sympathetic neighbor-lady catching him on his way out assigns her
do-nothing thug boyfriend (Kikujiro) to escort Masao on his travel. This
entire set up is assembled nicely, capturing our interest and, of course,
teasing us with the tasty premise of a small innocent boy, old beer-bellied
thug pairing.
Kikujiro is fantastic. Expressing half of all his emotions though a single
eye twitch-like blink staring blankly off of a rough, stone chiseled face. A
rose on a grave. His stocky body and dispassionate demeanor make no attempts
to hide a cave-cold rock-hardened heart. I love this character.
Wallet thickened with his girlfriend's funds, Kikujiro drags the poor boy to
the racetrack. Though well shot this sequence lasts too long. In fact, that
sentence sums the lead weights that drag this potentially buoyant production
from high recommendations. By way of example ... Kikujiro walks across the
sandy beach to a waiting Masao in one touching scene, but for an audience to
watch a lead character walk 50 feet through the sand on a 100 foot wide
shot - it's just asking too much.
Since the film is essentially a road trip (lots of hitchhiking), the gentle
pace is inherent and previously established. These long drawn out shots try
our patience, while several good sequences would be strengthened with just a
few more beats cut from them. In the end, these delays dilute our
sympathies.
One other note, a nudist occurrence appears nearer to the end (of the film).
Americans may find this a bit troubling and even obscene, but if memory
serves me, Japanese still enjoy communal bathing, in fact, an invite of a
guest to bath with the family or children is really a warm extension of
friendship. It is from this perspective, the character's (Baldy's) nudism
ought be interpreted. (This is not to be confused with the sick old man's
behavior in the park, earlier in the film.)
All in all, though too slow and too long for its own good, "Kikujiro" gives
us a juicy character so rough to like that his description must have been
written on sandpaper. Kikujiro stares at us with his one eye blinking, we
should hate him, we want to hate him, but instead he endears us even more
than a small child searching for his mother. That's acting and direction
with depth, with grit, with boldness. Kikujiro is played by his
writer/director Kitano.
Kikujiro. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Beat Takeshi (Kitano), Yusuke Sekiguchi, Kayoko Kishimoto, Yuko
Daike, Kazuko Yoshiyuiki, Beat Kiyoshi, Great Gidayu, Rakkyo Ide.
Written and Directed by Takeshi Kitano.
Produced by Masayuki Mori, Takio Yoshida a Sony Classics Release .
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Replacements, The (2000)
A formulaic, root for the underdogs, football, feel good film that feels
good. Late in the season the Washington Sentinels hire on "The Replacements"
to fill the swelled helmets of the pro's picketing for larger bottom lines.
Gene Hackman comes out of retirement to hand-pick and coach this team of
misfits which include: a sumo wrestler, a convict, one over enthusiastic
SWAT cop, a deaf guy, a coupla gangsta body-guards, a soccer player and
Shane Falco (Keanu), the coulda-been that never-was.
Hackman throws for the heart and so does the film. It's just plain good fun,
good solid dialogue peppered with plenty of grins, and a lot of football
action.
Especially well done, the breaking of the picket line scene where our motley
crew watches as their heroes mock and taunt them, a lunchroom scene where
the boys bicker over race, and the opening sequence with Keanu underwater
scraping barnacles from boats. He comes across an old football trophy in the
muck and tosses a submerged pass while Lit rocks on, "If I could get another
chance I'd put it in a ziploc bag and keep it in my pocket."
Hackman: "You know what separates the winners from the losers?"
Reeves: "Yeah, the score."
Langton: "You get that bruise from the game or the fight afterwards?"
Reeves: "I'm not sure, it all kind of blurs into one big beating."
The only drawback ... a cheer squad made up of lap-dancers. Oh, they have
their moment, but the film never really explains why the cheer squad needed
replacements also - did the regular's strike as well?
Anyway ... Good music, good acting, good heart. One satisfied viewer
cheered, "Finally, a good guy film!" I'd add, "That everyone can enjoy."
The Replacements. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Keanu Reeves, Gene Hackman, Orlando Jones, Jon Favreau, Brooke
Langton, Rhys Ifans.
Directed by Howard Deutch.
Written by Vince McKewin.
Produced by Dylan Sellers at Warner Bros/Bel-Air.
Grade..........................A
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Jesus' Son (1999)
Excellent dialogue, direction, and acting injected into a rather bland film.
The main character (Billy Crudup) is high on pills for most of this two-hour
presentation. Appropriately, the story is told in tangents and a somewhat
jostled sequence.
If you don't enjoy being around real people when they're high, you'll
probably not enjoy spending nearly two hours with someone acting that way (I
didn't). But that's me, plus there are folks who enjoy "drug movies" (as a
friend of mine called this one), so perhaps you'll find more to enjoy here
than I.
Still, I'm a huge fan of the little star Billy Crudup. He handles this role
with apathetic perfection.
If this review hasn't scared you away yet, expect a slowly paced film.
Gentle, yet harshly realistic. So realistic it's at times boring. The focus
is entirely on Crudup as he retells the meeting of a girl that seems to have
meant a lot to him. But, their 1970's love affair is so drug-ridden that I
just couldn't share his enthusiasm for her.
Up until near the end, Crudup stumbles through his own life with a sort of
disconnection to the small deaths within himself and the real ones around
him. The last twenty minutes don't change pace, just perception.
Perhaps a good film to enlighten with a strong dose of simulated reality
those innocents who find the drug culture glamorous.
The title is burrowed from the song "Heroin" by Lou Reed, "When I put a
spike into my vein, and I'll tell ya, things aren't quite the same, when I'm
rushing on my run and I feel just like Jesus' son."
Jesus' Son. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Billy Crudup, Samantha Morton, Denis Leary, Jack Black, Will
Patton, Greg Germann, Holly Hunter, Dennis Hopper.
Directed by Alison Maclean.
Written by Elizabeth Cuthrell, David Urrutia and Oren Moverman.
Produced by Cuthrell, Urrutia, Lydia Dean Pilcher, Margot Bridger a Lions
Gate presentation.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Virgin Suicides, The (1999)
The provocative title "Virgin Suicides" connotes a rough edgy film shaded
with dark humor and graphic violence - perhaps even sporting a grainy 16mm
touch and feel to the projection on screen. But in reality, "Virgin
Suicides" plays out more like the "growing up" stories of "Liberty Heights"
or "October Sky" as it utilizes the suicides of five beautiful, blonde, teen
sisters as the story's vehicle.
Rewinding to the 1970's, this suburban high school tale aspires to recreate
the mystery, magic and agony of teendom.
Doctor to patient, "What are you doing here? You're not even old enough to
know how bad life can get."
Suicidal teen, "Obviously doctor, you've never been a 13 year old girl."
Narrator Giovani Ribisi recounts the events that lead up to the final
suicides, while simultaneously introducing us to the Lisbon sisters, his
group of neighborhood boys, and the intersection thereof. Though the
filmmakers' constantly seem to be telling this tale as some sort of
cathartic therapy toward understanding the suicides and therefore, I don't
know, comprehending life itself a little better; it unfortunately seems more
of an insincere excuse to relate a rather interesting story. In fact, it
isn't necessary that Ribisi needs to or even cares to know the WHY's. The
fact is, the story itself is compelling enough. In this way, it's not unlike
a bystander ogling a car-wreck for the inexplicable guttural attraction,
then trying to excuse his interest as purely investigatory.
But that's just what I saw, here's what the director had to say, "It's about
mortality and obsession and love. It isn't about romanticizing suicide. I
never saw the Lisbon sisters or their acts as real and I don't think they
were intended to be. The Lisbons are the figments of memory, these lovely
mythical creatures of the imagination who are more beautiful than reality
can ever be, so of course they cannot last."
Still, this is my review. The reasons for the suicides seem rather strongly
implied if not plainly obvious. Personally, I'd rather have had them left
mysterious. But as long as they weren't, any pursuit to their understanding
by Ribisi seems insulting. A focus from the domineeringly oppressive
parents' perspective, may have been a curious direction, though that would
have been another project all together. James Woods is awesome, albeit a
minor character, as the submissively bliss math teacher father; while
Kathleen Turner (mom) rules the house with an iron-gate fist.
In the end, this is not really the edgy graphic picture you'd expect. It's a
coming of age tale about boys and girls that never quite comes of age
itself, but still makes an interesting story. Ribisi's narration generalizes
the difference between the sexes, "We know that they knew everything about
us, but we couldn't fathom them at all."
Debuting director Soffie Coppla (daughter of Francis Ford) shows great
talent in portraing the moments. A family at home watching nature TV with
the handsome young male guest, a bare foot on the coffee table, the uneasy
parents. But this particular film, though compelling (even humorous) at
times, doesn't quite fill out in the end.
Virgin Suicides. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R. 97 minutes.
Starring James Woods, Kathleen Turner, Kirsten Dunst, Josh Hartnett, Hanna
Hall, Chelse Swain, A.J. Cook, Leslie Hayman, Michael Pare, Jonathon Tucker,
Anthony DeSimone, and Noah Shebib.
Written and Directed by Sophia Coppla.
Based upon the novel by Jeffrey Eugenides.
Produced by Francis Ford Coppola, Julie Costanzo, Dan Halsted at Paramount
Classics/American Zoetrope/Muse/Eternity.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Story of Us, The (1999)
"The Story of Us" could be described as a sequel to "When Harry met Sally,"
you know, like fifteen years later and with a heavier drama to comedy ratio.
There's a lot of the same back and forth talk about the nature of men and
women and relationships that's probably been going on for centuries with
very little universal resolution. However, instead of single people
chattering about this, we now have two very married folks with very real
kids. The weight of their history is far too heavy to support a Harry/Sally
lightness.
About midway through, Bruce and Michelle head off on a Venetian vacation in
hopes of "jump-starting" their waning marriage. This is were they meet the
movie's comic relief: a hilariously annoying couple from the States. But the
bickering stalemate demands further relief, so Paul Reiser and the director
himself (Rob Reiner) make comedic appearances. Though these two are amusing,
you'll still have to wade through more than a few yelling spats from the
leads.
I don't know about you, but I don't enjoy arguments at temper's edge. In
fact, when neighbors raise their voices to each other, my usual reaction is
to take a walk. Though this film's arguments are very well acted and
probably ring dissonantly true for many married (or divorced) movie-goers --
I just wanted to take a walk during those parts. That said, the highlight of
the film is a Willis monologue that brilliantly combines humor, sarcasm and
heartfelt soul-searching. Pfeiffer has a similar, yet less effective
monologue (near-missing the mark despite her fine efforts).
As for a plot ... Bruce and Michelle start the movie in marital discord
hobbling towards separation. To keep your attention, the filmmakers rely
entirely on strong performances, topical chit-chat and basic suspense ...
will they break up or realize that they're perfect for each other?
The Story of Us. Copyright Š 1999.
Starring Bruce Willis and Michelle Pfeiffer with Rob Reiner and Paul Reiser.
Directed by Rob Reiner.
Written by Alan Zweibel and Jessie Nelson.
Produced by Rob Reiner, ALan Zwebel and Jessie Nelson at
CastleRock/Universal.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Double Jeopardy (1999)
"Double Jeopardy" starts out rather rough and lifeless, not quite sure how
to set itself up for the real story. This is where Libby (Judd) is framed
(or did she really do it?) for the murder of her hubby Nick. She's quickly
herded off to prison where she spends six (or was it eight?) years in what
seems like 30 seconds. From there she's released to an institution for
parolees which is overseen by Tommy Lee. This is where the movie really
starts (so show up to the theater at least 30 minutes late).
Double Jeopardy gives Libby the right to blow Nick away (if he's still
alive) without worry of a second trial ("not true" says one real life lawyer
I've heard). Anyway (for the purposes of the film), we're left to wonder if
this sweet loving wife, would do it. But Libby is more interested in finding
her son. So she busts out of the parole halfway house and begins breaking
all kinds of laws. Which leads to two or three big action sequences. The
first making me painfully embarrassed for the filmmakers. The second being
very enjoyable and almost perfectly believable. At that moment I was willing
to change my mind about this picture. But an absurd cemetery scene near the
end buried any hopes of that.
Tommy Lee is awesome as always. Ashley Judd is unusually un-inspired, though
on occasion delivers a zinger. For example, when getting hit-on by some
unknowing male she responds, "Sure, I'd love to sit and chat with you, but
I've just got to call my parole officer first." The movie for the most part
is a hodgepodge of drama, action and even comedy. It just doesn't flow,
giving the feel of too many writers and/or directors.
The film would have benefited from a longer more in-depth prison experience,
during which we could have seen Judd learn all the tricks of the trade.
Tricks that would come in handy later. To do this, time could be taken away
from the frame job sequences. Or trash that whole section altogether (it's
simply not compelling, even if you don't know if she really killed him or
not). Start in prison, tell the frame-job story in flashbacks (if needed).
Kill and bury the cemetery scene. Develop Lee's conflicting motivation to
both arrest and assist Judd -- that's the most interesting aspect of the
film anyway.
Double Jeopardy. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Tommy Lee Jones and Ashley Judd, with Bruce Greenwood and Annabeth
Gish.
Directed by Bruce Beresford.
Written by David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook.
Produced by Leonard Goldberg at Paramount.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Legend of Bagger Vance, The (2000)
Jack Lemon walks out onto the fairway and has a heart attack. During 
this surprisingly un-traumatic experience he relives (that is, narrates 
to us) a story about a mysteriously wise (perhaps mythical) caddy that 
comes to the aid of a broken man back during the great depression. The 
story is told in the style of mid-80's films (like "The Natural"): warm, 
big, movie-like. Nothing is all that real, but really swell nonetheless. 
No artificial enemy torments our protagonists for tension (I found that 
refreshing). Well, there is a play at it early on, but most of the 
story's conflict rests squarely on Rannulph Junuh's struggle with 
himself. He's a first rate golfer, struck down in his prime (note the 
similarity to "The Natural") by war memories. The whole town of Savannah 
needs him to step up and play a big match against the two best golfers 
of the era. 
Damon (as Junuh) plays fine enough, but you might think that Robert 
Redford would be a "Natural" for the part, in which case you wouldn't be 
surprised to learn Redford directs. Actually, the actor I think of as a 
young Redford came to my mind - Brad Pitt. And though Will Smith does a 
better job than anticipated of playing the wise old (er... young) caddy 
Bagger Vance, Morgan Freemon would have been the more obvious choice. 
Yeah, Pitt and Freemon - I'm sure of it. Aside from that, the other 
casting choices were excellent. J. Michael Moncrief stroking a better 
than par swing as the 10-year-old Jack lemon. 
But hearty and hopeful too, and although it is structurally formulaic, 
the film goes several hundred yards in search of unformulaic details. 
Rolling off the green on a few strokes, the picture lays the ball right 
in the hole a couple of times as well. Improvements could have been made 
by striking Junuh with a few more (and detailed) flashbacks of wartime 
misery. Also, I'd have woven that last dance into a thing of beauty 
rather than a loose end in need of tying. That said, in a gentle and 
warm kind of way, I enjoyed the film. Not over the top great, but 
decidedly above average. 
The Legend of Bagger Vance. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Matt Damon, J. Michael Moncrief, Will Smith, Charlize 
Theron, Bruce McGill, Joel Gretsch, Peter Gerety, Lane Smith, Michael 
O'Neill. 
*  Directed by Robert Redford. 
*  Screenplay by jeremy Leven based on the book by Steven Pressfield. 
*  Produced by Chris Brigham & Joseph Reidy at Dreamworks/20th Ctry 
Fox/Wildwood/Allied. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Big Kahuna, The (1999)
At Press Day, I spoke with three principals of the film, ironically in a
Beverly Hills hotel hospitality suite...
Danny Devito, Peter Facinelli and John Swanbeck.
(One member of the press joked that this convocation's condiments were far
superior to those in the film.)
DD: "Better than a Cheeseball" (Danny Concurred) that's gonna be my new
line.
DD: He calls me up on a Friday night and says, "The part was written for
you." I say, "Oh yeah right - okay, just send me the script." He goes, "I'll
have someone walk it over tonight ... you can tell me tomorrow." So now I
begin to smell a rat ... "When do you want to do this movie?" He says, "Oh,
we start Wednesday." I said, "Oh, it was a part that was written for me,
huh?" (Laughs.) I says, "The next time I read a script with a liein' bastard
in it I'll send it to you!" (Laughs, in thought) ... Next year Jersey's
gonna make an epic about the phone book and [Kev's] gonna star in it.
(Suddenly more serious.) No, we had a good time, it was a good script, at
the right time. If you recognize that when it comes along, you gotta be open
to it ... you get gifts. This is a gift.
DD: We tossed him around, broke his chops. A couple of workhorses and a new
guy. (Laughs.)
DD: I was able to protect Quentin ... because I was a final cut producer and
there was no way anyone was going to tamper with that script no matter what.
DD: Everybody's free to talk and contribute and put his or her two cents in.
Whoever's setting up the game should make that understood by everybody, you
don't want to turn anything away, somebody might have a good idea.
RA: So what good ideas did you have ... that they used?
DD: What movie? (Laughs all around.) Well, I'm almost finished with the book
so I don't want to blow it. (More Laughs.)
PF: To work with talented actors makes my job easier. But at the same time I
was also fully aware that they're very powerful people and I didn't want to
get steam-rolled by them and be a piece of furniture while it's the Kevin
and Danny show. They are such great inspirations to me as not only actors
[but] as human beings. Kevin's at the top of his game, Danny's very
talented. They could have easily come in and been egotistical control
freaks. Kevin could have completely taken over ... you know he's producing
it as well. That's not how I felt at all ... It was three actors. Names,
egos, everything aside, it was three actors and a director working together
collaboratively, and everyone's opinions, voices, suggestions were valid and
everyone respected each other. We were exploring this piece together, and
learning from each other together. That's another thing I love about them,
they're not afraid to learn and grow.
PF: If I could pick an actor to pattern my career after it would be Paul
Newman, salad dressing and all.
JS: Roger gave me the script in 1991 and I sent it to Kevin with whom I'd
had a long history as one of his acting coaches. We had been looking for a
project to do together on Broadway ... [however] Kevin said, "Look, this
will make a great first small movie to help launch my film company (Trigger
Street)."
(On getting advice as a first time director)
JS: She says, "On a Clint Eastwood set, everyone is so cool because Clint is
so cool." So then I was really terrified because now I've got to go in there
and be like Clint Eastwood. (Laughs.) But the point was well taken and the
next day I went to the crew and said, "Look I'll make a deal with you. I'll
be very clear and decisive about the story we're telling and I will
concentrate on capturing that story with the actors and you guys will be
responsible for capturing it on film."
JS: "Pride and Prejudices," "Chinatown," "Godfather(s)" etc. ... I would
love to work with Susan Surandon sometime and Angelina Jolie. [However] this
is my feminist movie because, there's no women in the movie. Larry's
character has a line, "We're like dinosaurs..." For me the story captures
the way men were used to relating to each other and the way the world is now
challenging them to relate with each other and the old world, old boy
network doesn't really work anymore. There's much more honest intimate
connections that these guys are forced to deal with and that's what we were
going after.
JS: It's a part in Peter's character's life and not what the picture's
about. We don't play down to religion and we don't use it in any
self-serving, manipulative way. Really it's a story of humanity. I know a
lot of very religious people who have seen this film and loved it.
RA: Besides watching "12 Angry Men" and "Lifeboat" videos, what else did you
do to Prepare for this film?
JS: I think it was really key that I made a short film before we shot "The
Big Kahuana." We wrote, directed and produced it. So going through the
process once was probably the smartest thing I'd done. I had the story
direction experience, but I needed to learn the mechanics, I didn't want to
show up and spend 16 days learning who the script supervisor was and what
her job was.
JS: In the middle of editing, Kevin called and said, "We're shooting in
three weeks." So that become our lives for two and a half years.
RA: Now that "The Kahuana" is finished ... will you return to the short?
JS: Well we're thinking of re-shooting it digitally, because we want to get
our feet wet in the digital world. Or maybe making it into a feature.
RA: What was that one precious thing you learned while working on the short?
JS: It really taught me what the producer's job is. So I knew I could make
decisions as a director to do a better job for Kevin. I knew what was coming
down the pike before they happened.
RA: What was the budget for "The Kahuana"?
JS: 1.8 million - it was a passion project.
RA: What film directors have influenced your style?
JS: Mike Nicols and his improvisatory background, he gets great
multi-dimensional performances from his actors by playing a scene in
different ways to see how it looks. Ang Lee of "Ice Storm." Latest mentor is
Kimberly Peirce of "Boys Don't Cry." It was a grave injustice that she
wasn't nominated.
RA: The "Kahuana's" writer, Roger Rueff, was he on your set?
JS: We've known each other a number of years, I knew what he wanted from the
script. I thought movies are an image medium, but working more internally,
we were allowed to use the faces of the actors as our landscapes and the
special effects would be the emotions in their eyes. Roger was, in fact, not
on the set, and that was a request I made of him. I know actors when they're
working on material they love and then the writer shows up ... it brings an
element of consciousness to the work that I like to keep out of the process.
So Roger was only too glad to not get in the way of what these actors were
doing. But I'd call him every day, and play the audio tapes over the phone
to him.
RA: What appears in the film that is purely new that was not in the script?
JS: A little improvisation, but they were very intent on getting Roger's
words down, because they're all actors that admire a good script. Danny
would be up till 3AM memorizing his lines.
RA: If you were given a huge budget, what kind of film would you make?
JS: I'd like to tell a story without dialogue, not to say I want to make a
silent movie. Actually, that's what I tried to do with "The Big Kahuana." I
know the film was wall to wall dialogue. But we should really think as
though we were telling a story without words. So that the movie works on two
levels, there's the brilliant dialogue and then the emotional under level.
The non-verbal fascinates me.
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Drop Dead Gorgeous (1999)
Once you get used to the "Fargo" accents, "Drop Dead" will prove  amusing
and apt in accomplishing what it sets out to do.
A mock-doc (feigned-documentary), this film spoofs a teen beauty pageant in
Mount Rose, Minnesota. The documentary crew follows contestants and judges
through the days just prior and following the city finals. To push things
over the edge of silliness, someone is knocking off (as in killing)
potential teen winners; hence the exceedingly clever title of the movie. In
fact, this may just be the most appropriately titled movie of the year.
Some outstanding moments:
Contestants sport their "All-American" Head-dressings:
Mt. Rushmore, nuclear power (a mushroom cloud), and finally a large ball of
twine atop the head of an unlikely winner who cries out, "I think I
misunderstood the assignment!" The ironic coupling of religion, arms and
teenage girls in The Lutheran Sisterhood Gun Club. A past queen in all her
Hollywood stardom sells St. Paul pork products. Anorexic reigning queen
lip-sincs Melissa Manchester's "Don't cry out loud" from her wheelchair. And
last but not least, the top contestant tap dances to Industrial Rock music.
Starring Kirsty Alley, Kirsten Dunst, Denise Richards, and Ellen Barkin.
Directed by Michael Patrick Jann. Written by Lona Williams. Produced by
Gavin Polone and Judy Hofflund at New Line. Rated PG-13.
Grade ......................................... B+
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for My Favorite Martian (1999)
Based on the 1964 TV series of the same name, My Favorite Martian is a
light-hearted silly movie aimed at showing kids a good time. Disney makes no
serious attempts to keep this film reasonable from an adult perspective.
Rather, they spend all their time in the silly fun department going for the
juvenile chuckle in a Herbie, the Love Bug kind of way. And by Joe, I think
they got it.
"You are a brilliant quasar in my black hole of a day." A pleasant enough
complement from a quirky Martian. Though he's generally jolly, Uncle Martin
(his Earth title) is vulnerable to bouts of depression which cause him to
literally fall apart (as in -- at the major joints).
Our favorite Martian (Christopher Lloyd, of course) crashes to Earth just
yards from news producer Tim O'Hara (Jeff Daniels) who inadvertently ends up
housing the alien. The two are forced to bear with each other until "Uncle
Martin" can get the ship up and running. Tim attempts to document this huge
news story, but is plagued with moments of compassion toward the odd fella's
safety. The "way way over the top" government investigator played
hysterically by Wallace Shawn accuses beautiful-but-simple newscaster Brace
(Hurley) of hosting the alien in her body, "So if you're not really a
Martian ... do you have any idea how alien DNA got on your cigarette?"
Ray Walston (TV's original Favorite Martian) pops into the picture as well
(greeted by a bit of an applause in the screening I attended). If you're
curious or nostalgic and you've got kids ... treat them to this movie.
Starring Christopher Lloyd, Jeff Daniels, Daryl Hannah and Elizabeth Hurley.
Directed by Donald Petrie. Rated PG.
Grade ..................................Kids' perspective: A
Grade ..................................Older folks' perspective: B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Sweet November (2001)
On our way to the screening, we stopped to help a motorist in distress, 
so I ended up being tardy to this film. Therefore you may wish to 
pro-rate its accuracy. 
Charlize Theron finds herself a monthly project, rich work-aholic Keanu 
is November. 
Keanu frustrated and un-amused by the carefree, spontaneous, potentially 
dangerous Theron reads, "What do you want with me?" 
Keanu, "What makes you think I need helping?" 
Charlize, "You're in a box. I'll lift the lid." 
Keanu sarcastically replies, "Just hearing that makes me feel healed." 
I like this script - sort of a "Harold and Maude"-lite. Very well paced, 
and carefully directed except for an abrupt, sorely reworked ending 
scene. Still, soft and bright like the cinematography, the film packs a 
lot of heart. 
Charlize is stunning, lovable and professional; Jason Isaacs, awesome; 
little Liam superb; and Keanu, simply terrible. I've heretofore defended 
Keanu from the robust pool of criticism regarding his acting abilities. 
But, his performance in this film is clearly underwhelming. He delivers 
lines as if he'd just awaken from deep slumber and was handed the script 
even before a cup of coffee. Happily (and somewhat amazingly), despite 
the blunt deficiency of acting prowess in this effort, Keanu's resilient 
charm and good looks still command while on screen. 
Done well, a crisp free and easy scene in which Charlize romps on the 
beach with a clan of beautifully groomed white show dogs. It's a 
wonderful way to impress upon us the theme, "If you want to enjoy life 
... you've got to risk getting a little sand in your fur." Also of note, 
a short scene in which Keanu returns to his childhood home is accented 
nicely by Tony Bennett's "The other half of me" as a remembrance of 
Keanu's history with his dad. In fact, this is just one of other 
well-selected musical pieces on the soundtrack. Thirdly and fourthly, 
two advertising meetings - one where Keanu introduces the "Hot" dog ad 
campaign with fervor and passion, and the other where Keanu meets with 
the god of advertising. Keanu peaks in both of these masterfully crafted 
scenes. 
Warm and cozy dialogue, direction, and apt cast, compensate for Keanu's 
acting shortcomings all the way up to, but not including, the ending 
bridge scene. The timing and pacing of which beats completely off-sync 
with the rest of the picture. Even the direction and editing lag here. 
Nice bridge though. 
Would have been an "A-" were Keanu to have acted, but since he didn't, 
would have been a "B+" had the ending sequence been more aptly scripted 
and shot. Still I enjoyed what I enjoyed and will remember the sparkling 
zest for life and the strong heart of this picture. 
Sweet November. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Keanu Reeves, Charlize Theron, Jason Isaacs, Greg Germann, 
Liam Aiken, Robert Joy, Lauren Graham. 
*  Directed by Pat O'Connor. 
*  Written by Kurt Voelker. Based on a screenplay by Herman Raucher. 
*  Produced by Erwin Stoff, Deborah Aal, Steven Reuther, Elliot Kastner 
at Warner Brothers/Bel-Air/3-Arts. 
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Hak hap (1996)
Jet Li (of "Lethal Weapon 4" infamy) is the blacksheep of the 701 squad --
an elite military force of medically enhanced super-humans. Seems a few
701's got out of hand so the Hong Kong government decided to nicks the
program ... i.e. terminate these tough guys (and gal). At the film's
opening, Jet escapes alone (or so he thinks). For reasons not revealed to
us, this 701 who can feel no physical or emotional pain becomes a pacifist
and takes a job as a library page.
detective. And you know what happens when superhero's have cops for buddies
... they have a hard time staying pacifistic.
Okay, so the story isn't the strongest -- but did you really think it would
be? Did you care? It's Jet Li looking like Kato and kicking butt! If that's
what you expect, that's what you'll get.
"Black Mask" is a 1996 Hong Kong martial arts flick (rather typical of that
genre as well). It's been dubbed over in English to add that cheesy
late-night TV dimension to it. The squirty blood won't scare anyone
either -- save for the potential dangers of Red Dye #2. But, it's paced
well, Jet kicks a lot of bootie, it has romance, betrayal and a sense of
humor. I had fun and enjoyed (in particular) the relationship between Jet
and the cop; both played their parts respectably well, whether during a
mid-air drop kick or a friendly game of chess.
Starring Jet, Li Karen Mok, Lau Ching Wan, Francoise Yip.
Directed by Daniel Lee.
Screenplay by Tsui Hark, Teddy Chen, Joe Ma.
Produced by Tsui Hark and Released by Artisan Entertainment.
Rated R.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Haunting, The (1999)
Right up until the end, I wanted to praise this movie; but the less than
satisfying climax stole my thunder. Hell, I'm going to steal it back!
(There's got to be a little praise I can scare up.)
The greatest thing about this film is so often lost, ill-achieved or simple
forgotten in others. It's the mighty undercurrent churning beneath the murky
green surface. It's the feeling a film sets spinning inside it's viewers
hearts -- ever so delicately at first, until finally it's charging like a
locomotive. Though on the screen, only wide eyes and peeked ears hint of it.
When I was a I child, I lived in an old wooden house two blocks from the
train tracks. I slept up on the third floor. When a freight train tumbled by
in the wee hours of the morning, that old frame house would rattle and
shake, even sway; my bed would rock. Perhaps that should be scary, but I
came to like it. And now that I sleep in the land of earthquakes; when a
tremor rocks my bed, I don't wake up ... I have eerie, yet sweet reminiscent
dreams of home.
That's the kind of unseen enchantment, "The Haunting" so aptly sets spinning
like a huge magnificent gyroscope on a string. The hovering motion and quiet
driving force of the twisting top is hampered neither by imperfections in
the string, nor by gravity.
I simply praise "The Haunting" for this marvelous achievement. The kind of
scary that lures you, that you truly believe is good, and yet sets shivers
down your spine because you know it could just as easily be otherwise.
Though the ending simply isn't good enough for the fine footage prior, my
overwhelming feeling of the film is still that mighty enchantment. It's
visually beautiful. In fact, the press kit had so many great photographs
that I found selecting one to print a difficult task. The looming mansion
and each set within are absolutely magnificent, each room, each door.  I'm
giving this an A- for thickly rich visuals and the ability to stir up a
wondrously chilling undercurrent.
Starring Lili Taylor, Liam Neeson, Catherine Zeta-Jones and Owen Wilson.
Directed by Jan De Bont. Screenplay by David Self based upon "The Haunting
of Hill House" by Shirley Jackson. Produced by Susan Arnold, Donna Roth,
Colin Wilson at Dream Works/Roth-Arnold. Rated PG-13.
Grade ......................................... A-
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for X-Men (2000)
Back in high school, my best friends used to spend their allowances every
Thursday on the week's release of new comics. "X-Men" topped that list.
Still comic book collectors today, they told me about the creation of this
film some time ago. And so I looked forward to it, not as an apostle, but as
an outsider peeking in. I hoped to share their enthusiasm, but I feared a
cartoony recreation, overly impassioned with larger than life characters.
Fortunately, my fears were for naught!
"X-Men" is a film for moviegoers. Yes it has the action, but also solid
dialogue, acting, and careful astute direction. Often films beg some
patience from their audiences whilst laying out the story in careful order
to enter their climax at the right angle. The best films build steadily,
compelling at every turn. "X-Men" levitates so effortlessly that the climax
is upon us before we even know it. That's a careful script and excellent
direction.
Of course the characters are endearing as well. It helps immensely that they
don't take themselves too seriously, smirking at the overly profound
nicknames they've each somehow acquired.
The X-men are mutants. Every so often evolution skips a millennium or so and
leaves the human race a handful of individuals with varied and superior
power. Wolverine (played superbly by Hugh Jackman) has a metal alloy
integrated into his skeleton and the power to heal his injuries in seconds.
Storm can summon the rage of a tempest. Cyclops can destroy any target with
a pinpoint laser ray emitted from his eyeband. Etc.
Sounds like kids' stuff on paper, but David Hayter's script is so well
adapted that I expect adults to be flocking to this film in greater numbers
than non-conservative parents to "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire." In
fact, so many people rsvp'd that the pre-release showing I attended played
in two screening rooms.
This story's conflict arises when regular humans fearing mutants in the
classroom etc., discuss forcing mutants to register themselves and their
specific powers. The mutants are split on how to counter this movement. Ian
McKellen and old buddy Patrick Stewart are the two kingpins that play a game
of chess with their small but talented mutant armies. The title says it all,
there is very little regular human involvement here, however, there are some
really sweet fight scenes between mutants including one that is ballet
beautiful. More Kudos to the scriptwriter for keeping the combat dialogue
free of "I'm going to get you!" or "Now I'm really mad!" type comic book
cliché. In fact, the battle scenes are appropriately uncluttered with words.
There's also drama and sweetly surprising humor sown in.
Simply put, "X-Men" is good entertainment.
Starring Patrick Stewart, Hugh Jackman, Ian McKellen, Halle Berry, Famke
Janssen, James Marsden, Bruce Davison, Rebecca Romijn-stamos, Ray Park, Anna
Paquin.
Directed by Bryan Singer.
Written by David Hayter, Story by Tom DeSanto and Bryan Singer.
Produced by Joel Simon and William S. Todman, Jr. at Fox/Marvel.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Xizao (1999)
For a filmed entitled, "Shower" there's an awful lot of bathing going on. A
business man/estranged son receives a card from his retarded younger brother
seemingly indicating that their father has died. Hence, the older brother
makes a trip to northern China only to find the father still alive. This
unexpected reunion is a catalyst for retying untied family ties. It's sweet
and unique; a charming story sure to move you.
The father and younger brother operate an old fashion bathhouse in northern
China complete with cricket fights, Chinese chess, and bickering old men.
Unfortunately, the bathhouse is an endangered species in an ancient part of
town soon to be lost to modernization.
"Shower" is a sweet little drama, warm and homey, like a fireplace or a hot
bath. And though it moves gently, the pace is perfect, occasionally
punctuated by a loud audio hit, like a thunderbolt or throaty wisp of coal
fire, to keep you from getting too comfortable.
The filmmakers leave a few buckets of backstory untold; namely, the reasons
for the ill will between the father and older son. However, this not only
frees us to enjoy the story at hand, but also gives the film another element
of curious allure. Though still not necessary, eventually the father
explains the reason for the separation. Fortunately, he doesn't expend more
than a sentence on this rather expository history.
To nit-pick one last time, the film takes another baby step too far while
discussing the neighborhood, "The buildings are like old people, no matter
how much you fix them up ... they're still old." It's a fine analogy that
would have been made stronger by letting the voice remain metaphoric. The
"Like old people" interjection subtracts from the profundity; it's
redundant, we can already see those words in the old man's eyes!
But these are petty grievances, the bulk of this flick is high quality story
telling. I quite enjoyed it! (In Mandarin with English Subtitles)
Shower. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Zhu Xu, Pu Cun Xin, Jiang Wu, He Zheng, Zhang Jin Hao, Lao Lin, Lao
Wu.
Director/Editor/Writer Zhang Yang.
Produced by Peter Loehr a Sony Classics Release.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Meet the Parents (2000)
Some recent comedies seemed to have been searching, reaching, 
desperately grasping for something funny to print; "Meet the Parents" 
has the opposite problem. Funny bits abound -- there's barely room for 
them all. In fact, overstuffed to the point of tearing at the seams, the 
film might have benefited from a bit more cutting. 
Stiller is the Romeo in love with Pam. The couple must fly to her 
parents' home for the wedding of her sister. Stiller's objective is to 
"Meet the Parents" and win them over in order to acquire their consent 
to marry Pam. Ah, but pops De Niro is no push over. Pam warns, "Don't 
waste humor on my parents." 
In addition to abstaining from sex and cigarettes for three days, 
Stiller must field the suspicious De Niro who runs his household like a 
CIA agent or something of that ilk. The Poster shows the two sitting at 
a lie detector machine with Stiller in the hot seat. (Actually, at first 
glance I'd thunk wrongly that that was some kind of shock therapy.) 
Anyway, Stiller's stress factor increases geometrically as every good 
intentioned offering gets twisted on its ear. 
It's a very funny film (the first meeting sequence is absolutely 
wonderful), you'll have good hardy laughs, but the third act is a little 
messy. So messy, I just can't give the film the A- I would like to give 
it. 
Meet the Parents. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Robert De Niro, Ben Stiller, Blythe Danner,  Teri Polo, 
James Rebhorn, Hon Abrahams, Owen Wilson. 
*  Directed by Jay Roach. 
*  Written by jim Herzfeld and John Hamburg. 
*  Story by Greg Glienna and Mary Ruth Clarke. 
*  Produced by Mancy Tenenbaum, Jane Rosenthal, Rober De Niro, Jay 
Roach. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Stop Making Sense (1984)
A straight-lipped, ball-eyed David Byrne sets a tiny boom box on a bare
stage. The box clicks out a tragically unhip, retro drum-machine beat to
which he strums "Psycho Killer" solo on the acoustic guitar. A perfectly
quirky intro to Byrne's punk-paranoia, funk-roasted musical spazzfest. Bass
player Tina Weymouth joins him in "Heaven" (the next tune); each song
thereafter adding a new Talking Head player to the stage until the modest
Pantages Theater is rocking side to side with the sweat and swing of all
nine musicians.
Completely void of the now standard, blaringly quick, MTV camera cuts, this
particular concert flick allows you time to enjoy the band members sautéing
in their own emotions. What a refreshing way to view music. During "That's
the Way it Goes" all camera angles are kept above the waist; allowing only
"Head Shots" -- the musicians' eyes say it all. Byrne and the band are so
deliciously entertaining to watch that there's no need for digital special
effects, wipes, fades, millisecond cuts, guitar string close-ups, or crowd
shots. Much well-earned praise has been given to director Jonathan Demme for
this 1984 gem, but David Byrne gave the man mountains of visual sweetmeats
to dolly around.
When I saw the original release, I wasn't ready for Byrne's wiggly nervous
vocals. Now, from a 1999 perspective, I greatly appreciate his bold
electrically eccentric self-expression. It emanates from his eyes, voice,
guitar and boils over into his convulsing body. (The big suit can't even
contain it.) His ironic paranoid demeanor is a front for his magnetic
confidence. Byrne's oddity is set in perfect contrast to solid
punk-funk-rock and roll. (Perhaps he was exactly 15 years ahead of his
time.)
Though a surprising amount of the film is shot in soft focus (a euphemism
for "not really in focus"): a decade and a half later, the music and brash
presence of creative genius still byrne down the house.
Stop Making Sense: Re-release. Copyright Š 1999. 88 minutes. Not rated.
Starring The Talking Heads: David Byrne, Chris Frantz, Jerry Harrison, Tina
Weymouth, Edna Holt, Lynn Mabry, Steven Scales, Alex Weir, Bernie Worrell.
Directed by Jonathan Demme.
Produced by Gary Goetzman and presented by Palm.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Wing Commander (1999)
"If you just let yourself be drawn into the picture, you wouldn't have to
laugh." So said a viewer of "Wing Commander" to his giggling friend.
Apparently, the former had been drawn in and the later, moved to laughter.
That one statement pretty much sums up the audience's reaction to "Wing
Commander." Half the audience seemed taken in by riding the spaceships
through their seas of glory, while the other half chuckled in waves of muse
at the corny/cliche dialogue and plot developments.
I must admit, I'm fine with a mild amount of "the hokey" (I can even like
it!). So after voluntarily clicking out plausibility sensors in my mind's
eye, I was among those enjoying the ride. It wasn't until about
three-quarters of the way through that the following dialogue exchange
tickled me into becoming a member of the now exuberantly tickled sector of
the crowd:
"You'll be court martialled!" Commander Angel threatens lt. Blair (Prinze
Jr.). His response, "Oh, like I care..."
Is a synopsis really necessary? It's a space flick based on the video
game -- in the vein of "Starship Troupers", maybe "Star Trek", "Battlestar
Galactica" (if you're old enough). No footage is shot on a planet, most is
on a huge battle cruiser, with occasional dog-fighting jet-like crafts
mixing it up between the stars. We follow the good guys the entire film,
Freddie being the only Earthling (and in only one scene) that faces the
aliens eye to eye.
Though stretching probability, I did enjoy the spacecraft / U-boat motif.
The battle cruisers float in space like submarines -- firing missiles at
each other. A major character, Tarrent, is a captain Ahab re-incarnation,
navigating with medieval style maps. Not completely consistent with this mix
in time, but nonetheless fun, the jet-like crafts cut through the vacuum of
space making "air-like" sounds shooting at each other with virtual Gatlin
guns.
I also had a good laugh when a chunk of wreckage was shoved off the the
runway of the cruiser -- it dropped like a rock (but where? and why was
there gravity to make it fall?)
Back to the review: I think kids will love this picture ... kids from about
6 to 14. And to tell the truth -- I enjoyed myself, half the time drawn into
the film, half the time laughing at it.
Cast: Jürgen Prochnow, Freddie Prinze (jr.), Mathew Lillard, Tchéky Karyo,
Ginny Holder, David Suchet, Saffron Burrows and others.
Adult's Grade .................... B-
Kid's Grade ...................... A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Forces of Nature (1999)
Ben Affleck stares up at the camera as he's carried on the hands of his
bachelor-partying friends. It's an upbeat opening to a movie comprised of
one up-beat after another. DreamWorks takes a rather uninteresting plotline
and makes a movie that moves around it.
Punchy grooving funk rocks the unlikely coupling (or is it?) of Bullock and
Affleck as the latter contemplates his matrimonial promises. I loved the
music even though it was set on 11 compared to the relatively civilized
levels of the dialogue.
Seems Bullock on the set inspired the filmmakers to advance the picture
along at the pace of "Speed." They were also diligent in the editing room,
bringing humorous ironies to simple cuts.
Affleck and Bullock (who act up a storm) survive a plane wreck among other
disasters, hooking up with Vic, a marvelously deranged side character for
whom this fine exchange was written...
Steven Vahn shows off his finesse as a stand-up, crack-up, best man. While
DreamWorks shows off a few of it's not so natural-looking, but nonetheless
dazzling special effects. A few decibels short of a thunderous ending,
"Forces of Nature" will take you by storm anyway. You'll leave the theater
doing the funky chicken to a hippy-hoppy version of Crosby, Stills and Nash
"If you can't be with the one you love ... honey, love the one your with."
Starring Sandra Bullock, Ben Affleck and Maura Tierney.
Directed by Bronwen Hughes. Rated PG-13.
Grade.......................... A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for 15 Minutes (2001)
"15 minutes" is a title way too small for its film -- like a cork meant 
to damn the Nile. This is the most intense production of the year. 
"Hannibal" scary? Forget it -- comparatively speaking. Director John 
Herzfeld brews up a fervent stew of hard as brass conflict, gruesome 
homicides, tasteful sprinkles of humor, rock solid dialogue, 
tight-as-gears direction, solid performances, grinding sound track, and 
whirling cinematography. Powerful, simply powerful. 
Unfortunately, a few implausibles abate the punch - but not enough to 
stop this rumbling steamroller of a film. Never a dull, boring moment - 
ever. 
Two Europeans thugs come to the States to collect their money from a 
fellow thief and comrade. When they learn he's spent it all, the mean 
thug kills the friend with a kitchen knife while the Hollywood-loving 
thug videotapes the murder. It's gruesome and it's vile and it's angry. 
This film is not for the weak of stomach. Realizing that the friend's 
wife witnessed the crime, the mean one kills her too. Again the somewhat 
comedic Capra-wannabee tapes. Here lies the first implausibility. That 
mean thug would smash that camera against the wall -- this would be 
consistent with his rage and motivation to destroy all evidence of his 
crime. A smashed camera wouldn't have effected the play of the rest of 
the story. 
Those are the two bad boys; the good guys have a duo of their own. Bobby 
De Niro laps up the press as poster cop and "friend" of "Top Story" TV 
tabloid host Kelsey Grammer. Edward Burns plays a crackerjack Arson 
Investigator - a fireman with a gun. The give and take between this cop 
and firefighter team splendidly constructs the spine, heart and soul of 
the film. 
A second implausibility arises when the two bad guys begin to argue over 
ownership of their master plan. It's conceivable of course that this 
would happen, but the manifestation and timing of the event rides an 
altogether different grain from the rest their interplay. 
Both thugs are strong performers. "You think I came to America to work?" 
When the mean thug delivers that line ... you just know he's not very 
well tempered. De Niro endears the viewer to his character by first 
teasing, then assisting his unlikely partner, "You remind me of a puppy 
I used to have." His prep for a proposal moment further cements our 
sympathies ... however the actual proposal scene plays prominently 
cliche in this gritty original film. 
"15 Minutes" starts out like an independent picture, but eventually 
explodes into an all out Hollywood production that takes you up with it 
and slams you down. Excellent dynamics and direction ... this film will 
do very well at the box office. 
15 Minutes. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Robert De Niro, Edward Burns, Kelsey Grammer, Avery Brooks, 
Melina Kanakaredes, Karel Roden, Oleg Taktarov, Vera Farmiga, John 
DiResta, James Handy, Darius McCrary. 
*  Written by Directed by John Herzfeld. 
*  Produced by David Blocker and John Herzfeld at Industry/New 
Redemption/Tribeca a New Line Presentation. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Next Best Thing, The (2000)
In your past, were you ever an international pop icon? Or maybe you
accidentally made love with your best gay friend in a drunken stupor and
woke up pregnant? If so, then you can relate to "The Next Best Thing."
Or maybe you've gone to a multi-screen theater to see a movie, but after a
half-hour of viewing discomfort you snuck into another film to try your luck
at that show? "The Next Best Thing" recreates the experience and you don't
even have to get out of your seat. Because it is really two films - count
'em - two films in one. Not interwoven, but one right after the other. A
whimsically racy comedy starring Madonna and then a child custody drama
starring Rupert Everett.
Remember "My Best Friends Wedding" with Julie Roberts? Well, you may recall
that her best friend is a gay man with whom she vents her messy relationship
woes via cell phone. In an absolutely sparkling scene at the end of that
film, the gay friend comes to her rescue with style, comfort, and the
perfectly devilish hint of romance. "Next Best Thing" sets out to snatch
that moment while changing the sensual hint into a rude reality. In both
cases the gay friend is played by Everett; I've been told Madonna's role was
first offered to Roberts. And of course, there are the similar sounding
titles.
But while Everett was marvelous in "Wedding." He can't save a picture
ironically entitled "The Next Best Thing." Every gay stereotype is utilized,
along with one-liners that fall winceably short building a cheap imitation
of "Wedding's" charm. Fortunately, somebody must have realized that it just
wasn't working because a third of the way through the film, they start a new
film.
Basically, Madonna and Everett accidentally conceive a child. They decide to
raise the boy as their mother and father under the same roof, but not in the
same bed. Everett continues to date, but Madonna doesn't - until she meets
Benjamin Bratt who delivers a strong performance as the perfect marriage pro
spect. Everett's reaction is uncharacteristically selfish, and Madonna's
response to that is even more out of character.
Feeling betrayed by both leads' motivations, the rather lame excuse for a
climax is made lamer. However, the premises established are indeed
interesting. The film could have been improved by 1) dropping the entire
comedy preface, 2) drawing just a bit more out of Everett's relationship
with his own father, 3) more diplomatic dialogue between he and Madonna
prior to the legal battle. Also the interactions between Ben and Rupert
grace this seldom graced film - perhaps more could have been done there. An
earlier funeral scene was nearly very special - needing only a little
tweaking to pull it from the theatric.
Madonna's acting performance is not more or less than average.
The Next Best Thing. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Rupert Everett, Madonna, Benjamin Bratt, Malcolm Stumpf.
Directed by John Schlesinger.
Written by Thomas Ropelewski.
Produced by Tom Resenberg, Leslie Dixon and Linne Radmin at
Lakeshore/Paramount.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for South Park: Bigger, Longer and Uncut (1999)
Yes, it's offensive and rude and lewd and I don't feel comfortable with the
idea that kids are probably going to have access to it, but ... man, it's
funny!
I'd seen a few "South Park" episodes (the cable series) -- had a few good
laugh, but never tuned in regularly. I liked the off-shoot (pardon the pun)
film "Basketball," but found "Orgasmo" lacking. So I certainly had my doubts
about how "South Park" (this underdog cartoon series that grew from a
underground Christmas Special spoof) would take to the big screen. Would it
look small? Would it look stupid? Would I have wasted my time? Simply put:
"South Park" the movie takes to the screen like a rabid pitbull to a
maceless, bare-butted postal carrier.
In an age where so much language is first cleared through politically
correct filters; a film like "South Park" is a painful reminder of first
amendment rights. Frankly, it's refreshing in a blatantly revolting way.
Don't get me wrong, I strongly feel that it's good not to offend people.
However, there are also times when we begin to take our wonderful
differences too seriously; seeing them as topics to be avoided as not to
accidentally offend. We sometimes lose our good humor, choosing to be
impersonal rather than impolite. Not only can that dilute truth and artistic
license, but we may actually be making ourselves easier to offend. Perhaps,
it's a good thing to let people make fun of us from time to time -- a shot
in the arm.
Though I don't think they do it for any other reason than to confuse their
attackers, creators Matt and Trey make another point: "It appears that to
the American public horrific gory violence is acceptable viewing material --
but naughty language somehow crosses the line." It's a very third-grade
remark, not unlike "Why punish me? Look what Timmy is doing!!!" Still ... it
really got me thinking. Should we be that upset if our children swear? I
contemplated that question. If my kid is good and loving, and non-violent --
should I care if he swears? Perhaps, I too, am stuck in tradition. The fact
is I do care ... and, if I were you I wouldn't take my kids to this movie.
(In all fairness, I wouldn't take them to "Pulp Fiction" either.)
What it's about:
Underneath a thick layer of pottie-mouthed grade-schoolers, PC-crushing
offensive humor, and sex scenes with Saddam Hussein, "South Park" the movie
is all about its own controversy: namely censorship. Canadian movie stars
(animated characters): Terrance and Philip (never at a loss for a fart joke)
play out the saga of Matt and Trey under fire for corrupting the youth of
America.
"South Park" in their own words:
MS: You could say it's about the struggle for basic, inalienable freedoms in
the face of oppression, but you'd sound like a jerk.
TP: Just read "Moby Dick" and every time you come across the word "whale"
replace it with "Canadian".
What every parent should know:
There is A LOT of swearing. And not just the usual "F" and "S" word and
every conceivable combination thereof ... but, variations on these themes so
colorfully creative that you'd be hard pressed to think of any other verbal
projection you'd hate worse to pass into your child's ear. In fact, you'd
probably rather have a wasp get caught up in there than these obscenities.
These guys are experts -- they earn millions making cute little cartoon
characters swear like you and me with lit bottle rockets up our shorts.
It's the contrast that strikes the funny bone with a guilty chord:
"South Park" (the movie) is a musical (Parker's band writing most of the
lyrics). They set your heart warmly pumping with that magical "Disney
feeling" just to swat you like a blood engorged mosquito. The humor is
furthered with a third contrast -- sincerely intriguing and profound
thoughts. In "sensitive" Satan's big number he sings ... "Without evil there
can't be good, so it's got to be good to be evil sometimes." And in another
buoyant ditty delicately entitled "Blame Canada," America goes so far in
looking for outside causes to condemn for its own children's bad behavior,
that good old fashioned parenting somehow gets overlooked as a viable
response to the situation.
Done very well...
The Heaven and Hell sequences. George Clooney's cameo. The integration of
music. The fast pace and high energy. And ...you'll leave the theater
thinking about this movie and issues it speaks to for a long time.
Weakest link:
After a while, the verbal obscenity strings lose their shock value and
ironically, perhaps like "Clockwork Orange" (hinted at in the film),
actually may make some viewers sick of swearing.
My last word:
"South Park" is an explosively funny, openly offensive, shockingly
unsettling movie that surprisingly makes some poignant statements about a
1990's America. It teases and pokes at our favorite Pandora's boxes and then
rips their lids off without hesitation. It specifically ribs various racial
and gender groups so graphically, that one might easily miss the biggest
butt of the joke -- 20th century America. Not only that, but it has already
spoofed our responses before we speak. If you truly don't like that sort of
thing: then don't see it, don't talk about it, and raise your children well.
If you choose to protest, you'll just be fueling the flames.
Written by Trey, Matt and Pam. Directed by Trey.
Produced by Matt Stone and Trey Parker at Warner Bro's/Paramount/Comedy
Central.
Rated R -- Eek, don't let kids watch!
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Amantes del Círculo Polar, Los (1998)
Now here's a movie with lots of elements that I like. An attractive plot: a
tender love story budding from the hearts of two very complex eight-year
olds that continues into adulthood. More than one rich motif: the pattern of
circles (in one's life) and the repeated symbol of airplanes. These motifs
are artistically woven into the quilt-like fabric of the film. And then the
casting: since the story follows Ana and Otto as they grow, three separate
characters are needed for each lead. For the most part, these faces are very
well cast. Child Ana, and adolescent Ana, are shockingly beautiful; but all
(for the most part) give strong performances.
I also share a fascination with the Arctic Circle. Though you should know,
only a small portion of this film takes place in that region. And then
there's the texture. Foreign films seem especially attuned to reproducing a
very porous image on the screen. I appreciate that. "Lovers of the Arctic
Circle" is no exception -- it's a picture you can feel with your eyes.
But ... I didn't quite get it (for reasons I can't reveal without spoiling a
few good twists). It was certainly beautiful, but dark. Like an abstract
painting that draws you in by virtue of it's wonderful shapes and patterns,
only to leave you feeling trapped in its dark tragic colors. You're
mesmerized somehow, then the museum lights flicker at closing time leaving
you with the feeling of confusion and an odd sense of extraction from real
life for an extraordinary long amount of time.
On the other hand, if you're a lover of dark abstract art, you might just be
a lover of the Arctic Circle.
One last point ... Warning... don't read this if you haven't seen the movie.
Near the end, as Ana walks into Finnish Otto's apartment for the guest, why
can't it be her father that she finds?
Spanish Language with English subtitles.
Starring Fele Martinez and Najwa Nimri.
Written and Directed by Julio Medem.
Produced by Fernando Bovaria and Enrique Lopez Lavigne.
Presented by Fine Line Features.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for For Love of the Game (1999)
Like New York's Yankee Fans, you might want to root against Kevin Costner as
Detroit Tigers' aging pitcher Billy Chapel in another silly love story at
the baseball diamond. And for the first couple of innings you'd have good
reason to heckle. But like the aching Chapel, "For Love of the Game" slowly
pulls itself out of a sluggish slump. Sliding in slow motion under your
skin, it gradually pulls you from that slouched near-sleep position to the
edge of the bleaches ... baited and waiting on that last pitch.
Unlike most sports films, this one starts rather promptly into the
proverbial "big game." His lover (Preston) bails, his owner sells the team,
and the next day after a sleepless night Chapel steps up to the mound in
what could very possibly be his last pro game. Such a hurried start leaves
the viewer wanting for traditional character setups; fear not, the bottom of
each inning provides ample time for reflection. These "flashbacks" bring you
up to speed on what looks like a possible no-hitter for a guy who throws for
the love of the game.
Unfortunately, the film ends as it begins -- that last pitch is a fading
sinker (metaphorically speaking). Engaging and well directed in the middle,
but weak on beginning and end; Costner and Preston give outstanding
performances throughout. While it still hits above average, a different
climax may have made this a very fine film.
Save yourself a few bucks and quench your appetite for a good baseball love
story: rent "The Natural" with Robert Redford now and "For the Love of the
Game" around Christmas.
For Love of the Game, Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG-13.
Starring Kevin Costner, Kelly Preston, John C. Reilly, Jena Malone.
Directed by Sam Raimi.
Screenplay by Dana Stevens.
Produced by Armyan Bernstein and Amy Robinson at Universal/Beacon/TIG.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for How the Grinch Stole Christmas (2000)
It's the same old story the Doc published back in 1957, but with some
tweaking. The Grinch's grinchiness back-story is told and wha'da'ya'know
there's a love interest involved. Also, little Cindy Lou isn't simply the
sweet faithful who of yester-century; this who's got some Christmas
suspicions of her own, "Presents? Isn't that superfluous?" Later she sings,
"Did Christmas change or was it just me?" The maturing child perspective
makes a nice addition to the collection of Holiday tales.
Bumpy, but fun second and third acts follow a very rough first act.
Translating a fictional cartoon into fictional cartoony live-action is a
daunting unforgiving task that this first act does not make look effortless.
Whoville will take some time to get used to and the silly bustling of whos
spills over with silly gags unable to carve a smile on the average adult.
But, Jim Carrey's resilient spirit, rubber bones, and love of charades,
carries the production like an over-packed sack of toys up the steep
slippery slope. Though, two sizes too small, it's his heart that saves the
show.
A couple of the more notably riotous elements include the Grinch trying with
all his might to scare the unscareable, ultimately adorable Cindy Lou and
the Grinch's cave from crawling socks to self-defeating answering machine.
Speaking of machines, kudos to the set and prop designers. Kids will love
the wacky mechanization.
Speaking of speaking, I swear Carrey's cheers scare up a share of the vocal
wares of one Sean Connery imitating Mr. Magoo. Whoever, it works.
Interestingly, the press notes are careful to point out that Carrey "with no
accompaniment or anything to alter his voice" sang the signature song
"You're A Mean One Mr. Grinch" from the 1966 animated classic. I must say,
Carrey's absolutely splendid vocal work on that musical piece pulls together
one of the film's strongest moments.
Incidentally, Theodor S. Geisel (Dr. Seuss), content with the 1966 version,
turned down any following offers to bring "The Grinch" into live-action.
After his death in 1991, his wife Audrey likewise shook her head at all
proposals ... until this one, that is.
Dr. Seuss' How the Grinch Stole Christmas. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Starring Jim Carrey, Taylor Momsen, Kelly, Jeffrey Tambor, Christine
Baranski.
Narrated by Anthony Hopkins.
Directed by Ron Howard.
Screenplay by Jeffrey Price & Peter S. Seaman based on the book by Dr.
Seuss.
Produced by Brian Grazer, Ron Howard at Universal/Imagine.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me (1999)
Tired of the sophomoric humor Virgin Inc. has been pumping into their Austin
Powers/ Virgin Airlines radio ads, I expected the same from this film.
Fortunately, my fears of a buck-toothed drooling grin ra-ta-tatting juvenile
"Shag-isms" the entire length of a feature film were ill-conceived. Now,
that doesn't mean that Austin Powers is my hero or that he refrained
completely from driving his "Shaguar." It does mean that I didn't hate the
picture. In fact, "The Spy Who Shagged Me" is a strong "B" film for any
adult with an open-minded funny bone and probably a laugh-a-minute-riot cult
film for high school freshmen.
If you haven't figured it out yet ... "Shag" is euphemistic British slang
for making love. The writers miss no opportunity for making copulation puns,
going so far as fastening two large spheres (fuel tanks?) to the base of Dr.
Evil's Rocket Ship. Get the point?
Austin Powers (Mike Myers) is a James Bond spoof frozen in '69 and thawed
out in the nineties. In this episode, he must again stop the sinister dolt,
Dr. Evil (also Mike Myers) from destroying the planet. Dr. Evil, planning to
zap Washington D.C. with a "laser" based on the moon, fears foiling from
agent Powers. In hopes of diffusing our hero, Dr. Evil sends a cohort back
in time to steal Austin's "Mojo" (you know, his life force, suave, charisma,
the essence of his mystique). The Mojo-less Powers whimpers, "I used to be
so virile, now I'm nothing."
Like "Laugh in" or "Hee-Haw" almost charming in its relentless silliness,
"Shagged" sports 2 or 3 genuinely hilarious sequences which bump it up from
a "B" to a "B+." First, a tent-shadow scene in which lover, Felicity
Shagwell, appears to be emptying Powers' bowels of everything from
explosives to a sporting equipment. Secondly, there's a stream of quick cuts
connecting the sentences of unrelated characters trying to find just the
right word to describe the phallic image of Dr. Evil's Rocket in the sky. Al
so, you'll no doubt enjoy the cameos of good-humored celeb's.
Powers' famous catch phrases ("Oh, Behave" etc.) were plainly unfunny, but
"Shagged" had plenty other foolish jokes to tell. Overall, actor Mike Myers
did an absolutely smashing job with this light-weight script while playing
three roles to boot. Lastly, great costuming and makeup on his third
character deserve mention as do the props far exceeding those of Dr. Who.
(Btw, If you stay till the end of the credits, there's a little something --
a very little something.)
Starring Mike Myers and Heather Graham. Directed by Jay Roach. Written by
Mike Myers and Michael McCullers. Produced by Suzanne Todd, Jennifer Todd,
Demi Moore, and Eric McLeod at Newline/Eric's Boy/Moving Pictures/Team Todd.
Grade..................................B+
Bart Simpson's Grade...........A+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Tigger Movie, The (2000)
"The wonderful thing about tiggers is that tiggers are wonderful things.
Their tops are made of rubber, their bottoms are made of springs ... But the
very most wonderful thing about tiggers is I'm the only one!" an exuberant
Tigger bounces into action, tumbling to the ground the other ho-hum, yet
lovable, characters in Christopher Robin's Hundred Acre Wood.
Pooh's troop of animated stuffed animals being either too busy or just too
darned laid-back to bounce with him, Tigger finds himself direly lonely.
"I'm the one and onlyest one ... how I wish there was a double or a triple
of me."
Fluttering to help, Owl goes out on a limb by sending Tigger into the cold
wintry forest in search of his family tree.
While Tigger is innately effervescent, the rest of the cast (save for a
spirited Roo-boy) is rather lackluster in spite of their cute black-button
eyes and occasional charming remarks. The washed out watercolor look of
Pooh's woods is beautiful in its own way, but never was meant to carry the
thunder and excitement we've more recently come to expect from Disney with
it's thickly rich animated films like "Tarzan" and "Toy Story2." Though this
one is Tigger's movie, it's still Winnie's world and in defiance of one wild
cat's enthusiastic attempts, the picture remains soft on color, action, and
in the end quite wordy.
Nowhere in the film is this point better made than at the start and end of a
truly contrasting musical interjection. In the middle of the production,
Tigger is given an outstanding Broadway number in which he dreams/sings his
family history in a collage of American culture and European art recreated
entirely with Tigger faces. The texture of the production sparks here, it
firework-jerks our Eeyore-lazy hearts from their calm and stands out from
the rest of the picture like an orange-striped cat in the snow. It's
wonderful.
In all fairness, Pooh sings a sweet little "lulla-bee" calming nasty buzzing
bees into a hypnotic slumber, so that he might dip into that luscious honey
sapping from a tree that could have been Tigger's family tree. The film
would have benefited with more songs of this golden syrup-dipity.
I also enjoyed the snow rendering, which flickers in flakes of unique and
changing shapes. And though I'm no longer innocent enough to enjoy the tame
and many sight gags; your younger children might. However, I did get a kick
out of Tigger's word misinterpretations and blunders. In one instance, after
forgetting to offer refreshments to his guests he blurts, "Where are my
mannerisms?" And then, in a party mood, mistakenly almost asks Eeyore, "Or
how about a game of pin the tail on the do..." Jim Cummings does a smashing
job of Tigger-talk and remarkably speaks for Pooh too - vocally and in song.
In the end, the tender heartwarming climax and resolution may just choke you
up a bit in the Adam's apple - as they did I.
The Tigger Movie. Copyright Š 2000. Rated G.
Voices: Jim Cummings (both Tigger and Pooh), Nikita Hopkins, Ken Sanson,
John Fiedler, Peter Cullen, Andre Stojka and Kath Soucie.
Written and directed by Jun Falkenstein.
Story by Eddie Guzelian. Based on Characters by A.A. Milne.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Dr. T & the Women (2000)
Did you like Diane Keaton's "Hanging Up?" If so, you'll probably equally 
enjoy this rich (as in wealthy) women farce. Dressed in furs, wild hats 
and jewelry, these well-to-do women bumble around Dr. T (Richard Gere) 
like bees with cell phones. 
Though adored by his entourage of gynecological patients, daughters, 
sisters and even his screwy wife, Dr. T tries to keep his life from 
bursting apart at the seams. It's one thing after another until the roof 
blows off. 
The film opens between the legs of one of Dr. T's gynecological 
patients. Circus appropriate, Dixieland music comprises the soundtrack. 
But somehow, everyone thinks the gentle and sincere Dr. T has it all 
together. Even Dr. T's hunting pals envy his seemingly perfect life and 
perfect wife. "You're a lucky man, hang on to her," they advise him of 
his mentally ill spouse. "I'm trying," he replies with a heartfelt 
anxiety not picked up by the camouflaged buds. 
With wife (Farrah) institutionalized, daughters feuding over a wedding, 
woman lined up outside the office door for a check up; Dr. T finds a new 
refuge and a new set of problems. 
Gere is compelling and charming as always, the women perform admirably. 
Though the dialogue is strongly real, it's seldom sparkling. Sporting 
some fairly well paced direction, it's the story that seems to have a 
point missing. 
Coupled with the oft times annoying cell chat, the film hardly leaves 
the goer with any sense of satisfaction. Though the climax is 
interesting ... it isn't fulfilling, and you'll leave the theater 
feeling like you've just witnessed the work of a great conversationalist 
who didn't have much to say. 
Dr. T and the Women. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R. 
*  Starring Richard Gere, Helen Hunt, Farrah Fawcett, Laura Dern, 
Shelley Long, Tara Reid, Kate Hudson, Liv Tyler, Robert Hays. 
*  Directed by Robert Altman. 
*  Written by Anne Rapp. 
*  Produced by Robert Altman, James McLindon at Artisan/Sandcastle 5. 
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Play It to the Bone (1999)
There is little of interest in the first third of this film beyond
pretentiously quirky characters spewing meant-to-be-cute retorts at cliché
beats, devoid of punch.
Then comes Antonio Banderas' monologue. He intimately relives a scarring
fight experience at the garden. It's "Bone's" breath of life. From there,
the beat becomes more personal, the retorts more endearing, a few even evoke
deep laughter from this previously antsy viewer.
Used-to-be's, Banderas and Harrelson, now boxing buddies (who supposedly
have never fought each other) stumble across an opportunity to clear their
good names -- and of course, win a title shot. Lolita Davidovich plays the
domineering ex-girl who routes for them both.
The film crowns during the fight scene (big match between Woody and Antonio)
as many a star make a ringside cameos. This lengthy sequence is so
passionately directed and photographed, that it seems the rest of the film
is merely a convenient frame for its display.
I use the word "crown" instead of climax, because the picture never quite
pops. The writers seem to have gone out of their way to create a film with
absolutely no payoff. Perhaps it's some kind of inside joke that I don't
get.
Play It to the Bone. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Antonio Banderas, Woody Harrelson, Lolita Davidovich, Lucy Liu,
Robert Wagner.
Written and Directed by Ron Shelton.
Produced by Stephen Chin at Shanghai'd/Play It.
Distrubted by Buena Vista.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Leggenda del pianista sull'oceano, La (1998)
A grand piano accompanied by its carefree pianist (Tim Roth) glide like a
Ouija oracle across a glorious marble-like dance floor aboard the teetering
cruise ship Virginia. It's 1926, the savant at the keyboard is an orphan
raised by the crew whose music rages on in stormy waves; he has never set
foot on dry land.
The tale is a marvelous one, like a muted trumpet's melody it plays.
Conducted would be a better word than directed, the film is accented sharply
with visual and audio hits that strike at the right times. Tim Roth an
under-appreciated actor of excellence, will tickle your ivories with muse
and tug at your grand heart strings with sympathy -- portraying a pure soul
uncomplicated by cities, governments, or even an official name.
A coal throwing scene takes full advantage of the surround sound
capabilities today's theaters now offer. If you aren't drawn into the dark
belly of this boat by the sound of tossed charcoal, look around for a better
movie house. I would have liked to have heard this little-big film expand
its use of the multi-channeled system during musical performances as well.
Nearly a masterpiece, this happily embellished tour takes an odd turn just
before reaching shore, leaving me to disembark disoriented. I'd have written
an entirely different ending. Still, it is to be remembered that this is a
legend, a myth, a tale docked at the edge of the surreal.
Legend of 1900. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Tim Roth, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Clarence Williams III.
Written and directed by Guiseppe Tornatore.
Produced by Francesco Tornatore at Fine Land Films.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Runaway Bride (1999)
Galloping onto the screen, a bride in full gown rides horseback through a
field of tall grass accompanied by U2's "Still haven't found what I'm
looking for." "Runaway Bride" puts a strong hoof forward and never looks
back. It's a film full of solid, polished dialogue with a great premise, a
clinch cast and veteran director. It won't leave you sobbing at the altar.
New York columnist Ike Graham, infamous for his commentaries on the female
of the species, writes a shoddy article on small towner Maggie Carpenter
(Roberts) who has a knack for standing up grooms. Unlikely as it may seem,
Graham doesn't check up on the story, jumbles facts and uses her actual name
in the column. Carpenter writes back to the editor and Graham is canned.
Seeking vengeance, he heads to Hale, Maryland to get the real story as
Maggie makes her fourth attempt at the altar.
In my favorite scene, Gere shadows Roberts into a bakery where she is
choosing bride/groom figures for the cake. Gere picks up the three inch
bride whacking the little groom over the head with it, "Bam Bam Bam! Yeah,
this one's Maggie all right."
Like Robert's recent "Notting Hill," it's a sure bet.
Starring Richard Gere and Julia Roberts.
Directed by Garry Marshall.
Screenplay by Josann McGibbon and Sara Parriott.
Produced by Ted Field and Tom Rosenberg at Touchstone/Paramount.
Rated PG.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Fantasia/2000 (1999)
"Tick Tick Tick" the composer taps the podium setting the bird-like theme
into flight.
Similar to its predecessor, "Fantasia" of 1940, this version is more of a
collection of musical shorts than a feature film. So, I'll review each short
on its own.
In the words of Walt Disney (a cartoonist himself), "It is our intention to
make a new version of 'Fantasia' every year. Its pattern is very flexible
and fun to work with -- not really a concert, not a vaudeville or revue, but
a grand mixture of comedy, fantasy, ballet, drama, impressionism, color,
sound and epic fury."
For a variety of reasons, the profit deficiency of the 1940's "Fantasia" not
the least of them, it's taken Disney sixty years to make good on Walt's
hope.
Symphony No. 5
Triangles that flutter and fly becoming butterflies, birds, bats? Swarming
in a cloud of black wings with sharp and ominous flaring red highlights.
Grade ................................. A-
Pines of Rome
Doves tease a couple of humpback whales that take to the air in reply. A
baby whale attempts to ski off of the surface of the water, but ends up
finding himself trapped in an iceberg. The "gaggle" of whales soaring far
above the Earth is absolutely fascinating. If you could paint wonder ---
this is what it would look like. My chin literally trembled with awe.
Capturing the awesome feeling of one's first peer from the window of a plane
into the gloriously clouded sky, this segment lets us relive those precious
few dreams where we actually see ourselves arms out, levitating through thin
air.
Grade ................................. A+++
Rhapsody in blue
Animated in an old cartoon style with European flavor, we follow the
escapades of a host of depression era human characters including: a
construction worker/jazz drummer, down and out bloke, goofy rich guy.
Dominated by a grayish-blue color scheme, this segment stands out as stark
and drab. Perhaps, this is intentional as Gershwin's music relishes the
blues. Still, it feels out of place in a collection called "Fantasia." The
rich man's two second spontaneous dance with a street monkey, is this
segment's shining moment.
Grade ................................. B-
Shostakovich's Piano Concerto No.2
Based on the story "The Steadfast Tin Soldier," a one legged toy soldier
comes to life in order to save a toy ballerina from an evil Jack in the box.
The art incorporates computer animation. Nice story telling, great
expression and fine musical timing. I loved the majestic horns ringing as
the rigid soldier topples into the sewer system only to dodge the green
teeth of red-eyed rats.
Grade ................................. A-
Carnival of Animals
"What would happen if you gave a yo-yo to a flamingo?" Again, great
synthesis with the musical dynamics, but not very full of wonder and magic.
Grade ................................. B+
The Sorcerer's Apprentice
Old, but a classic. Textured with grain, this excerpt from the original
"Fantasia" plays nicely on the Imax screen. You can also see portions of it
at Disneyland projected on a shimmering wall of water during the simply
fantastic "Fantasmic" show. Mickey uses magic to ease himself of daily
chores, but ends up making a huge mess.
Grade ................................. A-
Pomp and Circumstance
Donald is Noah's right-hand duck as the animals march two by two. The
awkward match of this popular graduation classic to biblical cartoonery is
unflatteringly humorous. Fine for Saturday morning, sure ... but in a
feature classic? Nope.
Grade ................................. B-
Firebird Suite-1919 Version
The intangible spring renewal is personified in a beautiful maiden whose
vine entwined hair flows like a blanketing magic carpet, setting the darkest
of winter scenes alive with lush grasses and flowers. A powerful Elk looks
on. Strong climax and fitting end to the entire piece.
Grade ................................. A-
Each "Fantasia/2000" segment gets its own host, from Steve Martin to Quincy
Jones. My question is ... why not Mariah Carrey, Ricky Martin, Jenifer
Lopez, or even Jim Carrey? The closest hosting to any current pop icon is
Pen and Teller -- but even they are on the fringes of "in." My point?
"Fantasia/2000" takes time out of itself to preface each section with what
seems to me would make great introductions for the younger generations into
the classical world. But there are no Will Smiths to help make the
transition. Along the same lines, only "classical" works are included
(albeit some 20th century). Why not include Rock, Rap, or Jazz? Jethro
Tull's Ian Anderson orchestrated an album full of his rock tunes -- a
selection from that CD would have made for a richer mix while at the same
time brought a new audience to symphonic music. Run DMC's Aerosmith cover
"Walk this Way" which fused the rock and rap worlds, played by the Chicago
Symphony Orchestra could fuse yet another musical world. In "Fantasia/20xx"
I challenge Disney to lose the "matured" hosts and go for the icons of the
younger crowd while opening up Walt's wonderful idea of "Fantasia" to a
richer musical fusion. All types of audiences will benefit.
"Fantasia" was the first film ever recorded and released in stereophonic
sound, "Fantasia/2000" is the first (near) feature-length (though not really
a feature) released only at the giant screen Imax theaters.
Fantasia 2000. Copyright Š 1999. Rated G.
Starring Mickey, Donald and a host of others.
Directed by Pixote Hunt, Hendel Butoy, Eric Goldberg, James Algar, Francis
Glebas, Gaetan Brizzi and Paul Brizzi.
Conducted by James Levine. Performed by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.
Produced by Donald W. Ernst at Walt Disney Pictures.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for 10 Things I Hate About You (1999)
1) Shakespeare can be overbearing ... so many words so fast. This rewrite of
William Shakespeare's "Taming of the Shrew" is much more palatable stripped
of the Old English encryptions.
2) One viewer exclaimed, "Better than 'Shakespeare in love!'"
3) Here's the deal, two high school age sisters -- the sophomore: prep queen
seeks a normal dating life, the senior: bitch queen (her words) hates males.
Over-protective dad (thinking it a safe bet) won't allow the younger to date
until the older does. However, some young men interested in dating the
younger pay off an equally anti-social senior male to date the elder.
4) Slow beginning, then captivating.
5) Often very funny with a few endearing moments (one even jerked a tear
from me).
6) Great acting by leads.
7) Well paced.
8) Daryl Mitchell is hilarious as the literature teacher -- he raps to
Shakespeare.
9) Good music.
10) Stay for ending credits.
Starring Heath Ledger and Julia Stiles, Joseph-Gordon Levitt and Larisa
Oleynik.
Directed by Gil Junger.
Written by Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith.
Produced by Andrew Lazar at Touchstone/Buena Vista.
Rated PG-13.
Grade (Adults)................................... B+
Grade (Teens)................................... A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Human Traffic (1999)
Wow, what to say? If you liked "Clerks" or are deep into the "rave" culture
you'll no doubt enjoy this wacky drugged out piece of video-cinema.
Unfortunately, the majority of the movie-going population may think
otherwise. Heavy on the "F" word, focusing on illegal drug consumption and
expressed in a thick hyperactive and Welsh/British tongue; "Human Traffic"
nonetheless keeps an uncaring chin up, proud as it is paranoid.
Subject matter aside, the production is a drain trap, catching all the
social and philosophic ramblings of some excitable young UK talent, high,
coming down, and otherwise never at a loss for words.
Almost entirely character driven, there is a faint attempt to make a plot
out of getting an extra ticket so that this motley group of starburst mates
can hit the hottest dance/drug club in all of Cardiff. Oh, and another
smaller tension created by two best friends of opposite sex wondering if
there's more to their relationship.
Besides, the occasional ecstasy-inspired gems that spew from these nervous
pals; the look and feel of the production rattles with a juicy eye for the
screen. Though, sometimes overdone and/or mis-edited, writer/director Justin
Kerrigan interjects visuals that picturize what his characters are merely
conceptualizing. It's a tactic that David E. Kelley does so well with "Ally
McBeal." Overall, it's energy laden, cleanly-cut and looks good, and (like
Kevin Smith of "Clerks" that later did "Dogma") full of future picture
promise.
Watching stoned people swear is not my idea of a good time, but I did enjoy
the production techniques and the minor relationships between these main
characters and their parents.
In one scene, Muff's father chases him out of the house yelling about
getting a job or something. The camera follows the two as they tear down the
steps, Muff rants on how everyone he knows that has a job hates it and that
he's just "not ready yet to be miserable."
Human Traffic. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring John Simm, Lorraine Pilkington, Shaun Parkes, Nicola Reynolds,
Danny Dyer, Andrew Lincoln, Carl Cox, Howard Marks.
Written and Directed by Justin Kerrigan.
Produced by Allan Niblo, Emer McCourt at Fruit Salad LTD/Miramax release.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Hamlet (2000/I)
I don't enjoy Shakespeare. Or that is to say, I haven't enjoyed Shakespeare
when presented on film or stage. The big problem is too much poetry in too
short of time. He's very clever, that guy, I don't want to miss any word
playage. But it's ALL word playage encoded in backward archaic grammar.
Seems to me, this stuff works better on paper, read at your own pace.
That said, I loved the first half of this film. This "Hamlet" drew me in
like no other Shakespearean work, thus far. The gritty New York-style
imagery, the high-tech video-insert motif, the grungey beady-eyed Hamlet (a
shaggy goatee'd Ethan Hawke resembling the lead singer of "Sugar Ray"), the
near total elimination of pompous delivery. It's not one of those snooty
productions that treats its audience as if they were some unworthy
congregation in a stuffy old Victorian church "privileged" to be pastured a
righteous speech spat deliberately by self-proclaimed people of God. No,
this Shakespeare may as well have been Tarantino; a slick method for making
a 400 year old work more accessible to 21st century masses.
Did I mention that I never made it through any prior version of "Hamlet"? If
there was any doubt, this should distance my opinion from those of the group
of Shakespearean experts, lovers, etc. I love movies, and while I appreciate
poetry (used to write it, actually) they don't work well together - not at
length anyway (length being 25 minutes plus). Perhaps this is one reason I
found the second half of this film less than compelling.
Hamlet is outraged when he learns his father (the king in William's version)
the president of a huge corporation called Denmark has died, allowing his
mother (the widowed queen) to hastily marry the uncle (king's brother). Not
surprisingly, Hamlet's state is already askew, but the appearance of his
father's ghost sets his tilt in a spinning suicidal whirl (hence the classic
line "To be or not to be?"). Great filming on the apparition, though a morta
l actor without special effects is used, his intense red-edged eyes fill the
screen with a greater dread than a Spielberg poltergeist.
And that leads me to the second thing I don't enjoy about the Shakespeare
I've seen ... the plot. Often, I find them ... well, thin, weak and empty.
And this "Hamlet" is no exception. The premise is interesting ... but the
resolve, flatly put ... ridiculous. "Penn and Teller Get Killed" has just
about as much point ... and there's a lot more laughs (with just as much if
not more blood).
Still, William has the sharpest of dagger tongues. In fact, this dialogue
interplay is a two-hour sword fight of tongues. When I view films, I like to
write down the "gems" to include as quotes in my reviews, but this film is
so chock full of gems, that even just the ones I could decode in real time
were to numerous to capture on paper. Again, this is why I think Shakespeare
is a reader's art, not a theatergoer's (save for those who have already read
the pieces).
Here are just a few of William's many many brilliant quips that stabbed my
leaning attentions: Polonius warns his daughter of Hamlet's love:
"Affections? That blaze gives more light than heat. Don't confuse it with
fire." Polonius coaxes his couch potato daughter: "The wind sits in the
shoulder of your sail and you are stay forth?" Hamlet on living a lie: "Do
not spread the compost on the weeds to make them ranker ... throw away the
worser and live the other half." (Purists, kindly forgive the imperfections
in my transcriptions.)
In film, story is still more important than dialogue. From my admittedly
limited knowledge of Shakespeare, I fault him for soapy thin plots. However,
I praise director Mike Almereyda for the following reasons:
Great choice of music, mixing modern (sometimes reverse recorded) sounds,
with the epic classical timbers that conjure up images of cathedrals and
armored horsemen, but instead are married with elevators and soda machines.
Casting of Bill Murray as Polonius, he's a fresh, every-man, deep-hearted
pleasant surprise addition to the pool of Shakespearean performers. He's
excellent. I love the scene where he lifts Ophelia's foot to tie her shoe as
he lectures her. In fact, the film is full of wonderful as-they're-talking
events that make it real and not just a rackety wooden stage of costumed
speeches.
Likewise, casting of Karl Geary as Horatio (great job by him).
The TV-play of explosions as the apparition speaks to Hamlet.
The TV-clip usages of an Asian spiritual guru speaking on the use of the
phrase "To Be."
Gravedigger singing songs of the 1960's.
TelePrompTer ending.
Almereyda, had many decisions regarding what to leave out when adapting this
work. Personally, I would have cut the Claudius plotting with Ophelia's bro
scene to one minute, cut all of Ophelia's lines until she screams (Ophelia's
silence is an anchor to the earlier part of the film), hastened that ending,
perhaps beefed up the father-son interplay and/or Hamlet/Ophelia love affair
(sorely underplayed here).
There is an interview with Hamlet principals on the site:
http://www.rossanthony.com/interviews/hawke.shtml
Hamlet. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Ethan Hawke, Kyle McLachlan, Diane Venora, Sam Shepard, Bill
Murray, Live Schreiber, Julia Stiles, Karl Geary, Paula Malcomson, Steve
Zahn, Dechen Thurman, Rome Neal.
Direction/screen adaptation by Michael Almereyda.
Written by William Shakespeare.
Produced by Andrew Fierberg, Amy Hobby. Presented by Mirimax.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Rushmore (1998)
"When one person has the opportunity to live an extraordinary life, he has
no right to keep it to himself." This quote, scribbled in a book at the
Rushmore School library, sums up this eccentric film.
The son of a barber, Max Fischer (Schwartzman), scores a scholarship to the
prim and expensive private Rushmore via a play he'd written in second grade.
Nerdy, yet rebellious, Max embraces the extra-curricular opportunities at
the prep school -- founding or leading every club from bee-keeping to
fencing. However, such diversion of attention leaves his grades severely
lacking. This, coupled with his extreme antics, intended to win the heart of
a young teacher (Williams), Max finds himself expelled.
"This was supposed to be my night! You hurt my feelings!" Max exclaims to
Miss Cross in an attempt to excuse his very funny berating of her boyfriend.
It's a delightful scene, and just one of many.
Max befriends Mr. Blume (Murray), a millionaire who hates rich people. Blume
attempts to help Max win over Cross, but ends up falling in love with her
himself.
Bizarre friendships develop well and richly in this oddly funny film. If
you're tired of the usual movie -- I strongly recommend "Rushmore," you'll
find it quite refreshing. (Check under the theater seating for "safety
glasses and air plugs.")
Starring Bill Murray, Jason Schwartzman, Olivia Williams.
Directed by Wes Anderson (Bottle Rocket).
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Mumford (1999)
On a sunny, green-grassy day in small town Mumford, a 1940's milk truck
pulls up just as Dr. Mumford steps off with a patient for a little walk-talk
therapy: textbook "trite." And it's just the first layer of the cake. Still,
"Mumford" has plenty of good movie baked right in -- all that creamy white
schmaltz just can't bog it down. In fact, the fluff kind of rises to the
surface after the fact. Kind of like pleasuring yourself with the way
birthday cake tastes divine while you're eating it; but then on the ride
home from the party, your stomach may have a few points of its own to make.
The ads reveal a secret that ought to be held for the halfway point of the
film (skip this paragraph if you don't want to know). Though he's having
overwhelming success with the Mumfordonians; Dr. Mumford isn't a real
psychologist. And of course, there's a love story (or two or three) thrown
in for good measure.
It's a cozy film with fun characters, fine dialogue and an inspiringly warm
and fuzzy theme. You won't have a bad time, though you'll want for your next
flick to be one completely lacking sugar. I liked it!
Mumford. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Loren Dean, Hope Davis, Jason Lee, Alfre Woodard, Mary McDonnell.
Written and Directed by Lawrence Kasdan.
Produced by Charles Okun and Lawrence Kasdan at Touchstone.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Beautiful People (1999)
A Serb and Croat scuffle on a London bus. Britain's gritty melting pot is in
need of a pilot light; writer/director and Bosnian expatriate Jazmin Dizdar
strikes that match from behind a camera.
A young punker follows in the footsteps of hardened junkies, while his
caricature Archie & Edith parents remain out of touch. A physician recently
separated from his wife attempts to hold onto his kids and his sanity, while
a young couple contemplate aborting a child conceived in rape. The black
sheep of British elite falls for an illegal refuge. An ambitious reporter
flies to Bosnia determined to make sure Brits "give a shat about what's
going on out there."
Chunky story lines in this gravy begin to mix as the filmmakers increase the
heat and stir. The overworked doctor stops at the reporter's wife's home.
Her aristocratic artistry is an excellent contrast to his crushing
responsibilities. The Serb and Croat end up in adjacent hospital beds
continuing their spats like two kindergartners while the nurse on duty
appropriately scolds their inappropriate behavior. The most intriguing
blend, an intoxicated punkster crawls onto a convenient crate at the airport
for a snooze. Which just happens to land him smack in the middle of a
Bosnian war zone. Dazed and confused, he awakens pulling a disposable razor
from the supply pack upon which he'd just parachuted to the ground. His is
the most endearing experience. Thick in the heartwarming department, but not
an easy ride by any means. A fine story line with a flavor that anchors the
film.
Plot lines are patchworked nicely through the climax as in "Magnolia," but
run a pinch long and just a little hokey afterward. Save for a theatric
political assistant, all performances work well. A piano score brightly
spices the mainstay creating a filling entrée. And in addition to its other
perspective-gaining merits, the film offers Americans an empathetic glimpse
of the country we revolted against all those years ago.
Beautiful People. Copyright Š 1998.
Starring Charlotte Coleman, Charles Kay, Rosalind Ayres, Roger Sloman,
Heather Tobias, Danny Nussbaum, Siobhan Redmond, Gilbert Martin, Edin
Dzandzanovic, Steve Sweeney, Linda Bassett, Nicholas Farrell.
Written and Directed by Jazmin Dizdar.
Produced by Ben Woolford at Tall/stories & Beautiful Stories. A Trimark
presentation.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Deterrence (1999)
Unelected President Emerson (Kevin Pollak) and entourage are snowed into a
small town greasy spoon someplace in Colorado somewhere around the year 2008
and a few minutes after Hussein's son decides to blow away the handful of US
peacekeeping troops in Iraq and reinvade Kuwait.
With Timothy Hutton as the president's right hand adviser (and old college
buddy), and Sheryl Lee Ralph as military adviser; Pollak isn't interested in
playing games with this foreign aggression. Remembering Bush's little
escapade with that pesky older Hussein, Pollak cracks, "I'm not gonna just
drop a couple of Tomahawks on Iraq and say 'How do you like dem apples?'"
IBS (the CNN of the future) cut-always fill us (the audience) in on this
president's less than presidential appearance and demeanor at the
culmination of his election campaign. Perhaps motivated by a hidden agenda
or maybe because he's seeking to blow apart his "very second banana" aura,
Pollak plays tough and threatens to drop the big one on Baghdad.
>From there, the film plays like the 60's thriller "Fail Safe" where Henry
Fonda negotiates with the Russian president via telephone while one of our
accidentally launched warheads cruises toward Moscow. That, by the way, is a
pretty good film and similarly thought provoking.
"Deterrence" is a little rough in the launch. In fact, you might suspect the
whole invasion thing to be a hoax (a la, "Wag the Dog"), however, soon
enough the slack in the rope tightens, pulling you in as it holds you tense.
And even though the production never leaves that little diner, the strategic
political and military scenarios, personalities, ethics and personal beliefs
let fly like warheads from around the globe and entangle in a drama rich
enough to fill the screen. Will he really release the first nuke in 60 years
"wiping out a civilization where civilization began?" And if so will the
pilots of that unlucky B2 lose their nerve? "More men have walked the moon
than have done what we're about to do," they reveal to the president over an
unsecured phone-line into the diner, "I guess that's why we get the big
bucks."
Ironically the entertainment arc of this film follows that of a launched
missile. Discussing the ending would defuse the picture, let's just say that
I preferred the over all message of "Fail Safe" to my interpretation of
"Deterrence." But as writer/director Rod Lurie asserts, this is a film open
to many interpretations of which his and mine are only two.
Deterrence. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Kevin Pollak, Timothy Hutton, Sheryl Lee Ralph, Sean Astin, Bajda
Djola, Mark Thompson, Michael Mantell, Kathryn Morris, Clotilde Courau, and
Ryan Cutrona
Writer/Director Rod Lurie.
Produced by Marc Frydman and James Spies at Paramount Classics.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Charlie's Angels (2000)
Boy, this was a fun movie! Aside from a small lull in the third act, 
"Charlie's Angels" are simply devilishly hilarious. Don't be duped into 
thinking that "Bikinis and Karate" are all they have to offer. 
I've also heard folks say, "It was stupid!" But, me thinks, they missed 
the point. Of course it's stupid! The filmmakers are having fun, poking 
fun, with fun music and fun action. And the plot isn't even half-bad 
(1/8 bad maybe, but 1/2 -- nahhh). Anyway, the first half of this film 
rocks, glides, boogies, in such unique style that I didn't even care 
about the plot. Actually, when the film begins tending a bit too closely 
to its detective story - that's when things slow down. 
But, the beauty is in the ridiculous. As Weird Al says, "Dare to be 
stupid." 
Opening off the clouds of the Columbia logo through the window of a 
plane, Drew Barrymore, cleverly disguised as LL Cool J, commands a 
powerful action sequence that grabs you from your seat and tosses you 
into a way-jamming, rip-roaring 10 minute, opening which I feared the 
film could never match on an excitement level. But I was wrong. 
Tom Green's a cappella tormenting vocalization of, "Just call me Angel 
of the morning" eases us back into a gentler pace. The movie's tempo is 
set from there. 
"The Matrix" meets Maxwell Smart or Smart Jack or Jack Benny or Benny 
Hill. High-tech cool action gets double-dipped in humor and then 
impacted with the tongue tightly into the cheek. 
All three angels dress in undercover kimonos as the track rocks out 
"Turning Japanese ... I really think so" or playing the tuba and 
accordion dressed as Swedish barmaids. Barbie must have been envious. 
Lucy Liu massages a suspect. He sighs, "You're very good with your 
hands, I could use somebody like you on my staff." She retorts, "My 
hands aren't going anywhere near your staff." You can expect more of 
this risque double entendre. 
Later to the tune of Heart's "Barracuda" black-leather-clad Lucy Liu 
struts into a computer corporation where everyone is dressed in white. 
This wonderful contrast displays the film's bold and ballsy breakout 
attitude. 
Cleavage touting Drew exhales, "I love cars" as she licks the steering 
wheel. It's ridiculous on purpose! Don't take it seriously folks, you'll 
miss out. Cameron Diaz talks to her current boyfriend on the cell as she 
trades kicks with the enemy. The enemy breaks her phone, an appalled 
Diaz cries, "Hey, I really like that guy!" 
All act well (save for the Tom Green reprise), Sam Rockwell giving a 
great performance as Knox, the computer genius. Ten story high kudos are 
due to director McG for having the guts and charisma to put together a 
truly invigorating mix of satire and action. I loved it. 
"Charlie's Angels" is an Indy car race that breaks from the circle. 
Charlie's Angels. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Cameron Diaz, Drew Barrymore, Lucy Liu, Bill Murray, Tim 
Curry, Crispin Glover, Kelly Lynch, Luke Wilson, Sam Rockwell. 
*  Directed By Mcg. 
*  Written By Ryan Rowe & Ed Solomon and John August 
*  Produced By Leonard Goldberg, Drew Barrymore, Nancy Juvonen At 
Columbia. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Thirteen Days (2000)
Sharply percussive snare drum hits shatter the high flying violin song 
as nuclear rockets dash across the screen leaving mushroom clouds in 
their wake. This is not the opening sequence of some light tale. 
October 1962, the country is oblivious to the tension reeling through 
JFK, brother Bobby, and adviser to the president played by Kevin 
Costner. Soviet Russia builds nuclear weapons in Cuba; will the USA 
strike first to eliminate the threat or opt for negotiations with an 
untrustworthy government? 
"Thirteen Days" paints a Norman Rockwell picture perfect image of 1962 
... even dropping into black and white (or blue and white) for effect. 
And launches from there into a highly compelling spiral of 
argumentation, politics and diplomacy. All the while, the threatening 
black cloud of nuclear holocaust descends ever nearer the most powerful 
nation in the world. 
The military brass pressures JFK, "Order now and we'll be able to invade 
and take over Cuba in 8 days;" their pleas as insistent as television 
mail ads ... "Order now, Order now, Order now." Kennedy is torn, tending 
to the decision with grave seriousness, "There's something immoral about 
abandoning your own judgment." 
His assistant offers a double-edged reassurance, "There is no wise old 
man, there's just us." 
It's a long film that sneaks up on you. Enjoying the nostalgic view back 
into the 60's, and barely tolerating the fake accents, I didn't realize 
how much the tension had crawled from the screen under my skin. Then 
when JFK's publicity guy announces to the public that JFK will speak 
regarding a matter of the "highest urgency" - I felt my throat tighten 
in pain as if my country sincerely was in danger. 
And though, I could tell you with certainty that outcome of the Cuban 
Missile Crisis did not involve nuclear war ... I was still engaged 
firmly in this power play of politics and military muscling. Whew!!!! We 
won. 
Thirteen Days. Copyright Š 2000. 
*  Starring Kevin Costner, Bruce Greenwood, Steven Culp, Dylan Baker, 
Michael Fairman, Henry Strozier, Frank Wood, Kevin Conway, Time 
Kelleher, Len Cariou, Bill Smitrovich. 
*  Directed by Roger Donaldson. 
*  Written by David Self. 
*  Produced by Armyan Bernstein, Peter O. Almond, Kevin Costner. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Wedding Planner, The (2001)
Well, it's certainly an attractive money making idea. Put man-magnet, 
Jennifer Lopez (I don't know any guy who doesn't find this woman 
perfectly cute and sexy) in a chick flick and release it in January. 
Every 12 to 22 year old of either sex is going to see this movie. And 
they won't be disappointed. They might not be thrilled, but they won't 
be disappointed. 
Jennifer Lopez plays Mary Fiore, the ultra-organized-organizing wedding 
planner who can produce the perfect social event for anyone, except 
herself. She's the bride's coach, counselor and spiritual advisor to 
boot. Having faith in the concept of arranged marriages, her Italian 
father tries to marry her off to the young pizano she grew up with back 
in the homeland (Italy ... surprise). Meanwhile, Jennifer gets her shoe 
stuck in the middle of the street and falls in love with a handsome 
passerby. It's actually a very sweet scene from slapstick action to 
charming dialogue. And the children (that follow) in the hospital back 
it up 100%; sorry to see them leave the film forever after just one 
scene. 
Later, Jennifer and bo share two or three "old movie cliche" scenes that 
just stop the picture in its tracks. These sequences feel horribly 
"added later" as if the writers were trying to create a nostalgic homage 
sympathetic to the old black and white reel playing on their first date. 
Unfortunately, it doesn't work. "I don't even know your father's first 
name, but I know the curves on your face." Yikes ... that scene is as 
bad as a later bride/groom pre-wed chat scene is fresh. 
Here's a mild spoiler ... err, ah, the guy she literally "falls for" is 
the fiance of the woman who's hired her to plan the wedding. This sticky 
news sets up the conflict for the rest of the film. 
Popeye would have loved Penny, Jennifer's assistant in plandom. Judy 
Greer nails this bumbling Olive Oil sidekick role. 
Basically, "The Wedding Planner" is a sweet love story hampered by 
contrived conflicts. Lopez and McConaughey act very well and create 
great chemistry. A good portion of the dialogue is superb, the direction 
and editing very skilled; however, less than interesting portions of 
script were unfortunately never omitted. Especially after a crisp 
appealing first third, expect some serious downtime between peaks. 
Overall, a light night out. 
The Wedding Planner. Copyright Š 2001. 
*  Starring Cast: Jennifer Lopez, Matthew McConaughey, Bridgette Wilson, 
Justin Chambers, Judy Greer,Alex Rocco. 
*  Directed by Adam Shankman. 
*  Written by Pamela Falk, Michael Ellis. 
*  Produced by Gigi Pritzker, Deborah Del Prete, Peter Abrams, Robert L. 
Levy, Jennifer Gibgot at Columbia/Intermedia (C)2001. Rated PG-13. 
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Liberty Heights (1999)
A warm fuzzy film with a touch of blues for realism. Great script,
beautifully shot, and nicely acted. I especially enjoyed the quirky
friendship between the confident older Jewish brother and the rich daredevil
James-Dean-type gentile.
But there's other interesting story lines of equal importance including the
younger Jewish brother and the well-to-do "colored" girl from school. "Hi,
I'm Ben, I'm in your homeroom."
Set in 1954, the film holds true to the period.
Liberty Heights. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Adrien Broody, Bebe Neuwirth and Joe Mantegna.
Written and Directed by Barry Levinson.
Produced by Barry Levinson and Paula Weinstein at Warner Bros/Baltimore
Spring Creek.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Holy Smoke (1999)
The temptation to compare this movie to director Jane Campion's other film
"Piano" is too great to resist ... so I won't. That said, if you appreciated
"Piano" you probably won't appreciate this review. So bail, before it irks
you.
What was great, in fact, really wonderful about "Piano" was that one lasting
image of a full spirited young woman nimbly massaging the keys of a grand
piano resting it's three legs in the warm gold-sanded coastline of some
exotic land. Wind through her hair, crystal blue water ... her audience. Oh,
and of course that last shot of her plunging into the ocean from the boat
later. But the in between lacked a movie. This is my frustration with "Holy
Smoke." Only this time those points of interest rely on an emotional factor
as well as visual. It's as if the writers had said, "Wouldn't it be cool if
we had her stroke lipstick across Keitel's face?" or "What if ... etc.?" So
that the movie as a coherent piece falls follower to a series of loosely
connected dots that like so many false gods ... don't seem to lead anywhere.
That said, I really enjoyed the dialogue between Keitel and Winslet. Winslet
plays a "messed up" Aussie girl that's become a groupie of some Indian guru.
Her folks trick her back to Australia and hire Keitel (a highly paid
American guy with a solid rep as cult-head breaker). The two finally steal
away in a "Halfway hut" in the outback. This is were the real drama unfolds.
I was liking it. I was intrigued, but in the end, I felt teased ... because
it never develops into anything interesting, rather it degenerates into sex.
Also distracting, an awkward humor surrounding Kate's family that never
seems to strike a funnybone; at times resorting to silly physical comedy ...
pretty boy smashes nose into pole, for instance. The film could have dropped
its attempt at "Fargo" humor and monopolized on what it did well ... the
drama of two hard-headed, vulnerable people of opposite sexes locked in the
outback.
And a theme? I missed it. Was it that this woman finally breaks down and
"Be's kind?" Because of a series of actions carried out by the supposed
teacher of that lesson, I don't buy it. All the picture seems to say is "Men
are slaves to their genitals and women are slaves to their emotions." (Not a
very impressive learning experience.)
Holy Smoke. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Kate Winslet, Harvey Keitel, Julie Hamilton, Tim Robertson.
Written by Anna Campion & Jane Campion.
Directed by Jane Campion.
Produced by Jan Chapman.
A Mirimax release.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Caveman's Valentine, The (2001)
Living in a cave of rocks in a New York park, Rom (Jackson) believes a 
devil-like being emits powerful rays of evil over the city from atop the 
Chrysler building. Rom's demons (good and bad) also dance a game of 
"give and take" from just about any corner of his brain. When the 
tension comes to a boil, multiple superimposed images of orange 
ballerinas bring the demons/muses to life in an effectively splintered 
display surfacing in his mind like bubbles. Will they rule him with fear 
or will he become the choreographer of their intention? 
Jackson is as comfortable in this role as dreadlocks on a Rastafarian. 
He looks and plays great. Kudos to the make-up coordinator. 
Into Jackson's primitive, delusional existence comes a single homicide 
setting Rom on a one-man mission to avenge the victim's death. 
Disregarded by his police officer daughter as schizophrenic, Rom 
persistently amasses evidence, uncovering clues with his direct, brutal 
honesty. Hindered by episodes of dementia, Rom walks the slippery tight 
rope of sanity. Appearing only to him as if from the dead, his estranged 
wife speaks like his conscious, sometimes encouraging, sometimes 
critical, always direct. Rom's primal presence contrasts splendidly 
against the suit-wearing civilized. 
The artistic direction on this film rocks. A photographer's basement 
work area sharply detailed with implements and props fills the screen 
like a painting - perfectly lit and exposed on a rich stock of film. 
Further, I love the choice of music meant to be Rom's composition. His 
passionate moments at the piano are an audio/visual/emotional treat for 
the eyes, ears and heart. Rom's dreadlocks resonating like piano 
strings. 
The dialogue, though occasionally sticky, often hosts tasty bites:
Moira, "Arnold tells me you're a genius."
Rom, "Genius at what?"
Moira, "Music."
Rom, "He misrepresents my talent, I can put a match in my mouth and 
light up my smile like a jack-o'-lantern." 
(Btw, he actually performs that trick - a wonderfully haunting image 
that glows appropriately in this hearty production.) 
Though there are many, many excellent scenes (report read on subway 
train, self-pep talk prior to up-scale party, "balloon" reminiscing 
scene w/daughter in car, the demon moth images over credits, the music, 
etc.), there are also more than just a few sticky moments either poorly 
acted or edited or scripted. While those rough edges don't dominate nor 
are they potent enough to deter the robust and passionate swell created 
by the abundant masterfully crafted scenes, they do succeed in denying 
the production overall greatness. 
Still, a very strong B+, "The Caveman's Valentine" simply stirred me. 
The Caveman's Valentine. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Samuel L. Jackson, Colm Feore, Ann Magnuson, Damir Andrei, 
Aunjanue Ellis, Tamara Tunie, Peter McNeill, Jay Rodan, Rodney Eastman, 
Anthony Michael Hall, Kate McNeil. 
*  Directed by Kasi Lemmons. 
*  Written by George Dawes Green (based on his novel of same name) 
*  Produced by Danny Devito, Michael Shamberg, Stacey Sher, Elie Samaha, 
Andrew Stevens at Jersey Shore/Franchise/Universal focus. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Thirteenth Floor, The (1999)
Another "Twilight Zoney" Sci-Fi where what is real and what is merely
virtual aren't easily distinguished. The film starts strong presenting a
captivating scenario, then somewhere in the second half dips into a sappy
romance.
Sporting a great 1937 reconstruction of Los Angeles and good performances by
all involved, "13th Floor" looses focus when a love scene comes out of
nowhere. Most of the real action is reserved for the end, but the tension is
enough to keep the mystery ball rolling until then.
Starring Craig Bierko, Gretchen Mol, Vincent D'onofrio, Dennis Haysbert and
Armin Mueller-Stahl.
Directed by Josef Rusnak.
Screenplay by Josef Rusnak and Ravel Centeno-Rodriguez.
Produced by Roland Emmerich/Ute Emmerch/Marco Weber at Columbia/Roland
Emmerich.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Bachelor, The (1999)
Wild Mustangs rage free across an open field providing visual symbolism of
the bachelor's yearning for independence and variety of grasslands upon
which to graze. Crude as it may be, the analogy charges on. By the end of
the film, the steeds become brides chasing down one lone bachelor as he
darts like a terrified doe from a pride of hungry lions.
The pictorially spectacular intro and conclusion form an elegantly
impressive ring box which unfortunately contains a less than precious
romantic comedy, that at times is not comedic and even less often romantic.
Chris O'Donnell is TV perfect, but big screen short. Renée Zellweger does a
better job of fitting the bill. While Brook Shields blows them both out of
the water with her short cameo.
A stampeding horse, the film leaps strongly from the gate, yet the downtimes
between the admittedly strong laughs steadily increase as the reels
progress. Two weak supporting actors also contribute to mid-movie drag. This
could have been due to talent direction as few potent acting moments make it
to the screen.
Cutting to the chase, long time bachelor (O'Donnell) falls in love with
equally independent Zellweger; however as the relationship nears "poop or
get off the pot," the bachelor just isn't ready to ... well ... poop. Still
funny at this point, O'Donnell's flawed proposals are truly humorous. Then a
flagrantly contrived 100 million dollar inheritance (which will be lost if
he doesn't marry in 27 hours) leads to a less than compelling series of
finance inspired proposals to his dwindling list of past lovers.
Ultimately light and cute, the middle had me checking my watch.
The Bachelor. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG-13.
Starring Chris O'Donnell, Renée Zellweger, Artie Lange and James Cromwell.
Directed by Gary Sinyor.
Screenplay by Steve Cohen.
Produced by Lloyd Segan and Bing Howenstein at Segan/George Street/New Line.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Stigmata (1999)
Stigmata isn't just a cool/scary sounding word, nor is it Mitsubishi's
newest sportscar. It's what people are called who bare the wounds of the
crucifixion of Jesus Christ. Usually these people are devout in faith, but
not Frankie Paige; she's a free spirit, happy-go-lucky, partying
hairdresser.
Think you've had a bad day? Frankie gets nailed to the wall at the drop of a
hat (or holy water in this case). It's enough to make you cry tears of
blood.
But "Stigmata" the movie isn't all special effects of torture. Though the
writers may hammer it through your bones a little harder than necessary, the
theme is relevant and strong.
Good point aside, the picture suffered from a slow start, mediocre
soundtrack, expository dialogue in a Vatican scene, some sticky editing
choices and near miss intensities. And then there's the implausibilities.
Example 1: Frankie is attacked by an unseen force in a public dance hall
(okay, I'm believing that). Bleeding from the head and delusional she fleas
from the club, her best friend first gets her rain coat on before running
after (I can't believe that). Example 2: Admitted to the hospital for
puncture wounds clear through both wrists, she's assumed to be a suicide
victim (How would one drive a nail through that second wrist?).
Still, the picture had it's moments, I had my share of chills and as I said
... good point.
Stigmata, Copyright Š. 102 minutes. Rated R.
Starring Patricia Arquette, Gabriel Byrne, Jonathan Pryce.
Directed by Rupert Wainwright.
Written by Tom Lazarus and Rick Ramage.
Produced by Frank Mancuso, JR at MGM and FGM Entertainment.
(C) 1999. 102 minutes. Rated R.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for O Brother, Where Art Thou? (2000)
Two dim wits and a fast talker (Clooney) escape from prison in the 
1930's South USA. Seeking a hidden 1.2 million-dollar treasure, the 
police-dodging trio hitchhike from one near-surreal adventure to the 
next. All the while, deeply rich gospel music graces their adventures.
Clooney splendidly rattles encyclopedic phrases off a friendly southern 
accent. His two narrow-eyed buddies are also charming despite their lack 
of brains. Vying between the light and the peacefully religious, "O 
Brother" eventually favors the silly instead of the profound.
Beautifully filmed with carefully scripted dialogue, the production 
almost breaks out into cinema greatness. If only the rich touch and feel 
had been backed up with a stronger knot and substance, this one could 
have been as truly gorgeous as its music. A strong B+.
O Brother, Where Art Thou? Copyright Š 2000.
Starring George Clooney, Tim Black Nelson, John Turturro
Directed by Joel Coen.
Written by Ethan Coen & Joel Coen, based upon "The Odyssey" by Homer.
Produced by Ethan Coen at Touchstone(C)2000.
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Detroit Rock City (1999)
Teenage pot-heads risk everything to make it to a KISS concert.
With a synopsis like that, a lot of you may shrug off this picture as cheap
teen cheese. And for the first third, you'd be right. But like a discounted
junkie that straightens out his life surprising everyone with some actual
success, "Detroit Rock City" pulls itself out of high school mediocrity and
into actual good moviedom.
Picking up where Cheech and Chong (1970's comics who relied heavily on weed
for their humor, audience and perhaps inspiration) left off, "Detroit Rock
City" begins with a basement rock band of high school burnouts hell-bent on
finding their way into a local KISS concert. Mildly interesting during its
setting, the little film seems to lack what it finds later on -- heart.
After a series of mishaps the four boys decide to split up and have a try at
obtaining their individual "ins." This is where the story really takes off.
Each stumbles across a find more valuable than that prized entrance. The
film shows its true colors as a coming of age story.
One boy (Furlong) decides to enter a nearby male stripper contest. This
scene is a laugh riot and deserves high praise.
Set in the 1970's and produced by Gene Simmons (among others), this scrawny
little script eventually becomes a rich film.
Starring Giuseppe Andrews, James De Bello, Edward Furlong, Sam Huntington,
Lin Shaye.
Directed by Adam Rifkin. Written by Carl V. Dupre.
Produced by Gene Simmons, Barry Levine, Kathleen Haase at
Newline/Takoma/Base-12/Kissnation.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Lost & Found (1999/I)
"Lost and Found" is a laid back romantic comedy starring David Spade as the
rather unassuming, unlikely lover. His restaurant partner and best bud tells
him, "We thought you were kind of a jerk, until we got to know you." This
line sums the movie. In fact, David Spade's persona sums the movie. At first
look, you don't expect much, the second look is with narrowed eyes as you
contemplate other options for the night, but Spade's low-key humor and
resiliently idling charm eventually quietly worm into your heart.
Spade kidnaps the puppy-dog of his new neighbor (Marceau) in hopes of
winning her heart (Sophie's, not the dog's). Marceau's rich, handsome and
talented ex-fiancée flies over from France after her giving Spade a run for
his money.
The film begins below ground zero, with no action and poor dialogue wrought
with less than funny one-liners. Spade (who is perhaps more charm than
actor) is unfortunately the strongest actor on film until the fair maiden,
Sophie Marceau appears. Aside from the gratuitous French the filmmakers felt
compelled to have her spew, she is perfectly lovely and an interesting
contrast to Spade.
>From a hole, one can only crawl upwards. Surprisingly, this dud pulled
itself up by the bootstraps and even ascended a few feet above sea-level --
giving it's title an unexpected ironic meaning. Eventually, "Lost and Found"
becomes a mellow, romance-lite, comedy with a few good zingers and the heart
of a puppy-dog.
Starring David Spade, Sophie Marceau, and Patrick Bruel.
Directed by Jeff Pollack.
Written by J.B. Cook, Mark Meeks and David Spade.
Produced by Wayne Rice, Morrie Eisenman, Andrew Kosove, and Broderick
Johnson at Warner Brothers/Alcon/Rice/Dimano.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Company Man (2000)
This little film sure tries hard to be silly. Unfortunately, most hits 
strike wide of funny bone central. It's a Marx brother's script with a 
Stan Laurel where a Groucho should have been. 
Breaking onto the screen with "Secret Agent Man" rocking the sound 
track, the mood is set for a 1960's spy spoof. Mild-mannered 
schoolteacher Allen Quimp stumbles into spy mode in an attempt to quell 
his hounding spouse who has much higher aspirations for him than 
grammar. Sigourney Weaver does an average job of playing her Olive Oyl 
role with a bit of a sting, "Everything would be better if you just, I 
don't know, died." 
Early on, Quimp bumps into, and haphazardly aids in the defection of, a 
famous Russian gymnast very well played by Ryan Phillippe for about 3 
minutes before he defects from the film, "You want to leave Russia just 
when you're winning the space race?" This event Forest Gumps Quimp into 
actual assignments with the CIA. Eventually, Quimp finds himself smack 
dab in the middle of the Bay of Pigs, Cuba. 
I'm not quite sure why this film misses, it moves well and has high 
energy; perhaps it's the casting. I'd have recruited Paul Giamatti from 
"Duets" for the lead and Shelly Duvall as the pushy wife. Perhaps Jon 
Favreau or someone really dangerous like Harvey Keitel (or even Denis 
Leary) could have nailed the crazed "kill communism" soldier role. 
Leary is fine as an intermediary agent, "I've only started one sentence 
since you've been in town and you've been correcting it ever since!" 
Good lines like that get buried in throwaways like, "Just because you're 
a revolutionary, doesn't mean you have to be revolting." 
Lots of energy and movement, unfortunately little amusement. 
Company Man. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Douglas McGrath, Sigourney Weaver, John Turturroj, Alan 
Cumming, Anthony Lapaglia, Ryan Phillippe, Heather Matarazzo, Denis 
Leary. 
*  Directed by Peter Askin and Douglas McGrath. 
*  Written by Peter Askin and Douglas McGrath. 
*  Produced by John Penotti, Rick Leed, James Scotchdopole at 
Intermedia/wind dancer. 
Grade..........................C+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Pollock (2000)
Ed Harris paints a striking portrait of this talented artist/butt-hole. 
A docu-drama (with the accent on drama), "Pollack" follows the ten last 
years of the life of American abstract artist Jackson Pollack who died 
in 1956. 
It's a story of splashing paint, sobering love, anger, self-doubt and 
spilt and broken liquor bottles. Filmed in one strong arch-like stroke 
that peaks in the middle then splatters off the canvas in an untimely 
manner, the production, like Pollack's life, feels truncated and 
unfulfilled. 
Paced well, aside from a laboriously slow introduction, Harris is 
intoxicating. Marcia Gay Harden, as his lover, endless supporter, is as 
steadfast as a whipping post. It's great to see Bud Cort again (Harold 
and Maude) though his bright-eyed smile too soon leaves the screen. 
Kilmer's brief appearance adds little. 
I loved the artistic moments of creation. Harris staring at his shadow 
on a huge white canvas (so huge he knocked down a wall in his apartment 
to erect it). Harris finally finds inspiration to contrast his stillness 
with sharp confident motion pulling the emotions from his chest to the 
end of his brush. Simply awesome, simply beautiful. 
When asked, "How do you know you're finished with a painting?"
Pollack replies with a question, "How do you know when you're finished 
making love?" 
But more often than not, this portrayal captures a bottle at the end of 
his arm, not a paintbrush. And an unforgivably belligerent mood, that 
rushes like red pigment into the lives of those around him. 
Probably an excellent depiction ... if so, Jackson seems a man, I'd have 
not enjoyed getting to know. Hence, this intimate movie ... of me will 
not a friend make. 
Pollack. Copyright Š 2000. 
*  Starring Ed Harris, Marcia Gay Harden, Amy Madigan, Jennifer 
Connelly, Jeffrey Tambor, Bud Cort, John Heard, Val Kilmer, Stephanie 
Seymour, Tom bower, Robert Knot, Matthew Sussman, Sada Thompson. 
*  Directed by Ed Harris. 
*  Written by Barbara Turner, Susan J. Emshwiller. 
*  Produced by Fred Berner, Ed Harris, Jon Kilik a Sony Classics 
Release(C)2000. Rated R. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Go (1999)
Like "Hillary and Jackie", "Lovers of the Arctic Circle" and even "Pulp
Fiction"; "GO" tells the same story from more than one perspective -- three
in fact. Each perspective is carefully titled (ie: screen goes black, name
of character whose point of view is to be portrayed appears in white). I
find this a bit patronizing, I'd rather the filmmakers just thrust us into
the next perspective and let us figure it out. I'd appreciate that momentary
confusion.
"GO" depicts the fumbling side of the underworld, with believable foul-ups
that include graphic un-glorified violence and stumblingly fun dialogue.
This being the genre of "Pulp Fiction," and more recently, "Lock Stock and
Two Smoking Barrels."
In the "GO" story a young teen grocery cashier short on cash plays drug
dealer for the night. She and her friends get in way over their heads.
Perspective one: Ronna (Sarah Polley) decides to act as replacement for her
drug-dealing friend Simon who has taken off to Las Vegas for the Weekend. I
did not like this soulless character. I did not Polley's acting. I did not
like this third of the movie, Sam I am.
Perspective two: Simon (Desmond Askew) weasels his buddy Marcus (Taye Diggs)
into a violent predicament with two Las Vegas thugs. The interplay between
the two is quite entertaining. One of the best clips of dialogue plays in
the preview. Marcus cuts off Simon's black-blooded boasting with, "If you
were any more white you'd be clear!"
Perspective three: Adam (Scott Wolf) and Zack (Jay Mohr) are con men
recruited by an oddball detective to entrap Simon (or in this case --
Ronna).
Though I nearly walked out of this film during the first telling of the
story -- the second and third perspectives were extremely entertaining and
very cleverly intertwined.
Starring Desmond Askew, Taye Diggs, William Fichtner, J.E. Freeman, Katie
Holmes, Jane Krakowski, Breckin Meyer, Jay Mohr, Timothy Olyphant, Sarah
Polley and Scott Wolf. Directed by Doug Liman. Written by John August.
Produced by Paul Rosenberg and Mickey Liddell and Matt Freeman at
Columbia/banner/Saratoga.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Nutty Professor II: The Klumps (2000)
Perhaps I remember the first "Nutty Professor" a little too fondly. A film
sporting the ridiculous premise of a large scientist who takes his own
"skinny medicine" to impress the woman of his dreams. The scheme backfires
when the effect toggles uncontrollably with one other side effect ... the
slim version has its own personality so extremely different from Professor
Sherman Klump that it also has its own name - Buddy Love. That film was a
surprise laugh riot, with two short visits to the Klump residence for dinner
that made it a classic. These supper scenes are stand-alone funny and
technical wonders with Eddie Murphy playing more than just the Nutty
Professor and Buddy Love. Hence a sequel that expands Klump family
involvement.
There's another reason for a sequel - 270 million dollars. The production
notes are suspiciously quick to point that figure out. In fact they put it
this way, "Following the $270 million box office triumph of "The Nutty
Professor" in 1996, Eddie Murphy returns to the role..." That's the first
sentence in the "About the Production" section. Perhaps this profit
anticipation diluted the formula a bit.
Buddy returns to the screen in "The Klumps." Just as Sherman is preparing to
marry the latest woman of his dreams (Janet Jackson) and present his newest
greatest invention (youth serum), Buddy Love steps in to fowl it all up. The
sequel certainly does have its moments - many in fact. When Sherman's horny
gramma catches Buddy sneaking around ... well lets just say she's fixin' to
give him more than just a spanking. That scene will have you howling. And
the wise-cracking university dean played by Larry Miller deserves more than
just a few kudos for his sharply hilarious sarcasm. He's every bit as sharp
as Eddie is. And the Klumps themselves, from the loving bickering between
dad and gramma, to the choir singing, hand-clapping momma - you'll love this
virtual family. Eddie performs them masterfully, while the cinematographers
and make-up people create a boisterously entertaining reality out of plastic
and film.
But good characters are only one ingredient in a good film. Bluntly put,
this one lacks the heart of the first. In trying to re-create an old magic,
it fails to invent its own new magic. And though I hate to say it, this
picture about science professors needs more chemistry. The look and feel of
the production itself is 1980's with an "E.T." kind of cartoony-exagerration
to details that would have been better off left realistic. I.E.: the liquid
solutions are all bright primary colors; lightening strikes the night Klump
takes another serum in hopes of extracting his "Mr. Hide;" and in order to
test his dwindling intelligence, Sherman uses a computer simulated maze to
race a lab rat around a real maze. (BTW, they missed a good computer mouse
joke there.) Also, I like shocking toilet humor as much as the next guy, but
this film way-overplayed its "big butt" card and overspent its fart joke
allowance. And lastly, Buddy Love is simply more annoying and less endearing
this time around.
These uninspired factors conspire to "thin-out" the effect of the funnier
more inspired scenes. I loved the first "Nutty Professor," but was a bit
disappointed after eagerly awaiting this sequel.
Nutty Professor II: The Klumps. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Eddie Murphy, Janet Jackson, Larry Miller, John Ales.
Directed by Peter Segal.
Written by Barry W. Blaustein and Davide Sheffield, Paul Weitz and Chris
Weitz.
Based on Characters Created by Jerry Lewis and Bill Richmond.
Produced by Brian Grazer at Universal/Imagine.
Grade..........................B
----
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Dogme 1 - Festen (1998)
Gritty, grainy, shot with available light and a video camera -- so it looks
like your family videos. Although, I do hope this isn't your family.
And no doubt, directed a heck of a lot better than your videos. Vinterberg
(director) whips his little vid cam around like it's taped to the remote
control toy car from a "Home Alone" film.
The story follows Christian, a full grown man with childhood issues yet to
resolve, as he changes the tone of this family celebration.
"The Celebration" showcases excellent acting, a great screenplay, and new
innovative cinematography that is exciting and exhausting at the same time.
Directed and co-written by: Thomas Vinterberg (Vinterberg is a member of a
collective of film directors (Dogme 95) who oppose the auteur concept,
make-up, illusions and dramaturgical predictability; letting 'the inner
lives of the characters justify the plot.')
In Danish with English subtitles.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for 6th Day, The (2000)
If your loved one fell ill with a fatal disease at a young age would you
have him/her cloned? Letting the real McCoy die only to live with the clone?
"Sixth Day" does a good job of raising ethical dilemmas in the potentially
near future. But, if you weren't happy with the clone, would it be all right
to just kill it off? Would you have the guts to kill your own clone?
This is a film to prompt a lively conversation on the subject of genetics
and morality, but as an action film it's rather uninspired. Aside from an
exciting car chase early on, the action sequences play rote, as if everyone
involved had done them so many times that they were able to accomplish their
tasks with their minds on something else. Autopilot.
Supposedly a mild-mannered family man and chopper pilot, when the poop hits
the fan, Arnold switches into super-hero mode without the slightest
hesitation. Killing people and dodging the bad guys as if he'd been doing it
on a daily basis (or had an action-packed film career).
It's the not-so-distant future, computers have automated many of our normal
tasks and genetics have made it possible to change lives in ways that are
worth protesting over. Did your favorite puppy kick the bucket? Just bring
the remains to REPET and they'll clone you a new one. "He'll remember all
the tricks you taught him and even where the bones are buried." But the
kingpins of REPET also own NU-ORGAN and, though it's been outlawed, they
dabble in human cloning as well.
Hired as a charter pilot for the principal cloner and then presumed killed
in a mishap; Arnold gets cloned illegally by the bad guys. So when the real
Arnold sees another himself living his real life, the real and unreal bad
guys decide to really kill the real him. This conflict brings rise for
chases, capture and escape, and gunfights.
Stereotypical mod-squady thugs try time and again to nab the elusive Arnold.
Cloned back to life after being run-over by a car, one bad guy complains of
chest pains. "Your chest was crushed, completely crushed. This is a new one.
It's perfect! The pain is all in your head!" Since clones have the memory of
their sources ... do they remember the pain of death? Another mind toy.
The acting, aside from Robert Duvall as the head clone doc, is average. An
imperfect pace, mundane direction, and rather blotchy dialogue (a few
thought-provoking chunks mixed into rote action-film spewage) irritate the
picture's effect, but the main problem is the action. It's just not a
terribly exciting movie.
Quipped from the Bible, "On the Sixth Day ... God created Man." Anti-Cloner
protesters make the point that the good book doesn't say "Man created man,"
hence the apropos title and the film's best question, "Do clones have
souls?"
The 6th Day. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Tony Goldwyn, Robert Duvall, Michael
Rapaport, Michael Rooker, Sarah Wynter, Wendy Crewson, Rod Rowland, Terry
Crews, Ken Pogue, Colin Cunningham.
Directed by Roger Spottiswoode.
Written by Cormac Wibberley, Marianne Wibberey.
Produced by Mike Medavoy, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jon Davison at
Columbia/Phoenix.
Grade.......................... B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Prince of Egypt, The (1998)
The Exodus story painted and song into fiery crimson frames and enchanting
hymns; "The Prince of Egypt" delivers with Charleston Heston "Ten
Commandments" strength, the stern story of the Passover. Val Kilmer's voice
breathes Moses to life, Michelle Pfeiffer speaks for the sassy Tzipporah
with Ralph Fiennes bringing the same "faulted-stone" presence of his "Quiz
Show" to the Rameses Character.
I like a movie that grabs me from the get go. Take a vulnerable crying
newborn, put him in a woven basket and send him drifting down a river full
of crocodiles. I'm watching. The melodies to the haunting song "Deliver"
flow with the same grace and enchantment of the oil painted currents under
the baby Moses. This gorgeous somber scene spills into a rushing chariot
race as exciting as the best car chase scenes around.
The movie focuses on the relationship between two brothers Moses and
Rameses -- the love they cannot deny for each other and the chasm of faith,
purpose and mission large enough to part the Red Sea. A fantastic
psychedelic motif of Hieroglyphics are used to "enlighten" Moses of his
heritage as a Hebrew and the horrifying nightmarish truth of the pharaoh
(the man he used to call father). My breath slowed, eyes watered, and a
chill similar to that of the breath of Passover plague crawled up my neck as
Moses realizes his father drowned countless Hebrew babes. In fact, you might
consider leaving your younger ones with a babysitter due to this serious
subject matter.
No one is denying that the parting of the red sea scene from "The Ten
Commandments" is a powerful special effect (especially for it's time). Don't
worry, "Prince of Egypt" tidal waves command that same awe. I believe the
people at DreamWorks put their brushes to the film with the spirit Moses put
his staff in the mighty Nile, lighting it up with the eerie color of
bloodshed. This is a powerful engaging film.
The Prince of Egypt. Animated Feature. Rated PG.
Voices of Val Kilmer, Michelle Pfeiffer and other big names.
Directed by Brenda Chapman.
Grade..........................A+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Erin Brockovich (2000)
If the poster of Julia, babe in arm, strawberry-pocked halter-top popping
them two assets forward, hardworking blue-collar lips ready to launch a
stream of obscenities from the roughened-heart reminds you of a trashy
Sharon Stone in "Gloria"; fear not. "Erin Brockovich" is a fine production.
In fact, why isn't Julie Roberts on the Academy's list? She's simply
awesome.
A cross between "A Civil Action" and "Howard Stern" in drag, "Erin
Brockovich" graces the screen with the difficult balance of heart, tragedy
and hard-hitting pottie-mouthed humor. In fact, the film's only dips from
divinity occur during a couple of segments that postpone Erin's
lightning-charged tongue. It's her sharp lingua determined to cut though any
BS, which sets fly sparks. Her mouth is as refreshing as an ice cold shower;
it's sure to send hilarious jolts of truth through audiences around the
country.
Divorced twice, raising three kids, one-time Miss Wichita proves that
credentials and high-power suits play second fiddle to heart and brains.
Dressed like one of Charlie's Angles, busty waitress Brockovich and her
mouth take on big corporate lawyers in a case involving a small town's
polluted water supply.
This strong script along with its gritty dialogue still may have fallen
short even with Roberts' lead if not for some great supporting actors.
Albert Finney's patience and expertise complement Roberts' fiery passion.
Aaron Eckhart is both charming and real as love-interest-on-a-Harley.
The story is based on the real life exploits of one Erin Brockovich. If
you're curious to see what she looks like, Erin cameos as a greasy-spoon
waitress during a short segment near the beginning of the picture. In my
particular screening, a handful of viewers greeted her brief appearance with
a clap or two. By the end of the film, this audience of critics gave the
entire production a round of applause.
Erin Brockovich. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Julia Roberts, Albert Finney, Aaron Eckhart.
Directed by Steven Soderbergh.
Written by Susannah Grant.
Produced at Jersey/Columbia/Universal.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Mystery, Alaska (1999)
For as cold as it gets up north, these people sure make a warm picture.
Russell Crowe (of "LA Confidential" fame) is convincing, compelling and
infinitely likeable as John Biebe the anchor of the Mystery city Saturday
pond-hockey team. Mystery is a snow-covered town where everyone knows
everyone (occasionally a little too well). The heart and pride of the small
community is solidly routed inside that little black puck.
Enter Charles Danner (Hank Azaria), a former Mysterian displaced to the east
coast. He arranges to copter in the New York Rangers for a bit of high
sticking on the cold ice. "Mystery doesn't have much, but it does have its
dignity and its illusions," Judge Walter (Burt Reynolds) warns, "I suggest
you cling to both." It's an interestingly different role for Burt, though
his stern caution is ignored and Mystery goes on to mix it up with the NHL
team.
David E. Kelley of "Ally McBeal" and "The Practice" (to name just a few fine
credits) provides a quality script appropriately backed up with equally fine
direction, acting and a powerful score. Aside from a sad moment where my
throat was all caught up in knots, I was smiling. I love the opening
sequence: a lone player skating atop a winding frozen river.
Mystery, Alaska. Copyright Š 1999.  Rated R.
Starring Russell Crowe, Hank Azaria, Mary McCormack, Burt Reynolds, Colm
Meaney, Lolita Davidovich, Maury Chaykin, Ron Eldard, Ryan Northcott
(Weeks), Michael Buie, Kevin Durand (Tree).
Directed by Jay Roach.
Written by David E. Kelley and Howard Baldwin.
Produced by David E. Kelley and Sean O'Byrne at Hollywood Pictures.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Big Daddy (1999)
By Ross Anthony
I'm an Adam Sandler fan, so I was eager to see "Big Daddy." However, it's
not one of the most memorable films he'll ever make.
Basically, Adam's a 30-year old still living the life of a teenager and
liking it. But, his girlfriend has had enough of his non-committal attitude;
so 1) she takes a hike, 2) small child arrives at his doorstep, 3) Sandler
decides to adopt the kid in hopes that he'll (Sandler) will learn those
adult characteristics so desired by a girlfriend that the filmmakers didn't
spend any time making us care about.
There's really not much to say about this film. It was refreshing to here
Sandler use his regular voice and not one of his stupid character voices.
You see, I think he's both very funny and very talented on screen -- he
doesn't need the cartoon voices. Let me just go way out on a limb here and
say -- Adam Sandler has the same kind of dramatic talent in him that an
actor like ... say Tom Hanks ... has. Now, there I've said something
profoundly dissonant haven't I? Speaking of drama, "Big Daddy" is much more
of a light drama than a comedy. It certainly has comedic moments, and even
though they weren't very uniformly or artfully distributed (for instance the
ending is strangely more silly than the rest of the film); it's still
moderately funny/dramatic overall.
Grade..........................B+
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for What Women Want (2000)
Whew. I must admit I had expected to spend at least some of this 2-hour 
production wincing at a suspiciously non-grey-haired Mel Gibson playing 
his cute card to death. But, like "Charlie's Angels," my fears of 
gritting teeth were pleasantly all for naught. "What Women Want" boldly 
goes where other romantic-comedies have only flirted -- straight into 
the heads of women. 
Mel, raised in Las Vegas by a true blue showgal, could grow up but one 
way: a man's man, with a definitive idea of a woman's role in society 
(namely the bedroom). The story's beginning finds Mel, a successful 
advertising creator, in a firm soon to change its artistic direction. 
Helen Hunt steps in to remind this chauvinistic team that the market has 
shifted from male-minded consumers to decision making women, hence an 
about-face in advertisement strategy is in line. Of course, Mel has an 
unflattering "b" word for his new boss. 
Ah, but due to a freak accident (whose timing couldn't have been 
better), Mel acquires the supernatural power to actually hear women's 
thoughts. How this comes to pass is completely hysterical and I have no 
intention of ruining that for you. 
In fact, this movie provides plenty of hysterical moments. Our 
particular crowd busted its collective gut intermittently throughout the 
picture. In fact, they applauded graciously at fade to credits. 
Mel and Helen are expectedly on the mark, but Marisa Tomei in a smaller 
role rips up the screen with her natural talent. 
Barely a few sticky scenes could have been reworked, the sex roles are 
rather stereotyped, and having Mel react adversely to his new "power" 
seemed at first trite and contrived; but the overwhelming current of the 
film's fresh dialogue and crisp humor quickly eclipse these 
shortcomings. 
What Women Want. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Mel Gibson, Helen Hunt, Marisa Tomei, Alan Alda, Ashley 
Johnson, Mark Feuerstein, Judy Greer. 
*  Directed by Nancy Meyers. 
*  Written by Josh Goldsmith & Cathy Yuspa. 
*  Produced by Nancy Meyers, Bruce Davy, Matt Williams, Susan Cartsonis, 
Gina Matthews at Icon/Paramount. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Chocolat (2000)
Delicious cinematography tops this creamy small town tale about a 
non-conformist spirit who opens up a temptingly luscious chocolate shop 
during the Holy Lent season in a rigidly religious French village. 
Though a variety of not necessarily French accents abound, it's an 
English speaking film. After initially stirring up some sticky thick 
first third acting, the performances sweeten. Likewise, the pace picks 
up during the second half. Lena Olin is standout marvelous as Josephine, 
the town kleptomaniac. 
The good-hearted, but nomadic Chocolate-maker/spirit-lifter asks another 
drifter, "Did you ever think about belonging somewhere?" 
His response takes little thought, "No, you end up caring what people 
think of you." 
The film's only fault lies in its light fluffy center. Though the 
characters are all very lovely and endearing ... they seem far away. 
They don't reach into our hearts and choke us up. 
Filmed so gorgeously, the term eye-candy rolls apropos in the mouth. At 
times the script dips a bit into the too cute; but for the most part 
this is a solid, even Disney story. In fact, it reminded me a great deal 
of Disney's "Balloon Farm." "Chocolat's" last shot even includes a 
dangling balloon. A strong B+. 
Chocolat. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Juliette Binoche, Lena Olin, Johnny Depp, Judi Dench, Alfred 
Molina. 
*  Directed by Lasse Hallstrom. 
*  Written by Robert Nelson Jacobs. 
*  Director of Photography: Roger Pratt. 
*  Produced by David Brown, Kit Golden, Leslie Holleran distributed by 
Miramax. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Message in a Bottle (1999)
No, it's not exactly like "Sleepless in Seattle." In fact, the only part
that's similar is the first 20 minutes when Theresa finds the message in a
bottle, it gets printed in the news and the public responds. By the way, the
letter from Costner riddled in cliché (though, this might well be
realistic -- he's a boatman, not a poet) wasn't very intriguing. So, if you
happen to be reading this review on your way to the showing, relax ...
arrive late. The first 20 minute chunk is the weakest part of the film.
While I'm at it, I could have missed the last 20 as well.
Now the middle, that's pretty good. It's a delicate, fragile, gently paced
love story that moves along with a subtle energy created by the abrasion of
hesitation against anticipation. (Whew, get through that sentence?) In
short, it's simply sweet to watch these mid-life folks experiencing that
"first love" kind of awkwardness.
Kevin Costner and Paul Newman are ultimately believable as father and son.
They seem so natural as family, I have to wonder if they really are. Kevin
performs splendidly as a co-star in a movie that really isn't about his
character (for a change). Though I have to say, the film was rather lifeless
until he appeared on the screen, and then it seemed, all the other actors
were revitalized.
"I'm going to go back to the big city and you're going to forget about
me..."
Starring: Robin Wright Penn, Kevin Costner and Paul Newman.
Directed by: Luis Mandoki
Produced by: Denise Di Novi, Jim Wilson, Kevin Costner at Warner Brothers.
Rated PG-13
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for 200 Cigarettes (1999)
"Hey man, no smoking in my taxi," the disco cabby (Dave Chappelle) scorns as
he lights up one of his own. "You just told me there's no smoking!" the
passenger protests. Cabby, "I ain't smoking what you're smoking."
Despite these quotes and the scores of butts, "200 Cigarettes" isn't about
smoking. It's a relationship flick showcasing the interactions of 10 or so
young techno-freaky people on New Years Eve 1981. Although I was young in
1981 ... I didn't smoke, I wasn't into techno and my hair wasn't a primary
color. For these reasons I struggled to find someone in this film with whom
to relate. As the sometimes twisted, but nonetheless intriguing,
relationship stories developed, I was admittedly lured into the picture ...
until finally the interactions transcended the stereotypes.
There's the desperado (Paul Rudd) whose doomed love affairs keep him from
launching a romance with loose galpal Lucy (Courtney Love). There's the
Romeo (Jay Mohr) who is burdened by nameless flocks of women falling in love
with him at the snap of a finger. Accident prone Cindy (Kate Hudson -- is
simply stellar!) fumbles through most of the picture with dog poopie on her
back. Eric (Brian McKardie) is adorable, but sorely lacking in the manly
duty arena. And still a host of others populate the script including Ben
Afflect as the studly bartender and his brother (Casey Afflect, an excellent
"real person" actor) as your average leather-clad, mascara-wearing street
punk.
This odd mix of romantic web-winding culminates at a New Year's Eve party
that is cleverly left to your imagination ... which may well be the norm for
those of you who drink heavily on such occasions.
Starring Paul Rudd, Courtney Love, Kate Hudson, Ben Afflect, etc.
Directed by Risa Bramon Garcia
Produced by Betsy Beers, David Gale Van Toffler at Paramount Pictures,
Lakeshore Ent., with MTV and Dogstar.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Chuck & Buck (2000)
Excellent Dialogue, editing and a superb performance by writer/lead actor
Mike White. But the story is only decent, the telling is quite slow and
linear, subject matter potentially off-putting and the quality of the image
on the big screen - sorely lacking.
Essentially this is the story of a grown up boy who is still in love with
his childhood playmate (by now a grown up man). It's been years since
they've seen each other, but the passing of Chuck's mom brings them
together. Very nicely directed, the funeral scene captures the delicate
interplay of contradictory emotions. Buck is more excited to see his old pal
than he is dismayed at his mother's passing. Chuck, on the other hand,
trying to act appropriately for the occasion, isn't sure how to react to
Chuck's jubilant smile.
Throughout the film, Buck remains resiliently pre-teen. He's bright-eyed,
hopeful, playful, and broodingly obsessive. His every word is that of an
11-year-old. His every eyebrow raise and smile curl is that of a game loving
pubescent. He's remarkable, absolutely rock solid.
And if this film was just about one man's undying grip on childhood memories
and his attempts to once again bring them into reality with his reluctant
old buddy - then I'd have been more interested, really. But when that grip
becomes a grope, it's all too apparent that Buck's interests aren't entirely
innocent.
Most of the film is Buck stalking Chuck. There are no independent side
stories and we, as an audience, spend most of our time across the street
from Chuck's house or workplace, pseudo-sympathizing with the stunted
maturity of Buck.
Then there's the technical: This movie is shot on videotape then transferred
to film. The casual viewer will most likely notice that it's not as crisp or
clean or rich as film, or that it's often grainy especially in low light.
But I found the stair-step edges and color bleeding plainly distracting.
Tape is much cheaper than film, however this production is so professionally
handled from story to acting, I'm left wondering why they just didn't shoot
it on film.
Some pictures actually work on videotape, "The Celebration" (a European
flick) shot on tape makes sense since it revolves around a family event,
we'd expect it to be captured on tape. In fact, video brings a hyperrealism
to it. But "Chuck and Buck" displayed no artistic reason for the choice.
Chuck and Buck. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Mike White, Chris Weitz, Lupe Ontiveros, Beth Colt, Paul Weitz,
Maya Rudolph, Mary Wigmore, Paul Sand, Gino Buccola.
Directed by Miguel Arteta.
Written by Mike White.
Produced by Matthew Greenfield at Blow up/Artisan release.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Wo hu cang long (2000)
What to expect from a Chow Yun Fat kung-fu flick directed by Ang Lee the
director of such emotionally wrenching films as "Ice Storm" and "Sense and
Sensibility"? Add to this already tantalizing mix, the equally invigorating
spices of Michelle Yeoh of Bond fame and "Matrix" choreographer Yuen
Wo-Ping, and you get an artistically crafted, warm red-blooded,
mandarin-speaking masterpiece.
And like most masterpieces it's moody, dark at times, thought provoking
(you'll go home talking about it in the car) and not for everyone.
Though the film ends in a question mark instead of a period, there's hardly
a criticism to make. Paced with the rich flavor and patience of maple syrup,
this tiger/dragon drama takes flight during intermittent scuffles - therein
lies the real magic.
The instant these women masters take up arms, your jaw will open and remain
so, dry tongue and all until the robust bout ends. Your heart will hover as
these two graceful fighters race up walls like lizards or moths, then
scurrying across rooftops like the butterflies they'll set fluttering in
your stomach.
Absolutely A+ ballet beautiful fight sequences.
Perhaps more a film for the opera appreciator than Hong-Kong Kung-fu
aficionado, this is a film that takes you on a bareback horse-ride waltz
through beauty.
"When it comes to emotions, even great hero's can be idiots." Chow plays the
warrior monk; Yeoh his warrior love ... though both are too noble to have
commenced a romantic relationship. Tired of the killing, Chow gives away his
sword, only to find himself smack in the middle of the good fight against an
evil skilled witch and her lovely, yet wavering, young disciple.
The film harnesses the beauty and grace of a Disney animated feature, while
bending, like the supple green bark of bamboo, nearly into the surreal.
Director Ang Lee: "The film is a kind of a dream of China, a China that
probably never existed, except in my boyhood fantasies in Taiwan. Of course
my childhood imagination was mainly fired by the martial arts movies I grew
up with and by the novels of romance and derring-do I read instead of doing
my homework. That these two kinds of dreaming should come together now, in a
film I was able to make in China, is a happy irony for me."
Writer James Schamus: "The Chinese embedded in every word of this movie has
layers and layers of culture and meanings. They simply don't exist to a
Western ear. It is one of the truly delicious ironies of this movie, that
although I co-wrote it, I'll never fully understand all of its meanings."
Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Chow Yun Fat, Michelle Yeoh, Zhang Ziyi, Change Chen.
Directed by Ang Lee.
Written by James Schamus, Wang Hui Ling, Tsai Kuo Jung. Based on the novel
by Wang Du Lu.
Produced by Bill Kong, Hsu Li Kong, Ang Lee at Sony/Good Machine
Int/Columbia Pics Asia.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for She's All That (1999)
She's All That is a teen version of My Fair Lady. I'm not a teen, so I
didn't expect to like it -- surprisingly, I didn't hate it. In fact, I very
much enjoyed this very rich scene in which, GQ-prep Freddie Prinze Jr., is
forced to improv at an avant-garde poetry/performance "event" (presented
tongue-in-cheek). For the first time in his life he's unprepared, slightly
intimidated, and liking it. He drops a bean bag on his foot: "Hack-e-Sack,
Don't let it drop. Hack-e-sack, Don't let it drop." As he juggles the sack
with his feet and repeats the line to dizzying background projections, his
character conflict is subtly and cleverly revealed.
After being dumped by blonde cheerleader and prom queen shoe-in, Freddie
bets his best bud that his mere presence can convert any woman into a prom
queen. The bud chooses Rachael Leigh Cook ... the dorkiest art geek he could
find. Personally, I don't think he tried too hard, even with glasses Cook is
still pretty cute. From then on, Freddie moves in on Rachael attempting to
glamorize her with his popularity.
Cook's father, a pool guy, is a warm and wonderful side character. I
particularly like a scene in which he talks back to the TV during Jeopardy,
"Which Medieval printer copied the Bible without using his name?" Alex asks.
Cook's Father replies... "Hewlett Packard." That's funny.
If you're a teen and you like MTV's The Real World, I think you might enjoy
this picture. If you're not a teen, there's probably better pictures out
there for you.
Grade..........................Teens: B+, Non-Teens: C
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Corruptor, The (1999)
Chow Yun-Fat (of Hong Kong action film fame and "Replacement Killers") is
cool. Cooler than 007 (I'd give him a 009 on the cool scale) but in a Clint
Eastwood, not spy/gadgetry, kind of way.
Take a not so simple game of who-can-you-trust?, fine cinematography, a
great amount of gun fire, a slice of prostitution on the side and you've got
the ingredients for "The Corruptor."
After stylishly swank opening credits, the picture explodes onto the
screen -- a bomb in Chinatown. Yun-Fat is the tough, slightly crooked cop
respected in his district. Mark Wahlberg ("Boogie Nights") plays the rookie
(refered to as "the boy") whose white face and green bottom aren't welcomed
on Yun-Fat's Chinese team. The two grudgingly befriend each other while
eliminating members of gang A (like targets in a video game) as they are
seduced into a corrupt loyalty by gang B.
Despite a few unlikely plot developments, "The Corruptor" is compelling from
start to finish. Yun-Fat, following up "Replacement Killers" with style, is
beginning to show his age. But like Eastwood and Connery, I don't expect him
to loose his cool any time soon.
Starring Chow Yun-Fat and Mark Wahlberg.
Directed by James Foley.
Produced by Dan Halsted at Illusion Ent./Newline Cinema.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Exit Wounds (2001)
Here you'll find everything you'd expect from a film called "Exit 
Wounds" ... lots of gunfire, car chases, things blowing up and catching 
fire, expensive sports cars, cool good guys, crafty bad guys, hip music, 
tough guy one-liners, comedic sequences, and of course, gratuitous 
frontal nudity. I'm not quite sure the reason for the title, except that 
it sounds cool and implies plenty of bullets in flight. Wait, perhaps 
they were playing on the words in a more emotional sense, since Seagal 
is forced to "exit" a desirable position on the force. Naaaah, this is 
definitely a "shut the mind off and enjoy the action" type of film. 
An opening action sequence makes that point crystal clear, Lone Ranger 
Seagal single-handedly saves the vice president from a well-armed 
motorcade ambush. In the very next scene, despite his heroism, Seagal is 
promptly reprimanded and demoted for his inability to follow orders. 
Soon enough Seagal finds himself station in the rough part of town where 
a group of cops welcome him with an electric zapper and a 
stress-management group with desks comically too small for his huge 
body. 
The film does an excellent job of keeping action rolling and 
interjecting comic relief: Anthony Anderson in the Lamborgini scene, Tom 
Arnold in stress management, and as the credits roll the two of them 
chewing the fat improv-style will send you on your way chuckling. 
Of course, the story line has more holes than Seagal's stylishly dark 
garbs after a rain of bullets. He's so cool, never a scratch. And a few 
of the "dialogue only" scenes grind to a jam even a crowbar couldn't 
free. Still, you can't argue with a good car chase or helicopter 
bursting into flames, strong pacing, tight direction, and good 
old-fashioned action ... a lot of fun. Also worthy of note, a nice 
performance by DMX. 
Exit Wounds. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Steven Seagal, DMX, Isaiah Washington, Michael Jai White, 
Anthony Anderson, Jill Hennessy, David Vadim, Tom Arnold. 
*  Directed by Andrzej Bartkowiak. 
*  Written by Ed Horowitz, Richard D'Ovidio. 
*  Based on the novel by: John Westermann. 
*  Produced by Joel Silver, Dan Cracchiolo at Warner Bros/Village 
Roadshow/NPV Ent./Silver Pictures. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Dancer in the Dark (2000)
"Dancer in the Dark" is actually a completely accurate title, just don't be
mislead by the romantic connotations it might conjure. This is one special
film and in some ways fantastic. Yet at the end of the day, it's as edgy and
risky for a night's entertainment as the lead actress herself -- Björk who
was born and raised in Iceland. Her music reaching and daring into un-pop
territory, she's released some 14 albums by her current age of 34.
Shot mostly in the now not-so-fresh-and-exciting "gorilla video style" of
films like "Blair Witch", "Dancer" finds refuge (and indeed we the audience
do as well) in wonderful "musical" interludes. There, the colors are
fresher, the cameras stabilize, and the sound track fills with music
noticeably absent from the real world segments meant to portray Björk's
gritty factory-worker life in the most abrasive manner bearable. Our reward
for tolerating the overly wobbly videography and awkward editing is Björk's
stunning performance and a 100-cam view (as if inside-her-mind's-eye) of her
daydreams offered us via the handful of musical interludes where coworkers
break from their normal concrete lives and burst into song and dance.
"In musicals nothing dreadful ever happens." Unfortunately, Björk cannot say
the same of her hard life as a single mother working multiple jobs in order
to pay for an eye operation for her son Gene.
>From not-so-good to worse, Björk's story progresses, with the six or seven
fantasy reprieves.
Strong acting and direction grace this bold film, with choreographed moments
by Vincent Paterson of "Evita" and "Michael Jackson" fame.
Björk's music is eclectic and unusual. Imagine Grace Slick fronting for a
moody B-52's or Eurythmics tune while an industrial crunch replaces the
drummer.
Struck by her unique face on a poster, I sampled her music some years back
and decided I liked the poster better. However, in this film, her music not
only works, but fastens the scenes together with rivets.
I personally found the hand-held panning video camera tiresome, but loved
the shot from the vidcam mounted on the wheel of Gene's bicycle just under
the clothespins clamping a card to flutter off the spokes. The card's sound
is cleverly captured in the soundtrack.
Whether you enjoy this piece or not, this film will linger (perhaps "haunt"
is a better word) in your mind for days afterward.
Interestingly enough, one of those Dogma 95 filmmakers, Lars Von Trier set
this film in America, but filmed in Sweden; greatly due to the fact that he
simply doesn't take airplanes.
Dancer in the Dark. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Björk, Catherine Deneuve, David Morse, Peter Stormare.
Written and directed by Lars Van Trier.
Produced by Vibeke Windelov at Zentrope/Trust/Film I Vast/Liverator(C)2000.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Pushing Tin (1999)
Nice take off and landing, but the flight was rather uneventful. "Pushing
Tin" pits John Cusack against Billy Bob Thornton one-upping each other for
top air-comptroller status. The ego-dual isn't enough to move the plot
along, so wives get involved; changing the feel of the film from the air to
a worldly soap opera.
The two hot shots bump heads until one of them breaks. From there the
development of the relationship jumps a few thousand feet rather abruptly.
"Pushing Tin," sporting great dialogue, is very well acted. It's tense techy
setting is promising, but the meat of the movie seemed rather inharmonious
with it's dazzling slices of beginning and end.
Starring John Cusack and Billy Bob Thornton, Cate Blanchett and Angelina
Jolie.
Directed by Mike Newell. Screenplay by Glen Charles and Les Charles.
Produced by Art Linson at Fox 2000/Regency.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Anna and the King (1999)
The gold-tiled grand palace of Siam (Thailand's former name) shimmers with a
story rich in culture and theatric recreation. It's a piece plucked from the
diaries of a prim British woman about her exploits with a macho Siamese king
during volatile times; played by a tough American woman and a Chinese action
movie icon, respectively.
During the mid-1800's, an English widow and her son move from
Bristish-colonized Bombay to Bangkok. Commissioned by the king of Siam to
tutor his first son in English, Anna soon finds herself the school teacher
of his 50+ offspring. Not just a tad self-righteous, Anna challenges the not
just a tad arrogant male chauvinist top banana of the country. "She thinks
herself equal not just to a man, but to a king." Of course, they fall in
love.
A misty-eyed Anna relives a romantic moment, "He made me feel like ... " The
curt Indian housekeeper interjects, "One of his twenty-six wives?" Not too
proud to chime cute retorts, this version of "The King and I" never bursts
into song. Its earlier lightness gives way to a sincere sense of impending
doom with hanging bodies and blood spillage; romance is left as a subtle yet
omnipresent magnetic attraction between two stubborn leads.
Jodie Foster, a fine gritty American actor, plays the part of Anna with
rigid grace; but her less than proper British accent never lets us forget
that she is, indeed, an American. Additionally, her character lacks a
demonstratively brooding element. When the king slices her sympathetic
encouragement with his terse line, "You are not qualified to criticize me
about living!" he's referring to a side of Anna that this production fails
to instill on us. Consequently, the power of such a potentially mighty
assertion is limited only to the beam of intensity from under Chow's glossy
and reddened eyes. Anna's practical optimism could have been richly
complemented with an occasional emotionally-charged reaction to anything
that remotely reminded her of her dead husband.
Chow is king of the glare. He reigns supreme in the facial expression and
body language department. He can communicate a page worth of text in one
word; but unfortunately the converse is also true. Chow does all he can to
maintain stage mediocrity when delivering any dialogue longer than a
sentence. His (non-Thai) accent sometimes leaving viewers asking each other,
"What? Did you get that?" Still, he is charming and ultimately lovable as
king.
Pictorially splendid, it's largely large, epic and expansive. This retelling
commands the screen with such disciplined cinematography and direction that
you'll almost forget the ethnicity mismatch. Even though there must have
been some fine Thai actor that would have put even Yul to shame, and a
proper British actress to counterbalance; the story is just so marvelous
you'll end up having a good time anyway. It's a long one, pack a lunch.
"Goodnight ma'am, You've helped enough for one day."
Anna and the King. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG-13.
Starring Chow Yun-Fat and Jodie Foster.
Directed by Andy Tennant.
Written by Steve Meerson & Peter Krikes and Andy Tennant & Rick Parks based
on the diaries of Anna Leonowens.
Produced by Lawrence Bender and Edward Elbertat at 20th Century Fox.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Violon rouge, Le (1998)
"The Red Violin" is really a composition in five movements. Although the
primary theme (the violin) ties all the segments together, it is but a thin
string.
The violin has a history five centuries long, and five separate tales of
it's existence are shown. Starting in Italy, but roaming (no pun) to several
other countries. Each story is savory and delicately filmed. But they don't
sing in harmony with one another, nor do they build for a crashing
crescendo.
Still, it's a curious piece that held my interest and stirred my heart with
beautiful music.
Starring Jason Flemyng, Greta Scacchi, Don McKellar and Samuel L. Jackson.
Directed by Francois Girard. Produced at Lions Gate/Red Violin/Sidecar/TV
Srl/Mikado.
Grade ......................................... B+
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Summer of Sam (1999)
Here's one of those films that propose an ethical dilemma for me as a
reviewer. Nearly flawless as a production, but not the kind of movie I enjoy
watching. Nonetheless, I had some intention of giving "SOS" an "A-", but the
2 hour and 16 minute production ran about 16 minutes over. A surprisingly
significant mar to an otherwise awesome feat of filmmaking.
"SOS" is a grizzly picture about how an Italian neighborhood in the Bronx
reacts to the serial murders of the (unfortunately real life) infamous Son
of Sam. It's not really about the killer himself, kind of like the Titanic
wasn't really about a boat breaking in half (poor analogy, I know). Oh and
unlike the later, not a very good date flick.
The main character, Vinnie, is rather seemly (not unlike most of the
others). But Spike Lee, shows a great deal of directing and scripting
prowess with the ability to make us actually care about people, we would
probably keep our distance from in real life.
There's plenty of graphic violence as you'd expect, but also a surprising
amount of rough sex. These are seldom love scenes ... if you get my drift.
So why do I praise Spike? Picture-perfect diaglogue is evenly and
realistically dispersed among multiple actors. Also, these actors give
fantastic performances, especially Vinnie (John Leguizamo) -- you've got to
blame that kind of thing on the director. Lastly, save for the
aforementioned needless 16 minutes, the film progresses its tension level
smoothly from beginning to end. There are also the other masterfully crafted
elements like multi-dimensional characters that grow.
So why don't I recommend it? Bluntly ... it's no fun. It's a downer. It
started me resonating with an uncomfortable unsettling feeling that
continued 10 or 12 hours after the movie. Though, Spike would probably pat
himself on the back and shout out "mission accomplished" at my last
remark -- I don't find it amusing. In my view, the only positively redeeming
worth of the film lies in Vinnie's painfully learned lesson. But, it's a
lesson to which I'm hip. I didn't need 2+ hours of discomfort for it to have
made an impression; however, those rougher and tougher than myself may.
Starring John Leguizamo, Adrien Brody, Mira Sorvino,  plus. Directed by
Spike Lee. Screenplay by Victor Colicchio, Michael Imperioli and Spike Lee.
Produced by Jon Kilik at Touchstone. Rated R.
Grade ......................................... B
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews  visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Third Miracle, The (1999)
A little slow in getting started, "Third Miracle" builds well, Ed Harris
filling the screen with brilliant acting.
Tip-toeing along some of the same lines as "Stigmata," this film sheds a
kinder light on Catholics and dwells more on contemplation than graphics. Ed
plays a doubting Thomas priest and postulator (spiritual detective) who is
sent to investigate the miracle of a crying statue and verify a woman
(Barbara Sukowa) who abandoned her daughter (Anne Heche) as a genuine
American saint. But the film is really about Ed's internal struggle with
doubt.
The press kit provides this appropriately profound quote from charismatic
genius Albert Einstein, "There are only two ways to live your life. One is
as though nothing is a miracle. The other is as though everything is a
miracle."
The Third Miracle. Copyright Š 1999.
Starring Ed Harris, Anne Heche, Armin Mueller-Stahl.
Directed by Agnieszka Holland.
Written by John Romano (a former "Hills Street Blues" writer) based on a
novel by Richard Vetere.
Produced by David J. Siegel, A.C.E.
Released by Sony Pictures Classics (C)1999.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Miss Congeniality (2000)
It's an average film, packing some good Grace-Harty laughs while others 
gags fall off the mark. The most difficult to swallow being the film's 
premise that Sandra Bullock (as FBI agent Grace Hart) should somehow be 
unattractive without lipstick and nail polish.
Tomboy Grace Hart must go undercover as Miss New Jersey in the Miss 
United States beauty pageant (oh, sorry, make that "Scholarship 
pageant"). She's one tough lady sincerely unaccustomed to manicures and 
high heels. Therein lies the film's strongest hits - rugged Bullock 
trying to look sweet, elegant and giddy - all the while gritting her 
teeth in disdain. Unfortunately, some of the punch relies on our 
believing that Bullock isn't already beautiful. Such a presupposition 
leaves audiences feeling a tad insulted.
After a fine opening sequence the film moves quickly into a cheesy 
detective bust scene, compromising the momentum. Though it seems to be a 
cop movie, "Miss Congeniality" is essentially a "Cinderella" comedy. 
Since the slim climax relies on FBI plotting, it's authority wanes for 
lack of substantive action.
Still, Bullock and Michael Caine (as the beauty expert in charge of 
"transforming" this hardened agent into a queen) are marvelously 
charming, clever and fun together. Some of the dialogue here takes the 
crown.
Benjamin Bratt performs respectively. You'll also enjoy Candice Bergen 
and William Shatner as the co-hosts of the pageant.
Miss Congeniality. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Sandra Bullock, Michael Caine, Benjamin Bratt, Candice Bergen, 
William Shatner, Melissa De Sousa.
Directed by Don Petrie.
Written by Marc Lawrence, Katie Ford, Caryn Lucas.
Produced by Katie Ford and Sandra Bullock at(C)2000. Rated PG.
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Sixth Sense, The (1999)
Excellent. Go see it. "The Sixth Sense" bills itself as a psychological
thriller, but it's really more of a supernatural adventure picture that will
"raise those prickly hairs on the back of your neck."
Bruce Willis plays a child psychologist trying to "heal" a paranoid boy
(Osment). The boy's affliction: he's always scared. And he has good reason
to be.
Though this synopsis is quite brief, more said would mean fewer surprises.
And this is one film sure to surprise you. Rather, let's turn our attention
to the "horror" factor. Make no mistake, this is not a mindless slasher
film. And though it has its moments of gore -- they're usually brief.
Instead, it's the relationship between the psychologist and the boy that
aptly carries the picture -- that and the subjects of the child's "sixth
sense."
Bruce, the boy and his screen mother perform flawlessly. Writer M. Night
Shyamalan has given us characters for whom we care deeply and then wrapped
them up in the most dire of circumstance. But that's not all, he's directed
this picture with meticulous care.
It's a film that will resonate within you.
Starring Bruce Willis, Haley Joel Osment, Tony Collette and Olivia Williams.
Written and Directed by M. Night Shyamalan.
Produced by Frank Marshall, Kathleen Kennedy and Barry Mendel at
Hollywood/Spyglass.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................A+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Lucky Numbers (2000)
"Lucky Numbers" is one of those botched criminal activity films where 
one thing goes wrong right after the other; only these culprits are more 
regular-person-esque and less bad-guy-like (a smiley, but dim weatherman 
and a bubbly, but cruel lotto girl for starters.) 
Unfortunately, this cute chain of mishaps has little to tie together. 
There's no emotion arc and for a comedy, there's only a handful of good 
laughs. Still the acting is awesome, Travolta and Kudrow rock; and the 
somewhat amusing chain is directed well. 
The end result ... a film that would make a fine watch on TV if there 
were nothing else to do, but at the theater ... just can't fill the big 
screen. 
Lucky Numbers. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R. 
*  Starring John Travolta, Lisa Kudrow, Tim Roth, Ed O'Neill, Michael 
Rapaport, Daryl Mitchell, Michael Moore, Bill Pullman. 
*  Directed by Nora Ephron. 
*  Written by Adam Resnick. 
*  Produced by Andrew Lazar, Sean Daniel, Nora Ephron at Paramount. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Gun Shy (2000)
A wonderful lead in sequence: the camera dollies merrily through a New York
airport, working it's way into the men's room where a spooked plumber
overhears a neurotic, dangerous-sounding Liam Neeson ramble to himself about
life and death as he's sprawled on the cold tile floor of the handicapped
stall. The wide-eyed plumber tiptoes out to safety as Neeson's flashbacks of
a drug bust gone awry bring us up to speed. These flashbacks are produced
beautifully and artistically. They're a ballet of bullets and bodies,
blended with a marble-rich mix of humor, fear and hallucination. Bravo.
Though the overall concept is similar to last year's "Analyze This" where De
Niro plays the softening Mafia thug and Billy Crystal, his tagalong
psychiatrist; "Gunshy" is not redundant. Both movies are strong, funny and
unique in their own ways. Here, Neeson is the tough undercover cop nearly
crippled with fear over a near death experience during his last bust. But
instead of Neeson coupling with a single shrink, that role is split between
three other parties: four fellows in group therapy, Sandra Bullock as the
puppy-love interest, and even Oliver Platt as the "I'm sick of being a
cliché!" Italian thug.
In enlighteningly striking contrast to the other clients' petty grievances
of the day, Neeson offers his, "You're doing your best to bring in the bad
guys, the next thing you know, you're laying naked on a table full of
rotting fruit with an oozy up your @#$."
Neeson continues his undercover gig as the money savvy conduit between Mafia
thug (Platt) and drug dealer (Jose Zuniga). Andy Lauer's happy-go-lucky
performance as the yuppie financial investor lends a contrasting and funny
element to the quiet tough guy cast. Loosening up with Lauer's
party-oriented hosting, Zuniga admits, "You know, it's sometimes a pain
keeping up this Colombian Coke dealer stereotype - I never get to have any
fun!"
During a medical visit intended to relieve stress, Neeson stumbles across
Bullock. Later, when talking about her in group therapy he's asked, "How'd
you meet her? Did you score?" Neeson replies, "She gave me an enema." A
group guy conjectures, "I guess that's kinda like scoring?"
An over the shoulder shot of Bullock is surprisingly out of focus, and
uncharacteristically shoddy scripting make her initial scenes with Neeson a
little hard to digest. We feel rather rushed by the filmmakers to get her
into the story swiftly. Still, these blemishes along with a few other highly
implausibles seem minor and just don't slow this strong, fun production.
It's clearly a good time with a good heart. Go see it.
Gunshy. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Liam Neeson, Oliver Platt, Jose Zuniga, Michael Delorenzo, Andy
Lauer, Sandra Bullock.
Written and Directed by Eric Blakeney.
Produced by Sandra Bullock at Buena Vista/Fortis Films/Meat Hook.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Legend of Bagger Vance, The (2000)
Jack Lemon walks out onto the fairway and has a heart attack. During 
this surprisingly un-traumatic experience he relives (that is, narrates 
to us) a story about a mysteriously wise (perhaps mythical) caddy that 
comes to the aid of a broken man back during the great depression. The 
story is told in the style of mid-80's films (like "The Natural"): warm, 
big, movie-like. Nothing is all that real, but really swell nonetheless. 
No artificial enemy torments our protagonists for tension (I found that 
refreshing). Well, there is a play at it early on, but most of the 
story's conflict rests squarely on Rannulph Junuh's struggle with 
himself. He's a first rate golfer, struck down in his prime (note the 
similarity to "The Natural") by war memories. The whole town of Savannah 
needs him to step up and play a big match against the two best golfers 
of the era. 
Damon (as Junuh) plays fine enough, but you might think that Robert 
Redford would be a "Natural" for the part, in which case you wouldn't be 
surprised to learn Redford directs. Actually, the actor I think of as a 
young Redford came to my mind - Brad Pitt. And though Will Smith does a 
better job than anticipated of playing the wise old (er... young) caddy 
Bagger Vance, Morgan Freemon would have been the more obvious choice. 
Yeah, Pitt and Freemon - I'm sure of it. Aside from that, the other 
casting choices were excellent. J. Michael Moncrief stroking a better 
than par swing as the 10-year-old Jack lemon. 
But hearty and hopeful too, and although it is structurally formulaic, 
the film goes several hundred yards in search of unformulaic details. 
Rolling off the green on a few strokes, the picture lays the ball right 
in the hole a couple of times as well. Improvements could have been made 
by striking Junuh with a few more (and detailed) flashbacks of wartime 
misery. Also, I'd have woven that last dance into a thing of beauty 
rather than a loose end in need of tying. That said, in a gentle and 
warm kind of way, I enjoyed the film. Not over the top great, but 
decidedly above average. 
The Legend of Bagger Vance. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Matt Damon, J. Michael Moncrief, Will Smith, Charlize 
Theron, Bruce McGill, Joel Gretsch, Peter Gerety, Lane Smith, Michael 
O'Neill. 
*  Directed by Robert Redford. 
*  Screenplay by jeremy Leven based on the book by Steven Pressfield. 
*  Produced by Chris Brigham & Joseph Reidy at Dreamworks/20th Ctry 
Fox/Wildwood/Allied. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Save the Last Dance (2001)
Suburban raised Julia Stiles has no other dream than dancing her way 
into Juilliard Ballet School. All she needs is her mom's presence at the 
audition. Very early on in the movie her mother is killed in a car 
accident. The trauma causes her to give up dancing, but it's the 
logistics of guardianship, which lands her on a sofa bed at her somewhat 
estranged father's house smack dab in the middle of a black Chicago 
neighborhood. 
Actually, the tension between her and her jazz musician father 
oscillates nicely, though is never quite juiced. Imperfectly, he fumbles 
for her forgiveness regarding past events left unspecified but no doubt 
centering around his departure. She's not jumping into his arms too 
quickly. 
The real story is her relationship with a slick, bright, tough 
hip-hopster and her integration into the hood. 
Aside from a sweetly edited finale dance solo, Stiles doesn't exactly 
fill the ballet dancer shoes, though she has no problem stepping into a 
lead role and commanding the production. I like this actress. In fact, 
she choked me up in two separate scenes. And though charming and funny 
in other scenes, the lead male Sean Patrick Thomas, couldn't find the 
right angle to complement her tears, paling when the scenes get deeply 
emotional. Not that he has the best dialogue to work with. 
Teaching Stiles the finer points of hip-hop dancing, Thomas shines. 
Aside from the father angle, which was truncated mid blossom, this is a 
formula fish out of water, dancer flick. Not too schmaltzy, not too 
edgy. She should have saved the last dance for her father. 
Save the Last Dance. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Julia Stiles, Sean Patrick Thomas, Terry Kinney, Fredro 
Starr. 
*  Directed by Thomas Carter. 
*  Written by Duane Adler, Cheryl Edwards. Story by Duane Adler. 
*  Produced by Robert Cort and David Madden at MTV/Paramount. 
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Instinct (1999)
Perhaps, like the human race itself, "Instinct," far from flawless is
nonetheless seductively imperious, and yes, as lovable as a perfect paradox.
Though difficult to accept when seen on the screen for the first time,
Anthony Hopkins plays a brutal savage (Ethan Powell). Cuba Gooding Jr. is
Dr. Caulder, the star psychiatric resident. Seems anthropologist Ethan
Powell spent a few too many nights out with the gorillas -- a few dead
Rwandans later, he's extradited to the U.S. for trial. In the meantime,
Caulder does his best to free Powell ... from himself, from his insanity ..
well at least from Harmony Bay, your stereotypically violent psychiatric
prison.
It's a good film, but here's what it does poorly: 1) Its introductory
special effects (freezes/strobe-slowmo/reverse color) are cliché and
anti-dramatic. 2) Sutherland's Hollywood line, "He lives with the animals
... becomes one .. how does that happen?" sounds like an actor's line, not a
psychiatrist's. Is it really that unclear anyway? Still, the over-dramatic
question sets up the rest of the film rather nicely. 3) Once the cocky
Caulder takes the case, he boasts, "What if I can get him to speak?" The
film inflates this question with nothing more than hot air since we had not
been shown even one incident of Powell refusing to speak. Alas, Caulder's
line falls like a feather in a vacuum. 4) Other relationships beg
development. Powell's daughter, a fine character, is used only peripherally.
Then there are Powell's fellow inmates, although Caulder was strapped into
consulting with them, we see only dabs of interaction. 5) Gooding's
character is set up as the sharp buttocks-kissing corporate climber, yet we
witness him berate those he works with at Harmony Bay. Although, it's fun,
it isn't Caulder. The actor is directed out of character simply for dramatic
effect. 6) And lastly, Powell's personality is changed in only 2 years of
"hangin'" in the jungle. I would have expected 2 decades.
Okay, now the good stuff: 1) "Instinct" tells a great story that stands
steadfast to its sharply pointed question. "Who is the real savage?" 2) Two
excellent performers. 3) Solid focused dialogue. Here are a few examples:
Powell, "There's more danger in any city in the world than in the forest."
Caulder, "I never quit ... even when I'm doing something really stupid."
Caulder, "Your father may be very ill." Powell's Daughter, "Oh really, I
thought he was just in a bad mood." 4) And of course, there were times when
the heavy dramatics actually worked. 5) Lastly, the music. It's an excellent
driving score.
At the end of the day, "Instinct" has a pounding heart so powerful that it
makes its flaws drop like ticks off the hide of a charging Silverback
gorilla.
Starring Anthony Hopkins and Cuba Gooding Jr.
Directed by Jon Turteltaub.
Screenplay by Gerald DiPego. Produced by Michael Taylor and Barbara Boyle at
Touchstone/Spyglass.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Skulls, The (2000)
Would you swear your allegiance to some stealth secret society seducing you
with insurmountable sums, slick sports cars, sexy slender sisters,
scholarships to study law at several esteemed schools essentially securing
your prospective professional success? Struggling to pay the bills at his
Ivy League University, city-kid Joshua Jackson sighs, "My future's killing
me," then succumbs to the seduction as the price to calm the side effects of
entry into the Skulls skyrockets.
A group of ten recruited college studs (only 2 of which matter) stumble in
the dark through a mysterious and spooky initiation process. The two: our
hero Joshua and the typecast teen jerk Paul Walker.
There's actually a very exciting long boat race earlier on. Meant to endear
us to the main character (which admittedly, it does), the race itself is
more climactic than the picture's climax. The film is still intriguing as we
(along with Josh) learn about this elite secret society membering members of
congress etc. Why the club is called "Skulls," is never revealed - probably
it just sounds cool. To celebrate the new groups "rebirth," dressed in
expensive duds and rubbing shoulders with senators and judges, the music
rolls over to rock, a flock of gorgeous babes slow-mo into the room, and the
young new talent leave the party in $50,000 sports car of their choice. It's
a very slick sequence.
Not too long after, however, the film takes a dive into "Starsky and
Hutchdom," with a TV 70's bad guy pursues good guy into a fenced in alley
staple, that detours into a car chase worthy of "Dukes of Hazard." Oh sure
that can be fun, but in a film that sets itself up as clever, darkly
sinister and proudly bares the name "Skulls?" It's hardly stately. The good
old fashion duel at then end doesn't vindicate it in the least, nor is it
unpredictable.
Joshua Jackson pulls down a strong performance as does Paul Walker, but the
uneven dialogue dips into the silly. Despite it's excellent cinematography,
"Skulls" fails to "flesh out" a good premise.
The Skulls. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Joshua Jackson, Paul Walker, Hill Harper, Leslie Bibb, Christopher
McDonald, Steve Harris, William Petersen, Craig T. Nelson.
Directed by Rob Cohen.
Written by John Pogue.
Produced by Neal H. Moritz, John Pogue at Universal/Original/NewMarket
Captial.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Wood, The (1999)
Less than brilliantly recorded in audio and visuals, this film's spirit and
charm overwhelmingly eclipse technical pops and sputters. Often lower
quality production is coupled with lower quality performance. This is
absolutely not the case with "The Wood."
It's a buddy film. The story begins in the midst of wedding day hysteria.
The best men, eyes to camera, begin the history of their high school days
with the groom (who's cold feet have prevented him from making it to the
church on time). That history is portrayed in intermittent flashbacks, while
Roland (the groom) tries to make a final decision about following through
with his bride-to-be.
A second set of three actors are used to play the buddies as teens. Both
sets are excellent and fluid. The two portraying Slim deserve especially
high praise for their powerfully funny and spontaneous reactions to the rich
characters (and situations) that surround them.
Like "American Pie," this film is not afraid to broach the topic of teenage
sex. Controversial as that may be, condoms were again advocated and it is
rated R after all. Though both pictures can be enjoyed by teens and adults
alike, "American Pie" favors the teens while "The Wood" favors adults.
Aside from a muddy audio track, some sticky edits and a few lighting
problems; the only other negatives were a few commercial plugs that
interrupted the realism of the tale.
With an excellent script, fantastic performances by everyone (hence great
direction) and juicy chemistry between the buddies, "The Wood" proves
entertaining and funny. During my viewing, the theater erupted with
laughter.
Starring Elayn Taylor, Omar Epps, Richard T. Jones, Taye Diggs. Direction
and Screenplay by Rick Famuyima. Produced by Albert Berger, Ron Yerxa, David
Gale at MTV/Paramount/Bona Fide. Rated R.
Grade ......................................... A-
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Stuart Little (1999)
A stereotypical TV-50's couple adopts an orphaned mouse to muse their seven
year old son much to the chagrin of local felines.
Stuart is the personification (er, ah "rat"ificaton) of the word "charm."
Though the film's plot offers nothing new and the animal speak burrow's
"Babe" technology; Stuart's charismatic presence is alluring.
Stuart is the action figure of our youth come alive. Every step, every bow,
every smile fills us with amusement. The plot is circumstantial, secondary.
All we need is to see Stuart drive a toy car, navigate a remote boat, or
receive a kiss from his newly adopted mom -- and we're smiling too.
I wasn't crazy about Nathan Lane voicing Snowbell the cat, but Monty's
voice-sake did great as well as did Stuart's. The kid was exceptional.
Lastly, the art director created a nice cartoony feel to the entire live
action backdrop.
I'm a huge lover of "Babe," but was a bit let down with "Babe II" ... if you
agree with that, then "Stuart Little" is kind of like a "Babe 1.5."
Stuart Little. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG.
Starring Geena Davis, Hugh Laurie and Jonathan Upnicki.
Directed by Bob Minkoff.
Screenplay by M. Night Shyamalan and Greg Brooker.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Bian Lian (1996)
A Chinese film with English subtitles, "The King of Masks" starts out strong
and enduring, but squanders its tender sincerity on dramatics.
A sweet and aging street performer with no male descendants to carry on his
mask-changing art resorts to purchasing an orphan boy. The relationship
between the two outcasts from opposite ends of the life cycle is as warm and
rich to witness as the man's artistry. However, very early on we (the
audience) learn that the boy is really a girl, a promising conflict to this
modest paradise. Soon thereafter, the old man wises up to this fact as well.
A strong animosity between the two develops into a spark which ignites an
unnecessary fire of dramatic events resulting in the old man's
incarceration.
If I could forgive the accidental fire and the pending hanging of the old
man (which I could), then I would have enjoyed the orphan's desperate,
though theatric, act of redemption (which I did). But, it went too far.
Already dangerously teetering on the melodramatic, this powerfully sweet
scene concludes with entirely anticlimactic redundant and plainly putrid
dialogue. Where was the editor?
If my words are harsh on this little film, it's only because the filmmakers
wet my appetite with a wonderful setting to what I'd expected to be a great
film.
Why spill the beans so soon? This unique relationship would have been enough
to keep me interested -- I didn't need the pseudo drama. Why not have the
girl keep her secret well into her teens, only to find out after the old man
dies that he knew her secret all along?
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Shuang long hui (1992)
We stereotype Kung Fu plots as contrived excuses to display a lot of cool
martial arts fighting scenes. Oddly, I felt that "Twin Dragons" showed off a
lot of cool fight scenes as an excuse to display a good plot. Yeah, I was
really into the story. I didn't expect that from Jackie. The fight scenes,
though way cool, even seemed to distract me at times.
The black and white opening sequence embodies the humor and action we've
come to expect from the adorable Jackie Chan. It quickly depicts the "twins
separated at birth" story.
One Jackie grows up on the streets as kind of a nice guy thug; the other
Jackie having the privilege of a loving rich family becomes a turtlenecked
artist/composer/conductor type. Midway, the twins' lives intercept as they
find themselves trying to live the life of the other -- and kissing the
wrong women too. It's as cleverly coordinated as his stunts and charmingly
compelling to boot!
The only major flaw is a lull created by a rather typical "pre-climax" fight
scene. The real "climax" fight scene that followed it would have been plenty
for me. Still, a great time over all.
Starring Jackie Chan and Jackie Chan.
Directed by Tsui Hark and Ringo Lam.
Produced by Teddy Robin at Dimension/Distant Horizon/Media Asia.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Coyote Ugly (2000)
A struggling singer-songwriter moving to New York in search of fame finds a
cute Aussie boyfriend and a bar to dance on.
Here's a comment from a theatergoer:
"It was all right. It had a lot of good-looking people. It could have made
it."
Here's a comment from me.
"I made it (through, that is)." Admittedly, this was not a film that I
eagerly awaited screening. Skinny ladies in tube tops two sizes too tiny
spraying an inebriatedly rambunctious bar crowd with various spirits just
didn't catch my eye on the trailers (go figure). But if it caught yours, be
forewarned these are relatively minor segments of the film (likewise, Tyra
Banks' part).
Nor is this a film about four women. Rather, one modest, stage-frightened,
but determined girl from Jersey dominates the production. Can she make it on
her own in the big bad city? Can she keep her young Mel Gibson? Can she
impress her KFC eating father (John Goodman)?
Aside from pretentiously false modesty, Piper Perabo does a smashing job
with this near-cardboard character. Adam Garcia also is endearing, with the
Coyote Queen, Maria Bello, pulling down her hard, but caring role with both
fists. Tyra is fine. (Read in any inflection you prefer).
But the film caricatures the reality of song or beer selling, the
father/daughter relationship and even performance, be it music or buttocks.
Some of the wet bar dancing is fun (never too sexy), but the film really
only captivates when Violet (Perabo) plays her music. Unfortunately, that
only happens twice during which the filmmakers insert a time-passes-by
sequence over the music that moves the picture along with the kind of beat
and heart we've been waiting for. More songs from our leading lady would
have prettied up this coyote. A grittier realism would have also elevated
the tension level - as is, we never really worry about anyone.
FYI, as explained by the bar owner herself, "Coyote Ugly" is the term one
might use for the less than appealing appearance of your one-night-stand
laying in bed with you the morning after. "You'd rather chew off your arm
than risk waking him."
Still, I enjoyed Piper Perabo and would like to see more of her (now, stop,
you know what I mean!) in films to come. Additionally, I did pull out my
dusty six string and bang around on it a while when I got back from the film
... that's worth more than a "C."
Coyote Ugly. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Piper Perabo, Adam Garcia, Maria Bello, John Goodman, Tyra Banks,
Melanie Lynskey, Izabella Miko, Bridget Moynahan, Michael Weston, LeAnn
Rimes.
Directed by David McNally.
Written by Gina Wendkos.
Produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, Chad Oman at Touchstone (C)2000. Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B-
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Sugar Town (1999)
A solid "B" film. "Sugar Town" strums a strong steady beat that might get
you swaying, but lacks enough bass action to prompt a boogie.
Following four "aging" rockers as they try for a second round of success in
a fickle and slippery Los Angeles market; "Sugar Town" is the teen soap
opera genre re-written for forty-somethings.
Jade Gordon, playing a selfish mediocre singer, is annoying (but perhaps
that's her job). Ally Sheedy, as the nervously insecure Hollywood type,
performs marvelously. The writers deserve the largest praise for sound
dialogue.
Starring Ally Sheedy, John Taylor, Michael Des Barres, Martin Kemp, Larry
Klein, John Doe, Jade Gordon. Written and Directed by Allison Anders and
Kurt Voss. Produced by Daniel Hassid. Released through October Films. (C)
1999. 93 minutes. Rated R.
Grade ......................................... B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Edtv (1999)
Channel X is loosing in the TV wars to the Gardening Channel. "We're being
beat out by soil!" the producer cries, scrambling for a drastic measure she
gets the go-ahead on a scheme to have one average person in his average life
filmed live all day. She chooses Ed, an ordinary guy not unlike your cousin
or brother-in-law or you. Channel X becomes EDTV: "All Ed, All the Time".
The first few days of EDTV are dangerously boring, Ed drops a Pop-Tart in
the kitchen and a station executive blurts "Oh look, an action sequence."
But things quickly pick up when Ed's brother (Woody Harrelson) cheats on his
girlfriend who basically runs crying into the arms of innocent Ed -- and
it's on every TV set from Anchorage to New Orleans.
Matthew McConaughey gives a flawless performance as the American everyman.
"I prop the mirror up like this, and wah-la ... I can watch the TV while
sitting on the can. Yea, I might not be much in the business world, but I'm
a winner in the bathroom." He's cute and innocent, yet as apt and
charismatic as Paul Newman. Woody Harrelson is as flamboyant as ever and
Jenna Elfman is simply irresistible as the emotional love interest..."shout
out 'guys suck' then go eat a pound cake."
Two Qualms: 1) In a scene where Ed and crew (ergo, the viewing world) catch
his brother with another woman ... the brother fails to shut the apartment
door, thereby practically showing off his blunder -- I absolutely don't buy
it. 2) Ed, in an attempt to sneak away from the cams to visit his
girlfriend, decides his car is a good place to hide. (As if it hadn't been
broadcast on national TV at least twice a day.)
Anyway, good performances by everyone, including director Ron Howard. He's
sprinkled the film with sugary side gags that sweeten it's appeal. Though
the thunder of its big idea may have been lost to "The Truman Show"
(released months prior), this screenplay still has real and punchy dialogue.
Despite it's faults "EDTV" will engage from beginning till end.
Starring Matthew McConaughey, Jenna Elfman and Woody Harrelson
Directed by Ron Howard
Produced by Brian Grazer and Ron Howard at Image/Grazer/Universal.
Screenplay by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for October Sky (1999)
Across a starry October sky in 1957 a single object shined like a shooting
star in slow motion over the little town of Coalwood, West Virginia. This
spark, the Soviet satellite Sputnik, ignited the wick-like gaze of one
miner's son, Homer (Gyllenhaal); lighting in him a burning desire to become
a rocket scientist. The rest of the mining community had spent much too much
time underground, "Maybe it's a missile," one older gentleman figur's. The
reply, "Naw, droppin' one on this place, just be a waste of a bomb." The
younger generation was no more open-minded, "Let 'em have outer space -- we
got rock and roll!"
No passion for coal mining digging inside him, and a push over on the
football field, Homer had finally found something to shoot for, "I'mma build
rockets." Unfortunately, Homer's "John Wayne" father (Cooper) had no idea
how to respect a son who couldn't mine or stop a running back. This is the
major conflict. Will the adolescent son be strong enough to sell his lofty
dreams to a father who only dreams of coal?
The plot follows the usual formula, so that were it a rocket, one could
predict within a matter of feet where it would land. But don't let that stop
you from coming' out to view "October Sky". The acting is strong, the
direction tight, the music and cinematography dramatic. It's a solid
engaging film.
Starring Jake GyllenHaal and Chris Cooper.
Directed by Joe Johnston.
Produced by: Charles Gordon and Larry Franco at Universal/Charles Gordon
Rated PG.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
Ever feel like being someone else? Elvis, maybe? How about Madonna? Choice
is not an option here. Would you pay 200 bucks to crawl into a small hole in
the wall of a half size office building just to be in John Malkovich's head
for 10 minutes? Huh? Would ya punk? That's the "mind-blowing" ride this
picture offers ... well, not to you, but to other people in the film.
John Cusack is solid as the hippie radical puppeteer whose artistic talents
with wooden dolls are as extreme as his psychotic behavior. The puppets, by
the way, are fantastic. Their chop block shapes move with such grace and
human-realism. Their faces eerily carved into the likeness of Cusack and
Diaz. Diaz (Cusack's wife) and especially Keener (the bold, sexy
distraction) deliver strong performances as well.
Malkovich must have had a blast doing this movie ... pretending to be
Cusack, pretending to be himself. He's captivating as always. With more than
a squirt of lime-twist humor, it's a tightly written adventure fantasy for
the brave of open-mind.
"It's good in here Craig, better than in your wildest dreams." My
complements to the writer and director. The exaggerated audio really helps
to put you inside Malkovich's head. The ending credits also continue the
luring surrealistic feel in visuals and music.
The title isn't just some alternative rock band sounding chime -- it's
exactly what the film is about.
Being John Malkovich. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring John Cusack, Cameron Diaz, Catherine Keener and John Malkovich (of
course).
Directed by Spike Jonze. Screenplay Charlie Kaufman.
Produced by Michael Stipe and Sandy Stern, Steve Colin,Vincent Landay at
Gramercy/Single Cell/Propaganda/USA Films.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Little Nicky (2000)
Be prepared to spend the first twenty minutes in humor hell, where 
several big name actors flop over gags that can't beat a rubber chicken 
on the funnymeter. Wait, I take that back, a ghoul with breasts on his 
head is pretty funny. 
Adam is the daft third son of the current reigning devil. The older two 
sons missing a chance at dad's throne decide to escape on up to Earth, 
freezing the fiery gates to hell and leaving pops to decompose appendage 
by appendage for a full week. Adam is the only one who can save dad. He 
must bop on down to Earth, capture his brothers in a whiskey flask and 
bring them both back to Hell before the seventh day. 
The film takes a break from being horrible once Adam gets "down to 
Earth." Here the film is still not good, but lovable despite - and the 
hearty-laugh to wincing-groan ratio improves as well. Several very funny 
bits coaxed audible chuckles from this narrow-eyed crowd. Managing to 
avoid a slip back into the horrible, "Little Nicky" never breaks into 
the excellent, or even the very good. 
Sort of a "Dogma" lite (way lite), "Nicky" still may capture the amore 
of a certain party animal crowd just after they've mauled a refer-laced 
cake seeking only to satiate their craving for the less than silly. 
Perhaps it'll even become the next "Rocky Horror" - who knows? 
Little Nicky. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R. 
*  Starring Adam Sandler, Patricia Arquette, Harvey Keitel, Rhys Ifans, 
Allen Cover, Tommy Lister, JR. Kevin Nealon, Jon Lovitz, Quentin 
Tarantino, Rodney Dangerfield. 
*  Directed by Steven Brill. 
*  Written by Tim Herlihy, Adam Sandler, Steven Brill. 
*  Produced by Robert Simonds and Jack Giarraputo at NewLine/Happy 
Madison/REC. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2 (2000)
"There are a lot of nay-sayers who come in and ... say 'nay.'" 
This is the offhand, pseudo-documentary commentary that opens "Blair 
Witch" the sequel. A laid back, even silly mood "with witch" to contrast 
chilling horror. Well, not quite chilling horror; but eerie scary at 
least. 
I'd wager to say this film is quite nearly similar to the first 
inentertainment value - but for different reasons. A hugely welcome 35mm 
camera on a hugely welcome tripod make the sequel several times more 
watchable than the first. No more dizziness, headaches or vomiting. That 
indelible image of grass and trees waving, scratching back and forth 
against the screen as our actor/cinematographers run amok, has been 
thankfully left as a first film phenomenon. Also, 98% of what you see on 
screen is not shot by the participants at all, but in normal film 
fashion with a real anonymous camera-operator. The editing, though a bit 
dodgy in the start, becomes quite normal. 
Another welcome addition, the sequel has a bit more "plan" to it. 
Unfortunately, the plan never fully develops nor are the actors really 
scared. No matter what I read about that first film in the press notes 
... it is still this reviewers opinion that those actors were truly 
riled and confused. And that captured on film is worth more than a very 
good plan. The sequel hosts no such real emotions. Though the actors are 
perhaps equally talented - the first batch didn't have to act as often. 
Directing, acting and story being quite mediocre; it's the lack of 
climax that drops this film into the below average zone. Though the 
drama is actually pretty interesting, dare I say even mildly compelling, 
there's nothing meaningful that really ties the whole piece together at 
the end. Additionally, the motif of each player turning on the other was 
worked to death (pardon the statement) in the first film. 
Unfortunately too, so passes the soul of the seed that is the "Blair 
Witch Project." Who cares about some child killing witch myth? It 
certainly wasn't this plot that brought the original film out of the 
woods and into cinema lore; it was the scheme! The truly riled actors, 
the ballsie hype, the simple idea. 
This second film is more of the former and less of the later; making it 
more like any other ordinary scary movie of recent years. But in all 
fairness, for as much as it's departed from the first in guts, a sense 
of continuum maintains. And as with the first, there isn't much blood or 
slashing here - if that's the kind of thing you were hoping for, look 
elsewhere. 
A year later in Burkittsville, the region the first "Project" claimed 
home to the murderous Blair Witch is now overrun with movie fans and 
tourists. One opportunist with a van and camera equipment, accompanied 
by four paying customers, sets out to camp at the foundation of that 
infamous unholy house of the first film. All in good fun, but as you 
might guess, they don't get much of a pleasant night's sleep, while more 
than just the cameras play tricks on them. 
The Ending Contest: In 100 words or less write me a better ending to 
this film. (Shouldn't be too hard) I'll look over the entries and pick 
from them my personal favorite - sorry it's completely subjective. That 
winner will be printed on this site by Thanksgiving ... so send 'em in 
now. And let me look around, I can probably find a couple of free IMAX 
tickets around here somewhere to award the winner as well.
Blair Witch 2: Book of Shadows. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R 
* Starring Kim Director, Jeffrey Donovan, Erica Leerhsen, Tristen 
Skyler, Stephen Barker Turner, Lanny Flaherty. 
*  Directed by Joe Berlinger. 
*  Written by Joe Berlinger and Dick Beebe. 
*  Produced by Bill Carraro. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for 20 Dates (1998)
Wow, what a wild ride! Myles, a filmmaker, is recently divorced. In a way in
which Woody Allen might simultaneously host and be tape in The World's
Funniest Videos, Myles sets out to fall in love or make a movie -- which
ever comes first!
Inconveniently, they both happen. Myles convinces vile producer Elie to fund
this project to film, via hidden camera, 20 of his (Myles') dates whilst he
searches for love in LA.
One of Myles' dates wants to go bunji-jumping. So shivering Myles is
"forced" to jump off a bridge -- or risk embarrassing himself as a coward in
his own film. He finally jumps, then looking up at the camera, he curses,
"You better have f'ing got that!"
Much of the film documents Myles' oft failed, yet seldom dull attempts to
secure a date with an unsuspecting female. In one scene, Myles approaches a
woman in the grocery store. He leads in, "Oh, I see you're shopping in the
fat-free isle..." "Yes, they've got some good stuff here," she replies
friendly enough. "Well, we're having a fat-free party, if you'd like to join
us," Myles scams. "I don't think my boyfriend would like that." The woman
reveals. Undeterred, Myles replies "Why? He doesn't like fat-free?"
20 Dates is the result of over 140 hours of video tape humorously edited
down to 120 minutes, then bumped up to 35 mm film. The picture quality is
lacking of course, and visually gives you the odd sensation that you're
watching TV in a theater. I was never quite sure, what was real, staged, or
just clever editing. In the end, the unabashed humor pushed me over the
edge, I took the bate and roared in isle. This is one to put on your "to
rent" video list.
Starring and Directed by Myles Berkowitz. Rated R. 88 minutes.
Produced by Elie Samaha, Mark McGarry and Jason Villard at Phoenician
Films/Fox Searchlight
Grade..........................B+/A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Out-of-Towners, The (1999)
Road trip movies have one thing in common -- the concept of getting there.
Perhaps that's why I get antsy; awaiting the delayed arrival, most of the
movie seems ... well, pending. You might not expect a movie named "Out of
Towners" to spend a lot of time on the road, but it does.
With their son off to Europe, Henry (Martin) and Nancy (Hawn) can no longer
ignore the creaky sounds of their crusty rutty marriage. (Witnessing Goldie
and Steve bicker like your parents might make you feel prematurely gray.)
However, a 10 AM job interview for Henry, sends this average Ohio couple New
York bound. A painful array of mishaps prevents them from making the trip in
a straight line. Somewhere among the obstacles, they rediscover their
marriage. But it's the flea circus of calamity, that brings us from the
beginning of the film to the end and balances us like a spinning plate on
the pointed edge of tedium.
That said, Steve and Goldie are brilliant and hilarious, despite the working
conditions. This is the more wild and woolly Steve of "Planes, Trains and
Automobiles" from which "Out of Towners" borrows the infamous car rental
scene. A big Steve fan myself, I enjoyed his performance in this picture.
Goldie was rock solid as well, and John Cleese is 100% stand-up British
pomp.
It's the star power that gravitates this rather aggravating plot from the
depths it would surely have found without them. Seldom mediocre, "Out of
Towners" toggles between the tedious and the hilarious -- fortunately
capturing the latter more often than the former.
Starring Goldie Hawn, Steve Martin and John Cleese.
Directed by Sam Weisman. Based upon the screenplay by Neil Simon. Rated
PG-13
Produced by Robert Cort and David Madden, Robert Evans and Teri Schwartz at
Paramount/Robert
Evans/Cherry Alley and Cort/Madden.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Payback (1999)
Paying homage to the likes of Dirty Harry, Charles Bronson and Starsky and
Hutch ... "Payback" is a "Death Wish" of the '90s. Opening with a late '60s
secret-agent theme and filmed in a grainy bluish hue, the film has a 70's
feel without sticking plastic yellow daisies all over the screen. "Payback"
is packed with 90's twists, action and dialogue; so even though, president
Nixon and a certain Hicks fight are mentioned, you might still miss the
subtle "retro-ness."
Porter (Mel Gibson), a likeable thief, is betrayed by his wife in cohorts
with fellow thief Val (Gregg Henry). Following a successful sting, his
junkie wife Lynn and crime pal Val pop a couple of rounds in Porter's back
whilest fleeing with his share of the take. Months later, Porter exits the
hospital alive, but dead set on squaring the deal. And boy is he sorely
lacking in the patience department.
By now Val is hobnobbing with syndicate heavies after buying his way in with
Porter's money. Val spends his leisure time with Pearl, a tiny Asian
prostitute with an awesome left hook. Pearl's idea of foreplay brings the
battle of the sexes to an all out fist fight. It's shockingly funny.
Porter hooks up with Rosie, an old girlfriend who looks so much like his
wife that you might get a bit confused (so take heed). Rosie knows him well,
"I think the rumors that you're dead are true, you're just too knuckleheaded
to admit it." Porter and Rosie take on the entire syndicate for a scant sum
of 70 grand. All the while, a couple of cops ride Porter's back expecting
that this lunatic is actually going to be intimidated into handing a chunk
of the spoils to them. This and a few other plausibility issues are easily
overshadowed by the powerful and driven Mel Gibson. This movie is packed
with surprises, gunfire and humor; it's a fun action flick you shouldn't
miss.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Election (1999)
Here's a movie that raises a question of ethics (or is it morals). Either
way, the film steps all over such ideals, perhaps in hopes of redefining
them. Appropriately, it ended up poking me with an ethical dilemma: a film
with such excellent direction, acting, dialogue and humor, deserves high
marks from a reviewer; but my own sense of morality (regarding it's subject
matter) is holding me back from giving it the grade.
Allow me to clarify. The director of "Election" pays so close attention to
detail that he makes you feel like you're a participant in the film. The
timing of the editing is flawless. The script's dialogue is completely real,
riddled with the knocks and pings of everyday, high school population
stutters and stops. The acting ... appropriately straight on the money. And
it's funny. I was laughing, we were all laughing.
When Miss senior over-achiever discovers that her plans to become class
president are being challenged ... her prissy face loses it's smile and a
primal scream rings out over her closed mouth expression.
But the topic isn't just the election, it's infidelity and statutory rape
for starters -- involving students and/or teachers. Perhaps I'm not alone
when I say that kind of thing makes me feel uncomfortable. Don't get me
wrong -- I'm okay with being uncomfortable during part of a film --
especially if it's an investment toward a larger goal. But, I felt
uncomfortable for nearly the duration of this tremendously well put together
piece. Nor, did I feel resolved about it at the end. So, I think you see the
dilemma.
I'm going to be weak. I'm going to let my intangible, perhaps unjustifiable
feelings regarding specifically the touchy topics, prevent me from giving it
an 'A'. Forgive me.
Starring Matthew Broderick and Reese Witherspoon.
Directed by Alexander Payne.
Screenplay by Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor.
Produced by Jacobus Rose and Jim Burke at MTV and Paramount.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Forever Fever (1998)
Shot in Singapore, "That's the way I like it" is in English (or as they say
.. "Singlish") with no subtitles. We follow Ah Hock as he matures from a
rather selfish young adult into a caring individual with a wider view of the
world.
Still a kid at heart, Ah Hock is in love with Bruce Lee and a Triumph
motorcycle his job at the grocery store could never support. But it's 1977
and "Saturday Night Fever" finally dances into Singapore. Hock grabs
gal-buddy Mai and the two take lessons in hopes of winning a dance contest
so Hock can buy the bike of his dreams.
The movie follows the classic plot line of US golden oldie films: underdog
goes for a dream, gets advice from imaginary friend, is forced to take on
the advisory and ultimately learns a greater lesson for the effort.
Starting out kind of sticky (like a student piece), the film slowly matures
(much like it's primary character). Ultimately schmaltzy, you'll leave the
theater and feel good all night.
That's the Way I Like It. Copyright Š 1999.
Starring Adrian Pang, Madeline Tan and Pierre Png.
Written and Directed by Glen Goei.
Produced by Glen Goei, Jeffrey Chiang and Tan Chih Cong at Tiger Tiger.
Distributed by Miramax.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Girlfight (2000)
A succinct title that well sums the story. Angry Diana is sick and tired of
her father being sick and tired of her less than girlie demeanor.
Stereotypical pops pokes, "It wouldn't kill you to wear a skirt once in a
while." Consistent in this tradition of macho, he dishes out the dough to
send Diana's nerdy brother to boxing lessons at the local gym.
Perhaps you can see this coming, but brother "Tiny" doesn't exactly take to
boxing while Diana begs for it. Tiny offers up his lesson money to Diana.
Happy about the exchange, but concerned, Diana asks, "What are you gonna
do?" Tiny responds, "I'm a geek, I'm sure I can find something constructive
to do." Add to this a bit of romance and you have the premise.
A few more developments enrich this toned-down lady "Rocky" tale. In tribute
(I suppose) a major player in the film is even named "Adrian" -- though this
time Adrian is a boy.
Diana takes to boxing with force, but not grace, paralleling her acting
early on. But just as she determinedly sharpens her athletic skills, her
acting prowess begins to dominate the ring. By the middle of the film she'll
have you in the palm of her glove. Worthy of special mention, Trainer Hector
(Jaime Tirelli), friend Elisa Bocanegra, and Adrian (Santiago Douglas) all
deliver powerful performances.
The film progresses with the same resolve as Diana though surging
prematurely, with two mini-climaxes replacing the end of film climax you
might expect. That "big fight" is a bit more confusing (emotionally) than
surging. Perhaps a bit more dialogue between the opponents prior to the
match, may have cleared up the matter, allowing audiences to cheer instead
of narrow their eyes.
Aside from the slightly wobbly conclusion, this is a smashing script with
powerfully crisp dialogue that strongly connects with the target. Confident
direction includes nice "first person" boxing sequences especially in a bout
with another female boxer; "Girlfight" is a strong contender of a film.
Girlfight. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring michelle Rodriguez, Jaime Tirelli, Paul Calderon Santiago Douglas,
Elisa Bocanegra.
Written and Directed by Karyn Kusama.
Produced by Sarah Green, Martha Griffin, Maggie Renzi at Screen
Gems/Independent Film Channel.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Road Trip (2000)
Nope. Not Tom Greeny. Just greeny. Some people hate this guy, some people
love this guy. I happen to think he's pretty funny, but I don't like him.
However, none of this will effect how much you enjoy "Road Trip" because Tom
Green plays a minor role in the production.
And ninety percent of his role is not Tom Green material. Okay, there's the
rat in mouth trick - pretty darned funny, I laughed; and the kissing some
kid's mom on the lips part - funny, I'm not denying it. But all else is
scripted work that could have been done by any other actor - quite likely
better. Tom is best in an unscripted, unprompted environment. That doesn't
happen here, but it doesn't matter, because this film is not about Tom
Green. (Think I've made that point.)
It's about Josh (Breckin Meyer), he's had the same girlfriend/buddy since
first grade, but now that they've gone to separate colleges, he has reason
to believe she's cheating on him. So he does what any true friend would do,
he sleeps with a convenient babe, videos it and accidentally mails the tape
to his girl in Austin, Texas. Realizing his "I Love Lucy" blunder, he
gathers his friends and begs, burrows, steals his way to Texas to intercept
that package.
Okay, it's not the meatiest of plot lines - but I wasn't expecting one
anyway. I was expecting Tom Green, and/or comedy, both of which were absent,
tardy, or simply not paying attention.
The funniest scene finds Grampa in his pajamas with a Viagra-induced woody.
He's completely unembarrassed to greet the four college guests with his lil'
pal poppin' the tent, "What do you want me to do, cut it off?" It's very
funny actually.
Most of the acting is fine, but Seann William Scott's Jim-Carrey-wannabee
act is a bit grating. That and the fake bomb threat. I don't find that
humorous.
I've heard this film compared to "American Pie" ... sacrilege! In truth, you
could count the gut-busting scenes on one hand, and the chucklers on the
other and still have a finger or two left to do with as you please. (Don't
tell me I don't want to know).
Road Trip. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Breckin Meyer, Seann William Scott, Amy Smart, Paulo Costanzo, DJ
Qualls, Rachel Blanchard, Anthony Rapp, Fred Ward, Tom Green.
Directed by Todd Phillips
Written by Todd Phillips and Scot Armstrong.
Produced by Daniel Goldberg and Joe Medjuck at DreamWorks.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Fight Club (1999)
This picture "coulda been a contenda!" The flimmakers' fancy foot work in
matching up richly odd (yet achingly familiar) characters for a round of
painful redemption is nothing short of excellent. Unfortunately, the young
fighter (the film) starts slurring its punches, slipping and sliding in its
own sweat by the sixth round. Though still standing at the bell in the
ninth, "Fight Club" voluntarily hands over the title by squandering it's
award winning lead.
Upon the everyday canvas of life, a bizarre fighting ring is erected as a
stinging remedy/answer to it. I was (metaphorically) jumping out of my seat
and routing this picture on! Norton plays the stereotypical
materialistically-reassured yuppie with an atypically acute dose of
depression. Seeking some sense of purpose, he stumbles into a spectral
variety of support groups to which he becomes contentedly addicted until he
meets Brad Pitt. This is where the already powerful film shifts into
hyperdrive. Let's leave the plot line at that, shall we?
In the Tarantino spirit, this hard-hitting (at times plainly gory),
psychologically challenging film is also a comedy. Unfortunately, comedy
slips from this wondrously hybrid mix in rounds six through eight (reprising
in the ninth). Also, the motif of fists to flesh is slightly overdone.
Norton is great; Pitt, nothing less than mighty. Whether or not his
posterior is worshipped by half the population, Pitt is one of the greatest
actors of our time (and you can quote me on that).
"Fight Club" is simply rough and thick! Even though it loses punch during
its extended running time (about 2 hours 20 minutes), it is still a vibrant
contribution to the film world and has all the magnetically therapeutic
attraction to which cult-movie-goers will no doubt cling. "This is a good
life and it's ending one moment at a time." Enjoy it if you dare -- what are
you afraid of?
Fight Club. Copyright Š 1999.
Starring Brad Pitt, Edward Norton and Helena Bonham Carter.
Directed by David Fincher.
Screenplay by Jim Uhls (based on Chuck PalaHniuk's novel).
Produced by Art Linson, Cean Chaffin and Ross Grayson-Bell at
Unison/Regency/Tarus/20th Century Fox.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Yi yi (2000)
"Yi Yi, which literally translates to 'one-one' means 'individually' in
Chinese. This signifies the film's portrayal of life through each individual
member at each representing age from birth to death. 'A One and a Two and
a...' is what's always muttered by Jazz musicians before a jam session ...
to signify what's following the title is not something tense, or heavy or
stressful. Life should be like a jazzy tune." Director, Edward Yang.
With a gentle pace the film clocks in at just shy of three hours. Moving
along with serene steps, the gait simulates the pace of real life. Save for
a few indulgences in drawn-out silent shots, the film moves wonderfully
through the night - giving one the feeling of an experience rather than a
spectacle.
"Yi Yi" centers on NJ, a middle-aged man with a wife and two children, as he
meanders through crises in his marriage and work life. His first love pops
up after thirty years to make matters even more interesting. Ting-Ting, the
teen daughter, also must navigate matters of the heart as she wrestles with
the guilt of her grandmother's illness amidst the emotional whirlwind of
dealing with the opposite sex. NJ's young son, Yang Yang, poked and prodded
by the older girls at school, plots his mischievous revenge. Then there's
NJ's brother-in-law who becomes a husband and father in the same month; he
must field the repercussive actions of his old girlfriend.
It's the confident direction that instills a marvel to the film. Though, the
lovely real people with real problems to care about certainly help. In fact,
(again aside from the few indulgences by the young boy and Japanese
businessman) the film is quite photo-realistic - a slice of modern life in
Taiwan, which has the added bonus of educating those who are unfamiliar with
the Taiwanese.
This nice picture has a few scratches; isolated bits of excessive profundity
bubble up like bulges in a perfectly round tube. And being a slice of life,
there isn't any one strongly focused theme, though tidbits of philosophical
thought are tossed about.
The film takes firm grasp our sympathies, and though never losing hold of
our interest seldom evokes strong emotions.
NJ's wife sits at the bedside of a relative who has fallen into a coma,
"Talking to you is like prayer. I'm not sure the other party can hear. I
wonder if I'm sincere enough. (Sobs in self-pity) Would you wake up if you
were me?"
In Taiwanese, Mandarin, and Japanese with English subtitles.
Yi Yi (A One and a Two). Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Nienjen Wu, Issey Ogata, Elaine Jin, Kelly Lee, Jonathan Chang,
Xisheng Chen, Suyun Ke, Michael Tao, Shushen Xiao, Adrian Lin, Yupang Chang,
Ruyun Tang, Shuyuan Xu, Xinyi Zeng.
Director/screenplay Edward Yank.
Produced by Shinya Kawai, Naoko Tsukeda at J1+2 Seikaku Inkai, Pony Canyon,
Omega Project/Atom Films.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for American Beauty (1999)
Poetic in its execution, "American Beauty" is a satire on Joe America who
hasn't stopped to smell the roses in so many years that the high point of
his day is playing with himself in the shower. He hates his life, his wife
hates him and their daughter hates them both ... not a pretty picture.
It takes a beady-eyed next door neighbor and a teen cheerleader to turn
things around for this family -- though the turn around isn't at all in a
Disney fashion.
If sexual suggestion between adults and high schoolers bother you (as it
does I) you may be off-put by substantial portions of this film (as was I).
However, the more often than not artful script, powerful performances by
Spacey, Bening and Bentley, strong direction and rosy surrealism cannot be
ignored.
I opened with the word "poetic." Like an extended poem, "American Beauty" is
sometimes beautiful, sometimes tedious, sometimes too far removed. While I
love the theme ... "There is so much beauty, I don't know if I can handle
it. I feel like my heart will collapse," I'd have preferred that this
realization be stumbled across by means other than pot and lust. Still a
strong film.
American Beauty. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Kevin Spacey, Annette Bening, Thora Birch, Wes Bentley, Mena
Suvari, Peter Gallagher, Allison Janney.
Directed by Sam Mendes.
Produced by Dan Jinks and Bruce Cohen.
Screenplay by Alan Ball.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Dick (1999)
No, it's not about that! A generation ago (or so), old guys named Richard
used to like to be called Dick -- as a nickname see.
Set in 1972, two dippy fifteen year old girls stumble into the oval office
and are made official presidential dog walkers and later ... "Secret Youth
Advisers" to the president. Misunderstandings across their generation gap
with Nixon seemly dictate Tricky Dick's fate. If you're too young to
remember -- he's the president that got canned.
All of this occurs in a Forest Gumpy kind of way. But the girls, though
amusing, aren't as lovable as Tom Hanks in the aforementioned role. Nor is
their plight as endearing, making "Dick" -- Gump-lite.
I didn't start laughing until I saw Kissinger, however from there after I
enjoyed myself. Perhaps better appreciated by the over forty crowd, "Dick"
will make an excellent renter.
Of considerable muse: Nixon taking leave of office to Carly Simon's "You're
So Vain." His helicopter riding off to those lyrics is eerily apropos.
Starring Kirston Dunst and Dan Helaya.
Screenplay by Andrew Fleming and Sharyl Longin.
Directed by Andrew Fleming. Produced by Gale Anne Hurd at Columbia.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Dinosaur (2000)
Not quite the realistic Dinosaurs of "Jurassic Park," nor are they the
decidedly caricatures of "Toy Story 2." These Mesozoics are a cute computer
cross between cartoons and muppets.
In the grand opening scene, a fought after dinosaur egg trades hands (er..
ah claws) from one reptile to the next until a pteranodon (bird-like
reptile) drops it on some distant Lemur Island. (Anybody know if primates
and dinosaurs shared the same geological time period?) Anyway, the dominant
male lemur wants to discard this inauspicious scaley baby, but is soon
endeared to it. So, too, was I. Expecting big things from these Disney
people, the sweeping egg-toss sequence didn't quite grab me; and then with
the advent of that inter-species adoption - I sniffed a "Tarzan" copy.
But with the pace of a shooting star, the film changes direction as the
inhabitants of the lush Lemur Island are forced into a hasty exodus. I'll
leave the reason for their flight a surprise, but will say this ... it's
lovely. Absolutely lovely. A fantastically magical, chillingly glowing,
horrifically compelling sequence. It sucked me in like a tar pit (but it
wasn't a tar pit).
>From there the now grown dinosaur (Aladar) and his small pack of chimps join
a herd of other "sauruses" as they brave the dangerous and course migration
to a dreamy nesting place. Aladar exhibits some
out-of-previously-established character, cocky behavior, especially
inappropriate given present circumstances. This oversight could have been
corrected with the addition of a scene or two in Aladar's growing up period.
Kron (the head honchosaurus) leads the pack with an evolutionary Darwinistic
iron fist (er.. ah claw). "Then let the weaker ones die, they'll slow our
predators." Apparently, Darwin had never been to Disneyland. Of course,
Aladar encourages everyone to work together for the common good -- help each
other out. It's kind of hokey, but aside from a few hints at "mating" that's
about all the film has to offer in the meaning department.
But in the adventure and waycool-to-look-at departments - the film boulders!
(er.. ah rocks!)
Dinosaur. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Voices of D.B.Sweeney, Alfre Woodard, Ossie Davis, Max Casella, Hayden
Panettiere, Samuel E. Wright, Julianna Margulies, Owen Klatte, Joan
Plowright, Della Reese.
Directed by Ralph Zondag, Eric Leighton.
Screenplay by John Harrison and Robert Nelson Jacobs.
Based on an original screenplay by Walon Green.
Produced by Pam Marsden at Disney (C)2000.
Adult Grade ................................... B+
Kid Grade ..................................... A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Mission to Mars (2000)
What just happened on screen? Here's the best I can make of it: a rather
B-script with some G-force actors.
In a ten-minute, backyard-BBQ, introductory scene (here on Earth), we meet
the astronauts and their families via some gratuitous, expository
relationship background and goodbyes. The next thing we know, these folks
are on the red planet. "Mission to Mars" is not about getting there. It's
about salvaging the mission of the crew that meets with a rather unexpected,
unexplainable catastrophe while hanging out collecting rocks one day.
Basically, an upside-down tornado slowly builds up force just meters in
front of the four earthlings. Yet, they stand calmly as the martian stones
between their feet are pulled forward then thrust a kilometer into the
atmosphere. What were they thinking? Turn and run to the ship, you silly
mammals!
>From there, the rest of the film is a rescue mission launched off of the
World Space Station as it floats around the solar system.
The humans in their little white suits seem projected onto this man-made
Mars backdrop, space, or spacecraft -- kind of like Dorothy's gang in OZ.
The special effects are garden-variety: most fine to midland, some cheesy,
some impressive. A centrifugal gravity chamber of the rescue craft is very
nicely simulated. The suits are convincing, but space movies love to put
lights inside the astronauts' helmets. It's dark in space, do they really
think space-pioneers would appreciate penlights three inches from their
cheekbones shining into their eyeballs? Nope, but it sure looks good on
film. Lastly, fossil fuels in deep space in the year 2020? Doubtful.
Tim Robbins' presence is the only perfect thing about the film. Gary
Sinise's performance is also solid.
The producer quips, "If we've done our jobs right we'll be one big
advertisement for continuation of human space explorations." Hopefully
that's true, but concerning claims of advertisement, "Mission to Mars" shows
no shame in selling "space" to cola and candy products.
Though a few well-delivered one-liners tickled this audience, there were
equally as many embarrassingly unintentional gut-busters. Adequately
compelling, you may find the hokey "Mission to Mars" slightly insulting to
your adult intellect. However, the patient 10-year-old might just worship
this movie (if any exist).
FYI: Mars is visible to the naked eye in the night sky and it really is red.
Mission to Mars. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Starring Gary Sinise, Tim Robbins, Don Cheadle, Connie Nielsen, Jerry
O'Connell, Peter Outerbridge, Kavan Smith, Jill Teed, Elise Neal, Kim
Delaney.
Directed by Brian De Palma.
Screenplay by Jim Thomas and John Thomas.
Produced by Tom Jacobson at Touchstone.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Human Traffic (1999)
Wow, what to say? If you liked "Clerks" or are deep into the "rave" culture
you'll no doubt enjoy this wacky drugged out piece of video-cinema.
Unfortunately, the majority of the movie-going population may think
otherwise. Heavy on the "F" word, focusing on illegal drug consumption and
expressed in a thick hyperactive and Welsh/British tongue; "Human Traffic"
nonetheless keeps an uncaring chin up, proud as it is paranoid.
Subject matter aside, the production is a drain trap, catching all the
social and philosophic ramblings of some excitable young UK talent, high,
coming down, and otherwise never at a loss for words.
Almost entirely character driven, there is a faint attempt to make a plot
out of getting an extra ticket so that this motley group of starburst mates
can hit the hottest dance/drug club in all of Cardiff. Oh, and another
smaller tension created by two best friends of opposite sex wondering if
there's more to their relationship.
Besides, the occasional ecstasy-inspired gems that spew from these nervous
pals; the look and feel of the production rattles with a juicy eye for the
screen. Though, sometimes overdone and/or mis-edited, writer/director Justin
Kerrigan interjects visuals that picturize what his characters are merely
conceptualizing. It's a tactic that David E. Kelley does so well with "Ally
McBeal." Overall, it's energy laden, cleanly-cut and looks good, and (like
Kevin Smith of "Clerks" that later did "Dogma") full of future picture
promise.
Watching stoned people swear is not my idea of a good time, but I did enjoy
the production techniques and the minor relationships between these main
characters and their parents.
In one scene, Muff's father chases him out of the house yelling about
getting a job or something. The camera follows the two as they tear down the
steps, Muff rants on how everyone he knows that has a job hates it and that
he's just "not ready yet to be miserable."
Human Traffic. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring John Simm, Lorraine Pilkington, Shaun Parkes, Nicola Reynolds,
Danny Dyer, Andrew Lincoln, Carl Cox, Howard Marks.
Written and Directed by Justin Kerrigan.
Produced by Allan Niblo, Emer McCourt at Fruit Salad LTD/Miramax release.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for 102 Dalmatians (2000)
Usually, I like kid's flicks - I loved "Rugrats." But I growled through both
live-action 101 and 102 - ultimately all two hundred and three of these
Dalmatians. Despite my feelings, apparently allure exists, since Disney
opted for a sequel. And admittedly, I did overhear two young boys excitedly
telling each other their favorite movie parts while exiting the theater.
After a miraculous psychological cure, Cruella loves puppies and hence is
released on parole. Her parole officer is none other than Dipstick's owner
Zoey.
The few tricks deserving praise:
1) Again, grand costuming, especially on Cruella de Vil. 2)Nice opening
credits (you'll see spots). 3) When a cute puppy Dalmatian peers with sad
eyes at his spotless reflection in a mirror. 4) When the new Cruella shouts
"Murderer." Alonzo makes a great nervous butler. 5)Cruella's transformation.
6) "Lady and the Tramp" homage and Tony's restaurant reprise. 7) Parrot that
sings the cop to sleep. 8) Skinny dog with wild hair.
And the theater did explode with laughter twice - maybe three times, but not
more than that.
My bones:
In addition to the near total lack of any bones thrown to the adult
audience, here are some specific dog bites that left me gritting my teeth,
1) Giving a dog a new hairdo might sound good on paper, but on screen wasn't
funny. 2) One minute the dog is on the roof, the next cut he's hanging from
some ascending balloons. Where was the leap? Did the dog refuse to do the
trick? 3) The dogs pick out Zoey's clothing, another careful scene that
didn't hit the mark. 4) Cruella's cohort exclaims, "Steeling puppies is like
taking the baby from the candy." I don't know if kids find that cute, but to
an adult it's as painful as the empty chime of ... "I'm really beginning to
dislike that woman." 5) As we approach the climax a pseudo car-chase is
injected but with absolutely no point - perhaps only to amuse the youngsters
who don't need a point. 6) Continuing in the theme of pointlessness, the
film wraps itself up in a pie machine simulation from "Chicken Run."
To be honest, I just don't know how your kids will react to this film; you,
however, might want to bring something to read.
102 Dalmatians. Copyright Š 2000. Rated G.
Starring Glenn Close, Gerald Depardieu, Alice Evans, Ioan Gruffudd.
Directed by Kevin Lima
Written by Kristen Buckley, Brian Regan
Produced by Edward S. Feldman at Disney.
Adult Grade ............................ C
Kid's Grade ............................ ?
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Remember the Titans (2000)
"I'm not the answer to your prayers. I'm not Martin Luther King ... I'm 
just a football coach." 
1971 Virginia is in for a rude awakening, Denzel Washington takes over 
as the nation's first black high school head coach. Can the old coach 
tolerate working under him? With busing protesters tossing stones the 
first day of school, can the white and black players learn to play as a 
team instead of an angry mob? Can the town reconcile the racial 
tensions? 
Though all of the dialogue is poignant, some of it is soaked onto the 
film a little thick -- the youngest cast member pushing the oversell 
envelope. But, schmaltz is all the fault I can find with this extremely 
well paced, meaty film. Like "Meet the Parents," these filmmakers had so 
much to put into the film, they cut anything that wasn't immediately 
pertinent. Washington is high powered, as is just about everyone else in 
this film (Harris, Hurst, Patton!). "Titans" is full of people to like 
... and to learn to like. 
Denzel plays the hard guy that won't patronize any part of weakness, 
"You fumble the football and I will break my foot off in your John Brown 
hind parts ... and then you'll run a mile!" 
The film is a lot about character and a little about football. Not a 
single boring, slow, or unnecessary second. I loved it. 
Remember the Titans. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG. 
*  Starring Denzel Washington, Will Patton, Donald Faison, Wood Harris, 
Ryan Hurst, Ethan Suplee, Nicole Ari Parker. 
*  Directed by Boaz Yakin. 
*  Written by Gregory Allen Howard about the real life Herman Boone. 
*  Produced by Jerry Bruckheimer at Disney. 
Grade..........................A
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Kid, The (2000)
A single prop, fire engine red biplane dive-bombs into the life of Russell
Duritz (Bruce Willis). He's a high powered, self-confidant, expensive suit
wearing, image consultant for the stars and politicians; but he's a jerk. At
least that's what his assistant, Amy, thinks of him (when she's not falling
in love with him). "We can't go around anymore talking about what we're
going to be like when we grow up - we are up!"
On the outside, he's completely smooth, rock solid and successful, but his
inner child is so abused, we'll lets just say a real lively taste of his
childhood drops by for a visit. "I don't have time to go crazy. If you want
me to go crazy you'll just have to get on the phone with Janet and schedule
an appointment!"
It's a wonderful premise, charming, magical, endearing -- Bruce and "the
Kid" are equally so; but there are a few tweaks left untweaked - mostly in
conducting. A film is like a symphony - it's intensity and dynamics need to
be carefully controlled. Appropriately held back after the first act, this
film longed to rock and roll in the third, but it didn't quite bust out.
This could have been remedied by reducing the length of the segment where
Bruce and kid are trying to figure out what to do with each other, make a
quicker run to the climax - beefing up the peak, then extending the
resolution to include family relationships etc.
The film never quite sold the fact that Bruce was a jerk/loser in need of a
supernatural visitation. In fact, I found his cut-to-the-chase, brutally
honest personality quite refreshing. Yes, he was no saint, but neither the
Scrooge character we'd expect to be crying for inexplicable intervention.
Even with this error, the film is still delightful. It's clean, polished,
seeded well with juicy funny lines and solid talent. Lily Tomlin is smashing
as Bruce's eye-rolling secretary. I enjoyed the red paint motif and slick
opening sequence. A very strong B+, but it's more of an adult movie which
kids might like, than visa versa.
The Kid. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Starring Bruce Willis, Spencer Breslin, Emily Mortimer, Lily Tomlin, Jean
Smart, Chi McBride.
Directed by John Turteltaub
Written by Audrey Wells
Produced by Jon Turtletaub, Christina Steinberg, Hunt Lowry at
Disney/Junction ent.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Endurance (1998)
Though, called a non-fiction feature by it's producer, "Endurance" is
loosely a documentary on Haile Gebrselassie ... Ethiopia's Olympic gold
winner and one of the world's greatest distance runners.
Yonas Zergaw (Haile's real life nephew) plays the young Haile, growing up on
a ranching farm in Ethiopia. The eighth of ten children, the young Haile
must run six miles to school and still get home in time to milk the cows and
harvest the wheat. Some of Haile's real life family are present in the film
(though at times standing in for younger or dead relatives). Their
recreations are surprisingly genuine.
"Endurance" spares us the intrusion of a narrator, preferring to let the
simple images tell the story in their own time. The music ... wonderfully
wide open and rich (like the landscape) in the beginning, thins out during
the breadth of the distance. It embraces elements of the indigenous music,
but certainly not exclusively.
This sweetly simple and honest documentary, shouldn't be confused with a
feature film; but crossing the finish line, Haile's sincerity, will no doubt
choke up a tear in your eye.
Starring Haile Gebrselassie and his family.
Written and directed by Leslie Woodhead.
Produced by Edward R. Pressman, Terrence Malick and Max Palevsky at Disney.
Rated G.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Someone Like You... (2001)
Ashley Judd, dejected, rejected, and neglected by men in general, seeks 
some commiseratory theory with which to explain away the enigmatic 
query, "Why can't men commit?" She finds her comforting hypothesis in 
cows ... bulls, more accurately. Bulls, tired of old cows, scan greener 
pastures for greener heifers - so she discovers. "Monogamy isn't in 
their genes!" 
Greg Kinnear is the gentle, expressive, touchy-feely love-interest, 
while the actor (Jackman) who played Wolverine from the X-Men movie 
appropriately personifies the animal-man theory. He's absolutely 
shameless about his sexuality, yet subtly sweet; a well-drawn character 
brought to life by a strong actor. 
Speaking of acting and writing, "Someone Like You" employs 
professionals. The dialogue and relationships move the production 
warmly, confidently, and entertainingly from beginning to end, where, 
surprisingly the picture's prowess wanes. 
Though definitely predictable, this climax still could have soared. 
There would have been no avoiding the schmaltz - so splashing around in 
it a while ought to have been the prescription. Instead, the peak feels 
truncated with an unnecessarily cliche appendage. A respectable 
resolution follows, however. 
Instead of just dabbling in obsessive psycho behavior, a more acutely 
de-stabilized Judd would have backed the fluff with muscle (perhaps 
exhibiting job-threatening surreal delusional episodes). 
And those kisses! As a romantic-comedy, audiences expect kisses. 
Disappointingly, these tight-lipped pecks belie the chemistry built up 
between our big-screen lovers. 
Ah, but high quality scenes populate most of the film, like the one in 
which an obsessive forlorn Judd petitions a surgeon to remove nasal 
glands that link her sense of smell with memories. She begins the 
consultation calm collected and civilized, but in just one short minute 
and what seems like one breath, explains her plight to tears. Finely 
directed. 
The star power and direction iron out the wrinkles. If you're up for a 
light romantic-comedy, you'll have a fine time. 
Someone Like You. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Ashley Judd, Greg Kinnear, Hugh Jackman, Marisa Tomei, Ellen 
Barkin. 
*  Directed by Tony Goldwyn. 
*  Screenplay by Elizabeth Chandler. Based on the novel "Animal 
Husbandry" by Laura Zigman. 
*  Produced by Lynda Obst at 20th Century Fox. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for My Dog Skip (2000)
Sweet and schmaltzy, 1940's small town America. Formulaic, aside from an
abrupt slap in the face that comes out of left field to solidify this
endearing tale (or is that tail?).
A warm homey opening sequence brings us gently to Harry Connick Jr's first
word, "Memories" which breaks the dawn into a mellifluous yarn of a young
boy desperately in need of a best friend. Though Connick never appears in
picture, his voice shapes and buffs its glossy finish.
Like "October Sky," our young boy is parented by a stern (but underlyingly
loving) father and a strong demonstrative mother. Kevin Bacon finds his part
a bit awkward at first, leaving one hoping a Jon Voight or Christopher
Walken would have taken the role, but eventually Bacon hobbles up to the
call. (Don't get me wrong, I like Bacon ... it's just that he looks less
like a stern parent than he does an innocent kid.)
The mother also, is almost too beautiful, but does well with an undemanding,
standard role. Frankie Muniz, as the nine-year-old Willie Morris, is
charming. And Skip, well, everyone will leave the theater wanting to take
him home.
Very good, but a bit slow in the first half coupled with Bacon's shaky
start, I contemplated giving this picture a "B+." But, admittedly the
charming mutt and ensemble succeeded at choking me up more than just once
while cajoling an impressive round of applause from the handful of paying
customers at its conclusion. So, I rounded up! If you've got a 5 to 10 year
old, take a family trip to see this wholesome story.
My Dog Skip. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Starring Frankie Muniz, Diane Lane, Kevin Bacon, Luke Wilson, Caitlin Wachs.
Directed by Jay Russell.
Screenplay by Gail Gilchriest (based on the book by Willie Morris).
Produced by Jay Russell, John Lee Hancock, Andrew A. Kosove, Broderick
Johnson at Alcon/Warner Bros.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Dancer in the Dark (2000)
Press Conference Interview with Björk, David Morse and Catherine Deneuve
Björk approaches our table bright-eyed, but somehow faintly timid; she
pauses before sitting as a diver pauses to mentally prepare herself on the
board. Suddenly, she shakes her head, smiles, and taps a little dance, "They
were playing jazz -- I was having none of it. I was dancing Charleston."
The Icelander having broken her own patch of ice, sets a silver-glittering
Kuala bear purse on the table and then comfortably takes a seat.
Press: We had heard you decided not to act again...
B: Being in that creative environment were the film was I made an exception,
because of the film I wanted to act. But I should do music ... that's where
I'm at my best.
B: It's not like I got it all planned out. Things keep happening that I
thank God, I couldn't even imagine. Right now I feel very strong on focusing
on music. I get really depressed when I go to Tower records, I don't think
there are a lot of good records there. [Even my own stuff] I'm still far
away, I get embarrassed listening to my last CD's and so I've got a lot of
work to do.
On Selma songs:
I'm very proud. I was really into it at that time ... giving my interior up
to someone else. For someone as obsessed with music as I am, I always hear a
song in the back of my head all the time, and that's usually my own tune,
I've done that all my life and then suddenly to have someone else's songs in
there is like ... "AHHHHH" a bit scary! Right? But at that time I was ready
for it. I was ready to get really craftmanshippy, because I did 10 years at
classical education as a child, so I was ready to go really anal into music.
The whole idea of writing the music and then going back and hooking up with
Lars and getting someone else's vision I was really into that. That's a
challenge. That's actually understated ... a harder job than sitting there
and thinking of something.
RA: What were the parameters that Lars had given you? Did he give you
specific ideas for the songs?
B: I read the script and my immediate reaction was very emotional. So I
would start writing the songs from a very emotional point of view. More like
a form of love for Selma rather than anything else. For me to react in an
intellectual way ... I couldn't even though I tried, it's not what I'm
about. But when it came to arranging the music -- that's kind of when I can
get maybe slightly clever. That's the part that Lars wasn't interested in at
all, that's why he contacted me. Me being one of the most idiosyncratic
people around. I did the music very much how I wanted to.
Press: What was the first song you wrote?
B: The song that happens on the train. My first question to Lars was, "Does
she have a boyfriend?" Once [I got that song down], I knew what she was like
as a woman and the rest kind of ...[fell into place]. The next was "New
World" the title tune, that sort of was her being hopeful and really
believing that music can save people's lives.
(Some people, while addressing a group, tend to look around at each person,
but Björk turns her head to the person asking the question and responds only
directly to them. Her attention seems very personal - and her bluish brown
eyes, oddly hypnotic.)
On taking on the project:
B: My instinct is 50 times more wise than my head for sure. From the start
my instinct was saying, "Go go go" and my head was going, "This is the most
ridiculous thing you could do in your life." I had to follow my instinct.
Press: The music was so haunting, I was thinking about it all weekend.
B: I guess my music is always an emotional thing. I could never sit down and
decide okay let's do it now. You can't control those things and if you want
to control them then you got a problem. You're just being arrogant. It's not
your choice. It's finding strength in being vulnerable. I think sometimes
discipline is very important [too], but you have to be very careful what
areas you put discipline into. And when I arrange songs I can go with my
academic education. Okay, here we have something that was just burning...
okay just make sure it's got what it deserves and then you can sit there
with like 500 hours of studio time. Some of this music I was 12 to 16 hours
in the studio everyday for a year. You're definitely not on a high, inspired
all the time, you just sort of sit there with big bags under your eyes and a
cup of coffee.
On understanding Selma's pain:
B: She experienced a lot more pain than I have ever experienced. I've had a
lucky life. Some of these songs come from a painful place ... but it's not
mine. This is not my pain. I never felt this pain. But it provokes empathy
for sure.
On her terms with Lars:
B: I want to mix my tunes in London with people I normally work with, I'm
going to do the album sleeve for my album, the record's going to be the way
I want it to be, I'm going to have a final mix. For example, after Cannes I
went back and mixed it again. Basically, what I was asking for was that I
could protect my music ... nothing to do with acting being too difficult. So
I was one day off work, so I came back the next day with a piece of paper
and for one day they said we can't sign that, it's impossible. And then in
the evening -- they did. I was working from August to May non-stop. All that
work I wouldn't be able to do that if they didn't sign the paper. It's
happened so much, just because they were editing something and then
suddenly, "Oh, no, now we gotta do this" and then they'd like chop a minute
out of the song, which I don't mind, I actually prefer my songs to be 4
minute songs ... it was Lars who asked them to be 8 minute long. But it
would have to be the minute chopped out of it that I had to agree with. I'm
ready to collaborate, let's talk about it. It's not like I hand my music
over and go home, I can't do that. After twenty years of doing music, I just
can't do that.
B: There were other things... The fact that they put that thing over the
overture. Because apparently people don't concentrate because there's
nothing for the eye, only for the ear, and I was like "Uhhggg." First the
ears please, because listening in the dark is incredible and the fact that
you need something for the eye, just kills it. But in a funny way it
supports Selma's argument that people don't trust their ears and they don't
trust their instincts and the subconscious and mysterious. They have to like
analyze everything ... the eye is very much an instrument of logic.
On seeing herself on screen:
B: I can't really relate to it. I'd be lying if I told you what it was like.
I just watched it like "blahh" I don't even have an opinion on it. I know I
gave everything I got and a lot more, I'm proud of the film. If I close my
eyes I know all my heart is in there. And that's all I can do. I sit and
watch it, if I don't like something - it's out of my hands. I'm not
controlling like that at all, my acting or image or visual stuff. I wish I
was more ambitious ... but I just don't care. I always knew that when it
came to visual vanity ... I don't really give a shit. And I was right
because [just look at the film] I'd like have a handicam up my nostrils
after I haven't slept for a month and I'd be like [ah so what]. But there'd
be one wrong note and I'd be like "AHHHH" and I'd be running to the studio.
Choreographer Vincent Paterson, speaks with a deep resonating voice, like a
choir teacher or Harrison Ford:
VP: I think that the whole film is really a fable, I think that the great
contradiction for people is that you're seeing a fable for the first time
through a very documentary real world sensibility of filmmaking. Lars is an
amazing director, so much of what Lars does is alters his grips and vision
to bring out as much of the actor's personality ... so almost as much as he
asks us to be improvisatory, he's actually as equally as improvisatory as
he's creating.
RA: Were there really 100 cameras in the dance scenes?
VP: Yes, we used 100 digital Sony video cameras
VP: Yes, and actually in some pieces we used over 100, like in the train
sequence, we would mount 100 on the train and 50 in the landscape, they were
all cabled together. It was fantastic for the actors ... they got to go
through the entire piece from the beginning to the end. [Actually] Lars'
original idea was to do it live, vocally live, but the logistics of that
were too difficult. Lars makes a lot of rules and then breaks those rules
immediately. Even with the dancing, not a Dogma, this is not a Dogma film,
but he created his own commandments for the pieces. Part of it was, there
was no front to the pieces ... that you could face anywhere. I tried to
explain to him that it works better on paper ... [Finally] he changed that
rule and said, "Okay, okay, make it the other way." But everything is like
that with Lars, I mean the script is written out, he told us don't memorize,
just be familiar and then we would walk into the space and he'd pick up the
camera and just say go.
David Morse stands well over six foot, perhaps 6'4," and though he's played
several bad guys recently, his face is peaceful and reassuring. He sits
comfortably, ready, but calm and relaxed. He fields questions with a moment
of careful thought shown only in his eyes. His answers are mindful and often
times sown with a subtle, dry, biting humor easily missed, unspoiled by his
poker face.
Press: When you first read the script, did you have a sense of the
potential?
DM: No. (pause) I thought it'd be potentially something awful.
Press: Is that how you're choosing roles these days?
DM: No. (pause) It was really Lars that convinced me. I did question my
choice, not that what they were doing wasn't good, it was just the character
... was a really hard one to do... because I did not sympathize with him. He
chooses to do something I don't get. So how do you find your way, believably
and truly living that through, if you don't get it. So it was a hard one. I
tried mightily. But this one was a hard one to really feel like I'd done my
job.
RA: Of the wealth of roles you've played in the past of which are you most
proud?
Press: Were you happy to "Get out" of singing and dancing?
DM: No. (pause) Actually I was really disappointed. I was looking forward to
it. It would be fun to be up on the tables.
On possible audience reaction to the film:
DM: It's not a whole lot different than anything you do for love, you'd like
it to be embraced. In a way there's a satisfaction in doing something so
challenging that people are going to come down on different ends of the
spectrum. We have, Lars has, succeeded in making the film that he wanted to
make.
On Björk:
DM: She is so alive (pause) and unusual, she has no preconceptions, she's
not protecting herself - she was living her life as this woman Selma. It
just brings out things that don't always happen on film.
David mentions that the gun sequence was a bit frustrating for him because
the use of a weapon was so foreign to Björk:
DM: She couldn't just do the scene, (pause) but she WAS doing the scene.
Acting Legend Catherine Deneuve sits donning tint-gradated glasses, she
pulls the table mic a bit closer, and waves to Björk at the other table.
CD: I don't work hard anyway. That's not my type of living. It's difficult,
but it's not hard.
Press: How do you feel when reporters refer to you as legend or icon?
CD: I find it a little boring. Because it's a way of putting me away on a
pedestal and watch me and expect me to speak a few lines, but I try to
always break that strange idea.
On audience reaction:
CD: Yes of course, you always want people to like it. [But whenever] someone
special like Lars, takes a normal story and brings it into musicals, makes
you think differently and see things differently ... it's not reassuring.
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Brothers (2000)
White lace, pure like light through leader film, a milk-filled projector 
spills ivory onto the screen -- organic, undefined, like rays of the 
sun. The first distinguishable image strikes a menacing contrast. A cold 
steel .45 caliber pistol raises in the hand of some spinning bride 
donning full wedding dress. She aims. Click. Jackson (Chestnut) awakens 
from this telling dream. In the very next sequence he's talking with a 
psychiatrist about his inability to commit. A dramatic entrance into a 
very enjoyable production. 
Four rich professional men in their late twenties meet religiously once 
a week for a game of basketball and a drink at the club. The topic of 
discussion, "Love happiness and all that sh*t," ...from-the-heart 
straight-talk between brothers. Brian, the cynical one, is quick to make 
a lawyer's distinction, "Yeah sure, love and happiness ... not 
marriage!" 
Terry (Moore) decides it's time to abandon the field in favor of 
starting a life with fiancee Susan Dalian. Brian (Bellamy) openly 
criticizes that choice, speaking freely about the doom sure to follow. 
All the while, Brian battles his own issues with a mother that simply 
refuses to hug him. 
But the oral sex argument between Derrick (Hughley) and wife Sheila (R. 
Jones) breaks all awkward topics rules. Brutal, loving, honesty 
regarding this taboo subject propels the sequence like a bottle-rocket 
in a trash can -- striking side-aching hit after hit. It's perfect; a 
cinematic moment that glides. A scene that makes all other less-graceful 
moments instantly forgiven. 
Though the gel spreads unevenly, some scenes sparkling more than others, 
these "Brothers" are full to the brim with heart, soul, and a solid 
sense of humor. A picture well worth seeing. 
"There are so many different stories, so many different relationships 
... that people can draw from..." Chestnut says of the film, "I think 
each person is going to see or get something different. But first and 
foremost I hope they just come and laugh and have a good time." 
Brothers. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Morris Chestnut, D.L. Hughley, Bill Bellamy, Shemar Moore, 
*  Tamala Jones, Gabrielle Union, Jenifer Lewis, Tatyana Ali, Clifton 
Powell. 
*  Written and Directed by Gary Hardwick. 
*  Produced by Darin Scott, Paddy Cullen at Screen Gems. 
Grade..........................A
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Yi ge dou bu neng shao (1999)
When Mr. Gao, Shuiquan Village's only elementary teacher, tends to his
ailing mother across China, the mayor hires thirteen-year old Wei Minzhi to
substitute. Who else would want to come out to this shabby little town to
teach for a mayor who is more full of promises than cash, but a naďve
primary school graduate? Wei Minzhi is delightfully unprepared for her role.
Mr. Gao innocently asks, "What can you do?"
"I can sing," WEI MINZHI offers as she teeters her head from side to side.
A student herself, she begins by dispassionately, yet loyally, following
teacher Gao's instructions to write the lesson on the board, have the
students copy it, then dismiss them only when the sunlight hits a certain
nail on the pole. Meanwhile, she waits disinterested at the doorstep as her
students battle it out inside.
But the rule Mr. Gao made most clear (backing it up with more promises of
payment) was to maintain class size, "When I return I want to see all 28
students - not one less." So when a student is forced to go to the uncaring
city in order to earn money for his family, a hardheaded Wei Minzhi runs
after.
Though we're never quite sure if her motive is the money, loyalty, sympathy
or pure stubbornness; Wei Minzhi's plain-faced boldness, strength and
relentlessness win us over.
Overwhelmingly charming in its seductive grit, director Zhang Yimou takes
great pains to make the picture real and should be applauded for strictly
avoiding the melodramatic -- bringing images and circumstances to the screen
that are so real they are at times, boring. In his attempt to emphasize the
endurance of this one girl and the reality of her plight, he occasionally
over-emphasizes it. Several minutes could have easily been shaven from
various endurance sequences. And though I respect his discipline, the
wonderful payoff of the climax could have been drawn out just a bit -
audiences deserve it for surviving along with Wei Minzhi! Bring some
tissues, it's sure to clear your sinuses.
Lastly, the people are wonderfully true! Actual teachers, students, mayors,
etc. bring this script to life and sweeten its sincerity. Zhang Huike
portrays, with genuine honesty, the smugly grinning kid that learns a hard
lesson. Wei Minzhi also nails her tenacious role earning it over thousands
of other candidates in part by yelling apathetically into a crowded street
corner.
Not One Less. Copyright Š 2000. Rated G. 106 minutes.
In Mandarin with English Subtitles.
Starring Wei Minzhi, Zhang Huike, Tian Zhenda, Gao Enman, Sun Zhimei
Directed by Zhang Yimou.
Written by Shi Xiangsheng.
Produced by Zhao Yu at Guangxi Film/Beijing New Picture/Columbia Pictures
Asia.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Traffic (2000)
What a script! Sincere, detailed, gritty dialogue runs its street-real 
mouth all over this richly woven story. 
"Traffic" attacks the "The War Against Drugs" from multiple angles: The 
Mexican beat cop, the S. Californian detective, the higher level Mexican 
drug lord, the American drug lord's wife, the newly appointed 
commissioner on drug control in the States and his coke-snorting 
daughter. 
Filmed in an "off the tripod" documentary style, the look and feel of 
the film reminds me of "Three Kings." A burnt-out orange filter is used 
during the many south of the border sequences. It's an effective tool to 
"heat up" the tension of these scenes as well as assist the viewer to 
distinguish locales. Though tension building, the shakey camera bit 
grows a tad tiresome. 
I particularly enjoyed the intelligent, even classy, snitch; the 
repartee between US Detectives; the sweet ending shot; the Mexican cop - 
sort of a cross between a Latin Brad Pitt and Russell Crowe; and of 
course the masterful interweaving of many tasty subplots. 
Unfortunately one flaw, which in another film might be glossed over, in 
this otherwise intelligent production stands out like a footprint in a 
perfectly spread concrete patio. Sadly, that one breakfast scene spoiled 
my appetite for this meticulously prepared meal. 
Traffic. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R. 
*  Starring Michael Douglas, Benicio Del Toro, Don Cheadle, Luis Guzman, 
Catheine Zeta Jones, Dennis Quaid, Steven Bauer, Erika Christensen, 
Topher Grace, Jacob Bargas, James Brolin, Albert Finney. 
*  Directed by Steven Soderbergh. 
*  Screenplay by Steve Gaghan (adapted from U.K. miniseries "Traffik") 
*  Produced by Edward Zwick, Marshall Herskovitz and Laura Bickford at 
Gramercy/Initial/Bedford Falls. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Hamlet (2000/I)
I don't enjoy Shakespeare. Or that is to say, I haven't enjoyed Shakespeare
when presented on film or stage. The big problem is too much poetry in too
short of time. He's very clever, that guy, I don't want to miss any word
playage. But it's ALL word playage encoded in backward archaic grammar.
Seems to me, this stuff works better on paper, read at your own pace.
That said, I loved the first half of this film. This "Hamlet" drew me in
like no other Shakespearean work, thus far. The gritty New York-style
imagery, the high-tech video-insert motif, the grungey beady-eyed Hamlet (a
shaggy goatee'd Ethan Hawke resembling the lead singer of "Sugar Ray"), the
near total elimination of pompous delivery. It's not one of those snooty
productions that treats its audience as if they were some unworthy
congregation in a stuffy old Victorian church "privileged" to be pastured a
righteous speech spat deliberately by self-proclaimed people of God. No,
this Shakespeare may as well have been Tarantino; a slick method for making
a 400 year old work more accessible to 21st century masses.
Did I mention that I never made it through any prior version of "Hamlet"? If
there was any doubt, this should distance my opinion from those of the group
of Shakespearean experts, lovers, etc. I love movies, and while I appreciate
poetry (used to write it, actually) they don't work well together - not at
length anyway (length being 25 minutes plus). Perhaps this is one reason I
found the second half of this film less than compelling.
Hamlet is outraged when he learns his father (the king in William's version)
the president of a huge corporation called Denmark has died, allowing his
mother (the widowed queen) to hastily marry the uncle (king's brother). Not
surprisingly, Hamlet's state is already askew, but the appearance of his
father's ghost sets his tilt in a spinning suicidal whirl (hence the classic
line "To be or not to be?"). Great filming on the apparition, though a morta
l actor without special effects is used, his intense red-edged eyes fill the
screen with a greater dread than a Spielberg poltergeist.
And that leads me to the second thing I don't enjoy about the Shakespeare
I've seen ... the plot. Often, I find them ... well, thin, weak and empty.
And this "Hamlet" is no exception. The premise is interesting ... but the
resolve, flatly put ... ridiculous. "Penn and Teller Get Killed" has just
about as much point ... and there's a lot more laughs (with just as much if
not more blood).
Still, William has the sharpest of dagger tongues. In fact, this dialogue
interplay is a two-hour sword fight of tongues. When I view films, I like to
write down the "gems" to include as quotes in my reviews, but this film is
so chock full of gems, that even just the ones I could decode in real time
were to numerous to capture on paper. Again, this is why I think Shakespeare
is a reader's art, not a theatergoer's (save for those who have already read
the pieces).
Here are just a few of William's many many brilliant quips that stabbed my
leaning attentions: Polonius warns his daughter of Hamlet's love:
"Affections? That blaze gives more light than heat. Don't confuse it with
fire." Polonius coaxes his couch potato daughter: "The wind sits in the
shoulder of your sail and you are stay forth?" Hamlet on living a lie: "Do
not spread the compost on the weeds to make them ranker ... throw away the
worser and live the other half." (Purists, kindly forgive the imperfections
in my transcriptions.)
In film, story is still more important than dialogue. From my admittedly
limited knowledge of Shakespeare, I fault him for soapy thin plots. However,
I praise director Mike Almereyda for the following reasons:
1) Great choice of music, mixing modern (sometimes reverse recorded) sounds,
with the epic classical timbers that conjure up images of cathedrals and
armored horsemen, but instead are married with elevators and soda machines.
2) Casting of Bill Murray as Polonius, he's a fresh, every-man, deep-hearted
pleasant surprise addition to the pool of Shakespearean performers. He's
excellent. I love the scene where he lifts Ophelia's foot to tie her shoe as
he lectures her. In fact, the film is full of wonderful as-they're-talking
events that make it real and not just a rackety wooden stage of costumed
speeches.
3) Likewise, casting of Karl Geary as Horatio (great job by him).
4) The TV-play of explosions as the apparition speaks to Hamlet.
5) The TV-clip usages of an Asian spiritual guru speaking on the use of the
phrase "To Be."
6) Gravedigger singing songs of the 1960's.
7) TelePrompTer ending.
Almereyda, had many decisions regarding what to leave out when adapting this
work. Personally, I would have cut the Claudius plotting with Ophelia's bro
scene to one minute, cut all of Ophelia's lines until she screams (Ophelia's
silence is an anchor to the earlier part of the film), hastened that ending,
perhaps beefed up the father-son interplay and/or Hamlet/Ophelia love affair
(sorely underplayed here).
Hamlet. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Ethan Hawke, Kyle McLachlan, Diane Venora, Sam Shepard, Bill
Murray, Live Schreiber, Julia Stiles, Karl Geary, Paula Malcomson, Steve
Zahn, Dechen Thurman, Rome Neal.
Direction/screen adaptation by Michael Almereyda.
Written by William Shakespeare.
Produced by Andrew Fierberg, Amy Hobby. Presented by Mirimax.
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Hanging Up (2000)
An over-burdened Meg Ryan runs around town tending to everyone else's needs,
but her own. She remains mostly in good humor while doused with an
inharmonious silly physical comedy. Example: The phone rings and Meg answers
the TV remote.
Meg's Father (Matthau) is hilariously incoherent too deeply touching too
terminally ill. "How is it that a man can't recognize his own pants, but he
remembers his daughter's phone number." Matthau is wonderful, without him
"Hanging up" would have been completely "Disconnected." Kudrow, Keaton and
Ryan all give strong performances.
Aside from some early exposition, the dialogue is very good, very
re-written, and sharply detailed; however, the story line feels like a first
draft. What happens to Meg's kids as she tends to everyone else? After the
first 15 minutes, they're gone. We're teased into anticipating a plane crash
that never happens. And an interesting character (Dr. Amond) is left
undeveloped and un-used.
The intent was to portray a slice of the life of a good person with a
bleeding heart personality who is totally exhausting herself, but the
byproduct of that is ... we get exhausted along with her.
You might lose some sympathy when Meg tears a page from a public phone book
while driving to her estranged mother's house. Besides being a bit out of
character, that is so rude! What about the next person whose mother's maiden
name starts with the same letter?
In the end we have a film that touches on Meg's relationships with her
sisters and with her father and with herself in a on-again-off-again
humorous way, but without a great story to hold onto.
Hanging Up. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Meg Ryan, Diane Keaton, Lisa Kudrow, Walter Matthau
Directed by Diane Keaton
Screenplay by Delia Ephron and Nora Ephron
Produced by Laurence Mark and Nora Ephron at Columbia Pictures.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Down to Earth (2001)
Don't get me wrong, I like Chris Rock the comedian. But Chris Rock the 
comedic actor needs quite a bit of work. Ironically, his character is 
nicknamed "boo-y" in this rewrite of Warren Beatty's "Heaven Can Wait." 
A jumpy angel presumes Rock, a struggling comedian, dead as a truck 
approaches Rock's bicycle. Pulled from his body too soon, Rock pleads 
with heaven's managing angel, "I am not dead, now get me a new body, 
I've got an audition at the Apollo!" The angel concedes that Rock's 
death was indeed "untimely" and sets him up (temporarily) with the body 
of an older rich white guy who had just been killed by his wife's lover. 
It's a fun story, decently updated with a strong enough script. 
Unfortunately, nearly everyone in the film outperforms the lead; most 
notably two character actors - the butler and the maid. Chris is as 
stiff as a rock; his awkward delivery never lets us enter this wonderful 
world of make believe. Coupled with occasional rickety editing, the 
production feels of a less than average independent film. 
That said, of course, a few humdingers slip through:
"She's so skinny, you two might just start a fire havin' sex."
"Your mom has so much hair under her arms - she looks like she's got 
Buckwheat in a headlock." 
Wonderful also, the first scene where Rock (as the rich Charles 
Wellington) meets the butler. And, Rock (as Wellingtion) stirs up the 
waters as well as the intensity level of the film in a strong hospital 
board meeting scene. Nicely done. One last touch, Rock's first attempts 
at the Apollo result in boos so Herculean they create a gale, his 
coat-pocket handkerchief fluttering in its the wind. 
A stronger lead could have pulled this picture together. Additionally, 
the heart-stopping political incorrectness of Rock speaking hood-talk 
from the mouth of a rich white guy gave the film some of its brawnier 
moments. The production would have benefited by displaying the white 
Wellington (outside) more often (juicing the contrast), instead of 
showing us Rock (inside & out) nearly all the time. 
Down To Earth. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Chris Rock, Regina King, Mark Addy, Eugene Levy, Frankie 
Faison, Greg Germann, Jennifer Coolidge, Chazz Palminteri. 
*  Directed by Chris Weitz & Paul Weitz. 
*  Screenplay by Chris Rock, Lance Crouther, Ali Le Roi, Louis CK. 
*  Based on the film "Heaven Can Wait" by Elaine May and Warren Beatty 
which was based on a play by Harry Segall. Yet another version ... the 
1941 film, "Here Come's Mr. Jordon" 
*  Produced by Sean Daneil, Michael Rotenberg, James Jacks at Paramount, 
Village Roadshow,NPV, Alphaville 3 Arts. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Blair Witch Project, The (1999)
My goodness, this little picture has become such an event, hasn't it? The
film itself (without the chatter) wouldn't be much more than a video teens
might think pretty cool. However, everyone is talking about this film; the
gardener, the taxi driver -- I just discussed it with a semi-retired notary
in San Louis. Unless you're one of those weird, remote, or way-married folks
who never see movies anymore -- you've heard the hype.
Admittedly, I wouldn't have seen it without the popularity, without the
lines of people outside the theaters. Alas, my ever-growing curiosity could
no longer remain in the dark.
What it appears to be: The picture is about a film crew of three young
people (Josh, Mike and Heather) with the mission of documenting the legend
of Blair Witch. Supposedly, in 1940 seven children were killed up in the
back woods of New England and since then the older generation has always
spoken of hauntings.
The preface (in text) tells us that this documentary trio disappeared and
that we're about to see the film and video tape that they left behind. The
first twenty minutes are spent in nearby towns interviewing a few people
concerning their knowledge of the myth and whether or not they buy into it.
But much of the footage holds behind the scenes glimpses of the young trio
as they think and talk about their mission. It's reminiscent of MTV's "Real
World."
The remainder of the film is shot with no other subjects beyond these three
crew members in no other location than in the woods. No witch is ever
filmed. In short, there's a lot of shaky camera movement, hiking, arguing
about map interpretation, and spooky noises in a dark tent during the four
or five nights.
Heather is the director and project leader, she drives the crew. It appears
to me that she is in on the hoax. The other two actors seem to be truly
bewildered and increasingly "freaked out" by what appear to be "the real"
filmmakers (or producers, or friends of Heather) out in the woods making
cackling noises, ruffling the tent mesh, and leaving creepy patterns of
stones and sticks. Though I must say, Heather's cracking voice and red-eyed
tears often had me reconsidering my assumption.
Did I say "hoax"?
Perhaps hoax is too strong a word. Anyway, what's really happening is...
before the shoot, "real" directors Myrick and Sanchez provided their three
person mock-documentary crew a 35 page outline, a crash course on 16 mm film
and Hi-8 video photography, and daily clues left in a box. From there, "BWP"
is three rattled actors doing a fine job of ad-libbing. Whether or not the
actors where informed that they'd be harassed at night, I don't know. Either
way ... Myrick and Sanchez were getting heated drama during the day and
truly animalistic fear-filled utterances from them in the dark.
Technically speaking:
The little film is shot mostly on video tape and 16mm film, both of which
are not considered acceptable formats for the big screen under normal
circumstances. However this is not a normal situation. I have high praise
(and envy) for the conception of the "Blair Witch Project." The filmmakers
took a great idea, lied a little, and made a motion picture out of a bunch
of sticks and very little money. I'm sure they'll have secured themselves a
nice budget for their next production.
(FYI: DAT is Digital Audio Tape. The three often worry about getting the DAT
back. Which means ... they'd probably rented sound recording equipment and
needed to return it promptly or pay penalty fees etc.)
Entertainment value:
Oddly I found most of the production rather interesting -- though nothing
terribly scary till the end, which was more of a spooky cub-scout-camp-story
scary than really horrific. I enjoyed the drama between the three. I wanted
to see just how long Heather could keep these guys from beating the crap out
of her or taking off on their own. The sometimes extremely heated arguments
(usually between Heather and either one of the guys) did get tiresome. That
and the video was very jittery at times -- beyond what was necessary to
create the sense of nervousness I'm sure they wanted. I had to
intermittently look away from the screen to prevent a headache. Ultimately,
the movie was better than I'd anticipated, a curiously unique endeavor on
it's own (which I'm reviewing) and plainly outstanding as the event that
it's become.
The Remarkable Dollar Stats:
Filmmaker's budget: $35,000
Artisan's purchase price: $1.1 million
Projected domestic box office gross: $100 million
Starring Heather Donahue, Joshua Leonard, and Michael Williams.
Directed by Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez.
Released by Artisan.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Road to El Dorado, The (2000)
Rich rain forest green, as brilliant as those iridescent plankton at the
bottom of the ocean. And deep blue like the ocean too, pure crystal like
Linda Carter's eyes. Contrasted and balanced by crimson shadows cracking the
digital landscapes like a rainy day dawn casting blood-red beams across the
bottoms of surly purple storm clouds.
This may just be the first animated feature that's worth seeing for the
landscape scenery alone: a breath-taking crying waterfall, a flock of pink
and red butterfly flowers fluttering from the jowls of a grizzly cave. But
that doesn't mean there isn't a fun story. There is. Miguel and Tulio, best
buddies in light-hearted con set off for the riches of El Dorado - the city
of Gold! But greed, the mighty Cortes and his army, godly admiration of the
masses, and of course, a woman, challenge their friendship and purpose.
Most of the chatter between Miguel and Tulio (Kevin Kline and Kenneth
Branagh) is clever and charming (on an adult level), although the picture
relies upon it just a little too long leaving a lull or two for us to endure
between action sequences. At the same time, Cortes' mighty army, along with
Rosie Perez as the Eldoradan love interest are underused, leaving the
picture less 3-dimensional than it could have been. In fact, Rosie's sparse
dialogue would barely rival this paragraph in length. Having Rosie in a film
and not giving her a fiery speech of at least 30 seconds in length would be
like forcing Jennifer Lopez to wear a bra.
But I still liked this film! The action scenes charge and roll like bulls
through the streets of Pamplona. Kline and Branagh are more often charming
than not while the paint and pixels DreamWorks set swirling on the screen
effectively whirl excitement both aesthetically and physically inside their
viewers. The film's vivid wonder and wholesome story are sure to leave an
impression.
Despite its title, this isn't a "road" picture, but I suppose "Waterways to
El Dorado" didn't quite chime. Enjoy.
The Road to El Dorado. Copyright Š 2000. Rated G.
Voices of Kevin Kline, Kenneth Branagh, Rosie Perez, Armand Assante, Edward
James Olmos, Jim Cummings, Frank Welker and Tobin Bell.
Directed by Eric "Bibo" Bergeron and Don Paul.
Written by Ted Elliot and Terry Rossio.
Music by Elton John.
Produced by Bonne Radford and Brooke Breton at DreamWorks.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Cider House Rules, The (1999)
"Goodnight you princes of Maine, you kings of New England."
The Cider House Rules
"Cider House" cuddles itself around you like a sixty year old afghan.
Seemingly a heartwarming yarn of a cynical, yet loving, orphanage caretaker
(Caine) and one orphan that's been adopted twice and returned twice
(Maguire); this crochet comforter eventually becomes more of a patch work
quilt. Caine narrates this much of the tale even before the opening credits
finish. Though the first act blankets the screen with the warm
cinematographic look and against-all-odds optimism of "October Sky," "Cider
House Rules" never quite leaves the ground.
Caine grooms Maguire for his position as caretaker/obstetrician at the St.
Cloud orphanage, but instead, the good-natured, intelligent young Maguire
seizes a sudden opportunity to see the world. This is where the movie
changes its tone. No longer about the Caine/Maguire (promising son leaving
his possessive, but loving father) relationship, "Cider House" becomes a
soap opera platform for a pro-choice/pro-life debate eventually favoring the
former.
An attempted metaphor for society's meaningless out-of-date, out-of-touch
traditions/rituals/morals, "The Rules" serve as a constant pain in the butt
to those "real" (in-touch) people in the film. But, since these rules have
never been demonstrated to mean a darn thing to our endearing main
character, all the fuss about them at the end doesn't mean much to the
viewer. It could have worked, had Irving re-written Maguire's already
lovably indifferent demeanor.
The photography is grand and the acting solid all the way through with
special cudos to Delroy Lindo as the apple picker crew boss. Though each
scene stands strong on its own, the film as a whole falls short, trying hard
to condense just too much of the novel's material into a little over two
hours of cinema time. New threads start too far from where the old ones
finish, leaving "Cider House" with more patches than a quilt despite its
sincerely fine beginning.
Though two other John Irving books have been made into films ("World
According to Garp" and "Hotel New Hampshire"), the "Cider House" screenplay
is the first to have been penned by him as well.
The Cider House Rules. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Tobey Maguire, Michael Caine, Charlize Theron, Delory Lindo and
Erykah Badu.
Directed by Lasse Hallstrom.
Screenplay by John Irving (Based upon his novel).
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Mexican, The (2001)
Tone down the "Snatch"-like incompetent-thugs-botch-the-crime comedy 
genre and add a love story (with Julia Roberts no less) and you've got 
"The Mexican." An attempt to give a so-called guy-flick a sex change? Or 
at least make it unisex? Though both genres are compromised, don't let 
that stop you - this is still a pretty darned good film! 
Brad and Julia love each other, but only seem to be able to express 
themselves by yelling, occasionally borrowing lingo from their group 
therapist or self-help books, "Oh, now your blame-shifting!" 
Bad luck follows Brad like a rabid dog. His thug boss loses his patience 
at the start of the picture, "'I can explain' is something you say once 
in a blue moon, not every time you're given a task." Handling the 
proverbial "last job," Brad flies down to Mexico to retrieve a 
highly-valued legendary pistol named (Latin horns please ...) "The 
Mexican." Julia also loses her patience and takes off for Las Vegas upon 
Brad's departure where she is kidnapped by an intermediate thug 
(Gandolfini) whose job it is to "regulate funkiness." (That is, a 
hostaged Julia equals collateral against Brad's funky behavior.) 
Roberts and Pitt shine, but the script never shows us any on-screen love 
between them. Roberts and Gandolfini, however, now there's some sweet 
subtle romance. Gandolfini is such a strong actor, Roberts has to work 
overtime just to share the screen with him (And I think she's a 
sensational actor!). "You are a very sensitive person for a cold blooded 
killer." They polish a superb diner scene at the beginning of the second 
act. Btw, it was Julia who brought Gandolfini to the film. 
Sharply timed emotional music sparks the mood and prompts audio/visual 
irony - nicely done. Also, the varying legends of the aforementioned 
hand-carved weapon are told marvelously tongue and cheek with just a 
pinch of gunpowder. They flicker in 16mm sepia. Of smaller note, I loved 
a slow-mo shot of Pitt play-shooting a small group of kids pretending to 
be shooting him ... all in good fun. 
In addition to the lack of chemistry between Pitt and Roberts (which 
doesn't effect the film since they seldom share screentime), "The 
Mexican" slows in a few spots. One other blemish, the climax sequence, 
though tying a tight knot, is dulled by an implausibility (sorry, can't 
discuss that without spoiling). 
Overall, I had a good time. A very strong B+. 
The Mexican. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Brad Pitt, Julia Roberts, James Gandolfini, J.K. Simmons, 
Bob Balaban, Sherman Augustus, Michael Cerveris, Richard Coca, Castulo 
Guerra. 
*  Directed by Gore Verbinski. 
*  Written by J.H. Wyman. 
*  Produced by Lawrence Bender and John Baldecchi at 
Dreamworks/Newmarket. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Best Man, The (1999/I)
A late night card game with the guys would have been nothing short of movie
making perfection (great dialogue, direction, acting, energy) save for
Perrineau, though his character is lovable, he finds himself out-acted.
Also, "an oops" slips passed the directors careful eye: watch the card table
magically reset after it's been overturned. This scene is a microcosm of the
film itself: bouquet-catching actors, committed direction, toast-worthy
dialogue, but an occasionally crazy-chicken story line.
Here's the drama ... Taye flies to New York for the wedding of his
Pro-football playing best bud. The whole college gang is there with all
their past histories with which to build each other up or tear each other
down, and there are still a few secrets left untold. When the cat's finally
out of the bag ... who will end up with whom? Kind of a
"public-relationships" game of musical chairs.
Like "Seinfeld," Nothing really happens in this film. Even a scene in which
one character holds the other over the edge of a terrace seems out of place
and unnecessary. But the good solid humor and unforgettable acting power
keep "The Best Man" fun and ultimately entertaining.
Taye Diggs graced the screen mere months ago in another buddy/wedding film.
"The Wood" was rough around the edges (picture/sound-wise), but excellent on
script and performance. If you enjoy, "The Best Man" this weekend, let me
recommend "The Wood" as a fine renter.
The Best Man. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Taye Diggs, Nia Long, Morris Chestnut, Harold Perrineau, Terrence
Howard, Sanaa Lathan, Monica Calhoun, and Melissa De Sousa.
Written and directed by Malcolm D. Lee.
Produced by Spike Lee, Sam Kitt, and Bill Carraro at Universal/40 Acres and
a Mule.
Grade..........................Strong B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Proof of Life (2000)
An expert in K&R (Kidnap and Ransom), Russell Crowe endeavors to rescue 
a disconcerted woman's husband down in South America. Despite 
complications to this mission, Crowe is magnificently steadfast. Ryan, 
however, seems uncomfortable in her role as the hippie housewife, even 
more comfortless is Pamela Reed as the victim's sister. 
No fault of Crowe's, following a compelling 10-minute 
opening/introduction to his line of work; a full fifty-minute lull 
abducts all but one moment of spectacle from film. Until surprisingly, 
it's the smallest of lines, "Okie dokie," that wakes me from my glossy 
daze. Another 10 minutes of commanding film from there, and again, the 
production eventually slides into messy back-and-forth dialogue with 
Ryan. "Who do you care about?" she shouts accusingly at the guy who has 
obviously come to her rescue. 
A room full of thugs draw their weapons and yet, civilians Ryan and 
Reed, stand up and shout at them. I don't find that too realistic, even 
the strongest willed of citizens would shut up at the sight of a gun and 
hit the floor! 
Then the story takes a short dip into uncharacteristic melodrama that 
sticks out like a sore thumb. Pausing from the normal serious dialogue 
and sparsely interjected action; Meg and hubby David Morse, though miles 
apart, express their longing for each other during a series of back to 
back dissolves. It did not work for me. 
At the end of the day (that's an Aussie phrase), Crowe's commanding 
performance stands out too strongly against the backdrop of this 
awkwardly paced, off balance production. 
Proof of Life. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R. 
*  Starring Meg Ryan, Russell Crowe, David Morse, Pamela Reed, David 
Caruso, Anthony Heald, Stanley Anderson. 
*  Directed by Taylor Hackford. 
*  Written by Tony Gilroy. 
*  Produced by Taylor Hackford and Charles Mulvehill at Warner 
Bros/Castle Rock/Bel-Air. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Cast Away (2000)
Wow, I feel like I've just returned from a long vacation. Either that or 
I was sitting out in the rain for a couple of hours.
Juicy dialogue graces a tasteful dinner scene early on, but soon enough 
nearly all discourse gets kissed swiftly goodbye as you and Tom brave 
the weather on a tiny isle some place in some stormy ocean.
Like living alone in the wild, the film is curious, adventurous and 
exciting at times and at others, plain as sand, uneventful.
However, it was the tail of the tale, the last 25 minutes, that left me 
marooned. Sorry, details will spoil, but it's as if the film itself, 
after careful loving attention, was rushed off, dropped from a plane 
into the ocean and cast away. That last bit plays like a full feature of 
its own that had been mercilessly cut to just short of a half hour and 
stapled to the end of this island picture.
Lastly, I'm not a one to harshly criticize any production for picking up 
a few extra bucks on product sponsorship, but this presentation is one 
long commercial that leaves a bitter aftertaste.
Flaws aside, Tom does a great job working with only sand, coconuts, and 
crabs.
I interviewed Director Robert Zemeckis a few months back. At that time 
he'd just finished production of "What Lies Beneath" which was created 
after the first half of "Cast Away" and before the second half, giving 
time for Tom Hanks to loose all that weight. Ford and Pfeiffer are also 
interviewed.
Cast Away. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Tom Hanks, Helen Hunt, Nick Searcy.
Directed by Robert Zemeckis.
Written by William Broyles, Jr.
Produced by Steve Starkey, Tom Hanks, Robert Zemeckis, Jack Rapke at 
Dreamworks/20th Cent Fox.
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Vertical Limit (2000)
Hanging from a cliff in Monument valley, Chris O'Donnell and Robin 
Tunney sing "Take it to the limit one more time." It's a breath-taking 
scene - so bring plenty of breath with you. In the beat of an eye, slip 
of the foot, snap of a rope, these siblings meet up again halfway around 
the world in the Pakistani Himalayas. Dessert to snowcaps, this film 
takes climbing to the extremes. 
And therein lies the anchor of the film, not just big climbing, but big 
climbing slips, slides and falls. At precisely these times when expert 
climbers lose their grip, the film becomes ... well, most gripping. The 
plot, clichČ motivations and complications are just rote steps strollin' 
up a mountain. 
The dialogue, like the film itself, is plagued by peaks and valleys. At 
one moment a sharp satirical line gets the crowd laughing, the next 
moment, a serious line ... well, gets the crowd laughing (if you know 
what I mean). And though I liked the international assemblage of 
climbers, the wind and less than perfect sound quality conspired to make 
still other lines difficult to understand. 
Visually, the film is mostly tight. Besides the excellent special 
effects, there's a fantastic shot of two young leopards play-fighting in 
the snow. Unfortunately, focus problems irritate other images throughout 
the production. 
Because the story plays second fiddle to the action, scenes that should 
be touching ... really aren't. In fact, the most endearing characters 
are a couple of secondary goofballs -- sort of the Beavis and Butthead 
or Trapper and Hawkeye of the Himalayas. 
Whelp then, to summit up, though some of the action sequences are a bit 
"over the edge," they're great fun to watch. If you're not in the mood 
for compelling drama and just want to enjoy a bumpy ride - take yourself 
to the "Vertical Limit." 
Vertical Limit. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Chris O'Donnell, Bill Paxton, Annie Tunney, Scott Glenn, 
Izabella Scorupco, Temuera Morrison, Stuart Wilson. 
*  Directed by Martin Campbell. 
*  Written by Robert King and Terry Hayes. Story by Robert King. 
*  Produced by Lloyd Phillips, Robert King, Martin Campbell at Columbia. 
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Cradle Will Rock (1999)
This film's first shot unwinds with the patience, beauty and discipline of
an ornate grandfather clock. It's a great set up for a movie that seems to
be mostly setup anyway. Rich replication of the touch and feel of a 1930's
motion picture creates the illusion of simplicity. But, the myriad
characters and motivations are so vast, the dialogue and themes so intense
that, ultimately, you'll be surprised to be viewing quite a complex film.
Writer/Director/Producer Tim Robbins (responsible also for "Dead Man
Walking," but perhaps better known as the lead actor in "Shawshank
Redemption") says he spent seven years writing and re-writing this web of a
script.
The staged musical feel lends yet another hand toward sculpting the
ironically false sense of lightness. It's a masterfully crafted, directed,
powerfully paced and dramatically filmed work whose only fault lies in the
viewer's need to wait virtually two full hours for payoff. The pace is so
fierce and the web so intricate, that the set up is completed just as the
climax begins. Still, the payoff genuinely pleases, mustering up a lump or
two in the throat.
Americans face the harsh reality of depression complicated by the
unionization tribulations and the government's commie paranoia. Along with
other Work Programs, FDR spearheads "Federal Theater" designed to put
artists back to work while providing low cost entertainment for the masses.
A fine plan indeed, until the government realizes that their commissioned
artists have rather "politically incorrect" (for the time) themes to
express. The film focuses on a theater group directed by Orson Welles
(played by Angus MacFadyen) as it develops a musical ("The Cradle Will
Rock") so controversial that the participants must jeopardize their rare and
precious jobs to continue.
Other historic personalities are brought back to life as censorship debates
arise, making this a great film for the high school history teacher to
present in class.
You'll marvel at it .. simply marvel. But you may not "feel" until the
climax.
The Cradle Will Rock. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Hank Azaria, Emily Watson, John Tuturro, John and Joan Cusack,
Rueben Blades, Cherry Jones, Angus MacFadyen, Bill Murray, Vanessa Redgrave
and Susan Surandon.
Written and Directed by Tim Robbins.
Produced by Tim Robbins, John Kilik, Lydia Dean Pilcher at Touchstone.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Notting Hill (1999)
Despite my lack of appreciation for Hugh Grant, "Notting Hill" rocks.
Hugh bumbles modestly, dropping clever leafy quips like a young Maple tree
in a light breeze. In the film, Julia Roberts plays a beautiful, mega-famous
actress of average talent. Ironically, reality holds the opposite to be
true: she's an average looking woman with fantastic talent as an actress.
Whether or not she's a "pretty woman" to you is a rather mute point since
she aptly plays the role.
Meandering into Hugh's travel bookstore, Julia and Hugh strike up a
passionate, but impossible romance. Hey, what is it with the bookstore
fascination in romantic comedies these days? ("Got Email," "The Love Letter"
to name just a two.)
This typical "complicated" romance vehicle is not what makes the picture
rock. Rather, it's the sharp, sometimes raw, British-fused humor -- most
apparent in the first 60 minutes. This half of the film taken alone deserves
5 stars, 2 thumbs. However, it being only 50% of the "big picture" ... would
that be 2.5 stars and 1 thumb? Hold the quotient, there's still the
remainder to factor in...
Like an off road 4x4 that eventually stumbles across the beaten path,
"Notting Hill" offers much less untraveled territory in the second half.
None the less, the crisp humor keeps familiar scenery from becoming stale.
Beyond the slight decline in intensity after its middle, the film has only
one other area barely in need of improvement. Anna Scott (Roberts) is most
often unpretentious and calm, but occasionally weilds a particularly selfish
temper. Falling victim, William (Grant) is shocked, but far less upset than
he has the right to be and not as much as we'd like to see him be.
Surprisingly light and fun overall, "Notting Hill" is good solid
entertainment.
Starring Julia Roberts and Hugh Grant.
Directed by Roger Michell. Written by Richard Curtis.
Produced by Duncan Kenworthy at Universal/Polygram/Working Title/Notting
Hill Pictures.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for End of the Affair, The (1999)
Oozing like a maple tree with schmaltz, you'll have to peer over the
grizzlies in the front row lapping it up off their paws. If the director was
going for a look/touch/feel recreation of a movie made during the period
portrayed in this film (1940's) - then he got it. Save for the sex scenes,
which rival even the fleshiest of modern day films. (Perhaps, he made the
exception for Julianne Moore?)
Very watchable, although there isn't much more than an affair film here -
okay, a little bit more. The relationship between the lover and hired
private eye is actually quite sweet. And the ending is touched off nicely
with a truly welcomed surprise to an otherwise predicable piece.
End of the Affair. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Ralph Fiennes, Julianne Moore, Stephen Rea.
Directed by Neil Jordan.
Screenplay by Neil Jordan.
Based on the novel by Graham Greene.
Produced by Stephen Woolley and Neil J. at Columbia Pictures.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Galaxy Quest (1999)
Tim Allen, Commander Taggart of the hit TV series "Galaxy Quest," is
mistaken for a real space captain by Aliens desperately in need of his
courage. After reviewing the "historical documents" (broadcasts of the TV
show), the aliens beam him aboard bowing happily to his reluctant
leadership. Allen and crew of actors eventually decide to honor the
misguided recruitment and help defend these goofy aliens from the nasty
Sarris, a "A Bug's Life" grasshopper-like space bad guy.
It's pretty darn funny; though, you might be expecting a spoof, and while
elements of Star Trek mockery appear, they don't dominate. In fact, they
seem almost out of place in this stand alone space-comedy.
Since this alien race virtually worships "Galaxy Quest" they've built their
ship to the specs of the show's NSEA Protector. Therefore, pilot Daryl
Mitchell, though only an actor, should be able to step on board and do what
he does on the show 26 half hours a year. In a hilarious scene where he
first takes control, de-docking the ship from the star port, Mitchell drifts
a bit from center, the huge vessel screeches, scrapes and sparks against the
side walls.
Then there's crew member six, ever afraid of being killed off since his
character isn't important enough to have a last name. He mans the radar
after Sarris fires on the ship, "Uh Commander, there's this red thingee
moving closer to the green thingee - I think we're the green thingee."
Tony Shalhoub, the ship engineer, is awesome, "I'll get someone to spray
that with WD-40." Alan Rickman packs a whole lot more acting power than his
Spock-mock character demands; but that in itself is rather funny. Still,
it's the overly-friendly aliens themselves that keep this film rolling,
translating their shrieks into perpetually pleasant English for their idols,
"We've prepared some of your more Esoteric dishes, we hope you enjoy these
Monte Christo Sandwiches."
Focusing on fun, the direction of this film steers like a spaceship through
a mine field, dodging in and out from strong to "Dr. Who cheesy" and back.
Of course, the film doesn't take itself seriously, but should it have, while
maintaining its current level of fun, this could have been one of the finer
films of the year. Still, a good solid fun time. You'll laugh a lot.
Galaxy Quest. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Starring Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Alan Rickman, Tony Shalhoub, Sam
Rockwell, Daryl Mitchell, Enrico Colantoni, Robin Sachs.
Directed by Dean Parisot.
Written by David Howard and Robert Gordon.
Produced by Mark Johnson and Charles Newirth at DreamWorks.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Hurricane, The (1999)
Entitled "Hurricane" and whirling with hype, the film is good, but doesn't
quite pack the stormy punch you'd rightfully have anticipated. Less a fight
movie, and more a quiet emotional story of one man's endurance in the face
of racism and injustice.
In a black and white 1966 clip, boxer Ruben "Hurricane" Carter muscles his
helpless competitor to the canvas, woven into this sequence is a color 1974
sequence in which an imprisoned Carter prepares to defend himself against
reactionary guards. An excellent introduction after which the film
experiences an early lull of about a half-hour. Also the caption "7 years
later" appears on the screen confusing the time line issue (7 years from '66
or '74?).
Carter's autobiography serves as a convenient way to cover past history. The
stuttering stubborn boy who plays a child Ruben Carter sets the stage well
for the experienced Washington who is very good, but never breaks loose
(performance speaking). An hour or so into the film, a black teen (Lesra)
home-schooled by three white communal Canadians, becomes engrossed in
Carter's book "The 16th Round." This is when we as an audience are given a
sympathetic eye through which to view the drama. No longer innocent
by-standers, we become drawn into the ring by Lesras' passion and
compassion. It's the relationship between Ruben and Lesra that gives
"Hurricane" its thunder.
"Hate put me in prison, Love's gonna bust me out." The picture is seldom
short of this kind of schmaltz and Ruben is nearly always shown in a virtual
angelic light. Still, "Hurricane" endears, its positive message strongly
resonating.
Hurricane. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Denzel Washington, Vicellous Reon Shannon, Deborah Kara Unger, Live
Schreiber, John Hannah, Dan Hedaya.
Directed by Norman Jewison.
Written by Armyan Bernstein, Dan Gordon based on "The Sixteeth Round" by
Ruben Carter Based upon "Lazarus and The Hurricane" by Sam Chaiton.
Produced by Armyan Bernstein, John Ketcham, norman Jewison at
Universal/Beacon (C)2000. Rated R.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Supernova (2000)
"Karl Larson, he's the worst nightmare I ever met," a repulsed Angela
Bassett, chief medical expert aboard the Nightingale 229 medical rescue
vessel, warns of an emergency caller from a distant star sector. Robert
Forster (of "Jackie Brown" fame) decides to react without regard for
Angela's caution, risking the ship and crew in a dangerous "plasma warp" in
order to heed Larson's call. Actually, the warp sequence is pretty cool.
Forster is a strong actor; too bad he isn't used much. Co-pilot Spader (who
you might not recognize from his big-haired "Sex, Lies, and Videotapes"
days) picks up the slack. He performs the sharp, soft-spoken, tough-guy role
flawlessly. He and Angela flirt maturely; while crew members Lou Diamond and
Robin Tunny are considerably less subtle. Even less subtle in this respect,
Peter Facinelli (reminiscent of a Tom Cruise) is powerfully menacing,
alluringly buff, and dramatically "as strong as a horse." He's a very good
bad guy.
Seems our distress caller, Peter, has brought a little something special on
board: something erotically enticing and cosmically tragic, something "as
smart as God and a lot less nice." It's a fine core around which to script a
film. However well conceived, the picture ignores this beautiful object's
potential gravity, neglecting it for bad-guy-on-board action that just
happens to be in 22nd century space. For this reason, the title and the film
become somewhat estranged.
Trivial side note: A cool sounding name, "Supernova" refers to the explosion
of a star; but ironically, roughly translated in Spanish means "a big no
go." (Chevy realized this some years back.)
"Supernova" is simple, but well paced. It's graphically clean on the screen
and offers a bit of mindless movie fun. If you can endure a couple of "Leave
me behind and take the patient" kind of silly heroisms, as well as a lack of
real substance, you won't have a bad time.
Supernova. (C)2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring James Spader, Angela Bassett, Robert Forster, Lou Diamond Phillips,
Peter Facinelli, Robin Tunney, Wilson Cruz.
Directed by Thomas Lee.
Written by David Cambell Wison
Produced by Ash R. Shah, Daniel Chuba, Jamie Dixon at
MGM/Screenland/Hammerhead.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Love Letter, The (1999)
"Do you know how in love with you I am? Did I trip? Did I stumble? Lose my
balance, graze my knee...graze my heart?"
Un-addressed and un-signed, Helen (Kate Capshaw) picks the love letter from
the countertop mess at her fishing town bookstore. Suspecting it sent by
Johnny (Tom Everett Scott), Helen's previously rusted libido gets a slippery
shot of hot oil.
But the love letter swims its way into the hands of other small town
characters with hearts of sufficient longing to similarly overlook it's
misdirection.
Splendid acting all around, the dialogue is also crisp. However, the overall
path of the film proves somewhat anticlimatic. Rather one dimensional in
it's intensity, the film could have used definition to it's dynamics.
Admittedly, this may be due in part to a three minute segment I believe was
lost at reel changes during my particular viewing. (Disclaimer: My grade
reflects only what I saw, not what I presume missing.)
Regarding the remainder of the film two scenes are extremely memorable: 1)
Before deciding Johnny is the author, Helen initially visualizes each random
passer-by reciting the letter to her in her daily life (from the local
police officer to a pick-up truck full of workman, tastefully filmed, this
serial interlude is wonderful film play.) 2) Janet (Ellen Degeneres) upon
hearing the news of a close-to-home homosexual love affair exclaims,
"Lillian in love with another woman? I can't believe it!" Again, this one
line reveals the good-humored nature of "The Love Letter."
That said, if you like "Murder She Wrote" you'll love "The Love Letter."
It's cute and quaint, funny and occasionally enduring ... makes a great date
flick too.
Starring Kate Capshaw, Blythe Danner, Ellen DeGeneres, Geraldine McEwan,
Julianne Nicholson, Tom Everet Scott, Tom Selleck and Gloria Stuart
Directed by Peter Chan.
Screenplay by Maria Maggenti of Novel by Cathleen Schine.
Produced by Sarah Pillsbury, Midge Sanford and Kate Capshaw at
Dreamworks/Sanford-Pillsbury.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Yards, The (2000)
"Code of Silence" or "Honor Among Thieves" -- not that these are very
exciting alternate titles, but then "The Yards" isn't hard to beat. Equally
humdrum, the opening act (first third) of the film which slowly introduces
the characters in the play.
Leo (Wahlberg) has just been released from prison and embraces his ailing
mother. Willy (Joaquin), his buddy, is close with cousin (Charlize) who's
stepfather Frank (Caan) runs a big train parts company that employs Willy
and offers Leo a job as well. Willy and Frank keep the money coming in by
"playing ball" with local officials and politicians. Soon Leo is in over his
head.
A full act is too long to wait for a compelling moment. I must say, the film
finally did "reel" me in mid-way through and held me near to the end with
some very absorbing developments and a character or two to root for, but
then traded those attentions for a cheap bit of melodrama. Ultimately, I
left the theater saying "so what?" Additionally, the church organ soundtrack
is somewhat disorienting.
This is obviously a product of a lot of talented people. The acting is
strong (I love this cast!), the characters rich, the direction mighty, even
some nice cinematography ... but where is the heart? A drama for the sake of
drama? Perhaps one who appreciates a Shakespearean plot more than myself may
find this family/power opera a bit more quenching.
The Yards. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Mark Wahlberg, Joaquin Phoenix, Charlize Theron, Faye Dunaway,
Ellen Burstyn, James Caan.
Directed by James Gray.
Written by James Gray & Matt Reeves.
Produced by Nick Wechsler, Paul Webster, Kerry Orent at Industry Ent/Paul
Webster/Miramax.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Bone Collector, The (1999)
Yes, it's thrilling, suspenseful and at times even bone-chilling. One
woman's scream becomes a crying siren of emergency vehicles rushing to save
her from being boiled alive. That's an effective scene change. In fact, "The
Bone Collector" is a pretty good movie right up to the end where it makes a
clean break into not being a very good movie -- fractured, as it were, in
several places.
The on and off Denzel, is more on in this movie than off while Jolie is
simply radiant. Denzel plays a paralyzed homicide investigator for whom the
rookie cop Jolie becomes the eyes, ears and body. There's a killer loose,
he's leaving all kinds of TV movie clues for Denzel to decode. The
production, direction and acting work as a team to keep this film alive and
kicking; unfortunately the poorly scripted climax overwhelms them all with
stale anti-drama and ultimately leaves the picture itself somewhat hog-tied
and whimpering.
The Bone Collector. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Denzel Washington and Angelina Jolie, Queen Latifah.
Directed by Phillip Noyce.
Screenplay by Jeremy Iacone.
Produced by Martin Bregman, Louis A. Stroller, Michael Bregman at
Universal/Columbia
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Love & Basketball (2000)
This film takes the court with all the fervor, spark, and talent a crowd
loves to see in an underdog. Playing a fantastic first quarter and scoring
from every corner with flashy moves; the film nearly secures an "A+" by half
time. But like a team satisfied with a dominating lead, it just runs down
the clock in the second half.
New neighbors, a couple of ten-year-olds, shoot some hoops. The innocence of
their youth drives though the shaky defense - in this case a jittery camera.
The boy is cocky, albeit uneasy about a girl in HIS sport. The girl is
tough. Eventually embarrassed by the "female," the boy shoves her to the
ground. And so begins a beautiful romance that teeters on the rim between
love and basketball.
Older now, Omar Epps and Sanaa Lathan, are still the best of friends by high
school, whether they're dating each other or not. Of course, we know they're
in love ... but do they?
The film's dialogue is excellent, fresh, a high percentage deliverer. Sanaa
asks her sister, "Ever been in love?"
Sister: "Yeah."
Sanaa: "Ever been loved back?"
Sister: "Sure ... after I cut 'em off."
Kudos to the casting director are in order as well. The younger ballers are
very believable (and talented) matches to their teen successors. Apt at the
sport, Epps and Lathan (Sanaa learned the game in preparation for the film)
can still handle the screen. Epps is an outstanding actor, if you agree,
check out "The Wood" and "Best Man" on video. Lathan (also in "Best Man") is
captivating, strong and lovely in her bull-headedness.
I love the direction in this movie (second half excepted). John Swanbeck,
director of "Big Kahuana" said (in our recent interview), "faces will be my
landscape." Writer/Director of "Love and Basketball," Gina Prince-Bythewood,
(an athlete herself) paints mountains of emotion with her actors' eyes and
speaks mouthfuls with their bodies. In another example of her directing
finesse, we play 30 seconds of the game from the point of view of Lathan,
hearing her thoughts, seeing what she sees. It's great first person
basketball.
Unfortunately, what seemed to be a formulaic, but nonetheless "A" level
production, strikes a lull during a "strip basketball" sequence from which
it never quite regains its momentum or timing, nor does it really climax.
Faulty story line choices also hinder the climax; the film has a tidy
ending, but fails to deliver a swell. It pains me that such problems reduce
the film's total score to "B+."
If this talented freshman could just have kept its head ... "Love and
Basketball" would have made it to the championship game. Still, it's a
memorable production, and I'll be looking forward to future efforts from
these gifted people.
Love and Basketball. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Omar Epps, Sanaa Lathan, Alfre Woodward, Dennis Haysbert, Glenndon
Chatman, Kyla Pratt.
Written and Directed by Gina Prince-Bythewood.
Produced by Spike Lee and Sam Kitt at Newline.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Sparkler (1998)
When a film begins with a big truck slowly coming to a stop on a plastic
Bambi yard ornament, I get the feeling I'm going to be entertained.
Melba (Park Overall) and Flint (Don Harvery), the Fred and Wilma of
Victorville, live a blissful small town life until Melba catches Flint and
her best friend with their pants down. Sweet naive Melba swallows her tears,
dumps her white trash hubby, dolls up in her mother's best 1950's sparkly
jumper, and heads out for a night on the town. On the way, she crosses paths
with three rich, Las Vegas bound, brats from L.A. (one of which is Freddie
Prinze Jr.).
The three little kings ditch her, but Melba is the country cat that just
keeps coming back to find them.
Written and directed in a Fargo-esque kind of way, "Sparkler" brings real
life and coincidence together making for a fun quirky movie. I also
appreciated the true-to-life dialogue and attention to small detail.
Starring Park Overall, Don Harvey, and Freddie Prinze, Jr.
Directed by Darren Stein.
Written by Darren Stein and Catherine Eads.
Produced by Jennifer Amerine and Kimberly Jacobs
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Topsy-Turvy (1999)
I tried, but I couldn't make it all the way through this film. Fifty-five
minutes isn't a respectable enough length of time to do a legitimate review.
Therefore, feel free to call this review illegitimate.
Regrettably, I found this cold clammy presentation nearly as frigid as the
theater in which it was screened. Five layers of clothing, and a scarf
couldn't protect me from either. While the elaborately costumed characters
were cursing the oppressively hot weather in Europe, it seemed to me that if
I were to reach up and touch them, I'd find the temperature of their pale
cheeks similar to that of bathroom tile.
Set in Paris and London, the story opens as an "artistic-type" emotional
Sullivan scored his last composition for the trivial topsy-turvy stories of
the sternly British scrooge-like Gilbert. Sullivan wants to write operas!
Amidst this drama, long excerpts from productions are included, but play
heavily, contributing nothing to the behind-the-scenes story at hand.
Admittedly, I am a lover of the silver screen, not the stage. Visa-versian's
may beg to disagree with this review. To them I say, "No need to beg ... I'm
glad you enjoy stage. In fact, this article may very well be meaningless to
those of you that adore Gilbert and Sullivan productions."
I am a lover of music, mind you. A pianist myself, still, the musical
interludes and interjections fall like concrete (in all fairness, the
theater's sound system was sorely outdated). Nothing inspires, nor warms my
cold heart, though several attempts are made. In one bid at humor, two
topless dancers laughingly touch each other's toplessness; in another
attempt, one fellow in top hat and coat declares, "I played golf this
morning!" The lady gasps, "In this heat?" The gentleman, "Yes, but not in
this attire." (A few people snicker in the audience. Could I be missing
something?)
The vulnerability displayed by a vain Gilbert when the loss of Sullivan's
musical partnership seems imminent caught my attention. I do hope the
writers capitalize on this interesting character trait. Other than that, the
acting itself is fine, the costuming grand, but the over all appeal ...well,
not enough to keep me in my seat.
Topsy-Turvy. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Allan Corduner and Jim Broadbent
Written and Directed by Mike Leigh
Produced by Simon Channing-Williams at USA/October Films.
Grade..........................C
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Three Kings (1999)
Three kings and a joker (all US military) stumble across an "ass map" during
a cease-fire during the Gulf War. The map (which was found in an Iraqi
buttocks) could very well reveal the location of a great deal of gold. In an
attempt to return home rich, the four find themselves having to choose
between material or humanitarian wealth. It's a tough choice, so with death
on their heals they go for both.
Strangely resembling a journalistic version of "Saving Private Ryan," "Three
Kings" is really more like Tarantino in the Middle East. The grainy
overexposed footage goes a long way toward making you feel that this is
really happening. And the gruff point-blank bullets to the flesh make
blaring contrast to deadpan, stumbling humor. Oddly, it's not the humor that
takes you out of this "reality" the director carefully creates -- it's the
hyper-stylized cinematography especially present during an exchange of
gunfire. The camera stabs like a bayonet from the shooter to the target as
if to follow the bullet. A brave directorial option.
Thrown into the mix (none too subtlety) are sharp messages of politics and
humanitarianism. In one scene an American soldier who really believes he's
there to liberate Kuwait has oil forced down his throat in an attempt to
illustrate the truly "crude" reasons for his (the American) presence.
Though altruism prevails, the film is still a war comedy. And laughing at
such tragedy may be too much for some people to take (especially those who
have experienced combat first hand or their surviving loved ones).
Nonetheless, it's a strong, bold film with an incredible pace (which levels
off midway), outstandingly creative direction, rock solid acting (Wahlberg
is great), an aggressive (only slightly imperfect) script, and a fiercely
subtle sense of dark humor.
Three Kings. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Ice Cube, Spike Jonze and Nora Dunn,
Cliff Curtis.
Screenwriter/Director David O. Russell.
Produced by Charles Roben and Paul Junger Witt and Edward L. McDonnell at
Warner Brothers.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Perfect Storm, The (2000)
In a small Massachusetts fishing village, the season comes to a close smack
dab in the middle of Sword-boat Captain Billy Tyne's slump. Again, his crew
returns from the sea with a pittance of a catch, leaving them all with a
pain in the pocket book. Taking the hit personally, Clooney (the Skipper)
decides to sail the ship out one more time after only a day and half's stay
in hopes of restocking his fish bins and confidence. The fishermen try to
balance their lives on land with the steep ocean swells. First mate Wahlberg
puts it this way, "I got a woman I can't stand to be two feet away from.
Then again, I love to fish." Captain George knows the quandary, "Son, you
got a problem."
Slow going like the fish-catching, the first half of the film is as bland as
the second half is exciting. We must first be introduced to our crew and
their loved ones (and rivals) on land before we go to sea. The perfect storm
doesn't even begin to brew until the halfway mark at which point the crew
must decide to venture into the bowels of hell or safely wait it out while
their valuable catch spoils. Of course, they go for it.
And what a storm it is! Though digitally assisted, this is one "in your
face" hurricane. Huge waves, thick soot-filled clouds, winds with the force
of an anchor slung from a chain. Clooney and Wahlberg slide all over this
water-engorged deck as the sea comes at them from every direction. The
team's turmoil is integrated with a battered 24 foot sailboat's tumult and a
coast guard helicopter rescue team as they brave the skies of bullet rain.
This high intensity action sequence will have you clutching the arms of your
seat, or the arms of the person seated next to you.
The story itself has many of the elements of the disaster film formula: the
waiting loved ones, the feuding crewmates, the slick newscaster tracking the
story. The script offers standard dialogue, just to tell the story, nothing
much to chew on. So the weaker actors don't get any help from the writers.
The most interesting character drama comprises a couple of chips shouldered
by two feuding fishermen. Reilly and Fichtner have the acting power to back
up the animosity. Despite good performance by Clooney and Wahlberg, these
rivaling crewmen give the film it's strongest character driven drama.
Quite slow from the gate to half, where it rushes like a waterfall to the
near end, it's a stirring ride, but not a must see film.
The Perfect Storm. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring George Clooney, Mark Wahlberg, Diane Lane, William Fichtner, Karen
Allen, Allen Payne, Bob Gunton, Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio and John C.
Reilly.
Directed by Wolgang Petersen.
Written by William D. Wittliff and Bo Goldman. (Based on a true story)
Produced by Wolgang Petersen, Paula Weinstein, Gail Katz at Warner
Bros(C)2000. Rated R.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Kikujiro no natsu (1999)
The film opens gently, introducing us to young Masao on the first day of his
summer vacation. Other kids go out of town with their parents, but Masao is
being raised by his working grandmother, so he has no one to play with. Sad
and lonely, one day he sets out to visit the mother he's never known and who
resides off in some distant city making money to support him.
A sympathetic neighbor-lady catching him on his way out assigns her
do-nothing thug boyfriend (Kikujiro) to escort Masao on his travel. This
entire set up is assembled nicely, capturing our interest and, of course,
teasing us with the tasty premise of a small innocent boy, old beer-bellied
thug pairing.
Kikujiro is fantastic. Expressing half of all his emotions though a single
eye twitch-like blink staring blankly off of a rough, stone chiseled face. A
rose on a grave. His stocky body and dispassionate demeanor make no attempts
to hide a cave-cold rock-hardened heart. I love this character.
Wallet thickened with his girlfriend's funds, Kikujiro drags the poor boy to
the racetrack. Though well shot this sequence lasts too long. In fact, that
sentence sums the lead weights that drag this potentially buoyant production
from high recommendations. By way of example ... Kikujiro walks across the
sandy beach to a waiting Masao in one touching scene, but for an audience to
watch a lead character walk 50 feet through the sand on a 100 foot wide
shot - it's just asking too much.
Since the film is essentially a road trip (lots of hitchhiking), the gentle
pace is inherent and previously established. These long drawn out shots try
our patience, while several good sequences would be strengthened with just a
few more beats cut from them. In the end, these delays dilute our
sympathies.
One other note, a nudist occurrence appears nearer to the end (of the film).
Americans may find this a bit troubling and even obscene, but if memory
serves me, Japanese still enjoy communal bathing, in fact, an invite of a
guest to bath with the family or children is really a warm extension of
friendship. It is from this perspective, the character's (Baldy's) nudism
ought be interpreted. (This is not to be confused with the sick old man's
behavior in the park, earlier in the film.)
All in all, though too slow and too long for its own good, "Kikujiro" gives
us a juicy character so rough to like that his description must have been
written on sandpaper. Kikujiro stares at us with his one eye blinking, we
should hate him, we want to hate him, but instead he endears us even more
than a small child searching for his mother. That's acting and direction
with depth, with grit, with boldness. Kikujiro is played by his
writer/director Kitano.
Kikujiro. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Beat Takeshi (Kitano), Yusuke Sekiguchi, Kayoko Kishimoto, Yuko
Daike, Kazuko Yoshiyuiki, Beat Kiyoshi, Great Gidayu, Rakkyo Ide.
Written and Directed by Takeshi Kitano.
Produced by Masayuki Mori, Takio Yoshida a Sony Classics Release .
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Other Sister, The (1999)
I screened this film at a special sneak preview the weekend of the 20th
whose crowd was nearly unanimous in their responses. Filmmakers often make
us laugh and cry in the same picture, "The Other Sister" accentuates these
extremes. When our audience laughed -- they laughed in a wave. It's unusual
for a group of 50 or more people to be tickled at the same time, but we
were.
Carla Tate (Lewis), the "special" daughter of Elizabeth (Keaton) returns to
the wealthy "Tate Estate" after spending many learning and growing up years
in a "dedicated" institution. Momma Tate, combatting her guilt over that
abandonment, sets out to make it up to Carla, now a young woman. Momma's
smothering-mothering blankets her two other daughters as well. So you can
guess mom's reaction when Carla wants to attend a "regular" college, have
her own apartment and then (oh-my-gosh) date.
Danny (another "unique" individual) who enjoys riding buses and listening to
marching bands, makes the move on Carla. "Will you be my girlfriend?" Carla
silently rummages through her purse. Danny worries, "Are you getting the
pepper spray?" The two fall in love. In a charming scene, they discuss the
possibility of sex -- using manuals to make sure they get it right. "Man,
who thought of sex in the first place?" ... "I think it was Madonna." These
simple yet fresh responses make the movie sincere and humorous.
Occasionally, however, restraint is lost and Carla blurts some predictably
"usual" lines that had me wincing in pain. As for Danny and his unexpected
quips -- they're completely adorable.
"Maybe we should wait for a holiday to have sex. Holiday's are special,"
Carla considers. Danny grimaces, "I feel special right now."
Aside from a few sticky moments (mostly in the early part of the film), "The
Other Sister" is strong, rich with little details, and charming. But mostly,
it impressed me with its hardy ability to tickle and tear its audience.
Side note: This is the third recent "O.S." film, and I liked them all:
October Sky, Office Space, The Other Sister. Hmmmmm.
Starring Juliette Lewis, Giovanni Ribisi, Diane Keaton and Tom Skerritt.
Directed by Gary Marshall.
Produced by Mario Iscovich and Alexandra Rose at Touchstone.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Big Kahuna, The (1999)
Didn't get enough of Kevin Spacey this Oscar season? Well, the Kahuana has
got plenty more of that dry dark humor and smug eyebrow raising to quench
your appetite for the snake-tongued hard guy with a heart.
Adapted from its more appropriately named play: "Hospitality Suite," "Big
Kahuana" never leaves a 16th floor Wichita hotel room. But that's okay,
because acting power times three doesn't necessitate a change of scenery -
though direction and script are pretty darned important too. Don't worry,
they're included with the price of your ticket.
Three industrial lubricant representatives discuss sales strategy, religion,
character and carrot sticks vs. shrimp on ice. Spacey plays the aggressive,
no-holds-barred, long-time friend of the depressed, yet sweet Danny Devito.
Facinelli is the new guy, Bob, innocent and perhaps a bit too saintly for
the task at hand.
Spacey is a devilish delight. Devito's films can be hit or miss, but this is
one is certainly more on than off and refreshingly devoid of his Louie
character persona. Facinelli shows great talent and patience with his role,
flaunting his range when compared to that interstellar killer role in
"Supernova."
If we've all got something to sell, what parts do character and integrity
play in our occupational goals? The film explores these questions in a
simple, compelling, entertaining, stage-felt way.
Best quote: "That's the last thing I need to do ... grease another ***hole
for the lubricant industry."
See Ross Anhony's interview with Danny Devito, Peter Facinelli and John
Swanbeck at the website:
http://www.rossanthony.com/interviews/devito.shtml
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for What Planet Are You From? (2000)
Admittedly, I love Garry Shandling. For those of you who don't appreciate
his wry sense of humor and constipation-faced guise; well, probably you're
better off missing this one.
But for those to whom the name Garry Shandling means nothing, go see it.
It's funny. It's light-hearted, and best of all you'll leave the theater
feeling good.
Oh, one more warning: There's quite a bit of comedic play on
not-necessarily-flattering male/female stereotypes. But remember this is a
comedy. And of course, there's the sexual humor. But again, this is a film
about an alien (Shandling) who comes to Earth with one mission and one
mission only ... impregnate an earthling woman.
That said, one might expect a silly script of "Mel Brooks" quality starring
unknowns or at best B-comics. The great thing about "What Planet are you
from?" is that it stars high-powered actors like Bening and Kinnear. And
Shandling's just as strong. Not only that, but the script is sharper,
cleaner and oddly has a lot of heart: Bustin' your gut while still managing
to tighten up your throat.
What Planet are you from? Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Garry Shandling, Annette Bening, Greg Kinnear, Ben Kingsley, Linda
Fiorentino And John Goodman.
Directed by Mike Nichols.
Screenplay by Garry Shandling & Michael Leeson and Ed Solomon and Peter
Tolan Story By Garry Shandling & Michael Leeson.
Produced By Mike Nichols, Garry Shandling and Neil Machlis At Columbia.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Office Space (1999)
"It's not that I'm lazy -- I just don't care," Peter (Livingston) explains
to the two shocked efficiency experts hired to down-size the software
company at which he works.
Peter is the generic every-person. He's you and me (we'll not me -- I like
my job). Toiling with traffic, patronizing bosses, temperamental office
equipment and the Y2K problem. One day all that unspoken tension comes to a
boiling point, but instead of exploding ... it dissipates, leaving him in a
floating state of Nirvana. "Are you going to quit?" love interest Joanna
(Aniston) asks. "No, I'm just not gonna go," Peter responds with a
blissfully bent smile.
Soon enough, Peters learns that his two buddies at the company are being
phased out -- so the three develop a revenge/embezzlement plan that should
even the playing field (so they think). "It's a short life," Peter cries,
"We weren't meant to stare at computers in little cubicles all day,
listening to our eight bosses drone on about mission statements!" The three,
however, start to have second thoughts. In one of Peter's guilt-ridden
dreams, a judge puts it this way, "you've lived a trite little life" as if
that were his sentence, "and you're a bad person."
The plot line isn't the hook in this movie ... it's the satiric truths about
real life. With just a touch of exaggeration, reality can be darned funny.
It's the little things: The use of slow-mo to dramatize the stale office
environment is such an odd juxtaposition of events that we scream with
laughter. And then there's the gangstyle lynching of the office printer --
if you've ever used a copy machine in your life, you won't be able to watch
this baseball bat vs. technology scene with a straight face.
Starring Ron Livingston with Jennifer Aniston.
Writer/Director Mike Judge (of "Milton" animated shorts)
Producers Michael Rotenberg and Daniel Rappaport at 20th Century Fox
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Center Stage (2000/I)
If you like campy dance movies, this one won't let you down. One "free"
screener commented, "If I paid money for it, I wouldn't have been
disappointed." This reviewer, expecting a wince-able display, admittedly
winced only a couple of times. Another viewer/dance major said something
like this, "Great dancing ... err ah, ... dancers aren't good actors
though."
"Center Stage" is what you'd expect it to be - even a little more. Though it
has its fair share of stale acting, more than half of the principals do pull
their own weight. In fact, Susan May Pratt (Maureen) taps down a strong
performance as the prissy perfect ballerina soon to learn a lesson on self.
A scene with her domineering mom in the middle of the film is perfectly
written, directed and acted.
We follow a group of choice young ballet talent through soap, friendships,
and a year of strict dance training at ABC (only the world's premiere
studio). Which three will make it into the professional dance company? Campy
and fun, un-glamorized dance sequences, light, well-paced.
Center Stage. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Amanda Schull, Zoe Saldana, Susan May Pratt, Peter Gallagher, Donna
Murphy, and Ethan Stiefel.
Directed by Nicholas Hytner.
Written by Carol Heikkinen.
Produced by Laurence Mark at Columbia Tristar.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Music of the Heart (1999)
Based on the real life of Music teacher Roberta Guaspari and, surprisingly,
directed by horror notable Wes Craven, "Music of the Heart" is an
inspirational story that finds its harmonies not without their share of
dissonant notes.
Her husband out of the picture, house-mom Roberta moves to the inner city to
teach violin at the local elementary school. Burdened at first by the
troubles plaguing inner city kids and then later by budget cuts, Roberta
struggles to keep her violin class and family (two young boys) in tune.
Streep's portrayal of Guaspari is loving, yet refreshingly harsh, "That was
terrible! You're going to make your parents vomit if you don't practice."
The movie has just enough sappy moments already, an angelic teacher would
have made its own audience vomit. Though I like Angela Basset, her
performance as the beautiful hard-nailed principal is (as Guaspari would
say) terrible. As it turns out, her screen time is minimal. While Quinn is
wonderful as the love interest, this film is clearly all about Streep as
Roberta with the kids and the violins. Of course, Streep is supreme. Also,
Cloris Leachman (as her nagging mother) deserves praise. Delivering rather
plainly a total of no more than ten lines, Gloria Estefan's presence (the
supportive colleague) is not much more than a cameo. Both pairs of actors
playing Roberta's two sons (the film jumps to a "ten years later" second
half) do a fine job and are extremely well cast.
Contrived moments seemingly meant to add drama to the picture actually
subtract. For instance, Streep, originally declined a position by Bassett,
returns to the principal's office to show off how well she's taught violin
to her two sons. This is on the sticky edge of excessive sap; but not yet
over it. What should have been a rich scene is lessened by the fact that the
current burnt-out music teacher just happens to be in the office. The violin
playing is followed immediately by the near cliché, "Can't expect too much
from these kids" debate.
On the other hand, half of the 150 violin students appearing in the film are
or were actual students of the real life Guaspari. And seven of the
non-violin-playing child actors took lessons from her in preparation for
their roles.
In the end, living up to it's name, the picture has a lot of heart. If you
could score an excellent film like "Stand and Deliver" for violin blending
in the dissonant overtones of a less-than-excellent one like "Gloria," the
resulting performance would be "Music of the Heart."
Music of the Heart. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG.
Starring Meryl Streep, Aidan Quinn, Gloria Estefan and Angela Bassett.
Directed by Wes Craven.
Screenplay by Pamela Gray.
Produced by Marianne Maddalena at Craven/Maddalena/Miramax.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Map of the World, A (1999)
You've no doubt heard that one must "go through hell to get to heaven." In
"Map of the World" most of the going is through hell. As for the heaven
part, the strength or (as the press kit says) the "life-affirming" feeling
of living through the experience will have to suffice as a replacement for
the traditional blissful association. A rough analogy would be Rocky in his
first film -- he doesn't win, but he survives. However, unlike the underdog
boxer, Sigourney Weaver, seldom gets a punch in edgewise. It's all blow
after blow to her dignity, loved ones and "world" as she knows it.
The film opens to a real family ... something we don't see too often in a
movie. Kids scream driving parents nuts. At the end of the day, a naked
Weaver and Strathairn climb into the porcelain tub in a scattered bathroom.
The richly wrinkled tenderness of that scene is as real as the ornery
6-year-old daughter shouting, "I hate you mom!"
But, don't let that daughter steal your attention, Weaver is left in charge
of her best friend's children when one of the toddlers crawls off into the
nearby pond and drowns. And that's just the first knuckle-sandwich. A
discombobulated Weaver (a school nurse) encouraged by her normally passive
husband attends a PTA conference only to undergo an impromptu interrogation
in the hallway where she blurts this gem, "I'm trying to have a nervous
breakdown and no one will let me do it in peace."
Since the child's death, Weaver can hardly put two words together; however
when police show up at her door with handcuffs, she's miraculously able to
read the warrant (an abuse charge) and give directions to her husband before
being carted off. I believe the director was trying to indicate the odd
relief she experienced for having been extracted from her current torment -
still, her coherency inconsistency is rather abrupt. As is her best friend's
(Julianne Moore) upbeat attitude swing a short vacation or so after her
child's death.
Detained in prison awaiting trial, Weaver discovers an unlikely haven. The
concept of an overworked parent finding solace in lock-up is an interesting
one. I would have liked to have seen much more of Weaver's introspection,
but instead we (as the characters around her) are stuck with the view from
outside her head.
The husband, refusing to ask for his mother's assistance, leaves his kids
with the "egg lady" (a woman that terrifies them). Doubting even his own
wife with multiple abuse charges pending, one would expect the humility of
asking mom for help would be an easy choice.
Unlike the Rocky flick, this one has no bell. Suddenly, the fight is over;
no referee makes any call. By way of resolution, a three-minute monologue
recaps her year of pain.
For the most part, the acting is strong, but the direction is inharmonious,
some scenes weaker than others. Most of us can tolerate moderate amounts of
hard hits and setbacks for our protagonists; however, the 90% worth mapped
out in this film may overwhelm.
Map of the World. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Sigourney Weaver, Julianne Moore, David Strathairn.
Directed by Scott Elliott.
Written by Peter Hedges and Polly Platt.
Produced by Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall at Kennedy/Marshall.
A First Look presentation.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 1999. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Romeo Must Die (2000)
Glaring streaks of reflected streetlights rebound off a black sedan as it
parks sharply next to a silver sports car. Beat. Like synchronized swimmers,
five doors swing open, five Chinese thugs in suits step out. Beat. Camera
pans sharp Chinese guy with cool shades as he pops out of sports car to lead
the gang into hip-hip club for a little "exercise." Cool is the paint of
this American-made Hong Kong-style martial arts film.
Rival gangs attempt to curb contempt for each other in order to secure a
jointly profitable business deal. Asian family on one side, African American
on the other. Mutual respect via mutual fear. News of an irresponsible
murder of one prominent member compromises the truce and prompts Jet Lee to
bust his Hong Kong prison chains and fly to the States to avenge his
brother's death. He's not interested in truces or illegal commerce - he
wants revenge.
In his search for the slayer Jet stumbles across help from the daughter of
the black gang's leader; she's recording artist, Aaliyah - Juliet (if you
will). Top rap artist, DMX also makes an appearance.
The high powered warlords are brought to real life with conviction by Delroy
Lindo and Henry O, their second-in-commands (Isaiah Washington and Russell
Wong) also do a kick-butt job of acting and re-acting. Pawn thug, Anthony
Anderson, maneuvers smoothly between punches and punch lines. He's very
funny.
Jet li, of course, is loveably dangerous, saying it all as he silently
shuffles across an oriental garden bridge carrying his late brother's
deflated basketball. Well, actually, he does have a bit more to say with his
fists, twists and computer graphic assists. In one charming brawl, Lee
manages to de-belt his opponent. As the pants fall to the ground, Lee
fastens the poor guy's harry leg to his head with the belt.
Though this is definitely an action flick, "Romeo" does a fair job of
portraying compelling and interesting relationship pairings in-between and
during scuffles. Hand-to-hand and Heart-to-heart, and don't forget the
tasteful funnybone-to-funnybone relief. Not in the now-popular, laden
fashion via comedic-costar as in "Rush Hour," here the humor is an added
flavor, not an equal balance.
Aside from acceptable improbabilities in fight set-ups etc., "Romeo's" only
mars are: 1) D.B. Woodside wavers in his role as gang-leader Isaac's number
one son. 2) a scene in which a Mercedes catches up to a BMW motorcycle in
less than 100 feet. I don't think so. 3) Strong from beginning to end, the
climax isn't weak, but not as resounding as the beginning and middle,
despite the low frequency thuds that resonate front row seats as the titans
plant fist to bone.
Still these imperfections are no match for the strong acting, fun dialogue,
graceful agility of Jet Li, and cool direction of first time director
Andrzej Bartkowiak. It's just a big cool fun movie.
Romeo Must Die. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Jet Li, Aaliyah, Isaiah Washington, Russell Wong, Delroy Lindo
Directed by Andrzej Bartkowiak.
Screenplay by Eric Bernt and John Jarrell. Story by Mitchell Kapner
Produced by Warren Carr at Silver/Warner Bros.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Lake Placid (1999)
Kind of a cuter smaller version of the recent "Godzilla," "Lake Placid" is
actually a slightly better movie. Where "Godzilla" makes the head hurt,
"Placid" splashes up a bit fun. A solid "B" movie.
Basically, something big in a New England Lake bites a swimmer in half, so
paleontologist (Bridge Fonda) flies in from New York to investigate. She
teams up with a handsome ranger guy, small town sheriff,  and hippie
crock-doc who likes to backstroke with the dragons.
The dialogue between the four is throw-away sarcasm; still, a few beauts
slither through. And honestly, the interaction between the sheriff and
crock-doc is very amusing. It nearly takes over the movie and it should.
There's a scene where the fearless crock-doc jumps into the sea-monster's
waters, finding himself face to jaws he advises the beast, "I know biting my
head off right now might seem viable ... but it would cheapen you."
The mysterious reptile below the surface is the least implausible of the
unlikelies in this picture, but if you're willing to swallow them whole, you
might just have fun. Further, you'll get to see Betty White swearing like
one of the South Park gang. Now that's a good time.
Starring Bill Pullman, Bridget Fonda, Oliver Platt. Directed by Steve Miner.
Written by David E. Kelley. Produced by David E. Kelly and Michael Pressman
at Phoenix/20th Century Fox.
Grade ......................................... B
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Pitch Black (2000)
This sci-fi horror flick is at its best simulating a hypothetical three sun
solar system. Amateur astronomers (myself one) will raise many a
deliberating eyebrow at the assumptions we swallow in order to accept this
conjectural reality.
The film opens with a space vessel transporting a load of commercial
passengers (average people, save for the hardened criminal) all enjoying
dreams in cryo-sleep (save for the hardened criminal). Suddenly, unknown
objects rip through the walls of the vessel awakening all while killing the
captain (of course). Now if this is bad luck, just wait ... "Pitch Black"
defines the meaning of the phrase. The first mate, a sassy blonde, jumps to
the pilot seat in time to see the surface of some planet swiftly
approaching. In an effort to gain control of the speeding ship she quickly
purges large sections of it ... including the payload (the passengers); but
something's wrong, the lever sticks and she's forced to land with all on
board. This sequence displays perhaps the most exhilarating graphics of the
film. Atmospheric debris shatter the windshield into a splash of dust
(miraculously, the pilot's pretty face isn't in the slightest marred). But
still the menacing rush of dust and wind create a thrilling ride for the
audience as the ship slides across the burnt orange surface of an unknown
land. You'll sigh in relief when it finally comes to a stop.
Looking out on the horizon, survivors quickly conclude that there will be no
nightfall due to the multiple suns. Which is a good thing, because the
planet is inhabited by "a lot" of nasty pterodactyl type aliens that don't
like the light. But don't forget the bad luck factor; though the place is
devoid of anything else, our travelers quickly stumble across an old mining
factory, pick up one sample, instantly evaluate it as the last one, decode
its age at 22 years (in unknown planet time, that is), then run over to a
rather cool mechanical replica of the current solar system left by the human
minors mysteriously killed 22 years back. The sharp unmarred pilot
hand-revolves the geared planetary assemblage 22 times back into the solar
system's history. The convenient counter clicks backward. Ah-oh, an eclipse!
What are the chances of that? These poor kids just happened to be marooned
on a planet inhabited by light-hating beasts on the very day of its 22-year
cycle eclipse.
With an hour's warning, the quickly dwindling troop still isn't prepared as
the huge second planet with parallel rings rotating in opposite directions
(not sure that's possible) rather swiftly blots out the sun. Despite the
potential impossibility, it's a beautiful scene; the second planet's horizon
cracking the sun as if to release from it a swarm of bat-like monsters into
the honey-golden sky. Of course, just then one passenger finds the necessity
to run out into the darkness while the remaining group attempts to determine
the duration of this eclipse in order to assess a plan. Given the pilot's
lightening speed at predicting the eclipse and that nifty solar-system
model, she could have easily determined the duration. But she didn't.
As a viewer in the theater, witnessing the rate of the eclipse, you could
have reasonably guessed its duration to be brief - an hour or so. But, no
strangers to bad luck, this entourage embraces the ever-so remote
possibility that these two planets are orbiting in sync, thus they assume
the darkness may be very very long lasting and therefore need to rush out
into it and prepare their departure. Silly kids, have they forgotten about
the other sun(s)?
A murderer in the midst and thousands of hungry aliens to dodge, "Pitch
Black" is still meant to scare you. With many a cheap (sometimes tedious)
set up, suspenseful build, followed by either a kill or a fake out to
progress it along.
Nice performance by the bad guy, Vin Diesel (voice of "Iron Giant" by the
way). Respectably acted, filmed and directed, "Pitch Black" caps off with a
surprisingly Christian theme, but may make a better platform for a beginning
astronomy class than action-packed thriller.
Pitch Black. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R. 107 minutes.
Starring Vin Diesel, Radha Mitchell, Cole Hauser, Keith David, Lewis
Fitz-Gerald, Claudia Black, Rhiana Griffith, John Moore.
Directed by David Twohy
Written by Jim and Ken Wheat and David Twohy
Produced by Tom Engelman at USA films.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Tinseltown (1997)
"Tinseltown" opens with an upbeat Christmas toe-tapping melody as the brutal
costume killer brutalizes victim number four. It sets an appropriately
ironic tone for this black comedy/mystery about two penniless screenwriters
trying to sell a script in Hollywood.
Max (Arye Gross) is the slimy idea man that talks writer Tiger (Tom Wood)
into petty theft, breaking and entry, and potentially accessory to murder
one all in the name of getting their script produced. Tiger and Max are
forced to live in a self storage unit where they meet Cliff, the costume
killer (or is he?). The two sell homeless producer Arnie (Joe Pantoliano) on
the fresh idea of a film based on the costume killer. The twisted edge is
that Tiger and Max can watch the murders and interview the killer for a sick
sense of realism. Arnie bites -- they negotiate.
Arnie, "Hey, you're dealing with the big leaguers now!" Max, "Big leagues?
Arnie, you live in a park!"
Technically, the little film suffered from a few pops and glitches in sound
and picture. And although Arye Gross acted his heart out, Tom Wood was as
stiff as a tree. Desperately lacking a character to sympathize with, I
pathetically opted for the killer. The picture also failed to hold a grip on
my interest, though it culminated with a fun mystery-revealing conclusion.
Grade..........................C-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Monkeybone (2001)
A cartoonist (Brendan Fraser) plagued by nightmares in the past, finds 
love and sweet dreams in sleep doctor (Bridget Fonda). Unfortunately, a 
freak accident on the night of his new animated pilot's gala celebration 
knocks him into a surreal fantasy coma. Here the mild-mannered artist 
faces his cute muppetlike alto ego - the nasty, selfish, horny 
Monkeybone. 
"Welcome to downtown - where the night mares." Brendan spends much of 
the movie here, making deals with the god of sleep (brought to life 
marvelously by Giancarlo Esposito as some sort of hoofed animal) and the 
god of death (Whoopi Goldberg). Like his earlier works, "The Nightmare 
Before Christmas" and "James and the Giant Peach," director Henry Selick 
relies heavily on good old-fashioned stop-motion animation for his furry 
lead as well as many of the downtown characters. Integrating all of that 
with live actors is a daunting task. 
Thick and dark art direction oozes like syrup on pancakes. Downtown 
(coma-land) floats appropriately in some cosmic abyss and plays like a 
twisted amusement park. It's a hauntingly delightful creation. Also, in 
one sweet scene, Brendan is able to witness the black and white 
crystal-ball dream of his true love who awaits him hospital bedside in 
the land of the real. 
Aside from one extremely hilarious scene in which Brendan "goes ape" for 
Bridget, swinging on bed posts to the tune of Jimi Hendrix's "Foxy 
Lady;" Fraser is (as Death says) rather vanilla. An easy first choice 
for this role might have been Jim Carrey, though I'm sure others could 
be found to navigate the difficulties in leading and pulling together a 
production of live and non-live costars and sets. Though cute and crass, 
even the animated "Monkeybone" isn't over the top entertaining. Never 
uninteresting, "Monkeybone" the movie doesn't break out of it's own 
dreamlike state into the land of "bust your audience's gut" until 
organ-donor-man brings new life to the project. 
This actor (Chris Kattan), his organ-donor character, scripting and 
capture on film score straight 10's in the humor Olympics. If the two 
leads were this passionately funny (coupled with a bit of story editing) 
- then we'd be talking about the best film of the year. 
Monkeybone. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Brendan Fraser, Bridget Fonda, Whoopi Goldberg, Chris 
Kattan, David Foley Giancarlo Esposito, John Turturro (Monkeybone), Rose 
McGowan. 
*  Directed by Henry Selick. 
*  Written by Sam Hamm. 
*  Produced by Mark Radcliffe, Michael Barnathan at 20th Century Fox. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Duets (2000)
Huey Lewis' hustle-line "Karate-oke" might have made a better title to this
big-hearted, road-trippy, small-town karaoke contest-hopping, comedy.
Huey (sporting Al Franken nerd glasses) makes a living upping the stakes
with pretty-boy favorites at anywhereville, USA singing-dives. But his is
just one of two side stories to the main event -- a frazzled Paul Giamatti's
suburban salesman mid-life crisis sends him unshaven and skidding into a
reckless life of crossing the double-yellow and singing no-holds-barred to
colorized words on the video screen.
There's more to the film than that (I didn't even mention Gwyneth's role or
the spectacular performance by Andre Braugher or that Angie Dickinson
appears briefly); best to leave the rest to surprise.
Although the picture has a few screws that could use tightening and a couple
of minor "errors in judgment," the direction and attention to detail is just
as determined to live life to its fullest as bubble-eyed Paul Giamatti.
Delightful peculiarities pepper-spice the film. Examples: A groggy and
disoriented Giamatti draws the hotel window shades to a jetliner that's so
close it fills the entire pane, a young innocent Speedman comes home to his
girlfriend only to hear the guy she just slept with singing in the shower -
this is a crystal-fresh way to tell what could have been a Hollywood/soap
cliché.
Similarly, extraneous characters engulf their roles with richness. Even in
their limited screen time, they endear you to the film and strengthen your
commitment to the main characters. The most memorable being a
kleptomaniac/retired elementary school teacher, "They caught me with a
smoked ham in my crotch" and a road-hardened trucker with a John Wayne glint
in his eye. Kudos to those savory mini-performances.
Btw, adding to the film's sincerity: Giamatti, Paltrow, Bello (and of course
Lewis) do their own singing.
I didn't like the poster, but loved the film.
Duets. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Paul Giamatti, Andre Braugher, Huey Lewis, Gwyneth Paltrow, Scott
Speedman, Maria Bello, Marian Seldes (teacher), Bill Croft (trucker).
Directed by Bruce Paltrow (Gwyneth's pappa).
Written by John Byrum.
Produced by Kevin Jones, Bruce Paltrow, John Byrum at Hollywood Pics/Buena
Vista.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for But I'm a Cheerleader (1999)
In the over-stereotyped, suburban American, 1950's life-style, Megan is a
cheerleader who doesn't enjoy kissing her handsome jock boyfriend. The
camera peeps in through the windshield as these two make out in the car: the
boyfriend's tongue flopping around like the tail of some decked fish, while
Megan's eyes, wide open and fluttering in all directions, search for
something interesting to take her mind off what her mouth is doing. It's
hilarious.
Soon enough, her God-fearing, homophobic parents, confront her with their
scariest suspicions, "Our daughter's a lesbian!"
An obedient child and by now quite confused, Megan agrees to board at a
countryside "Heterosexual School" with a newly recruited small group of teen
lesbians and gay boys that are in for a "Mr. and Mrs. Cleaver" lesson in how
to be straight. Guys are taught to work on car engines and girls in pink,
learn to scrub stains from burnt pots and pans. And though this
simplistic/comedic angle on the gay issue has been played powerless already,
the edgy dialogue keeps the film fresh, lively and light.
On the phone to her parents, Megan reports, "You were right, I am a
homosexual, but I'll be regular soon." Then in defending her favorite
pastime she says to Graham (the tomboy dorm mate she is trying not to find
attractive), "Okay, maybe cheers aren't intellectual, but they make people
feel good." Graham snaps back, "No, cheers make people do stupid cartwheels,
orgasms make people feel good!" Kudos to the acting talent of both Natasha
Lyonne and Clea DuVall.
The art directors have painted each room of this large country house its own
special color, with an exterior of pink giving the whole scenario a
purposefully ridiculousness, cartoony feel. However, the music,
intentionally rinky-dink, adds little.
Though surreal and silly, the film is not afraid to say or do the taboo, so,
if girls kissing each other on the lips makes you squint your eyes and feel
nauseous then you ought to be forewarned. In fact, these scenes are done
tenderly.
The look of the film is somewhat over-exposed and technically just barely
short of the mark with an embarrassingly poorly cut scene just prior to the
climax. Still, it's wacky fun, and spiced with loose lips and one-liners
that'll more often than not crack up the crowd.
But I'm a Cheerleader! Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Natasha Lyonne, Clea DuVall, Cathy Moriarty, Eddie Cibrian, Melanie
Lynskey,
Bud Cort, Dante Basco, Rupaul Charles.
Directed by Jamie Babbit.
Written by Brian Wayne Peterson based on story by Jamie Babbit.
Produced by Andrea Sperling, Leanna Creel.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Enemy at the Gates (2001)
1942, A trainload of young Russian soldiers (Jude Law among them) spills 
out into the Volga River to Stalingrad; German bullets ripping through 
the chests of the brave ones, Russian bullets piercing the backs of the 
cowards. Law somehow survives, his amazing marksmanship witnessed by an 
enthusiastic Russian writer (Joe Fiennes) who delights in fighting the 
Germans with propaganda instead of gunpowder. Fiennes makes a war hero 
out of Law, "We need examples, yes, but to follow, not fear." A fine set 
up to a film where the war itself becomes the backdrop to an indecisive 
focus between a love story and a one-on-one of dueling snipers. 
After an opening sequence reminiscent of "Saving Private Ryan," the 
newspaper black and whites of Jude Law with his rifle and those award 
winning eyes piercing through the print and the depression lifts the 
hopes of those fighting to save Stalingrad. They'll make your heart 
swell, too. 
Law and Fiennes become fast friends, and then of course, in walks a 
woman soldier, Rachel Weisz -- well educated, but tough. Law is 
embarrassed by his lack of proper literacy. Later, unfortunately too 
much later, jealousy and desire provide the ammunition for a climactic 
ending. But with the timing off, the supply of ammo loses its potency 
while the passion misfires, missing targets it should have hit. 
A brash barracks love scene graces the picture, but ought to have 
occurred twenty or so minutes prior in order to set up believable 
intentions - namely the picture cutting exercise. A few other improbable 
progressions snag what essentially is a very nice piece of work. 
That opening sequence not only compels, but takes firm hold of your 
heart, only to slowly lose its grasp with a third act nearly as chaotic 
as war. Strong direction (aside from story telling difficulties), solid 
acting (especially from Law - he's awesome), tremendous set design and 
cinematography. The positives create a stronghold; though taking 
casualties, this fort of a film still stands. 
Perhaps a better title: "Snipers in Love" 
Enemy at the Gates. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Jude Law, Joseph Fiennes, Rachel Weisz, Bob Hoskins and Ed 
Harris. 
*  Directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud 
*  Written by Alain Godard & Jean-Jacques Annaud 
*  Produced by John D. Schofield & Jean-Jacques Annaud at 
Mandalay/Paramount. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Tarzan (1999)
"Tarzan" swings onto the screen with the power and grace of a charging
cheetah. The story of a lost infant in an African jungle is told richly with
music (Phil Collins) and colorful images. Kala, a female gorilla finds the
human baby and saves him from Sabor, the leopard. "I shall call him Tarzan"
she tells her un-approving dominant male, Kerchak. Terk, a young ape
retorts, "Tarzan? Okay, it's you're baby."
Tarzan and Terk become best friends as they grow into their teens.
You know the rest, British anthropologists, Professor Porter and daughter
Jane, come to observe while their bodyguard, Clayton, upsets the jungle
paradise.
Surprisingly, this is an action film! In one amazing scene, Tarzan rescues
Jane from an aerial stampede of perturbed baboons. Tarzan not only swings
with the greatest of ease, but literally "surfs" the mossy tree trunks that
wind like waves high above the jungle. This may just be the fastest paced
animated sequence ever produced -- easily rivaling the "Star Wars" pod race
in the exciting speed department.
Perhaps its only imperfection, the film puckers out a bit short of the home
stretch. But that lull won't stop me from heartily recommending this wild
action comedy to kids and adults of all ages. Go see it!
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for American History X (1998)
"Whewwww." An exclamation you'll likely hear exiting a showing of Tony
Kaye's American History X. The film is a pressure cooker of kerosene set on
simmer. Most of us tend to avoid tension in our daily lives, so if you've
forgotten how to stay calm while somebody probes you with a pointed object
such as racism -- either you should stay home or make sure you watch this
film to it's end.
Yes, whether you're white, black, yellow, Jewish, Christian, or even a
visiting extra terrestrial -- you are very likely to have an exercise in
restraint. And yes, American History X could be likened to a bent and rusty
dental implement; it's audience, a less than perfect set of teeth. Sound
like fun? "Fun" is definitely not the befitting word. But "poignant" might
be. Especially if you are temporarily mesmerized by the thought of hating --
as in race hate. Then take a look at this picture.
Aside from the uncomfortable feeling one gets at the sight of a bald white
man with a swastika the size of a tarantula tattooed to his chest, the film
was a bit awkward getting off the ground. The first 20 to 30 minutes were
aggravated slightly by some stiff dialogue and sticky acting. But after
that, a tar-thick layer of tension was cimematically laid via strong script,
careful direction, photography and a subject matter that has the strength in
it's little pinkie to tear America in half.
The middle is where this film effectively grabs (or should I say pins) the
viewer. A gritting dinner table scene with mother's boyfriend (Elliott
Gould) and skinhead Derek (Edward Furlong) serves Rodney King concentrate
instead of orange juice. I think I've still got my date's nail marks in my
wrist from that one. In another scene, Derek, being handcuffed in slo-mo,
connects eyes with his younger brother. That one glare tells the story of
their intense relationship. In fact, that one scene is the screenplay of
American History X in a glance. Artfully done.
I usually get antsy in longer films. My butt cheeks get cramped, or I'm
grinding my teeth to keep my bladder from bursting. For once, this is a film
I thought could have gone longer. Derek, gets a perspective-setting lesson
in prison (talk about posterior discomfort!). This and a wonderfully
developed friendship with a black inmate set his transformation in motion.
But it happens a bit too quickly for me.
All in all, Kaye paces this project well. Through its intense scenes and
grainy black and white flashbacks, the tale is revealed to us carefully.
It's a bold film, not afraid to speak it's mind. If you're bold enough to
see it, exercise your tolerance and sit through the whole thing.
American History X is high school student Danny Vinyard's (played by Edward
Furlong of T2 fame) essay on his older brother, Derek (Edward Norton) a
white supremacist skinhead just released from prison after killing two black
men.
Starring Edward Norton and Edward Furlong with Elliott Gould and Avery
Brooks.
Directed by Tony Kaye. Rated R.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Get Bruce (1999)
Bruce is a real life comedy writer, aggressively sought and found by hit
performers like Billy Crystal, Robin Williams, Whoopi Goldberg and Better
Middler especially for award and event performances like the Oscars. "Get
Bruce" is a documentary/biography on Bruce sporting lengthy interviews with
the four stars mentioned above and briefer spots with others.
It's fairly interesting and at times very funny, but it doesn't really tell
a story. It's more like a definition of the current state of one interesting
guy and how useful he is to others. There's no drama, no climax; but as I
said -- it is quite amusing. I'm just not sure why it's released on film. It
seems to me it would naturally play well for TV audiences.
Get Bruce. Copyright Š 1999.
Interviewed: Billy Crystal, Robin Williams, Whoopi Goldberg, Bette Midler
and more.
Produced and Directed by Andrew J. Kuehn at AJK/Miramax.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Mod Squad, The (1999)
If you watched TV in the early 70's, you'll probably remember "The Mod
Squad" TV series ... or at least Linc, because he was the coolest of the
trio. "Mod Squad" the movie, borrows the hip idea of deputizing three
prison-bound delinquents. The film starts out promising, but ends up
forgetting its promises.
Here's what the picture did well: 1) Balanced an off the wall, "few cards
short of a full deck" wild-mouthed, white guy (Pete) with Linc (a smooth
black guy who didn't need words to be cool). Even though liberties where
taken in completely changing the TV series' Pete character -- I still liked
this balance. Add to that the straight-shooter Claire Danes and we've got a
likable team. 2) Some of the action sequences were very nicely timed and
shot -- heart-pumping. 3) Though Giovanni Ribisi played the same character
from "The Other Sister" (okay, one notch sharper -- but a lot more
dangerous). He's very funny.
Here's where the picture fell short: 1) Was this a "Mod Squad" of the 90's?
If so, then why the use of "Right on" and "Solid" and the dust-buster on the
wall? If not, then why the late model Cadilac? 2) Convertible through a
car-wash -- been there/done that. 3) Twice our Mod Squaders catch the bad
guys just openly revealing their scheming plans, making it painfully obvious
what they are up to -- and repeating it twice for the tape recorder. 4) Then
there's the scene where the fat old male drug dealer wants to slow dance
with Linc -- What's that? I don't get it? Was it introduced to break the
lull? 5) Lastly, the characters themselves bring attention to the worn cop
show cliches that surround them: drug pimps, crooked detectives and
abandoned warehouse shoot outs.
Did I miss something? Was this supposed to be a spoof? Then it took itself
too seriously. If it wasn't supposed to be a spoof, then it threw itself
away. Which was unfortunate, because it could have been a decent movie.
Starring Claire Danes, Omar Epps, Giovanni Ribisi, and Dennis Farina.
Directed by Scott Silver.
Produced by Ben Myron, Alan Riche, and Tony Ludwig.
Executive Producers: Aaron Spelling and David Ladd.
A Metro-Golwyn-Mayer Pictures distributed by MGM.
Rated R.
Grade..........................C
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Castle, The (1997/I)
The Castle. A Miramax Films Release. Copyright Š 1999. Photo: Emmanuel
Santos
By Ross Anthony
"Love who you are and fight for the right to be the imperfect you," is a
seriously wholesome theme smack in the center of this quirky Australian
straight-faced comedy.
A tow-truck driver loves his paneled pool room and pre-fab house despite the
747's thundering overhead. But when the airport decides to expand the runway
and buy out the neighborhood, this man (as optimistic as he is average)
stands in the way.
Narrated by his third son, a character who ironically has nothing to do with
the plot, "The Castle" is a live action "Wallace and Grommet" without the
Grommet (and action for that matter). But it is full of dry and subtle humor
simultaneously ribbing and admiring the rural blue collar middle class. "I'm
going to take the Coronado, so if you can move the Mustang and the Duster, I
can get it out of the driveway -- and don't sideswipe the Torino."
Fine performances by all involved. "The Castle" is not a blockbuster; it's a
little film that accomplished everything it set out to do.
Starring Michael Caton, Anne Tenney, Stephen Curry, Sophie Lee, Anthony
Simcoe and Charles Tingwell.
Directed by Rob Stitch. Written by Santo Cilauro, Tom Gleisner, Jane Kennedy
and Rob Stitch (in 11 days I'm told).
Produced by Debra Choate.
Presented by Miramax/Village Roadshow/Working Dog.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Snow Day (2000)
Growing up in the north, I, too, longed for that prized announcement over
the early morning radio, "SNOWDAY, Schools are closed!!!" In its attempt to
recreate the elation a blizzard brings to children, "Snowday" slips and
slides all over itself.
Fundamentally a formula family picture, "Snowday" adds little to the four
story lines it borrows from countless other pictures. Each conflict
resolving wholesomely, but with little power.
In the primary saga, the teen son (Mark Webber) chases a beauty out of his
league while ignoring gal-pal Schuyler Fisk. A few endearingly unique
moments grace this tale, but for the most part, it evolves just as expected.
Next, the boy's little sister must conquer her demon -- the evil snowplow
man. Not only will he "steal" a second snowday by clearing the streets, but
he delights in mowing towards blissfully sledding children. The chains on
his tires are said to be made from "the braces of kids that didn't get out
of his way."
Thirdly, mom is a workaholic who ignores her family's needs. This plot line
pains viewers as she tends to the phone while family chaos ensues.
Lastly, dad Chevy Chase plays the town's second best weatherman. In order to
be free of gimmicky costumes meant to maintain his ratings, Chase must
snatch top guy status from his super slick rival. Chase's charm keeps this
subplot above ice water.
Strong music wisps with the magic of "E.T." and "Close Encounters"
desperately trying to make a snowman from this slush. But the visuals and
story, like it's poster, feel quickly cut out and pasted together by busy
people with other things on their minds.
Snowday. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Mark Webber, Zena Grey, Schuyler Fisk, Emmanuelle Chriqui, Chevy
Chase, Chris Elliot, Jean Smart, Connor Matheus.
Directed by Chris Koch.
Written by Will McRobb, Chris Viscardi.
Produced by Julia Pistor, Albie Hecht at Paramount/Nickelodeon.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Muse, The (1999)
By Ross Anthony
Albert Brooks plays a screenwriter "passing his prime." Having "lost his
edge" he entrusts the inspiration of a mythical muse (Sharon Stone) who's
prone to very expensive whimsy.
In traditional Albert Brooks style, his character is the sharp-witted, yet
droopy eye-browed whiner who just can't believe so many things are going so
absurdly off from the norm. He's perfectly amusing anyway. In fact, he
delivers a few whammy lines that knocked my socks off. For instance, when
wife (Andy MacDowell) rhetorically asks, "You're not going to walk on the
kitchen floor all covered with paint are you?" Brooks responds, "I'm not an
astronaut, I have to walk on something."
However, apparently due to weak direction and/or quickly shot scenes, a few
times Andy MacDowell and even Sharon Stone, look like they're relaxing on
the sofa at home reading the script for the first time. I felt embarrassed
for them.
Though consistently fun in an Albert Brooks kind of way, this film drags its
feet with the business of building to a climax. You might find more to muse
over if you wait for the video.
Starring Albert Brooks, Sharon Stone, Andy MacDowell.
Directed by Albert Brooks and Monica Johnson.
Produced by Herb Nanas at October Films.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B

Title
Review for Bicentennial Man (1999)
Patiently directed (occasionally too patiently), "Bicentennial Man" is warm
and cuddly, but not the over-the-top kind of comedy or intensity we've come
to expect from Robin Williams. Which probably accounts for at least some of
the negative reaction to it. The schmaltz factor remaining in tact, the tale
becomes kind of an E.T. matures and falls in love story. Not too exciting
for kids, but not bad for we -- more matured types.
Spanning a couple hundred years (hence the title) in a smidgen over two
hours, we follow the "life" of Android "Andrew" from his introduction to the
Martin family in 2005. Andrew shows a propensity towards art and culture
(fixing an old record player and mellowing to Mozart) not common (or
explicable) to Androids of his series. Able to simulate expression with
blinking eyes and raise-able brows, Andrew personifies man's own quest to
understand and better express himself as he seeks humanity.
The film raises interesting questions regarding humankind's ability to
assimilate (on a mass scale) appliances that become too human. But, it's
main point is Andrew's quest and ultimate ability to fall in love.
Outstanding performance by Wendy Crewson as she plays two or three members
of the Martin family over three generations. All others are fine as is the
script and direction, though this gently paced movie drags at a point or
two.
Bicentennial Man. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG.
Starring Robin Williams, Sam Neill, Wendy Crewson, Embeth Davidtz, Oliver
Platt.
Directed by Chris Columbus.
Screenplay by Nicholas Kazan.
Produced by Columbus, etc. at Columbia Pictures.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Cell, The (2000)
Whew... I'm almost speechless, thoughtless ... out of my mind. I've been
assaulted with music video images (Rated R for graphic violence) for nearly
two hours. I'm not sure what to think.
Well, I had to eat (that's for sure). After mentioning that I'd just seen
"The Cell" the waitress at a local restaurant asked, "Oh, how was it? I want
to see it?" My head just went blank. Hmmmm. The film's strange, so strange
that the quick rating neuron in my brain kind of flickered 'E' for error.
The film opens with Jenny, in a flaming white dress, on the back of black
horse trotting across the ridges of barren and endless sand dunes. She meets
a child and tries to encourage him out of his shyness. But it's not real,
she's in his mind and he's in a coma. This is the set up. Shift attention to
a serial killer, who has kidnapped his latest beautiful victim, caged her in
an automated torture cell and then collapsed into a coma himself. The cops
find him, but have no idea the location of "The Cell." By now we begin see
Jenny's use here, a psychologist in a futuristic facility capable of mind
connections.
All of this is filmed beautifully (though at times grainy) with keen
attention paid to transitions and sound. The film has big audio. Even in the
real world, the John Woo feel of direction gives a surreal edge. But once
into the minds of our principals ... sit back and enjoy the wild imagery.
High kudos to the art directors and costume designers.
Disturbing, sick, with moments of out and out gore, the film is a twisted
mix of last year's two big hits "The Sixth Sense" and "The Matrix." Though,
interesting and respectably compelling, not quite as fulfilling as either.
Bones? Okay, I've got nothing against Jennifer's butt, but not in this
film - she's a psychologist! An earlier gratuitous shot of Jen in her
underwear is clearly beneath the picture. Additionally, her glamour make up
is distracting. Perhaps it works in the mind sequences; but in reality, I
think a more plain/stark appearance would have complemented the film (as
with Tomei in "The Watcher"). Lastly, we're asked to buy into this sci-fi
techno-potentiality ... I was willing, but why the actual "mind-connecting"
room was fitted for locks is completely over the top hard to believe. One
must unfortunately chalk it up as a contrivance used only for plot
progression.
That said, good story telling, excellent direction, never a boring moment.
The Cell. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Jennifer Lopez, Vince Vaughn, Vincent D'Onofrio, Marianne
Jean-Baptiste, Jake Weber.
Directed by Tarsem Singh.
Written by Mark Protosevich.
Produced by Julio Caro, Eric McLeod at New Line.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Unbreakable (2000)
Hmmm. Well, I absolutely loved "The Sixth Sense." In fact, I did back flips
over that film. But M. Night Shyamalan's newest effort, "Unbreakable" failed
to ignite that same enthusiasm.
This is still an interesting film complete with scenes to marvel over
sharing screen time with the not-so-great moments. Generally speaking, too
much time is spent in the set up and not enough on the punch.
I've said before of "The Sixth Sense" that I didn't need the ending kicker
twist - I still would have loved that film. Not so of "Unbreakable" which
titillates unevenly like glitter in a murky stream. The opening shot between
seats is clever, but becomes tiresome. In fact, the whole first act could
have used a shot in the arm. Willis, Penn and Woodward are strong,
believable and likable. But, I've seen Jackson give better performances
(though the actor playing the younger Jackson does a fine job).
I particularly enjoyed the meaty sequence just prior to the end; more of the
like was needed as lead-ins to it. Perhaps they were written, but cut for
time. Too bad, cuts in the first act would have made for a better film.
Overall, the finished product is lumpy - a way-cool idea that is no doubt
way-difficult to translate to film. Shyamalan makes a respectable attempt in
"Unbreakable," but lands shy of the excellence he'd achieved in his earlier
work
Unbreakable. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson, Robin Wright Penn, Charlayne
Woodward, Spencer Treat Clark.
Written and Directed by M. Night Shyamalan
Produced at Touchstone.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Gladiator (2000)
Back in the days of the Roman Empire, Italian soldiers spent a lot of time
conquering Europe. But as one particular Caesar ages, he ponders his
purpose. "Maximus, why are we here?" (in Germania), he whines. "For the
Glory of Rome," Maximus (Crowe) responds. Reflecting on the bloodshed,
Caesar sighs, "So much for the glory of Rome." This seemingly-innocent
mumble has a wonderfully-biting double edge.
Tired of war, Caesar plans to raise his trusted and son-like warrior,
Maximus, to guardian of a restored republican Rome. Yet, in all his great
wisdom Caesar prematurely reveals the plan to his real son, Commodus.
(There'll be no Rome left for him.) Before Maximus is ordained, Commodus
kills his father and thus becomes a tyrant king. He orders the deaths of
Maximus and family, then sits back in the throne. Maximus narrowly escapes,
but is captured (as a slave) by a circus leader who runs a traveling
gladiator show. Coincidentally, Commodus decides to reinstate the game in
Rome, thus the mighty Maximus arrives back in the capital harboring a
festering vendetta.
It's a great story, celebrated warrior turned slave, turned gladiator,
turned revolutionist. And Crowe is steadfast. But here are the problems: His
son and daughter look like models in an aspirin commercial. They have no
lines. They're displayed either as Utopian or crispy dead - never real. So
we feel nothing for them and when they're slain, we don't care. Better to
leave them unshown. Crowe is a great actor, let his love for them be enough
to make us care. This is a long film, cut out their segments entirely.
Conveying them only as ideas, the film would be stronger. I have great faith
in Crowe's ability to make us long for that family with him. Unspecified, we
can fill in the blanks with our own warm feelings of home.
The two other problems involve the beginning and the ending. I just don't
believe that a great wise leader would have so immaturely handled such a
delicate situation as depriving the thrown from his immoral son. Caesar
would have ordered his son Commodus off on some important mission in some
distant land or other, while Maximus was ordained. Either that, or (dare you
scheme with me) Caesar may have wanted the son to murder him, thus inspiring
Maximus all the more - but if the writers intended this twist they certainly
did not clearly lay it out. Such a strategy would have improved the film and
my ability to "buy in" earlier on.
But weather you "buy in" or not, it's still a fun story. Powerful underdog,
rising from the slime and under-appreciated to challenge the all mighty
czar. And there's all that blood and guts in the arena.
The very first fight (meant to establish Crowe as a fighting man's general
of war) begins with nightsky-scraping flaming arrows that dash across in the
twilight emitting a magically-lethal orange glow. I thought to myself, "This
is one medieval battlefield rumble to end all cinema recreations." As the
conflict rages, the camera angles become increasingly narrowed and the
screen full of flames and blurred soldiers in slow mo. But the effect
becomes over-digitized in a strobe reminiscent of a consumer camera,
subtracting from the realism and gravity of the fight. And instead of
continuing the ever-tightening angle to personalize the savagery, a few
mid-wide shots are tossed in. It breaks up the direction of the sequence and
wakes the viewer from its hypnotic effect. Still a strong sequence overall,
but "The Messenger" did a better job.
Lastly, this is an action film and not-disappointingly it ends with action.
Unfortunately, a few additional lines of dialogue are tacked on, again
diluting the power of the event. Nothing needed to be said!
"Gladiator" does best what it proposes - it be's big! Though I expected more
from this two hour fifty minute epic, I still enjoyed it, while most others
I spoke with loved it.
Gladiator. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Russell Crowe, Joaquin Phoenix (Commodus), Oliver Reed * (Proximo
Palindromos), Richard Harris (Marcus Aurelius), Connie Nielsen (Lucilla),
Djimon Hounsou (Juba), Ralf Moeller (Hagen), Derek Jacobi (Gracchus),
Spencer Treat Clark (Lucius), David Hemmings (Cassius), Tomas Arana
(Quintus).
Directed by Ridley Scott.
Written by David Franzoni.
Executive Producers: Walter F. Parkes, Laurie MacDonald.
Produced by Douglas Wick, David Franzoni, Branko Lustig at
Dreamworks/Universal.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Never Been Kissed (1999)
Drew Barrymore is a lonely, 25 year old, copy editor for the Chicago
Suntimes. When a sudden firing leaves an undercover reporting job open, her
psycho chief editor impulsively promotes her to the task of impersonating a
17 year old student at Glen South High.
Barrymore is so giddy about playing undercover that she forgets what a
nightmare her own high school experience was. In her naivetZ, she also
neglects to sniff out a spicy hot story with which to quench her fuming
editor.
This is a sappy movie. It knows it is and it doesn't try to hide that fact.
It's also not without implausibilities and moments of bad acting (due in a
large part to her handsome teacher/ love interest). But it's fun. It's silly
teenage "Revenge of the Nerds" fun. And it's spirited. Barrymore's vitality
just won't let you write off this corny picture. She's adorable, charming
and so is her performance as the girl who gets to do high school all over
again.
Starring Drew Barrymore and David Arquette.
Directed by Raja Gosnell.
Produced by Sandy Isaac and Nancy Juvonen at Fox 2000 Pictures.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels (1998)
When I first saw the poster for this film, I thought "it's a spoof on
'Reservoir Dogs'." I wasn't too far off, it certainly shares that Tarantino
genre. Though, it's not a spoof -- unless you think "Reservoir Dogs" is a
spoof on "bad guy" films.
I suspect you'll enjoy this picture if you're a fan of Quentin Tarantino, or
even harsh action films like "Ronin." If you're not familiar with Tarantino,
this is what you can expect: An ugly real violence contrasted with gangster
goof-ups. Rat packs of hoodlum and hoodlum wannabes that fumble through a
gritty underworld maze surprising each other at the turns and exhausting
many a cartridge of bullets. Lots of dead guys.
This is a British film with four teams of shady characters, a thug and his
son, and Sting (as the involuntarily involved bartender). That's a lot of
bad guys, so it takes a while to introduce them all, making the first part
of the film rather uneventful and dry. The ball gets rolling near the middle
of the picture and picks up speed at a steadily increasing rate right up to
the credits. The twists and turns are well set up, yet unexpected and fun --
really fun.
Lastly, the picture sports some unique cinematographic sequences (utilizing,
super-slow-mo, stop-action, etc.) spicing up the presentation and
maintaining a light-hearted perspective despite the blood.
Starring Jason Flemying and Nick Moran.
Written and directed by Guy Ritchie.
Produced by Matthew Vaughn via Polygram released at Gramercy.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Galapagos: The Enchanted Voyage (1999)
Want to scuba, but don't want to shell out the money for lessons, equipment,
and travel? For about the rental price of a snorkle and goggles "Galapagos"
brings the experience to you - and you don't even have to get wet!
Marine Biologist Dr. Carole Baldwin descends thousands of feet into the
ocean to get her high, "I don't know whether to be excited or terrified. And
then I remember how privileged I am to be here. With only about one percent
of the ocean floor explored, the deep sea is Earth's last great frontier."
But before we go under, the 240-pound IMAX 3D camera (like a fishering net)
scoops up the rich surface animals of the Galapagos Islands. Hundreds of sun
basking marine iguanas become jagged rocks as our aerial shot widens.
Crystal blue water crashes into porously gloss black shoreline as
sidestepping crabs go under and reappear. Mossy turtles slurp up seaweed
like spaghetti as carefree seals flip and twist.
Dr. Baldwin swims with the absolutely huge schools of impartial fishes while
a loose-necked group of hammerheads converge. We're swimming too, navigating
the underwater currents with the back-flipping seals while the appropriately
large and swelling music caps the experience off as simply spiritual.
Having been the first to chronicle these islands 600 miles west of Ecuador,
Charles Darwin would have been a mossy phosphorescent green with envy
watching as Dr. Carole Baldwin (3000 feet underwater) vacuum-gathers samples
off the ocean floor from inside the Johnson-Sea-Link Submersible.
The film's only fault: about fifteen percent of the time the images don't
quite mesh, leaving unsightly ghosts as the two separate film projections
overlap with a shift. A mar that is overwhelmingly forgivable for a
production that makes wide and fertile usage of 3D technology.
Rich in color, dimension, education, entertainment and reverence; you're
kids will be reaching out toward the screen, their mouths round with the
word "Wow" repeating over and over. It's as if the theater becomes an
aquarium leaving you to swim with the finned animals. I was surprised I left
the screening dry.
Galapagos (3D IMAX). Copyright Š 2000. Rated G.
Starring Dr. Carole Baldwin of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum
of Natural History.
Directed by AL Giddings and David Clark.
Written by David and Barry Clark.
Produced by AL Giddings and David Clark at Mandalay Media Arts.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
I heard that some people liked this film. I was not one of them.
Kidman and Cruise play a rich married couple tempted by seductive notions of
infidelity. Kidman's character is intoxicated (alcohol and later marijuana)
for the first 50% of her performance, then she's awkwardly cold sober for
the finish. Cruise is smashing, as always ... but great performances seem a
bit of a waste in absence of a solid script.
Cruise plays an M.D. and ever-trusting husband that Kidman desperately wants
to make jealous. Towards that goal, she tells of a poking incident in their
past. But, to make that tale really poking we needed to see Cruise's rock
solid trust in her earlier on (not just hear of it). Perhaps a knowing
glance from Cruise while Kidman danced with a debonair gentleman would have
done the trick.
There were some outstanding performances by secondary actors. Notable as
well, was the cinematography. Shot with a bit of a grain through a softening
filter to give the lights an eerie glow, care was also taken to balance rich
primary colors nicely.
As for the odd script, I think there may have been some big schematic
symbolism -- as if the whole movie had been an analogy for ... I don't
know -- because if there was, I sure didn't get it. And although there were
a few (very few) good lines; most were stock, predictable, or less than
memorable. I may have tolerated the tediously slow build up if the payoff
was shocking; though the theme was a good one, the real shocker is that
there was no payoff.
As for the hot steamy sex ... there really wasn't much of that either; just
a lot of naked women (although cruise has his shirt off as often as
possible). Perhaps since the primaries were two of the sexiest people alive
having meaningful lovemaking in the opening sequences, and because they are
married in real life -- we regular folks might find empathy concerning
infidelity temptations a strain.
Starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman. Screenplay by Stanley Kubrick and
Frederic Raphael. Directed and Produced by Stanley Kubrick at Warner
Brothers. Rated R.
Grade ......................................... C+
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Lola rennt (1998)
Poor Lola, she just got her moped stolen and now her boyfriend is going to
get rubbed out by the bad guys ... unless ... she can find 100,000 marks and
get it to him in twenty minutes.
Lola does a lot of running. However, that's not what the film is about.
Rather, it's a study of the interaction between would-be strangers and
ourselves, if chance meetings are varied by fractions of seconds. Whew...
what a sentence! Basically, Lola runs her same 20 minute mission three
times. The magic of film allows us to witness the big changes in outcomes,
based on tiny changes in timings. A pretty cool idea.
The director also takes his fair share of creative license in this
production. I guess he figures, "It's not possible to have three tries at
any one instant anyway, may as well give Lola a shrieking scream capable of
breaking glass. And draw a cartoon Lola on occasion to add to the
soft-spoken surrealism." (That's not a real quote -- just me supposin'.)
Franka Potente (Lola) looks great on film. Her appearance matches the
part -- striking red hair, but not distractingly beautiful. Her loser
boyfriend is played so well by Moritz Bleibtreu that I actually care about
him. Still, it's Lola's mission that is the beating heart of this little
film.
Driving the three part marathon is a soundtrack factory sealed with
industrial music. If pounding music sparks headaches for you, stay home or
bring Tylenol.
I loved the opening shot of a soccer ball kicked directly up into the camera
which must have been on a crane (or balloon or helicopter). I loved the
shock Lola finds when she barges in on her poppa for the dough. And I loved
the casino scene. (I'm being vague on purpose.)
Though lacking the solidity of a full feature drama, this colorfully
nerve-wracking art film is an interesting study in chance events with some
fun chili pepper moments.
In German with English subtitles.
Starring Franka Potente and Moritz Bleibtreu.
Writer/Director Tom Tykwer.
Produced by Stefan Arndt and presented by Sony Picture Classics.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Art of Amália, The (1999)
With an eccentric introduction by the delightfully eccentric David Byrne,
this documentary spans the lifetime career of Portuguese's singing gem,
Amalia Rodriguez. Born in 1920, Amalia's natural talent brought her quickly
to the forefront of international music and easily held her there nearly to
the end of her life in 1999.
Though dabbling in other styles, Amalia is synonymous with Fado - the
Portuguese version of blues. As Amalia puts it, "Fado is Lament."
Filmed in traditional documentary style; we watch clip after clip of this
vocal treasure singing her heart out with intermittent historical commentary
by the English speaking narrator. From Portugal to France to Italy to the
USA, the documentary opens our eyes to TV in other countries. Amalia's own
remembrances captured in an interview during the last year of her life are
added to the mix. She speaks in Portuguese, while subtitles flash across the
screen. It's a pleasant enough recipe for a half-hour program, but looses
its punch by the hour mark. Interviews with friends and loved ones would
have helped.
Additionally, the program seldom delves below the surface of success.
Turning the angle to explore how a "singer of the sad" handles success and
stardom could have enhanced the attraction of this production. Amalia
herself says, "I was never really happy. I was never a cheerful person." Her
frank demeanor and obvious talent make her naturally fascinating ... but the
film attends only a glossy nostalgia.
Minor suggestions: Three or four times subtitles wisp across the screen
faster than the average reader can grasp. Slow them down by taking advantage
of the moments when the interviewee is paused between sentences. The mention
of a blues collaboration begged a sample clip, though none was offered.
Lastly, the film comes to a close with only a brief footnote that Amalia had
died a week before its completion. In consistent fashion, no further
information is given regarding her death, leaving the audience wondering.
Placing this footnote prior to the last long cut of Amalia singing, would
have at least emphasized its treasure while ending the film on a sigh and a
tear instead of a question mark.
Even if Fado is not your fancy, they'll be no avoiding the genuine allure of
Amalia Rodrigues' fantastic voice. Recorded through inferior microphones,
stored on imperfect film and out-dated tape formats, the rich tonal quality
of her voice still rings resilient. She must have been absolutely chilling
in person.
The Art of Amalia. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Amalia Rodrigues.
Narrated by John Ventimiglia.
Directed by Bruno de Almeida.
Written by Frank Coelho and Bruno de Almeida.
Produced by Manuel Falcao at Avatar/Arco/Valentim de Carvalho TV.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Encounter in the Third Dimension (1998)
Many of you may have heard about the newer 3D films that have been playing
at IMAX theaters. This is the one to see. Encounter offers an education on
itself -- the history and techniques of 3-D photography. But don't get the
wrong idea -- at every turn twist and protrusion it's a thrilling, learning,
theme park ride on (and sometimes off) the screen .
An "absent-minded professor" and hovering mechanical pal (Max) host you
through a film that doesn't let you sit back and relax. The professor's 3D
presentation of Elvira (yes, the Mistress of the Dark), having yet a few
bugs, traps her between the third and second dimensions. So while he's
trying to free her from the "second and a half" dimension, hi-tech jokester
Max begins the lesson.
In addition to early photo's originally shot in 3D, you'll see a 1903 clip
from the very first 3D motion picture, tidbits from the 3D fad of the early
'50's, equilibrium-challenging shorts and the 100 foot chrome spider from
Universal's T2 in 3D. You won't be thinking ... "Boy these 3-D glasses are
goofy" ... you'll be thinking ... "If those steel feelers touch me, there's
going to be lawsuits!"
You'll step out of the theater wiser, but nonetheless, wanting to ride it
again!
Starring Stuart Pankin & Elvira
Directed by Ben Stassen
Produced by Charlotte Clay Huggins at nWave Pictures n.v.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for True Crime (1999)
Clint is at it again. Imperfect reporter (i.e.: ex-drunk, current womanizer,
unable to feel compassion) has nose for the truth. When the newswoman
assigned to a "human interest" death row case dies before the convict --
Clint and his hunch are given less than 24 hours to pick up the pieces and
free the wrongly accused man (Isaiah Washington). Can it be done?
This is the old gritty Clint -- the "Do you feel lucky punk?" Clint. Extra
camera time is given to cigarette lighting and snuffing to remind you that
this is the tough Eastwood of yesteryear.
I was liking it, then it was getting boring, then it got exciting and
interesting and even got me all choked up. Then, in a last minute ditch
effort to save a life, a completely inebriated Eastwood walks his red nose
into the bar door on his way out, drives as fast as he can on a rainy night
(with an innocent passenger), pulls his emergency brake on a particularly
dangerous piece of road in order to set two trailing squad cars spinning
(Dukes-of-Hazard style). I mean, I'm there routing for him to save the death
row guy -- but come on, not at the expense of whacking a couple of officers,
and a jogger in his drunken stupor.
Other than that, some text book foreshadowing in the form of a green crayon
and crying child could have used some toning down.
Oh, and James Woods is absolutely wonderful as Eastwood's Chief Editor. He
plays the same hardball, yet light-hearted, lovable character that he played
in "Hercules" the animated feature.
Starring Isaiah Washington, Clint Eastwood and James Woods.
Directed by Clint Eastwood.
Produced by Richard & Lili Zanuck at Zanuck/Malpaso and Warner Brothers.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for General's Daughter, The (1999)
John Travolta plays Paul Brenner, a cocky military investigator shaking up
the top brass after the General's Daughter turns up dead. It's the type of
role Bruce Willis would have loved. That's not to say John isn't
commanding -- he is; it's just that the rest of the movie isn't commanding
around him. And I'm a little more comfortable when that happens to Bruce
Willis (sorry Bruce).
An intriguing premise, Capt. Elizabeth Campbell (the daughter of General
Campbell) is found strangled and apparently raped. Soon after, Brenner
uncovers her secret life of freaky sex with enlisted men. Not surprisingly,
no one at the base appreciates the investigation.
Loaded with a cartridge of high powered actors: Travolta, Hutton, Cromwell,
Woods ... "The General's Daughter" has a poorly aligned barrel. Though a few
scenes were shot well, hitting their targets hard -- too many shells sail
way wide. The rough dialogue is, in part, responsible. When the murderer is
finally found our investigators ask the stupidest question --"Why'd you do
it?" to which they get a well deserved response, "[You're so smart.] You
tell me." (Eek). Secondly, not all the big names deliver big. Cromwell isn't
his normal self. He's a fine actor, although his performance in this film
lacks substance. Hutton isn't spectacular either.
The strongest scenes, condescending and clever, pit the egos of Woods and
Travolta head on and center. Nearly too clever, these scenes destroy their
targets anyway. Woods is wonderful.
Still, the DNA bluff sequence that attacked my modest (yet innocent)
intelligence, along with a few other faulted scenes leave this decent and
respectable story line nearly as overpowered and helpless as its own rape
victim.
Starring John Travolta, Madeleine Stowe, James Cromwell, Timothy Hutton,
James Woods and Clarence WIlliams III.
Directed by Simon West.
Screenplay by Christopher Bertolini & William Goldman.
Produced by Mace Neufeld at Paramount/Rehme/Krane.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Watcher, The (2000)
Spader's tough, but depressed, cop performance is mesmerizing. How could
anybody in their right mind be afraid of Keanu Reeves? That takes an expert
actor. Spader does such a great job that you might even come to fear Keanu
too ... a little bit? Maybe? Well, fear not (er, I mean, don't worry),
there's a good movie here -- even if the bad guy isn't all that frightening.
Basically, Spader, out on workman's comp because of the drugs for the
insomnia and migraines due in part to an LA serial strangler (Reeves), has
moved to Chicago in search of peace and a good psychologist. Unfortunately,
Reeves, missing the special way Spader used to pursue him, packs his piano
wire and sets up shop in the windy city.
Psychologist (Tomei), "Maybe you're just afraid."
Spader, "You're f-ing right I'm afraid."
This well paced film, backed by thumpin' tunes, moves with strength. All
involved act well, with Spader topping the list; though his later scenes
aren't too bad, Reeves is simply miscast. (Leave the pretty-boy crazed
killer gig to Brad Pitt.)
Another major distraction to the project is overuse of a passé digital
effect - strobe. Every time the image juts across the screen, my teeth
grind. But maybe I'm biased, thinking it pretty cool, I overused that effect
myself many years ago with my own shorts. Seeing it here nauseated me while
denigrating the overall quality of the production.
Also, midway into the story, Reeves steps into Spader's psychologist's
office posing as a potential patient. This new twist to the personal game of
chess between he and Spader waxes extremely promising. Terribly intrigued to
see it develop, audiences may very well be dismayed when it drops out of the
film like a dead body.
Lastly in a third act face to face, a gritty overworked Spader draws his gun
on a smilingly giddy unarmed Reeves; sorry, I don't believe Spader would
turn an ear before taking a shot at some limb or other.
Still, overall, a very strong B+. This film is stirring, has action, humor,
and great dialogue (the Spader character is artfully drawn and portrayed).
It's not all that scary, though a few victims do get a bit choked up - you
probably won't.
The Watcher. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring James Spader, Marisa Tomei, Ernie Hudson, Chris Ellis, Keanu
Reeves.
Directed by Joe Charbanic.
Screenplay by David Elliot and Clay Ayers.
Produced by Christopher Eberts, Elliot Lewitt, Jeff Rice, and Nile Niami at
Universal/Interlight(C)2000.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Waking the Dead (1999)
It's kind of like oatmeal. Without honey or milk, it tastes rather bland,
but sticks to your ribs all day. Some wholesome thing inside you. One right
thing you did.
If you're in love, you'll empathize. But if you're not, you'll say, "Man,
it's been a long time. I'd sure like to do that again."
A new genre: political romance. A civics love story. Left meets right and
falls in love. In the farout 70's, Fielding Pierce, a young man born to
succeed in office, stumbles across Sarah, a revolutionary-minded
bleeding-heart with a twist of the Catholic. Of course they hop right into
bed -- and my goodness, these are some hot and steamy love scenes. All would
be hunky-dory hadn't the news reported Sarah's untimely death during her
libertarian mission down in Chile. A decade later and smack dab in the
middle of his campaign for office, Fielding starts to pretend he's seeing
and hearing Sarah again (or is she really there?). Coupled with gradually
corrupting powers of politics, his seductive visions set him struggling with
political goals, family expectations, personal morals, and sanity.
Billy Crudup plays the role extremely well, but mostly without pungency,
save for a few exemplary outstanding Oscar moments. In one scene, he thinks
Sarah's on the phone. He's shaking and crying and believably moved to near
vomit. In another pinnacle scene, he announces to his family that he may be
losing his marbles. It's wonderful: fancy restaurant, proper dinner party
and then this guttural outburst. Fantastic performances. Billy was very good
in another prosaic movie this time last year: "Hi-Lo Country". Jennifer
Connelly also performs well. In fact all do, and the direction is sharp;
it's just that the script is rather like oatmeal -- bland. Billy's two
moments - like unbroken, unresolved chunks of brown sugar, give a mighty
flavorful chew to this banal, but hearty meal.
The ending narrative is unnecessary and out of place in a movie that's all
about thinking and feeling. The people/letter scene is excellent and would
have served the slightly-open resolution well.
There is also an interview with director Keith Gordon on the site!
Waking the Dead. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Billy Crudup, Jennifer Connelly, Molly Parker, Janet McTeer, Paul
Hipp. Sandra Oh, Hal Holbrook.
Directed by Keith Gordon
Screenplay by Robert Dillon, based upon the novel by Scott Spencer.
Produced by Keith Gordon, Stuart Kleinman, Linda Reisman at Egg/Gramercy/USA
(C)2000. Rated R.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Head Over Heels (2001)
"I'm the woman with the worst judgment in men," admits Amanda (Monica 
Potter). Having been cheated once too many times, she leaves her latest 
disloyal boyfriend and rents a closet (err... room) in an extravagant 
apartment occupied by four goofy models and overlooking the residence of 
Jim Winsten (Freddie Prinze Jr.). Having sworn off men forever, she 
buries herself in her work (fine art restoration) and then, of course, 
gets weak in the knees for Freddie upon first meeting. But will he fall 
head over heels too, or will he be just like all the other men in this 
movie, or will he turn out to be a phony, liar, Vespa rider? 
Early on choppy editing left the production awkwardly timed. At Monica's 
workplace, the group of three senior ladies felt horribly filmed and 
added later. After a sticky first 20 minutes, the editing found a decent 
groove and the rough-edged acting also improved to adequate. 
The first meeting of Monica and Jim balances the sweet charming beats 
with ouch wince-able beats. Much of the humor lies in stuttery, got the 
words wrong because I'm in love, type dialogue, "I got the runs ... I 
ah, mean, I gotta run." 
Monica Potter shows some promise, gracing the screen with a reminiscence 
of Julia Roberts gone blonde and unrefined. "He must have some huge flaw 
... because I'm attracted to him." 
Freddie Prinze, Jr. simply smiled and giggled his way through the 
picture. 
4 models + 1 cop = a very bad scene. However, the two fish tank scenes 
brought a maturity and class to a production sorely unaware that those 
qualities were lacking. Though neither classy nor mature, by far the 
funniest two scenes required a toilet. (But they really were funny!) 
But hey, what do I know? I'm not a fourteen year old girl. 
Head Over Heels. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Monica Potter, Freddie Prinze, Jr., Sarah O'Hare, Shalom 
Harlow, Ivana Milicevic, Tomiko Fraser, China Chow, Jay Brazeau. 
*  Directed by Mark Waters. 
*  Written by Ron Burch, David Kidd. 
*  Produced by Robert Simonds at Universal. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Earth (1998)
"Earth" tells (in Hindi mixed with English) the story of the 1947
partitioning of India as seen through the eyes of a little girl named Lenny.
Lenny's Nanny, the beautiful Hindu Shanta, hangs with a hip,
religiously-mixed bunch of friends who try fruitlessly to hold their
friendship above their various affiliations as the British pull out after
200 years of rule.
Painting in a yellowish stroke the passion of life, love and death; the film
is accented with romance and courtship amidst tragic religion-based
massacring.
Though this particular dispute between Eastern religious factions occurred
half a century ago on the other side of the planet, it certainly colors an
all too familiar picture. Not short on cute proverbs and parables, the film
itself, teaches the saddest of lessons.
Slightly on the over-dramatic side (acting and camera direction), much of
the spoken English may be difficult to decipher. But, the pace is strong,
images warm and deep, and story powerful.
"Earth" is the second film in director Mehta's trilogy: Fire, Earth and
Water.
Earth. Based on "Cracking India" by Bapsi Sidhwa. Not Rated.
Starring Aamir Khan, Nandita Das, Maia Sethna, Rahul Kjanna, Kitu Gidwani.
Director/Screenwriter Deepa Mehta
Produced by Deepa Mehta at Cracking Earth.
Released by Zeitgeist.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for What Lies Beneath (2000)
A beautiful blond (Michelle Pfeiffer) aims her hair dryer at the
steam-filled bathroom mirror. But there's something wrong ... no
electricity. Still dripping from the shower she presses that little red
reset button on the outlet with her moist finger. ZAP! Just a spark! But
that's all it takes to set you on edge and keep you paranoid as you try to
see what's on the other side of every camera pan, every plot or doorknob
twist.
If you liked Hitchcock's "Rear Window" and Spielberg's "Poltergeist" and
uhm, I don't know, "Terminator 1" ... well I think it's safe to say, you'll
like this mix of the three. Me? Though the genre of suspense-driven films
isn't my fancy, I must admit I was quite compelled for the first two acts.
Director Robert Zemeckis does an absolutely scrupulous job of keenly keeping
his audience balancing precariously on the edge of their seats - simulating
the sensation we feel at a roller coaster's peak. Freeze that crested car
and peer hundreds of feet to the ground down two rickety wooden rails atop
the track's largest drop ... what lies beneath? Indeed!
It's the third and final act that lets go of all that careful teasing and
toying and begins (well, it's hard to say without spoiling for you) ...
suffice ... the climax that's not as smart as the first two acts.
Pfeiffer and Ford forge fantastically. Pfeiffer fans fear only the phantasm.
Her acting is grand. But resounding kudos must be song strongly to the audio
engineers, creators and mixers whose huge hits will enter through your ears
shattering your deliberately crystallized belly then setting the bits to
drift like glistening frost into your legs and arms.
Pfeiffer and Ford should be relaxing now that only-daughter Katherine Towne
has taken off for college. That might have been the case if it weren't for a
haunting past slowly surfacing. AHHHHHH!
"What Lies Beneath" is scary. If you're looking for intensely thick drama or
rich comedy, you should know that though both tastes are sampled, this film
is dead set on one thing only - to scare you.
What Lies Beneath. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Michelle Pfeiffer, Harrison Ford, Diana Scarwid, Miranda Otto,
James Remar, Amber Valletta.
Directed by Robert Zemeckis.
Written by Clark Gregg. Story by Sarah Kernochan and Clark Gregg.
Produced by Steve Starkey, Robert Zemeckis, and Jack Rapke at
Imagemovers/Dreamworks/20th Century Fox.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Bring It On (2000)
Well, surprisingly, there are a lot of things to like about this film. I say
"surprisingly" because I am not a member of the 14-year-old female,
apparent-target audience and yet, I must admit - I had a good time!
Here's why: great pace, good direction (all the actors look good), great
acting by Dunst (as  always), with costars also hoppin', funny script, some
nice cheer action (You know, cheer action is quite impressive in slow mo.
The aerial stuff is phenomenal, would have liked more.), abrasively
enjoyable toothbrushing sequence (like none other I've seen - have I seen
one?), Jesse Bradford's guitar reply to a surprise visit by Dunst, and his
goofy song for her, "I can't stand your cheerleading squad, but I like your
pom poms."
It's pretty much the high school team formula with boyfriend off at college
premise that makes a few (perhaps not breakthrough fresh), but nonetheless
respectable twists. Dunst plays the new cheerleading captain whose worst
nightmare comes true - her squad's routines aren't all original! She teams
up with new rocker from the city to keep the crew psyched and ready for the
cheer championships in Florida.
Here are a couple of the tongue-in-cheek lines that kept this audience
smiling and laughing:
Bradford encouraging his punkster sister to go for the cheer thing, "You get
to yell like you care about something."
Dunst, "This is not a democracy - it's a cheerocracy." Upset members
respond, "And you're not a cheerleader you're a cheertator!"
Also done nicely, not unlike the way cheerleaders might be thought to play
second fiddle to football teams, in this film these roles are reversed; the
jocks are almost a second thought - impotent, bullies at best.
Improvements? Sure, though the militant-cheerographer bit was a good idea
and made this crowd laugh, I felt a better cast actor could have really
rocked the place. Also, Eliza Dushku is introduced into the group as a
leather-wearing/gymnast, sadly, we never see her talents in the competition.
A lull at half-time stunts the awesome momentum created from the start. And
lastly, the film might have benefited from deeper relationships among the
characters (most are playful), instead the mood is kept light from beginning
to end, save for an almost heartfelt moment between Dunst and rival captain
of the Compton team, Gabrielle Union.
Overall, Hurrah for this little film, it's a good time. A strong B+.
Bring It On. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13
Starring Kirsten Dunst, Eliza Dushku, Jesse Bradford, Gabrielle Union, Clare
Kramer, Nicole Bilderback, Tsianina Joelson, Rini Bell, Natan West, Huntley
Ritter, Shamari Fears & Natina Reed & Brandi Williams (of Blaque), Richard
Hillman, Lindsay Sloane, Ian Roberts.
Directed by Peyton Reed.
Written by Jessica Bendinger.
Produced by Marc Abraham, Thomas A. Bliss, John Ketcham at Universal/Beacon.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Any Given Sunday (1999)
This is a hardcore football flick, not some mushy tale with football as a
backdrop. All American football all the time. So if you're not fond of the
sport, don't let your date take you. Even for those of us who like
football - it borders on the excessive.
What an incredible pace Oliver Stone delivers for 2 hours and 45 minutes,
impressive. The film is an MTV collage of sport, drama, and music. His fast
cuts, Hi-def digi-vid field shots and special effects put you into the
dangerous parts of the game; the dark side, where bones and spirits get
broken. Off the field, the action is still the same, ego's collide like
helmets.
Al Pacino plays Coach Tony Demata who can't separate life from the game -
nor can Oliver Stone. Like Tony's life, the film is all hardcore football.
Great acting, Jamie Foxx as QB Willie Beaman does a great job, but a
stereotypical play to make this 3rd-stringer turn hot shot into an
in-your-face vanity case is too fast and beneath the quality of the
production. I would have liked to have seen more complexity to that move.
Additionally, a scene that should have been the climax is cut short. Pacino
faces Diaz (owner) in the locker room closet - it's the all out fight we've
been waiting for ... and it's just starting to rock. But it gets cut short
of blossoming, leaving the climax to fall into a clich?coach's speech to the
team before the big game. That was fine, just could have been much better.
In an effort to make QB Beamen less predictable and more loveable - he
vomits in the limelight - it's a good quirk that works.
Any Given Sunday. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Al Pacino, Cameron Diaz, Jamie Foxx, James Woods, Dennis Quaid, Jim
Brown, Ann Margaret.
Directed by Oliver Stone
Screenplay by Oliver Stone based on novel by Rob Huizenga
Produced by Somebody at Some Production Company.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for State and Main (2000)
This briskly-paced dry comedy portrays the daily trials and tribulations 
of a film crew as they field obstacle after obstacle in Smalltown, 
America. The most blaring predicament - how to write the old mill out of 
a script entitled "The Old Mill?" 
"Why did we have to leave New Hampshire?" the bumbling writer asks the 
producer who is never at a loss for a quick fix answer or "associate 
producer" credit with which to patronize a discouraged contributor. 
There's the actress refusing to expose herself after recently finding 
God, the writer who can't create without a manual typewriter, the male 
lead actor with a fetish for underage girls and the local townsfolk 
spinning a love story or two into the mix. 
Cute, cozy and wryly funny; the film, feeling of "Northern Exposure" is 
slightly too TV. This is a small drawback, especially in the face of a 
thumping bustling pace that the filmmakers maintain from beginning to 
end. The only other shortcoming (and again a small one) lies in the 
casting. Populated by many interesting characters, the writer eventually 
becomes the focal person. Though, Philip Seymour Hoffman, performs fine, 
he simply doesn't elicit the compassion of the audience. Other actors 
who may have been better suited for the role include: Will Smith, Ben 
Stiller, Owen Wilson. 
State and Main. Copyright Š 2000. 
*  Starring William H. Macy, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Alec Baldwin, 
Charles Durning, Clark Gregg, Rebecca Pidgeon, Sarah Jessica Parker, 
David Paymer, Julia Stiles. 
*  Written and Directed by David Mamet. 
*  Produced by Sarah Green at Fineline/Hilltop/filmtown(C)2000. Rated R. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Mickey Blue Eyes (1999)
A single delivery truck attempts to give this film a good name ("Ross
Movers") during the opening sequence. Unfortunately,the goods are a day late
and a dollar short -- how apropos of the film itself.
Hugh falls for Jeanne. Jeanne's pop (Caan) is Mafia; ditto for rest of the
males in her family. She fears for the corruption of her soon-to-be hubby.
"Mickey Blue Eyes" is the step by step account of that corruption. This
occurs in a rather unstructured way that gives the film little movement
until the third act (last half hour) in which an interesting and amusing
sting plan is conceived, flubbed, and twisted.
Poor editing plagues the picture, especially in the first act. A scene in a
Chinese restaurant could have been funny, but falls on its face due to
poorly-timed and over-abundant edits. Dry-whitted Grant is cute and
charming, but trudges through painfully flat film moments that made me
wince.
The handful of times that Hugh tries to act like a tough New York Italian
gangster are really quite entertaining. They may, in fact, be the most
amusing moments of the film. But they are a rarity in this back and forth
love story, Mel Brooks-like farce, "Get Shorty"-wannabe picture.
Starring Hugh Grant, Jeanne Tripplehorn, James Caan.
Directed by Kelly Makin. Written by Adam Scheinman and Robert Kuhn.
Produced by Elizabeth Hurley and Charles Mulvehill at Simian/Castle Rock.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Dish, The (2000)
Back in '69, the USA made good on its promise to put a man on the moon. 
This modest, yet charming, Australian comedy asks, "What's the primary 
purpose of that?" Then answers its own question, "Perhaps a live TV 
signal so that the entire world, all of mankind, could watch." 
Since these signals can't bend around the Earth, the US needs a high 
performance communications dish on the other side of the planet. When 
the moon (and therefore Apollo XI) pass over the land down under, all 
eyes will be on a signal pulled out of the sky by a loveably real team 
of four gentlemen in a field of sheep. The patient dish director, with a 
pipe, is the heart of the team. His emotional and sharp-whitted 
right-hand man has a problem with the no-nonsense black-tied NASA 
American. The young engineer crunches numbers while wobbling weak in the 
knees over the local girl who brings the crew lunch. 
Such involvement in the lunar landing is a scientist's dream. As the 
responsibility heats up the tension, bonds cement across our four leads. 
Meanwhile, the tiny town of Parkes, Australia prepares to be either 
exulted or embarrassed as obstacles mount, "He knows everything about 
Apollo 11 - does he know where it is?" 
The local band of teens tunes up to play America's national anthem for 
the visiting US ambassador, but forgoes their own set up for the Jimi 
Hendrix (teeth to guitar) version. Any disappointment over that 
missed-op fades when the band's brass instead fires up the theme to 
"Hawaii Five-O." 
This sharp-tongued small film is well directed, acted, cast, written, 
conceived and scored. The mayor and his family play perfect on the 
screen. Watching Armstrong take "One giant leap for mankind" on the 
telly in their living room crowded with neighbors will likely choke you 
up as it did I. 
Quote from engineer Neil "Fox" Mason at the Dish's Control Desk in 
Parkes, Australia back in '69: 
"Delivering the pictures to the world was my proudest moment. Apollo XI 
was a once in a lifetime experience and it was great listening to the 
original audio broadcast that is used in the movie. It brought back lots 
of memories. ... I think it's one of mankind's greatest achievements in 
the 20th century." 
The Dish. Copyright Š 2001. Rated PG. 
*  Starring Sam Neill, Kevin Harrington, Tom Long, Patrick Warburton, 
Genevieve Mody, Tayler Kane, Billie Brown, Roy Billing. 
*  Directed by Rob Sitch. 
*  Written and Produced by Santo Cilauro, Tom Gleiser, Jane Kennedy and 
Rob Sitch at Warner Bros/Working Dog/Distant Horizon. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Analyze This (1999)
I gotta tell you, I was preparing to wince. I mean the previews didn't look
too promising and the ad in the paper made the two top name actors look like
they were pleading for our forgiveness for making such a stupid movie. And
De Niro, I just didn't know if I was ready to see a film hero make a fool of
himself.
My premonitions were all in vain. "Analyze This" is a respectably funny
piece of work. Crystal was as good as ever, and De Niro didn't let me
down -- even when he cried like a big thug baby. In fact, I'm very impressed
with him for taking that kind of risk (and also for not making a buffoon of
himself). Who else could have played the part of a Mafioso gang boss gone
all mushy funnier than an actor that we all hold with such high and hardened
wise-guy esteem?
I think you know the story, gangland boss Paul Vitti (De Niro) goes soft
(under more than one type of situation) so he hires (loosely kidnaps) a
shrink (Billy Crystal) to put his head back together. Wonderfully neurotic
Lisa Kudrow plays Billy's wife to be.
As I left the theater, I overheard a couple discussing the film ... "It was
good, but not great." Be that as it may, let me tell you -- not only did I
laugh a lot, but I went home with a nagging desire to play a Tony Bennett or
Louis Prima CD.
Starring Robert De Niro and Billy Crystal. Directed by Harold Ramis. Rated
R.
Produced by Paula Weinstein and Jane Rosenthal at Village Roadshow/Warner
Brothers.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Straight Story, The (1999)
Alvin Straight is seventy-three. He has bad eyes and hips. The state won't
issue him a driver's license, he refuses a walker opting for two canes and
he's too stubborn to have anyone drive him. Yet, his brother has had a
stroke in Wisconsin and he's bound and determined to get there.
"Alvin you're not thinking of riding this lawnmower to Wisconsin, are you?"
the mower salesman asks. Later Alvin puts it this way, "You're a kind man,
talking to a stubborn man."
This Straight story is also a slow one. The roaring pace (that's loving
sarcasm) of America's rural states, namely Iowa, add a carefully harvested
flavor to this simple robust tale. For example, a scene in which Alvin
purchases a "grabber" from a local hardware store takes a full two minutes
to blossom. It just goes to show you what patience and a good sense of humor
can yield.
The Straight Story. Š 1999. Rated G.
Starring Richard Farnsworth and Sissy Spacek.
Directed by David Lynch.
Written by John Roach and Mary Sweeney.
Produced by Mary Sweeney and Neal Edelstein at Picture Factory.
Distruibuted by Buena Vista/Disney.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Bowfinger (1999)
Bob Bowfinger (Steve Martin) is an aging Hollywood producer wannabe who, in
desperation, makes a cheesy alien movie that he believes is the next
"Independence Day." Action mega-star Kit Ramsey (Eddie Murphy) is cast to
play the hero; however, since Ramsey won't even glance at the script,
Bowfinger has to film him a la paparazzi (hence the word desperation).
Director Bowfinger cons the rest of his cast into believing that Ramsey
prefers to be filmed this way, "It's an action piece! We just need shots of
him running away from the Aliens!"
Murphy's second role in the picture is that of a nerd whose two great
talents are running errands and looking like Kit Ramsey. Murphy's portrayal
of this character is both charming and funny.
The script (also written by Steve Martin) is pretty funny, but it's not
especially funny. Although it does sport two especially riotous moments. The
first hilarious bit pits Murphy (as the nerd) against highway traffic (as
in, he's got to run across eight lanes of speeding vehicles). Bowfinger
assures him that the drivers are all stunt men. The second moment is the
last scene of the film -- sort of tacked on after the climax and resolution
(a bonus second ending); wherein, Martin and Murphy play geriatric ninja and
ninja dork respectively in Taiwan. Save for the highway scene, this ninja
sequence packs nearly the same yuck value as the rest of the film.
The picture could have benefited by characters that weren't just ridiculous,
but also endearing. Further, though the ending technically works, other more
interesting conclusions could have been employed. (Click here for Ross
Anthony revision notes.)
Silly and fun, but short on heart; "Bowfinger," a film about a film entitled
"Chubby Rain," proves slightly above average.
Starring Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy, Heather Graham, Christine Baranski.
Directed by Frank Oz. Written by Steve Martin.
Produced by Brian Grazer at Universal.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Return to Me (2000)
"It's a shame we gotta put roofs on 'em," architect, builder, handsome, rich
successful, eternally nice guy, David Duchovny utters the film's opening
line as he stands atop a partially constructed building. His sentence ends a
gentle, patiently tightening aerial shot from a blimp high above Chicago.
It's a sweet introduction, but here's a better one: close shot on Duchovny
donning a bloodstained white tuxedo standing disengaged and expressionless
as he peers through a hospital's emergency ward doors. Flashback: Duchovny
as teen on first date with future wife, first kiss, first marriage, wife at
her job with great ape at the zoo, at a zoo fund-raiser supporting wife's
projects, at night in the car afterwards - headlights jump the double yellow
and approach full speed. Back to present day: Duchovny gets the bad news as
a group of organ donor personnel jog past toting a full thermos. Roll
opening credits. Return to Duchovny, one year later, trying to re-start his
life while grieving the death of his wife.
That necessary background info could be filmed creatively in three minutes
(okay, maybe five). Instead, "Return to Me" spends what seems like 25
minutes just to establish Duchovny's love of his wife. This still isn't a
great sin, the problem is that it lacks life. Feeling more like a necessary
burden for the filmmakers than entertainment; moviegoers deserve better. If
we're going to spend a good fraction of the film on "prerequisite
information" it should at least be compelling. This one's tragically typical
littered with the trite, example: "There's my husband with Sidney the ape;
my husband's the one on the right." However, I quite enjoyed the conclusion
of this sequence (which ends visually as my suggestion begins); Duchovny,
bloodstained, peers blankly into surgery ward while soundtrack continues the
song "Return to Me" but minus the music, simply acappella. It's a chillingly
lonely affect.
The real story (which is quite interesting) starts when a sickly and dying
Minnie Driver receives David's dead wife's heart (via transplant - not the
US post) restoring her to health, much to the delight of her loving
grandfather Carol O'Connor. Driver is an excellent actress, Duchovny is also
charming with his subtle emotionalism, and director/actress/writer Bonnie
Hunt delivers a strong performance as Minnie's best friend. But it's
O'Connor's big heart and loving charisma that anchors the film (despite his
goofy Irish accent).
Mostly a love story (David soon enough meets Minnie), with comic relief,
(James Belushi is a lot of fun as beer-bellied, Joe Average, dad), the
picture also relies on suspense. What will happen when Minnie tells David
about her operation? Will they realize whose heart is where? If and when
they do, will it prompt a change of heart?
The family sequences are so warm and full, they'll leave you sure that these
writers have kids of their own. Aside from the pale intro sequence, the film
has heart and humor.
Return to Me. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG.
Starring David Duchovny, Minnie Driver, Carrol O'Connor, Robert Loggia,
Bonnie Hunt, David Alan Grier, Joely Richardson, Eddie Jones, James Belushi.
Directed by Bonnie Hunt.
Written by Bonnie Hunt & Don Lake.
Produced by Jennie Lew Tugend at MGM/JTL.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Rugrats in Paris: The Movie (2000)
I enjoyed this film so much, I wondered if it overshot the intended
audience. So I asked a few little tikes after the film. Two were too shy,
but their mom said they loved it. And the other one, he left the theater
singing, "Who let the dogs out!" the Baha Men's catchy chorus off the film's
soundtrack. That should clinch it then, a strong follow-up to the first
"Rugrats - The Movie."
The opening logo comes together in brilliant computer-animated ease forming
the familiar fun Nickelodeon-styled "Rugrats," then the lights dim as the
text changes to "The Godfather" font. You can expect this parody to pepper
spice the rest of this kids' flick. But there are plenty of other adult
ingredients, and two diapers full of pottie humor to go around for everyone.
After taking the consequence, Tommy is scorned by Angelica, "That's what you
get for winging your buggers on Susie." Undaunted Tommy smiles, "So that's
where I left 'em!"
Mr. Pickles gets a call from France summoning him to fix the huge
Godzilla-spoof robot he engineered for the Disneyland-spoof EuroReptarland.
Of course he takes the whole family. But this movie's star is really
Chuckie. Chuckie's need for a new mom compels him to search deep down and
find the courage to approach a beautiful princess. But he isn't the only one
scheming prospective partners for his single dad.
Though most of the animation is painted in the old fashion 2-D style; the
colors are Starburst juicy, and the action paced for those with little tiny
attention spans - so don't expect to be bored. These little munchkins get
into everything! And of course, songs tie it all together. You'll no doubt
be singing "Who let the dogs out" during your walk to the parking lot. But
there are a few other notes of note as well: "Chuckie Chan," the dream
sequence ("He'll break up the party if he's not on the pottie"), and "Reptar
I love you" (a refreshing poke-funnery of those Disney classic odes).
Chuckie-full of juicy one liners, you'll have to keep your ears open:
"I love their fries and all ... but."
"See how nice his head stays on."
"It's a nerd, it's a pain, it's Angelica!"
Rugrats in Paris - The Movie. Copyright Š 2000. Rated G.
Starring Voices: E.G. Daily, Tara Charendoff, Cheryl Chase, Christine
Cavanaugh, Cree Summer Franck, Kath Soucie, Michael Bell, Tress Macneille,
Casey Kasem, Joe Alasky, Debbie Reynolds, Jack Riley, Susan Sarandon, John
Lithgow, Julia Kato, Melanie Chartoff.
Directed by Paul Demeyer, Stig Bergqvist.
Written by J. David Stem & David N. Weiss, Jill Gorey & Barbara Herndon and
Kate Boutilier.
Produced by Arlene Klasky, Gabor Csupo at Nickelodeon
Movies/Paramount/Klasky-Csupo.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
"Unfortunately, no one can be told what the matrix is, you have to see it
for yourself," the radio ads drill. But, I can tell you this..."The Matrix"
(the movie) is a winding web of dream vs. reality vs. technological
dictatorship. It snatches you in your slumber, then challenges you to see
the real world as a dream. It won't insult your intelligence; in fact, like
Keanu, you'll spend most of the film trying to figure it out. As for the
rest: saliva will be evaporating from your wide open mouth as your jaw
lowers at the glass-shattering special effects.
I'm not sure why bullets are necessary to battle power-hunger software; but
it sure is cool to watch the empty shells fall to the ground in slow mo.
There are the times when the psychedelic, poetic, philosophic dialogue kind
of bogs up on itself and there's that lull in the second act ... but nothing
that a totally dope butt-woopin' climax can't blast from your memory. Now
that's why we go to see action movies!
The plot/concept is almost intricate enough to make you forget that fighting
technology with Kung Fu is essentially a silly idea. The acting won't steal
the show. It's the careful direction (unique, yet reminiscent of Terry
Gilliam, especially in "10 monkeys") and sensitive, creative use of
remarkable special effects that will burn this film in your memory. Buckle
up!
Starring Keanu Reeves and Laurence Fishburne, Carrie-Anne Moss and Joe
Pantoliano.
Written and Directed by the Wachowski Brothers.
Produced by Joel Silver at Village Roadshow/Grocho II/Warner Brothers.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Return with Honor (1998)
Generally, documentaries don't carry well in the movie theater (that goes
for the one's I've produced as well). However, "Return with Honor" is an
exception. Its spirit is more than enough to scale a 70 foot screen.
Beginning with what in hindsight sounds like pipe-dreams, "The clouds open
up like fields of cotton ... it's really beautiful," top-gun pilots talk
about the joy of flying ... and then the painful reality of being shot down
into enemy territory.
"I was taught to escape and evade under a variety of conditions and terrain,
and then after I was shot down and ejected to the ground I was able to
escape and evade for all of five seconds before I was surrounded by what
seemed like a hundred guns." This paraphrase sums up the "capture" segment
of "Return with Honor."
>From there the POWs (now 25 years later) recount their experiences in
"Heartbreak Hotel" and other prisons deep in Northern Vietnam. In a terribly
candid manner and then occasionally moved to tears (or humor), these
survivors sit as relaxed as old friends and tell in detail the tragic
hardships and bone bending tortures that just needed to be endured. Even at
their breaking points, they seem somehow to crawl away with chins up.
The interviews are shot on film and mixed with occasion recreations. Most of
the field footage is real -- including images of the prisoners under
captivity (from the archives of North Vietnam).
"We weren't allowed to talk, but we had to communicate, so we worked out a
tap code. We coughed in code, we raked leaves in code, we swept the floor in
code."
Some may see "Return with Honor" as an Air Force propaganda film, and though
it may tip in that direction, the genuine testimonials of these "Heroes"
transcend political opinion. The filmmakers create a work that progresses
with a very sincere intensity resulting in a rare mix of drama and fact. It
has all the soul of the Rambo movies, without the acting. Truly
inspirational.
Testimonials of Lt. jg. Everett Alvarez, Lt. Cmdr. Bob Shumaker, Lt. Cmdr.
John McCain, Cmdr. Jeremiah Denton, Cmdr. James Stockdale, Lt. Col. Robinson
Risner, Capt. Douglas Peterson, Maj. Red Cherry, Capt. George McKnight, Maj.
Sam Johnson, Lt. Paul Galanti, Lt. Ron Bliss, Lt. Tom McNish, Lt. Cmdr.
Richard Stratton, Seaman Douglas Hegdahl, Col. Tom Madison, Lt. Ed
Mechenbeir, Lt. Kevin McManus, Lt. John McGrath, Maj. George Day, Sybil
Stockdale, Henry Etta Madison, Alice Stratton, Phyliss Galanti, Marlene
McGrath, Lorraine Shumaker.
Written/Produced/Directed by: Freida Lee Mock, Terry Sanders with Christine
Z. Wiser at An American Film Foundation. Released by Ocean.
Grade..........................A
See Ross Anthony's interview with Terry Sanders and Freida Lee Mock at
http://www.rossanthony.com/interviews/returnint.shtml
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Girl, Interrupted (1999)
"Some advice ... never stick your finger out at a crazy person," a wild cat,
dangerously honest, less than stable Angelina Jolie warns an older
acquaintance of Winona Ryder at a local ice cream parlor during a rare field
trip from the institution.
Essentially, this is the story of one woman's sabbatical from sanity. We
begin the film with an assortment of flashbacks as Ryder admits herself to
Clayman Mental Center in hopes of getting a little rest from all the
headaches, hallucinations, etc. After the first half-hour, we're up to speed
on the history, and spend most of the rest of the film in the institution,
making friends and getting used to the awkward routine. "Don't drop anchor,
here," Whoopi Goldberg (nurse) cautions the confused Ryder.
Ryder is very good. Jolie is awesome. The direction, script and editing are
also supreme until the climax, where the script dumps a preciously delicate,
off-balance momentum for a rather cliché resolution. It was an "A" before
that.
Girl, Interrupted. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Winona Ryder, Angelina Jolie, Clea Duvall, Brittany Murphy, Vanessa
Redgrave, Whoopi Goldberg.
Directed by James Mangold.
Written by James Mangold, Lisa Loomer and Anna Hamilton Phelan.
Based on the book by Susanna Kaysen.
Produced by Douglas Wick, Cathy Konrad at Sony.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Flawless (1999)
These days, De Niro seems to be seeking out scripts with challenging twists
to his tough guy persona. "Analyze This" (earlier in the year) portrayed him
as a Mafia boss, who in search of meaning to his criminal life, enlists the
reluctant help of the comical psychologist Billy Crystal. In "Flawless," De
Niro plays retired hero cop Walt Koontz: strong, suave, and staunchly
homophobic. Walt soon suffers a stroke, prompting him ever-so-reluctantly to
take singing lessons (therapy) from his cross-dressing neighbor down the
hall. The relationship between these two (ahem) men, is the nugget of gold
that gives "Flawless" its appeal.
But there's plenty of less glittering film around this golden center. A
"Starsky and Hutch"-like drug/money drama weaves in and out lasting for
weeks and months without resolution -- until the end. Surprisingly, this,
essentially warm buddy film, wraps up with an action sequence. Farcical, out
of place, but not terribly destructive, the climax plays more off the good
humor of the writer/director than the vicious potential of the bad guys.
Though quiet brashly amusing, the drag-queen entourage overdoes the costume
parade at times. It's a rough, yet playful film with endearing moments,
where both hetero's and gays are cherished and ribbed.
Flawless. Copyright Š 1999.
Starring Robert De Niro, Philip Symour Hoffman. Rated R.
Written and Directed by Joel Schumacher.
Produced by Joel Schumacher and Jane Rosenthal at MGM/Tribeca.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Deep Blue Sea (1999)
About ten minutes into the picture, our primary characters chopper to an
off-shore facility faintly reminiscent of a well-kept "Water World" set
presented in such a way that you just know you'll be spending the rest of
the film there.
"Deep Blue Sea" has all the classic elements: The shark swimming hero (who
actually delivers a pretty good performance), the money guy, the preacher
(LL Cool J), the architectural guy, the innocent and lovely assistant, the
mad scientist (in this case, sexy and mad), and of course the beasts ...
smart sharks. Seems sharks have some protein in their brains that when
extracted can reverse the effects of Alzheimer's disease. I'm not sure why,
but instead of harvesting from lots of sharks, our mad scientist decides to
grow three sharks and enlarge their brains. "You've just taken nature's best
killing machine and given it will and desire." This fair piece of dialogue
aside, plenty of hokey lines abound (of which, Samuel L. Jackson, more oft
than not the lucky deliverer) setting our screening audience laughing in a
sort of cliché-induced hysteria.
For reasons less than obvious, all of the experimentation takes place
submerged under the ocean surface.
If you can bite that off, you might just have a good time ooowing and
aaahing at all the action (I did). Though the actual shark visuals aren't
remarkable, other action (I don't want give anything away) is rather
explosive. Nicely directed and seldom a dull moment, "Deep Blue Sea" swims
from beginning to end with well placed and carefully timed bumps, sputters
and twists.
It's no "Jaws," it's not really that scary, but it is fun.
Starring Saffron Burrows, Thomas Jane, LL Cool J and Samuel L. Jackson.
Directed by Renny Harlen. Screenplay by Duncan Kennedy and Donna Powers &
Wayne Powers. Produced by Akiva Goldsman, Tony Ludwig and Alan Riche at
Warner Brothers.
Grade ......................................... B+
(C) 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted and shot
documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Keeping the Faith (2000)
We all love Ben Stiller of "Something About Mary." And Ed Norton has
certainly become a well respected actor of recent time. (He's directing this
picture, by the way.) And who could resist the sexy tomboy Jenna Elfman
(Greg's Dharma)? But there's something about this reasonably funny film
"Keeping the Faith" that leaves a lingering doubt.
For sure the premise is devilishly sweet. Three best friends from childhood:
one becomes a priest (Norton), the other a rabbi (take a guess), the third
an aggressive high-powered business consultant (Elfman). Best buddies as
they worship the big guy, Norton and Stiller are altar-cowboys, inspiring
their respective New York congregations with refreshing zeal and silliness,
but not without a whole heart full of sincerity. This is where the film
radiates. Their friendship, confidence, love, and faith is expressed in a
wonderfully real, non-traditional, humorous, near-MTV, open/honest way. One
Santana-slick scene preaches this message without a spoken word: collar-clad
Norton and yarmulke-topped Stiller saunter down the streets of New York in
variable-slow-mo, donning leather jackets and dark sunglasses as they smile
and great passers-by. You'll love this sequence.
Enter Elfman. After having moved out of the neighborhood at age 13, the
alluring Elfman becomes hesitantly pursued by our two holy men - in a
lightly romantic-comedic, yet forbidden kind of way. This is where the doubt
slips in. The three are great performers, but there's an ever-so subtle
chemistry imbalance. The rapport between Norton and Stiller is so fresh and
exciting and honest - the film slides a baby step backwards in focusing on
Elfman and lover. The trio tangos for position, juggling dedication with
desire and comedy. Don't get me wrong, it's still entertaining ... it's just
that the meaty original story of the hip rabbi and priest simmers on the
back burner as the soapy love triangle bit occupies the screen. Norton's
character puts it aptly, "I feel like I'm in a Spelling TV series ...
'Melrose Priest.'"
Notable other points of remark: The opening five minutes is flatly lame (but
is over soon enough). Norton does a great Rainman impersonation. In smaller
roles, Milos Forman is awesome as elder confidant to Stiller, while Don the
Karaoke salesguy (Ken Leung) is over-the-top hilarious, stealing the screen
from the two top names in his brief appearance as he nails down one of the
films funniest, most memorable moments. I predict we'll see more of him in
the future.
Just a popcorn kernel short of an "A-", you won't have a bad time, but you
probably won't remember this film past Easter/Passover either.
Keeping the Faith. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Ben Stiller, Edward Norton, Jenna Elfman, Anne Bancroft, Eli
Wallach, Ron Rifkin, Milos Forman, Holland Taylor, Lisa Edelstein, Rena
Sofer and Ken Leung.
Directed by Edward Norton.
Written by Stuart Blumberg.
Produced by Hawk Koch, Edward Norton and Stuart Blumberg at
Touchstone/Spyglass.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Say It Isn't So (2001)
Like "The Mexican," "Say It Isn't So" tries its hand at genre gender 
blending. In this case, the "American Pie" no-joke-is-too-low, 
male-oriented comedy is injected with a dose of good old-fashioned 
female-oriented love story (about 2 parts the former with one part the 
latter). Even the title chimes like a Freddie Prinze Jr. flick. And like 
"The Mexican," though not rock solid, this film finds a way to 
entertain. 
The picture starts out with a bang. When dog-catcher Gilly (Chris Klein) 
joins his boss for a dysfunctional family dinner, insults are passed 
around the table like appetizers, while topics from sex to 
nipple-piercing comprise the main course of irreverency. You'll probably 
embarrass yourself by laughing at such lowbrow humor. After a strong 
first act in which Gilly falls in love with a lovely, though incompetent 
hairdresser, things simmer to nearly a lull after we learn a family 
secret that makes their love impossible. The enjoyment factor later 
elevates in time for the climax. Will Jo marry the wrong guy in Beaver, 
Oregon? Or will Gilly with the steadfast assistance of loyal friend 
"Dig," find a way to set things right? 
Shameless, the picture finds its humor anywhere it can - often in 
genital areas. In fact, I suspect, one spot too hairy for the censors 
was yanked from the final version. Still, don't let the physical comedy 
eclipse the clever-er one-liners. 
Here are a couple of lines that resonate the funny bone via the skull... 
After Gilly's awkward dining experience with the boss' psycho family he 
suggests, "Maybe you should hire a professional..." The boss responds 
without missing a beat and stone cold serious, "You mean ... hitman?" 
Then after Jo accidentally lops off a chunk of Gill's gill (ear), she 
invites him to dinner, "What are you doing tonight?" 
"Healing mostly." Gill shyly replies. 
There's more where those came from, some too obscene to mention here. 
Though easily missed because of its genre, the picture and lighting 
quality are very very sweet. 
Some gags drop like dead flies, while others are laugh-out-loud 
uproarious. In the end, an above average night at the movies. 
Say It Isn't So. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Chris Klein, Heather Graham, Orlando Jones, Sally Field, 
Richard Jenkins, John Rothman, Jack Plotnick, Eddie Cibrian. 
*  Directed by J.B. Rogers. 
*  Written by Peter Gaulke & Gerry Swallow. 
*  Produced by Bobby Farrelly, Bradley Thomas, Peter Farrelly at 20th 
Cent. Fox/Conundrum Ent. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Eyes Wide Shut (1999)
I heard that some people liked this film. I was not one of them.
Kidman and Cruise play a rich married couple tempted by seductive notions of
infidelity. Kidman's character is intoxicated (alcohol and later marijuana)
for the first 50% of her performance, then she's awkwardly cold sober for
the finish. Cruise is smashing, as always ... but great performances seem a
bit of a waste in absence of a solid script.
Cruise plays an M.D. and ever-trusting husband that Kidman desperately wants
to make jealous. Towards that goal, she tells of a poking incident in their
past. But, to make that tale really poking we needed to see Cruise's rock
solid trust in her earlier on (not just hear of it). Perhaps a knowing
glance from Cruise while Kidman danced with a debonair gentleman would have
done the trick.
There were some outstanding performances by secondary actors. Notable as
well, was the cinematography. Shot with a bit of a grain through a softening
filter to give the lights an eerie glow, care was also taken to balance rich
primary colors nicely.
As for the odd script, I think there may have been some big schematic
symbolism -- as if the whole movie had been an analogy for ... I don't
know -- because if there was, I sure didn't get it. And although there were
a few (very few) good lines; most were stock, predictable, or less than
memorable. I may have tolerated the tediously slow build up if the payoff
was shocking; though the theme was a good one, the real shocker is that
there was no payoff.
As for the hot steamy sex ... there really wasn't much of that either; just
a lot of naked women (although cruise has his shirt off as often as
possible). Perhaps since the primaries were two of the sexiest people alive
having meaningful lovemaking in the opening sequences, and because they are
married in real life -- we regular folks might find empathy concerning
infidelity temptations a strain.
Starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman.
Screenplay by Stanley Kubrick and Frederic Raphael.
Directed and Produced by Stanley Kubrick at Warner Brothers.
Rated R.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Almost Famous (2000)
"Almost Famous" is almost fantastic. Superb dialogue, outstanding direction,
acting and casting; unfortunately this near perfect script is marred by a
single pivotal scene.
The film opens in the year 1969 with William's eighteen-year-old sister
dropping the needle on a Simon and Garfunkel record as she steps out the
door, "This song explains why I'm leaving home to become a stewardess!"
William, after recently discovering that he's only eleven and not thirteen,
explores the mother-forbidden albums left behind by his sister: The Who, Led
Zeppelin, Cream.
Fast-forward four years, the nerdy adolescent William finds himself assigned
to write a story on the up-and-coming rock band "Stillwater."
Patrick Fugit (William) does a major chord job of staging that awkwardly
wonderful adventure of maturing in the wild circus around him. Kate Hudson
(the woman in the poster) plays groupie (sorry, that should be "band-aid")
Penny Lane warmly and whimsically. "One day, you'll be cool," She says with
her hands on William's shoulders. Shot with the camera point blank between
her eyes ... we feel like she's resting on our shoulders and speaking
directly to us.
Then there's Billy Crudup (guitar player Russell Hammond). Just before the
film a fellow reviewer friend mentioned that he was supposed to be the next
best thing ... for the past five years. "Almost Famous," I thought.
Actually, enjoying his performances in several less than great films, I
expected fame from him as well. He's "incendiary" ... in a low-key, gentle,
kind of way.
Frances McDormand as William's "Don't do drugs" mom is also smashing. You'll
remember her from her other awesome performance in "Fargo."
The film progresses behind the scenes of a rock concert tour that had me
just waiting for that final rock chord crescendo so that I could stand up,
cheer and light my lighter (if I had one). But I didn't have a lighter, and
then that one flawed scene just seemed to fly out of the clear beautiful
blue sky like a stalled jet plane striking the screen like nails on a
chalkboard; ultimately deflating my ovation to grin.
Interestingly enough, teenage rock journalist Cameron Crowe
(writer/director) tagged along after quintessential rock star Peter Frampton
back in the day, who was gracious enough to coach the "Stillwater" players.
Frampton chuckles, "I remember sitting with Cameron in the studio - just
like William with his notepad in the film - we were fast friends from then
on. And now I'm working for him."
Almost one of my top ten titles for the year, this imperfect diamond still
has much to enjoy.
Almost Famous. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Billy Crudup, Patrick Fugit, Frances McDormand, Kate Hudson, Jason
Lee, Zooey Deschanel, Michael Angarano.
Written and Directed by Cameron Crowe.
Produced by Cameron Crowe, Ian Bryce at Dreamworks(C)2000.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Wandafuru raifu (1998)
Imagine, right now, where you sit reading this article...you die, pack it
in, kick the bucket, pass on. You immediately arrive in your old (now quite
abandoned) high school building. There, some patient filmmaker explains that
you'll have three days to pick one memory from your life. One memory they'll
film. One memory with which to spend eternity. All other recollections lost.
Which fine moment would you pick? Could you pick?
Shot on 16mm "After Life" already has the film school feel. Add to that
documentary style interviews with a mix of actors and real people trying to
think of that one golden memory worth re-living for the rest of their lives
(post-mortemly speaking). The batch of recently deceased spend the next
three days reminiscing and choosing. A fellow with a poor memory is supplied
71 video tapes (one for each year of his life) with which to review and
ultimately, from which to select an event for recreation. After the third
day, set design begins. Then construction and finally filming. It's a
wonderfully interesting concept with some genuinely charming moments. But it
drags a bit after the initial interviews. The film could easily have been
ten to twenty minutes shorter (more than a few cuts are twice as long as
necessary). At times, I ached for a fast forward button.
Sweetly and gently crafted "After Life" asks a grand question to those newly
dead. Perhaps they could have improved their lot of "special events" had
they been asked while still alive. This may be "After Life's" greatest
gift -- all who view it are still alive (though a few may be sleeping).
Starring Takashi Mochizuki and Shiori Satonakia.
Written and Directed by Hirokazu Kore-Eda.
Produced by Shiho Sato at TV Man Union/Engine.
No Rating.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Gloria (1999)
A tough white "broad" (in Gloria's own words) and little Latino boy
adventure through a "B" movie. Gloria (Sharon Stone) is released from prison
after serving three years for her no-good boyfriend Kevin. She returns to
New York, only to find Kevin and his gangsters preparing to off little Nicky
(Jean-Luke Figueroa). Gloria's never been a good girl herself, so she finds
the urge to help the little boy awkward. However, after hearing how Kevin's
thugs took out little Nicky's entire family, she impulsively decides to
rescue the lad, thus adding danger to the adventure.
A word on how said thugs orphaned Nicky ... "MEAN". That's right, thug with
silencer caps gramma, mom, dad, and even little sister in one harsh scene.
It's definitely curdling, and deathly shocking in a movie that spends most
of it's time lightening up. As an example, Gloria returns to Kevin's thug
den to nab the kid and get away -- that's the extent of her plan. Despite
her cluelessness, she's able to gain the upper hand against a room full of
bad guys. Then in order to ensure her get away with the kid, she has the bad
boys go "full monty". It's quite funny, but equally ridiculous that these
heartless killers would allow a floozy in four inch heals and a little kid
to simply run away with a computer disc brimming with lethal information.
Though Gloria is clever enough to sneak out, she makes all the mistakes
cop-movie watchers would never make. 1) She immediately attempts to take
Nicky back to his house. 2) She then takes boy to nearest relative. 3) She
hobnobs with friends of Kevin drawing killers to her front door.
Miraculously, she manages to get away -- in the mob-mobile no less; which
leads to an interesting car chase where Gloria makes mistake number four. 4)
She hangs around the car after parking it in the open.
As for Nicky, most of of his lines and actions were only contrived vehicles
for which Gloria to respond. He was endearing in that wonderful "full monty"
scene, but after that, the scantily dressed Gloria drags him by one arm like
a rag doll through the rest of the film.
Starring Sharon Stone and Jean-Luke Figueroa.
Directed by Sidney Lumet.
Produced by Gary Foster and Lee Rich, Columbia/Mandalay Entertainment.
Rated R.
Grade..........................C-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Ready to Rumble (2000)
Man oh man, this movie had me laughing so hard, tears were running down the
creases of my smile-swollen cheeks. I was just one big baby balling my eyes
out. Now I'm not saying it was one-hunderd-precent, whoop-*ss,
neck-breaking, knee-slapping fun - but a swift kick to the gonads leaves a
lasting impression.
In the spirit of "Dumb and Dumber" (mock me if you will, but I loved that
film!) and more recently "Waterboy," "Ready to Rumble" brings back lovable
idiots to the screen. Stocky sparkplug Scott Caan, who played the charming
beer-minded jock in "Varsity Blues" is given more room to show his acting,
wrestling and funnyboner finesse. ("Blues" was a fine flick as a matter of
fact, though not especially funny.) David Arquette is Scott's "Dumber" in
this silly, innocently heart-warming mockery of a sport that is a mockery
already. (A spoof of a spoof - is that a double negative?)
Scott and David worship wrestling czar Jimmy King (Oliver Platt), and come
to his rescue after he looses his title as well as his self-respect.
Immediately following a few wince-able opening seconds, a surreal wrestling
rumble erupts in a small town convenient store, bringing the first of many
shouts of laughter from this cheering crowd. The sequence as with the other
wrestling scenes are filmed aptly, every power hit will leave you gasping.
Martin Landau even makes an appearance as body-flipping wrestling guru.
But the plot is broader than just rasslin'. David's dad is a hard guy cop
who pistol whips his wussy son into obedience. His reply to David's wimpy
desire to follow his dream, "Charles Manson followed his dream, Joseph
Stalin, Michael Bolton..." There were many other hard hitting punch lines
that I scribbled down, but admittedly they lie rather limp on canvas when
not brought to life by these talented actors and filmmakers. (Makes you
wonder how this script got sold.) In fact, the scene where King returns to
make peace with his estranged wife and kid, had me down for the count in
uncontrollable laughter. After that, it didn't matter that the ending went
more silly than funny or that a fistful of other punch lines failed to set
the teeth a-chattering.
"Rumble" is as funny as a van full of nuns singing Van Halen's "Running with
the Devil." If you love this kind of thing, this is just the kind of thing
you'll love.
Ready To Rumble. Copyright Š 2000. Rated NYR.
Starring Scott Caan, David Arquette, Oliver Platt, Bill Goldberg, Rose
McGowan and Diamond Dallas Page, Joe Pantoliano, Martin Landau.
Directed by Brian Robbins.
Written by Steven Brill.
Produced by Bobby Newmyer, Jeffrey Silver at WB/Bel-Air/Outlaw.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Messenger: The Story of Joan of Arc, The (1999)
"The Messenger" is a great movie that doesn't know when to quit. So in an
effort to enhance your viewing pleasure allow me to deliver this message,
"Leave the theater when Joan is captured."
I know that's a bold thing to say about a bold film that is thick with
vitality and blood-curdling drama. Directed with great care from a rather
slow paced introduction to a catapulting climax; this "mini-epic" is
definitely a surging "A" grade at this point. But there's forty-five more
minutes of film that unravel from the reel like Joan's spirit from her
tortured ribcage.
But allow me to praise for a while. Forget Joan of Arc, I believe in Milla
Jovovich! I would follow her into battle! Her tremblingly honest portrayal
of God's own peasant woman divinely sent to unify the French armies against
the invading British of the 1400's will have you reaching for your mighty
daggers against your personal demons (no undue insult meant to our current
British neighbors). Milla is magnificent and the cinematography grand! (And
I don't usually get excited about costume period pieces.) One inspired woman
charms the allegiance of even hard core warrior leaders leaving them, as
well as us, dumbfounded.
Hungry, yet oddly hypnotized by Joan's faith, the French soldiers rush the
British fortress. Joan, twelve feet up the wall, takes an arrow to the upper
torso. Cut to British archer POV (point of view). We've just shot an arrow
into the legendary Joan of Arc, her mysteriously innocent (despite the chain
mail and steel sword) blue eyes peer deep into ours ... with shock, no ...
pity, pity for us. Then in slow motion she falls backward from the ladder
into the mass of French warriors who stop dodging gnashing hatchets in order
to catch her. It's the kind of silver screen moment that movie-goers live
for! I loved it!
That's why it's personally difficult not to ignore the imperfections that
mar this near masterpiece. The biggest of which is the aforementioned
needlessly lengthy resolution that serves only to deconstruct the film's
main character. Second, is the under use of John Malkovich as the king of
France who is so wonderfully overwhelmed by Joan's nervously potent proem.
Yet, his character too, is also deconstructed (this time without due
process) into a rather cold immature puppet. I may have been convinced, were
I given glimpses of his internal struggle with the question on everyone's
tongues, "Is this Joan really set ablaze by the voice of the one God, or is
she just a loon?" A tormented Malkovich at battle with himself cut
intermittently into Joan's grizzly battle scenes, would have served this
bold picture well.
Still, an extremely strong "B+" with performances, direction and cinema
moments that will burn themselves at the stake into your memory.
The Messenger. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Milla Jovovich, John Malkovich, Faye Dunaway, and Dustin Hoffman.
Written by Andrew Birkin and Luc Besson.
Directed by Luc Besson.
Produced by Patrice Ledoux at Columbia
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Scary Movie (2000)
The Wayans brothers are back, bringing their wacky "scare tactics" to the
screen. It's goofy silly humor, from the most graphic sex jokes you'll ever
see on film to those old, tired, pot-head gags, to truly funny spoofs of the
fright genre from "I Know What You Did Last Summer" to "The Sixth Sense."
There are also some real (in a cinematic sense) hacking murders.
So if you like that kind of thing ... this is the kind of film you'll like.
Not over the top, gut-busting, but still pretty darned funny.
A group of college age friends harbor the secret of the poor bloke they
accidentally killed a year ago. All the while some psycho-killer in a K-mart
Halloween mask targets them.
I especially enjoyed the use of "The Matrix" special effects in a comedic
setting. Inventive fun.
Kudos to director Keenen Ivory Wayans for keeping the picture "lively" and
hoppin'. He's a smart creative force from whom I'm always excited to see new
pieces.
Scary Movie. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Jon Abrahams, Carmen Electra, Shannon Elizabeth, Anna Faris, Kurt
Fuller, Regina Hall, Lochlyn Munro, Cheri Oteri, Dave Sheridan, Marlon
Wayans, Shawn Wayans.
Directed by Keenen Ivory Wayans
Written by Shawn and Marlon Wayans, Buddy Johnson & Phil Beauman, Jason
Friedberg & Aaron Seltzer.
Produced by Eric L. Gold, Lee R. Mayes at Dimension/Miramax.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Original Kings of Comedy, The (2000)
This Steve Harvey-hosted comedy concert flick props up D.L. Hughley, Cedric
the Entertainer and Bernie Mac on a Charlotte, NC stage. (BTW, It's directed
and produced by Spike Lee at Four Acres and a Mule.)
Shot on videotape, the image quality suffers (the center wide shot blurring
these comics faceless). Still as the humor heats up, it's easy to forget
about this technical shortcoming.
Director Spike Lee, on the up and up, cuts up these stand-up cut-ups nicely
with backstage and "just hangin'" shots of the quick to quip quartet.
The first half of the film coasts with no big laughs, but Cedric's
appearance on the stage steps up the pace and the funnies. Then Bernie Mac's
aggressive almost terrorist humor will be sure to get you rolling - unless
you're a PC person. Mac is so "in your face," perhaps when TV/Cable finally
overcomes their fear of him, he'll have his own show called "The Bernie Mac
Attack."
Oddly enough, the topical nature of these four occasionally overlaps.
Especially noticeable the subject of "old school music" vs. hip-hop rap
culture and the phenomenon regarding events in which white people die in
masses, but black people never do. Highlights include: Hughley's observation
on while white people are always looking for something exciting to do ...
black people find regular things exciting enough ... like "pulling out my
wallet without getting shot forty one times," Harvey's impersonation of
rappers, Cedric's re-write of "Redemption Song," And Mac's school bus ride.
Sex and cussing are repeated motifs. In fact, the film ends on Mac's "MF"
injected monologue (which by the way, isn't as funny as the school bus bit).
But despite the obscenities, a small segment on the "old tunes" being all
about "love" gives the entire piece an overall warm heart.
Kings of Comedy. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring Steve Harvey, D.L. Hughley, Cedric the Entertainer, Bernie Mac.
Directed by Spike Lee.
Produced by Walter Latham, David Gale, Spike Lee at
MTV/Paramount/Latham/Four Acres and a Mule(C)2000. Rated R.
Grade..........................B+
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Gift, The (2000)
This ESP thriller starts off sluggishly, but opens up when Giovani 
Ribisi brings a crowbar to it at the end of the first third. Even before 
that, Ribisi's performances stand out against the bland acting and first 
act scripting of this "B" film. Greg Kinnear, though normally very good, 
is also bland. Hilary Swank gives her rather weak character some strong 
depth, but lead Cate Blanchett doesn't start to rock and roll until 
mid-film. 
Annie Wilson (Blanchett) has "the gift" of seeing things (as in dreams) 
that will happen or have happened someplace else. But for some reason, 
she still needs cards ... and a candle seems to help too. Can she 
provide direction when one sexy citizen of this small town shows up 
missing? Her deceased (we can assume) grandmother pays her a visit to 
remind her to follow her instinct. Annie turns away, and then back (and 
then ... what the?) gram is gone. It's the first of many spooky movie 
cliches. The flooded bathtub, dripping sink faucet, wind-squelched 
candles, googly-eyed corpse, old tire dragged from the pond, fingers 
reaching ever closer to the weapon scenes all occur later as the film 
unfolds. Unfortunately, barely fifty percent of the chilling suspense is 
actually chilling. 
But Ribisi is great. And you know what? Both lawyers are fantastic, and 
I just love the sheriff. The dialogue, especially in the "courtroom 
drama," (middle third of the film) is crisp and meaty ... some very 
sweet scenes there. 
Too bad Annie's motivations are kind of screwy. How and when she decides 
and doesn't decide to go to the police doesn't quite compute for a woman 
who has a family to consider. But the picture climaxes well enough and 
did I mention Ribisi is fantastic? 
The Gift. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Cate Blanchett, Giovanni Ribisi, Keanu Reeves, Greg Kinnear, 
Hilary Swank, Katie Holmes, Michael Jeter, Kim Dickens, Cary Cole, J.K. 
Simmon, Chelcie Ross. 
*  Directed by Sam Raimi. 
*  Written by Billy Bob Thornton, Tom Efferson. 
*  Produced by James Jacks, Tom Rosenberg, Gary Lucchesi at 
Alphaville/Lakeshore/Paramount Classics. 
Grade..........................B
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Insider, The (1999)
Based on the May 1996 Vanity Fair article "The Man Who Knew Too Much" by
Marie Brenner, "The Insider" follows the trials and tribulations of a former
big tobacco executive who coughs up sobering truths concerning cigarette
addiction. Mann's script remains boldly true to the article, right down to
naming names (CBS, Wallace, B&W, etc.); Mississippi Attorney General Michael
Moore even plays himself, "I saw it as a chance to have some fun and be a
part of history again." (Quote from production notes.)
Russell Crowe, almost completely unrecognizable from his long-haired,
hockey-playing, mountain man look in "Mystery, Alaska," works out the
nervous cricks in his neck as the middle-aged, whistle-blowing, former VP of
B&M (Kools, Viceroy). Managing the difficult role of an intelligent,
imperfectly sincere, tough, slowly crumbling pillar, Crowe displays
appropriately tamed flare and rugged modesty.
Pacino plays Lowell Bergman, producer of "60 minutes" and Wallace's right
hand guy. It's Lowell that erects the soap box/guillotine for Dr. Wigand's
big bean spillage. Willing to loose it all (family, reputation, even
freedom), Dr. Wigand refuses to be squelched by Tobacco's less than subtle
intimidation tactics (including but not limited to death threats). In fact,
the movie plays a bit like a horror flick at times ... Is the house safe for
the family? Will one of the kids be snatched away? Will an un-snuffed cigar
butt start the place on fire? Wigand weighs the risks: personal welfare vs.
right vs. stubborn horse pride, "I can't seem to find the criteria to
decide."
Eventually, Lowell's proximity and passion to this truth-teller leaves him
feeling the stinging singes of hot coals as well. Pacino's performance, as
in other films, is flawless. He's strong, passionate and completely driven.
Interestingly enough, I don't recall a single lit cigarette or pipe in the
entire picture, not even from a passer-by; perhaps making the film's only
flaw (if you wish to call it that) a wisping tendency toward the preachy.
Nonetheless, "The Insider" delivers good entertaining drama. After it's two
hour and thirty-seven minute duration, you'll still be left wanting more.
The Insider. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Russell Crowe, Al Pacino, Christopher Plummer and Diane Venora.
Directed by Michael Mann.
Screenplay by Eric Roth and Michael Mann.
Produced by Michael Mann & Pieter Jan Brugge at Touchstone.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
The "Star Wars" logo bursting on the screen opened a time capsule of
memories that exploded in a spontaneous applause from all of us. We were
charged and ready to be flown out of our seats in the same way the original
"greatest story ever told" had done it nearly a quarter century ago. And to
be sure, "The Menace" has some thunder under the hood; though I hate to say
it, not enough to match the infinite expectations orbiting in our heads.
"The Phantom Menace" is Episode 1 of 9 (episodes 4 through 6 were produced
prior). So your favorite characters are either young or not born yet, hence
played by different actors. The set up for things to come is all here,
cleverly planned, but rather plainly executed. The dialogue spills out of
passionless characters with little more purpose than to explain their
plight. Where was the drama? Where was the guts?
Part of the answer lies in robotic enemies. Scores of daffy duck soldiers
hardly fill the storm trooper boots. They shoot a lot, but never seem to hit
any human targets and are as easily knocked down as green plastic army
guys -- I didn't fear them. So how could I respect a "hero" who took them
out? The only formidable enemy is Darth Maul. With a double-edged light
saber, he steals the show -- taking on both the young Obi (Ewan McGregor)
and his Jedi Master (Liam Neeson). That's the drama I want! Unfortunately,
it's not enough to carry the movie. The only other characters that display
any spirit are 1) an annoying alien camel-like creature replacement for the
nagging C3PO droid and 2) the cocky young Skywalker. The latter is charming
and provides the closest being to a character with which to sympathize.
That said, in addition to the saber duel (or should I say trio), there's an
absolutely all-out-wonderful pod (hover craft) race that makes this episode
worth catching in the theaters. Spectacular in their imaginative designs,
the pod-chariots whirl around a coliseum type race course, seemingly weaving
in and out of the theater's audience. Sparks fly, as the screaming engines
blare from left to right, back to front -- this race will engulf you.
The choice to keep the main characters reserved and poker-faced, drains the
picture of many juicy possibilities. Why can't the young Obi be drawn
romantically to the Noboo Princess, causing an internal conflict? He is the
apprentice this time, but already seems rather flawless.
Quite uninteresting in its stale moments, the "Menace" soars from time to
time. And after all, it is "Star Wars." You can't stop respecting a Jedi
Master just because he's getting slower in his older years.
Starring Liam Neeson, Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Jake LLoyd and Ian
McDiarmid.
Written and directed by George Lucas.
Produced by Rick McCallum at Lucasfilm LTD/20th Century Fox.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Last September, The (1999)
Beautifully filmed, "Last September" has the feeling of an impressionistic
painting. The setting is that of the last days of the ruling "tribe" of
Ireland back in 1916 as the Irish begin to revolt. But the primary story is
at play in young Lois, a member of the elite, pursued by an innocent British
soldier, but allured to the roughened Irish renegade she had known as a
child.
Despite the text preface, this ruling "Tribe" scenario may still be a bit
confusing to those not privy to UK history. It certainly was for me. For
that reason, here is further explanation from the film's production
material: They are "the Ascendancy ... moneyed, graceful and essentially
feudal. The Anglo-Irish aristocracy (the wealthier heirs of English
immigrants in Ireland, who sound and appear English, although they consider
themselves Irish)."
Maggie Smith and Michael Gambon are superb in their proper snootitude. Fiano
Shaw gives a flawless performance as Lois' influential confidant. In fact,
most of the acting, direction, and cinematography are remarkable. It's the
culmination of the story that falls flat against this disciplined canvas.
Director, Deborah Warner's portrayal of the sheltered, ignorantly bliss
elite is as delicate and beautiful as the shell of an Easter egg -- inviting
friends over for a tennis party while the countryside trembles on the verge
of war.
Lois, herself, is carefree, emotion-driven, spur of the moment; and for that
we all fall in love with her. With giddily attractive dialogue
like..."You're so sudden all of a sudden." and "How do you know I'm not in
love with some married man or something." These lines are delivered in a
completely sweet and romantic scene with her innocent soldier-caller. This
stunning moment is followed by a charming chat with the experienced yet,
sensitively-humored, older woman.
Unfortunately, by the end of the film our patience with both Lois and this
oft-used story line may not be so sympathetic.
The Last September. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Keeley Hawes, Michael Gambon, Tom Hickey, David Tennant, Richard
Roxburgh, Gary Lydon, Maggie Smith, Fiona Shaw, Lambert Wilson.
Directed by Deborah Warner.
Screenplay by John Banville based upon the novel by Elizabeth Bowen.
Director of Photography Slawomir Idziak.
Produced by Yvonne Thunder at Trimark/Matrix/Scala.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for God Said 'Ha!' (1998)
The picture opens with Julia Sweeny (of Saturday Night Live fame) in a set
designed to look like her living room. She moves from couch to window,
beginning a monologue that I thought would serve well as a pleasant
introduction to the film. I was mistaken, the monologue is the film. But,
don't take that negatively. Julia conducts a fine one woman show.
Julia satires the comic and tragic stories of her family. Focusing mostly on
their struggle with a family member's fight against cancer; the Sweeny group
comically attempts to tolerate living under the same roof during this
"temporary" trying time. Sweeny's directness about the topic is likely to
knot up your esophagus -- so bring plenty of lozenges and tissues. Such
seriousness accentuates her ironic sense of humor, bringing chuckles through
your tears with lines like, "How do you hide a hysterectomy?" along with
tangenting silliness, "My sister lives in Japan with Yamamoto, her sweet
potato farmer boyfriend that we've affectionately nicknamed 'Yam'."
Technical knitpickings: the camera never leaves the stage, though it seldom
stops dollying around its subject. At times that's nauseating. Then, at dire
revelations, the camera not only stops, but cuts to a close-up. I'm sure the
intention was to emphasize Julia's sobering news, but it ends up clubbing
you over the head instead of letting the news resonate on it's own. Lastly,
aside from the warm sofa, the costume and set appeared to be lacking any
coordination (a serious oversight for a film that never leaves it's subject
or room.)
Though still worthwhile on film, I suspect "God Said Ha!" must have been
more powerful live on stage (its roots). Moreover, you will likely find this
picture as therapeutic as a support group, should you or a family member be
stricken with a cancer. Ontological professionals might consider purchasing
a copy of the tape as a useful reference piece for their clients.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Frequency (2000)
Simply put, the best film of the year so far. We film reviewers see three or
four (or more) pictures a week, so you may not need any further convincing.
But if you do ... read on. And for those of you that trust this reviewer and
like surprises, stop reading and go see the film!
The sun's flares (nicely visually represented) spool upward (to the tune of
"Crimson and Clover") 93 million miles away from our spinning planet,
causing beautiful blue neon illuminations across the starry starry night
skies of a 1969 and 1999 New York city. These freak conditions cross
wavelengths with time, making the impossible possible as a 36 year old son
talks to his 40 year old (and currently deceased) father over an old H.A.M.
radio transceiver.
The father and son connections, which occur in the same room, but three
decades apart, are so thick and resonating you'll want the entire film to
remain focused on them. Though never leaving that relationship, "Frequency"
pitches a cops and homicide story to boot. Pay attention, toggles in time
are not always announced with convenient captions - which adds to the
allure, mystery, and off-kilter swirl.
A tasty fire motif simmers under whirling planet simulations that surface at
the right times and places to keep the perspective appropriately wide and
tilted. All elements merge in a constructive interference to create a
wonderfully eerie aura (or should I say aurora?) that will swell your chest
and dominate your breath, enlarging your nostrils, hardening your Adam's
apple and moistening your tear ducts. The woman beside me rolled back and
forth, alternately crying out, blowing her nose, laughing, and covering her
eyes like an infant.
I have only two contentions, both of which are minor and may actually have
good explanations (if you know ... send them in.) 1) Fire-triggered
sprinkler systems in a 1969 police station? 2) How did son John know the
specific choices in the moment prior to his father's death? (Btw, Jim
Caviezel is awesome.)
"Backdraft" plus "The Sixth Sense" equals "Frequency." I'd have titled it:
"A Matter of Time," "Father and Sun Flares," "The Same Wavelength,"
"Communication Hertz" or "Serial Killer and H.A.M." Hey, stop reading and go
see it!
Frequency. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Dennis Quaid, Jim Caviezel, Andre Braugher, Elizabeth Mitchell,
Noah Emmerich, Shawn Doyle.
Directed by Gregory Hoblit.
Written by Toby Emmerich.
Director of Photography Alar Kivilo.
Produced by Hawk Koch, Gregory Hoblit, and Bill Carraro, Toby Emmerich at
NewLine.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Entrapment (1999)
Sean Connery (Mac) plays the "James Bond" of the art theft world. Catherine
Zeta-Jones (Gin) is the sexy insurance investigator who travels to England
after him. But who will entrap who? The film does a good job of keeping us
guessing all the way to the end. It's a careful balancing act not unlike the
gymnastics Gin shows off as she twists her body through a scattered array of
laser light alarms.
As always, Connery is terribly charismatic and I can't deny that he is still
handsome in his elder years, but I absolutely don't buy the manipulatively
clever Gin falling for him in a sexual way. Fortunately, all the contact we
have to witness is a short kiss -- which could have been more effective if
only implied.
The film is at its best when entrenched in clever thieving, planning,
gadgetry and execution. This it does very well. The film is at its worst in
its words; the dialogue dipping into immaturity at more than a few points.
All in all, "Entrapment" is a cute/clever, rather TV-esq picture that could
have used just a little more heart.
Starring Sean Connery and Catherine Zeta-Jones. Directed by Jon Amiel.
Screenplay by Ron Bass and William Broyles.
Produced by Sean Connery, Michael Hertzberg, and Rhonda Tollefson at 20th
Century Fox/Regency/Fountainbridge/Hertzberg.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Iron Giant, The (1999)
A weapon in the form of a large robot with a big appetite for metal falls to
Earth from outer space.
Without the gun part, this movie would play so much like every other
alien-falls-to-Earth story we've seen, that one could hardly get too excited
about it. Child finds alien, teaches alien to speak, hides alien from
government that wants to kill it ... you know the rest. There's even a super
cliche, slightly slanted scene where the robot learns to appreciate nature
by connecting with a deer in the woods.
But, "Iron Giant" is a gun and he's got a pertinent choice to make. When the
army comes to blow him away, will he fight back with all his alien might? No
one would blame him ... he'd certainly have the right to defend himself. Or
would he consider all he had just learned about the magic of life and decide
to use his power in some more "humanitarian" (though metallic) kind of way?
This is an important concept to have set before our kids (and a good
reminder for us, too): 1) You are powerful. 2) You can use that power
destructively or constructively. 3) Which are you going to choose?
Of course, the slant of this particular picture is the more selfless choice.
In fact, less than subtle messages like: "If you're good you have a soul"
and "It's not bad to die, but it's bad to kill" and "Souls don't die" and
"Guns kill" are the nuts and bolts of the story.
The animation is more in the old style which befits this 1950's tale. The
giant itself is charming. The voice talent hit their marks, Harry Connick
Jr. standing out as the most interesting, while a fair Tim Allen
sound-a-like speaks for the ornery FBI agent hassling our Iron Giant's small
friend.
Despite the fact that "Iron Giant" is more of a relationship (child buddy)
film than an animated action flick, kids will absolutely love it and they'll
be going home chewing on a valuable chunk of "heavy mental" of their own.
Voices: Jennifer Anisten, Harry Connick Jr., Eli Marienthal, James Gammon,
Vin Diesel.
Screenplay by Tim McCanlies, Based on book by Ted Hughes.
Produced by Allison Abbate and Des McAnuff at Warner Brothers.
Rated PG.
Kid's Grade..........................A+
Adult's Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Whole Nine Yards, The (2000)
A light-hearted contract killer and nervously pathetic dentist toggle
between teaming up and double crossing each other in this fun and funnier
near-farce comedy. Matthew Perry, playing a part that could have been
written for Jim Carrey, apprehensively stumbles all over himself - but it
works. Perry admits, "I'd do anything for a laugh in this movie." Director
Jonathan Lynn calls him an "Immensely talented clown."
Not a serious bone in its body, the film creates a cast of caricatures that
tangle and tango atop a slightly twisted dance floor. Perry is the wormy
good-hearted dentist that flops over strategically placed ottomans with all
the grace of a young Dick Van Dyke. The innocent-faced Perry even looks like
a dentist - doesn't he? The physical comedy is admittedly cheap - but Perry
pulls it off, he had me laughing every time. Perry's wife, Rosanna Arquette
playing Perry's wife, attempts to portray a French Canadian "ornerian" from
a comedic angle, but fails. Then there's Bruce as the slick contract killer
living next door. Willis is 100% smooth as he walks the fine line between
real person and comic book abstraction. Kevin Pollack's, mob boss's son
character that pronounces "W's" as "V's" falls short, but shoots no holes in
the film. In the end, it's the impeccable timing, pace and one liners that
give "Nine Yards" its zing:
"Have a nice day." Perry wishes his wife.
"I would if you do me a favor and die." She smilingly retorts.
"You like living in Canada?" Willis innocently asks Perry.
"I live here with my wife." Perry responds curtly, as if it were absolutely
obvious that the word "like" could not be used in any context involving his
wife.
After Willis easily intimidates the jittery Perry into momentarily
abandoning a few select body functions, the whimsical Willis grabs his keys,
"Come on, change your pants. We're going out!"
With perhaps the film's finest line betwixt his golden teeth, a
sparkling-eyed Willis savors this gem through a crooked smile, "It doesn't
matter how many people I've killed. What matters is how I treat those who
are still alive."
A price on his head, Chicago gangland contract-killer Willis moves next door
to Perry who's wife forces him to go back to the States to acquire a
"finder's fee" for ratting on the new neighbor. There, Perry meets up with
the huge Michael Clarke Duncan's loving fists and writer Mitchell Kapner's
plotting twists.
A few winceable story progressions in the front and end are easily
outweighed by a fine "body" of fun film in-between. I laughed out loud very
often.
The Whole Nine Yards. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Bruce Willis, Matthew Perry, Rosanna Arquette, Michael Clarke
Duncan, Natasha Henstridge, Amanda Peet, Kevin Pollak.
Directed by Jonathan Lynn.
Written by Mitchell Kapner.
Produced by David Willis and Allan Kaufman at WB and Morgan Creek/Franchise
Pictures/Rational Packaging/Lansdown Films.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Double Jeopardy (1999)
"Double Jeopardy" starts out rather rough and lifeless, not quite sure how
to set itself up for the real story. This is where Libby (Judd) is framed
(or did she really do it?) for the murder of her hubby Nick. She's quickly
herded off to prison where she spends six (or was it eight?) years in what
seems like 30 seconds. From there she's released to an institution for
parolees which is overseen by Tommy Lee. This is where the movie really
starts (so show up to the theater at least 30 minutes late).
Double Jeopardy gives Libby the right to blow Nick away (if he's still
alive) without worry of a second trial ("not true" says one real life lawyer
I've heard). Anyway (for the purposes of the film), we're left to wonder if
this sweet loving wife, would do it. But Libby is more interested in finding
her son. So she busts out of the parole halfway house and begins breaking
all kinds of laws. Which leads to two or three big action sequences. The
first making me painfully embarrassed for the filmmakers. The second being
very enjoyable and almost perfectly believable. At that moment I was willing
to change my mind about this picture. But an absurd cemetery scene near the
end buried any hopes of that.
Tommy Lee is awesome as always. Ashley Judd is unusually un-inspired, though
on occasion delivers a zinger. For example, when getting hit-on by some
unknowing male she responds, "Sure, I'd love to sit and chat with you, but
I've just got to call my parole officer first." The movie for the most part
is a hodgepodge of drama, action and even comedy. It just doesn't flow,
giving the feel of too many writers and/or directors.
The film would have benefited from a longer more in-depth prison experience,
during which we could have seen Judd learn all the tricks of the trade.
Tricks that would come in handy later. To do this, time could be taken away
from the frame job sequences. Or trash that whole section altogether (it's
simply not compelling, even if you don't know if she really killed him or
not). Start in prison, tell the frame-job story in flashbacks (if needed).
Kill and bury the cemetery scene. Develop Lee's conflicting motivation to
both arrest and assist Judd -- that's the most interesting aspect of the
film anyway.
Double Jeopardy. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Tommy Lee Jones and Ashley Judd, with Bruce Greenwood and Annabeth
Gish.
Directed by Bruce Beresford.
Written by David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook.
Produced by Leonard Goldberg at Paramount.
Grade..........................C+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Magnolia (1999)
You know those plate jugglers? The ones that start a plate spinning up on a
bendy rod. That's impressive enough, isn't it? But they set up another and
another, until there are nine plates tottering on sticks all over the stage.
Then you're not only impressed, but you start to feel like your attention or
your muse or your thoughts themselves are like wobbling plates. You slowly
come to realize that the able juggler has a plan larger than tableware ...
you've been set spinning on a bendy rod. Paul Thomas Anderson is that
juggler.
Showing finesse for film like none we've seen in a long time, Anderson
conducts a nine-ring circus and makes it look easy. With well over a hundred
big films produced a year, so many would-be-classics topple as they
approached climax. Perhaps it's a lack of directorial discipline, perhaps
it's creative control. No matter to the viewer, when the giant falls -- it
makes a horrible crashing sound!
"Magnolia" is so large it really climaxes twice, Anderson reveling in each
peak, where other artists stumble. Instead of dreading the turbulence, like
a pilot in a hurricane, Anderson relishes that intensity, plays it out with
all his might, rolling with the thunder instead of fighting it or
challenging it. Then grinning peacefully proud as it resolves. Never a
moment where he feels out of control. Never a doubt that a spinning plate
might have fallen.
Mainly character and relationship driven, Anderson's cast rises to the
occasion of this masterpiece. Tom Cruise will seduce and destroy you, Jason
Robards will have you hanging on the edge of his death bed, and John C.
Reilly will win you over in less than two minutes of screen time rising from
his knees after prayer with a slap of hands -- a personal high five to
himself.
The audio mix favors the music (volume-wise), glossing the production with a
music video feel. Anderson admits Aimee Mann songs (former lead singer of
"Till Tuesday") provided more than just a few seeds for the patiently
blooming "Magnolia." Her fans will love this film.
Anderson was careful not to tell too much of the story in its previews and
ads -- I will not defeat that effort. I will tell you this, "Magnolia" isn't
the dark moody indie type film I expected it to be by the black advert. Nor
is it an action attraction. It is, simply put, an entertainment event ...
like spending the day at an amusement park or (I don't know) parachuting
from a plane. Its complexity dangles on the edge of the human brain's
capacity for input. When the movie ended, I was starving -- though I'd had a
huge meal prior. So plan your day accordingly. You've been warned. Also,
bring aspirin -- it's pretty intense.
Magnolia. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Jeremy Blackman, Tom Cruise, Melinda Dillon, Philip Baker Hall,
Philip Seymour Hoffman, Ricky Jay, William H. Macy, Alfred Molina, Julianne
Moore, John C. Reilly, Jason Robards and Melora Walters.
Written and Directed by Paul Thomas Anderson.
Produced by Joanne Sellar at New Line.
Grade..........................A+
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Astronaut's Wife, The (1999)
This is one weird film. Weird and scary. Scarier than that Witch film,
probably the scariest film I've seen this summer (though it's been a tame
summer on the fright-o-meter). The fine sound engineering does a splendid
job toward this goal.
Lift-off looks promising with a cast of three actors I adore. The simply
irresistible Charlize Theron, rock solid actor Johnny Depp and strong
supporter Joe Morton from "T2" fame. Johnny goes up in space, has an
incident, comes back a little weird, or is it wife Charlize who's paranoid?
A creepy psychological thriller.
Surprise, it's no "Apollo 13." Though the film hooked me heartily in the
beginning, I grew tired in the middle (though scared), and while the twist
ending was indeed something I did not expect at all -- it wasn't something I
cared for either.
Great concept, awesome actors, fine dialogue, but a lack of that right
stuff.
Starring Johnny Depp, Charlize Theron, Joe Morton, Clea Duvall.
Director/Screenwriter Rand Ravich.
Produced by Andrew Lazar at New Line.
Rated R.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Man on the Moon (1999)
Don't arrive late, the five minute introduction is marvelously unique and
quintessentially Kaufman. The entertaining film that follows, though
documentary in nature ... "is not an historical biography and it's not
always faithful to the facts," director Milos Forman admits (in the press
notes) "It is, however, always faithful to the spirit of the facts."
Jim Carrey portrays the eccentric, controversial comic Andy Kaufman
(1949-1984) who charmed audiences with his Latka character on the 1970's
sitcom "Taxi," shocked millions with his disruptive antics on the live-taped
"Fridays," baffled all of us with his incitingly sexist challenges to
wrestle women on TV, and finally left us in 1984 wondering if his death was
just another prank. Robin Williams once referred to Kaufman as the "kamikaze
of comedians" because he didn't care if he bombed.
Carrey, once known as the "man with the rubber face" for his ability to
actually look like the celebrities he imitated, can't shake off the fame
surrounding his own. That said, Carrey is absolutely rock solid conveying
the Andy Kaufman persona in voice and eye movement. He never falters. Even
though he looks like Jim Carrey, this is not a Jim Carrey movie. Critics of
Carrey's acting ability won't be able to ignore this disciplined
performance.
Danny DeVito (responsible for the film's conception and realization) leads
us through the production while portraying George Shapiro (Andy's agent). In
the "Taxi" sequences, only original cast members appear (though DeVito's
Louie character is conveniently elsewhere). Especially with DeVito in a lead
role along with wrestler Jerry Lawler's cameos (he does a fine job, by the
way), this lends a warm, friendly, sentimental feel to the film for those of
us who knew the "TV" Kaufman. It also serves to reassure us that the film's
portrayal of this enigmatic comedian is authentic. Lastly, it appends to the
memory of Andy, a sense of family and belated forgiveness for pulling our
legs and yanking our chains.
Courtney Love's performance as Lynne Margulies (who was on the set virtually
everyday) confirms her talent as an actress, making the transition from the
rock world with more grace than, personally, I'd have expected.
The film sheds light on the mysteriously odd death of Andy Kaufman, but
can't resist casting a shadow of a doubt on its audience during a slightly
unnecessary last scene. Ultimately "Man on the Moon" is a strong film,
unique and enlightening; even after the many Kaufman documentaries released
in anticipation of it. As for those of you unfamiliar with Andy's work I'd
be very curious to hear your reaction to this film (email@rossanthony.com).
Man on the Moon. Copyright Š 1999. Rated R.
Starring Jim Carrey, Danny DeVito, Courtney Love, Paul Giamatti and Jerry
Lawler (as himself).
Directed by Milos Forman.
Written by Scott ALexander and Larry Karaszewski.
Produced by Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, and Stacey Sher at
Universal/Mutual Film
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Big Tease, The (1999)
"He'll be among his own kind," Local Glasgow friends of Crawford Mackenzie
say of the gay stylist as he takes off to L.A. to compete in that huge
extravaganza -- the World Freestyle Hairdressing Championship.
This is a mock documentary with the flamboyant, boyishly-naďve, Scottish
comedian Craig Ferguson as the man with the golden comb. He's perpetually
fresh, and spunky - a young Will Smith with white skin and an accent. Never
caught on film acting, every line and camera-captured glance seems true,
innocent and delightfully unrehearsed.
The film is shot and edited with the same energy and flare playfully
embodying its charmingly cocky protagonist. Repeated still frames, with a
flash to imply photo-shots are just one gimmick the filmmakers use to keep
the pace snappy. Another is multiple chop cut interviews, so that commentary
never gets boring.
After receiving a letter to "participate" in an international hair
competition, our modestly vain stylist flies to L.A. only to discover that
he's become the victim of a promotionally motivated misunderstanding.
Undaunted (mostly) he braves heart first into the often cold-hearted
bureaucratic web of "who you know" in Hollywood in order to correct the
oversight and compete legitimately among the top hair professionals of the
world.
Just plain, good, clean fun; the tease climaxes in a ridiculous display of
hair presentation. Of course, you'll be routing for the underdog as
contestants go head to head; the M.C. remarks, "the tension in this room is
so thick you could style it with a comb."
The Big Tease. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Craig Ferguson, Frances Fisher, Mary McCormack, David Rasche, Chris
Langham.
Directed by Kevin Allen.
Written by Kevin Allen, Sacha Gervasi, Craig Ferguson.
Produced by Kevin Allen, Philip Rose at Warner Brothers.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Patriot, The (2000)
"The Patriot" loyally rides strong in the first act. But becomes somewhat
disillusioned during the third and especially the second acts. Mel Gibson
fervently brings the father/soldier role to life.
In the 1770's, "retired" from the service, Mel is called to arms as a
Patriot, a supporter of a free America, to win the country from those pesky
British during our revolutionary war. A family man, he shrugs, "I'm a parent
... I don't have the luxury of principles."
There's a great deal of heartfelt father, son, family tension in the early
portion of the film, but all that gives way to blood, guts and the gory of a
very realistic wartime barbarity ... a sort of red, white and blue
"Braveheart." But as the body count mounts, the film changes its mind about
how it will portray killing. Eventually, the gory of war becomes the glory
of war.
Also a bitter mixture: the graphic seriousness of hand to hand, bayonet to
face field battles with corny throwaway humor. Though just a hand full in
number, these comic relief quips ... ring like laughter at a funeral. And
the schmaltz ... it's laid on maple syrup thick. I have a high tolerance for
melodrama, but this dose, tipped my strong stomach. One church/militia
recruitment scene breaks the schmaltz barrier and should have been cut from
the film.
Tough to swallow also, Mel twice uses the same shallow "trick" to fool red
coat officers. The first time it was cute, the second time, blatently
ridiculous in a film that strives to portray the revolutionary war
realistically. And the scene where these hungry war torn militiamen grimace
at the prospect of eating dog - just foolish. They're starving!
But you've gotta love Mel! When you see him there in the middle of South
Carolina, shots whizzing by, canons exploding, cotton wisping in the cold
cloudy sky like snow, riding a strong steed while clasping that gorgeously
unfurled 13-star United States of America flag ... you kind of forget about
all those years he spent in Australia. Preparing to rescue one of his sons,
Mel is absolutely savagely loving, brutally fatherly as he dashes through
the forest carrying an armful of muskets. That scene is beautiful.
Fantastically cast, Heath Ledger (of "10 Ten Things I Hate About You" fame)
gives a steadfast performance as Mel's number one son. Also contributing in
the acting department, Chris Cooper (who usually plays the jerk-dad,
"American Beauty") is commanding in perhaps his only good guy role this
year. And of course, the fight scenes are careful, powerful, stunning, and
quite realistic.
It's a big film, two and a half hours. You'll leave feeling like you've just
watched a mini-miniseries.
The Patriot. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Joely Richardson, Chris Cooper, Tcheky
Karyo, Jason Isaacs, Tom Wilkinson.
Directed by Roland Emmerich.
Written by Robert Rodat.
Produced by Dean Devlin, Mark Gordon, Gary Levinsohn at
Mutual/Centropolis/Columbia.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Battlefield Earth (2000)
John Travolta and Forest Whitaker do some Hollywood slumming in this
tenement of a sci-fi thriller.
You know, I do my best to keep from saying a film is "bad." A good teacher
finds little use in value-judging a report by a student. There are so many
criteria that we can "objectively" talk about -- strong here, weak there
etc. But this is just one of those scripts that you know the student must
have whipped out five minutes before class.
I'm really surprised with all the writing talent available in this town,
that no one said "Hey, this is just a bad script."
And the only reason I can think that Travolta and Whitaker did it was to
spoof themselves; relax in the lowest-of-brow movies to wind down from a
thick script or something. Perhaps it was a dare? Maybe they lost a bet?
Of course, they're decent, even the lead hero is good - as good as you can
possibly be with nearly nothing verbally to work with (in fact at times
nothing would have been better said). The acting is not the problem. Even
the premise is decent ... it's the contrived conflicts, advancements and
worst of all the dialogue of this film that makes one embarrassed to be a
lover of movies.
Basically, it's the year 3000, an ugly group of corrupt back-stabbing aliens
(the Psychlo's) have wiped out nearly all Earthlings and the remaining few
are used as slaves to mine gold for their home planet (I'm not sure why gold
is valuable to aliens). Until ... one of those slaves decides to fight for
... you guessed it "Freedom!"
Introductory dialogue is expository and would have been better left to "Star
Wars" type text preface. The look of the film is a bit too digital. Our hero
gets shot through a series of glass windows in shattering slow-mo - and yet,
it's just not thrilling.
Travolta (lead Psychlo) in an effort to better control the humans explains,
"We'll let it think it's escaped, just to see what food it likes best..." as
if the monopoly on oxygen wasn't enough to motivate "it". But, the scheme
gets even more ridiculous, instead of killing this rebel human (who had
already vaporized a couple of Psychlo guards) Travolta teaches it to speak
Psychlo and then gives it access to a library of knowledge. (Yeah, that
should teach it to behave!)
Of course, now armed with brains, brawn and revolutionary fervor, the lead
human proclaims to the mass of human slaves waving rocks and sticks, "We're
going to blow up their home planet ... of course, we'll need some extra
supplies." The delivery of this line was met with a robust round of chuckles
from the audience.
But, alas, there is rarely a film that has nothing at all redeeming to
offer. So due, here are a few kudos to those things well done: Shot of hero
from bottom cage of craft as it lifts off ground is strong and visually
stirring! In fact, the alien transport units were created and manipulated
well - they look very good on screen. Language nuances were handled nicely.
To the Psychlo's the chattering of humans sounded like "Ooga ooga"
animalistic or fraternal (in the college sense of the word). While the
Psychlo utterances warp into English so that we, the audience can understand
them (w/o subtitles). Lastly, ten-year-olds may very well enjoy this film.
Battlefield Earth. Copyright Š 2000.
Starring John Travolta, Forest Whitaker, Barry Pepper, Kim Coates.
Directed by Roger Christian.
Screenplay by Corey Mandell and JD Shapiro.
Based on the Novel by L. Ron Hubbard.
Produced by Elie Samaha, Honathan D. Krane, John Travolta at Warner
Bros/Morgan Creek/Franchise Pictures(C)2000. Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................C
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Rules of Engagement (2000)
Deep in the thicket of the Vietnam War, anonymous bullets fly, ripping
through branches, streams, leaves, catching flesh as the digital frame
stutters bursting into red. This impressive, yet bloody sequence fixes the
history of Tommy Lee and Samuel L. as battle-bonded mates.
But it's a present day military action in Yemen that ties Samuel L. onto the
hot seat and Tommy in the extremely warm one just beside him. An unruly
crowd outside the US embassy prompts the passage of three choppers full of
Sam and his men to "baby-sit" on foreign turf. But when the poop hits the
fan, Sam risks life and limb to evacuate the ambassador and his family. At
the end of the day the streets are bloodied with dead women and children and
Sam stands alone at the end of the national security adviser's pointed
finger.
A military court-martial trial comprises the rest of the film. Samuel relies
on old buddy Tommy Lee to defend him against one of the militaries finest
prosecutors, Guy Pearce. Pierce is fierce, a bony Chihuahua with a New York
accent (though he's surprisingly a British born Aussie). Tommy reluctantly
takes on the case, and finding no strong leg to stand on, becomes
disillusioned concerning his best bud's innocence. I love this development.
We too, begin to doubt Jackson. But just as the tension mounts, bam, we (the
audience) are presented with a two-minute scene that spills the beans
concerning Sam's guilt/innocence. Why? No longer can we enjoy the delicately
difficult position Tommy Lee must endure, because though he is not privy to
our intelligence - somehow he seems to have resolved his internal conflict
along with us.
Still, Jones and Jackson are so rock hard, that it's impossible not to be
compelled to the proceedings. Recognition is due also, to the excellent
audio mixing. The sound on this film "Rules!" Unfortunately, the climax
comes and goes with less impact than nearly every other scene proceeding.
"Rules" picks up and turns around the "Few Good Men" story, putting Tommy
Lee in the position of defending the Jack Nicholson argument. In the end,
"Rules of Engagement," though shrapnel-ridden and faulted, still stands
proud.
(I ran into a couple of real live US Marines after the screening. FYI, They
were pleased with the film's portrayal of the military.)
Rules of Engagement. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Tommy Lee Jones, Samuel L Jackson, Guy Pearce, Ben Kingsley, Bruce
Greenwood, Anne Archer, Blair Underwood, Philip Baker Hall, and Dale Dye.
Directed by William Friedkin.
Written by Stephen Gaghan.
Produced by Richard D. Zanuck, Scott Rudin at Paramount/Seven Arts.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Tailor of Panama, The (2001)
The film starts slowly, sleepily slowly, but builds well. Like Ravel's 
"Bolero," the first pages play so faintly you might think the film 
hasn't yet begun, but by the middle, the canal's waters are flowing so 
well that the current will take you rapidly to the climax. 
As an alternative punishment for his snaky behavior, Brosnan is sent to 
Panama in hopes of finding an assignment potentially less embarrassing 
to the British government. Some mundanely simple task that even a 
scheming womanizer like Brosnan couldn't screw up, for instance, keeping 
tabs on the canal and who's running it since the Yanks handed it back to 
Panama. 
Effortlessly bored, Brosnan slithers into Rush's suit shop in search of 
an unbiased insider with a good ear, loose tongue and empty pockets. 
Threatened with publication of his own imperfect passed, Rush tailors a 
story for which any slippery intelligence officer would be happy to 
grease palms. 
This is not the action-thriller Bond fans might expect. Instead, Panama 
rolls like a filmed stage-play. Dialogue (sometimes enjoying it's own 
cleverness a bit too much) and character relationships spin this yarn. 
Nod, nod, wink, wink. 
Sex and sexier, Brosnan has little patience for flirting, "There are two 
ways we can do this. We can wait till the six months have passed and 
then fall into each other with farewell passion, or we can begin an all 
out affair right now." 
I enjoyed the ever-increasing line of tension and complexity so evenly 
sewn through careful direction; however, the production should have 
begun with a stronger initial pace. The first twenty minutes are as 
slumberous as the last are captivating. The story, keen and interesting, 
whirls well, building nicely to an ending not easily predicted. While 
leaving its audience entertained, this climax lacks a moving emotional 
component. 
The Tailor of Panama. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Pierce Brosnan, Geoffrey Rush, Jamie Lee Curtis, Brendan 
Gleeson, Xatheine McCormack, Leonor Varela, Martin Ferrero, David 
Hayman, Jon Polito. 
*  Directed by John Boorman. 
*  Screenplay by Andrew Davies, John le Carre, John Boorman. Based upon 
the novel by John le Carre. 
*  Produced by John Boorman at Merlin/Columbia. 
Grade..........................B-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Mission: Impossible II (2000)
Remember MI-1? Tom Cruise hanging from the ceiling while performing all
sorts of spy operations? Yep, that's all I remember too. I wasn't crazy
about MI-1, and am feeling nearly the same about MI-2. Inversely, if you
liked the first, perhaps you'll enjoy the later.
I'm a big Cruise fan and willing to take the heat for it. He's a good actor
and looks great at the end of a string, or tumbling backwards while kicking
the bad guys in the face. In an MI-2 introductory scene, Cruise climbs Utah,
getting that red dirt under his nails. Woo does a fantastic job of putting
it all to the wall with aerial photography. This quietly huge moment is
boosted even higher via a screaming contrast with the previous airplane out
of control opening sequence. This is the scene I will remember from MI-2,
and Cruise doesn't even know his mission yet.
Ambrose (the biggest bad guy) gets a hold of the cure for the nastiest
man-made disease to date, all he needs is the actual virus to infect the
masses, shakedown the head of a pharmaceutical company, invest in the stock
market, then hand over the cure and badabing badaboom, he's a billionaire. A
simple enough plan were it not for Cruise's hand-picked spy team.
Professional thief Nyah Hall (Thandie Newton), the beautiful key player in
his alliance, steals the affections of both Cruise and Ambrose, and that's
no coincidence.
Though, these spies handle the art of science well, there's little chemistry
between Cruise and Newton. However, in perhaps the first "romantic car
chase" ever to grace the screen, the two tango in the dust and gravel of
their spinning convertible sports cars, artistic and elegant - kudos again
to Woo.
And that's it. No major twists, aside from some very nicely simulated
cyber-face changing, but after the first face-lift ... well, you get the
idea.
The dialogue is routine, dipping at times to below average. You know, the
familiar, "Get him!" and "Put a sock in it!" and "Ha, you should have killed
me when you had the chance." Plus, the filmmakers made every effort to
repeat import information for us, dangling there on the edge of insulting.
In fact, the overall production feels like an artfully crafted episode of
the "A-Team." At age ten, I would have been ecstatic over it.
Most of the big action is big; though often popping wheelies into the
ridiculous - it's still fun. Unfortunately, the momentum stalls in-between,
while many presumptions just don't hold water.
Though at times he gets carried away, still true, Woo is cool. This mission
would have been next to impossible without him.
MI-2. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13.
Starring Tom Cruise, Thandie Newton, Dougray Scott, Richard Roxburgh, John
Polson, Brendan Gleeson, Rade Sherbedgia and Ving Rhames.
Directed by John Woo.
Written by Robert Towne.
Story by Ronald D. Moore & Brannon Braga
Produced by Tom Cruise and Paula Wagner at Paramount.
Grade..........................B
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Journey Into Amazing Caves (2001)
"Amazing Caves" is not an exciting enough title for a sometimes 
breathtaking, sometimes wondrous audiovisual experience. 
The filmmakers take full advantage of this sensational medium to carry 
us with them to places God knows we'd never go ourselves: winding 
through the canyons in the Arizona desert, submerged underground, 
underwater, or dropping through huge ice crevices - climbing, paddling 
and swimming into mysterious, elusive holes in the Earth. 
Though the production pays due attention to education, the beauty and 
adventure of these journeys are gladly the main focus. Splendid visuals 
are backed up with warm fertile moody tunes from 60's rock band the 
Moody Blues. The band reworks (and improves) old favorites for the 
score, enjoying the grand performance of Large Format audio. 
Like exploring a hole itself, the film takes an excursion from the 
familiar beaten path of documentary format in favor of finding something 
spiritual to bring home in the specimen jar. Sweetly done. 
"The most dangerous part of caving ... is just getting to them." 
Cavers take to kayaks and drop down a 12-foot waterfall - your heart and 
jaw will drop with them. A copter'd cam scraps the pastel canyon walls 
over a limestone turquoise blue river - gorgeous (no pun intended). 
Later in an underwater cave, divers squirm through holes no larger than 
a pizza. The screen is huge, but a fantastic feeling of claustrophobia 
squeezes it to within an inch of a gasp. How did they get that huge 
camera through? 
My only suggestions lie within the realm of education. I wouldn't change 
a single edit on the current production, but might have added graphic 
overlays to back up some of the narrative. Liam Neeson's tongue gives 
appropriate potency to the voice-over; but several times technical 
phrases could have been illustrated in one corner of that huge screen by 
a chart, diagram or animation, while the big adventure continued. Such 
overlays would serve to make the production so rich with information 
viewers will want to see it twice or three times. 
Nine years in the making, "Amazing Caves" was well worth the effort. I'd 
have chosen a better title though ... perhaps: "Caving in", "Climbing 
into the Earth", "Climbing into Ice, Rock and Water", or my personal 
favorite: "Spelunk!" 
Amazing Caves (2-D Large Format). Copyright Š 2001. 
*  Starring Cavers: Hazel Barton and Nancy Aulenbach. 
*  Narrator: Liam Neeson. 
*  Music: The Moody Blues 
*  Directed by Stephen Judson. 
*  Written by Jack Stephens. 
*  Produced by Greg MacGillivray, Stephen Judson, Alec Lorimore. 
Grade..........................A
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 
>From newsgroup@rossanthony.com Mon Mar  5 19:01:10 PST 2001
        by maxwell.ee.washington.edu (8.9.3 (PHNE_18979)/8.9.3) with ESMTP id TAA26581
        for ; Mon, 5 Mar 2001 19:01:09 -0800 (PST)
        by mx-out.daemonmail.net (8.9.3/8.9.3) with SMTP id TAA37731
        for ; Mon, 5 Mar 2001 19:01:08 -0800 (PST)
        (envelope-from newsgroup@rossanthony.com)
        by mail.rossanthony.com with SMTP id Qo90wsF2
        Mon, 05 Mar 2001 19:01:05 -0700 (PST)
Author: Ross Anthony 
Subject: Review: Amazing Caves (2001)
Newsgroups: rec.arts.movies.current-films
Posted-And-Mailed: yes
Organization: www.RossAnthony.com
User-Agent: MT-NewsWatcher/3.0 (PPC)
"Amazing Caves" is not an exciting enough title for a sometimes 
breathtaking, sometimes wondrous audiovisual experience. 
The filmmakers take full advantage of this sensational medium to carry 
us with them to places God knows we'd never go ourselves: winding 
through the canyons in the Arizona desert, submerged underground, 
underwater, or dropping through huge ice crevices - climbing, paddling 
and swimming into mysterious, elusive holes in the Earth. 
Though the production pays due attention to education, the beauty and 
adventure of these journeys are gladly the main focus. Splendid visuals 
are backed up with warm fertile moody tunes from 60's rock band the 
Moody Blues. The band reworks (and improves) old favorites for the 
score, enjoying the grand performance of Large Format audio. 
Like exploring a hole itself, the film takes an excursion from the 
familiar beaten path of documentary format in favor of finding something 
spiritual to bring home in the specimen jar. Sweetly done. 
"The most dangerous part of caving ... is just getting to them." 
Cavers take to kayaks and drop down a 12-foot waterfall - your heart and 
jaw will drop with them. A copter'd cam scraps the pastel canyon walls 
over a limestone turquoise blue river - gorgeous (no pun intended). 
Later in an underwater cave, divers squirm through holes no larger than 
a pizza. The screen is huge, but a fantastic feeling of claustrophobia 
squeezes it to within an inch of a gasp. How did they get that huge 
camera through? 
My only suggestions lie within the realm of education. I wouldn't change 
a single edit on the current production, but might have added graphic 
overlays to back up some of the narrative. Liam Neeson's tongue gives 
appropriate potency to the voice-over; but several times technical 
phrases could have been illustrated in one corner of that huge screen by 
a chart, diagram or animation, while the big adventure continued. Such 
overlays would serve to make the production so rich with information 
viewers will want to see it twice or three times. 
Nine years in the making, "Amazing Caves" was well worth the effort. I'd 
have chosen a better title though ... perhaps: "Caving in", "Climbing 
into the Earth", "Climbing into Ice, Rock and Water", or my personal 
favorite: "Spelunk!" 
Amazing Caves (2-D Large Format). Copyright Š 2001. 
*  Starring Cavers: Hazel Barton and Nancy Aulenbach. 
*  Narrator: Liam Neeson. 
*  Music: The Moody Blues 
*  Directed by Stephen Judson. 
*  Written by Jack Stephens. 
*  Produced by Greg MacGillivray, Stephen Judson, Alec Lorimore. 
Grade..........................A
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Men of Honor (2000)
Though racist mentalities (and other obstacles) constantly try to put a 
stop to Cuba's undying determination to become a master chief diver; in 
the spirit of the Energizer bunny ... Cuba just keeps going and going 
and going. 
The title "Men of Honor" fades onto the screen over tremendous waves at 
high sea. As the waves topple, the brass instruments blare ... 
foretelling the melodrama to follow. It's a bit of a hokie film, but 
compelling nonetheless. 
Headbutting a couple of Navy MP's in the introductory sequence, De Niro 
wastes no time in taking command of the screen. His character is rich 
with unpredictability, honor, and rebellion. And of course, he's an 
awesome actor. Cuba's character, on the other hand, offers little 
surprise after he grows from a boy into a man who simply will not run 
out of battery power until he achieves Navy diver's highest rank. Cuba's 
acting is very good, but forever in De Niro's shadow. 
Michael Rapaport, who's been in just about every release this year 
(seems like), Forest Gumps his way into this one as the only white 
trainee who sympathizes with Cuba. 
I might have really loved this picture save for one too many jammed 
pulleys. There's also a problem of motivation in one tavern "tough guy 
to tough guy" scene. Cuba had just learned of some very sad news that 
prompted him to call the woman he fancied. While waiting for her to 
arrive, Charlize Theron shows up and coaxes him into the tavern conflict 
with a simple line or two. Seems to me, a man of Cuba's conviction 
wouldn't risk it all so easily. Perhaps a few moments were cut, leaving 
a gap in believability. 
Lastly, the film ends with text when it should have ended with images. 
That said, "Men of Honor," based on the life of Carl Brashear, is still 
a big movie with big acting, beautiful production work and 
kick-in-the-pants inspiration. 
Men of Honor. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R. 
*  Starring Robert De Niro, Cuba Gooding, Jr., Charlize Theron, Aunjanue 
Ellis, Hal Holbrook, Michael Rapaport, Powers Boothe, David Keith. 
*  Directed by George Tillman, Jr. 
*  Written by Scott Marshall Smith based upon the life of Carl Brashear. 
*  Produced by Robert Teitel, Bill Badalato at 20th Century Fox. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Mummy, The (1999)
A "B" movie wrapped in a winding cloth of "A" special effects. Universal
unleashes a film that feels like a ride at its studios in L.A. -- classic
Hollywood hoopla! Hundreds of screaming soldiers on horses, crashing
biplanes, scary monsters, and a wide-eyed Bob Hope kind of light-heartedness
"The Mummy" is not heavy drama ... it's scary-lite.
In ancient Egypt a man is naughty with the Pharaoh's mistress. She kills
herself and they mummify him alive. (You'd think that'd to teach 'em.)
However, much later (1923) an American adventurer (Indiana Jones without the
edgemacation) hooks up with a Hieroglyphics reading librarian and her
brother. Together they sort of accidentally awaken the mummy, whose "soul
mission" is to wreak havoc with its "human race ending" evil.
The crude toughened cowboy whose only knowledge is his experience couples
(in tasty contrast) with the clumsy, but proper librarian whose only
knowledge is theory. Though the film sets itself up rather nicely from a
scripting point of view; once the mummy kidnaps the girl, it isn't too much
more than a special effects vehicle.
What the movie did excellently: Pharaoh's Mistress' costume -- a great intro
to the film. Music - as powerful as were the special effects awesome.
Chuckles -- I laughed out loud more than a few times. And of course, KILLER
SPECIAL EFFECTS. The first appearance of the mummy is genuinely awe
inspiring.
What kept the movie from truly being great: Camels out run horses. A row of
soldiers stands in the line of fire, just to fall dramatically when shot. An
overkill climax that subtracts from the drama. Overuse of a great bugs
visual. And all though Brendan Fraser's first scream at the mummy is
pricelessly hilarious, all others thereafter fall short. But, the hardest
hit to this "big picture" was a cartoon-like plane crash that spanked a
disappointingly out-of-place end to a fantastic special effects sequence.
Though plagued a bit with bugs, "The Mummy" is still a whole heck of a lot
of fun.
Starring Brendan Fraser and Rachel Weisz.
Screenplay and direction by Stephen Sommers.
Produced by James Jacks and Sean Daneil at Univeral/Alphaville.
Rated PG-13.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Bacheha-Ye aseman (1997)
By Ross Anthony
The Children of Heaven is a sweet film about a boy, his sister and shoes.
Ali is a 10 year old living in a small town in Iran. His family is poor and
behind in rent payments; his mother ill. Ali sincerely tries to help out,
but he ends up losing his little sister Zahra's shoes during an errand to
have them repaired.
"How can I go to school without shoes?" Zahra pleads.
Ali and Zahra work out a plan to share his modest sneakers. Since her school
hours end just as his begin, Zahra wears the worn gymies first. Though he's
an excellent student, this "sneaker relay" causes Ali to be tardy. As for
Zahra, ashamed of the oversized shoes her lamenting gaze falls on the
footwear of all the other children in the playground.
I wept during this picture, but not from empathy; it was the stark beauty.
Ali's family is poor, but not to be pitied. The father, loud and full of
bombast, is nonetheless loving and dedicated. The beauty emanates from the
eyes of the children. Majid Majidi (writer/director) puts into film that
wonderful majestic world we used to see before puberty, when a pair of shoes
and a shiny pen could make you come running home from school with a skip in
your step and a smile that no news story could dampen. When your parents'
approval or disapproval was paramount. When the love between brothers and
sisters wasn't something to be contemplated, manipulated or even
expressed -- it simply was.
It doesn't matter if you grew up in Cincinnati or Tehran, that childhood
spirit proves universal.
Grade..........................A
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Sweet and Lowdown (1999)
Two words could not more amply describe Woody Allen's lead Character Emmet
Ray, played picture perfectly by Sean Penn. Emmet smokes on the jazz guitar
of the early 1900's (remember that century?)and is considered the best of
his era ... well except for this gypsy guy in France.
Penn does a slick job of fluttering his fingers across the fretboard, you
might actually think he's playing. Perhaps it helps to have a brother in the
music world. I've got two of Michael Penn's CD's, if you like thoughtful
alternative/folk rock - I'd recommend giving him a try.
But the real charm of the movie is Emmet's sweet and lowdown appeal. Emmet's
idea of showing a "dame" a good time is taking her to the local dump to
shoot rats. It's one of his favorite things to do, so why wouldn't it be
enchanting to share with his date?
In a marvelous scene boozer, Romeo, pimp, kleptomaniac, music prodigy, Emmet
Ray and his buddy are out looking for babes when they stumble across Hattie
(Samantha Morton) and her friend. They quibble over which man should get
which woman. Emmet, happy to be paired with "the small one" (Hattie),
becomes uncontrollably fidgety when he learns Hattie is mute. "Hey, let's
trade - just for a while," he pleads with his buddy, "This is my day off, I
want a talking girl!"
He's so offensively childlike in his frankness, while a genius with the
guitar. That makes for a rich character. Penn, one of the finest actors of
our time, revels in all his sincere absurdity.
Samantha Morton aptly fills her character's shoes without a word, while Uma
Thurman showing up later adds little to the picture. Woody himself appears
as one of a panel of modern-day jazz experts who comment on Emmet Ray
stories directly to the camera, making the film a mock-documentary.
I'm not a big Woody Allen fan, but this is a good one.
Sweet and Lowdown. Copyright Š 1999. Rated PG-13.
Starring Sean Penn, Samantha Morton, Uma Thurman.
Written and Directed by Woody Allen.
Produced by Jean Doumanian at Sony Pictures.
Grade..........................A-
--
Copyright Š 1999 Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Best in Show (2000)
If you can't get enough of the mockumentary genre ... here's another one 
from Christopher Guest (lead guitarist Nigel of "Spinal Tap") and Eugene 
Levy (bumbling father in "American Pie" and much earlier sketch comic 
with SCTV). These two funny men loosely drew up the script together, 
"Our outline gives a very solid blueprint to the actors so they know ... 
to get from point A to point B, but how they do it is largely up to 
them," says Levy. Both costar in the film while Guest directs. 
The Documentary follows five couples on their quest to win the Mayflower 
"Best In Show" cup for their pretty purebred pets. Out of fabulous Fern 
City, Florida comes the husband and wife team, Cookie and Gerry (Levy). 
Cookie's pre-marriage swinging provides the fuel for follies with nerdy 
hubby Gerry. 
Yuppie Starbucks types, Meg and Hamilton, broadcast most of the stress 
and dysfunction, with relationship tension as tight as the wires in 
their full-mouth braces. 
Harlan Pepper (Guest), a fly fisherman from North Carolina, can name 
every type of nut in the forest and moonlights as a veteran home 
ventriloquist. 
Scott and Stefan are the gay couple; while voluptuous Sherri says of 
wealthy aged husband, "We have a lot in common. We both like soup," and 
"We can always find something to not talk about for hours." 
Fred Willard nails the bit part of color commentator, a hundred times 
more knowledgeable about baseball than dogs. His canine-inanities are 
fielded by a low-key British expert. The frisky contrast of the two is 
sparkling. 
All involved do a strong job of improvisational acting. The direction 
and editing is tight and the humor very often delightfully dry. I 
enjoyed it. 
Best in Show. Copyright Š 2000. Rated PG-13. 
*  Starring Christopher Guest, Eugene Levy, Parker Posey, Michael 
Hitchcock, Catherine O'Hara, John Michael Higgins, Michael McKean, 
Patrick Cranshaw, Jennifer Coolidge, Jane Lynch, Bob Balaban, Don Lake, 
Jim Piddock and Fred Willard. 
*  Directed by Christopher Guest. 
*  Written by Guest and Levy. 
*  Produced by Karen Murphy at Castle Rock. 
Grade..........................B+
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across North
America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Beach, The (2000)
A somewhat snide Leonardo prefaces this "Lord of the Flies" type adventure,
"My name is Richard, so what else do you need to know?" As a matter of fact,
I would have liked to know that Richard wades on the selfish and untrue side
of ordinary. Which could have quickly been established in a brief opening
scene.
But "The Beach" does take care to establish the size of Richard's gonads.
His beach balls are easily dared. Arriving into a bustling exotic Bangkok,
locals promptly challenge Richard into drinking snake blood. Then Robert
Carlyle, delivering a fantastically psycho performance as a former resident
of the famed beach, more than sparks Richard's interest in the splendidly
secret cove three islands off the coast, "I'm not just talking ... 'oh,
that's nice, man' ... this place if f'ing perfect."
In need of some companionship (especially female) Richard recruits a French
couple to journey with him. By the end of the first act, the three, standing
on the second island and staring at the forbidden goal, dare themselves to
swim the void.
Up to here, the film rather closely traces a common tourist route. In fact,
ten years ago, I flew into Bangkok, crashed at a cheap hostel, got the
island paradise speech from a glassy-eyed traveler, hopped the train and
boarded the boat out to the same second island where I met up with an
Israeli couple. So in a strange way, the film may be roughly nostalgic for
those who've made the trip - up to this point anyway. At the time, Koh
Pangon was beauty enough, we didn't need to swim the 2K.
Once the trio reaches the forbidden island, "The Beach" dips into a short
sequence of which the "Blaire Witch Project" would have been envious. An
obsessed leader dragging two innocents into the thicket ... but with a much
larger budget, and experienced cinematographers.
Soon enough they find the cove haven to end all cove havens and a community
of pot-smoking hippies to go with it. "I've got a new vocation: The pursuit
of pleasure." The music plays backward during this scene to greater
intensify the dizzying beauty. Nicely done.
Leonardo plays the role well, especially in his reactions. Early on he
blurts to the violent psycho traveler, "No offense, but you're f'ed in the
head." As we await the consequences, Leonardo's facial expressions fill the
screen with anticipation, daring and a shady sort of naiveté.
But, in a move we'd not been warmed up to, Richard leaves a copy of the map
back on the second island. It is this copy that tempts the major conflict
for the rest of the film. A tempt that any self-respecting major conflict
would have ignored. But not this one.
Dabbling in surrealism, the film drifts into the dark and deathly, when
Richard himself comes to idolize the memory of the aforementioned crazed
traveler. Here, the twisted plot becomes savagely captivating. Unfortunately
soon after, all this set-up falls like a house made of cards; as the
filmmakers opt for a showdown style climax while abandoning what should have
been a personal, man vs. selfishness, culmination. The saga dumps to its
end, manufacturing the lacerated remains of a theme.
Well paced, acted and filmed, always interesting, with only a few sticky
moments; "The Beach" is a small scale, less potent, more commercial "Fight
Club." Both films follow a fringe character, start well, continue well, but
fail to find an ending that works.
A brief note: Though Richard's map shows the island paradise Northwest of
Koh Pangnon; the actual island filmed, Phi Phi Le, is miles away (off of
Phuket Island). Additionally, the producers reshaped the sand dunes somewhat
and filled out the coast with 100 coconut trees that weren't there prior.
The Beach. Copyright Š 2000. Rated R.
Starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Daniel York, Virginie Ledoyen, Guillaume Canet,
Robert Carlyle, Tilda Swinton.
Directed by Danny Boyle.
Screenplay by John Hodge. Based on the book by Alex Garland.
Produced by Andrew Macdonald at 20th Century Fox/Figment.
Grade..........................B+
--
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has scripted
and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries across
North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. For more reviews visit:
http://RossAnthony.com

Title
Review for Emperor's New Groove, The (2000)
"This story is about Me! ... I was a really nice guy and they ruined me 
for no reason," David Spade begins his reign over this Disney film from 
the get-go and never lets go. 
Changed into a llama by Yzma, his wicked Grinchy-looking advisor, the 
emperor is forced to come to terms with his total lack of heart. In 
stark contrast, John Goodman, as the big-hearted Pacha, makes an 
unlikely partner in the emperor's attempt to reclaim the thrown. 
Hey, this is a really funny movie! (And I'm a few years older than five) 
Spade's wry, dry, whiny, biting edge vibrates against the expected 
smooth gloss of Disney paint ... it'll set your funny bone resonating. 
Kudos to the director, editor, and screenwriter as well, though Spade is 
definitely the star of this show (as Carrey in the Grinch); this film 
still packs plenty of well-timed physical humor and a healthy supply of 
delightful one-liners from other characters. 
Kronk, Yzma's kid-spirited sensitive-male thug, delivers a host of juicy 
gags. Yzma orders, "Kronk, break down that door!"
Kronk narrow's his eyes, "What? Are you kidding? That's hand-carved 
mahogany." 
A nervous villager stands before Yzma.
Yzma barks, "It's no concern of mine that your family doesn't have ... 
what was it again ... food?"
The villager mutters something inaudible.
Yzma finishes, "Yes, well you really should have thought about that 
before you became a peasant." 
Toward making Emperor Kuzco even more vain (and since the story is told 
by him), other character's dialogue sort of blurs into blah blah as they 
fall victim to his short attention span and gross lack of empathy. A 
very nice touch. And then as a Llama, Kuzco stumbles clumsily around on 
his new hoofs -- strong creative insight to thicken this already rich 
character. 
The film's only flaws are consolidated into one unfunny jungle 
restaurant scene that plays like a bad 1960's sit-com. It's an ugly 
blemish that is soon enough over and done with. 
In sum, the emperor's jaded, Spaded, jagged-edge of vanity cuts a sharp 
b-line to the jugular. Though small tikes may miss some of these satiric 
nuances, the film still stocks a powerful momentum. At about an hour 
fifteen, it's smaller in length while decidedly passing on the usual 
Disney animation grandeur (not a one character ever breaks into song); 
still this is a pretty darned fun and funnier film. 
The Emperor's New Groove. Copyright Š 2000. Rated G. 
*  Starring the voices of David Spade, John Goodman, Eartha Kitt, 
Patrick Warburton, Wendie Malick. 
*  Directed by Mark Dindal. 
*  Written by David Reynolds, Story by Chris Williams and Mark Dindal. 
*  Produced by Randy Fullmer at Disney. 
Grade..........................A-
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 

Title
Review for Quills (2000)
Paris seventeen ninety-four, a criminally insane man scribbles out 
barely pornographic, cheap, lust novels masked with poetic sounding 
prose. Aided by a chambermaid at the asylum, the books make print with 
copies selling faster than prostitution. 
The film begins with a very nicely filmed execution scene and a 
bloodthirsty observation, "How quickly pleasure is taken from one and 
given to others." The sex-guilty maiden is fitted to the guillotine as 
the townsfolk enjoy the festivities. 
Soon the crazy Count demands a warmer form of payment from the maid 
(Kate Winslet), "A kiss a page!" 
Winslet coyly replies, "May I blow them or must I administer them?" She 
then asks if there's room for negotiation, to which the Rush smugly 
expounds, "The price is every bit as firm as I am." 
It's a festival of snobbish, yet still plainly sophomoric puns. Though, 
I chuckled a few times, these were rarely due to the double entendres. 
Surprisingly and inappropriately, a serious film erupts from between the 
buttocks of this Shakespearean-like farce. The Abby in charge of the 
Asylum and the crazy Count debate human nature "To eat, sh*t, f*ck," the 
Count insists. Countering the Count, the Abby offers, "To fall in love." 
But the staid half of the production relies too heavily on vanity as a 
motivating force for every turn, mudballing the film into a mucky 
progression of farcical twists that never seems to stop rolling. The 
film itself becomes like the Terminator. Seeming ending after seeming 
ending, it just won't die. 
Rumor had it that this is a sexy picture. Eek, about as sexy as 
necrophilia. The lewd fable proves an inhospitable host for the more 
meaty conflict between priest and pervert. "Have you no faith in your 
own mission?" Rush bitingly asks the Abby, ... a great poke toward a 
subplot that unfortunately drowns in the muddle. 
Though the performances are fair and the costuming & sets very nice; 
these characters have no depth. All but Rush's are mere whims of the 
author, vehicles for pointless plot twists. Simply stated, the film is a 
cheap novel itself with an insulting attempt at a moral stapled on at 
its end. I'm not appalled by the vulgarity ... I'm appalled by the lack 
of entertainment. 
Quills. Copyright Š 2001. Rated R. 
*  Starring Geoffrey Rush, Kate Winslet, Joaquin Phoenix, Michael Caine, 
Billie Whitelaw, Patrick Malahide, Amelia Warner, Jane Menelaus, Stephen 
Moyer. 
*  Directed by Philip Kaufman. 
*  Written by Doug Wright (based on his play). 
*  Produced by Julia Chasman, Nick Wechsler, Peter Kaufman at Industry 
Ent/A Walrus & Assoc/ Hollywood Partners/ Fox Searchlight. 
Grade..........................C
-- 
Copyright Š 2000. Ross Anthony, currently based in Los Angeles, has 
scripted and shot documentaries, music videos, and shorts in 35 countries
across North America, Europe, Africa and Asia. 
For more reviews visit: http://www.RossAnthony.com 
