Authors
Jim Gillogly
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Blade Runner (1982)
     The definitive version of BLADE RUNNER runs until 10 Oct 91 at the
Nuart in West Los Angeles.  The test audience that saw this version
before the initial release was befuddled and depressed, so the studio
added lots of lame Harrison Ford voice-overs and tacked some tacky
aerial footage (recycled from THE SHINING) onto the end, together with
more lame voice-overs suggesting your standard Official Hollywood Happy
Ending.  This release reverses those losses, turning a good and artistic
(but flawed) film into an impressive, integrated film that deserves
another two stars on *anybody's* scale.
     Getting rid of the patronizing and distracting voice-overs achieves
most of the gains.  The story flows just fine without them, and we're
allowed to concentrate on the wonderful dark sets and the Vangelis
score.  The score appears to be utilized differently; I don't have it
all memorized, but I noticed one change -- when Deckard is noodling with
his piano in the Criterion Laser Disk version, the Vangelis score is
woven around the notes he's playing; the piano stands out more in the
Director's Cut.  I believe we're hearing more of it during the long
approaches to Tyrell Corporation where we used to hear voice-overs.
[SPOILER WARNING -- I'm about to go into detail that you may not want to
read]
     Some of the gorier scenes that had been added back into the
Criterion LD were not present in the Director's Cut (DC).  The extra
footage of Dr.  Eldon Tyrell's eyeballs getting popped and dripping down
his face were left out, as was the second shot at Pris which resulted in
her flailing around even more vigorously on the floor, and the nail
popping out the back side of Roy Batty's hand.  Good riddance to all of
them, say I: they didn't advance the story or our identification or lack
of it with any of the characters.
     The movie ends with Deckard and Rachel getting into the elevator at
Deckard's building after finding the silver foil origami unicorn; we
still hear the echo of Gaff's parting remark: "She won't live, but then,
who does?"  It's great -- just perfect.
     For the real aficionados, two of the more blatant continuity errors
have been fixed:  Bryant tells Deckard in his office that *two* of the
replicants were fried in the electric field when they tried to break
into Tyrell Corporation.  This means we no longer need inside knowledge
about Mary, the All-American Mother Replicant, to count the bodies.  The
other bug that was fixed was the Asian lady reading the serial number
off the snake scale in her electron microscope: she now reads the same
one we're seeing.  Those are the only ones I noticed; there might have
been more changes.
     The issue of whether Deckard is a replicant was not clarified at
all in this version (and I was glad of it).  We still have the classic
lines from Rachel ("Have you ever retired a human by mistake?"  "This
Voigt-Kampff test of yours -- have you ever taken it yourself?")  and
Gaff ("You've done a man's job.").  [Quote accuracy not guaranteed]  We
still have Deckard's eyes glowing gray in two places (as opposed to the
gold glow in Nexus Six replicants' eyes): when Rachel says "I'm not *in*
the business:  I *am* the business."  and when Rachel is playing the
piano while Deckard is resting.  Some have speculated that Deckard's
unicorn dream would appear in this version, definitively settling the
question, since Gaff's origami unicorn would indicate that he knew one
of Deckard's mind implants.  However, there was no hint of this dream in
the DC.
     All in all, it was a wonderful experience...  the same feeling you
would get if you'd seen only the colorized version of CASABLANCA, and
finally got to see the original black and white.
