Authors
Bradley Null
Number of Reviews
11

Title
Review for Boiler Room (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Bradley Null.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/31c4717f6627fb4e88256885001d861a?OpenDocument
 America is the land of opportunity, and now more than ever, the
opportunity that most Americans are preoccupied with is that of easy
money.  Our news media is saturated with stories of the instant
millionaire, 25-year-old startup CEOs worth nine figures or the crafty
investor that bought that startup on IPO and doesn't have to worry too
much about his day job anymore either.  There are a number of powerful
cautionary tales waiting to be drawn from this unwholesome frenzy.
BOILER ROOM tries to tell one of these stories, but sadly it fails to
add much to the greed genre established by its two heavily referenced
predecessors: WALL STREET (1987) and GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS (1992).
 BOILER ROOM is the story of Seth (Ribisi), a 19-year-old college
dropout obsessed with the American dream of easy money.  After
concluding rather quickly that college isn't necessarily the fast track
to a quick buck, he opens up an underground casino out of his house in
Queens, providing a popular service for the local city college kids.
After his disapproving father (Rifkin) finds out about the casino, Seth,
feeling a repressed need to gain his father's approval, looks into an
opportunity to become a stockbroker at the small firm of J.T. Marlin.
 As it turns out, the firm, located in the heart of Long Island,
conspicuously far from Wall Street, is a "chop shop," shorthand for a
brokerage house more interested in pawning off securities for its own
interests rather than serving its customers.  When Seth's father
discovers this, not only does Seth not find the approval he was hoping
for, but he is excommunicated from the family.
 Though he has only a minor part in the film, Ben Affleck is highlighted
in trailers for the film, and the discerning observer will notice a
strong similarity between his scene in the trailer, and Alec Baldwin's
immortalized portrayal of a real estate shark in GLENGARRY GLEN ROSS.
In fact, Affleck's big scene draws heavily on Baldwin's, though his
performance (and the material he has to work with) does not live up to
what is almost universally agreed upon as the best performance of
Baldwin's career.  This is not the only referencing of David Mamet's
portrayal of the dark world of real estate cold-calling in this movie,
however.  Later in the film, when receiving some instructions on how to
cold-call potential customers, Seth is told to remember one of Baldwin's
catch phrases from that scene, "A-B-C.  Always Be Closing."  BOILER ROOM
also liberally references, both directly and indirectly, its direct
predecessor in the "greed is good" category of filmmaking.  Not only
drawing its basic theme and plot structure from WALL STREET, BOILER ROOM
also draws its best dialogue during a scene in which a number of young
stock brokers sitting in one of their sparely decorated mansions,
compete with each other to quote lines from WALL STREET, whose
antagonist, Gordon Gecko, is obviously regarded as an idol within the
group.
 As a movie, BOILER ROOM is moderately entertaining.  Vin Diesel in
particular, off a strong turn in SAVING PRIVATE RYAN, turns in a
powerful performance as Chris, one of Seth's mentors at J.T. Marlin.
Sadly though, Ben Younger, in his writing and directorial debut, adds
very little to the filmic pantheon in his own voice.  Even the film's
most prolific statement on the American obsession with getting rich,
"either you're slinging crack rock or you've got a wicked jump shot," is
a quote of the rap star Notorious B.I.G.  The most admirable outcome of
this film might be that it leads viewers to check out its two
predecessors.  I would urge the same as well.
Director: Ben Younger
Producer: Suzanne Todd, Jennifer Todd
Writer: Ben Younger
Starring: Giovanni Ribisi, Ben Affleck, Vin Diesel, Nia Long, Taylor
Nichols, Scott Caan, Ron Rifkin, Tom Everett Scott
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Road to El Dorado, The (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Bradley Null.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/bebb69b65e89ff94882568b20012269e?OpenDocument
 THE ROAD TO EL DORADO is DreamWorks' second big attempt, after 1998's
PRINCE OF EGYPT, to break into Disney's monopoly on the animated film
business.  It is an effort as disappointing as the first.
 The one aspect of this film that fits squarely within genre conventions
is the subject matter.  Like such classics as BEAUTY AND THE BEAST and
ALADDIN, EL DORADO finds a classical fantasy in the lost city of gold,
couching it in a historical context: In this case is the Spanish
explorer Cortez's very real search for that mythical city.
Unfortunately though, Cortez is lost for the bulk of the film while we
are left to follow two roguish Spaniards (voiced by Kline and Branagh)
who stumble upon, in sequence, a map to El Dorado, Cortez's ship to the
New World, and El Dorado itself.  Once the two con artists find El
Dorado, they are of course hailed as Gods, and the bulk of the story
concerns just how they are going to carry out this charade and make off
with the gold back to Spain.  In the process, we are left with a
half-hearted conniving native medicine man voiced by Armand Assante as
our only hope for a true villain.  Once they find the lost city, the
plot follows turn for turn that of the 1975 Sean Connery vehicle, THE
MAN WHO WOULD BE KING.  One could argue that plagiarizing a great film
is not such a bad idea, considering a great bulk of the audience has
never seen said film or read the book it is based on.  Nonetheless, it
tends to irk any true movie fan to see great movies remade badly.
 Plagiarizing the plot is not the only evidence of cutting corners found
in this film; the action sequences also seem for the most part to have
been cut down into action shots.  Compared with TARZAN's extensive and
breathtaking use of deep canvas (the effect of making animation look
three-dimensional), EL DORADO feels downright static, at least until the
final climactic action sequence.  Likewise the dancing canvas we have
expected from musical numbers since FANTASIA are not only static, but
heavily infused with the fluorescent hues and musical bits from the
likes of YELLOW SUBMARINE.
 Witnessing DreamWorks fumble around the animated film genre for the
second time, one might wonder if Jeffrey Katzenberg was not perhaps
boasting a bit when he claimed to be the genius behind Disney's recent
success in the animated genre.  You might wonder in fact if Katzenberg
took anything at all from his experiences at Disney.  While Disney
continues to knock out quality animated fare in the tried and true
Disney tradition without Katzenberg (see 1999's TARZAN and TOY STORY 2),
DreamWorks continues to stumble in this arena.
 EL DORADO also follows in THE PRINCE OF EGYPT's footsteps bucking genre
conventions by lassoing a PG rating.  However, more risqué than PRINCE,
EL DORADO seems to claim its rating through a racy bit of sexual
innuendo between the roguish Spaniard Tulio (Kline) and the bad girl
native Chel (Perez).
 I wouldn't ordinarily paint myself as a fan of genre conventions or
brand names, but sitting down to see DreamWorks muck up the animated
film format, I found myself yearning for a Disney picture.  Does Disney
just have the magic touch, or have they patented and contracted into
infinity all of the elements of good animation?
Director: Bibo Bergeron, Will Finn, Don Paul
Producer: Brooke Breton, Bonne Radford
Writer: Ted Elliott, Terry Rossio
Starring: voices of Kevin Kline, Kenneth Branagh, Rosie Perez, Armand
Assante, Edward James Olmos
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Remember the Titans (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Bradley Null
You can find the review with full credits at
http://filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/4273eccb750e44ab882569680006d5fc?OpenDocument
     Here's the pitch:  Take an emotional drama about the racial
conflict concerning the integration of a black high school and a white
one in the South.  Then wrap the entire plot around a hard-nosed high
school football coach (Washington) with an unorthodox style but an
uncanny ability to get the most out of his players.  As an added little
twist in this case, the old white head coach (Patton) stays on as an
assistant so we can play with a fair amount of racial conflict and power
struggle as these two egos collide, and ultimately generate a little
more emotion as they become friends.
     The last bit aside, we've all seen this movie a couple of times
before, so we know what to expect from the feel-good sentiment.  To be
sure, a lot of bigoted white folks are going to do a lot of mean things
until they slowly start to understand that we are all the same on the
inside.  And a bunch of jaded and underachieving high school athletes
will slowly learn what it is their coach is trying to teach them about
becoming men and champions.  Throw in the fat kid from the wrong side of
the tracks who finds his inspiration and a little pride along the way,
and we've got the most heartwarming film ever made.
     The only trouble with this concoction is that in trying to
concurrently satisfy these two very demanding genres -- sports story and
racial drama -- director Boaz Yakin and producers Jerry Bruckheimer and
Chad Oman felt compelled to include the same stock scenes that we've
seen before in both of these genres.  The townspeople rise up against
the outsider coach, the players who struggled under him at first come to
respect him, the white man finally realizes that he and his black
counterpart aren't that different, and of course, there's the
ever-popular brick-through-the-window of the new black family in the
neighborhood.  Of course, the filmmakers ride these powerful scenes for
all of the emotion they've got.  But ultimately, this continuous
stringing along of genre conventions weighs the film down, preventing
the filmmakers from bringing any really new elements to the table.
     Remember the Titans is based on a true story.  And thankfully so. 
If it weren't for that fact, audiences probably wouldn't buy all of
Yakin and Bruckheimer's string pulling.  As it turns out, even though
Bruckheimer, the action producer with the touch of gold, would seem
unqualified for this picture, these two manage to mine the emotional for
it's worth.  As it turns out, genre cliches turn out to be the most
powerful elements of the film, alongside the force of nature that is
Denzel Washington.  In particular, the emotional scenes of the team
coming together on the football field prove the most effective.  (If you
don't know much about football, you can identify these scenes by the
fact that they usually follow an impassioned speech by one or another
player or coach, and are always backed by an emotional rock or R&B hit
of the 60's or 70's.)
     Ironically, the occasions when the filmmakers aren't following
genre conventions (in the film's rare opportunities for originality) are
the times when the film tends to flounder the worst.  Most notably, the
subplot about a sexually ambiguous surfer-boy from California is simply
awkward and dilutes from tension at the heart of the story.  Also, the
decision to bookend the film with a funeral sequence from ten years
later is stupid and pointless.  It was unnecessary and overbearing in
films like Titanic and Saving Private Ryan, but here it is simply a
waste of the audience's time and attention.  You actually find yourself
wondering who is going to die and how that will tie in to the plot, only
to find out in the end that it doesn't tie in at all.
     All in all, the movie is very consistent if not overpowering. 
You've seen it all before, but the competent repackaging will manage to
tug at your heart strings anyway.  We're all suckers like that, I
guess.  And Jerry Bruckheimer knows it better than anyone.
Director: Boaz Yakin
Producer: Jerry Bruckheimer, Chad Oman
Writer: Gregory Allen Howard
Starring: Denzel Washington, Nicole Ari Parker, Will Patton, Kate
Bosworth, Wood Harris, Kip Pardue
http://disney.go.com/disneypictures/rememberthetitans/flash/index.html
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/redirect?tag=filmcriticcom&path=subst/video/sellers/amazon-top-100-dvd.html
Movie Fiends: Check out Amazon.com's Top 100 Hot DVDs!

Title
Review for Bachelor, The (1999)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Bradley Null.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/26de22cbfc3e38508825681f000d08c0?OpenDocument
There are two types of comedies coming out of Hollywood today:
adult-oriented star-vehicles and teen-oriented ensemble pictures. You
can say what you will about the preponderance of whining, post-modern
`Dawson's Creek' reprises stocking our airwaves and movie theaters, but
you can't say much at all about the vacuous one-trick pony known as the
modern Hollywood romantic comedy.  So I will keep my comments on THE
BACHELOR brief.
In full, the plot of THE BACHELOR is that Chris O'Donnell has 27 hours
to tie the knot, which would assure him of a $100 million inheritance
and cozy jobs for life for himself and all of his friends.
Unfortunately, he already monumentally botched his proposal to his
girlfriend, Renee Zellweger (I won't bother with character names here; I
didn't remember them, you won't either).  Wacky high-jinks ensue, and we
all hope desperately it will work out for the best between Chris and
Renee.
If you've seen the trailer for this movie, you've already sapped all of
the sentiment that you're going to get out of this vehicle.  In its
feature length form, THE BACHELOR throws in some awkward voice-over, a
trite recurring dream sequence wherein O'Donnell imagines himself a
mustang, and an apparently mute James Cromwell.
In a word, THE BACHELOR is insignificant.  No characters, no depth, no
theme, no message.  Even its intended witticisms fall flat.  (And by the
way, James Cromwell's *got* to say something.  He's the best actor in
the film.)
It's sad that the only comedies starring actors old enough to rent a car
these days can't seem to make it beyond a sales pitch.  Sadly, the
studios seem to think that a catchy plot point is more important than an
interesting plot.  Is this what the dumbing down of America has come
to?  I sure as hell hope not.  Wake up, America!  You deserve better
than this.
** our of 5
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Title
Review for Mille et une recettes du cuisinier amoureux, Les (1996)
.     The title character of A Chef In Love is a Frenchman with equal
passions for his restaurant and his lover.  These dual passions create
an unusual love triangle which, like most of the film's political,
romantic, and historical issues, is never quite resolved.
     Like the contemporary The English Patient, A Chef In Love is
structured around countless flashbacks and takes pleasure in confusing
our sense of time and place.  It ultimately becomes apparent that these
flashbacks present a love story which takes place in pre-Soviet Georgia,
and our chef's female love interest is a member of that country's
aristocracy.  Both of the chef's passionate romances become troubled
when the Communist revolution threatens his prosperity, and he is forced
to choose loyalty to one of his loves.  This story is recounted in a
compilation of old letters and diary entries which have been delved up
by the woman's son and the chef's niece.
     Originally, the woman's son, Anton, is completely unaware of his
mother's past relationship and his parents's past identities.  However,
in an early flashback we see Anton's father chasing his mother with a
knife muttering the name of this chef.  This serves to quickly verify an
unresolved conflict that Anton becomes eager to uncover.  The flavor of
this subjective flashback, in which the fleeing mother suddenly becomes
a turkey and is slaughtered by her husband, establishes the confusion
and complexities packed within this film.  Throughout, we are taken by
surprise as the narrative jumps from past to present, uncovering new
evidence and then addressing the effect that the discovery of it has had
on Anton.
     This flashback structure also adds to the film's theme of
repetition and circularity.  For example, the camera commonly lingers
over the same entrees and artwork in both the past and the present,
creating a sense of timelessness for the film's subject.  The settings
and other decor in the film are also quite beautiful.  However,
throughout, the camera's persistently tight frame prevents us from
enjoying the grandness of these exotic locations and feasts.  This
denial of spectacle serves to focus attention more tightly on the
complex love triangle and the tension it causes, which is developed up
to the last frame of the film.
     Unfortunately, this preoccupation with the lovers forces most of
the others characters into flat and subservient roles.  For example,
Anton, although he discovers a whole new side of both his mother and
father, is denied the screen time to deal with these issues.  Likewise,
Anton's father is given just enough screen time for us to realize his
complexities, but not enough for us to understand them.  The most
egregious oversight however, is of Marcelle, the cook's niece, who is
not characterized at all, and ultimately serves to merely jump-start the
narrative by bringing these diary pieces to Anton.
     As a mature romance, A Chef In Love is the most compelling film to
come along in a long time (far superior to The English Patient). 
However, it is almost regrettable to witness so many interesting
characters and subplots being neglected for the sake of a single, albeit
interesting, story.

Title
Review for Night Falls on Manhattan (1997)
     With Night Falls on Manhattan, Sidney Lumet has created one of the
most dedicated issue movies in a long time.  As a high-profile, yet
righteous, defense attorney (a first in modern film), Richard Dreyfuss's
character admits that he took an unwinnable case because he wanted to
expose corruption in the NYPD.  Lumet seems to have created an
unwinnable film for similar reasons.
     Lumet has taken a very bare-bones approach with the plot of Night
Falls on Manhattan.  One minute Andy Garcia's Sean Casey is an assistant
DA trainee, the next minute he is the District Attorney of New York. 
Likewise, the first twenty minutes of the film set up a courtroom drama
which Lumet flies through in a series of quick scenes.  Unconventional
editing techniques, including periodic jump cuts and abrupt truncations
of scenes that barely seem to have begun, help push the narrative
forward, all of which serves to confuse the audience as to the film's
true focus.
     Ultimately, it becomes clear that the goal of this hectic structure
is to unfold a series of issues for the audience.  Lumet confronts us
with tough questions at every turn:  Who do we blame for police
corruption?  To whom is a lawyer most responsible, the law or his
family?  How much can we share with the people we love?  Lumet packs it
in, and he does so by creating several only-in-Hollywood coincidences. 
For example, Garcia happens to be in the right place to try the case of
the drug dealer that shot his father.  The perfect woman for Garcia also
just happens to work for a lawyer on the other side.
     The issues and questions that Lumet poses are powerful, but his
plot manipulation and acceleration for the sake of these issues hurts
his bid to satisfy a sophisticated audience.  In his need to get in and
out of every scene in half the time that it should take to develop,
Lumet seems to have resorted to a short-hand form of directing his
actors.  At every emotional point in the story, one character invariably
begins yelling.  Lumet is obviously trying to make a point that such
issues lead to uniform short-temperedness, but the consistency of these
outbursts prevents us from distinguishing the different character's
personalities.
     With this subject matter, Lumet is obviously trying to make a
gritty, un-Hollywood picture.  The sets (such as a courtroom modeled
after Lance Ito's instead of Perry Mason's) and the overwhelmingly drab
color of the film beg us to look at it as a slice of realism.  However,
the plot twists and flat characters confound this attempt to make an
intelligent film.  Lena Olin, miscast and unbelievable as Andy Garcia's
love interest, portrays the most awkward character.  Not until the end
of the film does it become clear that her character is actually in love
with Garcia's, when the plot resolution tells us so.
     An audience looking for a traditional Hollywood courtroom drama
will be taken aback by Night Falls on Manhattan.  Nevertheless, it
brings with it some powerful questions which a thoughtful audience will
want addressed.  In the end, the film's uncomfortable blend of Hollywood
conventions and complex subject matter will have a hard time finding its
audience among the main-stream majority of moviegoers that are only
looking for answers.
-Christopher Null  /  null@poboxes.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Title
Review for Surviving Picasso (1996)
     If you learn only one thing while watching SURVIVING PICASSO, it
will probably be this:  Pablo Picasso was a big fat jerk.
     Unfortunately, that's about all you'll learn, as Merchant-Ivory's
latest exercise in excess sheds little light on the great artiste and
leaves the viewer with even less of an understanding as to why Picasso
was the man he was.
     Anthony Hopkins is the obvious choice for Picasso, and the film
takes the track of vaguely following Picasso's life along with his many,
many love interests, including the psychotic Dora Maar (Julianne Moore
in a fantastic performance), his wife Olga (Jeanne Lapotaire), a couple
of other relationships, plus the mysterious Francoise Gilot (Natascha
McElhone), who suffered with Pablo for some ten years.  (All of the
women perform their roles admirably.)
     What the film doesn't do is show you any insight into Picasso's
life, except for the fact that he was stingy, paranoid, stubborn, and
basically a lech.  The movie's liberal use of voice-over and thick
accents doesn't help matters, and this already cryptic tale becomes even
more inaccessible -- not only is it hard to understand what this movie
is really about, it's hard to understand what anyone is saying.
     As played by Hopkins, Picasso is transformed into a childish goon
with no redeeming qualities, and given SURVIVING PICASSO's 123 minute
running time, this gets extremely tiresome, extremely quickly.  For the
last 1 1/2 hours, I was really just waiting for the credits.  So I guess
we'll never really understand what Picasso was all about.
     The sad result is that, in the end, SURVIVING PICASSO is really
just one long exercise in survival itself.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm

Title
Review for Chasing Amy (1997)
.     The intro sequence of Chasing Amy, comic book frames of oddly
familiar characters, informs us immediately that we are entering the
world of Kevin Smith.  That world is one over-populated with comic book
fanatics, philosophical drug dealers, and ambitionless
twenty-somethings.  To Smith, the film's director, that world is New
Jersey.
     Like characters found in other recent Gen X movies, Smith's heroes
are unjustifiably hip.  n Chasing Amy  there are two groups of
characters, Jersey boys afraid of the city, and fixtures of the NYC
underground.  But regardless of background, every character in Chasing
Amy is poised with a witty remark or comical/philosophical riff on love
or life.  Smith even highlights the (self)-importance of his
protagonist, played by Ben Affleck, by unabashedly naming him after the
coolest literary character of the twentieth century, Holden Caulfield.
     Going well beyond other Gen X movies such as Swingers and Reality
Bites, Chasing Amy embraces the new generation with an unparalleled
frankness.  Although this boy-meets-lesbian love story is more mature
than Smith's earlier work, its never before seen subject matter is
indicative of Smith's predilection for ignoring the taboos of film. 
Frank discussions of sex and perversion are common in Smith's world of
wordy, quick-paced diatribes long on profanity.  Smith tackles this
material with characters and situations that come across, despite their
wit, as strikingly awkward and realistic.  They never have the perfect
line to describe their emotions or what they want.  Their attempts to
riff on their problems en route to solving them display a realistic
ineptitude in dealing with serious problems.  Either the characters have
too much to say or nothing at all, but in all cases the outcome of these
slipshod attempts is bad.  Although the intermittent stupidity and
vulgarity of Smith's characters is sometimes painful to watch, the
film's refreshing realism is an invaluable experience.
     Despite this powerful subtext, Smith's world is not devoid of
humor.  Though self-absorbed, all of Smith's characters are quite
amusing, and the plot development, camera work, and editing in Chasing
Amy capitalize on the humor in every situation.  In one instance, an
atypical riff on sexual acts leads to a fierce comparison of sex wounds
and a game of one-upmanship that riotously parodies such battle scar
comparisons from Lethal Weapon and the adventure film genre.  Smith's
hand-held camera and static long takes also serve to focus action within
the frame and on the borders, which he uses for comical and emotional
effect.
     In all cases, Smith's awkward situations, for both the characters
and audience, play off of traditional film structure in which everything
fits together seamlessly.  In Smith's world, you can count on only one
thing:  when Silent Bob (played by Smith himself) finally speaks (and he
will) he is going to say something profound.

Title
Review for Being John Malkovich (1999)
[filmcritic.com presents a review from guest writer Bradley Null.  You
can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/5bdc9b968fed6d738825681700177455?OpenDocument
The question on everybody's lips would be: Why John Malkovich?
The centerpiece of BEING JOHN MALKOVICH, in case you haven't guessed, is
a portal, which provides the unique opportunity to "be John
Malkovich."   As one character, when approached with the chance,
exuberantly improvises, "Great!  That was my second choice."  Which
leads us right back where we started.  Why John Malkovich?
You've probably guessed that BEING JOHN MALKOVICH is a bit off-center as
far as major motion pictures go.  In short, the plot revolves around a
puppeteer (John Cusack) who discovers the aforementioned portal after
assuming a day job as a fileclerk, his homely wife (Cameron Diaz), the
woman he falls hopelessly in love with (Catherine Keener), and the
effects that this portal has on each of these characters, and to a
lesser degree on its host, John Horatio Malkovich (John Malkovich).
The premise isn't the only thing that is odd about this film.  The
characters are odd, (a puppeteer).  The casting is odd, (Cameron Diaz as
homely).  The camera work is best described as claustrophobic.  The
settings are disheveled.  And the two major locations outside of John
Malkovich's psyche, the 7 1/2th floor of an office building, and the
Jersey Turnpike, can only make one wonder what exactly is going on here.
Maybe BEING JOHN MALKOVICH is a sociological study.  Maybe it was
intended as an intelligent examination of personal identity, our
society's obsession of being somebody else, and the capitalist
instinct.  More likely it flowered from an intriguing concept in the
mind of first-time screenwriter Charlie Kaufman into an intriguing
story.
There's no denying that BEING JOHN MALKOVICH is definitely a refreshing,
often hilarious story.  Jonze, a unique visionary in music videos and
awards show performances up till now (see Fatboy Slim's choreography in
the 1999 MTV music awards), is without doubt the right man for this
directing job.  The originality of the entire concept will delight all
of you moviegoers out there with an obsessive urge to find something
completely different.  The premise, the plot, and the performances offer
plenty to think about.  But don't think too long, or the despairing
logic it is all built on might collapse.
But you're still wondering: Why John Malkovich?  I couldn't say.
3 stars
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com
Author - Network Administrator's Reference, 1999 - ISBN 0-07-882588-1
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0078825881/filmcriticcom

Title
Review for Drowning Mona (2000)
filmcritic.com presents a review from staff member Bradley Null.
You can find the review with full credits at
http://www.filmcritic.com/misc/emporium.nsf/2a460f93626cd4678625624c007f2b46/2806678910bd05a588256896002ac2e9?OpenDocument
 If you've ever found yourself in a theater watching a movie like THROW
MOMMA FROM THE TRAIN or DON'T TELL MOM THE BABYSITTER'S DEAD, then
you'll understand my experience with DROWNING MONA.  DROWNING MONA is
one of those films that you might hear about and shrug it off as a bad
idea.  Then you'll see a trailer and realize that your first instinct
was right.  There is no logical reason for you to ever see this movie.
It looks unfunny, moronic, and you have already crossed it off the list
of all the movies you are potentially interested in ever investing your
time in.  But despite all of that, you somehow end up forking over eight
bucks for the privilege to see it.  And your worst fears are realized.
 Suffice it to say that DROWNING MONA is a bad film.  It is a very bad
film.  Let us count the ways.
 First, there is the plot.  Everybody hates Mona.  Mona gets killed.
And the question is not who did it, but who didn't do it.  As far as
this plot goes, let me just ask, can anybody think of a good whodunit
black comedy?  Hell, THE TROUBLE WITH HARRY was Alfred Hitchcock's worst
movie.  I'll even go so far as to say that it's simply not wise to
attempt to conjure any sort of comedy out of movies about mean and/or
dead women.  Anyone who has seen either of the two movies cited above
should understand this concern.  In the particular case of MONA, it
seems to be an important element of the plot and theme of the movie that
nobody seems to care who killed MONA.  They are just glad that she is
dead.  Well, I ask, if nobody in the movie cares, then why the hell
would we?
 The second problem with the film is the characters and the acting.  The
actors were actually the reason I talked myself into seeing this film in
the first place.  I mean sure, Danny DeVito and Bette Midler have a
tendency to not discriminate when it comes to scripts.  And they also
have a tendency to sink to the level of their material.  But here we had
Jamie Lee Curtis, William Fichtner, Casey Affleck, and Will Ferrell, all
actors whom I before had thought either had some talent or were at the
very least a little funny.  But none of them pulled it off here.
Affleck particularly, who was hilarious in GOOD WILL HUNTING, turns in a
conspicuously morose performance as the good kid that turns into the
prime suspect.  Fichtner has the sole funny line in the script.
Ferrell, as the funeral home director, trying to pull off yet another
variation of his Saturday Night Live stock character (half shifty, half
outright weird), just can't seem to suck enough out of the script to
generate a single laugh.
 The third problem with the film is the theme, otherwise known as the
point.  To put it bluntly, this movie has no point.
 So just in case your best judgment has left you and you find yourself
standing at the ticket booth.  Maybe everything else is sold out.  Maybe
you feel a sudden compulsion to experience the entire oeuvre of Bette
Midler.  Maybe you're just not thinking.  Please, DO NOT SEE THIS
MOVIE.  If movies like this perform poorly enough at the box office,
maybe we won't be subjected to any more of them.
 That's my public service announcement for the month.  Black comedy is
hard.  Only the select few, like the Coen brothers or Stanley Kubrick
seem to be able to pull it off.  Please note that none of them had
anything to do with this film.
--
Christopher Null - cnull@mindspring.com - http://www.filmcritic.com

Title
Review for Sleepers (1996)
     How on earth did Kevin Bacon get top billing in a cast that
includes Robert DeNiro, Dustin Hoffman, Brad Pitt, and Jason Patric --
just for starters?  That's just one of the disturbing aspects of
SLEEPERS (and I don't mean that in a bad way), Barry Levinson's new
drama/thriller that finally redeems him for the idiocy of DISCLOSURE and
TOYS.
     Based on the extremely controversial novel, SLEEPERS tells what is
purported to be a true story of revenge in Hell's Kitchen in New York
City.  Four early-teenaged friends (played as adults by Patric, Pitt,
Ron Eldard, and Billy Crudup -- who I have to mention just because I
like to say "Crudup") are sent to a juvenile center when a prank goes
wrong and almost kills a bystander.  The brutality that occurs in the
center does not need to be expounded upon, but suffice it's very
horrible, and that guard Sean Nokes (Bacon) is the baddest of the bad
guys.
     Flash forward 13 years to 1981, when a very non-reformed John and
Tommy (Eldard and Crudup) run into Nokes in a neighborhood bar, and, on
the spot, shoot him 6 times in front of 4 witnesses.  When it goes to
trial, a now-assistant D.A. Michael (Pitt) takes the case and decides
it's time for payback to everyone from the bad-old days at the center.
     Working with attorney Danny Snyder (Hoffman), their old
neighborhood priest (DeNiro), old pal Carol (Minnie Driver), and
newsman-in-training "Shakes" (Patric), Michael constructs an intricate
plan to get the guys off the hook and bring down the juvenile center in
the process -- by losing the case he is prosecuting.
     If you've seen GOODFELLAS, you know what you're in for -- an
overly-narrated epic saga about growing up in New York and the
consequences of events that start when you're just a kid.  And just like
Scorcese, Levinson lays on the narration like butter on pancakes (all
via Patric), and this gets old, *fast.*
     But the point is that SLEEPERS is a very powerful story, and you
never really notice that it's 2 1/2 hours long.  The performances are
universally good (although Eldard and Crudup basically have no lines),
and seeing Dustin Hoffman as a long-haired alcoholic/failed attorney is
quite a treat.  DeNiro is excellent in showing his inner turmoil over
whether or not to lie on the witness stand, and the kids (who I don't
feel like naming right now) all pull off their parts just fine.
     SLEEPERS has its share of technical goofs, like a whole lot of
black-and-white flashbacks, slow-motion, fast-motion, surreal-motion,
and other camera tricks that really detract from the story and don't
belong here.  Also in question is a really rotten score and a
questionable choice of background "period" songs -- and you can blame
veteran composer John Williams, if you can believe that.
     Oh well, at least it's a very solid story that leaves you
wondering... did it really happen?  As for the moral of this little
tale?  This is all I can figure:  Two wrongs don't make a right, but
maybe 150 wrongs do.  They might be right about that.
-Christopher Null  /  null@filmcritic.com  /  Writer-Producer
-Visit the Movie Emporium at http://www.filmcritic.com/
-and Null Set Productions at http://www.filmcritic.com/nullset.htm
