Authors
Felix Kreisel
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Yekhai (1995)
Montreal 1996
The recently concluded Montreal World Film Festival is one of the better
known venues of the cinema world. It attempts to promote a wide range of
filmmakers from many countries by requiring as little as possible in
promotion expenditures. This year the Festival organizers paid special
attention to current Russian films and even gave a special prize in the
category of the Russian Cinema of Today. This writer was able to view a
number of the more significant films presented at the Festival. Preceding
my impressions I have included the official descriptions provided by the
Festival organizers.
Director: Georgy Shengelia. Script: Alexei Timm. Based on the play
"Yekhai!" by Nina Sadur. Photography: Ilia Diomin. Editor: Edward Gimpel.
Music: Roman Zagorodniuk. Sound: Yuliia Yegorova. Cast: Vladimir Il'yin,
Tatiana Kravchenko, Larisa Shakhvorostova. Producer: Konstantin
Slobodchikov, Roman Burimov, Oldmore Image.
One long winter evening, Piotr Gavrilin, a rural bulldozer operator,
suffers a fit of depression. He feels that his life is senseless. He has a
good wife, some savings for his retirement and his children are all grown
up and living on their own. But one thing appears to have gone missing from
his life: love. For other people this may just seem like the onset of
middle age: for Piotr it is a full-blown crisis. His wife won't give him
any money for drink, his boss doesn't appreciate him and among his old
friends only the goat has remained faithful. The only way out for Piotr
seems suicide. He lays down on the railway track and waits for the next
train. But fate would have it that the locomotive is driven by a former
actor from the local drama group and he manages to stop the train in time.
Act Two is about to begin.
This movie was the gem of this Festival. It was funny, sad, wise,
insightful. Gavrilin, played by Il'in, lost more than love, he lost a sense
of purpose. Yes, his wife is very different from the thin, shy adorable
girl he married. She snores in bed, watches Mexican soaps and only seems to
care about money, and more money. But it is his whole neighborhood, his
village and his country which have changed drastically, and for the worse.
He walks out of the house onto the evening street after a quarrel with his
wife, and realizes that he is completely alone, except for his pet goat.
All his neighbors have their TVs on and are watching some idiotic foreign
(or foreign inspired) shows. His workmates release themselves through
weekend drunken binges. The former factory head, who has now become the
president of the production association in which Gavrilin holds a share, is
screwing the workers out of their stock in the enterprise while at the same
time he is also screwing his private secretary right there in the office
(this scene is reminiscent of the hilarious portrayal of the state
governor, played by Mel Brooks, in the movie "Blazing Saddles").
   The acting by Il'in is superb, he has a fantastic screen presence. When
in the middle of the night he pulls out an old photo of his wife and tries
to find with a magnifying glass the lost beauty on the face of the snoring
woman lying in bed next to him, we feel the full weight of years and bad
experiences which had stunted her personality, just as they ravaged her
body. When his wife's TV turns out to be more important than their
relationship, Gavrilin hacks up the Sony with an axe. When life loses
meaning, Gavrilin decides that it will take a whole train to separate his
head from his body, lesser methods of suicide won't do.
   The driver of the oncoming train is also a real character. He was
formerly an actor in a workers' club and has a real love for the theater,
for words and their effect on a person. He turns to Goethe's "Faust" to
find a way to convince Gavrilin that life has its own reason, that
knowledge, even knowledge of one's frailties and mortality, is precious. To
see these workers' hunger for reason, for truth, their appreciation of
Goethe's poetry is truly optimistic. When the bulldozer driver and the
train driver discuss their lives and loves we see ourselves in them, we too
search for happiness.
   This adventure ends when a woman track inspector finds the stopped train
and takes the fellow philosophers to her house for dinner. Gavrilin's wife
and goat also turn up in the end.
   The director, alas, finds happiness in a retreat from society, in a turn
of a lonely woman track inspector to God. Religion has for many Russians
become their last desperate hope. What a pessimistic outlook this is.
-- 
Iskra Research -- Historical research and publication of Marxist classics
in the Russian language.
Address: PO Box 397142, Cambridge, MA 02139-7142; e-mail: fjk@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/fjk/iskra.html

Title
Review for Revizor (1996)
Montreal 1996
The recently concluded Montreal World Film Festival is one of the better
known venues of the cinema world. It attempts to promote a wide range of
filmmakers from many countries by requiring as little as possible in
promotion expenditures. This year the Festival organizers paid special
attention to current Russian films and even gave a special prize in the
category of the Russian Cinema of Today. This writer was able to view a
number of the more significant films presented at the Festival. Preceding
my impressions I have included the official descriptions provided by the
Festival organizers.
Director: Sergei Gazarov. Script: Sergei Gazarov, Andrei Dmitriiev. Based
on the play "Revizor" by Nikolai Gogol. Photography: Mikhail Agranovich.
Editor: Irakly Kvirikadze, Galina Patrikeieva. Music: Alexander
Eisenshtadt. Sound: Alexander Khasin, Irzhi Gora. Cast: Nikita Mikhalkov,
Oleg Yankovsky, Yevgeny Mironov, Anna Mikhalkova, Marina Neiolova, Zinovy
Gerdt, Armen Dzhigarkhanian. Producer: Sergei Gazarov, Nikita & Piotr Film
Company, Most Group.
In a small, provincial Russian town in the middle of the 19th century, Ivan
Khlestakov, a young rake from St. Petersburg, and his valet Osip stop and
put up at the local inn. Khlestakov has lost all his money gambling and has
nothing left to pay for travel or accommodations. Still, he demands to be
served. As it happens, the local governor had been waiting for a visit by
an inspector from the capital and rumors are that the official will be
traveling incognito. The local government is thoroughly corrupt and,
terrified of being found out, they imagine that it is Khlestakov who has
come to conduct the inspection. The governor invites the young man to his
house and gives a luxurious reception in his honor. At first a bit
embarrassed by all the attention, Khlestakov soon warms to the role. He
gladly accepts the extravagant hospitality as well as all the bribes, not
to mention opportunities to flirt with the governor's wife and daughter.
The deception is eventually uncovered but this only adds to the
mortification and embarrassment of the governor and his cronies. (The
famous satire by Gogol had its premiere in 1836 and has been revived in
numerous productions around the world, including a 1949 film adaptation
directed by Henry Koster and starring Danny Kaye).
This movie, despite its cast of brilliant actors in every role, is a coarse
and vulgar debasement of the biting social satire written by Nikolai Gogol
one and a half centuries ago. Gazarov eschews appealing to the viewers'
intelligence and turns every scene into a lightweight farce.
   Gazarov added a large number of farcical scenes and strokes to Gogol's
script. The roles of Bobchinsky and Dobchinsky have been combined and this
Bobchinsky-Dobchinsky has been told to act the part of a lunatic with a
split personality, always accompanied by his alter ego
Dobchinsky-Bobchinsky. While Gogol wanted to satirize the
interchangeability of the petty landlords, their lack of uniqueness,
Gazarov just goes for the physical laughs.
   There is much stumbling and falling throughout the movie, especially in
the scene of the first encounter between the governor, played by Mikhalkov,
and Khlestakov, played by Mironov. There is a ridiculous scene of duck
shooting from the window of the hospital in which Khlestakov shoots a
couple of ducks, then a fish. This scene is worthy of The Three Stooges.
The scene of the town gentry meeting with Khlestakov at the governor's
house was turned into a vaudeville number: the governor's wife whistles,
his daughter plays the harp, Khlestakov sings and dances, everyone else
stumbles, jumps and applauds.
   The discussion between Khlestakov and the hospital administrator about
the ill "getting healthy like flies" is emphasized and expanded. Where
Gogol wanted to show the callousness of the tsarist administrators for the
public, Gazarov does not see this point of view at all. Average people do
seem to be flies to him, "expensive medicine or medical treatment is not
needed, if they are fated to die, they will die". On the other hand, the
final scene of the movie has been designed to evoke sympathy for the
governor, to somehow make him out to be an innocent victim.
   There was an hour long press conference with the director, Gazarov and
the two leading actors, Mikhalkov and Mironov. The first question quite
obviously referred to the lack of social satire in the movie, although the
journalist went out of her way to compliment the director by finding some
parallels (invisible to the rest of us) between the tsarist bureaucracy
portrayed in the movie and the Soviet or post-Soviet regime. In response,
Gazarov took the bit between his teeth and vehemently declared: "There is
in principle nothing political and social here, this is a pure comedy 
 I
took all the politics out". The audience was taken aback at this outburst
since normally the directors and actors try to do just the opposite and
impute some deeper meaning to their work. But questions of official
corruption and theft of state assets obviously strike a nerve in present
day Russia, and Mikhalkov and Gazarov see their job as deflecting any such
discussion.
   Mikhalkov went at length about art being pretense, developing the idea
that "both the director and the actors must fool the viewer". The idea of
Art being Truth is these days taken for an obvious truism, so Mikhalkov's
and Gazarov's rationalization of misleading and desensitizing the public
comes as a shock when expressed so directly and unequivocally. The Montreal
audience of journalists and movie goers included, however, a large number
of celebrity hounds and middle class yahoos. Mikhalkov skillfully played up
to their mood of uncritical adulation and acceptance of status quo. When
one hostile critic asked about Mikhalkov's own fake political campaign
(Mikhalkov supported Chernomyrdin during the parliamentary elections),
Mikhalkov refused to discuss politics. Instead he claimed that since this
movie needed special sets and costumes, it required a special kind of civic
courage to stage, that the director (and by implication, Mikhalkov also)
were heroes for staging it. Not a single journalist present pointed out
that such "courage" was quite commonplace, since most of the movies
presented at the Festival were historical costume films (Baryshnia, Return
of the Battleship, Road to the End Of the World, etc.).
   At times it seemed that both the critics and these hack director and
actors were united by a common goal: to distract the viewing public from
any discussion of contemporary problems of the Russian society, to leave
hidden the destruction of popular culture taking place in the former Soviet
Union and the regime's responsibility for this catastrophe.
   Sixty years ago Trotsky noted that the cultural efforts of totalitarian
Stalinism "in the last analysis 
 came down 
 to taking care that art
assimilates its (the Stalinist bureaucracy) interests, and finds such forms
for them as will make the bureaucracy attractive to the popular masses".
With Trotsky we exclaim: In vain ! No literature can fulfill that task. No
movie director's tricks can make Khlestakov attractive to the Russian
people.
-- 
Iskra Research -- Historical research and publication of Marxist classics
in the Russian language.
Address: PO Box 397142, Cambridge, MA 02139-7142; e-mail: fjk@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/fjk/iskra.html

Title
Review for Utomlyonnye solntsem (1994)
     This 1995 feature film took a number of prizes at the Cannes Film
Festival, and deservedly so.  Nikota Mikhalkov both directed and
starred in it in the role of Sergei Kotov, a Red Army officer, hero of
the Civil War and a pillar of the Soviet regime.
     What starts as a languorous and idyllic story describes one day in
the life of a privileged family in the new Soviet Russia on a lazy
Sunday in the summer of 1936, just weeks before the first of the
infamous Moscow Trials broke on a stunned world.  The sense of imminent
danger is palpable throughout this gripping film.
     Realism of this film is developed on various levels.  Firstly,
Mikhalkov uses vivid summer colors and a typical rural location to
bring the viewer into the midst of a July countryside somewhere near
Moscow.  Secondly, the skilled use of choice actors: tender and
talented portrayal of Kotov's six-year-old girl by Mikhalkov's own
daughter, the sensuous elegance of the beautiful Ingeborga Dapkunaite
as Kotov's wife, the nervous energy of Oleg Menshikov as the intruding
antagonist, and so on.  Thirdly, there is the masterful counterposition
of quick action and peaceful periods of weekend rest.
     Finally, there is the shocking reality of the Purges themselves,
totally unprecedented in world history.  From mid-1936 until 1939
Stalin wiped out the vast majority of the top echelons of the Soviet
regime: most of the top commanders of the Red Army, the majority of
the leaders of the Bolshevik Party during its heroic period of struggle
for power, the leading engineers, designers and scientists, outstanding
writers, artists, film and theatre directors, and so on.
     Stalin's assistants in this counterrevolutionary terror directed
against the organizers of Bolshevik victory and the builders of the
Soviet state were in many cases individuals who resisted the October
Revolution in 1917 or who stayed on the sidelines.  Stalin's chief
prosecutor at the Trials was Andrei Vyshinsky, a former Menshevik
leader.  Among the chief torturers of the NKVD was Lavrentii Beria,
known to all the Caucasian revolutionaries as a tzarist agent
provocateur; two of the chief stage managers of the show trials were
Henrik Yagoda and Nikolai Yezhov, unknown during the Revolution and the
Civil War, but promoted by Stalin in the fight against Trotsky and the
Left Opposition.
     Mikhalkov reaches towards an understanding of the reactionary aims
of Stalinist purges.  His protagonist Kotov begins to see the class
basis for this genocide of the true revolutionaries at the hands of the
power hungry bureaucrats and the former White Guards.  However, the
director's power of penetration is limited by the confusion and
disorientation still prevailing in Russia.  We hope that this film
marks a new step in the search for the truth about the history of the
Revolution led by Lenin and Trotsky, and the Stalinist
counterrevolution which followed.


Title
Review for Road to the End of the World, The (1996)
Montreal 1996
The recently concluded Montreal World Film Festival is one of the better
known venues of the cinema world. It attempts to promote a wide range of
filmmakers from many countries by requiring as little as possible in
promotion expenditures. This year the Festival organizers paid special
attention to current Russian films and even gave a special prize in the
category of the Russian Cinema of Today. This writer was able to view a
number of the more significant films presented at the Festival. Preceding
my impressions I have included the official descriptions provided by the
Festival organizers.
Director: Ruben Muradian. Script: Gennady Bokarev, Ruben Muradian.
Photography: Boris Shapiro. Editor: Lidia Volokhova. Music: Vladimir
Rubashevsky. Sound: Larisa Shutova. Cast: Zarif Bapinaiev, Barasbim
Mulaiev, Natalia Fateieva, Boris Kuliev, Zarema Bechelova, Alexander
Pashutin, Bagrat Khachatrian, Viktor Proskurin. Producer: Ruben Muradian,
Antik-100.
The "Great Patriotic War" (World War II) was beginning to draw to a close.
But Stalin's repressive government agencies were still working at full
capacity and the plan for the mass deportation of the native inhabitants of
the Northern Caucasus was put into effect. March 8, 1944 became a black day
in the history of these people. The film tells their pathetic story.
The Second World War exposed the social, economic and national
contradictions within the Soviet Union. The great conquests of the October
Revolution: central planning, industrialization, cultural progress of
masses of people gave the Soviet state great advantages in the military
sphere by comparison with the preceding tsarist regime and assured its
final victory over fascism. Yet the bureaucratic police state of Stalin
undermined many of these gains and contributed to the initial victories of
the Nazi invaders: the policy of forced collectivization and artificial
famine of 1932 alienated the peasantry, especially in Ukraine, its economic
zigzags slowed industrial development, its police repression during the
Great Purges destroyed the fighting capacity of the Red Army, its eclectic
blindness allowed Hitler the element of surprise.
   Towards the end of the war the regime had to forestall any movement
among the masses of people towards greater democracy. For the Stalinist
bureaucracy, its policy of self preservation meant that the anger of the
Russian people at the great unnecessary losses had to be channeled into
Great Russian chauvinism, that the Soviet nationalities were to be pitted
against one another and the rigid police state of 1930's reestablished.
Over the next ten years we witness the harsh genocidal policies of exiling
and exterminating whole nationalities, relocation of peoples, anti-cultural
crusades of Zhdanov and the anti-Semitic campaign culminating with the
extermination of the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee and the Doctors' Plot.
   In 1941 Stalin disbanded the German Autonomous Region on the Volga. In
early 1944 the Stalinist regime attacked the following nationalities: the
Chechen, the Ingush, the Karachay, the Balkar, the Kalmyks, the Crimean
Tartars.
   This movie was introduced by its director Ruben Muradian as a
documentary story, telling the tragic events of March 1944 when the 40,000
members of the Balkar nation were picked up by the force of 20,000 NKVD
troops and driven thousands of miles to Siberia.
   Muradian does succeed in explaining that Stalin's policy was completely
irrational even from the point of view of nation building and state
security. The NKVD collected all persons of the Balkar nationality, even
the Party and Komsomol members, even the soldiers and officers of the Red
Army and their families, including Stalin's own henchmen in the local
hierarchy. They were all moved to the Siberian wilderness and great many of
them died en route or from the privations of the initial settlement period.
   Unfortunately, Muradian's method of story telling turns this historic
tragedy into something of a melodrama. He pads the movie with much scenic
imagery (probably to save money). His use of documentary materials is
primitive: his long repetitious sequences of moving locomotives and trains
do not add much to our understanding of events. On the other hand, he uses
actors for all the action scenes, contemporary people instead of photos of
the real victims, imagined story instead of the grim tales of 1944. He
shows us a dying Red Army soldier and his fiancee, and turns the crying
girl's face towards the camera milking us for emotions. He shows an elderly
woman dying of a heart attack as the NKVD bastard pushes her down. He shows
a loyal Stalinist committing suicide, a Red Army hero chasing the trains
across the country, and so on. Such things happened, to be sure, but this
reviewer does not like the movie directors who use these hackneyed cliches
to jerk tears out of the viewer.
   As interesting as the movie is the tale of its screening around the
world and in Russia itself. The Russian government film agency Roskomkino
normally provides the seed money, the permits for studio use and other
facilities to film a movie. Muradian's movie was duly filmed, a copy sent
to Roskomkino, one reel was sent to the festivals around the world 
 and
that is all. This picture was not screened in Russia at all, and the
director does not know of any plans to do so.
   This writer suggests that this movie was produced solely as a showpiece
at the festivals like the Montreal venue to provide the public opinion in
the West with a proof of the liberal and democratic intentions of the
current Russian regime. True, Yeltsin and his generals did bomb Chechnia
into the Stone Age, kill some thirty thousand and send hundreds of
thousands more to squatter camps in the neighboring regions. But, the IMF
and the World Bank can assure the gullible public that some of the money
they sent to Russia was spent on filming this humanitarian drama, and this
proves that Yeltsin's heart is in the right place.
   How do you, my reader, like to be taken for a fool?
-- 
Iskra Research -- Historical research and publication of Marxist classics
in the Russian language.
Address: PO Box 397142, Cambridge, MA 02139-7142; e-mail: fjk@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/fjk/iskra.html

Title
Review for Muzyka dlya dekabrya (1995)
     The recently concluded ten-day-long Montreal Film Festival paid
special attention to Israeli, Latin American and Canadian films.
However, a number of recent Russian films were presented as well.  This
writer was able to see three of these films and here are my
impressions.  Preceding my analyses I have included the official
capsule descriptions provided by the Festival organizers.  But let us
look at the movies....
     "Alexander Larin, a famous artist, a former Soviet citizen,
returns to Russia from the United States.  He comes to see Masha
Bersenieva, a beautiful young woman whom he knew when she was a child.
At the time he was going to marry her mother Anna, but when he found
himself falling in love with the daughter, Larin became afraid of the
consequences and he left them both.  Six years have passed since then.
Anna has married a rich businessman and Masha is engaged.  Larin's
sudden appearance upsets the stability of the women's lives.  Larin's
visit is a hopeless attempt to return to a country which no longer
exists, to love which has vanished.  The past overtakes him as
punishment.  Six years earlier Larin betrayed not so much his love as
himself.  In contrast to Larin is Mitia, Masha's fiance, who is
forthright about his feelings and has no intention of abandoning his
values and principles."
     The story begins with the landing of a foreign airliner in the
St. Petersburg airport.  A Russian painter who had settled in the US a
few years ago arrives back home to a changed and renamed Leningrad.  We
see nothing much of the city, what we see of it appears empty, run
down, uninhabited.  Two small boys beg the new arrival for a dollar and
scornfully reject rubles.  Telephones are vandalized.
     The action centers on an artistically inclined family living in a
huge mansion on the banks of the Neva river.  How did they manage to
occupy this large building?  What happened to its former tenants?  How
does this family make a living?  What do they do all day besides
smoking, drinking vodka and quarreling in front of the TV?  Good
questions all, but the answers are left to the viewer's imagination.
     The slim, attractive forty-something mother is excited that her
former lover has come back and something will change in her
chain-smoking, soul-searching-and-not-finding-anything existence.  Her
beautiful daughter is about to marry an art photographer, a very nice,
sensitive and gifted boy.  The mother has a husband, a businessman of
the new type: a Mafia kingpin who controls half the city, a ruthless
trader and a player of Russian roulette, just as ready to put a murder
contract out on someone as to shoot himself.  He seems to be the
provider of the house, the source of wealth, power, money, contacts,
servants, caviar, passports, plane tickets abroad, subsidies for the
young photographer and so on.
     Without going into the whole story we should immediately note that
normal working people are absent with a few exceptions: waiters,
bartenders, bodyguards and the above mentioned street urchins.  The
only social or political comment comes from the mouth of the
Godfather's second in command.  This fine fellow is a fascist
nationalist who wants to kick all the liberals out and to set up a
"strong" regime which will bring order.
     The movie ends with a couple of killings, a suicide and a case of
madness.  The final scene is of the same plane taking off from Russia
and flying to that other planet -- the Golden West.  One final note:
the main actor who played the part of Larin, the Russian-American
painter, has in real life already abandoned Mother Russia and settled
in Montreal, Canada.
     Needless to say, a flat plot like this brought out the worst in
all of the actors: they are without exception wooden mannequins, mere
shadows and caricatures of people.  They are totally unreal and
unbelievable.  A wise viewer will avoid this film.
"The spectacular life and career of Russian ballerina Olga Spesivtseva,
who died from dementia in New York in 1991 at the age of 96, is
recounted in this film not as a biography but as a chronicle of her
love affairs, particularly with the ballet GISELLE.  GISELLE
immortalized her life and GISELLE destroyed her life.  The mysterious
relationships between talent and madness, between creativity and
obsession, between freedom and fate are explored in a film that is
part drama, part detective story and part elegy on the power of love."
     This is a complicated story within a story.  In the present Russia
a couple of ballet dancers entertain the vodka swilling and cocaine
sniffing clientele of an exclusive garden night club.  Somehow the
story turns into a tale of a great Russian ballerina, Olga
Spesivtseva.  We meet her as a young hopeful at the St.  Petersburg
ballet school before the outbreak of World War I.  She gets her big
break when an aging ballet critic notices her pas de plies.  Olga
sleeps with the critic and becomes a star.  After the Revolution and
the Civil War she abandons the critic and, attracted by the new power
elite, sleeps with Lev Kamenev's assistant, a young Chekist.  Then she
emigrates to Paris, charms the pants off a few ballet aficionados, is
rejected by a gay dancer and meets a rich American ballet lover.  In
1932 she is filmed in the role of Giselle and critics rave about the
reality of Gisele's madness.
     All around her men become miserable: the critic has to go back to
his ugly wife; Kamenev's assistant is shot by the GPU; the gay dancer
doesn't get to be in the movie and turns out not to be gay at all; the
rich American financier turns out to be in the employ of the Soviet
secret police and is killed as well.  Spesivtseva eventually goes mad
and is shut up in a New York insane asylum.
     Back in today's Russia the new ballerina, who may be the
reincarnation of Spesivtseva, is also going crazy.  Does anyone care?
     Out of all the theatrical forms of art ballet has always been the
most abstract, elitist and remote from the masses of people.  While it
is physically demanding of the actor, it is also most corruptive.  As
Olga Spesivtseva says about herself and her colleagues:  "We always
sleep with the rich and the mighty."  The Imperial Russian ballet had
provided bedmates for the tsarist ministers and governors; the great
Soviet ballets supplied courtesans for the Politburo.  Today, the
Russian ballet troupes hardly ever perform in Russia; the mighty dollar
and D-mark buy nights of pleasure with the dancer-prostitutes (male and
female); the extensive preparatory schools for young dancers are
withering away and there will be no new Ulanovas, Plisetskaias and
Nureyevs.
     "When he went to fight for his country, Ivanov was a hero.  Now
that he has returned from seven years as a prisoner of war in
Afghanistan--"from the other world"--his family and his village are
not so sure.  The Afghan war veteran has returned as a Moslem.  A
devout Moslem to boot.  He has his rug, prays towards Mecca five times
a day and mutters "Allah Akhbar."  He no longer drinks, smokes or
touches girls.  And, worst of all, he won't steal.  "Son," his mother
cries, "do you think we don't know that to steal is wrong?  ...  But
stealing from the state, that is how we survive!" Some of the villagers
secretly sympathize with the boy, but theirs is a very insular society
and the world of Islam is threatening.  Ivanov is no longer a hometown
boy, he's a stranger--a "Moslem"--and the threat has come home."
     This film was introduced at the festival by the director and the
producer.  Speaking poor English they wanted to say one thing: they are
dedicated to Russia, they are not about to leave it and emigrate.
     Many things set this film apart from the rest.  It is set in the
country, not in any city (actually in the region of Riazan'); it is
filmed mainly outdoors, not inside a bar, a house or a theatre.  It
celebrates Nature; it contrasts the clean, healthy beauty of the river
and the rolling green meadows with the ugly, stultifying social
relationships predominating in this and in many other villages of
Russia.
     The main personages, Ivanov and his mother are set before us with
sympathy and love.  The young man is struggling to understand his place
in the Universe; the Moslem God is for him a set of ethics, a guide to
his relationship with his family, his neighbors and the rest of
humanity.  Ivanov tenaciously clings to the Moslem prayers he learned
in the far off mountain village in Afghanistan from his adopted
grandfather who rescued him from a firing squad.
     Ivanov's mother is like everybody's mother, working to provide for
her family, always worrying about her children, her home.  The elder
son is a drunken lout, disgusting in his crude laziness and anger,
stealing the family's valuables to buy a bottle of vodka, dangerous
when frightened by something incomprehensible, like his younger
brother's religion.  The brothers fight and the home situation turns
murderously ugly.  There is a moment in the movie, when the mother
tearfully tells her beloved younger son that he must leave home to
prevent a tragedy.  She loves him, but the elder son, the lazy, no good
drunkard needs her more.  This scene shattered me with its reality and
truth.
     The movie's portrayal of the economic and social changes is
commendable, although incomplete.  The story alludes to the ongoing
shady machinations of the local leadership.  Apparently the collective
farm of the Soviet days survives and everyone still works half
heartedly in the communal fields and still steals whole heartedly for
the private cow and for the tiny garden plot.  But now, some land deals
are being hatched behind the backs of the villagers.  The director of
the farm is still running things in a heavy hand, but he has left the
"Communist" Party and instead of a red Party card he now boasts a gold
Orthodox cross.  He drives around in a car and even flies in an army
helicopter.  He receives a million dollars for selling something, we
are not quite sure what.
     Alas, in today's Russia there are no happy tales to tell, so this
movie also ends in a tragedy.  The directors are too honest to pretend
that some set of circumstances, some economic factors or even some God,
Moslem or Orthodox, will change the situation for the better.  It is up
to us to consider: What is to be done?
     If, which seems unlikely in view of the monopolization of American
cinema by Hollywood shlock, this movie does appear in the United
States, it should not be missed.
     In general, the Russian cinema, like the rest of national culture
is in a period of sharp decline.  The number of films produced is down
because the industry is no longer subsidized by the state as in the
past.  The budgetary considerations lead the directors to eliminate or
minimize the more expensive production features like street scenes, car
chases, location shoots, etc.  The process of talent drain, similar to
the brain drain in science and engineering, is depleting the industry
as the more talented actors, technicians and directors migrate to the
West or to more lucrative pursuits.
     We should also consider the ideological void of today's
post-Soviet society.  The illusions, which dominated among the artistic
strata of the Soviet Union a few years ago have dissipated.  Five or
ten years ago these elements believed that the dismantling of
centralized planning and the introduction of the regime of the
bourgeois market will rapidly reward them with prosperous and secure
life-styles (the "Dallas" and "Santa Barbara" syndrome).  Instead, the
"free professions" have today all but disappeared.  The great literary
and scientific journals have closed, the institutes are dying of
hyperinflation, the medical professionals (with the exception of those
few serving the government and business Mafia) are underpaid, deprived
of basic supplies and overwhelmed with the effects of the general
social and medical catastrophes.  This week's public teachers' strikes
illustrate the desperate state of the educated layers.
     Another factor to consider: who is funding these movies?  It is a
fact that the producers and the directors must go hat in hand to the
Mafia kingpins begging them for donations to produce the next film.
One does not, of course, bite the hand that feeds him.  Hence, instead
of painting a true picture of reality, we get evasions, half-truths,
escapes into the past, etc.  Films today do not attract the public;
from what we saw at the Festival, with reason.  A recent article in the
well known illustrated weekly Ogonyek decried the fact that Russian
films are produced primarily for the various festivals, mostly foreign,
while the public is treated to a steady diet of second rate Western
shoot-em-ups and TV fantasies about the lives of the rich and famous.
     The reality of Russian capitalism is shocking beyond belief; it
should call for an explosion of literary and cinematic indignation.
Why does not a new Saltykov-Schedrin satirize the Prime Minister
Chernomyrdin for his numerous stock portfolios?  Why does not a new
Gogol cut into President Yeltsin, drunk both with power and with vodka?
A young Gorky should be telling the stories of the current lower
depths, for example the ghoulish fact that in Moscow thousands of
elderly pensioners were murdered in the past couple of years in order
to steal their apartments.  A new Lev Tolstoy should be painting the
dramas of the social disaster overwhelming every layer of society.
     Similarly in film.  The young Soviet cinema of the 1920's, which
gave us the docudrama of Eisenstein's Potemkin and the intense
breathtaking realism of Dziga Vertov, was animated by deep optimism.
Eisenstein, Vertov, Pudovkin and others believed in the future, in
their ability to affect changes, in the perfectibility of both society
and Man.  Today's cinema is permeated, on the contrary, by deep
pessimism, tempered only by opportunistic mysticism.
     The Russian filmmakers, as well as writers, poets, musicians,
artists, etc. are unwilling to look squarely at the developing
capitalist reality because, hampered as they are by the fatal
identification of Stalinism with socialism, they see no alternative to
it.
--
Iskra Research -- Historical research and publication of Marxist
classics in the Russian language.
e-mail: 72633.3207@CompuServe.com
http://www.mit.edu:8001/afs/athena.mit.edu/user/f/j/fjk/Public/iskra.html

Title
Review for Vozvrascheniye bronenostsa (1996)
Montreal 1996
The recently concluded Montreal World Film Festival is one of the better
known venues of the cinema world. It attempts to promote a wide range of
filmmakers from many countries by requiring as little as possible in
promotion expenditures. This year the Festival organizers paid special
attention to current Russian films and even gave a special prize in the
category of the Russian Cinema of Today. This writer was able to view a
number of the more significant films presented at the Festival. Preceding
my impressions I have included the official descriptions provided by the
Festival organizers.
Director: Gennady Poloka. Script: Vladimir Bragin, Gennady Poloka. Based on
the novel "Return of the Battleship" by A. Kapler. Photography: Yevgeny
Davidov. Editors: E. Guralskai, T. Maliavina. Music: Veniamin Basner.
Sound: G. Kravetsky, A. Koniaiev. Cast: Mikhail Urzhumtsev, Liudmila
Potapova, Yelena Maiorova, Vladimir Sterzhakov, Tatiana Vasilieva, Armen
Dzhigarkhanian, Ivan Bortnik, Vasily Mischenko, Ernst Romanov, Valery
Nosik, Boris Novikov, Boris Brunov, Igor Kvasha, Alexei Buldakov. Producer:
Mikhail Zusmanovich, Gennady Poloka, Ritm Studios.
Dashing German cavalry officer Johann Frantsevich Hertz loved the
Revolution and fought to defend it in wartime  against the "White
Russians"  and in peace  against the NEP, against prostitution, against
anybody and anything that he thought a threat to its success. Then he fell
in love with Klavdiia and he threw himself into his affair with her with
the same passion as he had previously shown for revolution. But many things
emerged to prevent their happiness: Hertz' fictitious wife, the secretary
of the Odessa communist party, a bag of fried sunflower seeds, and an
Eisenstein unknown to the inhabitants of Odessa.
This movie was for me one of the highlights of the Festival. From the first
moment it appeals to the viewer with its boisterous visual love of Odessa,
one of the architectural and cultural jewels of the Black Sea coast. I am
not an Odessit, but have visited the city as a child, and shall forever
remember the loud humor of its inhabitants, the intricate funny patois of
its language which mixes Russian, Ukrainian, Yiddish, Romanian and a few
other languages, the white acacia trees on the wide boulevards, ice cream
parlors, the historic steps, the busy port and markets. There are other
lovely port cities in this world, Marseilles and San Francisco come to mind
when seeing the panorama of Odessa.
   It is a lovely feeling to watch the city scenes in this movie. It is one
of the few current Russian movies to show us real street scenes, crowds,
street cars full of passengers, shops, a beach crowded with bathers.
   The story itself centers on a German, Johann Hertz, who had read Bakunin
and Nietzsche at the Goettingen University, but turned to Karl Marx for a
true explanation of capitalist society, and in the crucible of World War I
and the Russian Revolution has come to the aid of the young Soviet
republic. Hertz joined the Communist party in 1918 and had served in
Primakov's Ukrainian cavalry corps, was badly wounded in the Civil War, and
has now been demobilized and sent to recuperate in Odessa's mild climate.
   The year is 1925, Lenin had died a year before, the New Economic Policy
is in full swing and that social inequality, against which Hertz has been
fighting since 1918, is blooming once again in the new Russia. Hertz from
the first is portrayed as an oddball. He wears a cavalry uniform with blue
cross chevrons and a blue star on his hat, not the normal red star and
chevrons. He does not drink, curse, stuff himself, abuse women or come late
to the office. His prized possession are his books.
   The boorish Odessa regional Party secretary appoints Hertz to head the
local artists' employment bureau despite Hertz' protestations that he knows
nothing of art. From this vantage point we are treated to a comic view of
the entertainment industry in the city, a kaleidoscope of opera baritones,
circus performers, cinema has beens, burlesque dancers, magicians, and so
on. Hertz' efforts to bring some order to this chaos of bribe taking, fake
ration cards and IDs, pseudo-cultural and pseudo-proletarian pseudo-art are
futile but funny.
   In the first half of this film we see nothing of the new truly
revolutionary and liberating art. Hertz seems overwhelmed by the hacks left
over from the bon monde of pre-revolutionary Odessa. Meanwhile he is
hustled into a fake marriage with a local floozy, whom he tries to educate
in Marxism, and falls into a true love at first sight with beautiful and
kind Klavdiia, a single mother of two girls.
   Then Odessa is visited by the team of Moscow film makers under the
direction of Sergei Eisenstein who is here to make a movie of the famous
1905 mutiny on the battleship Potemkin. We are now in for a fabulous treat.
We get to see the making of this world shaking movie, we hear Eisenstein's
method explained, we see how the cast were recruited, the stages set up,
the hundreds of unprofessional extras instructed in their roles, how the
structure of this film emerges from the scaffolding of this ant-like
activity.
   Hertz' single minded and narrow barrack-style communism prevents him
from realizing the revolutionary creativity of Eisenstein's methods and he
tilts at windmills (literally) trying to prevent the filming of the famous
Odessa Steps scene of the movie. Fortunately for us he does not succeed.
Neither does Hertz succeed in liberating himself from the straitjacket of
official rules and directives of his office and the Party secretary.
Although Klavdiia did get a part in the filming of "The Battleship" (she
plays the part of a Jewish mother of a little boy killed on the Odessa
steps by the Cossacks), she is soon unemployed again. Klavdiia is forced to
sell sunflowers seeds on the street to feed her family, is caught by the
militia, brought into Hertz' office and he cancels her actor's employment
card, her proof of legitimacy. The new Soviet bureaucracy swallows Hertz
and destroys his chance for happiness. Klavdiia's curse shatters Hertz'
inner fortitude.
   Then the finished movie "Battleship Potemkin" comes to town. The
director, Gennady Poloka, correctly presents the magnificently ennobling
effect of this masterpiece on the town's population. People are excited by
the movie, both about the actual revolutionary events of 20 years ago,
about their own roles in the Revolution and in the filming of the movie.
   Hertz, however, has now become completely unhinged. Seeing Klavdiia in
her dramatic role of the desolate mother on the Odessa steps brings to him
his own action in letting down the only woman he ever loved, and who loved
him. Hertz sees her life and death on the screen time after time. His own
life is over, he lives only on the screen. We see him much later, a lunatic
dressed in the old army rags, still coming to see "The Battleship" in a
deserted theater.
   The scenes from the movie "The Battleship" are one of the strong and
uplifting notes in this wonderful film. They give evidence that the October
Revolution did not spring from a secretive and conspiratorial coup by a
tiny group of disciplined and ruthless Bolsheviks but was a rising of the
whole Russian nation. The presentation of Communist Party life in 1925 as a
series of orchestrated meetings full of illiterate sloganeering by boorish
louts in high positions is an ahistorical projection of the later Stalinist
period backwards. This is a common view in Russia and is fostered both by
the past Stalinist lies and the present anti communist propaganda.
   Fortunately, we have other evidence. The memoirs of Baitalsky
("Notebooks For Grandchildren"), a young Odessa communist of that period
who was later jailed for Oppositional activity and spent decades in the
GULag, tell us of mass literary, artistic, theatrical, musical activities
among the young Communists and the spirit of self sacrifice, egalitarianism
and freedom which prevailed in their midst. The bureaucratic regimentation
did come later, but it came as a result of the planned persecution of
idealistic and devoted Communists of the Hertz type, their gradual hounding
out of the Party and their replacement with careerists and lackeys.
   The period beginning with Lenin's illness and death witnessed a
transformation of the Bolshevik party. In Ukraine, the leader of Communist
party during the Civil War, Khristian Rakovsky, supported Trotsky in the
1923 party debate and was recalled from his post. Some leaders underwent
moral and political degeneration, e.g. Stalin and Bukharin. Other leaders
of the heroic period were gradually supplanted by pragmatic apparatus men,
for example Trotsky and Zinoviev were replaced by Voroshilov and Molotov.
Along with the organized opposition activity there were a number of
suicides out of despair or in protest, yet such suicides occurred more
frequently after the possibility for legal opposition was exhausted. In
Ukraine, one of the leading party organizers, Yevgeniia Bosh, one of the
signatories of the Platform of the 46, committed suicide in 1924. The
leading Soviet diplomat and a long time supporter of Trotsky, Adolf Joffe,
took his life in protest at Trotsky's expulsion from the party in 1927.
   The director intentionally and incorrectly paints Hertz as a lonely Don
Quixote, and Hertz' ideal of a world commune as an impossible dream.
Similarly, of all the heroes of communism, only Marx is shown on posters
and placards in the movie; other towering figures of the communist world:
Engels, Luxembourg, Lenin and Trotsky are not even mentioned. Hertz is
presented as the only true communist, yet Odessa was one of the centers of
oppositional activity at that time. Such a picture of a lone individual
against an indifferent world is belied by the movie itself. Some of the
most powerful sequences in this movie occur when the Odessa audiences see
themselves in the movie reenacting the heroic events of the 1905
Revolution. These moments offer us a hint of that spirit of heroic self
sacrifice when masses of people throughout Russia were animated by Hertz'
dream of world communism. It was this dream which moved millions of working
people in 1917, and which today is still the only hope for mankind.
-- 
Iskra Research -- Historical research and publication of Marxist classics
in the Russian language.
Address: PO Box 397142, Cambridge, MA 02139-7142; e-mail: fjk@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/fjk/iskra.html

Title
Review for Nesut menya koni (1996)
Montreal 1996
The recently concluded Montreal World Film Festival is one of the better
known venues of the cinema world. It attempts to promote a wide range of
filmmakers from many countries by requiring as little as possible in
promotion expenditures. This year the Festival organizers paid special
attention to current Russian films and even gave a special prize in the
category of the Russian Cinema of Today. This writer was able to view a
number of the more significant films presented at the Festival. Preceding
my impressions I have included the official descriptions provided by the
Festival organizers.
Gone With the Horses  Nesut menia koni.
Director: Vladimir Motyl. Script: Vladimir Motyl. Photography: Nikolai
Nemoliaiev, Alexander Negriuk. Editor: N. Alferova. Music: Isaak Shwartz.
Sound: J. Fetisov. Cast: Andrei Sokolov, Agnieszka Wagner, Sergei
Vinogradov, Gennady Pechnikov, Vladimir Kachan, Valentina Kosobutskaia.
Producer: Boris Greenberg, Arion-Studio.
A modern romantic melodrama filled with mad passions and the vagaries of
fate. Although the film is inspired by the stories of Anton Chekhov it is
by no means any sort of "adaptation". The film's action takes place today
and offers an ironic comment on the selfishness and intolerance of
contemporary society.
The name of this movie is taken from a well known song by Vladimir Vysotsky
in which the balladeer sings of the inexorable fate and the nearness of
doom. This is a story of a young post-Soviet rascal. A Russian patriot of
the fascist type, Ivan did not quite succeed in catching the gravy train, a
seat on which his father's high post in Soviet society should have assured
him.  Now, he is studying to be a lawyer, using his healthy good looks to
win beautiful women, earning his diploma not through diligent study of the
quickly changing laws but by performing stud services for an ugly female
professor in return for course notes and examination help. He sees the
beautiful Nina (Agnieszka Wagner) driving in her husband's foreign car from
the airport, is smitten by LOVE (lust, we and his closest friend, biologist
Eisler, think), and follows her, cynically noting to his friend that he can
seduce any wife right in front of her husband.
   The story now gets interesting. We are given an insight into the
mentality of a new type of "interdevochka", one who is kept not by a
foreign but by the new Russian businessman, and who consoles herself with
artistic and literary pursuits. These literary ideals take over her
imagination. Although attracted to Ivan by his animal magnetism, Nina
(Wagner) must justify to herself her betrayal of her husband by sacrificing
herself on the altar of love. She admits the affair to her businessman
husband (after he discovers her liaison), and leaves him to give herself to
Ivan.
   Ivan does not want her at first: he is busy with exams, he has his stud
duties with the woman lawyer, etc. But Nina's dowry of a brand new Opel
limousine, generously given to her by her former husband, win the day for
true "love" Moscow style. She divorces the businessman and the young couple
marry.
   The story develops some months later in the Crimea where the young
couple have moved after Ivan received his law diploma.  Nina has made more
sacrifices: she underwent a post-term abortion at Ivan's demand, and the
abortion left her physically ill and morally anguished; her career in
literature is going nowhere, Ivan has no interest in or knowledge of
poetry, and has even lost his sexual interest in her. Yet she clings to
Ivan all the more, despite his lies, drunkenness and recent sexual
frigidity.
   The glimpses of social and economic conflicts in the Crimea were of
particular interest to me. The director showed us the antagonism between
the emerging capitalist farmers and the feudal regime of the old collective
farm. We are also given a hint of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict on the
peninsula in that the police prefer to be bribed with Russian rubles rather
than the worthless Ukrainian karbovantsy. Of course, the US dollar is much
preferred by everyone.
   The story reaches its dramatic peak with a duel between the honest and
high-minded Eisler and Ivan, with Eisler defending Nina's honor against
Ivan's boorish drunkenness, selfishness and lies. A minor wound received by
Ivan and Nina's continuing selfless devotion to him shock this scoundrel
away from the precipice into which the fate was driving him.
   The director introduced this film before the screening and explained to
the audience that he wanted to reaffirm the timeless human values and to
show "the path of a repenting sinner back to God". In the movie we are
indeed offered numerous views of an Orthodox church atop a hill. It is
unclear, however, in what way this God affected the agnostic cynic Ivan, or
the self abusive Nina, or the atheist Eisler.
-- 
Iskra Research -- Historical research and publication of Marxist classics
in the Russian language.
Address: PO Box 397142, Cambridge, MA 02139-7142; e-mail: fjk@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/fjk/iskra.html

Title
Review for Baryshnya-krestyanka (1995)
Montreal 1996
The recently concluded Montreal World Film Festival is one of the better
known venues of the cinema world. It attempts to promote a wide range of
filmmakers from many countries by requiring as little as possible in
promotion expenditures. This year the Festival organizers paid special
attention to current Russian films and even gave a special prize in the
category of the Russian Cinema of Today. This writer was able to view a
number of the more significant films presented at the Festival. Preceding
my impressions I have included the official descriptions provided by the
Festival organizers.
Baryshnia-Krestianka (Lady-Peasant)
Director: Alexei Sakharov. Script: A. Zhitinsky, Alexei Zakharov. Based on
the short story by A. S. Pushkin. Photography: N. Nemoliaiev. Editor: L.
Shmigliakova. Music: Vladimir Komarov. Sound: I. Urvantsev. Cast: E.
Korikova, E. Rednikova, D. Scherbina, L. Kuravliov, V. Lanovoi. Producer
and Sales: L. Poliarskaia, Ritm Film Studio of Mosfilm Association.
Liza had her eye on her handsome young neighbor Alexei, for some time and
he has had his eye on her. But their fathers, feuding landowners, clearly
aren't about to let the two young people get together. Liza has an idea.
With the help of a maidservant, Nastia, she dresses up as a young peasant
girl and wanders into the forest ostensibly to gather mushrooms. As she
planned, Alexei spots her and the peasant disguise doesn't fool him a bit.
This movie celebrates pastoral Russia of a century and a half ago. It
presents an unchanging society, frozen into a traditional patriarchal
culture (or lack thereof), with both the landlords and the peasants, both
men and women unquestioningly following their paths through life.
   The story is not original, it is a watered down, conformist version of
Romeo and Juliette. Two neighboring landlords conduct a feud which their
offspring must follow. The young man is fresh from a Dutch university, but
the education was wasted on him since he just wants to join the Hussars.
The young girl is dreaming of romance with a tall, dark man with a large
mustache, but knows that her father will decide on a husband. The foreign
words employed by the gentry, their Western dress, tastes in poetry and
music are just a thin veneer, barely concealing the basic idiocy of country
life. Here is one example of the 
   Pushkin satirizes the basic uselessness of the landed gentry when he
quotes one of them lauding the other for discovering how to mortgage their
estates on the London market. The movie director reenacts this scene in the
movie but then celebrates this idiocy by extolling the fathers' taste for
homemade vodkas and liqueurs.
   This is a low budget escapist film, and the viewer is advised to read
Pushkin instead.
-- 
Iskra Research -- Historical research and publication of Marxist classics
in the Russian language.
Address: PO Box 397142, Cambridge, MA 02139-7142; e-mail: fjk@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/fjk/iskra.html
