Authors
Cynthia A. Bussiere
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Twelfth Night: Or What You Will (1996)
TWELFTH NIGHT is an adaptation of Shakespeare's bittersweet
romantic comedy about shipwrecked siblings, mistaken identities,
and, of course, true love.  The story opens with a storm at sea
during which Sebastian and Viola, twin brother and sister, are
separated in a shipwreck.  Each presumes the other dead and
proceeds to make a new life for himself and herself in Illyria, the
ancient country on whose shores each is washed up.  Viola dis-
guises herself as a man and befriends Orsino, Duke of Illyria.
Sebastian lies low with the assistance of his friend Antonio.  Even-
tually, Viola and Sebastian are reunited, but not before they both
participate in the wooing, winning, and wedding of the Duke's
beloved Countess Olivia -- together, that is, with Olivia's uncle
(Sir Toby Belch), her steward (Malvolio), her woman (Maria), 
and the uncle's protege (Sir Andrew Ague-cheek).  Feste, one
of Olivia's servants and resident clown, wanders in and out of the
proceedings, alternately making trouble and dispensing wisdom.
Director-screenwriter Trevor Nunn, a director emeritus of the
Royal Shakespeare Company, has adapted the play to film in
a variety of structurally effective ways.  Initially, while keeping
the locus of the action in the Dukedom of Illyria (watch for a
quick cut to Baedeker's ILLYRIA), he has updated the play in
both time and setting to the early-middle nineteenth century.
Additionally, he has reordered the sequence of a number of
scenes in the play and presented them in such a way as to
make greater cinematic sense of the action as a whole.
Finally, he has "opened up" the play for the film.  The ship-
wreck scenes, in particular, have been judiciously expanded
to provide some enlightening backstory on the characters.
Among other things, these scenes establish Sebastian and
Viola as professional performers, thereby lending credibility
to their subsequent disguises.  These scenes also establish
the nature and depth of the friendship between Antonio and
Sebastian.  Overall, despite some vocal dubbing inconsist-
encies, and a few rather abrupt scene changes that could 
have been fleshed out to provide clearer narrative transitions,
the film is a delightful adaptation of the play.
The film was shot on various locations in Cornwall in the autumn.
Thus, the sea is present and visible in many key external scenes.
Additionally, the locales have a fairy-land aura to them:  Olivia's
manor seems like Cinderella's house, and Orsino's fortress seems
like the Prince's castle.  While there are no specific allusions to 
Christmas time (apart from the title of the film), the warm reds,
greens, and golds of the season, as well as of autumn, predominate.
Outdoors, these are the colors of fruit and foliage.  Indoors, these
are the colors of interior decoration and decorative foliage.
The acting is superb.  Nicholas Farrell's Antonio adds a dimension
of sexual attraction to his friendship with Sebastian that Farrell
sublimely conveys without speaking.  The fact that Antonio knows
the attraction is not mutual only serves to deepen the pathos of the
friendship.  This male-male pairing is contrasted to the female-female
pairing of Olivia and Viola, another situation in which the attraction is
not mutual.  Both of these pairings are set off against a third male-
female pairing of Orsino and Viola.  This pairing is not conveyed
dramatically as well as it could have been; one senses an incipient
attraction more because one perceives it to be logical than because
the actors have conveyed it emotionally.
Helena Bonham Carter's Olivia is a joy.  In a well-paced transition,
her Olivia moves from grief-stricken sister who has sworn off men
to eagerly lovestruck ingenue and covers all points in between.
Similarly, Nigel Hawthorne's brilliant Malvolio is a character of 
many layers.  Wearing an obvious and ill-fitting toupee that is both
the symbol of his dignity and an object of derision, he is capable
of low comedy, high dudgeon, and touching pathos.  Ben Kingsley's
Feste is a fabulous concoction of reserved wisdom and loud annoy-
ance.  He is also possessed of a very sweet singing voice and sings
all of the songs in the play.  Considering that these have been sung
and recorded fairly frequently by world class singers of art song,
Kingsley does a remarkably fine job with this music.
The depth of affection between Viola and Sebastian in this film is
something profound to behold.  The invisible bond between them
conjures up the other when only one is on the screen.  Imogen
Stubbs and Steven Mackintosh are made up and photographed
in such a way that they really appear to be twins.  Moreover,
the resemblance goes more than skin deep, because they truly
act as brother and sister.  As individual actors, each seems to be
an opposite side of the same coin.
As the film ends, various couples come together and various single
persons go their own ways.  The dispersion of the latter is quite 
touchingly staged, suggesting that, while all may end happliy ever 
after for those who have found their true loves, others are still left
alone and bereft.
Apart from everything else this film has to offer, it presents an excel-
lent opportunity to watch an ensemble of accomplished Shakespearean
actors at work.  Additionally, it offers an opportunity to bask in the
rhyme and meter of Shakespeare's spoken verse.  Finally, it provides
an opportunity to consider, or reconsider, an ostensibly light-hearted
play that nevertheless continues to reveal hidden depths of the human
heart in a series of small epiphanies.

Title
Review for Microcosmos: Le peuple de l'herbe (1996)
Narrator (English version):  Kristin Scott-Thomas
This documentary film (which I have affectionately dubbed LITTLE BIG
BUG) observes a day and a night in the lives of a bunch of bugs in a
pre-selected field in Aveyron, France.  The extraordinary point of the
film and, of course, the reason to see it, is that the cameras get right
down into the grass -- not to mention into the honeycomb, inside the
ants' storeroom, and behind the dragonfly in flight -- to give us a bug's-
eye view (and, occasionally, a bird's-eye view) of life.
A lot of things happen in a day, to humans as well as to bugs, and
this film captures the essentials common to both species:  Birth, 
death, dinner, sex, fights, weather, physics, and endless grooming.
Birth is fascinating because quite often it includes re-birth in the form
of the emergence of a winged insect from its cocoon.  Death and 
dinner are inextricably entwined, inasmuch as there is generally a 
causal relationship between the two throughout the film.  Sex ranges
from a ladybug quickie to a stately, erotic, lovely encounter between
two snails.  The fights are cool because, at this range, you might as
well be watching GODZILLA vs. ANY LAND-BASED CREATURE.
The weather aspect is interesting because the film examines the effect
of "massive" raindrops falling not only on a single ladybug sitting on
a blade of grass, but also on a crowd of skeeters floating on the
surface of a pond.  The physics aspect is great fun as the camera
observes a beetle confront and ultimately solve the problem of contin-
uing to roll uphill a ball of dung that has become stuck on a stick.
(Rest assured that the Sisyphean nature of this task has not been lost
on the filmmakers.)  In fact, the physics of water and air play out in
unusual and enlightening ways throughout the film, and your name
doesn't have to be Dr. Science for you to figure them out.  Finally,
the grooming pays off because these bugs *look marvelous* -- sleek,
shiny, and beautifully colored.  Moreover, they are set in gorgeous
backgrounds of foliage and flowers designed to make them look
their best.
The film took three years to complete and an additional six months to
edit.  Apparently, some of this time was spent creating and perfecting
the photographic technology to complete the picture.  To say that the
film makes extraordinary use of close-up photography is a redundancy.
Additionally, the film uses time-lapse and slow-motion photography to
great effect.  Finally, the film makes outstanding use of feature film-
making techniques.  The work of Jean Renoir and Theo Angelopoulos
came immediately to mind as I watched particular shots.
There are several reasons why this film is eminently watchable by all
but the most diehard bug hater.  First, because these are beautifully
photographed bugs in a natural, clean, lush environment, rather than
an ugly bunch of cockroaches living in filth, the disgust factor is
eliminated.  Second, because most of the bugs are shot almost
exclusively in close-up, and therefore appear to be larger-than-life
size, the creepy-crawly factor is kept to a minimum.  Third, because
the bugs are *never* shown attacking humans or other non-insect life
forms, the fright factor is eliminated.
Overall, this is a delightful and witty anthropomorphic film with
mercifully low cute and gross-out quotients.  Its displays of humor
and, occasionally, high comedy, are tempered by the overriding
intelligence and compassionate empathy that pervade the film.
The film has great respect for its subjects, and at no time does it
laugh at them.  Moreover, the film's use of music, both instrumental
and vocal, only serves to enhance the expression of its viewpoint.
In a very sweet, conclusory touch, the end titles list and describe
the creatures in the film under a heading that translates as "With
the participation of, in order of appearance:"

Title
Review for Some Mother's Son (1996)
[This review was first posted to CINEMA-L on January 16, 1997.]
Director:  Terry George (directorial debut)
Screenwriters:  Terry George and Jim Sheridan
Producers:  Jim Sheridan, Arthur Lappin, Edward Burke
Associate Producer:  Helen Mirren
Music:  Bill Whelan
In the late seventies, when (or shortly before) Margaret
Thatcher took office in her first term as Prime Minister, the
British government embarked upon an apparently harder line
toward the IRA and its imprisoned volunteers than had 
previously been adhered to.  In the words of the film, the
government adopted a three-pronged policy of "isolation,
criminalization, and demoralization."  "Isolation" referred
to a policy of geographical containment under which the
British set up a system of road blocks and closures to
hamper the movement of the IRA throughout Northern
Ireland.  "Criminalization" referred to a policy under which
IRA prisoners were denied previously held "special category"
status as political prisoners and, instead, were treated by the
criminal justice system as criminal terrorists.  "Demoralization"
referred to a policy of breaking the will and the morale of
imprisoned individual IRA volunteers and of the organization
as a whole.
SOME MOTHER'S SON, a docudrama, focusses on the
criminalization and demoralization prongs of that policy,
although the story is set in motion by the isolation prong.
As such, the film telescopes into the time frame of its story
various events that actually occurred in Belfast in response
to the British hard line.  These events culminated, as the film
culminates, in a prisoners' hunger strike in the Maze prison
between March 1 and October 2, 1981.
Twenty-one prisoners went on the strike, and ten of them died.
Of the ten, only one was sentenced to a life term.  (Terry George
states on the film's web site that, had they lived, all of the nine
non-lifers would have been released by 1987.)  Among the dead
was Bobby Sands, beautifully played in the film by John Lynch.
Sands was a prominent IRA member and a leader, within the
prison, of the hunger strike.  During his prison term, he was
elected to Parliament.  He was a member of Parliament when
he died.
The strike didn't end until the mothers of the remaining striking
prisoners exercised their powers as their sons' legal guardians
and authorized medical intervention to save their sons' lives.
By doing so, these women effectively took their sons off the
hunger strike.  Of course, the dilemma faced by each of these
women was horrendous:  By saving their sons' lives, they
betrayed their sons' convictions and destroyed the cause for
which their sons had fought so long and hard in the first place.
Thus, the film centers on the common dilemma of two mothers
whose imprisoned sons have joined the hunger strike.  On the
one hand, there is Annie Higgins, played by Fionnula Flanagan.
Annie is a farmer's wife and dedicated IRA supporter.  By the
time the film opens, one of her sons has already been killed by
the British and her remaining son Frank, played by David O'Hara,
is an IRA fugitive from justice.  Her third child is her fabulous
smart-mouthed, quick-tempered, red-headed daughter named 
Theresa who takes after Annie.  On the other hand, there is
Kathleen Quigley, played by Helen Mirren.  Kathleen is a teacher
in a Catholic girls' school.  She is politically uninvolved to the point
of naivete, but she hates the IRA for the violence for which it stands.
Like Annie, she has three children, two sons and a daughter.
Unbeknownst to her, her elder son Gerard, played by Aidan Gillen,
is an IRA volunteer.  Her younger son, as shown by a brief but
illuminating moment in the film, may or may not grow up to
emulate his older brother.  Her older daughter, played by
Geraldine O'Rawe, has her hands full just coping.  Both mothers
are the mainstays of their families:  Annie's husband is quite
elderly and physically unable to work.  Kathleen is a widow.
The film follows the gradual leftward politicization of Kathleen
after her son Gerard's arrest, trial, and conviction on a charge
of attempted murder.  Annie's son Frank, tried jointly with Gerard,
is also convicted.  Both young men are sent to the Maze to serve
their sentences.  The courtroom scene in which these events take
place is highly sensational and quite moving in its brutal brevity.
When Gerard immediately joins the series of small ongoing protests
conducted by all the IRA prisoners in his cell block, Mirren portrays
Kathleen as having no choice but to resort to political action to pro-
tect and ensure his welfare in prison once the authorities begin
retaliating against the prisoners.  In effect, his cause becomes
her cause, and she takes it up lovingly and ungrudgingly.  The
film realistically charts her progressive politicization in a way 
that smoothly and efficiently advances the story.  Along the way
she engages in her own small rebellion against her Catholic school
employer and its principal, the formidable and implacable Sister
Bernardina (the nightmare nun of everybody's Catholic school
education in the fifties and early sixties).
Concurrently with Kathleen's political progress, and equally real-
istically, the film charts the progress of the budding friendship
between Kathleen and Annie.  The two women begin as openly
hostile to one another.  They then gradually warm up to each
other, bond very closely, and then gradually come a bit apart
again.  This progression features, among other things, a hilarious
car ride along a beach that is meant to be funny, despite the fact
that it stands for more than it is.  Structurally, these personal
developments are woven into Kathleen's political development,
because it is Annie, whose political convictions and activism
are in place by the time the film begins, who involves Kathleen
in specific political activities.
Eventually, the series of protests at the prison lead to the hunger
strike, which both Kathleen's and Annie's sons join.  From this
moment forward, both women move into the center of a mael-
strom of the competing interests of the three major players in
these events:  The IRA, the British government, and the Catholic
Church.  The IRA is represented by Danny Boyle, the head of
Sinn Fein in Belfast.  Well and strongly played by Ciaran Hinds,
Boyle is a fictional composite character, not the least part of
which is probably Gerry Adams.  Boyle stubbornly and aggres-
sively supports the prisoners' cause and serves as their repre-
sentative in the outside world.  The British government is
represented by a ruthless counter-terrorism law enforcement
official (whose scenes are often intercut with newsclips of
Thatcher advocating her government's line), who is determined
to break the backs of the prisoners and who, to that end,
pursues a zero-tolerance policy and a stance of non-negotiation.
Steering a middle ground between these extreme factions, yet
supportive of the prisoners, is the Catholic Church.  Initially,
the Church is represented by the head of the Catholic Church
in Ireland, the cardinal who comes to the Maze to say Mass
for the prisoners.  Horrified at the conditions he witnesses there,
he immediately holds a press conference, to the extreme
embarrassment and consternation of the government.  However,
more often, more prosaically, and less dramatically, the Church
is represented by Father Daly, the local parish priest, who has
the heart-breaking tasks of giving the last sacrament to dying
hunger strikers and presiding at their funeral Masses.
Ultimately, each mother, Kathleen and Annie, holds the life
of her son in her hands and must make the decision to let
him live or watch him die.
All of the performances in the film are strong, accurate, and
(with a few exceptions) beautifully understated.  Mirren is
fabulous.  Her Kathleen has a touching diffidence, a surprising
naivete, and great quiet courage.  She also has flashes of humor
that are a tribute not only to Mirren's acting, but also to George's
direction and Sheridan's and George's writing.  Flanagan, whose
character undergoes no political changes throughout the film, has
ostensibly less to work with.  However, because the depth of her
character's personal changes is arguably greater than that of
Kathleen's, she alternates brilliantly between hardened political
ideologue and blooming, softening private person.  In a fabulous
piece of acting, her physical appearance reflects these develop-
ments by actually changing from within in front of the camera.
Hinds, whose strong, quiet presence defined the character of
Frederick Wentworth in PERSUASION, is an incredibly compelling
screen presence here.  His Danny Boyle also radiates strength,
but of a steely, threatening, potentially explosive kind.  As such,
his character is as implacable as that of his British anti-terrorist
counterpart -- and that of Sister Bernardina's, to boot.  His char-
acter is, unfortunately, rather underwritten, especially since it
appears that at least one of the real-life characters of which his
is a composite had a greater hand in the prison protests than
the film conveys.  Finally, the actors -- Aidan Gillen, John O'Hara,
and John Lynch -- who portray the prisoners display a stunning
talent that we rarely see in American actors of the same age.
Furthermore, they all have strong film credits.  Gillen was in
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, O'Hara was in BRAVEHEART, and
Lynch was in IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER.  In prison, with
their uncut hair and unshaven beards, these young men have
Christlike appearances.  This imagery is further reinforced by
background shots of anti-British posters depicting a young man
crucified on the Union Jack.
Bill Whelan's folk-based Irish music is a strong and palpable
presence in the film.  Whelan, a record producer and theatre
and television composer, is probably best known as the composer
-- in its entirety -- of RIVERDANCE THE STAGE SHOW.
The film itself is extremely well thought out and therefore very well 
made.  Like Spike Lee's DO THE RIGHT THING, the filmmakers
and the actors know what they're talking about.  Just as DO THE
RIGHT THING conveyed a deadly accurate anatomy of a race riot,
SOME MOTHER'S SON conveys a deadly accurate anatomy of a
political hunger strike in which the lives of twenty-one young men
turn on things like the interpretation of words such as "right" and 
"privilege" regarding what clothes to wear.
Almost nothing is wasted in this film.  Therefore, the smallest
occurrences and visuals, such as an apple swiped from a lunch
or a member of Parliament smoking a cigarette, take on signifi-
cance.  The film opens and closes with a view of the Irish Sea.
In between, and throughout the film, shots of feet on firm 
ground, such as marchers' feet in a candlelight vigil, are
everywhere.  The film also makes sparing but effective use
of slow motion.  Additionally, some of the editing, such as the
intercutting of a portable missile attack with a close-up of girls'
feet doing an Irish hard-shoe dance, is stunningly effective.
Finally, the two principal crowd scenes -- the candlelight vigil
for Bobby Sands and Sands' funeral -- are outstandingly well
done.  (The funeral alone comprised an entire second unit.)
These scenes were not only exceptionally well-choreographed;
they were also extraordinarily moving in a way that crowd 
scenes just usually are not.
Even though the film is essentially a work of fiction, all of the
major events it depicts actually took place.  These include the
hunger strike itself, the various prison protests -- including the
infamous "dirty protest" -- leading up to the strike, the cardinal's
visit to the prison, the election of Sands to Pariliament, the vigils,
the deaths, the funerals, and the secret deals, talks, and negotia-
tions surrounding the hunger strike.  Furthermore, while the
characters in the film, with the exception of Sands and a member
of Parliament, are fictitious, they are all composite characters
based on real people.  It appears that Belfast viewers may be
able to recognize and identify the people on whom the characters
are based.
The film was shot on location in Skerries, a small village north of
Dublin.  Skerries stood in for Belfast, where the principal events of
the film take place.  The Maze, together with its H-blocks where the
prisoners were housed, was recreated in some Dublin warehouses.
The bottom line of this film is the interplay between the personal
and the political in the lives of its characters.  Sometimes the two
are inseparable, sometimes they are in sync with each other,
and sometimes they are at odds with each other.  There is no
question that this film has an explicit republican bias.  However,
there is also no question that the issues raised in the film are
ultimately resolved on personal grounds.
