Authors
E.J. Winner
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Ngo hai sui (1998)
The gradual introduction and growing popularity of Jackie Chan in America has 
from the beginning been fraught with odd twists and turns.  "Rumble in the 
Bronx" at last popularized Chan for American audiences, but Chan cultists 
tend to hold this to be a disappointingly trivial film.  These cultists 
generally came to Chan via  "Drunken Master" some years before the release of 
"Rumble", and still hold that film in high esteem - even though it is 
actually inferior to a number of later Chan films, including the 1994 sequel 
"Drunken Master II".
The release of "Rumble" was followed-up theatrically with the release of 
"Operation Condor"; the problem with this is that "Condor" is actually the 
sequel to "Armour of God", a more interesting and more problematic film, 
which was released in America only on video.
Chan solidified his "Rumble" reputation with the extraordinarily 
energetic "Supercop", which also introduced Michelle Yeoh to American 
audiences two years before her appearance in the James Bond film "Tomorrow 
Never Dies".  "Supercop", by the way, is also a sequel to a previous film, 
"Police Story", which only appeared in the US on video.
Chan then embarked on 3 film ventures almost guaranteed to subvert his 
reputation: the James Bond imitation "First Strike";  the low-key, difficult 
to follow "Mr. Nice Guy", and the disastrous "Rush Hour", which apparently 
succeeded at the box-office, much to my disappointment.
This year, the continuing saga of Chan's appearance of America continued 
on its twisted way.  A film made around 1985 was re-dubbed and released 
theatrically: "Twin Dragons".  The odd thing about this is that "Twin 
Dragons" has been available in America on vuideotape for at least ten years!  
Meanwhile, almost simultaneously, Chan's most recent Asian release, 
1998's "Who am I?" was also released in America - but only on video! 
The odd thing about this simultaneous release is that Who am I is 
decidedly the better of the two films. So before remarking on "Who am I?", a 
brief note on "Twin Dragons":  This film, co-directed by Tsui Hark and Ringo 
Lam (although Lam claims he only acted as second-unit pick-up director), is 
loosely based on a Claude Van Damme film, "Double Impact" and was made (very 
quickly) as a benefit for the Hong Kong Director's Guild. It is enjoyable, 
and has one or two remarkable stunts, but on the whole is a bit of fluff, 
even by the standard of "pure entertainment.
On the other hand, "Who am I?" - co-directed by Chan and Benny Chan (no 
relation) - is a well mounted stunt-and-fight-filled maze of plot and theme, 
as Chan stars as a commando with amnesia in a struggle with a corrupt CIA 
agent over a recently discovered explosive element derived from a meteorite; 
the film moves from South Africa to the Netherlands, and involves 
considerable double plays and double-guessing on the part of Chan's character 
as he struggles to reclaim his memory while also stopping the corrupt CIA 
agent from successfully selling the new element to the highest bidder.  The 
message of the film is very positive, and the action is lively; the editing 
and camera-work are worthy of commendation.
There are some draw-backs to the film: Relationships between Chan's 
character and, first, a tribe of South Africans, and then later two women 
helping him, are never fully developed; thus Chan's character, rich in 
potential, is never developed fully, since this would require greater 
interaction with others. 
For Chan fans the film is also disappointing in a number of subtle ways: 
the stunt work here tends to belie Chan's claim that he works "without a 
net"; i.e., without safety-supports.  The slide down the skyscraper. for 
instance, is too obvioulsy along a guide wire.
Secondly, the climatic final kung-fu battle between Chan and two 
kick-boxing thugs, while well done and exciting in itself, is clealry derived 
from the climatic finale of the much better "Drunken Master II." 
Both these problems raise an important issue which has been buzzing 
around Chan Fans for a couple years now - namely, is the master running out 
of steam? Is he perhaps growing too old for the kind of acrobatics his stunts 
and fights require?
Well, stay tuned for the next episode of the saga...

Title
Review for Last Man Standing (1996)
    In the middle '20's, Dashiell Hammett (best known as authro of "The Maltese
Falcon") wrote two unrelated novels, "The Glass Key", about Ned Beaumont an
alcoholic gambler who uses duplicity to save his mob boss from taking a murder
rap for a corrupt politician (all thw while fending off a rival mobster), and
'Red Harvest", in which a nameless private eye (also alcoholic, a status shared
by many Hammett heroes) is hired to clean up a small town kept in fear by two
warring boot-leg mobs. 
I believe "Red Harvest" did make it to film in the '30's, but I haven't
been able to track that down and never saw it.  "The Glass Key" was first made
into a (not too successful) film in 1935, and then re-made in 1942.  The remake
concerns us here.  Directed by Stuart Heisler in a style that compounds the
typical crime film briskness of the '30's with the shaded undertones of the
then developing 'noir' genre, it is actually quite a good film, and in a number
of ways daring for its period.  True to the novel, literally everyone in the
film is corrupt in some way, and especially fascinating is the appearance of
William Bendix in a minor role of an overtly homosexual sadist of a thug. Alan
Ladd plays Ned Beaumont as a true anti-hero, cold, calculating, true to no
ethic but his own - a type Hollywood at that time was having problems
presenting, since the strong ethics of the character undercut all the
assumptions of sociopathy of such types popular at the time. The film finally
betrays itself with a "kiss-and-make-up" final scene that completely undercuts
the ethical problematic of the novel (in which Beaumont finally betrays his
boss by running off with the boss' fiancee).  But until then, the movie moves
towards its dark "who-dun-it" revelation rapidly and filled with tension.
There is a scene dead center in "The Glass Key" where Beaumont is captured
by the rival mob boss and tortured by the sadistic thug (which is from the
novel), and filled with Freudian undertones due to the homosexuality of the
torturing thug (Bendix) (also implicit in the novel).  I think it was Japanese
cinema expert Donald Ritchie from whom I remember an anecdote that it was this
scene that fascinated Akira Kurosawa to such an extent that he felt compelled
to make a film based on a Hammett novel.  Interestingly, he did not do a remake
of "The Glass Key", however.  Instead, he transposed "Red Harvest" to the Japan
of the civil wars of the 1860's, rewriting the nameless private eye as an
equally nameless wandering samurai played (played with exquisite panache by
Toshiro Mifuni), while at the same time parodying the typical *chambara*
(swordfight film) popular in Japan.  I refer of course to "Yojombo" (1962). 
Nonetheless, the the torture sequence is lifted from "The Glass Key" and
interjected as a pivotal scene in "Yojimbo".  A couple of subtractions and
additions need be noted here:   Kurosawa strips the Freudian subtext out of the
torture sequence completely, so that the torture becomes a study in the what
Hannah Arendt referred to as the "banality" of evil" - the torturers are just
doing a job.  This fits neatly with the critique of capitalism implicit in the
film, and which is equally implicit in the Hammett original, so the loss of
Freudian content goes by unnoticed.
On the other hand, Kurosawa and Mifune add an earthiness to the nameless
hero lacking in Hammett's tension filled original: Mifune's samurai is always
scratching, eating, cringing or sneering.  Perhaps this is to make up for the
subtraction of the element of  alcoholism that was the chief weakness of
Hammett's anti-hero.  But it also has the effect of rounding out the character
so that he becomes human to us in a way Hammett's anti-hero is not.        
In 1965, a fledgling Italian director, Sergio Leone,  was hired to do a
typical "spaghetti western" of the era.  Instead, hje remade 'Yojimbo" (without
giving credit to the original, by the way) as "A Fistful of Dollars".  The
failure to credit "Yojimbo" as inspiration raises some ethical questions - but
it must be noted that Kurosawa himself made no reference to Hammett in the
credits to "Yojimbo"! 
In any event, "A Fistful.(...)" is a young director's film, full of flaws;
but it has an undeniable black-humor and is crisply directed, with some
striking visuals that seem to come out of  nowhere, given the genre context in
which the film is made.  The nameless hero is played with a particular coolness
by Clint Eastwood, which undercuts the earthiness- the scratching and
scruffiness - that remains from the Mifune version - Eastwood's anti-hero
rarely eats, and never cringes or sneers.  The pivotal torture scene remains,
as defined by the Kurosawa version, given a peculiar brutality by the addition
of  a pan of the expressionless faces of the onlooking outlaws.
Eventually we want to get to Walter Hill's 1996 remake of "Yojimbo", "Last
Man Standing", but we first have to side-track into an uncredited remake of
"The Glass Key", the Coen Brothers'  1991 "Miller's Crossing'.  This is in a
number of ways an astounding film, (certainly one of the Copen Brothers' most
tightly knit, narratively), full of black-humorous quirks, such as the
marvelous set-piece of Albert Finney as the crime boss turning tables with a
tommy-gun on would-be assassins in a car which he calmly follows on foot until
at last the car crashes and explodes, while a classic rendition of "Danny Boy"
plays over the soundtrack.  The Coen Brothers' also take a minor scene from the
Hammett text - where Ned Beaumont drunkenly gambles away his hat and then has
to go hunting for it after he sobers up -  and turn it into an over-arching
metaphor for the emotional emptiness the anti-hero (marvelously played by
Gabriel Byrne) struggles with throughout the narrative and which Hammett left
as merely implicit.  They also return the ethical bleakness to the finale,
without actually duplicating Hammett's - now it is the crime boss who gets the
girl and the anti-hero who is left to ponder the ruin of his friendship with
his former boss.  It should also be noted that the Coen Bros. return the
alcoholism to the anti-hero, thus further problematizing an already
difficult-to-grasp character.
This actually brings us at last to Walter Hill's "Last Man Standing",
since the nameless anti-hero by now is a raging alcoholic who has a whiskey
glass or beer bottle in his hand half the time he's on screen. Continuing the
bizarre history of plagiarism and mis-crediting that surrounds these films,
"Last Man Standing" is openly credited to Kurosawa's "Yojimbo" . 
Unfortunately, Hill isn't re-making "Yojimbo", he's remaking Leone's "Fistful
of Dollars" (!), including Leone's additions and subtractions to the "Yojimbo"
story - as well as adding touches of his own, such as a scene of a visit to a
prostitute by the anti-hero (well played by Bruce Willis in what may be his
best starring performance) that not only exhibits the character's unfailing
preparedness for violence (he is attacked while copulating and without
hesitation grabs his guns and kills the attackers) but also in the long run
reveals his uncharacteristic sympathy for women (he finally bails the
prostitute out of jail and pays for her bus-fare out of town).  This becomes
the explanatory "weak-link" that finally brings him to ruin (as Bruce Dern's
corrupt sherriff remarks, "when you go down it'll be over a skirt").  Hill is
an odd director; with the right cast and crew, he produces miracles; with a
group of hacks he hacks with the worst of them (ala "Red Heat").  Fortunately,
"Last Man Standing" has all the right crew and cast at the right time and
place.  Hill turns the Hammett-Kurosawa-Leone black comedy into a darkly
gothic, gory gangster movie.  The humorous becomes simply absurd, and the
anti-hero survives, not by his wits or even by his skill with a gun, but simply
because he hasn't died yet (although as he drives away, bullet in his guts, he
remarks voice-over "something would turn up; it always does").
All of these films are highly recommended.  They leave a trace along the
history of cinema of the Modern era's attempt to find some ethos in a
captialist world where all that matters is the achievement of  wealth and power
and the skills necessary to attain these.  Both the anti-hero and his enemies
are professionals, but the question recurrs: at what point does the profesional
at last allow his humanity to show? in his sadism (as with the villains) or in
his ethics (as with the anti-hero)? Both Hammett's texts and their various film
versions wisely leave the question open, something for the audience to take
home and ponder, rightly disturbed.
