Authors
Doug Moran
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Henry & June (1990)
OVERVIEW:
     A look at the relationship, erotic and literary, between Anais Nin,
Henry Miller, and their respective spouses Hugo and June.
REVIEW:
     I'm sure by now we're all familiar with the hype surrounding the
recent release of HENRY AND JUNE, the first film to receive the MPAA's
newly minted NC-17 rating (which Tom Shales of NPR tells us stands for
"Not in Cincinnati, or a 17 mile radius thereof").  It's been banned in
some cities, and been called "an erotic masterpiece" in others.  So
what's the film like?
     Well, first and foremost to my eye, it's a Philip Kaufman film
(director of THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING).  Every scene positively
drips atmosphere.  Everyone smokes, some gracefully.  Kaufman has
populated Nin's Paris with a remarkable collection of hookers, thiefs,
and (bizarrely) wandering street magicians, who stiffen and relax ropes,
make stolen wallets become doves, and other strange things that really
have no bearing on anything, as far as I can tell.  There are romantic
fogs, poetic rainstorms, and dramatic thunder-and-lightning scenes.
Kaufman's feel runs through the entire film; his thumbprint is on every
scene.
     Second, of course, it's about Nin and Miller, two writers of erotic
literature, and players in the erotic lifestyle.
     In the first instance, as an atmosphere film, it succeeds.  The
film lays it on a bit thick for my tastes, and the elements of drama
lurch a little too much into the arena of melodrama, I think.  But the
atmosphere is maintained, and the film is beautiful to look at.
     And as a display of acting talents, it's excellent.  Fred Ward
certainly makes the most of his role, as does Maria de Madeiros.  Uma
Thurman made me actively dislike her and feel uncomfortable when she was
on screen, quite a contrast to my reactions to her previous roles in
BARON MUNCHAUSEN and DANGEROUS LIAISONS.  The only character who seems
weak is Hugo, and it is difficult to say whether this is the fault of a
very weak character, or poor acting, although I am inclined to think it
is the former.  Certainly as his is played, Hugo is a boring, obtuse
nerd of a man, not what I would call a plum role.
     Finally we come to the story.  As a story, this film is somewhat
uneven.  This is not what you would call a classic conflict/resolution
drama; it is more the story of Anais Nin's coming of age, and Henry
Miller (and his wife June) was the catalyst for that coming of age.
While I found her story interesting, it was certainly less than
fascinating for me, and I left the theatre feeling somewhat unfulfilled.
How did this relationship change her life?  How did it change Henry
Miller's life?  What happened to the two marriages?  The film remains
mute on these subjects, and left me somewhat frustrated.
     As for the erotic elements, they have been overadvertised as far as
I can see.  There are certainly a lot of breasts and buttocks shown on
the screen, and a number of fairly graphic (but certainly far from
hardcore) lovemaking scenes, but none of them really struck me as
erotic.  Most of the sex in this film struck me as more animalistic and
desperate than erotic.  Unless you find raw rut erotic, you probably
won't find this film very erotic.  There are those that might argue that
what we saw wasn't "raw rut," but it certainly looked that way to me.
     Overall, an interesting film that was worth seeing.  I think you
absolutely have to suspend your disbelief, and if you can, you will
enjoy this movie.  If you can't, the atmosphere and melodrama might get
in your way.  Certainly not an erotic masterpiece, but also far from
being a dog.  I give it a 6.
