Authors
David Elliot
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Wes Craven's New Nightmare (1994)
     I finally got around to seeing WES CRAVEN'S NEW NIGHTMARE last
night.  I had already seen PULP FICTION too many times, so WCNN seemed
a viable option for some blood-soaked entertainment.  How wrong I was.
     The plot is one of the silliest, and most confused in recent
memory.  The actors in the film all play themselves, all the way down
to Wes Craven playing the director of A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREET (which
he was).  Heather Langenkamp--the heroine from NIGHTMARES 1 and 3 plays
herself down as a jittery, slightly spineless mother.  The film opens
with a stupid scene in which a robotic Freddy glove slices two SFX
techs into mince, then runs around the room like Thing from THE
ADDAMS FAMILY.  It's really quite embarrassing to watch.
     To cut a long (and inane) story short--Wes Craven tells Langenkamp
that because the "Nightmare on Elm Street" films have ended--Freddy
has been let out "like a genie from a bottle" ... erm ...  because ...
that's the way the script was written.
     Freddy has been getting into Heather's dreams, because he was the
one who "killed" him first.  He also enters the dreams of her son--an
intensely precocious and distasteful little child, a cross between
Macauley Culkin and Linda Blair.  The kid's stuffed dinosaur "protects
him from the mean ol' man with the claws."  Oh, how cute yet
menacing ... I don't think.
     I don't want to give too much away, but let's just say that the
final scene where Heather climbs into her sons bed and crawls down one
end to face Freddy has to be one of the most ridiculous scenes ever put
into a commercial horror flick--especially one with Freddy's cult-hero
status.
     The performances are hammed up--Langenkamp's screeching, illogical
portrayal being rather annoying--and Robert Englund (the actor who
plays Freddy) is simply written out of the script half way through the
film.  The loose ends are never tied up ... and the film basically
sucks.
     If you are not convinced to stay away from this piece of garbage,
I'm going to print it in capitals:
     That's right.  The big guy with the killer claws is only seen for
the final scene ... and even then he acts like a moron.  I give this
film a low -3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  Steer clear, guys.  It's
garbage.  If only I could get my 9.50 back....
