Authors
Mark Takacs
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Naked (1993)
FineLine Features / 126 mins / unrated
Open in January in Seattle theatres
Tak Rating:  see once at full price  (sorta more.. see discussion at end)
TV-Style-One-Line-Summary
-------------------------
     A bleak, apocalyptic derelict flays the comfortable illusions away
from everyone he meets, strangers and friends alike.
Tak Summary
-----------
     This movie doesn't have much of a "plot" in that the characters
are out to save the world, solve a mystery, or avoid a slasher.
Rather, it's a character study.  We're watching Johnny, a likable
slimebag as he moves about from bars, to his ex's apartment, back to
the streets, and back to the the apartment.  That's about it.
     But, oh, the things you'll experience along the way. Just let
director Mike Leigh yank your emotions over various sugar-coated
razors, gilded knives, and warm, fuzzy, cuddly, parasites.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     Ok, first a confession.  I missed the first fifteen minutes, as
we had difficulty finding the theatre. (Yeah, I know, how hard can it
be?  Trust me, this one's *obscure*.)  So there may have been things
(perhaps important things) at the beginning that I missed.  However, I
think the rest of the movie was compelling enough to warrant a review,
or perhaps I should call it a "warning."
     Think back to that movie you saw that really, really, disturbed
you--but in such a way that you just *might* wanna watch it again,
tell some friends about it, or at least think about it for a long time
to come.  Was it perhaps ERASERHEAD or other David Lynch madness?
Maybe it was DELIVERANCE?  How about the pain and anguish in FAREWELL
MY CONCUBINE? Or maybe some little scene hidden in an otherwise
innocuous movie like FLATLINERS?  Well, NAKED shoves all those right
aside to get my vote as most disturbing movie.
     The title is aptly picked.  NAKED is not about naked flesh (more
on this in a bit), it is about naked emotions. After watching this
movie, I felt as if my defenses had been stripped away, and held high
over my head, leaving my naked emotions bubbling up all over the place
and making a mess.  (Where'd that come from?! -self_editing_tak)  I
think the director's main tool in achieving this is the "satanic
angel," Johnny.  He's such a likable guy on the surface.  You really
*want* to like him.  I actually found myself making excuses and
forgiving this slimebag.
     Why's he a slimebag?  Well, he's the essence of the abuse of
power.  And he really gets into it--in all kinds of ways.  There are
several scenes where he date-rapes women, and numerous other equally
disturbing scenes without physically abuse.  No, far worse, he merely
*talks* to them and presents them with a black and twisted reflection
of their life.  I think that's far worse.  In one scene, he charms his
way into a lonely, shy, and painfully co-dependent waitress's
apartment.  He charms her into feeding him, steals her favorite book
while her back is turned, uses her shower, then turns on her verbally.
He exposes all her little self-lies about where her life is headed,
what she's doing now, what she did in the past, and tries to toy with
her sense of pity.  Luckily, she has the sense to throw him out, but he
leaves her shattered and crying at the top of her stairs.
     Aside from all that, he's a likable character.  I think I liked
him because he's a surly bastard/cuss.  He's got a razor sharp wit,
cutting sarcasm, a sense of irony, and a broad-ranging knowledge.  But
it was disturbing to find yourself liking Johnny and suddenly
remembering or seeing more of his atrocities.  Makes me really wonder
how I could like someone so thoroughly nasty.
     Not *once* is sex or nudity portrayed in anything close to a
sensual, erotic or even desirable fashion.  Actually, I was rather
repulsed by the whole concept of nudity and sex for awhile after this
movie.  Eeah.  The only time you see flesh is when it is being sexually
or physically abused.  Jeremy, as loathsome a figure as Johnny,
continually struts around in nothing but skimpy briefs that show off
his trim figure.  Leigh seems to be associating sexuality and the body
image with some very unattractive behaviors and ideas.
     At one point in the movie Johnny is offered a chance to change his
life around.  We see him dreaming of a better life in another place.
But when Louise, the strongest character in the movie, offers him a
chance to realize his dream, he declines.  I'm left with the impression
that he's much more comfortable complaining about how bad life is,
rather than doing anything about it.
     This movie is *ripe* for moral analogies.  In one interpretation,
Johnny represents the petty abuses of power.  He's a derelict and his
crimes are senseless and random.
     Jeremy also abuses power, although he is wealthy, confident,
irrepressibly arrogant, smug and in a traditional position of power.
The most disturbing thing about his rape scene was not the actual act,
but the inevitable acceptance with which Sofie accepted it.  I saw it
coming a mile away, and so did she.  She actually shrugged and sighed,
as if to say "Not this again..."  At that point, it wasn't "rape," but
"sleeping-with-your-pig-of-a-boss" kind of attitude, but it quickly got
way outta Sofie's control.
    The main women in the movie seen to represent a broad spectrum of
how people in society deal with abuses in power.  Sofie puts up with
it, another ignores and denies it, and Louise won't take any of it.
     On a good note, Johnny has some fascinating speeches.  Two of my
favorite scenes in the movie were when Johnny explains that bar codes
are the "sign of the beast" foretold in Revelation, and a when Johnny
tries to re-unite some oddly matched Scottish(?) lovers.  And a scene
toward the end of the movie where the distraught apartment owner tries
to restore sanity to her house provides much needed comic relief.
Technical Comments (bitch-n-moan section)
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     This is a hard one. I really did like this movie, though it wasn't
exactly fun. I'd definitely recommend you experience it (Don't just
*see* it).  But it is disturbing and you'll need to talk/brood about it
afterwards.  I might be tempted to see this again, but only in the same
manner that you'd pick at a scab or carefully worry a toothache that is
capable of sharp, piercing pains.
ps: And here's some more text from the Press Release....
Press Synopsis/Scream sheet
---------------------------
     Two major awards were bestowed upon NAKED at last spring's Cannes
Film Festival--Mike Leigh (HIGH HOPES, LIFE IS SWEET) garnered the Best
Director prize and David Thewlis' riveting performance resulted in the
Best Actor reward.  For writer/director Leigh, NAKED marks a shift from
the skewed and wildly imaginative themes of his earlier work to one
that contains a deeper and darker undercurrent as he renders a
provocative and moving vision of contemporary England.  Still remaining
at the core of a Leigh film is a gallery of eccentrics coupled with
offbeat black comedy.
     Johnny (Thewlis) is a vagrant enduring a life devoid of meaning or
direction. His scroungy good looks inspire trust and beneath the skinny
frame and sad expression there is a sense of reassurance.  But it is
all a disguise.  This satanic angel is as capable of expressing love as
is Jack the Ripper.  Wandering London, Johnny leaves a trail of living
corpses--wild flights of absurd rhetoric are interspersed with the most
eccentric of characters.  All the while, he is half-hearted in his
avowed goal of reconciliation with his former girlfriend.  As seen
through the eyes of Johnny, NAKED is a compelling portrait of urban
existence where the viewer alternately sees the violence and
gentleness, the comedy and tragedy of life.  Acclaims were embellished
upon NAKED as it premiered at the recent New York Film Festival with
critic Vincent Canby stating, "a brilliant somersault of a movie that
lands Leigh in new cinematic territory."

Title
Review for War Room, The (1993)
An October Films Release / 96 mins 
film by: DA Pennebaker & Chris Hegedus 
Featuring: James Carville & George Stephanopoulos
Tak Rating: watch it on cable
TV-Style-One-Line-Summary
-------------------------
     You-are-there documentary of Clinton's Presidential campaign,
focusing on James Carville & George Stephanopoulos as they lay out
strategy, do damage control, and cope with daily difficulties.
Tak Summary
-----------
     The film begins tracing the efforts of the War Room -- Clinton's
campaign headquarters -- in the New Hampshire primary, and leads us all
the way through the last days of the election.  We see phone
interviews, bull sessions, staff meetings (equally as boring as any
I've ever been to), pep talks, behind the scenes convention footage,
spin-doctoring, scandal shunting and attempts to leak a story.
    Instead of focusing on Clinton, like the film-makers originally
intended, the focus was shifted to THE WAR ROOM staff, specifically
James Carville and George Stephanopoulos.  Bill Clinton is rarely
shown.  It ends up as a study of THE WAR ROOM and the two people who
successfully guided it.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     I generally don't like documentaries.  They remind me of high
school social studies classes where half the class is sleeping and the
other half is doing last night's homework for math next period.  I
always managed to learn something though, I just never enjoyed the
format.  The same goes for THE WAR ROOM.
    I did get an interesting look at how a campaign runs.  Anyone who
thinks a political campaign is a model of order, organization and
efficiency will be disillusioned after this film.  Bill Clinton's
"well-oiled political machine" is chaotic, headless-chickens
running-around, seat of the pants group like any other group that needs
to respond dynamically to rapidly changing information while still
presenting a unified, organized and dignified front.  Only the efforts
of Carville and Stephanopoulos lend the mess any direction.  While
usually hellish to be involved in, such chaos is great to watch.
    Repeatedly during the campaign, THE WAR ROOM staff has to deal with
mudslinging from other candidates and questions about Clinton's past.
These include draft issues, Jennifer Flowers, and college activist
organizations.  With some of these same issues plaguing Clinton today,
it's interesting to realize that some of the same people
(Stephanopoulos at least) are still at work defusing and directing
policy.
    The human elements are THE WAR ROOM's best point.  That and the
LACK of narration.  Seeing the excitement after the debates, seeing the
tense final days when everything is topsy turvy, seeing their
depression when a news story is suppressed, seeing their reactions on
the last day as it slowly dawns on them that they've done it.  These
are the things that made the film watchable.
    There's some great lines here too.  And you know they're not
scripted... they're real lines.  After a phone interview -- "I bet I
said something you could take out of context" -- Bill Clinton.  The
sardonic Carville has several; my favorite regards Perot's expensive
campaign -- "That's gotta be the single most expensive act of
masturbation...".  And Stephanopoulos after the election results are in
-- "Now we have to actually do something..."
    One thing I can't figure out -- how do they expect to make money on
this film?  I can't see it being a big box office draw. The husband and
wife team of Pennebaker and Hegedus were dead set on making a feature
length film, but who were they making it for?  Who's the PAYING
audience?  Perhaps people who hang out in coffee shops and talk about
politics? (Admittedly, there's a glut of those here in Seattle -- maybe
they're on to something...)  But still.  Maybe they've got a sweet side
deal with video.
Technical Comments
------------------
    Of course, I knew THE WAR ROOM was a documentary and didn't expect
steady-cams and special lighting effects.  Accordingly, documentary
fans will be happy with the obligatory running-with-the-camera footage,
as well as dialogue volume swells, and rough manual pans as they flip
back and forth between speakers.  I think they actually added to the
behind-the-scenes feel.
    How did they film a 96 min movie while still maintaining a behind
the scenes feel?  According to the press packet, the film was done
without huge lights and sound booms.  No one was ever asked to "say
that again for the camera", and the cameraman often lurked in the
corner of the room, rather than crouching at people's feet.
    In fact, the war room staff often forgot the small film and sound
crew was there, often asking incredulously "You guys were filming?  We
thought you were waiting..."  But you'd never know from seeing the
movie.  The film and sound crew got some great stuff from their
unobtrusive locations.
    Additional footage was culled from unused bits of a film called
FEED, which covered the 1992 NH primary, and from network TV source
tapes.  The network excerpt were great.  It was fun to see a TV
reporter being jokingly (?) cut down by his interviewee moments before
she and he start their standard schtick -- "This is Joe Blow reporting
to you live with ..."
Tak Rating system:
------------------
    Documentaries are interesting, but I'm not sure this works well as
a feature film.  It's not really a date film, a Saturday afternoon
matinee, or even late night cable.  I wouldn't be surprised to find
something like this on your local PBS channel, or some of the better
cable educational channels.  Actually, if you're in high school or
taking a poly-sci class, this would be a GREAT excuse for a field
trip.  Maybe you can even get it paid for as an official activity.  If
not, you can at least munch some popcorn and get out of the classroom.

Title
Review for Hercules Returns (1993)
Directed by David Parker
ScreenWriter Des Mangan
35mm / color / 82 mins / Australia 1993
Rated: M+ (15 years and over - medium level course language)
Tak rating: see it once, pay full price
TV-Guide(tm)-Review
-------------------
     When an *unsubtitled* Italian version of a hideously campy Italian
muscle-man movie arrives at the Gala Opening of a new theatre, the
three person crew redubs the movie *live* from the projection booth, with
hilarious results.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     I've done it.  You've probably done it.  You're sitting up late
one night watching an incredibly *bad* movie of some sort, and you start
throwing in your own versions of the lines -- "Don't shoot me yet, I
neeed to flex first!", things like that.
     Well, the team "Double Take" (Des Mangan & Sally Patience) has
turned this concept into a hilarious and profitable business.  It
started March 1986 at an underground cinema in Sydney, Australia when
they rescripted and redubbed ASTRO ZOMBIES live to a forty-person
audience.  A few months later they were playing in Sydney's arthouse
theatre, sold out five hours before the show, and turned away 600
people.
     Now director David Parker and producer Philip Jaroslow brings the
"Double Take" team to the movies with HERCULES RETURNS.  There's
really only maybe fifteen or twenty minutes of "wrapper" -- the rest of
the film is the old Italian movie with Double Take's redubs and
occasional shots of the chaos going on in the projection booth as the
characters bustle to provide the live dialogue.
     The movie was quite a hit at the `93 Seattle Film Festival, and
the audience I saw it with was laughing out loud throughout the movie.
The general style makes me want to use adjectives like "madcap" and
"zany"; it's certainly not a dark or intellectual comedy.  The humor is
definitely adult: Hercules grabs the queen's daughter, Labia, which
prompts the queen to say "Get your hands off my Labia!"  The original
incredibly bad Italian sets (really fake looking leftover stuff) also
adds to the fun.
     The provides a good laugh, and does so in a refreshing and
original style (I have a low tolerance for stupid/bumbling idiot and
slapstick comedy).  It's well worth your $6.50. (or whatever)
Press Summary Synopsis
----------------------
     Frustrated by the uncaring style of his megalith employer, the
Kent Cinema Corporation, film buff Brad McBain decides to take on the
big boys by opening his own old style cinema.  Cartoon shorts,
usherettes with trays and much nostalgic razamatazz will accompany the
Gala Charity Opening Night of the very same Sword'n'Sandal
Italo-Spanish miniature epic which last graced the screen of the now
revamped Picture Palace 30 years ago.
     But super-egotistical Kent Corporation boss Sir Michael Kent will
stop at nothing to crush opposition in "his" town. He sabotages
McBain's big night by ensuring on all-Italian, *non*-subtitled versions
of the 1964 sub-classic HERCULES, SAMSON, MACHISMO AND URSUS ARE
INVINCIBLE is delivered, forcing McBain, his weird projectionist
Sprocket and hard-hitting publicist Lisa to come up with entirely new
dialogue and sound effects -- improvised on the spot from the
projection booth.
     In their new version, Hercules becomes a frustrated cabaret
artiste from ancient Greece, desperate for a gig.  Sent by Zeus to the
Pink Parthenon nightclub in Climidia, he is forced to take on fellow
iron pumper Samson (now a wimp who cries at the thought of violence).
If victorious, Hercules will marry the nightclub owner's daughter,
Labia -- and thus clench a permanent booking at the club.
Problematically, Labia seems more romantically entangled with
Testiculi.  Ursus is now a drunken Scottish bouncer at a local bar.
Multiple punch-ups ensue, along with much damage to paper mache
columns, and poor Hercules' sexuality is deeply challenged along the
way....
     Brad's ex-employer and would-be nemesis Kent, on seeing the
audience in an uproar of approval, is now even more determined to undo
his upstart competitor.  The insanity soon spreads from the projection
booth into the cinema, and then onto the foyer for the big final
showdown.

Title
Review for In weiter Ferne, so nah! (1993)
TV-Style-One-Line-Summary 
-------------------------
     An angel experiences life on earth and finds that things are
better (and worse) than expected.
Tak Summary
-----------
     The movie starts out with our hero, and another angel, popping
about time and space to observe whatever catches their fancy.  Unable
to stand by and witness a tragedy about to happen, one of the angels is
unexpectedly cast into human form.
     Thus begins his adventures--he wanders aimlessly, becomes
homeless, joins a band of similarly "fallen" angels, works for a
gangster, and then tries to make a difference.  Throughout his
adventures, the Devil (William Dafoe) ensures he has a really hard time
and gets some of the more dubious human experiences.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     I saw this movie by accident.  Seriously.  I was at a screening of
BAD BEHAVIOR, a comedy, which started late.  By the end of the movie a
small crowd was waiting to get into the preview theatre ... so I just
stayed seated.  I had *no* idea what I was getting into.
     So picture my surprise when the movie opens in grainy black and
white with a French narration and subtitles.  Do you remember that beer
commercial?  It goes something like this:
    [bored guys and dates watching a clown speaking anguished French]
    [another night--movie w/explosions & gunfire ... now dates bored]
     Well, the first fifteen to twenty minutes mins of this film seemed
like the anguished-clown foreign film clip.  Our hero and his companion
move around space and time (within a few generations), philosophically
musing to us (in French, with subtitles) about life, death, and what it
might be like to be a human.  Ei Yi Eee.
     Okay, so I think I'm identifying more with the guys in that
commercial ... I like guns, bullets, adventure and whatnot.  Hell, I
saw CLIFFHANGER twice and *loved* it.
     But just before my patience wore uncomfortably time, our hero is
thrust into a human body, and then all sorts of fun stuff happens.
Eventually we get to see some limited gun-fu, mobsters, a hare-brained
con involving "Columbo," and some extensive acrobatics (I always
suspected those acrobatic people were a little, well, different).
     Okay, on to the subtitles. *Weird*, but neat.  The characters are
speaking French at first.  As the cast expands, they include German,
then English, dropping the subtitles only when English is spoken.
     As the film rolls on, they start mixing the languages ... French,
German, English, all kinds of things--*in the same sentence*!  And I
didn't even notice at first!  It posed absolutely no problem to my
understanding of the dialogue.  Now, admittedly I took a two years of
high school German (mainly so I could understand what the extras were
saying in the war movies I was into at the time--RAIDERS OF THE LOST
ARK is a good case), but I felt as if I could understand anyone, no
matter what language they happened to be speaking.  'Twas a neat
feeling.  If you see this movie, watch for this effect.
     The movie had lots of little subplots, almost too many. Most
everything is wrapped up at the end. But I was left with a vague sense
that something, somewhere, was skimmed over, rushed past us, or left
unfinished.  But I'll be damned if I can remember what.  This seems to
be a characteristic of Wim Wenders stuff.  I had a similar feeling with
UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD.  Apparently, he loves to explore lots of
things in long movies.
     Focus.  I guess that's the problem.  We're all over the place
here.  We get a sermon on guns, pornography, gambling, homelessness, a
sentimental attachment to an elderly Nazi chauffeur, acrobatic angels
on a stealthy ninja mission, death, precious life, and all SORTS of
things.  It leave you with a lot to think about... lots of breadth, no
depth.  The most engaging films I've seen have focused on one theme,
rather than this huge assortment.
     If I'm gonna see a serious film (as opposed to a whup-ass film) I
much prefer a film that acts as a magnifying glass, focusing the sun
into a painfully burning spot, rather than a nice diffuse tan.
Technical Comments
------------------
     They did the currently trendy switching from black-n-white for the
angels (apparently angels have dog eyes) and color for humans. It did
work well though.
     Soundtrack is pretty cool too.  Lou Reed has a cameo role as
himself.  I've heard friends say they like the soundtrack, though I
haven't heard it yet.  I tend to let the soundtrack fade into the
background ('cept for UNTIL THE END OF THE WORLD, another Wim Wenders
film, which had an awesome soundtrack that jumped out at you.  Oh, and
there was DAZED AND CONFUSED, too).
Tak Rating system:
------------------
     Well the Cannes Film festival people liked it.  It got a "Grand
Jury Prize: Cannes 1993".  As for me, well, it was good, but in the way
something very beautiful, expensive and fragile in your mother's house
is.  Or a big smorgasbord that you want to savor, but you're only
allowed a pinch from each area.  So I enjoyed watching it, but I'm not
gonna rave about it.

Title
Review for Warlock: The Armageddon (1993)
Directed by Anthony Hickox
ScreenPlay Kevin Rock & Sam Berard
35mm / color / Trimark & Tapestry 1993
Rated: R
Tak rating: Watch it on LATE night cable in a few months.
            Either that or sucker a friend into renting it for you. 
TV-Guide(tm)-Review
-------------------
     The Son of Satan, reborn every millennium (or thereabouts), tries
to unleash his Father on the unsuspecting Earth via a collection of
magical runestones while a pack of elderly Druids and their two newest
Warrior/Druid inductees fight to contain The Evil One for another
millennium.
Tak Summary
------------
     Well this screening was sponsored by KUBE 93 in the Seattle area,
and I didn't get a chance to obtain any publicity packages from them,
so you'll have make due with what I recall from the movie.  The actor &
other data is from my photocopy of the admission ticket.  But it's only
been two hours since I left the theatre and when I started typing this,
so it should still be pretty fresh.
     ...In some dark past, the stones that are used to contain or
release Satan are lost and scattered when invading hoards burst in on a
Druidic ceremony where they have just successfully used the stones to
contain the latest incarnation of Satan's son.
     Cut to the present, where a beautiful young New York woman becomes
instantly pregnant when exposed to a lunar eclipse, promptly gives
birth to a blackish glob which scoots across the floor and devours the
lady's fluffy white yappy dog (Yea!), and then metamorphs into a fully
grown Julian Sands.  In one of the only similarities to the first
movie, the Warlock channels Satan through the fresh corpse and receives
his mission (gather the stones & break Dad out of Hell) and a gruesome
map to their current whereabouts.
     The rest of the movie flashes back and forth from the Warlock's
gradual acquisition of the stones, to the two young warrior/druids'
training sessions as they prepare to defend their two stones from the
Warlock.
     In the final showdown, the elderly druids provide only a monetary
pause for the warlock, who chases the two yung'uns to a stonehenge
forest clearing, where we are treated to psychic knife-fu, tree-fu,
pickup-truck-fu, motorcycle-fu, and lots of spiffy computer graphics.
Is the ending ever in doubt?  Nope.  But I expected I knew how it would
end going in and I wasn't disappointed.
Technical Comments
------------------
     I don't usually bother with this, because I don't feel qualified
to judge that kind of stuff.  And I'd rather NOT notice such things.
Most of the time, I go to a movie to be entertained in one form or
another, not to admire someone's craft. But that's because it's usually
done with enough skill that I don't notice such things like sound,
editing, composite shots, photography, and whatnot.  Well, not this
time.
     At times, the voices seemed oddly "wrong," almost as if they had
been dubbed in afterwards, and in a bathroom chock full of echos.
There were multiple instances of "orbiting cameras," as well as several
appearances of the "midget cam."  It also looked like they were playing
with a dual-focus technique ...  often one person's face would take up
half the screen in profile, with the other person shown on the other
half of the screen in the distance. Fine -- except for the monstrously
fuzzy area where they fused the two images together.
     It also looked like they got a good deal on by-now generic
computer effects.  A psychic knife-fight with an obviously computer
generated dagger, a morph melt-through, digitally erased footage, and
plenty of others.  Actually, I may be attributing too much to the
computers.  I'm sure it's more cost effective to use the more classic
techniques in some cases.
     And of course lots of traditional buckets of blood (the Warlock
has *black* blood -- oooh), squishy gore stuff, and melting wax heads.
Oh, I almost forgot the "bury-the-guy-in-the-ground-with-a-fake-body"
trick like they used for Bishop at the end of Aliens.  Lots of fun.
Plus I'm sure they used lots of good old fashioned slasher-flick
tricks.
Tak Thoughts
------------
     I went to this movie cause I love bad B movies.  (and Whup-ass
movies -- which I define as any movie with an invincible hero(ine) with
lots of foot-fu, stick-fu, bullet-fu and anything-else-fu.  Current
examples include Striking Distance, Hard Target, and Demolition Man.)
So I wasn't looking for quality, just a bit of class.  I was sorta
disappointed.
     The first movie had some intriguing ideas (nails in the
footprints, old-wives tales that were true, etc) as the witch-hunter
from the past tracked down the slowly strengthening Warlock, who had to
FIND his powers.  In one scene, the Warlock had to stew up a little boy
to make a flight potion.  But in WARLOCK: THE ARMAGEDDON, watch out --
he's ready to whup-ass from the git-go.  To be fair, there's some neat
satan-detection gear (slug-o-meter), as well as some voodoo-esque
son-of-satan damaging gear (I bet there's no leaves in hell). But I
guess I wanted more and better.
     Perhaps it's just that time pleasantly obscures my memory, but
there didn't seem to be that many sheer buckets of blood and gross-out
effects in the first WARLOCK.  Well, exception for that one scene with
a fried tongue sandwich... blah!
     There was a bit of blatant good-guy-stupidity here and there -- if
you've got the Son of Satan impaled by your friendly animated tree, you
don't just *assume* he's dead, especially if you've just gone a few
rounds with him.  The whole theatre groaned loudly at this one.
    Lots of good/bad/stupid one-liners like the following:
     Julian Sands *can* act. He can.  Really.  I've seen him.  But he
doesn't get much of a chance in this movie.  He has one stoic
expression pasted on his face through the whole movie (could he be a
computer model with a Julian Sands texture map?) except when he gets to
thrash around if someone gets in a good shot.  Then he gets to grimace
and chomp down on those special *black*-foaming-blood capsules.  Cool.
     There were no attempts to scare the audience either. Thinking back
to the first one, I shouldn't have expected any of that, though some
flicks of this caliber (the later Freddy Krugers for one) still
attempted to throw in the occasional Spring Loaded Cat.  (Apologies to
"the phantom."  I stole his SpringLoadedCatQuotient -- I love it --
it's so *true* -- watch yer typical horror flick and see.)  The only
anxiety produced is deciding whether you really WANT to view the latest
incoming gore, or if you'd rather examine your hands for stray
particles of dirt.
     I wish they had a bit *less* of a budget, or paid the script and
story writers better, instead of buying lots of blood and so-so special
effects.  As one of my companions remarked when we were leaving the
free screening... "I woulda been mad if I had paid any money for that
film."  My feelings exactly, and we were both fans of the first one.
     Oh, well, it'll be great to see it on late night cable soon.  I'd
love to see what MST or Double Take (the ppl who did Hercules Returns)
or even a few friends with attitudes can do for WarLock:The
Armageddon.
(With the exception of Julian Sands, the didn't seem to be anyone
involved in the production of both movies.  Hmmmm. )
