Authors
Menno Praas
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Yao a yao yao dao waipo qiao (1995)
Looking for action? Wrong movie. Ever wondered how a fourteen year old
boy would feel living amongst Shanghai gang members? This is the movie
for you.  How does this innocent boy from the Chinese countryside turn
up in a violent gang? He happens to be a relative of the godfather of
one of the most important gangs in Shanghai in the 1930's.  In this
capacity he is trusted to be the servant of beautiful nightclub singer
Bijou (played by Gong Li). She is the gang leader's concubine, living
in every conceivable luxury.  The boy gets very close to the gang's
daily life.  He is aware of violence around him, but seems unable to
grasp the reality of it. What he experiences threathens his peace of
mind but exceeds his comprehension.
In this movie director Zhang Yimou prefers to suggest the use of force,
rather than showing it.  He also deliberately leaves out most action,
an important ingredient of Western style Coppola and Scorsese mafia
movies.  During the making of the movie Zhang Yimou was in the process
of separating from his partner Gong Li.  Despite this, Zhang Yimou
offers Gong Li lots of time to expose her beauty and qualities to the
public. In my opinion Gong Li fills too many gaps in the scenario by
singing a choice of Chinese lovesongs in the nightclub.
Bijou behaves like a spoiled woman. She tries her luck when she is
having an affair with the gang's second in command.  The gang survives
a fierce attack from a rivalling gang. The leader decides to go in
tactic hiding.  The gang escapes for a couple of days to an island off
the coast. Bijou and the boy join them.  Bored with the quiet island
Bijou has several conversations with a widow, living a primitive, but
happy life on the island. In these conversations Bijou re-accepts her
own low family background.  Suddenly, the movie shifts into action. By
accident the boy witnesses the preparations of a new attack on the
gang. Now the plot thickens. The final battle takes place outside the
view of the camera. We just witness bodies piling up. Meanwhile Bijou
is ready to abandon her superficial and luxurious lifestyle and
acknowledges her true nature. To me, Gong Li doesn't quite convince in
her acting on this point.  Finally, as the boy's world completely turns
upside down, the story reaches its conclusion.
