Authors
Clark Quinn
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Princess Bride, The (1987)
     I admit it, I was skeptical.  I also was hopeful.  This paradox came about
by having read the wonderful book THE PRINCESS BRIDE by William Goldman and
being unable to imagine that it could be turned into a successful movie,
capturing the humor, wonder, the *magic* of that book.  Why, then, was I
hopeful?  Well, the screenplay was written by the same William Goldman who
also wrote the screenplay for one of my all-time favorite movies, BUTCH CASSIDY
AND THE SUNDANCE KID.  And the director was Rob Reiner, who has an apparently
flawless record with THIS IS SPINAL TAP, THE SURE THING, and STAND BY ME.  With
mixed feelings, I went to see a sneak preview of the movie THE PRINCESS BRIDE.
     For once, my optimism was richly rewarded and my cynicism was sent
snivelling back under its rock; this is a near-perfect movie.  The movie
captures, as did the book, an unabashed affection for heroic fantasy, touched
with a soft spot for True Love, and retaining a deft appreciation for humor.
Witty, warm, and still exciting, this movie captures the magic that seems so
elusive in today's bottom-line oriented movie making.  Of course, there is more
than just a good screenwriter and director behind this success.  As I have
gleaned from an interview with Norman Lear and Rob Reiner in the Calendar
section of the Los Angeles Times, and an excerpt, published on the net, from a
cinema magazine, this is definitely a labor of love by the principals.  Rob
Reiner fell in love with the book and has been trying to make it for many
years.  William Goldman wrote the screenplay for the book and fought to regain
control of it so that it could get made.  Norman Lear produced the money for
the movie when Rob Reiner was having trouble obtaining it, with no strings
attached.
     Enough about the history, how about the movie?  Well, most of the casting
is nearly perfect.  As the mysterious and heroic protaganist of the story,
newcomer Cary Elwes is perfect.  Capturing the necessary secure confidence,
self-effacing humility, and romantic fervor, Elwes *is* Wesley.  I didn't
recognize Mandy Patinkin as the murdered swordmaker's son, Inigo Montoya, until
part way through the movie.  He just about stole every scene he was in.  In
fact, my favorite scene in the movie is the duel between these two on the brink
of the Cliffs of Insanity.  Similarly well cast was Andre the Giant as the
strongman, Vizzini (?); Chris Sarandon as the wicked Prince; and Christopher
Guest as the evil advisor to the prince.  From there the casting was only a
little less effective.  I wish I could be more enthused about the heroine.
Another newcomer, Robin Wright is beautiful enough as the milkmaid-turned-
princess, Buttercup, but she seemed to lack some magic sparkle.  I may be
picking at nits, but I confess that I thought her a tad wooden.  Another
niggling problem was the casting of some of the bit parts.  For reasons I can
only guess at, a number of cameos were filled by (to greater or lesser extent)
well-known characters.  By and large, these failed (for me) to capture the
requisite gentle, subtle humor that characterized the rest of the movie.
Wallace Shawn, as the Sicilian, was particularly strident and unconvincing as a
masterful schemer.  Peter Cook, as the Bishop, added a jarring note to the
wedding scene.  Billy Crystal and Carol Kane, as the semi-retired miracle
worker and his wife, added a less distracting note, but their scene still
retained a touch of schtick.  To end on a cheery note, Peter Falk as the
grandfather and the boy who played the sick grandson, in the story surrounding
the story of the Princess Bride, were both excellent.  In fact, I was
pleasantly surprised at the understated job Falk turned in as the grandfather
slowly arousing the interest of the originally sceptical child.
     The rest of the movie stood out, too.  The scenery and cinematography were
not noticeably awkward, a frequent problem in fantasy movies.  While you had to
be aware that some of the settings (such as the infamous Cliffs) were not real,
there was none of the usual artificial look about places like the Swamp of
Fire.  If I do not notice the scenery too much, if the scenery is an integral
part of the movie, I consider it a success.  The same holds true for the music.
With my tin ear, the only time I notice the soundtrack is when the music
strongly contrasts with what I would expect in a scene.  In one recent movie I
kept wondering, "Why are they playing this creepy, somethings-gonna-happen
music in the middle of the denouement?"  While this may be damning with faint
praise, Mark Knopfler's score certainly didn't intrude on the scenes at all.
You'll have to read another review to find out more about how effective the
score was.
     The screenplay, as I should have expected, was wonderful.  As was noted in
the excerpt on the net, large amounts of the dialogue were lifted from the
book.  The rest of the dialogue seemed to aptly mesh with the atmosphere that I
waxed so enthusiastic about at the beginning of this review.  My only
hesitation is that I saw this at a sneak preview in our large auditorium, which
has a murky sound system, so that I missed some of the dialogue, particularly
of Andre the Giant (who had some good lines).  Similarly, the pacing of the
direction was superb.  There were no flat spots, no rushed action.
     All in all, I think that THE PRINCESS BRIDE is a must see.  While I will
have to see it again before I confer upon it the status of a classic, I will
give it a strong 3 on the -4 to +4 scale.  I may well give it a 4 after a
second viewing.  -- Clark
Starring: Cary Elwes, Robin Wright, Chris Sarandon, Christopher Guest,
          Mandy Patinkin, Andre the Giant 
Screenplay: William Goldman
Music: Mark Knopfler
Director of Photography: Adrian Biddle
Editor: Robert Leighton
Executive Producer: Norman Lear
Producers: Rob Reiner and Alexander Scheinman
Director: Rob Reiner
Clark N. Quinn
clark%ics@sdcsvax.ucsd.edu 
OR {ucbvax,decvax,akgua,dcdwest}!sdcsvax!sdics!clark.uucp  

Title
Review for Angel Heart (1987)
Starring: Mickey Rourke, Robert DeNiro, Lisa Bonet, Charlotte Rampling
Directed by: Alan Parker
Produced by: Alan Marshall and Elliott Kastner
Executive Producers: Mario Kassar and Andrew Vajna
Screenplay by: Alan Parker
From the novel: "Falling Angel" by William Hjortsberg
Director of Photography: Michael Seresin
     I saw this movie at a special pre-release screening here at UCSD.  Before
the movie started, there was a trailer stating something to the effect that the
version we were seeing was not a finished product, and that color, editing,
etc.  (I can't remember the rest) may be adjusted.  We saw the film Saturday
night, the film is being released on Friday.  Sidenote: can they really make
major changes in that short a time?  
     The story is set in 1955, and involves a PI, Harry Angel (Mickey Rourke)
hired by a mysterious stranger named Louis Cyphre (Robert DeNiro) to find
Johnny Favorite, who welshed on a debt he owes Mr. Cyphre.  The only
information Angel has is that this man is supposed to be in a hospital in
upstate New York, unrecovered from a traumatic wartime accident.  The plot
complicates as Angel tracks his man to New Orleans and encounters voodoo
magic, murder, and a surprise ending.  Unfortunately, only part-way into the
movie I gradually recognized the story as one I had read in a magazine
(undoubtedly either culled from the book or expanded into a book at a later
date).  While I remember feeling that the story was one of the more interesting
and eerie that I had read, being privy to the solution of the mystery may have
diluted the effect of some of the revelations in the movie.  I did try and get
an unbiased view of the effect of the pacing by talking to my viewing
companion afterward, who was not aware of the story.
     For this movie to work, it is important that the questions lead in a
tighter and tighter spiral, the tension must mount, the pace quicken.  While
there can be occasional minor buildups and releases, overall there has to be a
heightening sense of mystery and peril.  On two of these scores the movie 
succeeds, and on one I believe it fails.  First, the screenplay felt tight; 
the clues led ominously to the next one, and each one seemed to provide more
questions than it answered, right up to the slow realization of the solution.
There were a couple of plot holes, but only one truly felt jarring, and, set
near the end, it did not detract from the pace.  In addition, the 
cinematography set a tone that properly framed the action.  Early on, a mood 
of foreboding pervades the movie, and the camera succeeds in capturing a 
seediness in the environs with drab colors and small details.  Unfortunately, 
the pace is uneven.  Certain scenes are dragged out for no obvious reason, and
several mystery cliches are needlessly added.  The worst offense is the
seemingly obligatory horror scene that turns out to be a dream.  One other 
time there is a dream sequence that seems unnecessary, but this scene is not 
so much of a red herring.  I hope that if they change the film at all, it is
the use of judicious editing to tighten the film and remove or trim the slow
spots.  In this movie, if you have too much time to think, the film loses.  I
think this weakness is particularly a shame, since director Alan Parker is 
taking away from nice work by screenwriter Alan Parker.  I do not know what 
Alan Parker has previously done.
     Mickey Rourke does a fine job of making Harry Angel an everyman's PI.
Occasionally he seems to fall too far into the nervous school of acting, but
his gradual realization of the real story is nicely evoked.  Lisa Bonet is
striking as the sexy, worldly young voodoo priestess.  Robert DeNiro captures
the mystery of Louis Cyphre well, but Charlotte Rampling is not given enough
leeway to play her part of the fortune-teller debutante girlfriend of the
missing man.
     There is considerable violence and gore in the movie, perhaps more than 
necessary.  There is also some flesh and sex, but not gratuitously.  I 
especially think the ending twist is highly imaginative.  Looking back, I think
that a good job was done in translating the feel of the story to the screen.
Overall, I would give the movie a high 1 on the Leeper scale of -4 to +4.  A
better job of editing would give it a solid 2.  
--
 Clark N. Quinn
 Institute for Cognitive Science C-015
 University of California, San Diego
 La Jolla, California 92093
 (619) 534-5996 (UCSD): (619) 457-1274 (Home)
 {ucbvax,decvax,akgua,dcdwest}!sdcsvax!sdics!clark.uucp  OR  clark@nprdc.arpa

Title
Review for La Bamba (1987)
Starring: Esai Morales, Rosana DeSoto, Elizabeth Pena, Joe Pantoliano, 
          Lou Diamond Phillips
Music by: Carlos Santana and Miles Goodman
Director of Photography: Adam Greenberg
Executive Music Producer: Joel Sill
Executive Producer: Stuart Benjamin
Produced by: Taylor Hackford and Bill Borden
Written and Directed by: Luis Valdez
     Luis Valdez (ZOOT SUIT) has crafted a lively, earthy, fond remembrance of 
Richard Valenzuela, who became famous as Ritchie Valens ("it could have been 
Richie Zuela").  Starting with the return of his wayward older step-brother, 
the Valenzuelas move into the Los Angeles area, and Richard finds an audience 
for his singing and playing, moving briefly on to fame and fortune.  Does 
anyone besides me not know what happened to Ritchie Valens?
     This is a picture that works on a number of levels.  First, the story is
(apparently) an accurate portrayal of the life of Ritchie Valens.  Second, the
story is engrossing as cinema; a moving, motivated tale of the trials and
tribulations of people who must face life with courage and dignity.  Finally,
this is a stirring celebration of the success of the music of the Fifties and 
of the cultural influences that shaped, at least, part of it.   
     I must credit the actors with an exceptional job.  I am not familiar with
any of the actors and actresses, which made it easy to avoid feeling that I was
watching a familiar actor play yet *another* part, but I never got the feeling
that I was watching some less-than talented performer stone-face through a
portrayal on the strength of a physical match.  Without exception, the 
characters were believable and sympathetic.  In the only character portrayal I
can attribute, Lou Diamond Phillips captures Ritchie Valens as a talented,
committed young man with senses of both humor and duty.  Also worth mentioning
are the performances of Valens' older step-brother, girl-friend, mother, and
agent.  In particular, Ritchie's older brother alternates between bouts of
good-natured hedonism and frustrated anger without slipping into bathos or 
pathos.  
     As might be expected, the music is exceptional.  I was only aware of
Ritchie Valens as a predecessor and influence on the band Los Lobos (aside
from being familiar with his greatest hit "La Bamba"), but was pleasantly
surprised to find that I greatly enjoyed all his songs.  While I am very fond
of Los Lobos, I wasn't aware that they had performed all of his songs until the
movie was over (they also appear as the mariachi band that Ritchie hears play
the title song on his adventurous trip to Tijuana).  The film also consists of
a succession of some of the classic songs of the fifties.  Carlos Santana also
had a hand in the music, according to the credits.  
     To sum up, great music, good acting, and an interesting story make LA
BAMBA not only a good movie, but a good time.  I'd give it a +2 on the Leeper
-4 to  +4 scale.  
Clark N. Quinn
clark%ics@sdcsvax.ucsd.edu 
OR {ucbvax,decvax,akgua,dcdwest}!sdcsvax!sdics!clark.uucp  

Title
Review for No Man's Land (1987)
Starring: Charlie Sheen, D. B. Sweeney, Randy Quaid 
Written by: Dick Wolf
Music Score by: Basil Poledouris
Executive Producers: Ron Howard and Tony Ganz
Producers: Joseph Stern and Dick Wolf
Director: Peter Werner
     The idea is a good one: a young cop, given a tricky undercover assignment,
finds it hard to separate the good guys from the bad guys in a world that's 
not black and white.  I haven't seen it done before, but that doesn't mean it
hasn't been done; as I understand it, the current television show WISEGUY has
the same basic plot.  The question is, how well have they dealt with it here?
     D. B. Sweeney is the young cop from a nice family.  He is well-liked
although a bit naive.  He is also a good Porsche mechanic.  Randy Quaid thinks
this makes him an ideal candidate to be the inside man in an investigation of a
car theft ring that has already lead to a policeman being killed.  Charlie
Sheen is the young, charming, and rich owner of the Porsche repair shop that
is the front for the car theft ring.  He may also be the man that killed the
policeman. 
     Unfortunately, the plot moves predictably.  The young cop is seduced by
the fancy lifestyle, the charm of the Porsche shop owner, and the fragile
beauty of a young woman from the new life.  He questions whether he is after
the wrong man.  The ending was telegraphed long before the final resolution.
I'm afraid that the director (Peter Werner, who I am not familiar with) was
working with a story that needed some unusual twists.  Instead, we are given
cliches.  The charming owner just happens to have a beautiful sister who falls
for the young mechanic.  Of course there is a bad cop.  A car chase.  And a
rival car theft gang who are much less savory than the upstanding group who
support the infiltrated ring.  
     Yet, there are saving graces in this movie.  Werner has a nice feel for
the bravado banter of young men living on the edge.  He captures the excitement
and the danger of living in the fast lane and working on the wrong side of the
line.  The tension in the scenes where the two young men are actually stealing
the cars was almost palpable.  Even the obligatory car chase had moments of
humor and, yes, subtlety.  The story moves swiftly (sometimes too swiftly) and
maintains a reasonable level of excitement.  Also, the characterizations are
quite believable.  Sheen has just the proper edge as a jaded, wealthy young
man with too much freedom.  Sweeney not only looks the part but manages to act
convincing as the young cop with divided loyalties.  Quaid gives to a small
part a credible interpretation.  
     Overall, the unoriginality of the story detracts from a stylish
presentation, leaving me no recourse but to give the film a +1 on the -4 to +4
scale.
Clark N. Quinn
clark%ics@sdcsvax.ucsd.edu 
OR {ucbvax,decvax,akgua,dcdwest}!sdcsvax!sdics!clark.uucp  
