Authors
Steve_Tenney
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Doors, The (1991)
     Yes, after watching Oliver Stone's (an appropriate last name for
the director of this movie) THE DOORS, you remember it even if you
really weren't there :-)!
     I saw the Doors at Avalon Ballroom in San Francisco back in 1968
(or was it 67).  At that time we were really into the San Francisco
Sound--a la Big Brother and the Holding Company (with Janis), Jefferson
Airplane, the Grateful Dead, the Sons of Chaplin, Moby Grape,
QuickSilver Messenger Service, etc.  So on this one night when this LA
Band showed up on stage, with Morrison and his black leather pants
(hey-- we were more into knee-high leather moccasins, paisley shirts and
stuff), slithering across the stage on his belly while reciting his
"poetry" (Dylan was more my kind of poet), we had rather mixed feelings
about the experience.  Somehow The Doors just didn't fit into the
atmosphere in old Avalon Ballroom that night.  Somehow you really got
the impression that Morrison was on a less-than-healthy trip, so in '71
when I heard of his death I wasn't surprised at all.
     I really "dug" this Oliver Stone movie, even though I found it
somewhat depressing.  Naturally, a movie about the self-destruction of a
rock hero during a very turbulent age would tend to be depressing.  I
found myself trying to sift from this movie any positive memories of
that era I could.  There were many positive idealist, though naive,
aspects of the counter-culture movement, especially around the San
Francisco Bay Area.  But unfortunately that movement was born by drugs
and eventually died by drugs.  
     The Doors was brilliantly filmed, acted and directed, and caught
the very strange, exciting and destructive character of that time.  It's
probably a movie you will either want to see three or four times or
else....  not even once, depending on your taste and background.

Title
Review for Defending Your Life (1991)
     I just saw DEFENDING YOUR LIFE yesterday.  It stars Albert Brooks and
Meryl Streep.  It's one of the best movies I've seen in a long while.
It's the kind of movie which *should* cause people (at least anyone who is
at least half way conscious) to reflect on their own current life
situation (but in a kinder, humorous fashion).
     Basically Albert Brooks plays a divorced yuppie who is about to
celebrate his birthday alone, driving his brand new BMW.  He dies in
that BMW and is sent to a "Holding Place" (I am reluctant to use the
Roman-Catholic term of purgatory--because of the negative
connotations), called Judgement City.  The purpose of this city is to
review each new arrival's life, or at least some pivotal episodes of
such, to determine if they are ready to advance to the next level of the
universe, or to be sent back down to earth to try it again.
     "This is not a trial," one of the judges at Brooks' review
explains; instead, it is just a process to help them come to a fair
decision on his fate (so what's the difference?).
     Rip Torn does an excellent job as Brooks' defense attorney and Lee
Grant is just as able as the stern prosecutor.  Judgement City has been
made to look very familiar and earth-like to the judges so that they
can feel as comfortable and at-home as possible (it also saves the
production company a fortune in costly set designs and special effects).
     Brooks did a magnificent job in writing and directing and there's
plenty of gags to keep the audience laughing, (i.e., the weather station
in Brooks' motel room which states "74 degrees, perfectly clear All the
Time".  The dialogue is also very well written.
     In a nut shell, Brooks' review is not going well.  It seems that
the basic criteria in life to be judged by, is whether he was courageous
enough, if he had enough gumption to stick up for himself and others in
various situations.  Naturally Lee Grant repeatedly brings up many
episodes which clearly demonstrate how lacking Brooks is in the "gutsy"
category.  Rip Torn remains upbeat and almost jovial even in the face
of what seems to be a meager task; the few episodes he is able to scrape
up in Brook's defense are very pitiful.
     Brooks meets and falls in love with Meryl Streep, who's life review
is going just grandly, and seems to be a cinch for the next level.
Brooks does a great job in bringing out the humor by contrasting Meryl's
situation with his own (She gets to stay in a much classier hotel, with
a Jacuzzi and French pastries, they only need to review four episodes
from her life, compared to nine from his).   
     I really loved this movie and the concept of the afterlife (though
it's not really original).  If indeed we are judged in this manner after
we die, I'm sure it wouldn't be so simple or straightforward, and
courage wouldn't be the only criteria.  I'm sure kindness would have to
fall in there somewhere.  But one can only speculate-------
