Authors
Marc D. Rossner
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Crimes and Misdemeanors (1989)
     I have seen the movie of the year and it is Woody Allen's CRIMES AND
MISDEMEANORS (previously it was HEATHERS followed by DO THE RIGHT THING, to
give an idea of where I'm coming from).
     CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS is quite unlike any Woody Allen movie that has
preceded it -- it combines highly dramatic, philosophical, and religious issues
while retaining some of the sarcastic humor that we would expect.  The plot
structure would suggest that the movie be retitled "Brothers and Sisters".
Although there is no "star" in this ensemble piece, the main plot elements and
issues revolve around opthamologist Judah Rosenthal, played by Martin Landau.
Judah's brother is Jack, a slimy underworld figure (Jerry Orbach), and his good
friend is Ben, a patient and a rabbi (Sam Waterston).  Ben has a brother named
Lester (Alan Alda), an unctuous TV sitcom mogul, and a sister who is married to
Clifford Stern, the Woody Allen character.  Cliff has his own sister who is
divorced with a teenage daughter that Cliff takes under his wing.  Not part of
these families but involved romantically with them are Dolores (Anjelica
Huston) and Hallie (Mia Farrow, of course in there somewhere).  This all sounds
very complicated but it is in fact quite easy to follow all these
relationships.
     The plot, not to give any spoilers, revolves around the enormous ethical
and religious dilemmas suffered by Judah (Landau).  These "crimes" are mirrored
by smaller crises in the life and work of Cliff (Woody), and also in the old
movies to which he is addicted.
     I found no flaw in the performances.  Alan Alda inherits what might be
considered the "Tony Roberts role" but he convinced me that his was better
suited for it than Roberts would be -- modifying his sleaziness and pomposity
with just the right amount of generosity to prevent him from being totally
detestable.  Martin Landau is low-key but extremely effective in getting the
audience's empathy (my only complaint is that it seemed unrealistic that the
character he portrayed would make some of the choices he did).  Sam Waterston
does a fine job in making  a "saintly" character sympathetic to the audience.
Woody is Woody (although looking much older now), and the other actors are all
excellent in smaller roles.
     Here then is a Woody Allen movie which brings the audience into the lives
of the characters and provokes much thought without being painfully
Bergman-esque.  +4 -- worth seeing again at premium prices.
Marc D. Rossner (att!speedy!marc  or   marc@speedy.att.com)
AT&T BL -- Red Hill
