Authors
Rahul Prasad
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Matrix, The (1999)
    Before I saw "The Matrix", I was only aware of the Wachowski Brothers
earlier effort, the critically acclaimed "Bound". Now I wanna see it! This
is probaly one of the better films of the year despite some labelling it's
complex plot as too ambigious. Surprisingly, the best thing about the movie
is not the stunning special effects, the stunts or Laurence Fishburne, but
Keanu Reeves. The actor has consistently been given the thumbs down by
critics, but his perpetual frown and quizzical look is exactly what the
movie needed.
He plays Neo, a computer programmer/hacker, who is contacted by
renegades led by Morpheus(Laurence Fishburne) who is convinced that Neo is
the man to lead the people of Earth out of the Matrix. The Matrix is an
elaborate and intricate program that depicts a make-believe world for
humans. Everything in it resembles the real world but it is infact a prison
for the mind. It is invented by machines who use the humans as Guinea pigs
to feed their AI. With the help of Neo, Morpheus and Trinity(Carrie-Ann
Moss) alongwith a bunch of others are out to break the stranglehold that the
machines have on the human sub-conscious. Neo is upto the challenge, but is
not so sure of his own ability until he realises in the movie's breathtaking
climax that the human mind is too fast for the machines to keep up with.
The make-believe world is however zealously guarded by agents, who are the
gatekeepers of the Matrix and destroy anyone/anything that disturbs or tries
to break out of the Matrix. Australian actor Hugo Weaving in his first major
role as a baddie is delightfully wicked and is clearly enjoying himself!
There are some stunning special effects, well-choreographed stunts and
the fight scenes are fabulously worked out! The movie is a treat on the big
screen and despite it's plot, not too many will walk out without a sense of
amazement and awe. I know I did:-)
The acting is adequate at the most but it is not the driving force for
the movie. The movie was shot in and around Sydney last year and is a
welcome change, although mostly the setting is dark and brooding in keeping
with the movie's premise of doomsday and it's aftermath. Go see this if you
have'nt already done so!!! You won't complain about not getting your money's
worth:-)
Rating: **** out of *****
