Authors
Zach Ralston 
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Lost Highway (1997)
Directed by David Lynch
Starring Bill Pullman, Patricia Arquette, Balthazar Getty, Robert Loggia, 
To sleep, perchance to dream. To dream, perchance to kill your wife, rob a
porn star, and blow out the brains of a gangster.  Welcome to the world of
David Lynch, a warped, unpredictable world that has been responsible for as
many good dreams (like the darkly comic romance Wild at Heart) as bad ones
(such as Dune, and the crass, boorish  Blue Velvet,).  
Lynch's latest psychic nightmare Lost Highway, is possibly his most
schizophrenic and dissociative entry, running all over the place faster than
rapid eye movment.  The opening credits are immediately grabbing.  We are
hurled down a dark highway, yellow lines racing by with blurry intensity to
the beat of a throbbing David Bowie dance.  The names of the cast shoot out
at us, and we know that there is something amiss, since these names include
Henry Rollins, Gary Busey, and Richard Pryor.  Lynch has staked his claim to
this film, and however bizarre and incomprehensible it may be, we can't
accuse of it of not being engrossing.  
But along with the enticing mood comes inherent, deliberate confusion.
 Describing the plot would be futile, since no audience member will be able
to figure it out, and I suspect Lynch himself doesn't know what it's about.  
Lost Highway is an exercise in sensual filmmaking, geared for shock and
surprise rather than cerebral connections.  Characters become other
characters, and actors change faces like chameleons change colors.  What
lingers is not a linear narrative, but singular images, with emotions ranging
from fear to sexual desire, and everything in between.  
As expected with an experiment like this, not everything is consistently good
or bad.  Lynch is beyond good and evil, until his films define a context of
their own, and all we can do as viewers is respond with base impulses and
instinctual reactions.  Lost Highway is an antidote to rationality; things
can go just as horribly wrong as they can go ecstatically entertaining.
The story that pretends to be a plot, at least for the first hour, revolves
around Fred Madison (Bill Pullman, whose tusseled locks and nordic features
make him look suspiciously like a watered-down Lynch), a sax player who is
married to the sexy Renee (underplayed seductively by Rosanna Arquette).
 When mysterious videotapes of Fred and Renee's private lives begin appearing
on their doorstep, the wealthy Los Angeles couple call the cops, who offer no
help.  Unfortunately it is this pair of police that arrest Fred a couple days
later for slashing Renee to death, a murder he can't remember committing (and
we can't remember watching).
On death row, Fred inexplicably changes bodies - his soul is transferred to
the youthful car mechanic Pete (Balthazar Getty, unsuccessfully imitating
James Dean), who must be subsequently released from jail, since he couldn't
possibly have murdered Fred's wife.  Pete returns to work for his boss
(Pryor, in a thankless and condescending role), and resumes friendship with
the evil Mr. Eddy (Robert Loggia).  Mr. Eddy's mistress is Alice, a blonde
bombshell, played by -- yes, Rosanna Arquette.  Is Alice the same person as
Renee, or does she just look like her?  Is Pete the same person as Fred, even
though the two look totally different?
Then the story gets really crazy.  Lynch feels content to excuse his
narrative unwinding with the fact that dreams are just as perplexing.  It is
not Lynch's goal to communicate in terms we like to understand; he wants us
to catch a glimpse of his subconscious, a mind that doesn't connect from A to
B.
Early in the film, Fred states that he hates video cameras because, "I want
to remember things the way I remember them. I don't want to reflect the way
things really happened."  This is the closest Lynch comes to telling us
straight out his filmmaking motives.  Realism has no part in his world;
documentary is fiction and fiction is fantasy.
For much of the movie, especially the first half, Lynch's images are
brilliant. He shows a rare talent for personifying the "id," and denying the
superego. Filmically, Lynch is a Freudian anarchist, treating sex and
violence as sensuous desires rather than moral problems.  But when these
psychological gimmicks surface as filler, the film grinds to a halt, as
confusion becomes a hinderance rather than an asset.  It often feels as if
Lynch is being sick for the sake of being sick, hoping that abstract gluttony
masks his lack of substantial ideas.
Lost Highway is if anything, an interesting film.  It doesn't aspire to be
conventional, but it also doesn't apsire to be safely entertaining.  Lynch
admits that his dreams are often scary, funny, twisted, and terrible. And to
see into his mind, we have to endure some of the terrible to get at the
hidden genius.
