Authors
Grant Watson
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Avengers, The (1998)
I heard an awful lot about The Avengers before I saw it. I read all of
the incredibly unfavourable reviews and the baggings and the outright
witchburnings.
   So I went into the cinema suspecting that I was about to endure one
of the worst films of my life. I *had* to see it, however. It was The
Avengers, based on one of the absolute best TV shows ever. (Alongside
Doctor Who, Star Cops and Blake's 7, incidentally. Let's see them
adapt those last two in Hollywood...)
I was surprised.
   I was very surprised, and to a very large degree I was delighted.
   First up, however: much of The Avengers is not very good. Sean
Connery is downright awful, the editing is jumpy and distracting and
the direction and timing flat and off-key.
   On the other hand, it boasts a wonderful script that delightfully
echoes the original (particularly in an early scene between Steed and
Mrs Peel driving to DeWynter's estate). Ralph Fiennes, while perhaps a
little uncomfortable in such a simple role, generally convinces as
secret agent John Steed and Uma Thurman is wonderful as the cat-suited
Emma Peel.
   Some brilliantly surreal scenes and ideas go towards presenting a
highly enjoyable movie indeed. True, it's buried under a thin layer of
crap, but the quality is in there nonetheless.
Mixed, but highly enjoyable. Particularly the teddy bears.

Title
Review for Masters of the Universe (1987)
"Masters Of The Universe"
STARRING Dolph Lundgren, Frank Langella, Courtney Cox, James Tolkan,
Christina Pickles, Meg Foster and Robert Duncan McNeill.
WRITTEN BY David Odell
DIRECTED BY Gary Goddard
Review by Grant Watson, copyright (c) 1997.
When I was nine, I started buying the coolest toy figures in my local
department store. Masters Of The Universe was the pinnacle of what I
was after for action figures: they combined science fiction and
fantasy, had cool names like Mekanek and Stinkor and each came with
its own little comic book to read.
   Of course, the animated series produced by Filmation remains one of
the most wildly successful television products in world history. Given
the tremendous success of the toys and the cartoon (not to mention its
moderately successful spin-off She-Ra: Princess Of Power), it was
inevitable that a production company would put two and two together,
come with the result of "trillions" and make a live-action Masters
movie.
Let's be blunt: Masters Of The Universe is a very bad movie. The story
is painfully dull and mind-numbingly cliched (hands up who *wouldn't*
guess He-Man and Skeletor take their fight into the real world) and is
acted out by either incredibly untalented actors (Dolph Lundgren as
He-Man for one) or good actors (James Tolkan, Meg Foster) given such
awful characters and dialogue that they can't help but seem terrible.
   It is extremely clear that someone making the movie wanted it to be
as good as Star Wars. We have the alien bounty hunters, the desert
skif technology, Stormtrooper lookalikes and a musical score so
reminiscent of John Williams that "deja vu" is too polite a term to
use in describing it. "Blatant uninspired ripoff" would appear more
appropriate.
   TV fans might want to check out Courtney Cox (Monica in Friends)
and Robert Duncan McNeill (Lt Paris in Star Trek: Voyager), very early
in their careers and not doing to well in them either.
So in the face of such mindless sub-mediocrity, is there anything to
make Masters Of The Universe worth watching at all?
   Yes, there is. One incredible good reason. His name is Frank
Langella.
   Langella has always been one of the underrated actors of Hollywood,
appearing in countless films over the years. Here he plays Skeletor,
the villain of the piece. Dressed in opulent black velvet robes and
bearing a skull for a face, he is one part Darth Vader, one part
Emperor and two parts Grim Reaper. Given this character, Langella
falls right into it with style and precision. Skeletor is believable,
interesting and manages to tread the fine line between being a homage
to the past and startlingly original in his own right.
Masters Of The Universe. I remember loving it when I was eleven. At
twenty one it's difficult to see why. But, as I said, it is blessed
with a superlative villain who makes the entire thing worth the tedium
of the remainder.
   Besides, this year marks the film's 10th anniversary. Watch it with
some friends for a good laugh and celebrate.
__________________nzone@iinet.net.au_______________
"Science fiction is about the future and fantasy
is about the past - the myth of the way things used
to be. Science fiction is, in a sense, trying to
construct a myth of the future."

Title
Review for Batman & Robin (1997)
BATMAN AND ROBIN
Directed by Joel Schumacher. Written by Akiva Goldsman.
Starring Arnold Schwarzenegger (Mr Freeze), George Clooney (Batman),
Chris O'Donnell (Robin), Uma Thurman (Poison Ivy) and Alicia
Silverstone (Batgirl).
First, some personal history.
   I grew up from a very early age as a tremendous fan of Batman. He
was my favourite character in the animated series "Superfriends". I
read his comics at every opportunity. When the "Superman" movies were
in the cinemas I spent a lot of time wondering why no one made a
Batman movie.
   In 1989 I rushed to the cinemas to see "Batman", and loved what I
saw. It made me an instant Tim Burton fan (I still am), introduced me
to Jack Nicholson and convinced me that Michael Keaton was one of the
best actors in Hollywood. More than anything, it convinced me of the
utter brilliance of Batman: as a character, a concept and as one of
few genuine mythic heroes of the 20th century.
   In 1992 I watched "Batman Returns" and loved it just as much. When
Warner Bros started a new animated series, I watched and loved that as
well. I'm currently even basing part of an Honours thesis at
university on the guy.
   My point is that out of all the fictional characters that I read,
watch and love, Batman is pretty well up near the top. So when Joel
Schumacher directed the abysmal "Batman Forever" in 1995, I was
certain that the Batman film franchise had hit an all-time low.
I know what you think I'm going to say now, but my purpose for all
that is a little different.
   You see, I went into "Batman And Robin" expecting quite literally
the worst film I would ever see. I was expecting the most
mind-bending, thought-numbing, heart-wrenching heap of manure that I
had ever been forced to endure. Every friend I had who had already
seen it told me not to bother: to save my money and go see something
else - *anything* else.
Surprise, surprise. "Batman And Robin" is actually pretty good.
   Certainly it has monumental problems. Firstly, Akiva Goldsman's
screenplay is badly conceived, ill-plotted and filled not so much with
dialogue as with a string of unfunny one-liners and puns that would
have had Adam West and Burt Ward quaking in their boots.
   Similarly, much of Joel Schumacher's direction is gratuitous,
overly flashy and confused.
   The production design is hideous, with excessive neon lighting, 40
story statues built around the city and a Batmobile even sillier than
the last one.
On the *other* hand...
   The actors all cope very well with what they're given. George
Clooney is convincing as Batman, and does a reasonably good job as
Bruce Wayne. Chris O'Donnell, one of the very few highlights of
"Batman Forever", keeps his good effort up in his second involvement.
Uma Thurman hams it up wonderfully as Poison Ivy, while Alicia
Silverstone is passable in a role that Goldsman's script tends to
forget with frightening regularity. It is only Arnold Schwarzenegger
who sticks out in the cast, fluctuating wildly between a
one-dimensional wisecracking villain and a tragic character destroyed
by the events of his life. One or the other (preferably the latter of
the two) would have been good. Leaping from one to the other, he
merely created a confusing mess.
The music this time around is an improvement, and the Smashing
Pumpkins song at the end outdoes U2's effort completely. The costumes
for Batman, Robin and Batgirl are all very good, with the strange
nipple fixation the only drawback to an otherwise impressive look.
"Batman And Robin" is very big, extremely loud and undeniably very,
very stupid. In terms of scripting and direction, it's a careering
disaster in the making, it's cast holding on for grim life from one
collision to another.
   But it's also very, very fun to watch. And let's face it, that's
what these kinds of movies are all about.
Review copyright (c) 1997, Grant Watson (nzone@iinet.net.au). It may
be reprinted freely, as long as the author is notified.
__________________nzone@iinet.net.au_______________
"Science fiction is about the future and fantasy
is about the past - the myth of the way things used
to be. Science fiction is, in a sense, trying to
construct a myth of the future."
