Authors
Akiva Goldstein
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels (1998)
PLease post the following review to the newsgroup
rated R
starring Jason Flemyng, Dexter Fletcher, Nick Moran, Jason Statham, Steven
Mackintosh, Vinnie Jones, Sting
written and directed by Guy Ritchie
Guy Ritchie's new British import LOCK, STOCK AND TWO SMOKING BARRELS
is a film that can be either loved, loathed or both. LOCK, STOCK tells
the story of 4 criminals who pool their money into a rigged game of
poker. They even lose some money that was lent to them by local "porn
king" "Hatchet" Harry (P.H.  Moriarty). He gives them a week to
retrieve the money. From that point on, the film goes wild, twisting
plot points around your head quicker than you can say "What's going
on?"  LOCK, STOCK would be confusing as an American film, but it is
British, which makes it all the more confusing because of the
unidentifiable slang and accents. Throughout the film, I could not
distinguish one character from the other. In my opinion, LOCK, STOCK
needs maybe 3 viewings to be fully enjoyed. One to recognize Guy
Ritchie's direction, which is at once derivative and dazzling. Two to
in some way digest some of the dialogue being spoken. And three in
order to try to understand each plot point. But sadly, most people,
like me, would rather just see a film once.
Despite its shortcomings, LOCK, STOCK is a fun-filled caper, and it
has more energy and hipness than most of our violence-laden action
pictures. LOCK, STOCK was supposedly a huge hit in England, and it's
not hard to see why. I only wish that the filmmakers and taken the
approach that Artisan Films did to MY NAME IS JOE by subtitling the
English-language film. Another one of the film's flaws is its
excessive use of drum & bass music between scenes. At the beginning of
the movie it was hip, but towards the end it becomes repetitive. There
is really no message in LOCK, STOCK, and it never comes close to
reaching the poetic display of RESERVOIR DOGS, but if you're looking
to spend a free afternoon at the movies, this should provide some
entertainment as long as you bring a dictionary. (Oh yeah, I forgot to
mention that Sting has a small role)

