Authors
Martin Wendelborg
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for 1941 (1979)

1941 followed a pair of huge hits from Steven Spielberg, "Jaws" and "Close
Encounters of the Third Kind". The script, originally entitled "The Night
the Japs Attacked" was written by two then fresh-out-of-film-school writers
named Robert Zemeckis and Bob Gale, who would later find big success in a
Spielberg-produced movie named "Back to the Future".
The plot, loosely based on actual events, concerns a panic that arises in
Los Angeles when they think they are under attack by Japanese bombers. The
characters, plots and subplots are numerous and the locales plentiful. In a
movie with so many characters, some are bound stick out more than others.
John Belushi plays "Wild Bill" Kelso, a fighter pilot in pursuit of what he
thinks is a Mitsubishi Zero; Slim Pickens plays a christmas tree vendor,
Hollis Wood, who is captured by a wacky Japanese submarine crew, including
the commander (Toshiro Mifune) and a German officer (Cristopher Lee); Dan
Aykroyd plays Sergeant Tree, who doesn't like to see Americans fighting
Americans; Treat Williams is Corporal Sitarski, who hates eggs.
Any story in "1941" can be overlooked, as it is just an excuse to create
crazy, off-the-wall set pieces and incredible situations. As a comedy, it
is largely hit-and-miss. Unfortunately it is more miss than hit, but
especially John Belushi manages to create some hilarious moments throughout
the film. It's a shame he's in it as little as he is. Spielberg and company
seem to have worked from the attitude that "bigger, faster, more" equals
"better" and it shows as the movie goes from one big set-up to the next.
"1941" can be appreciated on this one point. You must struggle hard to find
a movie this big, crazy, immature and uncontrolled. One scene, especially,
stands out as great after seeing it - a huge fight scene at an SCO dance.
Appreciation for the other craziness, which includes cannons, airplane
chases, ferris wheels, submarines and gas stations, is variable. There is a
lot of screaming, shouting and general noise throughout the movie.
Other good points to "1941" include terrific special effects, great
production design, and a superb score by John Williams.
However, the spectacle and pace of "1941" can be very tiring, which is
probably why it to attract crowds at the box office. Too often,
possibilities for humor are killed by the uncontrolled pounding of gags
taking place. The whole movie feels like a young, successful filmmaker out
of control, which might not be too far from the truth about "1941". Still,
for the very reasons it doesn't quite work, "1941" is truly a one-of-a-kind
movie.
Available on laserdisc from Universal Home Video is an extended cut of
"1941" which includes many new scenes with Bobby DiCicco, and also cut
scenes of less than subtle sexual references (including a scene where Ned
Beatty tells his daugter to show the soldiers "a good time".)


Title
Review for Radioland Murders (1994)
"Radioland Murders" was a long time pet project for Excecutive Producer
George Lucas, who first thought it up after finishing "American Graffiti"
in 1973. He had his friends, who also helped him write "American Graffiti",
Gloria Katz and Willard Huyck (also responsible for films like "Howard the
Duck" and "Best Defense") write a screenplay, which was subsequently
rewritten by sitcom writers Osborn and Reno before the movie finally went
into production in 1993.
The movie takes place in 1939 and concerns a struggling radio station, WBN
in Chicago, that plans to take on the three major radio networks in
America. It is opening night, and the cast of zany characters have to cope
with last-minute script changes, hostile sponsors and MURDER. Brian Benben
plays Roger Henderson, one of the writers for the radio station. He is dead
set on winning back his soon-to-be ex-wife, Peggy Henderson (Mary Stuart
Masterson), secretary to the station manager (Ned Beatty). Peggy is
convinced that he has been unfaithful with the sex-crazed Claudette
Katzenback, the "va-va-va-voom" girl (Anita Morris), who is married to the
station's owner (Larry Miller, with a terrible german accent). In reality,
Claudette has been getting it on with everyone at the station except for
Roger, especially the director (Jeffrey Tambor), who is being blackmailed
by the trumpet player. When the trumpet player is killed, things start
going to hell...
The premise holds some promise for great comedy, but the writers seem to
have confused "frantic action" with "humor" too much of the time. During
the too-long 112 minutes you are hit over the had with gag after gag, too
many of which fall flat. The cast contains many familiar faces, so many in
fact, that you fail to make an emotional connection with any of them. Some,
like Bobcat Goldthwait, Cristopher Lloyd, Harvey Korman, George Burns and
many others, play so small and pointless characters that you wonder why
they are even there.
Nevertheless, there are many things about "Radioland Murders" that actually
work. Brian Benben (from the TV series "Dream On") is quite a good leading
man, and manages to evoke smiles and laugter from time to time, as do
Michael Lerner and Dylan Baker as a pair of detectives. The production
design and overall look of the film is excellent, and you'd never know the
movie was shot with a budget of only $10 Million. After all, with George
Lucas, the owner of the THX programme and Industrial Light & Magic, on
board you can excpect top-notch a Audio- and Visual experience.
However, the hyperactive pace of the film and the inscessant cross-cutting
between events, on stage and off, detracts from the overall enjoyment of
the film. If the filmmakers had only taken it easier (and allowed some more
re-writes) it might have been better. Still, if you are rested and prepared
for 112 minutes of mayhem and craziness and you manage to overlook the 50%
of jokes that don't work, you will find that Radioland Murders is a movie
quite unlike any other, frantic and flat in places, but still amusing and
interesting to watch.

