Authors
Jim Reiff
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Under the Bridge (1996)
Rating: On a scale of 1-5....   3.
The rating is based on a preview screening complete with chapter marks 
and soundtrack by Mader (THE WEDDING BANQUET and IN THE SOUP) in 
various stages of completion.  The rough edit of the film was compelling
and well paced.  The next New York screening should be even better.
     As the film opens we follow eight year old Eddie Manly (Matthew
Weathers) along the broken Brooklyn waterfront.  He follows Sammy
(Damien Leake--SEA OF LOVE, APOCALYPSE NOW, BORN ON THE FOURTH OF
JULY) who unsuccessfully tries to scare Eddie off.  Realizing that like
himself, Eddie has no where else to go, Sammy takes Eddie with him down
into Hellhole: a desolate riverside littered with the crumbling
carcasses of New York's extinct industrial behemoths.  This is the
urban frontier land of squatters, hookers  and thieves.
     What follows in this feature debut, written and directed by
Charles Weinstein who grew up in Spain, is a mixture of urban fairy
tale that borders on magical realism and the grim reality of people who
have fallen outside the American, post-industrial system.  The
cinematography of John Thomas (THE NIGHT WE NEVER MET, METROPOLITAN, and
BARCELONA for which he received the Spirit award) mixes 35mm color and
black and white manipulated to create the illusion of spontaneous
Super-8 imaging.
     Hellhole is administered by mayor/commissar John (Zach
Grenier--TWISTER, STARS FELL ON HENRIETTA, THE GUTTER SONG,
CLIFFHANGER.)  John is the kingpin of the motley commune and decides
who lives where in Hellhole and John wants nothing to do with little
Eddie.  His self-involved, crackhead brother played so despicably by
Bruce MacVittie (STONEWALL, THE STAND) doesn't even acknowledge the
kid's existence until he becomes useful for something.  John, clearly
put out by the restrictions put upon him by having Eddie around assigns
the care of him to Kathy (Melissa Leo--HOMICIDE, SCARLETT,
VENICE/VENICE), a junkie streetwalker who has lost custody of her own
son to the family courts.  Kathy angrily rejects Eddie at first but
forced to live together in close quarters he begins to grow on her.
     A number of tales are told in UNDER THE BRIDGE as Eddie touches
the lives of everyone around him.  The mere presence of a child begins
to change behavior of the adults who grow slightly more human and
responsible whether they want to or not.  Only Mickey seems immune.
     The film becomes a bit surreal when Rube the Cameraman (Michael
Imperiou--I SHOT ANDY WARHOL, GOODFELLAS, MALCOM X, JUNGLE FEVER)
shows up wanting to make a movie about the homeless in Hellhole
and John, Sammy, and Mickey decide to have a barbecue party with a
hundred dollar lottery win.  It is a party that Eddie will remember for
the rest of his life.
     The film is unusual and usual.  It is everyday life for some
people in New York yet unimaginable by most New Yorkers. The films
extras are real homeless people who scratch out an existence on the
Brooklyn waterfront, under the Williamsburg Bridge.  The cinematography
of John Thomas combines the acutely real with a touch of the unreal.
The acting is top rate so no one appears to be acting.  Nothing really
happens yet everything happens, at a brisk pace and with long lasting
effect.
Also with:
Marion Quinn, Kimber Riddamien Young, Olek Krupa, Karrenjune Sanchez
Weinstein and Clark previously co-produced the short film, The Gutter Song,
written and directed by Weinstein, which received international acclaim and
was distributed theatrically in Europe.

