Authors
Jim S
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Jaws (1975)
     Just watched the new Laserdisc version celebrating the 20th
anniversery of JAWS - the film that started the summer blockbuster
craze. The LD contains a 2+ hour documentary on the making of the film,
plus hundreds of still photos and promotional trailers. The film is in
wide screen and THX enhanced. The quality is superb.
     It's easy for people to dismiss JAWS, now that years have passed
and the inevitable sequels have somewhat tarnished the JAWS name.
Watching this film, however, I am awed at what great filmmaking this
is. Sure, it is not exactly "deep", but that's beside the point; JAWS
is pure escapist/ adventure filmmaking, and it is that genre at it's
absolute best.
      The pacing of the film is perfect; there is no fat needing to be
trimmed. All scenes either advance the story or develop character. And
the characterization in JAWS may very well be what seperates it from
other action films. These are no cardboard characters, but real people
you care about and root for. All three principle performances (by Roy
Scheider, Richard Dreyfuss and the late Robert Shaw) perfectly
compliment the action. Shaws' recollection of the Indianapolis tale (in
which a WWII ship sank and nearly all its' crew was devoured by sharks)
is an astounding scene; it is so flawlessy acted and developed that you
forget you are watching an adventure/suspense film.
      Steven Spielberg was a 27 year old unknown when he began filming
JAWS.  The film went over 100 days over schedule and doubled its
original budget. Spielberg came very close to being fired on more than
one occasion. In hindsight, it is amazing that Spielberg was able to
get the film made at all. That he made a terrific film is nearly
unbelieveable.  But he did.
      Sit back and watch JAWS again, and take in all its pleasures. The
final 40 minutes, when the three men head out to sea to confront the
great shark, is the best action/adventure/suspense filmmaking you may
ever encounter. See how seamless the Oscar-winning editing is.  Marval
at the atmosphere Spielberg and John Williams' classic, Oscar-winning
score create. Root for the three heroes in the ultimate confrontation
between man and beast. See Scheider find redemption, Dreyfuss get
humbled and Shaw meet his fate. And remember, just because the film
became part of our popular culture doesn't lessen what a cinematic
achievement it was.
