Authors
Rev Dr Phil Herring
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Last Seduction, The (1994) (TV)
     Late last year I saw a quirky, stylish film called RED ROCK WEST
by the then little-known director John Dahl.  It had some of the
elements of a road movie (including, I might add somewhat facetiously,
Dennis Hopper), but was at its heart a thriller, with shades of film
noir (for example, the bad woman who leads a basically good man astray
with her womanly wiles).  It was solidly paced, with well-written
characters and an original plot, and I liked it.  In Australia, though,
it was released quite some time after it was made, and only saw a
limited release in a few art-house cinemas.
     So it was with some optimism that I approached THE LAST
SEDUCTION.  I wasn't disappointed (and neither was the appreciative
full house at Sydney's Dendy Cinema, which in general shuns the output
from the Hollywood factories in favour of more innovative product).
Dahl didn't write this film (script credit goes to Steve Barancik), but
it still bears a strong resemblance to his previous work.  It's dark,
and it features a rather naive young man being led astray by a smarter
and less scrupulous woman, who is seeking the removal of a troublesome
husband.  If you saw RED ROCK WEST, this much will be familiar,
especially when you find out that the film is set in a small town.  (I
might also somewhat cynically add that the main plot difference lies in
the woman being the drifter, and the man the local.)
     Such resemblances aside, the film is very different in mood and
pacing.  The action is set in a small town in upstate New York, a town
that seem to go out of its way to be boring.  The evil woman in this
film is Bridget, wife a bent doctor, who robs her husband of a large
sum of money gained from a one-off drug deal.  She's forced to hide out
in the tiny town of Benton, where she meets Mike, a local bored with
the small town after trying his luck in the bright lights of Buffalo,
N.Y., but back in his hometown after a failed marriage.
     Unlike Nicholas Cage's drifter character in the previous film,
however, Bridget (played by Linda Fiorentino) is no dummy--she's a
hard, manipulating bitch.  It's poor Mike (played by Peter Berg) who
gets sucked into a relationship that is, from the outset,
manipulative.  Watching Mike get used and abused by Bridget is the main
driving force in the film.  It will make you squirm.
     Bridget also has all the best lines.  Her opportunism and
objectivist ethos is so transparent that you just have to laugh at her
one-liners, showing as they do the sheer balls of the woman.  She's a
smart character, there's no doubt about that, and her plotting is a
times obvious and at others, utterly opaque.  Either way there's plenty
of suspense and action, mixed with laughs along the way--and although
the film doesn't take itself all that seriously (as indeed it
shouldn't), it's a brilliant piece of film-making, and well worth the
price of admission.
     The roles of the characters raise some interesting side issues,
however.  One element that I had to consider was the role of the
corrupting woman in this film, and by implication, in the genre of film
noir.  Although I really doubt that this film falls into the latter
category, it shares many elements with it, and even at moments invokes
DOUBLE INDEMNITY, the film that gave rise to the genre.  The waitress
in the Dendy's restaurant (which, incidentally, serves very good food)
expressed a *very* positive attitude towards the character of Bridget,
despite admitting that she is, essentially, a conniving bitch you'd
really rather not know personally.  While I fully admit that feminism
is about giving women choices (including the choice to be conniving
bitches), I'm not entirely sure that this film has shaken itself free
of the older ideas about the woman-as-corrupter.  This element was
important in the 1940s as an expression of the puritanism and misogyny
of the cinema of the day, but what does it suggest to the audiences of
1994? Mind you, THE LAST SEDUCTION doesn't insist on the same moral
ending as a film of the 1940's would, so maybe I'm leading myself up
the garden path here.
     What I *am* sure of, though, is the continued stereotyping of drug
dealers in Hollywood films.  It seems that every bad guy in a film
these days is a drug dealer.  There used to be some variety on this
score (note that THE GETAWAY breaks this pattern, but is a remake of
a much older film), but today it has become a cliche.  It's a sign of
the strength of this film, though, that neither of these particular
cliches get in the way of what is, essentially, a very fun film to
watch.
-- Phil.

Title
Review for Bad Boy Bubby (1993)
     The theme of a person locked away for their entire life, and then
by chance released into the wide world, has been explored fairly often
in the past (BEING THERE and THE ENIGMA OF KASPAR HAUSER spring to
mind), and they generally fall into two categories: either the person
will succeed in the experience, or the world will destroy them.
     But in the low-budget Australian film BAD BOY BUBBY, this is not
really the main issue.  The person who is imprisoned is Bubby, kept
locked up for 35 years by his abusive mother in a filthy basement
flat.  He is, to all intents and purposes, an infant.  Then one day he
seizes his freedom, and escapes into the black night of the industrial
suburbs of Adelaide.  The rest is part adventure, part tragedy, and part
comedy.  It's also very intense, confronting and discomforting.  Bubby
is the target of hatred, charity, loathing and love, and this emotional
roller coaster closely parallels the experience of the audience, who
are subjected to black, ironic humour mixed with images that openly
defy the conventions of commercial cinema.
     And despite the well-worn theme, the film manages to keep you in
your seat.  It doesn't have the usual monotonic form of a mainstream
film (an opening exposition, followed by a steady, direct run to a
clear resolution); instead, it vacillates between joy and despair.
Bubby has good days and bad days; the audience gets to ride up and down
with him.
     And despite his naivete and inability to cope, at no point does
Bubby become pathetic.  In the end, he is resilient, and the audience
sees him grow up very quickly without losing his identity.  This, in
spite of all the cruelty that he experiences and inflicts.
     And the visual imagery in the film is amazing.  It is almost
wholly bleak, dark, and at times positively Hogarthian, with a lot of
attention paid to the texture of dirty skin, the sagging of folds of
fat, the dull fall of artificial light, and the patina of used, worn
surfaces.  It's a visual experience that you can also feel and smell,
and it's both repellent and oddly appealing.  The dark visuals add
directly to the film's black humour; both Bubby and his new-found world
are, in places, very, very funny in their cruelty and stupidity.
     It must be said, though, that not everybody will enjoy this film.
It's probably unconventional enough to discomfort most viewers, and the
first forty minutes are set in a tiny, claustrophobic space, and are
quite difficult to watch at times; plus the film directly addresses the
matter of what is beautiful, and the way that women are used in movies.
(Not in any overt way, mind you; it's just there if you want to look
for it.)  And on the subject of sex, this film has a lot of it, and
it's quite explicit, but the way it operates on the viewer is subtle
and strange.  It isn't simple eroticism.
     There is also the matter of the final resolution, which I found
somewhat disappointing; on the other hand, I think that it was
unavoidable, given where the film was going.  Some of the acting is
also a tad uninspired, possibly because those actors weren't
experienced.
     In summary, this low-budget film is an amazing experience; its
good points overwhelm its flaws, and I can only say that it's
thoroughly watchable, and probably headed for a cult following.

Title
Review for Leon the Pig Farmer (1992)
Written by Gary Sinyor and Vadim Jean
Directed by Vadim Jean and Gary Sinyor
Actors: Mark Frankel, Janet Suzman, Brian Glover, David de Keyser,
        Maryam d'Abo, Gina Bellman, Connie Booth
     Aren't Jews are inclined to feel guilt, feel sick at the sight of
non-kosher food, and know what every other Jew in the world is up to?
Stereotypes can be damaging, but they do seem to form the basis for a
lot of humour and comic characterisation.
     And the stereotype is the premise of this film.  Leon is Jewish,
born into an upper-middle-class family in Golder's Green, London, son
of a curtain salesman, but alas, too scrupulous to remain in his job as
a real estate agent.  He quits at a bad time--under pressure from his
family to procreate, and more than a little neurotic about women, he
finds himself in a minor crisis when he discovers by accident that he
is the product artificial insemination, and his real father is--he
comes the big joke!--a Yorkshire pig farmer.  So, in a search for his
real roots (whatever they may be), he heads off to visit his new-found
parent.  He turns out to be more than willing to take him in, and
treats him as one of his own, but is far from stereotypical; in fact he
tries to make him more at home by becoming even more Jewish than Leon's
family.
     This is an enjoyable film, but the laughs are not tightly packed
together.  Instead, it's a rather lightweight experience; fun, but not
funny.  There are some genuine "moments" but they tend to be a tad
obvious, being based, as they are, on well-explored ideas.  This is not
helped by the film's use if very Allen-esque details--such as the
strangers offering unasked-for advice, the neurotic mother and father,
and the sweetheart who wants rather more that Leon can provide.
     There are also one or two minor problems (not the least being what
to do with Connie Booth's accent--if she's married to a Yorkshire pig
farmer, why does she have a North American accent?), but hey, I enjoyed
it, and although the basic ideas get pushed rather far than they should
be (at times the film bogs down, usually when dealing with plot logic,
as if the writers were keen to get to the next funny bit and didn't
want to try too hard at that point), they at least have an original
setting.  The film also contains a clear metaphor for Leon's dilemma -
I'll leave you to work out what it is--that serves to inject a bit
more thought into the story than it would otherwise have.
-- Phil.
