Authors
Denes House
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Star Trek: First Contact (1996)
[Note that followups are directed to rec.arts.movies.current-films and
rec.arts.movies.startrek.current only, not to rec.arts.sf.movies.  -Moderator]
The following contains significant spoilers for the movie Star Trek:
First Contact. Reading the review before seeing the movie may spoil
some fans' enjoyment of the film, though I studiously avoid giving
away the end, or the culmination of any plot point.
The film opens (after some eye-sore credits) with a spectacular pull-back
from within the eye of Captain Picard (Patrick Stewart) to show that he
is trapped within the monstrous hive-ship of the evil Borg collective. The
sequence recounts Picard's "assimilation" into the collective years
earlier, and sets up some of his key character motivations for the rest of
the film.
The Borg, as fans of the Star Trek: The Next Generation television series
will know, are perhaps the most fearsome foe the crew of the Enterprise
has ever faced. Part organic, part machine, the Borg are relentless in
their drive to assimilate the genetic and technological distinctives of
cultures that they encounter into their own. Assimilation is painful and
brings all individual minds into a collective hive-mind, losing all
individuality, and becoming part of the "all." Interestingly enough, what
Star Trek sees as evil, Isaac Asimov promoted as the highest good and
the nature of all reality in his "Foundation" series.
Flash forward several years. The Borg are attacking the Earth once again.
Picard, now captaining the new Enterprise (NCC-1701-E), is ordered to
patrol the Romulan Neutral Zone, rather than join in the fight. Picard bitterly
observes that Starfleet Command probably considers him a risk rather than
an asset because of his unstable feelings towards the Borg. When the battle
goes badly, though, Picard and crew disobey and head for Earth, maximum warp.
The battle is a mess. The U.S.S. Defiant, captained by Deep Space Nine's
Lt. Worf (Michael Dorn) is badly damaged, and her crew beamed aboard the
Enterprise.
Picard assumes command of the battle group, and under his direction, the Borg's
cube ship is completely destroyed - but not before launching a smaller,
spherical ship that plummets towards Earth. The Enterprise pursues the
sphere,
as it begins to generate a temporal vortex.
Realizing that they cannot defeat and assimilate humanity in the present,
the Borgs' plan is to head back in time to prevent the formation of the
United
Federation of Planets, Starfleet, and eventually Picard, by stopping a pivotal
event - humanity's first contact with extra-terrestrial life.
That contact will come the day after Zefram Cochrane (James Cromwell) makes
the first warp-speed flight. The Borg want to stop that flight from happening.
Picard decides to follow the Borg back in time, to stop their evil
machinations, and keep history on the right path.
The resulting movie plays out on three levels. First is Picard's fight
against the Borg onboard the Enterprise, as they try to assimilate the ship
and her
crew. Next is second-in-command Will Riker (Jonathan Frakes)'s quest to ensure
Cochrane takes his epoch-making flight. Finally, there is the struggle as
the Borg seek to assimilate Lt. Commander Data (Brent Spiner) the
Enterprise's android second officer.
Can Picard stop the Borg? Will Data be assimilated? Will Cochrane make his
flight? These are the storylines that drive this film, and fortunately, all
of them turn out to be interesting, character-driven tales.
This is a plot that could easily get confusing, but first-time film director
Jonathan Frakes keeps us in the story, and writers Ronald Moore and Brannon
Braga give us characters to relate to, who bring out all the necessary
explanations.
Each thread of the story unfolds in a fast-paced but clear manner, with strong
implications of what could happen if this does not all work. In other words,
it's compelling.
The story weaves in themes of revenge, duty, destiny, hero-worship,
individuality, loyalty, seduction, temptation, and many more.
Picard is driven by his pain and desire for revenge, along with higher ideals
like protecting his planet and culture, and defeating a foe whose evil
perhaps he alone fully knows. He is seduced by the siren song of revenge,
and is willing to destroy his life, his ship, and his crew in pursuit of
that end.
Data is seduced on a far more immediate level. The simple pleasures of warm
breath blowing across the most intricate sensory network imaginable --
human
skin -- are obviously just as tempting as the sensually evil Borg Queen's
sexual advances. His ultimate desire -- to become more human -- comes
within reach, but the price is the destruction of all that he holds dear.
Cochrane experiences what might be called negative-seduction. The prospect
of being a hero, a "statue," repulse him. He knows his own frailties and is
too honest with himself to want to see himself worshiped. Like the early
Christian missionaries Paul and Barnabas, Cochrane wants to scream, "Why
are you doing this? I am only a man, not a god!" His desire is to run away
from the destiny that awaits him, at the cost of a better future for
humanity.
All three stories achieve their thematic complexity from genuine human
character struggles.
And that is my favorite thing about Star Trek: First Contact. The film has
been praised loudly for its special effects, and they are impressive (see
below). But this movie works first and foremost on a character level. This
is a character-driven, not an action-driven movie. There is furious, tense
action, to be sure -- but all of it is at the service of the plot and the
characters. The action and effects serve the story, not the other way
around.
I was on the phone with my mom, talking with her about "Independence Day,"
which she had just seen on video. Did she enjoy it? "Yes, but you could
just as easily have turned off the sound and enjoyed it just as much." ID4
was all "sound and fury, signifying nothing." First Contact is a movie
about real characters, and ultimately, a movie about US.
Any film that delves into human character as deeply as First Contact does
taps into the well of our self-concept, and challenges us to ask questions
about our own values, motivations, and desires. What drives us? Is is
revenge, sex, or fame? Or is it rationality, loyalty, and nobility? Moore
and Braga's screenplay not only touches on serious themes, but does so by
exploring real characters, brought to life by gifted actors.
In general, the acting in First Contact is superb. Roger Ebert wrote that
Bond movies and Star Trek movies rise and fall based on the quality of
their villains. The Borg, and in particular the Borg Queen (Alice Krige).
Marked by a particularly gruesome, fascinating, frightening and sexy makeup
design, the Borg Queen as played by Krige is a scintilating character, evil
and fearsome yet at times tender and touched by human frailty. She scares
you and seduces you at the same time.
Patrick Stewart is a forceful but focused personality on the screen, at
turns raging or vulnerable, macho or frightened, governed through a
struggle between moral choice and raging passion. His performance is marked
by a brilliant clarity, focusing a turbulent energy. Every minute he is on
the screen he controls the scene, even when his character is out of
control. Stewart is a big-screen presence, commanding respect, winning
trust, inspiring connection in the audience.
Serving as Picard's counter-balance is Alfre Woodard's Lily Sloane, an
equally forceful screen personality, and the character most likely to be
talked about as you leave the film. Woodard is in most scenes with Stewart
through the film's last two acts, and is the only one with him in the
movie's most powerful and pivotal scene. Not only is her character
necessary, her performance needed to be top-notch, and Woodard's was
Oscar-caliber.
Brent Spiner turns in an excellent performance, playing the innocent "son"
being seduced by a gruesome evil. Spiner has commented that he sees Data's
relationship with Picard as being a son/father relationship, and that
shines forth clearly here. Like Ripley going back for Newt in Aliens,
Picard's actions towards Data show the fatherly concern he has for his
android son. Spiner portrays the Last Temptation of Data well, skillfully
causing the audience to wonder just what side he's on.
James Cromwell as Zephram Cochrane is less intense, but quite believable in
his role as reluctant role model for high school kids for centuries to
come. He is not what the audience expects him to be, but he plays a fully
realized character that the audience comes to identify with.
Solid supporting performances were turned in by the whole Next Generation
cast, most notably Michael Dorn as Lt. Worf.
Despite all the rumblings on the Usenet, I did not see any irreconcilable
continuity mistakes in First Contact. Strong reference is made to Data's
emotion chip, to the destruction of the Enterprise, and to Worf's tenure on
Deep Space Nine. The Holographic doctor (Robert Picardo) from Star Trek:
Voyager appears in a priceless scene, and even the starship Bozeman is
mentioned in the opening battle scenes.
The only possible mistake I want to deal with specifically is Zephram
Cochrane's planet of origin. The character of Cochrane was originated in
the Classic Star Trek episode "Metamorphosis" where he was refered to as
"Zephram Cochrane of Alpha Centauri." This has led some Star Trek novelists
and others to speculate that first contact with aliens happened with folks
from Alpha Centauri, or that Cochrane was born on an earth colony on that
planet.
First Contact's timeline makes more sense, but Trek canon must be appeased.
It is highly possible that Cochrane was born on Earth but *settled* on
Alpha Centauri later on in life. In any case, First Contact's assertion
that Cochrane was from Earth does not *directly* contradict any filmed Star
Trek to date.
The special effects were of the "ooh and ahh" variety, causing the audience
to gasp in wonder, but at no time did they dominate either characters or
plot. Frakes uses them as the beautiful tools that they are, and no more.
There are space battle scenes, plasma explosions, space walks on the hull
of the beautiful new Enterprise, and a spectacular escape-pod scene, but
all of it goes simply to telling the story - and that's the way it should
be.
This movie will leave a lasting impression. Darker than any other Trek
film, but complex emotionally and structurally, Star Trek: First Contact
may be the best Trek movie to date, and is an excellent movie by any
standard. Acting, directing, writing, and special effects are all of an
Oscar-quality level, which goes together to create a dynamite film.

