Authors
Anthony E. Wright
Number of Reviews
5

Title
Review for Money Train (1995)
     At the New York Transit Museum, a abandoned subway station in
Brooklyn that vividly shows the history of one of the finest and
largest public transportation systems in the world, a movie theater is
lined with photos of classic straphanger-oriented films from the past.
But the cinematic romance with the underground is still alive: this
impressive display (which includes THE FRENCH CONNECTION, THE WARRIORS,
and DEATH WISH) does not include the recent spate of movies paying
homage to public transportation, like DIE HARD WITH A VENGEANCE, WHO
FRAMED ROGER RABBIT?  and GHOST.  Sandra Bullock is single-handedly
making public transportation sexy, more than all the "Miss Subways"
pageants of old, with the big hits SPEED and WHILE YOU WERE SLEEPING.
     The new exhibit at the Transit Museum last week, alongside subway
cars from the 1904 to the present, is the actual cab used in the
filming of the MONEY TRAIN, a new film focusing on a fictional train
which collect millions of dollars a day in token sales. (While the New
York Transit Authority does have 20 revenue collection cars, this shiny
fortress-like version is a Hollywood creation.)  A helpful tour guide
says that four such models were made, but the other three were blown
up.
     That fact is basically what you need to know about the MONEY
TRAIN: it's a thrilling action adventure where trains rollick around
quickly and blow up, like SPEED.  The other main fact is that it stars
Wesley Snipes and Woody Harrelson, doing similar action roles as in
their transportation-based thrillers PASSENGER 57 and THE COWBOY WAY,
respectively.
     But the reference is clearly to the similarly hip and urban romp
WHITE MEN CAN'T JUMP, to which MONEY TRAIN is basically a sequel.  The
characters even seem similar: Snipes plays a trash-talking show-off who
is grounded in the urban scene; Harrelson plays a white guy who has a
black sensibility, which provides wonderful comic possibilities, but
the character has gambling, identity, and other problems.  In MONEY
TRAIN, the two are dubbed "the transit twins," as foster brothers doing
undercover transit police work.  Just to play it safe, Jennifer Lopez
is brought in to play the attractive Hispanic female, although without
the schtick of Rosie Perez. (Lopez would have stolen the movie away
from the male leads if not for a truly horrible characterization by the
writers.)  But even if the characters do seem awfully familiar, we get
enough plot, which offers more than just padding for the action.
     It's a good movie, action-packed with just enough sass, humour,
energy and seriousness to keep it interesting throughout.  It gets the
adrenaline pumping.  However, I must confess that as a mass-transit
buff, and a New Yorker with an admiration of the subways, I might be
biased.
     The question I asked when the film ended, and that my companions
did, and that the country is now asking given recent news events, is:
Why did the TA agree to help with this film? Not only does it make the
TA look like idiots, and portrays the subways as especially dangerous,
but also gives people some stupid ideas: running around on tracks,
riding on top of subway cars, torching subway token booths, jumping in
front of trains, and (oh, yeah) stealing money trains.
     With the recent torching of a token booth that could have been a
"copycat" act, the old questions about how the media affect society are
dramatized as a token clerk sits in the hospital with serious,
life-threatening problems.  The normal responsible line is to say that
violence in context is fine (a la SCHINDLER'S LIST) but violence for
pure titillation is not (a.k.a. RAMBO).  Shouldn't movies portray events
which do occur--like booth torchings, which happening a couple of times
in the 1980s? Or do we want a sanitized media, free from real-life
events and problems? Perhaps the torching was over-the-top: they didn't
show the consequences of a booth torching, as the token clerk survived
unscathed in the movie; and they didn't show that booth now come with
sprinkler systems, making it hard for that crime to occur.
     With the torching (and the preposterous money train hijacking,
which certainly isn't realistic), most of the action stunts in this
movie involve stupid and dangerous things.  But I must confess, that's
what makes the movie exciting: they do the taboo things that as a
life-long rider I wouldn't and couldn't do.  I've occasionally thought
about trying to jump onto the tracks to quickly get to another
platform; that makes it more fun when Wesley Snipes does it as a #5
approaches.  Sure it's an irresponsible movie (in more ways than one),
and unfortunately, that's half the fun.
     The other public issue is the question of cooperation: The Transit
Authority usually frowns on movies that show the system as
"out-of-control."  (From the movies, you wouldn't get the facts that a
subway station or train is always safer that the streets above it.)  Yet
the Mayor's Office policy is to let Hollywood do their thing,
especially if it means bringing money into the city.  Most of the film
was in fact filmed on a Hollywood set, due to some TA reluctance.  But
that's still leaves the question why Hollywood's money train currently
sits on New York subway tracks.  Perhaps it was stolen.

Title
Review for Persuasion (1995/I)
     Jane Austen is getting a Hollywood make-over.  She might have been
the ghostwriter for the summer hit CLUELESS, so closely did it follow
her book "Emma" scene-by-scene: it just transported the story into
present-day teen Valley culture.  Later this year, Merchant-Ivory
veteran Emma Thompson will add her star (and Oscar) power to a film
version of SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
      Some Hollywood agent is probably calling on Steven Spielberg to
direct MANSFIELD PARK, starring Jeff Goldblum, Laura Dern, and
computer-animated aristocrats.  With all this movie-making, the BBC
arthouse productions of Austen's work might get lost in the shuffle.
That would be a mistake for both Austen fans and neophytes.
     PERSUASION is opening nationally after its one-theater run in
Manhattan, with its adaptation of what some Austen fans believe is her
best novel, bursting with romantic tensions and incisive social
commentary.  There's little Hollywood glitz here: The scenery is
pleasing and real.  The language is understandable but retains its
clever wit.  And while attractive, the characters much more plain than
the perfect creations that movies usually attempt to claim as real
people.  Little makeup is used: No one would mistake this for one of
those dressed-up Merchant-Ivory galas.  Narratively, we see how truly
dreary being English aristocrat can be.  The houses are silent except
for the creaking floor boards.  Rooms are lit with only sunlight or
candles.  The directing capitalizes on these aspects for good effect:
The camera actually rocks with the movement of a ship, or the bustle of
a horse-drawn carriage.  We get the full ride, with the bumps
included.
     Those familiar with PERSUASION be forewarned: while this film
attempts to capture the spirit of the book, many details were deemed
expendable.  The basic story remains intact, but scenes are switched
around, dropped, and even tweaked.  The movie changes some of the
action to make plot points stronger.  It even draws from early drafts
of the book--so some Austen lovers might be needlessly concerned about
the eventual outcome.  Yet even the most rabid Austen fanatics will be
pleased by the movie.  Those who don't remember reading "Pride and
Prejudice" and the like in high school might need a little coaching and
careful viewing in the first half to get all the characters and
relationships straight, but the experience is still worth it.
     The story focuses on Anne, the white sheep of a ludicrous
aristocratic family, when she meets up with Captain Wentworth, a sailor
whose hand she was persuaded to spurn, by her friends and family
concerned by his lack of money.  Although now he has come back from the
wars a rich man, and she has become more independent to boot.  But
getting the two together still requires a lot of maneuvering.  Anne is
the protagonist that we like: A literate, unpretentious lady that even
deigns to visit with friends below her on the class scale, which
predictably rewards her with valuable gossip later in the story.
     The acting between these two main characters gets at some of the
romantic tensions that light up the book....  The (perhaps too) frequent
close-up of Ann's wide eyes are remarkable, because with only a twitch
they convey her longing and amazement at her predicament.  Most
everyone else does well portraying the silly characters that Austen
created.  In fact, the moviemakers were generous: director Austen might
have made the characters more ridiculous.
     But besides the story of romance, the social satire is biting.  To
our amusement, we see the stultifying boredom and pointlessness when
the family give a courtesy call to a well-connected relative.  Anne
talks with a friend about the difference between "good company"--an
obsession among the aristocrats--and the "best company," for which Anne
has a fairly different criteria.  When an associate makes a point by
referring to the women characters in novels, Anne pointedly reminds him
that the novels are written by men.  Even just the cruelty of it all is
portrayed:  when discussing the family finances, her absurd, vain
father exclaims, "Ask Anne? Whatever for?"
     Perhaps the only problem is that social satire of another century
is similar to a day-old wedding cake: it still looks beautiful, and one
can appreciate the craftsmanship, but to some it loses a delicate touch
that makes it so tasty.  Yet when leaving the Paris Theater in downtown
Manhattan, one is immediately greeted with the horse-drawn carriages
running along the base of Central Park; the historic Plaza Hotel,
perhaps the most expensive lodgings this side of England; FAO Schwartz,
the literal playground of the rich; and around the corner, Trump Tower,
the most visible symbol that if Jane Austen were a screenwriter today,
she would have a lot of material to work with.  Despite Hollywood, we
may need her now more than ever.

Title
Review for How to Make an American Quilt (1995)
     "Are they re-releasing that documentary on the AIDS quilt?"
questioned a friend.  Given the title, one might expect that or an
art-house needlepoint lesson.  But mainstream movie-goers should enjoy
this lyrical and entertaining movie about love, sex, and
relationships.
     The central character Finn spends a summer to write her thesis at
her grandmother's house, as a group of older women make her wedding
quilt on the theme "Where Love Resides."  The characters stitch their
feelings about love (and the related themes of sex, men, relationships,
children, and commitment) into the quilt, as the audience sees
flashbacks from key moments in their lives.  Winona Ryder performs
admirably as the story's center, but the credit goes to the entire
ensemble cast, including Anne Bancroft, Ellen Burstyn, Maya Angelou,
Jean Simmons, Lois Smith, Kate Nelligan, and Alfre Woodard.
     This could be the quintessential Ryder movie (yes, she narrates
yet again in raspy voice-overs), in that she embodies several roles
that she has taken before.  She plays the generational icon (perhaps
even the same character) as in REALITY BITES or even HEATHERS.  She
perhaps made woman-binding films like this possible with her success in
LITTLE WOMEN.  And she is the vehicle for a larger allegorical tale, a
la EDWARD SCISSORHANDS.  Different people may enjoy various aspects of
the film, but there enought here for everyone.
     Call her a Twentysomething Everywoman.  Daughter of divorced
hippie parents, Ryder's Finn weighs her recent engagement against her
fear of commitment, to a thesis topic, a career, or a man.  While she
is young, her sensibilities are cautious, and in times it seems the
older women are having more fun.  Ryder's performance speaks directly
to the questions that many of her age group face as they begin the
"adult" portion of their lives, dealing with commitment, temptation,
and experimentation.  She learns from her elders all sorts of
conflicting lessons, and while she goes through uniquely 90s twists, we
see that most of the issues are universal, for every age and
generation.
     It's refreshing to see an all-woman cast, and one that is so
spunky.  Rather than the gentility of LITTLE WOMEN or the cattiness of
any soap opera, these women seem to break out of the stereotypes: many
of the issues and stories they deal with men will identify with,
although this is a clearly a female film.  In fact, to make that point,
all the male characters are caricatures: the steamy Latin lover that
tempts Finn, the flirtatious artist of passion, the one-night dreamboat
that becomes a father, the career-focused scientist who loses his love
and his family, the faithful husband that makes the one big mistake,
and the poetic soulmate who turns out to be married.  They are all
here, as mirrors for the women to react to.
     These are stories of relationships, but it is more than
pieced-together vignettes of Meg Ryan movies.  The gorgeous California
grove landscape, the lush cinematography, and the heavy
symbolism--framed by the quilt--uplifts this movie from good to great.
These stories do weave together, beautifully, as they also instruct
Finn on her life.  The overlapping sequences are done well.  By the
time the symbolism perhaps overreaches with the second appearance of a
guiding crow, the audience is lulled into a mystic trance, not unlike
being wrapped in a warm quilt with a loved one.

Title
Review for Clueless (1995)
     This ain't Shakespeare, but CLUELESS has several audiences in
mind.  Teenagers and those who still identify with them should enjoy
and perhaps even identify with some of the characters.  Outsiders to
teenage and/or California culture will feel "as if" they are on an
anthropological exploration.  Jane Austen fans will enjoy the clever
update of their favorite author's novel EMMA.  CLUELESS is a silly, fun
movie.  Yet those looking for social satire should stick to the book.
     Alicia Silverstone, 18, known primarily for Aerosmith videos,
plays the lead role, Cher Horowitz, with glee and a glint of mischief.
She's a Beverly Hills high school babe, rich and popular, good yet
shallow.  There's none of the awkwardness that defines teenage life,
only supreme confidence.  Yet the characterizations of cliques, petty
disputes, and obsessions ring true, and will resonate with anybody who
is still (god help them) in the throws of adolescence.  (Cher amusingly
praises how considerate her best friend Dionne and her boyfriend are to
each other--"when nobody is looking.") This movie also has the one
necessity for a teen-cult film: Great lines.
     In fact, this might qualify as one long "Saturday Night Live"
sketch (a good one, though), with the reliance on such
caricature-making lines, from "As if!" to the desire to be a "Betty" or
a "Baldwin." However, while this give-and-take has some wonderful
moments, the real power of this film is the cumulative effect.  Those
who might mock Valley-Speak with an occasional "Omigawd!" should
beware that *the entire movie* is spoken in such parlance.  Writing the
dialogue for this movie was probably as hard for the Bronx-raised Amy
Heckerling as speaking in Klingon ... yet by the end I believe in it as
a form of communication.  Even the most cyncial adults should enjoy
this celebration(?) of California teenage culture.  The directing is
savvy, from a hysterical L.A. freeway scene, which lets us experience
firsthand how a learner's permit driver reacts to a tractor-trailer
behind her, to the idea of a phone being transformed into the 2001
obelisk, complete with """""Thus Spracht Zarathrustha.
     Critics looking to pan a teenage film normally rely on the
"Where's the plot?" crutch.  That's usually a good call, but here, the
writers have Jane Austen as a defense.  The movie takes virtually every
plot device from EMMA, to the point of even calling one character,
Elton, by the same name.  Austen fans will enjoy how clever this
adaptation is done: paintings become photographs, balls become raves,
live-in family friends become ex-stepbrothers, and fireplaces become,
well, electric fireplaces.
     Perhaps the social satire that this films offers is that perhaps,
as Jane Austen chronicles, we as a culture were always this ditzy, this
shallow, this clueless.  This is all the social commentary there is,
except for the obligatory making fun of the extremes of Beverly Hills
high school's inhabitants, with their constant nosejobs and cellular
phones to talk to each other in the hall.  This film could have had the
potential to contain strong Heathers-like satire, but it stayed at a
satisfying uber-Beverly Hills 90210 level.  No message, but a fun and
goofy summer movie.

Title
Review for Clockers (1995)
     Except for two cameo shots, Spike Lee does not appear in this film
about a low-level drug dealer in the New York projects.  Yet his unique
directing style is overwhelmingly present, enough to almost stifle the
story's own merits.  Yet his skills and the solid work of the cast also
makes this movie worth seeing.
     Even more than most Lee projects, CLOCKERS is less concerned with
moving a plot along than with presenting a world, a situation. (You
probably remember the premise and character of previous Lee movies that
the actual story.) He gives us another wonderful version of Brooklyn
verite, complete with high-rise projects juxtaposed with the concrete
pavement below, and the bodegas and Associated grocery stores in the
background.  Like in most other Lee films, this is also a provincial
story, where most of the action takes place on a few select blocks: No
helicopter shots of New York, we see the mundane, redundant landscape
of the characters, and feel the virtual walls that keep them there.
     Unlike the colorful scenes of DO THE RIGHT THING or MO BETTER
BLUES, this picture is a dreary grey.  The cinematography goes a little
overboard but keeps the film visually interesting, with Lee's signature
shots of slow-motion cars and close-ups with moving backgrounds, as
well as fresher and stunning work when dealing with "What If?"
flashbacks.  The momento is set by the horn music that seems lifted
from SCHOOL DAZE or JUNGLE FEVER and a heavy dose of rap.
     The plot is quickly set-up in the beginning: A night manager at a
burger joint has four bullets pummeled through him; the confessed
murderer is a "decent" black father of two that holds two jobs to keep
the family afloat, and never has been in legal trouble before.  While
one of the investigating white cops is willing to leave it at that
(John Turturro), the other (Harvey Keitel) think that the confessor is
covering for his drug dealing brother Strike (Mekhi Phifer), and by
association his boss Rodney (Delroy Lindo).
     But then nothing much happens; the plot stops for an hour.  The
audience is introduced to these characters and several others, playing
various parts in a morality tale in which no one is pure and
blameless.  There is a lot of didactic talk here, from Rodney telling
Strike never to use the crack he sells, to Strike telling a local kid
Tyrone to study in school.  But perhaps we are meant to take this
preaching with a grain of salt:  despite the lectures by Andre, a "good
black cop," or Tyrone's mother, nothing much changes.  In fact, we see
how each generation gets implicated and steeped into the criminal
culture.  In a frightening scene, Rodney learns how to kill from his
supposed "best friend," and his lessons get passed on to Strike, and
then to Tyrone and a whole new group of children.  The culture, the
film suggests, is reinforced by certain types of rap (but thankfully
separates that from the "positive" works of the genre) and even by
video games which show a virtual reality that is more reality than
virtuous.
     This elaborate set-up also includes the inner workings of a drug
deal; the routine of the police that surveil the dealers, and the
hobbies of Strike.  After all this, the last act contains the vestiges
of some intriguing police work, which gets closer to the truth but
nothing is fully resolved.  To underscore that point, the film ends
ultimately not on any of the characters and their respective fates, but
on yet another murder in the projects, which brings resonance to the
opening credits sequence that zoom in on crime scene photos.
     The reason to go see this film is the atmosphere that Lee creates;
it isn't his best film, certainly, but it has its provocative moments,
fraught with a moral complexity that is great to argue about and
impossible to settle.  Lee gets in his own way sometimes, but
ultimately he comes through.
