Authors
George Wu
Number of Reviews
8

Title
Review for Boys Don't Cry (1999)
She was born Teena Brandon in Lincoln, Nebraska, but she introduced herself
to everyone as Brandon Teena. She dressed like a boy, acted like a boy, and
had girlfriends whom she apparently treated better than had she been a boy.
Even after she was found out, raped, and murdered, Brandon's girlfriends
remained enraptured of him, for in every case aside from Brandon's
biological gender, Brandon was a "he."  Susan Muska and Gréta Olafsdóttir
produced The Brandon Teena Story, a documentary released last year
recording these events.  That film was poorly-made, unintentionally
exploitative, but nevertheless, enormously powerful owing to its subject
matter alone.  Now comes first-time filmmaker, Kimberly Peirce's dramatic
narrative version, Boys Don't Cry.  It's well-made, non-exploitative, and
enormously powerful owing to Peirce's creative direction and her stars
bravura performances.
Following actual events pretty closely, Peirce and her co-writer Andy
Bienen pick up the story from Brandon's move from Lincoln to Falls City,
Nebraska, where Brandon meets and falls in love with local girl, Lana. This
incurs the wraths of Brandon's heretofore friends, John Lotter and Tom
Nissen, both ex-cons.  What is impressive about Boys Don't Cry is that
Peirce doesn't sensationalize the material, which is easily done in lesser
hands with such subjects as gender-bending, rape, and murder. Nor does
Peirce, a lesbian, exude an agenda.  Brandon is shown warts and all as a
thief and habitual liar (about far more than his gender), while John and
Tom are welcoming and amicable before they uncover Brandon's secret. Peirce
even allows that John's loathing for Brandon may derive more from his
jealousy of Lana than homophobia, though homophobia abets his actions. 
Brandon does not come off as a martyr, but very much an individual. Brandon
refuses the label of lesbian. The subtext is gender fluidity and the
questioning of why we have to categorize sexual orientation at all.  Labels
emphasize difference, and difference is a code word for misanthropy.
Peirce intersperses wonderful time-lapse sequences of the horizon, the
clouds, the stars, even a refinery throughout the film.  While these could
just be throwaway flourishes, their beauty and timing point to a
transcendent hope in the characters' dreams, no matter how stupid they may
be, like Brandon's preoccupation with Memphis or Lana's wanting to become a
karaoke singer.  Only at the end, does Pierce's romanticization get the
better of her, in a fictional love scene between Lana and the doomed
Brandon.
The entire cast is superb.  Actress Hilary Swank holds nothing back in
giving the character of Brandon brashness, longing, hope, naivete, and
denial.  Matching her every step of the way is Chloë Sevigny as Lana, and
their chemistry together is wholly convincing.  Sevigny (along with Sarah
Polley) is among the great actors of her generation.  Peter Sarsgaard
imbues John with both humanity and barbarous malevolence.  In two smaller
roles of great merit are Alicia Goranson, who plays Candace, Brandon's
first friend in Falls City, and Jeanetta Arnette as Lana's outlandish mom.

Title
Review for Star Wars: Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999)
STAR WARS: EPISODE I - THE PHANTOM MENACE  (1999)
Like it affected others of my 20-something generation, Star Wars left its
indelible impression upon me.  It defined the ultimate goal of escapist
cinema for the worse, though that was not George Lucas' intention.  Star
Wars came amidst attempts by other directors to make the Great American
Film -- from Nashville to The Deer Hunter, One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest
to Network.  But it was Lucas who succeeded, at least in the minds of the
American public.  And he did it with an (apparently) apolitical fantasy. 
Today, (attempted) apolitical fantasies are practically all Hollywood
produces.  Because this is the context that Star Wars: Episode I - The
Phantom Menace arrives in, it is only special because it has been 16 years
since the last Star Wars film.
Whatever one thinks of the original Star Wars, it did not lack what The
Phantom Menace suffers from -- a strong sense of vision.  Despite Star
Wars' comic book-like origins, Lucas refused to play it for camp and for
the most part, that worked.  The lack of self-consciousness about the
material helped make Star Wars feel new even though its story was not. 
Lucas loses that focus in Menace, which is entirely too cute and
self-aware.  R2-D2, C-3P0, even Jabba the Hutt are not here because of the
demands of the story, but because they serve a sentimental purpose.  The
result is to make the Star Wars universe entirely too incestuous.  It was
bad enough that Lucas made Luke and Leia siblings in Return of the Jedi. 
Now we learn that Luke's father, Anakin, created Luke's later happenstance
companion C-3P0 and that Anakin was also assisted by R2-D2 in his own
fateful space battle.  This is just too capricious.  Seemingly taking part
in every major event in galactic history, R2-D2 must be the Forrest Gump of
the Star Wars universe.
Lucas' lack of focus leads to a very uneven motion picture.  The story
begins with two Jedi, Qui-Gon Jinn (Liam Neeson) and his apprentice Obi-Wan
Kenobi (Ewan McGregor), attempting to reconcile a (unspecified) conflict
between the Trade Federation and the planet Naboo.  After a failed
assassination attempt against them by the Federation, the Jedi stowaway on
ships bent on invading the planet.  There they encounter the Gungans,
amphibious creatures who inhabit an underwater city.  The sole purpose of
this meeting is to set up the Gungans for later in the plot, and as such
this otherwise seemingly pointless encounter feels incredibly awkward. 
However, the worst thing to come out of this is that the Jedi get a Gungan
companion named Jar Jar Binks.  Jar Jar's sole purpose is to act as comic
relief, but not only is he not funny, his perpetual jabbering is endlessly
annoying.  Jar Jar's reputation as the first fully-digitized character in a
live-action film falls into the same category as The Jazz Singer's being
the first talkie -- unmeritorious.
Too much of the time, Menace feels like its only going through the motions.
 Qui-Gon seems to take for granted that he can take Anakin (Jake Lloyd)
from his mother (Pernilla August) and neither will object.  When the time
comes to do so, Anakin and his mother display only mild hesitation.  This
would have worked perhaps if the film had stressed their lives as slaves so
that Anakin's mother would obviously want him to escape to a better life. 
As it is, the mother has some vague notion that Anakin is special, so why
not put him in the hands of this Jedi she hardly knows?  The whole scenario
in which Qui-Gon gets Anakin under his wing is convoluted and could have
been greatly simplified.  The Menace script needed two more drafts.
Despite the obfuscated plot, the film feels very rushed.  Establishing
shots go by quickly, often wasting the effort that went into creating some
stunning digital landscapes.  The climax mirrors that of Return of the
Jedi, intercutting among a lightsaber duel, a ground war, and a space
battle, but the pacing is too frenetic.  Although sporting supposedly
superior special effects, these sequences are less involving than those in
Jedi.  This is particularly surprising with the space fight.  This sequence
suffers from the film not establishing how to accomplish the goal.  When it
is finally achieved (and who doubts that it would be), it happens
completely by accident.
In terms of action, the highlight of Menace is the lightsaber duel in which
Darth Maul takes on Qin-Gon and Obi-Wan.  The choreography, taking note of
Hong Kong cinema's recent influence in Hollywood, far surpasses that in the
three previous Star Wars films.  On the other hand, there seems to be far
less at stake.  Taking the conflict for granted, Lucas does not even have
the antagonists speak to one another, thus lessening the emotional
involvement over why they are fighting.  In only a couple of instances
during the duel do we even get a sense of momentum shifts.  The beauty of
the choreography takes precedence over who wins or loses.
None of the actors ever really get to let loose.  They all feel too
uptight.  One of the problems is that they do not have an internal
conflict, only an outside goal.  In the original Star Wars, Luke yearned
for more in his life but was also plagued by the self-doubt festered upon
him by his uncle.  Han Solo had to decide what was more important to him,
money or risking his life to help others.  The only internal conflict in
Menace is Qui-Gon deciding whether to break the Jedi council's prohibition
to train Anakin and this situation only arises halfway through the movie. 
Everyone else's main goal is to save Naboo.  Characters who have no inner
life are not very interesting.
Instead the focus should have been put on Anakin.  Menace hints at his
desire to free the slaves on Tatooine, but this is only spoken, not shown. 
Yoda cites Anakin's fear, but this too is enormously abstract. 
Unfortunately, Jake Lloyd would not have been up to the task to carry the
film anyway.  Like most American child actors, he overacts or is too
self-conscious (which I blame on the watching of too much television
acting).  Compare Lloyd's performance to that of the children in the
British Hope and Glory or the Swedish My Life as a Dog, and we see how much
is wanting.  Lucas does not help him by putting all sorts of 1990s
colloquial expressions in his mouth, which will date the film quickly.  (In
general, the film is filled with bad dialogue.)
Anakin's relationship with the Naboo Queen, Amidala (Natalie Portman), also
feels forced (no pun intended).  While we know the two will eventually
become Luke and Leia's father and mother, the strains of their caring for
each other rings false when these two barely know each other.  No chord is
struck between them.  Perhaps had Lucas given them the playful antagonism
between Han Solo and Leia, this could have worked.  As it is, their
relationship is sterile.
All this said, the appeal in The Phantom Menace is simply that it gives us
the first chance in 16 years to return to the Star Wars universe.  In terms
of fulfilling this nostalgia, from the opening fanfare to the lightsaber
duel, Menace succeeds.  Menace is also more of a stand alone story, a
prelude to the "epic" events to come, like J.R.R. Tolkien's The Hobbit. 
Luckily, Lucas can use Menace as a testing ground and learn from his
mistakes for the next two installments, which will be desired all the more
for the lackings in this one.
http://pages.prodigy.net/zvelf/index.htm

Title
Review for Thin Red Line, The (1998)
What I look for in a movie is not necessarily perfection.  Sometimes a
movie has such strong ideas that despite whatever flaws it may have, I will
prefer it to a better-made film that is not as thought-provoking.  The Thin
Red Line is flawed but it provokes.  Terence Malick returns to filmmaking
20 years after Days of Heaven and produces this meditative look at war. 
Unlike this year's Saving Private Ryan, which dwells on war as a necessary
evil and explores the moral ambiguities thereof, The Thin Red Line simply
says war is waste.  While that might seem obvious to some, only after
experiencing the film do you realize how profound a waste it is.  Saving
Private Ryan has an underlying and practical acceptance that war will occur
and it has a great cost; The Thin Red Line says idealistically avoid this
at all costs.  One message is not necessarily more correct than the other. 
It just depends on one's point of view.  In Malick's film, war is set in a
tropical paradise, and John Toll's cinematography is beyond lush.  The
setting poses the question, why are we fighting in the face of such beauty?
 In Saving Private Ryan, the capture of a German soldier presents the moral
quandary of whether to let him go.  In The Thin Red Line, the Japanese
present the moral quandary of war in the first place.  They are just like
the Americans -- frightened and angry, grieving and praying.  All that
separates them is war.
The flaw in The Thin Red Line comes in the voice-overs.  Unbelievable as
coming from the characters and sometimes pretentious, sometimes corny, the
voice-overs tell us what the images before us already do and are completely
unnecessary.  Dispensing with them, Malick could have achieved a
Tarkovskian grandeur.  Instead, he gets distracting self-consciousness.
Aside from that, Malick's direction is stunning.  The tracking shots across
windswept hills and  around transports speeding toward shore are
extraordinary.  Sean Penn, Elias Koteas, and Nick Nolte give the best
performances.  Penn is subtle as a sergeant trying to hide his humanism,
Koteas is genuine as a compassionate captain, and Nolte startling as a
colonel whose blood vessels are about to burst if he cannot win his battle.
 John Travolta and George Clooney are the worst in cameo roles.
Ultimately however, The Thin Red Line's interest is not in the characters
and it is not in drama. It has been frequently criticized for its lack of
dramatic structure, but Malick clearly has different things on his mind. 
Has no one ever thought that getting dramatic entertainment from war is
exploitative?  What Malick is working with is theme, and in that, The Thin
Red Line is most provoking.

Title
Review for Lianlian fengchen (1986)
The Hou Hsiao-hsien retrospective at New York's Walter Reade theater is
doubtlessly one of 1999's movie-going highlights.  The Taiwanese Hou is
perhaps the greatest director of the past two decades, yet because of the
state of foreign film distribution in the United States, none of his films
have received commercial release here.  Instead, we cinephiles have been
left to discover his extraordinary works at museums and festivals.  I had
seen about half of his repertoire before this retro, but it was still
revelatory.
In Hou's work, one can visibly trace his cinematic influences, and in turn,
he has influenced many others.  Hou has a style somewhere between
Michelangelo Antonioni and Yasujiro Ozu enhanced by Hou's own striking
sense of camera placement and framing.  His mostly provincial subject
matter would also do Italian Neorealists such as Vittorio De Sica and
Roberto Rossellini proud.  Like De Sica in his earlier films, Hou uses
mostly nonprofessional actors.  Some of Hou's most verbal supporters
include directors Olivier Assayas and Kore-eda Hirokazu, both of whom have
shot documentaries on him.  To be more like his Chinese filmmaking idols,
Hou and Edward Yang, Hirokazu now inverts his name so that his surname
appears first in credits, which is contrary to Japanese convention.  Along
with Hirokazu's beautiful Maborosi, Tsai Ming-liang's Rebels of a Neon God
and Bruno Dumont's La vie de Jesus are particularly obvious descendents of
Hou's work.
Given American ideology's emphasis on individuality, this country's
filmmakers put the camera's focus on the character above all else.  Hou,
however, with his careful framing, long takes and long shots accentuates
space and environment while depicting character.  This greater sense of
place shows how characters are inextricably bound to their surroundings
which contribute as much to who and what they are as their own actions.  In
Dust in the Wind, for example, in one take, long shot with no camera
movement, Hou shows us some old men sitting on the front steps of a house
during a sudden electrical black out.  A loud bang comes from within the
house puzzling the men.  The wife of the house hysterically enters frame
left and rushes up the steps inside.  We hear her talking to old Grandpa,
who appears in the doorway cursing about how he mistook a firecracker for a
candle.  Not only is this funny, but it feels more real as Hou keeps us
detached in our role of observer yet involved in caring for what happens to
these people.
Dust in the Wind is about Wan and his girlfriend, Huen, who quit their jobs
in their small mining town of Jio-fen and move to Taipei to find work.  Wan
becomes a delivery boy while Huen assists a seamstress.  Wan is a little
too proud for his own good, but is earnest in taking care of the
introverted Huen.  He can barely take care of himself however.  Hou makes
an apparent reference to De Sica's Bicycle Thief when Wan finds his
motorcycle stolen.  His resulting depression leads him to wander in the
rain, getting him a case of bronchitis.  Then he finds himself drafted by
the army.
Hou collaborated with Chu T'ien-wen, who has written or co-written all of
Hou's films, to give Dust in the Wind marvelously vivid details.  Upon
first moving to Taipei, Huen asks Wan what he thinks about various shoes in
a store.  After selecting a pair they both like, Wan finds that Huen is not
asking for herself but for her family.  She pulls out pieces of paper with
the outlines of her family's feet traced on them so she can buy them the
right sized shoes.  Dust in the Wind is filled with these little vignettes
revealing the struggles as well as the savored moments of everyday life in
Taiwan.  The film never romanticizes or sentimentalizes though it is filled
with beauty, even of the ugly sort.  Many images -- the characters marching
up to their hillside home next to a mountain cast in the shadows of passing
clouds, a Buddhist ritual in front of a raging ocean, soldiers silhouetted
against an overcast sky -- are breathtaking.  Dust in the Wind, being more
diffuse and directionless than its predecessor The Time to Live and the
Time to Die, ultimately doesn't equal that film's impact.  It is
nevertheless, one of the best films of the 1980s.
Hou's films have only now finally found video distribution in the U.S., but
they will have none of their impact on the big screen.  The travesty is
that most will never have the opportunity to view them as they should be
seen.  This Lincoln Center retrospective helps to correct that a little
bit.
George Wu's Obsessed About Movies Page
http://pages.prodigy.net/zvelf/

Title
Review for Dogma (1999)
Kevin Smith is like a big kid.  His humor is that of a sophisticated
juvenile's.  He grew up idolizing Star Wars and loves comic books, having
also written a few.  He also has a cult following, mostly composed of
teenagers, college students, and Smith's own fellow adolescent-minded
grownups.  Smith is hilarious in person and in writing, but when he tries
to be earnest and moralize, that is when he goes wrong.  Kevin Smith is a
better writer than director, and he'll be the first to tell you that.  That
might also be part of the reason why his moralizing comes across as so
heavy-handed.  Great directors show us their theses instead of having the
characters sermonize them.  This was true in the overrated Chasing Amy, and
it is true for Dogma as well.
That is not to say Smith's message is a bad one.  In Dogma, Smith tells us
that problems arise when people believe beyond any doubt that their insight
into God and God's desires is superior to anyone else's.  Basically,
dogmatism is bad.  Changing the minds of the dogmatic is virtually
impossible, and since the dogmatic believe that they have special insight,
they also know what is best for you, whether you like it or not.  This is
not exactly a new message in movies (see Inherit the Wind), but I have no
problems with recycling old ones, particularly since Dogma's protesters are
proving Smith's point.  Smith's own problem with delivering this message is
that he beats us over the head with it like we are reading a Dogma for
Dummies book.  But this is Smith's personality, and his simplistic views
neglect such adult issues as how does one interpret the Bible (or Koran,
etc.) correctly (or if there even is a correctly) and how one settles
disputes of heretofore dogmatic concerns.
The story concerns abortion clinic worker Bethany (Linda Fiorentino) being
chosen by Voice of God, Metatron (Alan Rickman), to prevent the destruction
of the universe by two fallen angels, Bartleby (Ben Affleck) and Angel of
Death, Loki (Matt Damon).  Along the way, forgotten thirteenth Apostle,
Rufus (Chris Rock), stripper muse Serendipity (Salma Hayek), and slacker
duo Jay and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith himself) come to
Bethany's aid.  Fallen muse, Azrael (Jason Lee), proves to be the
behind-the-scenes manipulator for all the chicanery.
The logical but convoluted plot only exists as an excuse for the jokes and
to make Smith's points, and in itself, has little dramatic momentum.  Among
the supposedly outrageous claims made by the film is that God is a woman,
Jesus was black, and the Bible was written by a bunch of racist,
misogynistic white men.  Of course, Kevin Smith does not necessarily
subscribe to these ideas himself.  They are a metaphor for the fears and
insecurities of the dogmatic.  Smith says as much in his amusing disclaimer
that precedes the movie.  When Harvey Weinstein asked Smith to put it into
the film before Cannes, Smith thought it might give validation to
protesters' claims that the film was sacrilegious, but then he rethought it
and turned the disclaimer into a joke.
The film's humor is uneven.  Some parts are very funny as when Bethany goes
for a fire extinguisher when Metatron makes a burning-bush kind of
entrance.  But many of the film's jokes just bomb, as in virtually anything
involving Salma Hayek's Serendipity.  Also, some of the jokes can be seen
coming from a mile away.  Still, Smith keeps the zingers coming at a
sufficiently rapid pace.  Among the actors, Fiorentino and Rickman stand
out by far.  Fiorentino virtually by herself gives the film emotional
weight.  Damon and Affleck are fairly lackluster.  Rock and Hayek exist in
the film pretty much only as comic relief as are Mews and Smith.  But the
latter duo fare much better because Jay and Silent Bob, who recur in all of
Smith's movies, are much more in line with Smith's brand of humor.  Bud
Cort, George Carlin, Janeane Garofalo, Guinevere Turner, and Alanis
Morissette all make cameo appearances.
George Wu's Obsessed-About-Movies Page
http://pages.prodigy.net/zvelf/

Title
Review for American Beauty (1999)
Lester Burnham (Kevin Spacey) is in a loveless marriage, has a daughter who
hates him, and is on the verge of being fired from his job.  His id is
reawakened however when he encounters and obsesses over Angela Hayes (Mena
Suvari), a pretty blond who is also his daughter's good friend.  In the
mean time, his daughter, Jane (Thora Birch), meets and fall in love with
the new next door neighbor, Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley), a drug dealer who
videotapes everything around him.  This is the setup of the much
buzzed-about American Beauty, a film similar to The Ice Storm in subject
but not in theme.  While both sport dysfunctional families, The Ice Storm
was essentially about the inability to communicate.  American Beauty is
about joie de vivre counteracted by the illusions with which people live.
At the very beginning of American Beauty, in voiceover, Lester tells us he
is going to die.  This plot device works thematically to get us to see this
character in a different light -- one who may or may not make the most of
his life in the time he has left.  But giving this knowledge to the viewer
also has a destructive side effect.  The end of the film makes us focus on
how Lester is going to die, which really has little to do with the rest of
the movie.  The filmmakers encourage this by supplying multiple
alternatives (though not all are equally plausible).  This sudden
transition to thriller temporarily ejects the film's thematic concerns out
the window.
All the characters see something that is not really the case, except for
Ricky, the all-compassionate drug dealer aesthete.  Ricky is not the
disciplined hard worker his Neo-Nazi father, Colonel Fitts (Chris Cooper)
thinks he is.  A later plot twist further warps the Colonel's
misinterpretation of his son.  Ricky is also not the psychopath Angela
thinks he is.  Angela is not the perfect embodiment of fantasy that Lester
thinks she is, and Angela is not the worldly teenager Jane thinks she is. 
Jane does not care for her mother as her mother Carolyn (Annette Bening)
thinks she does.  All of this of course leads to tragedy.
Unfortunately, the characters are so caricatured, it takes a good portion
of the film for the all-around great cast to transcend their exaggerated
natures and humanize them.  Writer Alan Ball doesn't help matters by
outfitting each character with heavy symbolic weight.  Lester is the
Anarchist, Carolyn is the Ayn Rand Capitalist, Thora is the Lost Soul,
Ricky is the Artist, Angela is the Temptress, Colonel Fitts is Evil
Incarnate.  This is ultimately the kind of heavy-handedness that drags the
movie down.
In one scene, Ricky tells Jane that what he is about to show her is the
most beautiful thing he has ever filmed.  A Tarkovsky would have just shown
it (though not as blandly as done here).  Director Sam Mendes saddles his
image with the weight of the world and makes it feel trite.  This most
beautiful thing could have been just a naďve teenager's romanticism, but
Mendes returns to it later, indicating it is what Ricky intends.  Mendes is
an accomplished theater director, but this is his debut film, so he might
be forgiven for not following one of the most basic rules of narrative
filmmaking -- show, don't tell.  Mendes certainly does his share of
showing, but then the characters always tell us afterwards about the
significance of what we've just seen -- irrational homophobia!  Materialism
run rampant!  This does not only place a mistrust in the viewer, but makes
the film feel too self-important.  The most erring instance of this "just
in case you didn't get it" is the film's ending montage.  It is overstated,
sentimental, and wrongheaded.
American Beauty is a powerful film, but it owes its debt more to an
extraordinary cast than to its flawed writing and direction.
http://pages.prodigy.net/zvelf/index.htm

Title
Review for Bad ma ra khabad bord (1999)
Abbas Kiarostami's latest film, The Wind Will Carry Us, starts off
with a series of extreme long shots depicting a lone vehicle winding
along hillside roads while its inhabitants amusingly discuss how to
locate their destination.  These people come alive for us before we
ever see a face, and this is a tactic Kiarostami utilizes throughout
the picture.  As a matter of fact, we will only ever see one of these
journeymen up close, a certain Behzad (Behzad Dourani), initially
identified as a telecommunications engineer.  These men reach a
provincial village of white buildings couched in a small valley, but
what are they doing here?  Why are they concerned with the health of a
sick old woman?  And is Behzad really who he says he is?  Kiarostami
is slow in offering up answers, and ironically the film is more
interesting before we get them around the midway point.
The film takes its title from a poem recited within it, and refers to
how certain things are beyond our control and is simply dependent on
nature.  Like Kiarostami's Taste of Cherry, the theme of The Wind Will
Carry Us is life and death, but more specifically our governance over
death and exploitation of life.  To this end, Kiarostami injects
technology into the mix.  The village Behzad finds himself in  resists
the use of his cell phone in a comical manner, and the villagers
resent his camera.  Both embody the conflict of technology with a
specific culture, a way of life.  Metaphorically, Behzad and we, the
audience, are continually unable to see many of the people Behzad
encounters.  The sick woman never appears onscreen, a milkmaid refuses
to show her face, and the most we glimpse of a hole digger is his
feet.
Kiarostami's camera placement and use of space is extraordinary here.
His cinematographer, Mahmoud Kalari, perhaps Iran's foremost Director
of Photography, deserves praise for capturing landscapes that
practically glow.  Some of Kiarostami's metaphors are overburdened --
a turtle turned over on its back, a dug-up leg bone -- and the film
becomes a little overlong and repetitive, but for the most part,
Kiarostami makes nigh a misstep in producing one of his best films
yet.

Title
Review for Hurlyburly (1998)
Hurlyburly is a very black comedy adapted by David Rabe from his own play. 
On the surface, it is about a misogynistic casting director (Sean Penn)
trying to save his relationship with his girlfriend (real-life wife Robin
Wright-Penn), but actually it is an existential treatise on communication,
or more accurately, the lack thereof.  Unfortunately, director Anthony
Drazan is not particularly adept at transcending the stage origins of the
material.  He is not the most visually stimulating director and hasn't much
perception on how to use cinematic space.  Apparently though, he is quite
good with actors.  Sean Penn supplies one of the year's best performances
in his courageous and revealing depiction of Eddie, a Hollywood casting
director constantly snorting cocaine.  Chazz Palmenteri is excellent as
Eddie's best friend, Phil, an unemployed actor who gets his points across
with threats and violence.  Even better is Kevin Spacey playing Mickey,
Eddie's deeply sarcastic roommate and business partner.  I am convinced now
that Spacey is easily one of the best actors working today.  Penn has
already long held that status.  Robin Wright-Penn, Garry Shandling, and
Anna Paquin are all fine even if their performances don't quite stand out. 
The only actor who does not pull her load is Meg Ryan, here as an
intelligent prostitute (apparently wearing the most wondrous of
wonderbras).  Regardless of what's going on around her, whether she's just
been pushed out of a moving car or is planning a day at Disneyland, Ryan
essentially keeps the same tone in her voice.
Hurlyburly is really about how the characters cannot understand one
another.  All of them with the exception of Mickey constantly ramble on
until they forget what they themselves are talking about.  Half the time,
they realize they don't even have the vocabulary to communicate their
points and their tirades dwindle into gibberish like "blah blah blah!" 
Even when they say what they mean, the other characters are either in
denial or thinking they're talking about something else.  Eddie is pulled
between spiritualist Phil and the utter realist Mickey.  Phil looks for
answers to his problems in fate and destiny or even Judaic mysticism. 
Mickey, on the other hand, always makes Phil the butt of his jokes.  Eddie
envies Mickey's ability to deal with reality unstintingly while looking to
Phil and his metaphysics for some hope in his life.
Despite the film's aspirations, it never quite fulfills its potential.  It
often plods along aimlessly, and has a few too many contrivances such as
when Anna Paquin's character reappears at the end for an attempted but
unfulfilling catharsis.  Still, if the film doesn't give answers to its
existential angst, it at least asks the right questions.
