Authors
Gerald Forshey
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
        It is interesting how hard it is for film makers not
to make the same films they or others made in the past.
Director Wolfgang Petersen turns Gary Oldham into John
Malkovich's character from _In the Line of Fire_, almost 
investing him with the same attitudes and speeches.  Then
he tries to make sense out of the airplane like he did in the
submarine of _Das Boot_.
        Then he takes the arrogance of the President's 
speech about terrorists should be very afraid, and turns
it on him by making him choose between his family and 
political suicide.  And that's only in the previews!!!
        Of course, there is moral cause injected...Oldham
tells one of the people he holds hostage that he will not take
moral instruction from a nation that killed 100,000 Iraqis, but 
it passes like no one really meant it anyway.  Movies like this
like having moral clauses in them, but they must be passed 
over quickly before the audience starts having real moral qualms
themselves about all the killing (the President gets to kill with 
moral fervor).
        But the formula is lifted from the Arnold /John Maclain/ 
Steven Seagal movies.  They are put in an alien environment by
some form of treachery, then assorted atrocities are committed,
they begin to make inroads while passing through all sorts of 
troubles, are captured, and by some superhuman effort of will
(which of course means shedding their own blood) they manage
to free themselves and then reverse the situation.  The openings
come from James Bond movies, as do the endings, replete with
memorable statements as the killers are dispatched.
        What is corrupt about this is that he gets to make two
right choices which are contrary to one another (notice I didn't
say contradictory), and get away with it.  That is what the 
audience loves eventually.  Then when the trouble is dispatched
Lotte Lenya (or someone else) comes back to kill Bond, while 
some other fatal threat is hanging over them.
        Ford is our Gary Cooper or late Bob Mitchum these 
days.  It is about his presence, not about his acting.  He said
on a talk show, he didn't want to change his clothes for the 
film, that they should show the changing circumstances.  I 
think that was the right choice, since they change more than
he does in the movie. What ever happened to the Ford of _The
Mosquito Coast_ or _Presumed Innocent_ or even _A Clear and
Present Danger_?
        And the explosions?  They write plots with explosions 
in them so dark screens can go yellow and orange. Who says 
abstract art is not pop art?
        It is all annoyingly pleasant.  It is all about money and
technique, and built for an audience for whom moral questions
are problems occasionally for politics and business, but never
the popular art.  But it does have its moments, such as when
Ford has to read the instructional manual in order to make a 
cel phone call.  It might one of the few moments of truth in the
movies recently.
