Authors
Jason John Seaver
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Wagons East (1994)
     Well, Labor Day has passed again, the summer movie season for 1994
is over.   Since the response to my 1993 summer-movies-in-review was
overwhelmingly positive (1 that-was-kinda-neat, 0
you-idiot-why-would-we-want-to-see-that?), I thought I'd do it again.
     There were either fewer actively awful movies this summer, or I've
gotten better at choosing movies to see, or my standards have dropped.
I don't believe I saw anything I really loathed this year.  However,
while last year had several *GREAT* blockbusters (The Fugitive,
Jurassic Park, Much Ado About Nothing, In The Line of Fire), this year
had only one.  By August mad bombers and comic-type movies were
starting to get played out, too.
     Anyway, on to the capsules!  The "avoid at all costs" category is
missing, probably because I didn't see COLOR OF NIGHT or THE CLIENT.
FORREST GUMP
     Movies like FORREST GUMP and SCHINDLER'S LIST are making the
Oscars no fun at all.  The prediction of "Gump takes everything" will
probably be both pretty common and reasonably accurate come Academy
Awards-time because not only do the actors (outside of Tom Hanks and
Sally Field, mostly a group of relative unknowns) give believable
performances in a difficult cast of characters, and not only are the
visual effects incredible, falling solidly into the "FX so good you
don't notice them" category, but the story seems to affect people on a
spiritual level.  Maybe the time was just right for a movie that told
people that if they always did right, things would fall into place.
THE LION KING
     The general reaction to the musical number used to open THE LION
KING is something along the lines of "Zounds!"  The opening five
minutes have some incredible animation, and it's done over one of the
two Tim Rice and Elton John songs in the movie that are really
exceptional ("Circle of Life").  The rest of the movie isn't quite up
to the incredible technical achievements of the opening, but has (in
Zazu, Timon, Pumba, and Scar) a bunch of nifty characters that are fun
to watch.  It's not as good as, say, THE LITTLE MERMAID or BEAUTY AND
THE BEAST, but well worth seeing.  "Can You Feel The Love Tonight" is
also a shoo-in for the Best Song Oscar.
CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER
     Harrison Ford.  Tom Clancy.  How can you go wrong?  Watch PATRIOT
GAMES to find out.  This movie was a huge improvement over its
predecessor because of the writing:  The team of Donald Stewart (one of
two people who have worked on all three Jack Ryan movies), Stephan
Zailian, and Don Milus wrote a script which, though it couldn't include
the whole book, kept as much as could be kept in a 2:10 movie.  The
Clancy fan will appreciate some of the film's attention to detail -
unlike PG, C&PD actually includes, by name, Judge Moore, Emil Jacobs,
Rob Ritter, and Dan Murray.  Unfortunately, the last two had sever
problems implementing.  The computer confrontation rang true, and many
screen shots actually looked reasonable.  Even with the inevitable
fist fight at the end, the movie never seemed to talk down to the
audience, a welcome change from the legion of thrillers that assume the
average movie-goer needs things done in words of one syllable.
THE SHADOW
     I'll admit, there were probably five other people in the country
who liked this one.  In a summer with four superhero/comics movies,
though, this was the best of the lot, quite possibly because it had the
best villain.  John Lone oozed evil as Shiwan Kahn; his willingness to
wallow in it made Alec Baldwin's title character of Lamont Cranston
seem flat and uninteresting whenever the two were on-screen at the same
time.  But make no mistake:  This is a fun movie, with lots of nifty
visuals and battle-of- wills action.  My only complaint is in some of
the casting; Ian McKellern was almost a non-entity, and who came up
with the idea that it was even necessary to write for Johnathan
Winters?
SPEED
     The surprise hit of the summer, SPEED delivered the
action/adventure goods with a minimum of pretense.  Neither Keanu
Reeves, Dennis Hopper, or Sandra Bullock do a huge amount of acting in
this three-act film, but that's okay because they don't have to; part
of the thrill is that the movie-goer is along for the ride and in a way
their low-key performances make it easier to place oneself on the
rigged-to-explode elevator, bus, and train with them.  This movie is
due out on $20 video this November and will probably be a huge seller
because it's so much fun.
BLOWN AWAY
     The second big mad-bomber movie of the summer, BLOWN AWAY suffers
a little in comparison to SPEED because they are not the same sort of
movie and as such really shouldn't be compared to each other.  BLOWN
AWAY is a pretty straightforward thriller, with a Good Guy (Jeff
Bridges) and a Bad Guy (Tommy Lee Jones) who wants the aforementioned
Good Guy dead.  Why he does is best left unsaid here, but the method, a
series of intricate bombs, may not appeal to all; the penultimate
device is a treat for those who like "Rubes," but the rest of the
theater groaned, not appreciating what they saw as nifty in the
extreme.
TRUE LIES
     Tom Arnold is just a gas in this movie.  He steals scene after
scene from the other Arnold in it and deserved his name before the
title much more than Jamie Lee Curtis, who is just barely present and
breaks the pattern that director James Cameron had established of
strong female leads.  Though the middle section featuring Ms. Curtis is
at times acutely painful to watch, the sandwiching (a James Bond
opening, a terrific horse chase, and a hugely expensive and impressive
finale) makes this worth the money.
THE MASK
     Jim Carrey is a funny guy.  That's one of the problems with THE
MASK, because Carrey happens to be much funnier with the Mask off than
he is with it on.  He gets a lot of help, though, from two new actors
making their movie debut:  Cameron Diaz, a 21-year-old beauty who
displays more acting ability than most models, and Max The Dog, who
provides half the movie's laughs as Milo the wonder dog.  The cartoony
stuff isn't quite up to ROGER RABBIT, but Carrey, Max and Diaz are all
up to the task.
HONORABLE MENTION:
     JURASSIC PARK played at a *lot* of $2 theaters this summer and was
still a blast.  Went to see it with members of my family that hadn't
seen it yet, and a good time was had by all.
MAVERICK
     This movie was about two really funny scenes away from being in
the "Above-Average" category.  As it stands, it's still a fairly
entertaining way to spend five bucks, with light-hearted performances
from Mel Gibson, James Garner, and Jodie Foster that carry the
inoffensive fun for the full two hours-plus.  There's about three of
the aforementioned "really funny scenes," two involving poker games and
one hilarious cameo by Danny Glover.
THE FLINTSTONES
     This was a potentially poor movie but for the casting of John
Goodman as Fred.  Goodman's roly-poly, lovable personage was a natural
for this live-action cartoon, which is how one must look at this
movie.  It's a cartoon, even if they are using (for the most part) real
actors and not line drawings.  It's pretty easy to enjoy if looked at
on that level, with the exception of a squandering of Johnathan Winters
even more complete than THE SHADOW's.
THE CROW
     The defining characteristic for this movie was its bleakness.  At
times, life only seemed worth living by the thinnest of margins, and
the fact that it was, in fact, marginally better than death was cruel
because as soon as the movie starts, the characters who seem to have
the most to live for are dead.  This bleakness sets up a very
interesting film-noir atmosphere - for example, the film seems to be
filmed in three primary colors, black, white, and red - and the acting
is above-average for an action movie.  It's too bad that there's not a
more interesting story; this movie really could have been something
special with it.
A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE
     Only a summer movie by dint of being released three days before
Labor Day, A SIMPLE TWIST OF FATE is an uneven drama written by and
starring Steve Martin, inspired by the novel SILAS MARNER.  The movie
encounters problems because it's tough to have a melodrama without a
villain.  Gabriel Byrne's character, though put in that slot, has
motivations that are not entirely reprehensible; Stephen Baldwin's
character isn't in the story long enough to be considered a proper
villain.  On the plus side, there's good chemistry between Steve Martin
and Catherine O'Hara (who become fast friends, NOT love interests) and
the series of young actresses who play Mathilda.
BLANKMAN
     The second- and third- most funny guys from "In Living Color" (David
Allen Grier and Damon Wayans, respectively) can't hold a candle to #1
(Jim Carrey).  However, this movie does supply some laughs, even if
it's the most deserving-of-an-R PG-13 movie I've seen in some time
(nude pictures in the background, long jokes trying to milk humor out
of a guy getting an erection).  When it's on in the final action
sequence, it's very funny - especially David Allen Grier's
karate-chopping hero known as "Other Guy," but not funny enough.
WAGONS EAST!
     Though not as bad as its reviews, this is NOT John Candy at his
best.  The story (pioneers facing danger when they head east, trying to
go home) may have had potential in the right hands, WAGONS EAST! only
succeeds when it tries to be a cartoon.  Hopefully there's hope for
CANADIAN BACON, the other "John Candy's last movie" that's in the can.
Tri-Star could have released THE QUICK AND THE DEAD instead of this.
Tragic.

Title
Review for Demolition Man (1993)
     Combine KNIGHT RIDER 2000 and CROCODILE DUNDEE with a tiny bit of
BRAVE NEW WORLD, and the result will, for better or worse, be something
like Silver Pictures' new action comedy, DEMOLITION MAN.  In this case,
it manages to be better than several of its components, although the
writers have an unfortunate tendency to play it safe a little too
often.
     The movie opens in 1996 as LAPD sergeant John "Demolition Man"
Spartan heads into his final confrontation with Simon Phoenix, a
sociopathic criminal he's been trying to collar for two years.  Though
Phoenix is captured, the warehouse he was using as his headquarters is
completely destroyed, and more than twenty hostages are found dead in
the wreckage.  Both men are sentenced to cryo-prison, where they will
be placed in suspended animation, having rehabilitation work fed
directly into their minds.
     Thirty-six years later, Phoenix escapes when thawed out for a
parole hearing.  Within two hours he's killed seventeen people; a
development for which the San Angeles (much of LA was leveled by "the
big one of 2010," LA and several other cities have become the idyllic
San Angeles metroplex) Police Department, which hasn't had to deal with
a "Murder Death Kill" in twenty years, is woefully unprepared.
Luckily, the cop who brought Phoenix in last time is in cold
storage....
     The producers must be congratulated for going out on a limb here.
While people would have paid to see a movie that was little more than a
two-hour shootout between Stallone and Snipes, the movie has a
satirical bent.  It pokes fun at formulaic action movies--someone
actually comments on a one-liner thrown out in the middle of a fight,
and when Spartan gets angry at being regarded as some sort of
action-movie stereotype, the speaker simply switches him from the
"macho he-man" stereotype to the "brooding loner" ideal.  The dwindling
American attention span has been extrapolated to where fifteen-second
commercials are the most popular music.  The fear of intimacy being
created in the AIDS era has extended to the point where nobody ever
touches each other, not even to shake hands.  What some observers see
as a disturbing trend to sacrifice freedom for safety in America today
is pervasive.  The names "Spartan" and "Phoenix" actually seem to be
chosen with something in mind, and an "underground" movement is to be
taken literally.  Stallone and Snipes look like photographic negatives
of each other early on in the movie.
     However, many of the interesting questions that could be raised in
this movie are given lightweight treatment.  Spartan had a wife and
daughter, and though his spouse's death is one of the first things he
learns when being revived, he doesn't seem to react much.  Spartan
mentions a nightmare that lasted thirty years, and Phoenix had a
similar experience, but little is made out of it.  And though at least
some explanation is offered for the radical changes in society (better
than with most movies of this genre, most recently typified by
Fortress), it doesn't quite seem adequate.  And is the sterile
environment limited to San Angeles, or does it extend to all of
California/ the United States/North America/western civilization/the
world?  Also, it would seem that Spartan has more in common with
Phoenix than anyone else in this future, but little is done with this.
     The action is well-shot, and the special effects are pretty
seemless.  They even showed a metric temperature reading that didn't
say "degrees Kelvin," although the object in question was a 1 K without
any visible insulation.  The acting is tolerable.  Stallone, though
somewhat wooden, has learned a lot about playing the straight man from
his brief foray into comedy, and pulls off his lines here without
embarrassment, and actually managing to elicit quite a few laughs.
Wesley Snipes throws caution to the wind as Simon Phoenix with an
over-the-top portrayal of the insane criminal mastermind.  Bullock is
fairly poor, but it fits with the character she plays.  Hawthorne is
passable, and half of Denis Leary's four scenes are more or less
carried by material straight out of his stand-up routine (he even
starts pacing back and forth).  Rob Schnieder from Saturday Night Live
also shows up as a character who might have escaped from an SNL skit
about bureaucrats you want to punch out on sight.
     DEMOLITION MAN falls in the 7.0-7.5 range.  It's more clever than
the average action movie, but missed several opportunities.

Title
Review for Malice (1993)
     Whatever you do, don't see this movie twice.  It's not a bad way
to spend an afternoon, and it will keep you guessing, but a lot of time
it doesn't play fair with the audience.  You may not notice it at the
time, but fifteen minutes out of the theater, max, and the flaws will
become readily apparent.
     Bill Pullman plays the Dean of Student Affairs at Smith College, a
(real) all-female school in Massachusetts.  A serial rapist has been
stalking and mutilating his students, and he's understandably upset.
The detective assigned to the case (Bebe Neuwirth) hasn't had any
success in tracking the criminal down, and finds circumstantial
evidence that he may actually be the culprit.
     One of the girls manages to live through the experience, thanks to
a brilliant surgeon (Alec Baldwin).  The surgeon, it turns out, went to
the same high school with the dean, and is new in town, and looking for
a place to stay.  His classmate has an apartment on the third floor of
his house he can rent out, although his wife Tracy (Nicole Kidman) is
none too thrilled by this arrangement, even though it was originally
her idea to rent the apartment out.
     Point one in Malice's favor:  All four of the identified actors
give excellent performances; I was especially impressed with Pullman,
whom I had previously seen only in Mel Brooks's SPACEBALLS.  Neuwirth
actually did a little too well--I could have easily done without the
central Mass. accent, which in my opinion borders on one of the most
obnoxious modes of speech in existence (and I go to school and have
family here).
     Point two:  The situation absolutely screams that Baldwin's
character will be revealed to be the rapist, and that the movie will
culminate in a confrontation between him and Pullman that leads to the
former's demise.  Happily, that resolution doesn't come to pass.
     Point three:  The police are actually portrayed as efficient,
trustworthy, and effective.  This seems to be an extremely rare event
and should be noted.
     Taking away from MALICE, though, is that the situation that does
come to pass is unlikely in the extreme, with plot holes big enough to
drive a tank through comfortably.  The plot twists and turns like a New
England road, surprising at every opportunity.  The plot twists create
a terrific sense of paranoia, an atmosphere where no-one can be
trusted.
     They also suffer from seeming to be made up by the writers as they
went along.  Oftentimes a new revelation will have only a tenuous
connection to the story set out at the beginning of the movie, and by
the end several facts about the real situation are flat-out
contradictory.
     I've tried to reveal as little as possible about the movie because
it is, despite the writing flaws, an enjoyable (if ephemerally so)
movie.  The dialogue is well-done, the basic idea behind the plot is
good enough to make up for the missteps in execution.  Someone else
mentioned that a quirky mentor seems to be a Scott Frank trademark
(remember Robin Williams's role in DEAD AGAIN); Anne Bancroft is
excellent in her scene.
     I'd put it in the 6.0-6.5 range.  See it once, preferably at
matinee prices, and enjoy it for its plusses, rather than its fault.
