Authors
Will FitzHugh
Number of Reviews
10

Title
Review for Wild Bunch, The (1969)
Sam Peckinpah's classic western just got a limited theatrical run with
some restored footage.  I've seen it a couple of times on video, late
at night and kind of woozy, so I decided to go see it on the big
screen.  I sat in the front row; for this epic I didn't want anything
between me and the screen.  I wanted to see Ernest Borgnine's nostrils
like two railway tunnels.
Peckinpah portrays the west as a grimy, sweaty place populated by the
stupid, the weak and the dishonest.  Against this backdrop, William
Holden's gang of outlaws seems princely.  They're fucked up, too, but
they at least retain some shreds of morality and purpose.  The only new
scenes in this release are some flashbacks that show Robert Ryan and
Holden as friends and then show Ryan captured and sent to jail.  Their
relationship was never fully explained in the earlier version but I
never really wondered too much; it wasn't really that complicated.
The first scene finds the gang, which includes Borgnine, Bo Hopkins
(not for long, though) and Warren Oates, robbing a bank in a small
border town in Texas.  They are being set up by Ryan, who got his
freedom from prison by agreeing to hunt down his former partners.
Luckily for Holden, Ryan is surrounded by idiots, including the
especially stinky, gun-kissing Strother Martin.  Most of the outlaws
escape with the loot when a Temperance Union parade catches most of the
bullets meant for them.  This first scene is classic Peckinpah.  It's
relentless, violent, and honest (when was the last time you saw an
innocent bystander die in a Hollywood action flick?).  The slow-motion
shots of horses and people falling are disgusting and grand at the same
time.  Is he glorifying violence, lovingly caressing it like Martin and
his 'aught-six', or is he trying to horrify us with the reality of it?
Who knows?  I was relieved when the scene ended but half an hour later
I was yearning for the next eruption of violence.
The movie follows the gang into Mexico, where they find they've risked
their lives for sacks full of steel washers.  They drift further south,
pausing for tequila and woman in the home village of their lone Mexican
member, Angel.  Then they plan a heist of an American Army shipment of
rifles for a Mexican rebel general, whose tequila and woman they enjoy
in some wacky, drunken scenes.  Ryan anticipates the theft but they get
away this time with the rifles and a machine gun in a breathless chase
scene.  They negotiate the trade for the rifles, but the general
captures Angel when he discovers that one of his cases of rifles was
given to the villagers.
The final scene has the four remaining gang members taking on all of
the general's men in a suicidal attempt to rescue Angel.  They may be
criminals, but they'd rather die than leave one of their partners to be
tortured to death by being dragged behind the general's ultra-modern
roadster.  This scene satisfied the thirst for blood I'd been
suppressing for most of the movie.  It seems to go on forever, a litany
of gunshots, flopping bodies and death-grimaces.  Peckinpah is
proclaiming not only the death of the 'Wild Bunch' but of the western.
A world of machine guns and fancy cars is no place for a gang of
outlaws, anyway.

Title
Review for Doom Generation, The (1995)
This is billed 'A Heterosexual Film by Gregg Araki' who I gather has made
some low-budget homosexual films which I haven't seen.  This one is a charming
coming-of-age piece.  At least charming when compared to any other movie that
features blood-splattered convenience store robberies, motel-room sex and
various psychotic characters met in cheesy retail stores.  The main characters,
Jordan and Amy, are two love-struck punkers ('three months' Jordan says
reverently when asked how long they've been going out) who get caught up in
a whirlwind escape from the law after they meet up with Xavier, a slightly
twisted guy who gets them out of tight spots by blowing people away.  One
bit of sample dialog should give you the flavor:

You get the idea.  Kind of like a John Hughes movie but with sex, violence and
bad language.  Everything's very stilted.  I assume it's on purpose.  As David
St. Hubbins said, it's a fine line between stupid and clever, but this film
refuses to accept that and blurs them together entirely.  Heidi Fleiss has a
cameo.  Araki pays homage to 'Easy Rider' by having our gang brutalized by
redneck nazis at the end.  Good double bill with 'Half Cocked' if they ever
come out on video.
I saw this movie alone but it could be good for a date if you want to test
his/her reaction to things generally considered vile.  Might as well initiate
the discussion of bodily fluids as soon as possible in a relationship.  You're
gonna have to deal with them anyway, right?

Title
Review for Mallrats (1995)
Some will invoke the dreaded 'Sophomore Slump' shorthand review they
learned in Movie Criticism 103 and there's some truth to it, I
suppose.  Kevin Smith follows up his mesmerizing, no-budget debut,
'Clerks', with this coming-of-age drama about two boneheads, Brodie and
T. S., who get dumped by their girlfriends and go to the mall to put
the pieces of their shattered lives back together.
Most disappointing is the fact that with a bigger budget Smith could
not find better acting talent.  The aforementioned boneheads are played
by Jason Lee, who takes a page from the Brian O'Halloran (reprising his
archetypal Jay role from 'Clerks' in a cameo) school of acting and
yells all his lines, and Jeremy London, who reminds me of a younger,
duller (now that's dull) Brendan Fraser.  Shannen Doherty is a welcome
breath of professionalism as Brodie's ex-girlfriend and Michael 'Serial
Killer' Rooker slips a bit from previous roles but still impresses as
the other ex-girlfriends' manipulative father.
Still, this is the second-best movie I've seen that takes place almost
entirely in a mall (first would be 'Dawn of the Dead').  See, Smith is
expanding on his vision of the two-store strip from 'Clerks' and
creating a whole world to play with.  The protagonists' inane
discussions of what does and does not constitute a food court skewer
the absurdity of our modern pop culture.  There's lots of comic book
references, a cameo by Stan Lee and some topless fortune telling.
Silent Bob and Jay fill the Shakespearian fool roles and provide some
hijinks as they try to wreak havoc with mall security.
Kevin Smith seems to have had a bit of trouble in the transition from
no-budget to low-budget, but no matter.  Slick is not always better and
I for one will take some flaws with my entertainment.  The longer he
can stay away from Hollywood (and if he keeps this up, it might be
while), the longer he can produce these warped, slice-of-New-Jersey
visions of a broken America.

Title
Review for Birdcage, The (1996)
Yes!  Finally, Hollywood makes a version of 'La Cage Aux Folles'
that the average American can appreciate.  Now that we've been
softened up by the adorable 'Mrs. Doubtfire' and 'To Wong Foo,
Thanks for Everything, Lee Meriweather', cross-dressing and
homosexuality can be funny without being disturbing to grandma
and grandpa.
This is good, I suppose.  Better than 'Philadelphia' which seemed
like a calculated 'gay' movie and much better than director Mike
Nichols' recent work ('Wolf', 'Working Girl', 'Regarding Henry'
and the massively disappointing and suppressed 'Closing Time').
There's political humor as a gay couple's son wants to marry the
daughter of an Alan Simpson-like ultra-conservative senator (played
by Gene Hackman, who Simpson might want to consider as a double the
next time he angers reasonable citizens.  Full-time job, that).
He somehow convinces his parents, Robin Williams (not in a dress, and 
luckily, much less annoying than he is on talk shows) and
Nathan Lane, to act like a nuclear family for the senator and his
wife (Dianne Wiest, doing an impersonation of a giant mouse).  This
plan is doomed to failure but good for lots of laughs.
The cast is rounded out by Hank 'Apu' Azaria as the nutty houseboy
Agador and Christine Baranski (from 'Cybill') as Williams' ex-wife.
Lane's mincing wears a bit thin in spots but he picks up a full head of
steam when impersonating the traditional mom that the senator expects.
Hackman, who realizes somethings up, takes to mom as a Barbara Bush-
type wonder woman and forms an opinion of Williams as a playboy.
Well, the whole charade unravels, people fall down, there's a fair
amount of semi-naughty good humor and a happy ending.  I had a good
time at this movie, really, but let's think about this a minute.
After seeing a few Hollywood 'gay' flicks, your average small-town
moron thinks that these people are funny, good with makeup and have
nice tans.  A lot of them have kids and ex-wives, too, for some
reason.  Makes a good link to the heterosexual world, I reckon.  The
closest 'The Birdcage' comes to sex is some risque dinnerware and the
closest Nichols comes to any lasting satire is Hackman in a dress.  He
doesn't seem to realize that crowd-pleasing can only get you so far.
Alan Simpson would have taken one look at that white knee-length item
and foamed at the mouth.  I realize the ending was probably the same in
the French version so he can use that as an excuse but sharper writing
could have made more of this.
You fuck!  Can't even go out for a good laugh without bringing politics
into it.  You and Robert Redford can go make boring movies together in
your Aspen love-nest.  Hollywood big shots have just as much right to
free expression of thought as Barbara Streisand does.  People who want
a little current events can go suck on Barbara Walter's (or Hugh
Downs', if you must) glass teat and shut up so I can relax after a hard
days work at Philip Morris.  Now go home and wait for Sylvester
Stallone's or Demi Moore's (I can't tell them apart in a PG-13 flick)
next movie and leave me alone.

Title
Review for Half-Cocked (1994)
A cute, bored, existentialist teenager from Louisville, Kentucky steals
her brother's van full of band equipment and takes four friends on a
pathetic and funny trip across middle America.  Give the average punker
$1000 and cheap B&W movie camera and you'd probably do a lot worse than
this.  The only recognizable face is Ian Svenonius, lead singer for
Nation of Ulysses, who's finally reaping the benefits of being named
Sassy Magazine's Mr. Sassy a couple of years ago.  Will he be the next
Henry Rollins?  We can only hope.
Anyway, this veers from funny to boring to sad, but mostly funny.  They
play a few gigs despite not knowing how to even set up the drum kit.
Shit, that's probably how Green Day got started.  They suck, but if you
suck enough, you run the risk of being considered cool.  One show ends
with the singer throwing bottles into a trash can as the drummer
reaches crescendo after crescendo.
There are pieces of Linklater's 'Slacker' and some ideas from
Jarmusch's earlier work; it's almost 'Louisville Cowboys Go America'.
I wonder if the plot of the movie unfolded as a parallel of the making
of the picture; did Suki Hawley steal a van full of movie-making
equipment out of boredom and run off with her friends filming whatever
scared and amused them?  Probably not, but that's what it feels like.
This will probably invite comparisons to 'Clerks', but I doubt Hawley's
next movie will star Shannen Doherty and be featured on Entertainment
Tonight.  I'm guessing it'll be better, too...

Title
Review for Drug Mule (1996)
This film starts out as the thematic sequel to the 1995 film festival
hit 'Flesh Suitcase'.  In that film, two men swallow balloons full of
heroin in order to smuggle it from Malaysia to the States.  The
majority of the movie takes place in a hotel as the men wait for the
balloons to re-emerge.  One of the men is a first-timer and the plot
unfolds as the more experienced one relates stories and advice from
past runs.  The hotel is populated with go-go girls, an
apocalypse-obsessed religious freak and the eccentric manager and his
dog, all of whom get swept up in the plot.  Eventually, a balloon comes
up missing and the drug's owners show up, looking for someone to
blame.  The movie succeeds on most fronts with a blend of black humor,
sharp dialog, competant acting and nearly ridiculous plot details.  The
violent conclusion is a bit disjointed, but the film is a welcome,
personalized look at the pawns in the worldwide drug trade.
The follow-up, 'Drug Mule', pushs the suspension of disbelief even
further.  The two drug runners, this time a man and a woman, use a
donkey as their 'flesh suitcase', loading the beast's digestive tract
up with well-wrapped heroin.  Once over the border Mexican border into
Arizona, the two hole up at a ranch to wait for the results of their
scheme.  As in 'Flesh Suitcase', the details of the plot are exposed in
a series of flashbacks as the veteran woman and the neophyte man pass
the time.  This doesn't last long, however.
The plot starts to twist unrecognizably as the donkey turns out to be
more than it appears.  William S. Burroughs' 'The Place of Dead Roads'
seems to be an inspiration as the ranch soon becomes populated with the
ghosts of indians and gunfighters and competing spys from unnamed and
possibly extraterrestrial sources.  The donkey (or whatever), now able
to talk, shrink to half its original size and mentally control anybody
past puberty, has assimilated the heroin and sets up a pre-teen drug
empire at the ranch to feed his massive habit.
The beast uses the two runners as bait to get their bosses under his
control and soon pushes his influence worldwide.  There are some darkly
comic scenes of children negotiating with American and Middle Eastern
drug kingpins.  The plot trys to stay on course as the two original
characters try to escape the beast and get back to reality, but they
(and us) are in way too deep.  The movie goes nearly out of control in
a wigged-out space opera across the solar system as the beast and his
army of prepubescent psychotics fight it out against the real
intergalactic government power (the Leptoids), an organization that
claims that the CIA and KGB are its 'tiniest, most insignificant field
offices'.  Good, twisted design (David Lynch would have been proud,
even scared) makes up for a small budget (think 'Doctor Who' if
designed by Francis Bacon and H. R. Giger as a boy).
'Drug Mule' lasts for almost three hours and I had a splitting headache
after I saw it.  Don't let that deter you, though.  Do what you have to
do prepare yourself; it probably won't help, but take a few painkillers
before you sit down.  The plot and characters, the main building blocks
for most movies, become secondary to the overriding vision and horror
of the scenario.  This film is the most powerful piece of modern cinema
since, well, since there has been modern cinema.  To properly view this
movie, it should be viewed through a telescope while being projected on
the dark side of the moon with the soundtrack being spliced directly
into your otic nerves.  No shit.

Title
Review for Die xue jie tou (1990)
This is the first John Woo movie I've seen (unless you count 'Hard
Target' which I've tried to erase from my memory) and for the most part
I was impressed.  It starts off weakly, though, as we follow three
friends through some character introduction sequences of sterile gang
fighting (set to the Monkees' 'I'm A Believer'), dancing, and general
goofiness.  I was reminded of some James Dean flick; this is painful
stuff.  One particularly odious scene shows Ben, Frank and Paul racing
bicycles towards the end of a pier in what might be some kind of homage
to the 'chickie run' in 'Rebel Without A Cause'.  Slow motion, overly
dramatic music; I was questioning my decision to go to the movies at
all.
Luckily the action picks up a little as Frank has to borrow money from
a loan shark to pay for Ben's wedding reception and gets bloodied by
some of Ringo's punks while carrying the money.  He and Ben later kill
Ringo and they and Paul hide out in the hills.  They get a job
smuggling penicillin to Saigon and we're off to Vietnam, where the
brutality really kicks in.
They almost immediately run into trouble as they get caught in a riot
caused by an assasination attempt, lose the contraband in an explosion
and get rounded up in the search for the bomber.  These kids are
obviously in over their heads.  After the bomber gets brutally executed
in front of them they go to a nightclub where they get involved with a
Hong Kong singing star who's been kidnapped, addicted to heroin and
forced into prostitution.  She's been enslaved by the gangster they
were supposed to deliver the goods to.  Ben (the married one) falls for
her.  They meet up with another man, Luke, who for some reason trusts
them, and together they set up a raid on the nightclub.  Massive
violence ensues (again set to the Monkees, changing the way I'll listen
to 'I'm A Believer' forever) as they get a chest full of gold and the
girl while wiping out the gangster's army of goons.  Paul begins to
show signs of being a weasel when he urges Luke to drive away with the
gold before Ben and Frank escape.
They escape on a boat but Paul, Frank and Ben are captured by the North
Vietnamese army.  Prison camp.  Forced to shoot Americans.  Torture.
Luke joins Americans in rescue.  Paul and Frank escape with the gold
again but Paul puts a bullet in the wounded Frank's brain when his
screams threaten to give them away.  Paul then shoots Ben while
escaping on a boat with the gold.  All four survive somehow in various
states of mutilation.
Later, Ben and Luke meet up in Saigon and find Frank, a virtual
vegetable, who they put out of his misery.  Ben joins the trail of
refugees to Hong Kong and finds his wife and child.  He also tracks
down Paul, who is now head of a shady corporation devoted to money
laundering.  They fight to the death, eventually ending up by the docks
amid explosions, Paul face down with Frank's skull beside him.  Yow.
It's not too original to compare Woo to Peckinpah.  The action
sequences use lots of angles and slow motion to drag out the violence
to almost unbearable length.  Woo also shows Peckinpah's inability to
realistically portray scenes of normal human interaction; the character
development early in the film is torturous.  But Woo's scenes of the
Vietnam war are chilling compared to American versions.  Never would a
Hollywood director be able to show prisoner killing prisoner.  I hope
his next Hollywood project works out better than... what was the name
of that film?  I can't remember.

Title
Review for Strange Days (1995)
Squid Alert!  Squid Alert!  Kathryn Bigelow's new one comes out of
the box like countless science fiction novels.  Experiences can be
recorded 'right from the cerebral cortex' and then played back
to give the viewer the more or less complete experience (unless
you open your eyes and get 'double vision').  Ralph Fiennes
plays Lenny, a dealer in these taped lives.  Hey, that was pretty
good.  I should write copy for promos, 'He's Lenny, a dealer in
taped lives'.  Brrrr.
What I meant to say is that I've following Kathryn Bigelow's career
since the beginning.  I was beginning to think she peaked with 
'Near Dark', a movie about a Winnebago full of vampires.  Things
started to look grim after that.  'Blue Steel' was pathetic with
Jamie Lee Curtis horribly miscast as a tough cop.  'Point Break'
livened things up a bit and was actually pretty good for a movie
starring Patrick 'Duh' Swayze and Keanu 'Huh' Reeves.  She did
a part of 'Wild Palms' and the Oliver Stone influence seems to have
worn off a bit.
The recorded experiences, like the disastrous robbery that opens the
movie, are jerky, kinetic and scary on the big screen (if you get real
close, 19" diagonal is pretty big).  Especially the one with Juliette
Lewis rollerblading and coming on to me, I mean Lenny.  It's the near
future, see, and New Years Eve, 1999, finds the streets of L.A. full of
gangstas, whores and big fat cars.  More people than you'd expect wear
wigs because that's how you hide the recording headgear (or 'squids').
Never trust anyone with fucked-up hair in this movie.
Oh, right, the plot.  Actually, never mind.  Suffice it to say that it
gets a bit confusing but it looks good.  Angela Bassett saves Lenny's
scrawny ass more than once.  Most of the action takes place in crowds
at clubs, warehouses and parties.  The world threatens to go down the tubes
at the end and there's a handful of twisted psychopaths to pick from
as Lenny tries to save his beloved Faith (symbolism, I guess).  For this
movie to come true the Rams have to move back to L.A., the LAPD have to
remain violent and unstable, and black and white people have to refuse to
live in peace and harmony for another five years.  Um, 1 out of 3, is my
guess.  Would have been if 2 out of 3 if Bob Dole had become president.

Title
Review for Tommy Boy (1995)
I saw this one on video and I consider it an ominous sign when 6
previews are tacked onto the beginning of the tape.  Is the movie that
short?  Is anybody who rents this a sure bet to see just about
anything?  Apprehensions aside, let's continue (the answers to those
questions, by the way, are 'no' and 'probably').
'Tommy Boy' is Chris Farley's first major role after smaller,
moderately amusing parts in 'Airheads' and 'Wayne's World'.  Here he
plays a fat, dumb recent college graduate who gets a do-nothing job at
his father's (Brian Dennehy) auto parts factory.  There's some amusing
stuff of his last days at college; drinking, smoking, passing out and
running into things.  If Jim Carrey is the Jerry Lewis of the 90's (a
stupid comparison, in my opinion) then Farley is the Buster Keaton and
Charlie Chaplin (two guys put together, get it?) of the, um, well,
let's put it this way: he's got the hair of Nicholas Cage, the body of
John Candy and the face of, uh, well, forget it.
So his father marries Bo Derek whose son is Rob Lowe who actually turns
out to be her husband.  Dad has a heart attack at the wedding (the
prospect of spending the rest of his life staring into Bo's blank stare
probably pushed him over the edge) and Bo and Rob's plan to take over
the business goes on the fast track.  Tommy is forced to take over his
father's sales route to save the business and Farley and weenie David
Spade hit the road.  See, the trip is not only a literal journey to
riches but a spiritual quest for self-discovery (a la 'Zen and the Art
of Motorcycle Maintenance: the Series' or Dennis Hopper's wistful
'Flashback') which leads them to the brink of failure and then to
ultimate success.  Plus Farley gets hit with a two-by-four and runs
into some more stuff and there's several witty masturbation jokes
thrown in.
Did I mention the obligatory love interest?  Luckily, the director
(Peter Segal, whose only other film was 'Naked Gun 33 1/3') has the
good sense to leave any love-making off-screen (which is bad enough for
those of us with vivid imaginations).  Or maybe it was cut to satisfy
Jack 'Off' Valenti, along with the bong-inhalation shot that was
clipped almost to nothing.  Whatever.  The final analysis reveals that
Farley has too much talent to waste in watered-down John Landis-type
retreads like this.  He should be playing Puck in Kenneth Branagh's 'A
Midsummer Night's Dream' or Baron Harkonnen in the David Lynch version
of 'Dune' (can you imagine? David Lynch doing 'Dune'.  How could it
fail to be cool?) or a replicant in 'Blade Runner II' (now that my
first choice, John Candy, is no more).  Don't go for the quick kiddie
cash, Chris.  Pursue your artistic vision.  Scare people.

Title
Review for Leningrad Cowboys Go America (1989)
Finnish director Aki Kaurismaki (the Finnish Akira Kurosawa?) gives us
a deadpan, droll comedy about a Russian band going to America.  In the
grand tradition of road movies ('Easy Rider', 'Thelma & Louise',
'Wagons West', that sort of thing) that use physical travel as a
substitute for any real character development or plot, this one ups the
ante and gets rid of all but the most basic characters and dialog as
well.  That's ok, though, because these guys are masters of every genre
of music, dress like freaks (fur coats, unicorn-like hair and really
pointy shoes) and let nothing stand in their way as they travel across
America to a gig at a Mexican wedding.
There are some great scenes as the band tries out for a New York
promoter, fails to impress, and buys a huge Caddy (from Jim Jarmusch,
no less) to drive across country.  Did I mention that they've carted
their dead bass player all the way from Finland, packed in ice?  This
comes in handy as their domineering manager uses the casket (tied to
the top of the car) to keep his supply of Budweiser cold.  He forces
the band to subsist on crumbs while he sucks down the brews.  They get
a few gigs in middle America, with varying results, and in a stirring
scene, meet a long-lost cousin working at a gas station.  By this time
they've revolted against their manager and the cousin takes over as
singer.  They experience an emotional rebirth and their final gig at
the wedding is a rousing success.
'Leningrad Cowboys' raised a few questions for me.  Is this a real
band?  And where can I get a t-shirt?  I guess they are; they played at
some MTV thing a couple of years back.  Is this some kind of joke?
Well of course it is, but like the best jokes (Butthole Surfers, Flann
O'Brien's 'At Swim-To-Birds') they never acknowledge that it's anything
but reality.  I've noticed that some people have a hard time dealing
with this kind of humor, probably because part of the joke's on the
audience.  These are the same kind of people who made Stephen Spielberg
a millionaire and think Jim Carrey is the next Jerry Lewis (whatever
the fuck that means).  These people can play the Malcolm MacDowell
character in my own personal 'Clockwork Orange', forced to watch this
movie while tied down and having their eyelids pulled back painfully by
little wire things fashioned out of the paper clips in my desk drawer.
In fact, I've been having happy recurring daydreams about it.
