Authors
Dan Chodos
Number of Reviews
4

Title
Review for Manhattan (1979)
Very few films can make you laugh and care about the characters at the same
time, Woody Allen's "Manhattan" has both in spades. A brilliant tale of a
contemporary neurotic in the romanticized world of Manhattan. The contrast
is as clear cut as Gordon Willis's magnificent black and white
cinematography. With Gershwin blasting in the background, we follow the life
of would be writer Isaac (Allen) Davis as he and his friends clumsily bumble
around each other trying to find the right key of happiness. The problem for
Isaac and his pseudo-sophisticated friends is that they think they earned
the answer to the secret to life because they can dissect art and drive
convertibles. A healthy relationship however, still alludes them.
Allen is in rare form as he puts on the balancing act of his questionable
career moves, underage (Hemingway) girlfriend, lesbian ex-wife (Streep), and
a rendevous with his best (only?) friends mistress (Keaton). The plot is so
seamless it almost seems unrehearsed, a tribute to Allen as he masters his
insecurity shtick but never relies on it to get him through a scene. Isaac
is dating 17 year old mature for her age Tracy, but recognizes his
insecurities and refuses to commit to what she wants -- a serious
relationship. Isaac pushes her away because subconsciously he wants to
escape this kind of life. Very soon after that, his best friend, Michael,
introduces him to his mistress Mary so he can go back and live happily ever
after with his wife. The male characters essentially use each other to clear
their collective conscious. But it doesn't work, it can't work, not in this
world with these characters. Isaac almost knows to begin with that he can't
be happy, but goes through the appearance of striving for it anyway. Mary,
played so wonderfully by Diane Keaton is so insecure that she needs men like
Isaac and Michael to justify her existence in the world of higher culture.
There's a famous scene in "Manhattan" with a still shot of the 59th street
bridge. It's beautiful and perfect, almost too perfect to be used in a movie
with characters so undeserving. As they take us through their daily routine
of savvy dinners racquetball clubs and museums we begin to discover that
there's less to admire about this kind of life and more to pity. The last
scene would be painful to watch if it were in any other movie. Isaac pleads
with Tracy to take him back as she's just about to board a plane to Europe.
Does she take the plane and escape this world? It's an important question,
and the fact that we care to know is what makes "Manhattan" one of the best
films of all time.

Title
Review for Shining, The (1980)
Stanley Kubrick's adaptation of Stephen King's Shining works on some
levels, and fails on others. A family is left to take care of a
Colorado hotel for the winter. They will be completely isolated, having
only each other and the knowledge that some years ago, another
caretaker killed his family due to 'cabin fever'. Yup, you guessed it,
Jack comes down with a case of Cabin Fever and tries to murder his
family. Luckily, his isolated son has something called the 'Shining', a
sort of ESP where he can communicate and see into the future. The
premise is great, but with in a space of 10 minutes Jack completely
flips out, and we never uncover the mystery as to why. Soon afterwards
the premise is nearly a means for Jack Nicholson to go from scene to
scene shouting out catchy (and sometimes funny) phrases in a murderous
rage. The setup is never developed masking the last hour as a handful
of brilliantly directed and acted scenes that together don't add up to
much. Nicholson and Kubrick make the film scary enough to keep our
interest for the moment, but when its over you can't help feeling a
little dissapointed.  Where did the ghosts come from?  Sure we can
speculate, but what fun is that Jack?

Title
Review for As Good As It Gets (1997)
    "What if this is as good as it gets?", bellows Melvin Udall (Jack
Nicholson) midway through the film in a psychiatrist's waiting room. James
Brook's delightful new comedy answers that question with a firm "no, it gets
better Jack," and then takes us on a journey to prove it. There are three
central characters to "As Good As It Gets": Melvin the obsessive compulsive
but successful writer, Carol (Helen Hunt), the warm hearted, single mothered
waitress, and Simon (Greg Kinnear), the gay artist who lives next door. Each
have something to gain from one another and although their stories knock on
the door of clichesville it is entertaining none the less to watch.
    The film relies on Nicholson's natural screen charm to get us to
overlook his homophobia and racist reactions to the full illustrious city of
New York.. We're supposed to juicily bite into the fact that his bigotry
should be excused because he has obsessive compulsive disorder. In that
aspect "As Good As It Gets" insults its audience floundering in between a
serious character study of people OCD and a light hearted comedy. Take one
scene where Melvin obsessively washes his germs away using 3 bars of soap.
It's a painful scene to watch, sloppily giving the audience an excuse to
pity poor Melvin. It doesn't belong in this movie because there is no
justification for it. It's obvious from the get go that Brook's has trouble
layering the comedy he's aiming for with a character study the we deserve.
    The plot unfolds like a pyramid as Melvin attempts to reach for a higher
level of happiness in his life. Carol, the waitress at a local restaurant he
routinely eats in has a sick son with a very serious case of asthma. In an
almost desperate attempt to cling to the only person who will give him the
time of day, Melvin essentially buys Carol's affection in somewhat awkward
and seedy circumstances. We know from their first encounter on screen that
it's only a matter of time (in fact, too long) before Melvin and Carol get
romantically linked.
    But what stands out is the terrific performance by Kinnear as the
understated Simon. It seems as if Brooks doesn't even try to reach for
something and as a result comes a magnificent character developed from
simple storytelling. If he had only applied that same style to Melvin and
Carol, leaving out the unnecessary footnotes and relationship filler, we
would have fluency on the same level (although more serious) as Woody
Allen's "Annie Hall".
    While Nicholson's charm temporarily sways us from thinking about the
awkward moments, there are much deeper questions we want answered. Why after
so long does Melvin want to change? We want to believe that Melvin is a more
complex character than nasal-yet-funny phrases like "do you get me
sweetheart?" Unfortunately, Melvin and the film are funny, but laughter here
is only skin deep.

Title
Review for Air Force One (1997)
The concept of "Air Force One" is taken directly from the book of cliche.
But, y'know, there's a reason for cliches and why so many films revolve
around them -- they work. They make for good solid, entertaining stories.
But the negative connotation of the word cliche comes naturally with time
and overuse. Here we have Harrison Ford playing the President of the United
States who mumbles his way through a declaration of war on terrorist. His
plane, with family and all on board, is then hijacked. And we're off to the
races!
It's the same old routine to boot when our heroic president sacrifices
himself to save the plane and avert the evil Russian terrorist plans.
Instead of developing a character to root for, "Air Force One" relies on the
audience's patriotic obligation to cheer on our hero. He's the president,
represents America's resiliency in the face of danger, so we're clinging to
our arm rest with every terrorist he encounters, right? Wrong.
One thing "Air Force One" has going for it is terrific casting. The film is
a star vehicle as the audience wants to root for Harrison Ford more so than
the cardboard role of President Marshall. Everything plot related i.e. the
"bigger" picture such as some confusing scenes with the Russian prisoner
ends up being lost making the film not amount to much. The movie defines the
"been there done that" syndrome. I for one was hoping the President turned
out to be a coward, sacrificing his country and family to save his life. At
least that would have been refreshing.
