Authors
Dr. V. B. Daniel
Number of Reviews
2

Title
Review for Mulan (1998)
Starring the voices of Ming-Na Wen, Lea Salonga, Eddie Murphy,
B.D. Wong, Donny Osmond, Harvey Fierstein, Jerry Tondo, Gedde
Watanabe, James Hong, Miguel Ferrer, Soon-Tek Oh, Pat Morita, June
Foray, George Takei.
Okay, here's the deal. Y'all remember here a while back, I told you a
tale about an old gunfighter, still sharp after all the years of
dueling it out with anyone who wanted to call him out?  A young
upstart named Fox tried him, and got both barrels in the gut, and
might never be the same again. in a few short months, three upstarts
known as Little Steven, Angry Jeff, and Invisible David are coming to
town, and they're riding hard to prove themselves.  But, the old
gunfighter, Old Walt, don't seem too worried 'bout all that.
Ol' Walt could've kicked his feet up on the bar. He did slack off a
little for a while there, and he almost got taken out. So he sharpened
up his act. Lost some dead wood, built himself over from the ground
up, and regained his reputation as the toughest hombre in town. Some
day, somebody may beat him, but at least for now, he's holding all the
cards.  And, there's another little secret out there that only Walt
hisself knows. He's got cards waiting in the wings that are gonna be
even harder to beat. He's not buying new guns, or trying new
bullets. He's just keeping his weapons in tip-top form, and he's
dedicating his best to the weapons that keep him alive.
Y'all figured out my little allegory this time? The folks at Disney
seem to be getting a little tired of all the doomsayers, sirening the
death of the Walt Disney Company as the animated feature giant. Fox
tried to blast them, and the best they could do was "Anastasia", a
laugh-a-minute cartoon about the Russian Revolution and the only
survivor of Stalin's assasination of the Russian Royal Family.  Nice
choice, guys. Warner Brothers tried to fight back with "Quest For
Camelot," one of the more sloppier pieces of animation to drip out of
the bedpan in a while. And, in the wings, the Dreamworks boys are
readying "Prince of Egypt", the animated story of Moses, another odd
choice for cartooning.
And what does Ol' Walt answer with? Only the best animated feature
they've made since "The Lion King." It's called "Mulan," and it's
based on a Chinese legend about a young girl. And, folks, lemme tell
you, it's a marvel. The soundtrack doesn't rise to new heights, but as
an animated feature film, this is textbook stuff.
Mulan, as voiced by actress Ming-Na Wen, is a young Chinese girl, the
only child born to her father's house. In order to follow Chinese
culture of the day, Mulan should only be a proper young lady, petite,
subservient, and passive. The only way to bring honor to her family is
by marriage, a marriage to some wealthy, respected family. But Mulan
doesn't fit that mold at all. She's adventurous, she's full of
questions, and she's a bit of a tomboy. Her father's love is the light
of her life, though, so she tries to go through with tradition and
make nice for the local matchmaker. Big mistake. She doesn't play the
quiet and obedient woman part too well, and the session is a washout.
But, before this can lay waste to the family's hopes, the Huns invade
the Chinese border, heading straight for the Emperor's palace.  The
emperor (Pat Morita) issues a conscription notice, decreeing that one
male from every family will join the army to fight off this attack.
Mulan's father, a war hero, is now old and crippled from past battles,
but as the only male of his house, he must go to join the fighting. He
is honor bound. Mulan cannot stand the idea of losing her father, and
she knows he won't survive another war, so she chops off her hair,
steals her father's battle armor, and rides off, disguised as a boy,
to serve in her father's place. If her disguise is discovered, her
family will be dishonored, and worse, the law decrees that her
commanding officer, Shang (B.D. Wong), must execute her.  Thankfully,
her ancestral spirits decide to send her a guardian
spirit. Unfortunately, the best they can do is a little red dragon
named Mushu (Eddie Murphy).
What's there to say, people? Disney has quite a rep for bringing
strong female characters into the spotlight, at least in their
animated movies. But Mulan is not like The Little Mermaid's Ariel, or
Belle from Beauty and the Beast. She's not all dreamy-eyed and
wonderous, and she's not book-smart and spunky. Mulan is more
quick-witted and fast on her feet, driven not to prove some great
question, but to do what she can to save her father. She just wants to
make good on the family name. Wen's voice is determined and, like
Pocahontas's Irene Bedard, is feminine but full of strength. There's
only a half-hearted effort to show Mulan trying to sound like a boy,
mainly because it really isn't necessary. The character in the voice
suits the spirit, the spirit of a fighter.
The other voice casting is just as good.  Listen for Harvey Fierstein
as one of Mulan's fellow recruits. He sounds just like one of those
toughs that always got dropped into basic training with John Wayne or
Van Johnson as the sergeant. B.D. Wong pulls off the young commander's
character well, the young man put in charge while his father, a
general, goes off to fight. It was nice to here June Foray's voice
again. For years, she was the voice of Bullwinkle's Rocky, and
countless other legends of Toon Town. Here, she gives Mulan's Grandma
Wu a needed splash of sass. And a special kudo to Eddie Murphy, for
bringing Mushu to the level of Robin Williams' Genie in
Alladin. Murphy plays this strictly as a sidekick thing, stealing
scenes left and right and cracking jokes at every turn. Mushu sounds
like he's just in from Eddie's standup routine, but without the
cussin'. He's hip, streetwise, and drop-dead funny. Robin still owns
the title, but Eddie is a close second.
The true heroes of this movie, though, are the artists who gave the
film the look it has. It goes from being painstakingly gentle and
exquisite, as seen in Mulan's family cherry orchard, to vast and
realistic, seen in the mountain battle scenes. There are scenes of the
Great Wall and the Forbidden City that could pass as "real-film"
cinematography, almost awe-inspiring until you remember what you're
watching, and then even more awe-inspiring to think of the time
involved in such detailed art. These scenes, in particular, harken
back to the super opening of "The Lion King," with the animals in
early morning making the trip to Pride Rock. Compare that footage to
scenes from a National Geographic special if you get a chance, and
you'll get my drift. Even the detail in the artwork of the horse
mirrors Chinese art of the time. These horses are not like Pegasus,
all sleek and tight, they're strong and muscular and round, much like
those seen on silk screens and in sculpture from that time. They even
throw in some Abbott & Costello slapstick during the training
sequences, as this motley band of clods trains to be a fighting
machine.
If I have an argument with Mulan, it's with the music. There is not a
big, show-stopping song here like those in "The Lion King," "Beauty
and the Beast," or "The Little Mermaid."  These songs are just light
and witty, although there is a nice ballad near the beginning.
They're as much for laughs as they are for music's sake. But, to
cancel out my argument, I'd much rather have this fare than be
force-fed another lukewarm ballad that is SUPPOSED to be the
showstopper. "Hunchback" had two of these dramatic, poignant songs
that went zippo, and that godawful monster of music, Michael Bolton,
forever turned me off with that "Go The Distance" thing from
'Hercules'. Since the death of Howard Ashman, the only one to capture
the heart of Disney music has been the team of Tim Rice and Elton
John, in "The Lion King". Until they find another combo like Rice/John
or Ashman/Menken, I'll continue to cringe when I hear a musical number
priming in a Disney feature.
I'm not going to sugarcoat this point, I'm telling you plain out. See
"Mulan." Heck, go see "Mulan" a couple of times. See it once, for the
movie, to laugh, to hear Eddie act a fool, to know the story. Then,
see it again and just look at the artwork. Some museums don't have
this kind of quality. Until the other upstarts learn how to combine
the best of everything and make it all come together to look this
perfect, Ol' Walt will still be the only gun in town, still shootin'
after all these years, and by God, still winnin'.
See more great reviews and movie fun at:
See our many other sites at http://www.stairwell.com

Title
Review for X Files, The (1998)
'The Big Leap to X-World'
Dr. Daniel's review of The X-Files: Fight The Future
Starring David Duchovny, Gillian Anderson, Martin Landau,
Blythe Danner, Armin Mueller-Stahl, Mitch Pileggi, John
Neville, William B. Davis, Glenne Headly, Bruce Harwood,
Lucas Black, Tom Braidwood. 
Okay, here's the deal. There's a big ol' rush nowadays toward anything
along the lines of "unexplained phenomena," those weird
head-scratchers that just seem to happen for no apparent reason. We
get a lot of that stuff here in Carver Point, too, believe it or not.
There's a man named Herbert Potterman, lived here 63 years, who always
seems to get deathly ill about three days before his wife's people
have their family reunion. He can be perfectly fine one day, then,
Ethel Ann will remind him about her reunion this coming weekend, and
he's in my office the next morning, poor soul. He always gets this
mysterious aching in his back and stomach that we can't figure out,
but I always have to tell Ethel Ann that Herbert'll need to stay home
that weekend 'cause it pains him to travel.
Usually, about Monday of the next week, Herbert's pain fades away, and
he's back to normal. And, even more mysterious than that, on the
Tuesday of that same week, I find a hundred-dollar bill in my mailbox,
taped to a fruit jar full of a clear, slightly oily liquid that has a
strong scent of distilled spirits about it. Oh, the oddities of the
world....
I guess this new-found interest in the unexplainable could be traced
to TV's new darling, the "reality" show, starring aliens and crop
circles and haunted houses. But I believe it goes beyond that. I think
it can be traced to a conspiracy within television, eminating from the
Fox network. These people have secretly hooked a good part of the
country on a show called "The X-Files", a show devoted to every
unexplained mystery you could think of, and a few I bet you never
wanted to think about.  A sleek combo of sci-fi and horror, wrapped in
the guise of almost-documentary style of filming, it plays us all like
violins, pulling on every string we have that loves to be scared, and
puzzled, and scared some more. And I love it. I love it to death.
That's why I've been geared up for the new version of the show, this
time in theatrical form, known as "The X-Files: Fight The Future." If
there ever was a TV show that deserved to be a film, this is it. The
show has pushed the limits of TV, and it was only logical that movies
be the next output. They had the stars, they had the following, they
had the creepy little supporting cast, they had it all. So, when the
movie opened, I was there.  Planted.
The film stars the Dynamic Duo of the Nineties, David Duchovny and
Gillian Anderson as FBI agents Mulder and Scully, and it literally
picks up where the TV show ended its season a few weeks ago, a very
interesting twist on the "cliffhanger" theory of TV season-enders. As
we pick up, the two are investigating a network of power-brokers
(played by John Neville, Martin Landau, and Armin Mueller-Stahl) that
are involved in a project concerned with the colonization of the
planet by means of alien life forms. The movie pulls all of the tricks
it uses on the show, including my favorite semi-villain, the
Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B. Davis). We get other quick hits like
the "black oil" aliens and the super-bees. We also get a new,
meaner-than-hay-ull bunch of aliens.
I really don't feel comfortable going any further than that, because
I'd get into divulging secrets, and, as any fan of the show can tell
you, the only thing worse than a secret is a secret revealed.
Let's do this. I liked the movie, and parts of it impressed me, but it
never seemed to reach where it was shooting for. It's good, but it's
nowhere near what I was expecting.  When a show like The X-Files gets
the chance to strut its stuff on a big screen, it ought to absolutely
take it to the moon. The movie never makes that leap. Oh, there's more
gore than we get to see on TV, and there's some profanity stirred in
to spice things up, but, to dump this thing into the middle of a
summer line-up, everybody was geared up for super action and
heart-pounding suspense and some "WHOA!" special effects, and none of
that ever really shows up. The movie is bigger in scope than the show,
but it's not near better.
At the same time, I almost think that this might have been the plan
all along. Build a big hoo-rah for the movie, tease us with talk of a
consummation of the romance between Scully and Mulder, spring some new
villains on us, bait us for everything, and then leave us hanging
until the new TV season starts. If this is the case, that's almost
forgivable. But, if this is the best they can do, somebody might want
to wash off the blackboard and start over. The "coincidences" we've
learned to accept on TV don't play quite as well on a huge screen as
they do on a 22-incher at home with the bulbs out. And, I have to
admit, I was less than thrilled that Scully and Mulder act so
surprised when they discover a conspiracy going on and alien life
involvement. Just what have these folks been doing for five years now,
bending spoons with their heads and walking on fire? They've stepped
into bigger piles of governmental poo-poo on TV and never even
blinked, so why be amazed that it's happening again? Deal with it!
"The X-Files: Fight The Future" has a nice look to it, and, if you
follow it as a glorified two-hour episode of the show, then, yes, it
works fine. But, if the long-range plan is to pull a "Star Trek" with
this, and go full-time cinema, Chris Carter and Crew better tighten
some screws and do the same thing they did to make the TV show so
popular. They're gonna have to quit playing it safe and push the
envelope. Pardon the reference, but they will have to go where no
movie has gone before.
So, all that said, all you "X-ers" out there, relax. It works. Maybe
not as well as you'll want it to, but it works. And, remember, the
first "Star Trek" movie stunk, and they're still going. And there's no
way Shatner's gonna get a chance to ruin any of these. With Carter in
charge of the world, it could only get better, or worse, which always
seems more fun in X-World.
See more great reviews and movie fun at:
See our many other sites at http://www.stairwell.com
