Authors
Steve Hastings
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Under Siege (1992)
     Terrorists have taken over a Navy warship.  They control the whole
thing, including its cruise missiles and its nuclear warheads.  Their
plan is going by the numbers.  They have only overlooked one thing: the
cook.
     Steven Segal is the cook, and of course he is no ordinary cook but
a former Navy SEAL.  The stage is set for lots of gunfights, explosions,
and general mayhem.
     If any of this sounds like you might like it, you probably will.
The movie is well-done for what it is.  You never really doubt that the
cook will save the day, but there are many surprises along the way.  The
action scenes are well-done, and Segal doesn't ruin things by
overacting.
     One thing I didn't expect: the background for the action, the Navy
warship, is a major part of the appeal of the movie.  I enjoyed seeing
the action move all over the ship.  I particularly enjoyed a sequence
involving the main guns -- able to propel a shell that weighs as much as
a VW Bug for miles, they don't make 'em like that anymore, and I enjoyed
getting a close look at them in the movie.  Contrast that with the
high-tech Phalanx close-in defense system which you also get a close
look at.  If Naval hardware interests you, you'll enjoy these parts,
too.
     The plot is good.  It doesn't require too much suspension of
disbelief; I was wondering how terrorists could take over a warship, but
the plot hand-waves that issue nicely.
     There is one moment where the buxom blonde is shown bare-breasted.
If you blink at the wrong moment you will miss it, so they won't have
any trouble rendering this movie nudity-free for the inevitable TV
showing.  The woman character starts out useless and annoying, but the
more the movie goes on the better the script treats her.
     Star Trek fans take note: Colm Meany is one of the villains, using
language you aren't used to seeing him use as Chief O'Brien.
     I saw this movie in THX Dolby Digital Stereo; the sound was
awesome, from explosions that shook me in my seat to the little pinging
noises empty cartridges made as they hit the deck.  This very much added
to my enjoyment of the movie.  By all means see this on the big screen.
     If you enjoy violent action movies, I recommend this at full ticket
prices.
