Authors
Pat Canavan
Number of Reviews
3

Title
Review for Election (1999)
    Comparative only to "Go" as the years most original comedy,  Alexander 
Payne's new film "Election" supplies enough dry wit and trenchant humor to 
place it in a category that is far beyond what we would expect from the 
quintessential "teen comedy."  Whereas most teen movies are cast based upon 
looks (i.e.: I Still Know What You Did Last Summer), Election is one of the 
few that eyed for talent,  something very refreshing for those looking for 
substance in the recent abundance of low-quality teen films.
Although Reese Witherspoon has a large role as the ambitious and 
overachieving Tracy Flick,  the film is centered on the mundane life of 
teacher Jim McAllister (Matthew Broderick).  Everyday he goes through the 
routine of running around the track,  taking a shower,  and preparing his 
lessons.  The monotony of his life is cleverly shown in a scene in which he 
is shown over and over explaining the difference between executive,  
legislative,  and judicial.  As he is giving a lecture on morals and ethics,  
he seems reluctant to call on the anxious Tracy,  and almost annoyed at her 
zeal.  It's ironic that morals and ethics would eventually come back to haunt 
him.
Tracy is asked why she puts up posters even though she is running 
unopposed for president in the upcoming school election.  "Coca-Cola is the 
number one soft drink company in the world without any major competitors," 
she responds.  "But they spend millions of dollars on advertising.  I guess 
that's how come they stay number one."
McAllister is unnerved when he finds out that his colleague has had an 
affair with Tracy.  "He's the type of guy who became a teacher because he 
never wanted to leave high school," McAllister explains.  He then becomes 
even more worried he realizes that Tracy will win the election,  and they 
will have to spend a lot of time together.  He tries to inspire Paul Metzler 
(Chris Klein),  the athlete who seems to be more caring than the archetypal 
popular jock,  to run for office.  "Maybe it's time to give something back," 
he tells him.  Metzler eventually decides to run,  and when he starts to date 
the love interest of his lesbian sister,  she enters the race as well,  
seemingly just despite him. It is in fact his sister Tammy,  who turns out to 
be the dark horse in the election,  after her rousing speech on the 
meaninglessness of a student body.
By using coarse sexual dialogue,  unexpected viewpoints,  and 
freeze-frames at the strangest of moments,  Payne is able convey his dark 
humor with a sense of quirkiness that is both amusing and remarkably 
engaging.  In fact,  one extreme close up of a teacher describing a sexual 
encounter with a student is so surprising and frank,  that it nearly garnered 
the film an NC-17 rating.  The success of this type of offbeat high school 
movie could also be seen in last year's "Rushmore."
Reese Witherspoon is able to give the best performance of her young 
career.  Her voice embodies the determination of someone who will stop at 
nothing in order to assure their success.  The walls of her room are laden 
with posters that are more likely to be seen in a classroom rather than 
teenagers.   On the night before the election,  her candor is seen when she 
prays,  "Dear Jesus,  I really must insist that you help me win this 
election,  because I deserve it."
The performances of Broderick and Witherspoon power Alexander Payne and 
Jim Taylor's (who previously collaborated on Payne's first movie "Citizen 
Ruth" in 1996) script to play perfectly on the screen.  Election's 
sophistication and attention to the times rivals John Hughes teen classic 
"Sixteen Candles,"  and looks even better when compared to today's teen 
movies.

Title
Review for Go (1999)
    In Doug Liman's 1996 sleeper hit Swingers, he paid tribute to Quentin 
Tarantino's breakthrough film Reservoir Dogs by emulating a scene in which 
the main characters walk in slow motion to their cars. In his new film Go, he 
pays tribute to Mr. Tarantino at even greater length by telling his story 
from three different perspectives, which is part of what made Pulp Fiction so 
successful. In contrast to his 1996 film, which was very character-driven, Go 
relies heavily on visuals to deliver its impact.
    While some critics will call Mr. Liman a copycat, I would refrain from 
such surmise, for he is able to push the genre that Tarantino made famous as 
far as it can go.
    The central home where the story commences is a suburban supermarket, 
where bored clerks debate such questions as "are there any dead celebrities 
whose first name begins with an 'X.'" The often sardonic Ronna (Sarah Polley 
of The Sweet Hereafter) is desperately in need of cash so she won't be 
evicted. Her ebullient English co-worker Simon (Desmond Askew) helps by 
giving her his shift while he goes out of town. The visibly tired Ronna is 
awakened when two charming strangers, Zack (Jay Mohr) and Adam (Scott Wolf of 
Party of Five) ask her to step in for Simon in a drug buy. Financially 
strapped, she jumps at the chance and takes her friend Claire (Katie Holmes) 
with her.
    She able to score some Ecstasy from Burke (Timothy Olyphant), Simon's 
creepy drug supplier. This only after she has to give up Claire as collateral 
while she finds the money. Ronna's story will end at a raze where she is 
selling cold medicine to stoned partygoers. We only see a glimpse of her 
story's end, as the second one begins where the first one started: the 
supermarket.
    As in Swingers, Liman shoots the film himself and creates a fast paced 
energy that can be both dizzying and inviting. The speedy action matched with 
caustic dialogue can be most easily seen in the second story, that of Simon's 
Las Vegas spree. Along with his buddies, he indulges in gambling and lap 
dancing, finally culminating with a car chase on the Vegas strip. While this 
type of run-through may seem a bit cliché, Liman's jolt of energy and 
screenwriter John August's trenchant humor make the action seem all too 
original.
    The final story is that of Adam and Zack, two soap-opera stars that were 
eager to make a drug buy back at the supermarket. William Fichtner has a key 
role in this segment as an eccentric undercover cop whose ambiguities leave 
us wondering if whether or not he's gay. Even Adam and Zack are under 
suspicion when Claire sees them and makes the observation "Gay man are so 
hot. It's tragic."
    Liman doesn't use much excess light while shooting and doesn't seem to 
mind if a shadow is momentarily visible, "just like in real life," he says. 
While lacking the character depth of "Swingers," Go makes up for it with 
attitude and wit. Perhaps Mr. Liman has ever superceded the man he has paid 
tribute to as Hollywood's most precocious and bracing young director.

Title
Review for American Beauty (1999)
    It's the tenth month of the year,  and one has to be wondering when a 
film worthy to be nominated for best picture will be released.  It wasn't 
like this last year,  when "Saving Private Ryan" had been released in the 
summer,  and set the standard for the Oscar rush pics of November and 
December to live up to.  A truly exceptional drama had not been released 
until now,  and like "Ryan," "American Beauty" is the film that others will 
have to overcome in order to become the new favorite for best picture.
Although the film boasts several unique and absorbing characters,  it is 
essentially driven by Kevin Spacey's smooth portrayal of Lester Burnham,  a 
42-year-old suburbanite going through a severe mid-life crisis.  He is 
saddened at what his life has become,  but conveys his unhappiness with a 
cool sardonic tone that is echoed throughout the film.  We first see him in 
the shower masturbating.  "This is the high-point of my day," he tells us.  
"It's a downward spiral from this point on."
A similarly sharp Annette Benning plays Lester's wife Carolyn,  an overly 
ambitious workaholic,  whom Lester believes has forgotten who she once was,  
and has now become a phony.  "See the way the handle on those pruning shears 
matches her gardening clogs? That's not an accident," Lester scathingly 
remarks.  
Among the many things disturbing is the relationship the two have with 
their teenage daughter Jane (Thora Birch,  who plays a role very similar to 
that of Christina Ricci in "The Ice Storm," and even looks like her).  Their 
everyday dialogue has deteriorated into hi's and hello's,  and when Jane 
catches her dad leering at her friend,  her disgust and antipathy towards him 
begins to ferment.  She can't stop talking about what a loser she thinks he 
is,  and even speaks of how she could do without his pathetic existence.  
It is obvious that both parents hardly spend enough of their attention on 
Jane.  Carolyn becomes interested in a rival real estate salesman,  whom she 
idealizes for his success,  and seems to represent the same way Carolyn has 
lost her genuineness when he tells he that the key to success is always 
reflecting an image of success.  Lester turns his attention to Jane's 
self-absorbed best friend,  whom he can easily picture himself sexually 
involved with.
Jane tries to turn her attention away from her parents,  and she begins 
to focus on her new next-door neighbor Ricky Fitts (Wes Bentley) whom she 
discovers videotaping her every move.  "I'm not obsessing,  just curious," he 
explains to her,  who is somewhat annoyed but relishes in the attention.  The 
Fitts family is even more of a paragon of dysfunction than the Burnham 
family.  Allison Janney is Ricky's vapid mom,  who barely communicates a 
change in facial expression to either Ricky,  or his authoritarian father (an 
excellently hard Chris Cooper).
The feel closely resembles Ang Lee's 1997 critical success and commercial 
failure "The Ice Storm," (even the score is similar) although this plot is 
much thicker and the Alan Ball's screenplay is much more comical.  First time 
director Sam Mendes,  who brought the same sexual charge to his production of 
"The Blue Room," could be in line for an Oscar,  and wouldn't it be a 
surprise if a DreamWorks director other than Speilberg won the award.  In 
fact,  there is only one thing standing in the way of a deserved sweep at the 
Oscars,  and isn't it ironic that it is the same thing that led to "The Ice 
Storm" getting snubbed: the controversial themes (especially homosexuality 
and sex amongst teenagers) are hardly looked highly upon by the conservative 
Academy.
It doesn't matter though,  how many awards the film racks up,  or its 
rank among the best films of the nineties.  In a year where the best made 
films seem to be teenage comedies ("Election," "American Pie," "Go"),  a 
drama so phenomenal as "American Beauty," is well worth the wait.
