Authors
PMILAN@FSC.EDU
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead (1995)
     The new wave of gangster films, spearheaded by Quentin Tarantino,
keeps on growing.  Once, young filmmakers wrote and directed these kind
of films in homage to Martin Scorsese; now things have grown more and
more outlandish in tribute to Tarantino's warped sensibilities.
     Gary Fleder's THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD walks a line
between the two.  The film stars Andy Garcia as Jimmy the Saint, a
kindly gangster-turned-legitimate businessman who runs Afterlife
Advice, in which the dying record their last thought so that their
children can refer to them in years to come.  The business is failing,
so to raise money, Jimmy's forced to come out of retirement and work
for The Man With The Plan.
     As played by Christopher Walken, the Man is a paraplegic don, who
conducts his business from a wheelchair. (Walken must be the only actor
who can project menace while moving only his head.) The Man sends Jimmy
on an "action"; capture the new boyfriend of his son's former fiance,
and convince him that marriage would be a very bad idea.
     Jimmy assembles a crew of like-minded individuals; Franchise
(William Forsythe), who now runs a trailer park; Pieces (Christopher
Lloyd), a leprous criminal; Easy Wind (Bill Nunn), an out-of-town
player; and Critical Bill (Treat Williams), a certified psychotic.
     As must be obvious, nothing goes as planned; by the end of the
"action," the boyfriend *and* the fiance lie dead, and the Man With The
Plan has hits out for all five members of the crew.  Jimmy's forced to
scramble around, trying to save his boys, protect the woman he loves
(Gabrielle Anwar), rescue a prostitute friend from the streets (Fairuza
Balk), and in general, keep from getting killed.
     All this plays out with a mix of absurdity and profundity.  For
every over-the-top touch (Critical Bill is first sighted in the
basement of a funeral parlor, using a corpse as a punching bag),
there's a moment of quietude and clarity.  Christopher Lloyd's final
speech is one of the best of these moments.
     THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE DEAD is certainly dark-
humored, especially in respect to Critical Bill and a hitman named
Mister Shhh (played by a fairly menacing Steve Buscemi), but it also
has a genuinely affecting love story between Garcia and Anwar.  The
performances are first-rate across the board, especially Garcia,
Walken, and Williams, who deserves a John Travolta-style resurrection
for his work here.
     My one big problem?  Just this; I'm a Warren Zevon fan.  How in the
hell do you write a movie called THINGS TO DO IN DENVER WHEN YOU'RE
DEAD and *not* put in the Zevon song of the same name?  Ah, well.
