Authors
Steve Bailey
Number of Reviews
1

Title
Review for Bug's Life, A (1998)
Picking on Pixar's A Bug's Life, I feel like a bullying kid refracting
the sun through a magnifying glass onto an anthill. As with Pixar's
initial computer-animated feature, Toy Story, the animation is seamless,
the voice performances are flawless, and Randy Newman's score
complements the story perfectly. And yet the movie isn't the eye-popping
surprise that Toy Story was. This story of an oppressed colony of ants
is far more (you should pardon the expression) down to earth.
The story's main ant, a ne'er-do-well named Flik (voice of Dave Foley)
helps his colony thwart a bullying group of grasshoppers led by the evil
Hopper (Kevin Spacey). Flik finds his helpmates in a low-talent circus
troupe that gets roped into helping the ants through some
miscommunication on Flik's part.
That's about all there is to the story. Most of the movie's fun comes
from the sly voicework (best is "Frasier's" persnickety David Hyde
Pierce) and some low-key, throwaway jokes. Toy Story had much of the
same appeal, yet is primary storyline was rich and imaginative--it made
you look at the world of kids' toys from a fresh perspective.
Ant colonies notwithstanding, the Bug's Life story is very routine. We
know perfectly well that the hero will bungle everything he tries until
the story calls for him to come through. Some might carp that the movie
seems familiar only because Antz beat this movie to the same territory.
Yet it shares the same character problem as Antz: Why should we care
about a bunch of ants with borrowed personalities? Antz was a standard
Woody Allen comedy with insects instead of New Yorkers; A Bug's Life has
the standard Disney "repressed hero rising to save the day" formula.
The movie is far more enjoyable than the in-jokey Antz, yet A Bug's
Life
lacks the sense of wonder that the first Pixar feature inspired. One
giveaway is the latter movie's lightning-fast pace, so fast that some of
the jokes and exposition are unclear. A Bug's Life is so intent on
outdoing its predecessor, it's afraid of stopping for a moment lest the
kiddies get bored.
Submitted by: Steven Bailey
http://pages.hotbot.com/movies/skad13
Steven Bailey, a movie reviewer for The Beaches Leader newspaper in
Jacksonville Beach, Florida, has movie reviews posted in The Internet
Movie Database at:
http://www.imdb.com/M/reviews_by?Steven+Bailey
